Aalborg Universitet Longitudinal Studies in HCI Research : A Review of CHI Publications from 1982 - 2019 Kjærup , Maria ; Skov , Mikael B . ; Nielsen , Peter Axel ; Kjeldskov , Jesper ; Gerken , Jens ; Reiterer , Harald Published in : Advances in Longitudinal HCI Research DOI ( link to publication from Publisher ) : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 67322 - 2 Publication date : 2021 Document Version Accepted author manuscript , peer reviewed version Link to publication from Aalborg University Citation for published version ( APA ) : Kjærup , M . , Skov , M . B . , Nielsen , P . A . , Kjeldskov , J . , Gerken , J . , & Reiterer , H . ( 2021 ) . Longitudinal Studies in HCI Research : A Review of CHI Publications from 1982 - 2019 . In E . Karapanos , J . Gerken , J . Kjeldskov , & M . B . Skov ( Eds . ) , Advances in Longitudinal HCI Research Springer . Human – Computer Interaction Series https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 67322 - 2 General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . ? Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research . ? You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain ? You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ? Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn @ aub . aau . dk providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Downloaded from vbn . aau . dk on : July 02 , 2021 Longitudinal Studies in HCI Research : A Review of CHI Publications from 1982 - 2019 Maria Kjærup 1 , Mikael B . Skov 1 , Peter A . Nielsen 1 , Jesper Kjeldskov 1 , Jens Gerken 2 , Harald Reiterer 3 1 Aalborg University , Human - Centered Computing mariak / dubois / pan / jesper @ cs . aau . dk 2 Westphalian University of Applied Sciences jens . gerken @ w - hs . de 3 University of Konstanz harald . Reiterer @ uni - konstanz . de Abstract : Longitudinal studies in HCI research have the potential to increase our understanding of how human - technology interactions evolve over time . Potentially , longitudinal studies eliminate learning or novelty - effects by considering change through repeated measurements of interaction and use . However , there seems to exist no agreement of how longitudinal HCI study designs are characterized . We conducted an analysis of 106 HCI papers published at the CHI conference from 1982 to 2019 where longitudinal studies were explicitly reported . We analysed these papers using classical longitudinal study metrics , for example duration , metrics , methods , change or stability . We illustrate that longitudinal studies in HCI research are highly diverse in terms of duration lasting from few days to several years and different metrics are applied . It appears that the paper contribution type highly in - fluences study design . While , only a little more than half of the papers discuss or illustrate change / stability during their studies . We further underline considerations of durations vs . saturation , identifying points of measurements and matching con - tribution types with research questions . Finally , we urge researchers to extend im - plications presented on perceiving duration as a singular attribute , as well as longi - tudinal systematic approaches to ‘in - situ’ studies and ethnography in HCI . Keywords : Longitudinal , literature review , study design , duration , change Introduction Longitudinal studies in HCI ( Human - Computer Interaction ) research have been ap - plied and discussed for several years , and the potential of conducting studies that are longitudinal by nature are almost quite evident , e . g . the opportunity to measure or observe changes over time [ 6 ] . 2 Longitudinal studies or longitudinal research are commonly applied and used in other research disciplines . For example , in social science it has been used to focus on studying phenomena over an extended period of time and to study changes within these phenomena . Pettigrew [ 16 ] defines longitudinal research in social science as lengthwise and thereby as research studies that span a period of time . For this chap - ter , we adopt a definition on longitudinal data in HCI research from Gerken [ 7 ] , who states “ longitudinal data present information about what happened to a set of research units [ in our case , the participants of a study ] during a series of time points ” . Thus , duration of time and change are highly important for longitudinal studies . But various challenges and obstacles have been identified for longitudinal studies , e . g . that they can be very cumbersome or labour - intensive ( high demand on resources ) and also risks of panel attrition . Several conference events have been organized at the annual premier international HCI conference The ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems ( CHI ) over the past years , e . g . workshops [ 4 ] , with these sub - goals “ in - depth discussion of key issues both appropriate methodology and research questions that lend themselves to longitudinal study ” and “ generation and dissemination of best practices for longitudinal research to the CHI community ” . Resonating a need for consensus on longitudinal HCI . Also , previous user experience ( UX ) research has started to shift their focus from initial UX to more prolonged sustained use , thereby requiring longitudinal studies [ 10 ] . In this chapter we will give an overview of how previous CHI contributions have conducted longitudinal studies , for inspiration . Additionally , we will present rec - ommendations for future longitudinal HCI research . It is important to note that longitudinal research should be seen as a specific tool and not the silver bullet to empirical research in any field . So , while it is important to promote the application of longitudinal research , it is also necessary to understand the pitfalls and difficulties that come with it . By providing this analysis we aim to shed some light on these aspects as well . The challenge of Identifying longitudinal HCI There is already much HCI research that is longitudinal , but it is also fair to state that much less research is explicitly longitudinal . Various forums at the CHI con - ference have addressed a need for stronger focus on longitudinal research within HCI , e . g . workshops [ 3 , 4 , 8 ] , panels [ 23 ] , SIGs [ 7 , 22 ] , courses [ 2 ] . However , we still have little empirical evidence about how we as an HCI community understand what longitudinal research is for HCI studies , how we should think about it , which methods apply , and how it should be evaluated . Only two small sections are dedi - cated to this broad topic in a newly updated version of one of the common textbooks on HCI research methods [ 12 ] . Ethnographic studies are often longitudinal – at least implicitly – but not always . Case studies often provide a snapshot and hence not longitudinal , but not always . The timespan of experiments is traditionally short , but several are longitudinal . There seem to exist a genuine lack of clarity as to what longitudinal is and should be in HCI research . In our reading of the 106 CHI papers , 3 we found that only one paper referenced a source text for longitudinal data analysis ( appendix reference [ 41 ] ) . Instead , others would reference other HCI publications on HCI longitudinal studies , while most of them included no references on longitu - dinal studies or research at all . There seem to be no common , unified definition for longitudinal research in HCI , only emerging definitions formed in panels and dis - cussions in the context of CHI , and not even these are referenced that often . Studying Change In the social sciences , longitudinal research has been more common , with periodic censuses which aim to understand societal developments being one of the popular and oldest examples [ 13 ] . So as a starting point we can state that longitudinal re - search has been used to focus on studying phenomena over an extended period of time and to study changes within the phenomena . But how so ? From a more tech - nical perspective , we can follow Taris who contrasts longitudinal research with cross - sectional research [ 21 ] . In cross - sectional research there is only one single measurement for each individual or case in the study – ideally at the same point in time . Typically , such research is applied in HCI for example when running a survey or to compare different interaction techniques in a controlled experiment . Longitu - dinal studies however are “ running lengthwise ” as Pettigrew puts it [ 16 ] . This means that there need to be at least two measurements for each case and for the same var - iable at different points in time . This then allows for comparison of data among the time variable and thereby the study of changes . Change is the primary variable of most interest in longitudinal research , and the appropriate conceptualization of change is central [ 18 ] . The emphasis is also here on change and from the point of measurement of variance they claim that longitu - dinal research must contain three or more repeated measurements . In Pettigrew’s longitudinal process research the empirical analysis is directed at understanding the process of change ( over time ) , the contents of the change , and the context in which it happens . Guidelines have been established to inform how to develop and evaluate longitudinal research on change . The necessary conceptualizing of change , they state , requires an explication of a theory of change , duration of change as well as predictors of change . Different aspects should be clarified including the level of change of interest , group average change , intra - unit change , or inter - unit differences in intra - unit change . It is often the relationship between variables that is the most interesting and this can be examined only by a longitudinal study . Elements of comparison are vital for longitudinal studies and quantitative ap - proaches are implemented for comparison and significant relationships between set variables . Ployhart and Vandenberg [ 18 ] address statistical analysis in their guide - lines and urge to be aware of potential violations in statistical assumptions inherent in longitudinal designs ( e . g . , correlated residuals , non - independence ) . The potential errors have to do with the nature of longitudinal research where variables change ; they become more or less heterogeneous , over time . Being precise about which var - iables are expected to change , why they are changing and ( when relevant ) the nature of dynamic relationships over time . Time is not the only valid variable , as they em - phasize ; most constructs do not change , evolve or develop because of time , rather 4 they do so over time . An example is that time does not make children grow into adults ; genetics and environment are the causes . Pettigrew [ 16 , 17 ] argues that prag - matically judgements in longitudinal research will be made based on the themes and research questions being pursued , the empirical setting of the research , researcher - subject relationships and funding and other resource constraints . What researchers can say something about will be dependent on the variables , which are measured . METHOD The primary goal of our study is to explore previous CHI papers where longitudinal studies have been applied and reported . Particularly , we are interested in analysing how CHI papers have studied change or stability over time , what time or duration is in CHI studies , and finally what kind of research methods that longitudinal studies apply . For this analysis , we ground our work in the definition stating “ longitudinal data present information about what happened to a set of research units [ in our case , the participants of a study ] during a series of time points ” [ 7 ] . In our paper selection , we were inspired by the four phase analysis on empirical studies illustrated in Bargas - Avila and Hornbæk [ 1 ] , but since our analysis focuses on only one outlet ( CHI proceeding series ) , most of the exclusion steps are not ap - plicable for our study . Thus , we conducted three phases when selecting publications for our study namely identification , retrieval , and analysis . For readability , when referencing appendix references outside of Findings , we will clearly mark it . Phase 1 : Identification Of Publications We used the exact query or search term “longitudinal” in the ACM Digital Library ( DL ) database and further limited our search to only include publications from the proceeding series Human Factors in Computing Systems conference ( CHI ) . We searched for the query in all ACM DL fields including title , abstract , keywords , and full text . The CHI conference has been held annually since 1982 and the ACM DL include all conference proceedings from 1982 ( the first CHI ) until 2019 ( the latest CHI ) . We found that the query term “longitudinal” is significantly unique to capture the type of publications that we would like to include . We have only included published CHI papers in this analysis . We certainly acknowledge that longitudinal studies are also published at other HCI venues . We address this in discussion , referencing a previous analysis that adds interesting and complementary perspective on longitudinal studies in HCI research . Phase 2 : Retrieval Of Selected Publications We retrieved 137 publication entries out of the 138 entries from phase 1 . One entry in the ACM DL included no PDF and referred to a CHI 2008 workshop call on information visualization . This entry was excluded from our set . The 137 publica - tion entries ( PDFs ) were archived , and we then printed and numbered all entries in alphabetical order after first authors last name . For our study , this phase involved 5 only the above exclusion of publications as we only had one data source ( the ACM DL ) and therefore , no duplicates were included in our set of publications . We have included the entire list with all 137 CHI publications in the reference appendix in this chapter . Phase 3 : Publications For Analysis During this third phase we wanted to exclude papers that did not e . g . report from an empirical study as our goal was to analyse how CHI research conduct longitudinal studies and not only how they talk about these studies . A total of 31 publications were excluded from the analysis , all listed here as appendix references . First , we removed twelve entries where the publication did not report from an empirical study [ 5 , 6 , 7 , 17 , 21 , 25 , 26 , 61 , 65 , 66 , 86 , 123 ] . Secondly , we excluded eleven publica - tions where the term longitudinal referred to something different than the study or research method [ 35 , 50 , 52 , 56 , 67 , 69 , 76 , 102 , 129 , 130 , 137 ] . Thirdly , we ex - cluded seven publications where the study had not yet been done , but where the authors suggest a longitudinal study should be done [ 22 , 23 , 31 , 101 , 103 , 108 , 135 ] . Finally , we removed one publication where the paper did not have sufficient details on how or whether an empirical longitudinal study actually had been conducted [ 91 ] . A resulting list of 106 CHI papers was used for our analysis and can be found in the reference appendix of this chapter ( they are marked with an “ * ” ) . We initially described the 106 publications using themes and characteristics of lon - gitudinal research from related disciplines ( as introduced in the background ) . Here we used the definition from Gerken [ 7 ] on longitudinal data on what happens to a set of research units ( participants ) over a series of time points . Based on this , we constructed a framework for analysis that consisted of entries for duration , variables and metrics , data types , research methods , study context , how the term longitudinal is used and applied , and finally a short summary of the paper . Additionally , the 106 CHI papers were re - read with a focus on argumentation for or against longitudinal aspects , how it was implemented in methods , and how findings were impacted by the longitudinal aspects of the study . Following , papers were sorted and analysed through emergent themes , reflected in the findings . We also analysed and catego - rised all 106 papers , regarding their specific type of contribution they present , taking inspiration from the CHI contribution types as illustrated in the CHI 2017 website where it is stated that “… a single paper may often fall between contribution types , or offer its own unique contribution …” While we certainly acknowledge that CHI papers often make several contributions , we have attempted to determine a primary contribution of each paper for us to discuss different kinds of studies in relation to contribution type . 6 D u r a t i on ( Long i t ud i n a l S t ud y ) N o t S p ec i f i e d ( N = 22 ) 14 d ays o r s ho r t e r ( N = 16 ) 2 t o 4 w eeks ( N = 12 ) 1 t o 11 m on t h s ( N = 31 ) 1 yea r o r l ong e r ( N = 25 ) Paper Primary Contribution I n t e r f ace A r t e f a c t s o r T ec hn i qu es ( N = 29 ) 2 0 , 40 , 4 7 , 7 3 , 7 9 , 8 0 , 9 3 , 13 4 46 , 51 , 72 , 82 , 87 , 104 , 113 , 114 , 115 , 126 , 131 , 132 44 , 48 , 59 , 94 , 106 , 116 15 , 18 , 94 U nd e r s t a nd i ng U se r s ( N = 43 ) 2 4 , 30 , 3 8 , 4 9 , 90 58 , 122 36 , 53 , 64 , 128 12 , 13 , 19 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 45 , 77 , 81 , 83 , 84 , 95 , 98 , 99 , 100 3 , 4 , 10 , 16 , 32 , 55 , 78 , 92 , 96 , 107 , 109 , 110 , 111 , 112 , 120 , 127 , 136 S y s t e m s , Too l s , A r - c h i t e c t u r e a nd I n f r a - s t r u c t u r e ( N = 15 ) 6 0 , 62 70 , 85 34 , 37 8 , 9 , 68 , 89 , 117 , 119 , 125 33 , 71 M e t hodo l og y ( N = 11 ) 1 1 , 11 8 41 , 42 , 43 , 54 , 57 , 63 , 75 , 88 , 105 Th e o r y ( N = 5 ) 2 , 1 4 , 74 39 , 124 U n ce r t a i n ( N = 3 ) 1 , 1 33 121 T ab l e 1 : C a t e go r i z a ti on o f t h e 106 i n c l ud e d C H I pap e rs f r o m t h e p e r i od 1982 - 2019 . T h e x - a x i s ill u s t r a t e s t h e du r a ti on o f t h e s t ud y d e - s c r i b e d i n e a c h pap e r ( f ou r t y p e s + non s p ec ifi e d ) , w h e r e a s t h e y - a x i s d e s c r i b e s p r i m a r y c on t r i bu ti on t y p e . N u m b e rs i n t h e t ab l e r e f e r t o t h e app e nd i x r e f e r e n ce li s t . 7 Overview of Longitudinal HCI Research In the following overview , we present key characteristics for the 106 CHI contribu - tions , namely duration , metrics , and change . We would like to stress that when we reference papers in this section , the number refers to the numbers in the Appendix References . First , our analysis showed that two contribution types amounted for almost 70 % of the papers namely “understanding users” with 43 papers ( 40 , 5 % ) , while “develop - ment and refinement of interface artefacts or techniques” has 29 papers ( 27 % ) . This is perhaps not surprising as CHI papers deal with developing or creating new user interfaces and interaction techniques , but also studying user interaction with sys - tems . Looking at the other contribution categories we see that “systems , tools , ar - chitecture , and infrastructure” have 15 papers , while “methodology” and “theory” have 11 and respectively five papers . Finally , we were unable to categorize three papers towards primary contribution [ 1 , 121 , 133 ] . In the following , we will for practical reasons refer to the contribution types as interfaces , understanding , sys - tems , methodology , or theory . Study Duration : Plateauing And Evolution Our findings illustrate that the duration reported in the included CHI papers varies greatly for longitudinal studies . This is shown in table 1 . Also , we identified two different but related tendencies in our analysis related to study duration that we refer to as plateauing and evolution . In the following , we will illustrate duration , and we will illustrate plateauing and evolution . Our analysis showed that duration ranges from only a few days , e . g . , [ 115 ] , up to several years , e . g . , [ 112 ] , and it can be argued that CHI longitudinal studies are measured over days , weeks , months , or years . We identified 22 studies where the duration is not reported or unclear – these are listed as “Not specified” in the first column of table 1 . Instead , these papers focus on describing , e . g . , the number of sessions carried out , the duration of the individual sessions , interval between ses - sions , or tasks within this session [ 20 , 47 , 49 , 72 , 73 , 79 , 80 , 93 , 134 ] . In the fol - lowing , we primarily consider and discuss the papers with a reported duration ( N = 84 ) , and in the following we will unfold observations regarding CHI paper study durations . Interestingly , it appears that the contribution type affects the study duration . Inter - face papers employ relatively short studies ( less than a month ) , whereas papers on understanding have rather long studies ( often a year or longer ) . For the 21 interface papers that do report the study duration , 18 of them ( 85 % ) integrate longitudinal studies with duration less than a month . Whereas for understanding papers , 30 of the 43 papers ( 71 % ) report from longitudinal studies that are at least one month long ; and 17 of the 42 papers ( 41 % ) conduct studies that are one year or longer . As the most ‘extreme’ example , Sillence et al . [ 112 ] conducted a study over five years . 8 However , a few understanding papers employ short study durations ( less than two weeks ) , e . g . , Jain [ 58 ] . While interaction papers mostly have short study durations , we found it interesting to observe that systems papers have rather long study periods where 9 papers out of 15 ( 60 % ) have study duration of at least one month , for example the study in [ 71 ] with a two - year study . But systems papers also employ short study periods like [ 34 ] with three weeks of study . Furthermore , we only found one study , [ 34 ] , among the systems papers conducted in a laboratory . Here the participants played a game for approximately one hour in an attempt to learn mandarin as a second language . Lan - guage education and self - study took place outside the scope of the study . Some of the CHI papers report from retrospective studies , where the duration refers to the time the collected data covers . The data collection is done electronically and is already produced , stamped or tagged , and available on servers . For example [ 4 , 110 , 127 , 136 ] ) are all understanding papers where the data cover over one year . As an illustrative example , Yuruten [ 136 ] conducts statistical analysis on a well - known public dataset , previously collected for another purpose and used in other studies . More of these studies explore data from anonymous users of social networks ( twit - ter , discussion forums , collaborative music making site ) . This has some disad - vantages according to Wang and Kraut [ 127 ] who argue that due to the snapshot quality of their included measurements , they are not able to make strong causal claims . But Settles and Dow [ 110 ] use this kind of data collection as a supplement to their own surveys . Plateauing in Performance We identified a focus in several studies on what we refer to as plateauing in perfor - mance ( i . e . plateauing defines reaching a state of little or no change after a period of activity or progress ) . While only six of the included papers directly use the term [ 3 , 46 , 79 , 81 , 114 , 115 ] , we found that 20 papers discussed issues related to plat - eauing , and it played a significant role in defining longitudinal characteristics of the studies . Plateauing in performance was particularly in focus for more papers on interface artefacts and techniques , which were typically carried out in lab environments , e . g . with a relatively modest duration of few days [ 115 ] and up to 6 weeks [ 15 ] . While [ 3 , 81 ] are both understanding papers , with a duration of months to years , the plat - eauing described refers to behavior and habits , not performance . For some duration was not even specified , rather there was a focus on number of sessions . For exam - ple , the number of sessions wherein learning a new mapping would still be feasible [ 47 ] , where the amount of time elapsed for performance with a new input method would settle compared to a familiar one [ 73 ] and where the difference becomes negligible [ 79 ] , sessions required to mathematically project when users would reach expert levels [ 80 ] . It is however worth noting that the description of what constitutes a session , at what interval sessions should be carried out and the number of sessions varies wildly . A session might be timeboxed ( e . g . [ 59 , 82 , 87 , 114 ] ) or might consist of a certain task e . g . typing an amount of phrases [ 44 , 46 , 72 , 94 , 113 , 131 ] . Sessions 9 can be carried out within an interval - as an example [ 59 ] held lab sessions at an interval of at least 12 hours and not more than two days . Whereas [ 115 ] stated the importance of carrying out sessions at the same time on consecutive days . Conduct - ing lab sessions , there might be practical constraints that dictate session duration , interval and number of sessions , although it is not explicitly argued . In relation to plateauing , a number of interface artefacts and techniques papers argue that stability in performance can often be reached within days or weeks ( e . g . [ 15 , 44 , 46 , 48 , 59 , 72 , 82 , 94 , 115 ] ) . Of course , different aims necessitate different du - ration , for [ 115 ] the aim was to explore a new input modality in a target acquisition task as well as participants initial attitude towards this modality , thus they planned for five daily sessions , whereas for [ 15 ] the aim was to determine the fastest and most consistently stable input of one new and one known condition , after partici - pants passed the label of novice user , thus they planned for 20 sessions . Castellucci and Mackenzie [ 15 ] found that while two interaction techniques ( graffiti and unistroke ) had equally high error correction rates , the new technique was consider - ably more consistent than the other “ Investing the same time learning unistroke can result in significantly faster stroke time and higher text entry speed ” . Whereas , Sporka et al [ 115 ] argued the need for a longer study duration for stronger evidence on performance plateauing . A key plateauing concern is to understand when do users move from being novices to being experts during the conduction of an experiment ? Thus , several experiments here involve prospective users where they use a new interface or a new interaction technique over a period of time . As an exemplary study of accounting for longitu - dinal aspects in plateauing in performance , MacKenzie and Zhang [ 80 ] ( although not specifying a duration ) applied a 2x20 within - subject factorial design to see the development from novice to expert with a new developed text - entry technique . They found that expert levels ( theoretical upper - bound ) were not reached within 20 sessions , but mathematically projected it would take around 30 sessions . They relate to the longitudinal aspects arguing learning time is a usability issue , therefore lon - gitudinal empirical evaluation is important ; “ We want to establish not only a lay - out’s potential for experts , but also the learning time for typical users to meet and exceed entry rates with a QWERTY layout ” . MacKenzie and Shawn further describe a so - called “crossover” point , where performance with a new technique would ex - ceed current practice . However , they point out that this “ elusive crossover point ” may not always be reached if the new technique is simply not good enough or needs refinement . E . g . Son et al . argues that in their case for two - thumb typing in VR that although one condition implemented showed improvements , further work is needed to reach an adequate performance level in comparison to non - VR typing [ 113 ] . Ad - ditionally , MacKenzie and Zhang argue that the number of users for these evalua - tions are typically lower than usual , however the vital part is that they are evaluated over a prolonged period of time [ 80 ] . Majaranta et al . [ 82 ] challenged previous evidence that gaze typing is slow by changing the gaze time from constant to adjustable and evaluated on this in a series of ten lab sessions . They concluded that after four 15 - minutes sessions , equal to one hour of practice , learning decelerated prominently . They reached a plateau in 10 learning . However , Jain [ 59 ] argues that a concern is to actually pinpoint the exact moment when subjects cross a threshold from novice to expert and through a longi - tudinal study , they were able to demonstrate that after an hour of practise , their users was able to transition to expert users within their particular system . Reporting on the point where performance plateaued was found in other studies expressed as ei - ther minutes / hours of practice or the specific day / session [ 15 , 46 , 48 , 82 ] . Evolution Our analysis showed that 12 studies explicitly concern evolution – something evolv - ing over time . These studies are concerned with how e . g . personal information man - agement behavior evolves over time [ 10 ] , or how evolutionary patterns of commu - nication strategies emerge over a project lifecycle and how these might affect delivery performance and quality of new product development [ 16 ] . The studies had common traits : They were carried out in the field , in low - control situations , or “in the wild” [ 98 ] , as well as they had a duration equal to or above one month and up to several years . As an example , Chattopadhyay et al . [ 18 ] explicitly emphasize the choice of longitudinal methods to explore how use cases of their collaborative presentation plug - in would evolve naturally . In a one - month long deployment , data was collected through observation , interviews , one focus group , supported by sys - tem interaction logs and video recordings . This enabled authors to observe and re - port on “ emerging practices and shifting dynamics ” for evolving presenter and at - tendee practices . However , the authors qualify this as initial insights and argue for larger scale studies to validate , elaborate and qualify these findings . Likewise , a study from last year by Niemantsverdriet et al . [ 95 ] is concerned with social inter - action , exemplified by a longitudinal study of shared use of a lighting control system and how social dynamics evolved around coordination . Many of the evolution studies are concerned with understanding users . A recent exemplary study is Erete and Burrell [ 32 ] , who explore citizen participation in local government . The study ran for three years and it reports on how online tools were organically adapted by citizens in order to engage in local governance in three com - munities . One result showed , that they were able to capture change in uses : “ During this study , we observed residents in Community 2 use an open discussion board initially and change to a private email list . ” Through a triangulated approach in - volving observation , interviews and qualitative content analysis , authors gathered extensive empirical data on a regular basis and subjected these to inductive analysis . Whereas Erete and Burrell’s study is mostly descriptive , Parkes et al . [ 98 ] address evolution and clear temporal aspects for introducing technological interventions in their research question on how children’s use and interpretation of the tangible sys - tem Topobo will evolve over time . Here several case studies of monthly use without an explicit study protocol or researcher involvement allow teachers to unfold the possibilities and constraints for Topobo together with children of various ages and in various contexts . 11 Use Of Metrics , Variables And Methods A considerable amount of the 106 CHI papers report from studies that apply mixed methods in their research design . We found that 62 % of the papers employ both quantitative and qualitative research methods , while 31 % employ quantitative re - search methods , and just 7 % employ qualitative research methods . Metrics and variables Several quantitative papers deal with interface artefacts or techniques ( 48 % ) , and they often apply metrics or variables that make results easily comparable to previ - ously reported results , e . g . , [ 44 , 73 , 113 ] , or to previous models , e . g . , [ 20 ] . Several of these papers deal with text entry via text input interfaces , and they are often con - cerned with measuring typed - in words per minute – a common quantitative metric in the quantitative - only papers ( e . g . , [ 44 , 46 , 59 , 79 , 80 , 93 , 113 , 131 , 134 ] ) , but also in the mixed - method papers ( e . g . , [ 20 , 72 , 82 , 114 ] ) . Other metrics or variables used in these papers are number of errors / corrections , error / correction rates , time elapsed between one action / keystroke to the next , stroke duration , etc . varying on the study technology and focus . Interestingly , twelve out of 33 quantitative research papers ( 36 % ) are understanding papers . Here we found a focus on stringent variables and a vocabulary to match , as illustrated in these papers [ 4 , 12 , 13 , 111 , 127 , 128 ] . Although varying in duration ( weeks to years ) , all have an emphasis on variables for statistical analysis on a large dataset from a large sample size . For [ 4 , 13 , 111 , 127 ] they outline one to two de - pendent and several independent variables . White and Richardson [ 128 ] set up two primary parameters on which to measure : community size and contact rate . Some studies , e . g . [ 4 , 111 , 127 ] relied exclusively on data retrieved from servers , while other studies , e . g . [ 12 , 13 ] , supplement such data with survey data . Some of the understanding papers are concerned with more abstract constructs ; motivation , bias and user experience ( e . g . , [ 36 , 64 , 100 ] ) . For example , Fiore et al . [ 36 ] compared four conditions which differed in elements of intrinsic or extrinsic motivation . Karapanos [ 64 ] uses the AttrakDiff 2 questionnaire to evaluate deployment of a new technology as the author argues : “ For evaluative , high level summary judgments single item measurements are appropriate and commonly used ( e . g . , to measure subjective wellbeing ) . ” Few CHI papers report from a qualitative - only study ( 7 % ) . As an example , Pasquetto et al . [ 99 ] conducts two qualitative case studies , primarily relying on firstly a literature review and secondly ethnographic long - term observations , with a focus on open data policy and practice in major scientific collaborations . Their re - search questions regard rationales , definitions and infrastructure of open data , as well as their relationship . Categorizing this as an understanding paper . They con - clude on how definitions change and how the relationships are more complex than before assumed and how this affects policy and practices . Some important limitations of longitudinal data analysis are explicitly emphasized in [ 12 , 55 ] for example , Burke and Kraut [ 12 ] state that it is impossible to rule out every possible ‘third factor’ that might account for a portion of an association 12 between an independent variable and its effect on the dependent variable . Hutto et al . [ 55 ] argue that longitudinal study research inherently has great power as corre - lational research due to the fact that time - dependent , repeated observations are con - sidered as they state : “ When input A is consistently and reliably observed preceding outcome B for the exact same group of individual’s time after time , we have greater confidence in suggesting a causal relationship between A and B . ” Burke and Kraut [ 12 ] nuance this for their particular study saying that “ like many large - scale obser - vational social science studies , we cannot draw definitive causal conclusions , even with longitudinal data ” as unmeasured variables unavoidably existed that they were not aware of in their study design . They further speculate that even though they found only few quantitative differences , if qualitative differences had been taken into account , they might have reached a different conclusion . Research methods and study design The level of control of studies varies , depending on the context it was carried out in , as well as the objective of the study . Studies in the context of the lab had inher - ently relatively high control . In a relatively high control field experiment of text input techniques , Ghosh and Joshi [ 44 ] presented participants with a guideline for how many sessions that could be carried out when , how often , and what constituted a session . However , some more low control field settings introduced new interface techniques and instructed participants to use it freely over a specified duration while logging their interactions , for example [ 51 , 104 , 132 ] . The study design of Garzonis et al . [ 40 ] is somewhat different . They divided their study into 4 stages with one week of field study with daily prompted but randomly scheduled interactions , fol - lowed by lab studies and web based surveys , thus triangulating research methods . With five hypotheses , they aimed both at investigating the intuitiveness of two con - ditions ( auditory icons and earcons ) as well as hypothesized on the order of lab and field based activities . In line with this , Jain and Boyce [ 57 ] in a case study intro - duced a four - staged model of longitudinal data elicitation , as well as assessed the model with empirical evidence from a case of comparing two mobile applications . Firstly , a usability study was carried out , following three weeks of interacting and diary keeping , thirdly a retrospective reconstruction interview , completed with a follow - up survey after four months of use . With this study design they were able to conclude on how user preferences for the two applications shifted and stabilized , providing a completely different picture than the one from the start of the study . Mchlachlan et al . [ 89 ] reference a concept , as inspiration for their study design , Multi - dimensional In - depth Long - term Case studies ( MILCs ) . They employ this study design for evaluating adoption of a large data set visualization system . In line with this , Gerken et al . [ 42 , 43 ] employed concept maps , in their case used to eval - uate the usability of Application Programming Interfaces . Concept maps , they ar - gue , are particularly good at addressing concerns of qualitative data gathering in longitudinal studies , as they visualize data and make it easier to identify changes over time . Four studies concern social media and being social online [ 3 , 110 , 111 , 127 ] . E . g . , Wang and Kraut [ 127 ] studied the link between social media participation and work 13 performance . They analyzed logged activity on social media , and compared these with internal performance ratings . They collected data once every year from the same participants to study baseline performance and year - to - year variability , and concluded that employers should encourage adoption of social media among their employees . Armchambault and Grudin [ 3 ] investigated the usefulness of social me - dia for organizational communication over a study period of three years . Here they annually invited 1000 randomly selected employees to answer a survey , upon an - swering they were subsequently excluded from participating again . By having rep - resentable samples , authors reported on growth in use and acceptance over the years , as well as changes in behavior and concerns . Additionally , recently Saha et al . [ 105 ] proposes in a case study to view social media as passive sensing for lon - gitudinal studies of behaviour and wellbeing , as one aspect of sensing in a larger project named Tesserae project . Passive sensing as an unobtrusive data collection method , specifically through radio reflections , is proposed by Hsu et al . in response to “ Studies ( that ) rely on diaries and questionnaires , which are subjective , errone - ous and hard to sustain in longitudinal studies ” [ 54 ] . Measuring Or Discussing Change As introduced in the background section , measuring change ( or stability ) is a pri - mary concern for longitudinal studies . Our analysis revealed that 66 % of the CHI papers explicitly report on change ( or stability ) . We have included papers that illus - trate , analyse , or discuss aspects of change in their paper . We assessed the studies’ points of measurement ( PoM ) and distinguish between studies with less than three PoMs and studies with three or more PoMs . For measuring change or stability , 20 papers directly address that issues exist with what they refer to as “snapshot” and cross - sectional studies [ 3 , 10 , 12 , 34 , 41 , 48 , 53 , 55 , 58 , 81 , 85 , 89 , 97 , 100 , 109 , 117 , 122 , 125 , 127 , 134 ] . However , they do not dismiss these studies , rather they see longitudinal as supplementary for exploring different , temporal aims . As an example , Fan et al . [ 34 ] supplemented previous lab studies focusing on short - term recall , with a longitudinal study to focus on measur - able improvement in learning otucomes . As well , Gerken et al . argues “ In a purely cross - sectional design , one might come to the conclusion that a much higher differ - ence between mouse and laser - pointer does exist compared to a more realistic test setting including practice ” [ 41 ] . For Oviatt et al . [ 97 ] the extended study duration over three sessions revealed a stability over time , which they claimed as valuable to inform future design guidelines on ‘adaptive temporal thresholds’ on multimodal integration patterns . A little more than half of the included papers ( 54 % ) report from studies with three or more PoMs , while they also focus on measuring change or stability . Karapanos et al . [ 64 ] , for example , argue that longitudinal studies should integrate three or more POMs to enable greater insight into the exact form of change . Mott et al . [ 93 ] found that mastery comes with repetition and they based their study on several POMs of varying length and interval to regularly measure progress . They stress that the longitudinal nature of their study over eight POMs allowed them to 14 observe user performance with changes over time of two techniques where they expected the learning curves of the two techniques to be different . However , some - times the change is not captured within the original duration , in which case some studies turn to prediction models in favour of extending the duration , e . g . [ 80 ] The changes and stability of use of technologies is also in focus in studies through observations intended to predict which factors influence sustained use e . g . [ 68 , 81 ] . Also , change is not always easy to pinpoint , but can happen over long periods of time ( e . g . [ 10 , 16 , 19 ] ) . Several studies point out that conceptual change or stability is inherently time dependent , e . g . , motivation , relationships , integration , and habit - uation [ 27 , 28 , 36 , 81 , 100 ] . For example , Fiore et al . [ 36 ] studied motivation to initiate participation in longitudinal studies through four conditions of incentives , and although they saw effects on recruitment for some conditions , these did not extend to continued participation . This seems to be a particular problem for longi - tudinal studies , particularly visible in [ 128 ] and also addressed in [ 88 , 105 ] . Longi - tudinal studies like [ 81 , 100 ] focus on motivation for exercise , and Macvean and Robertson [ 81 ] stress that new products inherently have the problem of novelty wearing off . They found that their prototype iFitQuest successfully facilitated light exercise over a seven - week period . It initially encouraged moderate to vigorous in - tensity exercise in many participants , but this tended to level out in the last few weeks of the study . Although the novelty of the product or service in itself can wear off , it might inform long term changes in behaviour ( e . g . [ 68 , 84 , 119 ] ) or the lon - gitudinal study might reveal unintentional consequences of design [ 77 ] . Kim and Mankoff [ 68 ] and Teevan et al . [ 119 ] both found that making the invisible visible , in the form of respectively indoor air quality and changes in web content , saw users reflecting on and changing their behaviour . For Lee et al . [ 77 ] their field work on employing a social robot in a workplace resulted in a so - called “ripple effect” where non - participants would become part of the social interaction as observers or directly involved in the interaction . The extend of the ripple effect were perceived to be unanticipated . We found that 26 papers report from studies with 1 - 2 POMs ( 26 % ) , and 12 of these papers address change or stability . Interestingly , a large number of studies ( 34 % ) did not describe , report , or discussed change or stability explicitly [ 1 , 4 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 18 , 29 , 30 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 45 , 53 , 57 , 58 , 62 , 63 , 70 , 71 , 75 , 83 , 84 , 98 , 104 , 106 , 110 , 116 , 117 , 120 , 126 , 128 , 132 , 136 ] . These papers typically focus on , e . g . , describing , testing , or recommending without mentioning , illustrating or reporting on change over time . Some studies have pre - and post - measurements [ 8 , 9 , 19 , 64 , 119 ] , Karapanos et al . [ 64 ] stress the limitation of having only two PoMs , arguing they are only measuring current states and not the changes that happened in between . Two studies [ 112 , 120 ] have a particularly long duration , where the duration in these cases could be ex - pressed more appropriately as an interval between two points of measurements . For [ 112 ] Sillence et al . studied changes in online health from surveys spaced five years apart and Tullis [ 121 ] re - attempted a study , where participants were asked to point out the pictures they chose six years ago to represent a pictorial password . In the cases where studies primarily rely on automated data logs or highly frequent sensor 15 data , it is not easy to determine PoMs . As an example , Voida et al . [ 125 ] used a continuous data log of user interactions , as well as a post - study interview . Although the authors argue they provide initial evidence of shifts in activities with the intro - duction of their intervention , they also argue for future work to focus on the whole lifecycle of these shifts , which would require more PoMs . Additionally , when data collection is carried out retrospectively , it is not easy to determine PoMs , this was seen for [ 4 , 30 , 110 , 127 , 136 ] . Considerations for Longitudinal HCI Study Design While the three themes under findings constitute a primary contribution of this chapter , we will in the following unfold some of the interesting characteristics of longitudinal HCI research . This discussion unfolds themes from our findings and relates them to longitudinal research ( questions ) . Duration against Saturation Rogers [ 19 ] argued in a feature for Interactions magazine that the burning question in HCI research used to be “ How many participants do I need ? ” but that the hotly debated question now was “ How long should my study run for ? ” This certainly also characterizes longitudinal studies in HCI research , and our findings show that the publications in our study had very different durations . Rogers and Marshall has ech - oed the importance of running long - term studies “in the wild” [ 20 ] . Stacked up against running such long duration studies , however , is the cost and tenure of re - searchers involved as “ papers must be written , and research budgets are tight ” . Our findings suggest that the paper contribution seemed to play a role in determin - ing the duration of a study and it seemed somewhat evident that you need to study over extended periods of time if your aim is to understand how people adapt or use technology in real life contexts , often referred to as in - situ or field studies . But on the other hand , new interaction techniques were often tested in terms of learning , as techniques were compared against baselines . We argue that plateauing in perfor - mance for new interfaces and interaction techniques , often with a short duration , has a stronger focus on data saturation rather than duration , where sessions and in - terval between sessions are more important , rather than the length of the study . An - other trend we found was evolution studies focusing on patterns of change or sta - bility , ultimately with the aim of predicting natural and evolving interactions with technologies or in order to infer design decisions , usually manifest over a longer duration . A goal for longitudinal studies is to run for as long as it takes for changes or stability to emerge [ 18 ] . When novelty bias wears off , the integration into rou - tines and habits begin and will reveal stability . How long this takes depends on the cycles inherent in the object and context of the study . Point Of Measurement : An HCI Perspective Points of measurements receive much attention in related disciplines stating multi - ple points of measurements as a common definition . In HCI research , Kjeldskov et 16 al . [ 11 ] conducted a longitudinal study involving two usability tests on an electronic patient record system with an interval of one year between measurements . This en - abled them to conclude that many usability problems endure , despite interacting with the system regularly in between measurements . They concluded that poor de - sign did not disappear over time even with learning and increased familiarity . We saw such study design in five of our included papers , but Karapanos et al . ( appendix reference [ 64 ] ) , emphasize a limitation to this design “… one may not readily infer time effects as these might be random contextual variation , given that we have only two measurements . ” According to Karapanos et al . [ 9 ] , longitudinal studies with more than two meas - urements points are “ the gold standard ” for measuring change . They do argue that it is increasingly laborious when generalizing over large populations of users and products . However , we argue that this “gold standard” of more than two points of measurements is something to pay attention to in longitudinal study design as un - derlining certainty of change and stability . Karapanos et al . [ 9 ] present retrospective evaluation as an alternative to longitudinal studies . The retrospective evaluation re - lies on the elicitation of user’s experience from memory , but our study suggests that study design employ data logging to aid recall or to altogether replace recalling of events . In the event of relying on or supplementing with data logs , continuous meas - urements was often used . While retrospective or continuous data logging might ob - scure the distinct points of measurements , here lies possibilities for future research for a negotiation on how this will adapt . Contribution Type And Research Questions Besides this comprehensive analysis of CHI papers , we are only aware of one other similar analysis , although less extensive , that has been presented by [ 6 ] as part of a proposed taxonomy for research questions in longitudinal research in HCI . In the following , we will show how the main findings of our study relate to this taxonomy . The taxonomy encompasses two main branches : the research interest in average or cumulative data over time and the research interest in changes over time . Average or cumulative over time is not considered “true” longitudinal research in several other disciplines . But Gerken argues that it is common practice in HCI re - search to call these longitudinal as they share the characteristic of having multiple points of measurements [ 6 ] . This does not mean that this type of contribution is not valuable or appropriate , however in terms of analysis it is comparable to a cross - sectional problem . Without proper framing of research questions and data gathering , you will not get the full benefit of the longitudinal design and can’t conclude on change over time . Examples of these studies can be seen in some studies not con - cerned with change ( appendix reference [ 70 , 104 , 106 , 126 , 132 ] ) . Interest in change ( over time ) is additionally branched into two different contribu - tions namely effect of change and process of change . The effect of change is con - cerned with the outcome of change or pre - and post - measurements , whereas process of change is concerned with the shape of a change process , what events occur and answering in - depth how and why questions . Interest in the effect of change , can be 17 seen in research questions regarding the outcome of change and for pre - post meas - urements . As an example of the first , Gerken et al . ( Appendix reference [ 41 ] ) were concerned with the performance of novel pointing techniques . They compared a laser - pointer to mouse pointing and were interested to see how long it takes partic - ipants to learn to use the laser - pointer . So while they applied multiple PoM they were actually focusing on the outcome of a learning process . In line with this are several of the studies concerned with plateauing in performance , where they are interested in learning , comparison or the ‘crossover point’ . For examples in pre - post measurements see ( Appendix reference [ 8 , 9 , 19 , 64 , 119 , 128 ] ) . For interest in the process of change , we also recognize plateauing in performance papers as addressing the shape of change . One example are input device experi - ments which try to fit learning data to the power law of practice , which in itself is a description of the shape of change . Also , what we termed evolution papers are often concerned with the shape of change . An example can be seen in ( Appendix refer - ence [ 16 ] ) as authors were interested in hierarchical communication patterns and strategies of these and how these strategic patterns change during a project lifecycle . According to Gerken’s taxonomy , the interest in process of change can also be ex - pressed as interest in occurrences of events or more specifically whether or when events occur . An example of a research question is : “ Whether and when do people adopt a specific new technology in their daily routine ? ” [ 6 ] . Although not explicitly formulated as a research question , rather formed from inductive analysis , ( Appendix reference [ 32 ] ) saw how one community changed from using one technology to another during the study . However , they do not argue why this happened . Meanwhile , we also recognize that studies not included in this review concern the shape of change over time ( e . g . for field deployments of design artefacts ) . For ex - ample , Odom et al . designing intentionally for slowness ( stating regular points of measurements ) [ 14 ] [ 15 ] and Gaver et al . who present empirical understandings on how to overcome the often short - lived effects of most environmental HCI interven - tions [ 5 ] . Often these studies , while not explicitly longitudinal , concern introducing change in the form of new ( to the user ) technologies and reporting in what ways attitudes , behavior and practice changes . Implications for Longitudinal HCI Research Summarizing our overview of common characteristics and three points of consid - eration above , we will now outline three implications for longitudinal HCI studies , that we perceive as important to consider . These relate to studies that involves meas - uring longitudinal data on what happens to a set of participants during a series of time points as articulated and pointed out by Gerken [ 7 ] . Firstly , time duration should not be considered a singular attribute in longitudinal studies . Our analysis found that it is important for HCI researchers to consider du - ration not as a singular attribute , but in relation to points of measurements or even expected change rate . Therefore , just conducting a long - term study does not make the study longitudinal , and in fact , sometimes it is not even necessary to run for a 18 long period of time , if the observed variable changes quickly and can be measured with multiple points of measurements in a short duration . Secondly , longitudinal data measures should be considered when conducting stud - ies in the wild , or sometimes known as field or in - situ studies . Our analysis further showed that field studies sometimes already have the necessary duration to actually conduct longitudinal measures using multiple and systematic points of measure - ments to measure changes ( or stability ) over time . But our study also showed , that despite having the duration for longitudinal collection , many of them lack a system - atic study design to express change over time for mainly qualitative approaches . Thirdly , subject progression is important when conducting laboratory studies . While our analysis found that laboratory studies involving longitudinal aspects have rather different characteristics e . g . duration or session lengths , we observed that for several of these studies , it was important to track subject progression throughout the study , for example when subjects go from being novices to experts ( e . g . when learn - ing a new interaction technique or a new type of interface or prototype ) . This relates closely to plateauing and evolution in longitudinal studies , and involves selecting and defining meaningful measure metrics and variables . Thus , researchers should be careful when designing such studies and decide how progression can be deter - mined . Conclusion We have conducted an analysis of 106 publications at the CHI conferences pub - lished in the period 1982 to 2019 in which longitudinal studies are reported . Our motivation for this study was the lack of empirical understanding on how pre - vious HCI studies have conducted longitudinal studies and we hope that such an understanding can bring forward discussions of longitudinal HCI , with the ultimate aim to reach common consensus and a shared definition . Our findings illustrated that HCI longitudinal studies are highly diverse in terms of duration lasting from studies conducted over a few days to studies conducted over several years . In our findings we explained two longitudinal trends , namely plateauing in perfor - mance and evolution studies . These do not cover the entire pool of included papers , but they do describe important characteristics of several longitudinal HCI studies . Studies considered in our analysis integrate different metrics , and we found that the paper contribution type highly influences the longitudinal study design . We further found that more than half of the papers discuss or illustrate change or stability dur - ing their studies . We analyzed previous longitudinal research published on CHI for researchers wishing to conduct longitudinal studies to take inspiration and advice , as well as learn from past challenges and successes . REFERENCES 1 . Bargas - Avila J a . , Hornbæk K ( 2011 ) Old wine in new bottles or novel challenges . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , 19 USA , p 2689 2 . Baxter KK , Avrekh A , Evans B ( 2015 ) Using Experience Sampling Methodology to Collect Deep Data About Your Users . In : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’15 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 2489 – 2490 3 . Bickmore TW , Consolvo S , Intille SS ( 2009 ) Engagement by design . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 4807 4 . Courage C , Jain J , Rosenbaum S ( 2009 ) Best practices in longitudinal research . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 4791 5 . Gaver W , Michael M , Kerridge T , Wilkie A , Boucher A , Ovalle L , Plummer - Fernandez M ( 2015 ) Energy babble : Mixing environmentally - oriented internet content to engage community groups . In : Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . pp 1115 – 1124 6 . Gerken J ( 2011 ) Longitudinal Research in Human - Computer Interaction . Universität Konstanz 7 . Jain J , Rosenbaum S , Courage C ( 2010 ) Best practices in longitudinal research . In : Proceedings of the 28th of the international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 3167 8 . Karapanos E , Jain J , Hassenzahl M ( 2012 ) Theories , methods and case studies of longitudinal HCI research . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference extended abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts - CHI EA ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2727 9 . Karapanos E , Martens J , Hassenzahl M ( 2010 ) On the retrospective assessment of users’ experiences over time . In : Proceedings of the 28th of the international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 4075 10 . Karapanos E , Zimmerman J , Forlizzi J ( 2009 ) User Experience Over Time : An Initial Framework . Chi2009 Proc 27Th Annu Chi Conf Hum Factors Comput Syst Vols 1 - 4 729 – 738 11 . Kjeldskov J , Skov MB , Stage J ( 2010 ) A longitudinal study of usability in health care : Does time heal ? Int J Med Inform 79 : e135 – e143 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijmedinf . 2008 . 07 . 008 12 . Lazar J , Feng J , Hochheiser H ( 2017 ) Research Methods in Human - Computer Interaction , 2nd ed . Morgan Kaufmann 20 13 . Menard S ( 2002 ) Longitudinal Research , 2nd ed . SAGE Publications 14 . Odom W , Wakkary R , Hol J , Naus B , Verburg P , Amram T , Chen AYS ( 2019 ) Investigating Slowness as a Frame to Design Longer - Term Experiences with Personal Data . In : Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1 – 16 15 . Odom WT , Sellen AJ , Banks R , Kirk DS , Regan T , Selby M , Forlizzi JL , Zimmerman J ( 2014 ) Designing for slowness , anticipation and re - visitation . In : Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1961 – 1970 16 . Pettigrew AM ( 1990 ) Longitudinal Field Research on Change : Theory and Practice . Organ Sci 1 : 267 – 292 . doi : 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1 . 3 . 267 17 . Pettigrew AM ( 1997 ) What is a processual analysis ? Scand J Manag 13 : 337 – 348 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0956 - 5221 ( 97 ) 00020 - 1 18 . Ployhart RE , Vandenberg RJ ( 2010 ) Longitudinal Research : The Theory , Design , and Analysis of Change . J Manage 36 : 94 – 120 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0149206309352110 19 . Rogers Y ( 2011 ) Interaction design gone wild . interactions 18 : 58 20 . Rogers Y , Paul M ( 2017 ) Research In the Wild . Morgan & Claypool , London 21 . Taris T ( 2000 ) A Primer in Longitudinal Data Analysis . SAGE Publications 22 . Vaughan M , Courage C ( 2007 ) SIG : capturing longitudinal usability . In : CHI ’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’07 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2149 23 . Vaughan M , Courage C , Rosenbaum S , Jain J , Hammontree M , Beale R , Welsh D ( 2008 ) Longitudinal usability data collection . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2261 APPENDIX REFERENCES ( CHI 1982 - 2019 ) 1 . * Alcaidinho J ( 2016 ) Canine Behavior and Working Dog Suitability from Quanti - metric Data . In : Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’16 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 193 – 197 2 . * Aragon CR , Williams A ( 2011 ) Collaborative creativity . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1875 3 . * Archambault A , Grudin J ( 2012 ) A longitudinal study of facebook , linkedin , & twitter use . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human 21 Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2741 4 . * Arguello J , Butler BS , Joyce L , Kraut R , Ling KS , Wang X ( 2006 ) Talk to me : foun - dations for successful individual - group interactions in online communities . In : Proceedings of the 2006 SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing sys - tems - CHI ’06 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 959 5 . Baxter KK , Avrekh A , Evans B ( 2015 ) Using Experience Sampling Methodology to Collect Deep Data About Your Users . In : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’15 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 2489 – 2490 6 . Beale R , Vaughan M , Courage C , Rosenbaum S , Jain J , Hammontree M , Welsh D ( 2008 ) Longitudinal usability data collection . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing sys - tems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2261 7 . Bickmore TW , Caruso L , Clough - Gorr K ( 2005 ) Acceptance and usability of a re - lational agent interface by urban older adults . In : CHI ’05 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’05 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1212 8 . * Bickmore TW , Picard RW ( 2004 ) Towards caring machines . In : Extended abstracts of the 2004 conference on Human factors and computing systems - CHI ’04 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1489 9 . * Bickmore TW , Consolvo S , Intille SS ( 2009 ) Engagement by design . In : Proceed - ings of the 27th international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 4807 10 . * Boardman R , Sasse MA ( 2004 ) “Stuff goes into the computer and doesn’t come out” : a cross - tool study of peronal information management . In : Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’04 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 583 – 590 11 . * Bruun A , Gull P , Hofmeister L , Stage J ( 2009 ) Let your users do the testing : a comparison of three remote asynchronous usability testing methods . In : Proceed - ings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1619 12 . * Burke M , Kraut RE ( 2014 ) Growing closer on facebook : changes in tie strength through social network site use . In : Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM confer - ence on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 4187 – 4196 13 . * Burke M , Kraut R , Marlow C ( 2011 ) Social capital on facebook : differentiating uses and users . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 571 14 . * Campbell RL ( 1990 ) Developmental scenario analysis of Smalltalk programming . In : Proceedings of the 1990 SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems Empowering people - CHI ’90 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 269 – 276 22 15 . * Castellucci SJ , MacKenzie IS ( 2008 ) Graffiti vs . unistrokes : an empirical compari - son . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 305 16 . * Cataldo M , Ehrlich K ( 2012 ) The impact of communication structure on new prod - uct development outcomes . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 3081 17 . Chang JS , Doucette AF , Yeboah G , Welsh T , Nitsche M , Mazalek A ( 2018 ) A Tan - gible VR Game Designed for Spatial Penetrative Thinking Ability . In : Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 4 18 . * Chattopadhyay D , O’Hara K , Rintel S , Rädle R ( 2016 ) Office Social : Presentation Interactivity for Nearby Devices . In : Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 2487 – 2491 19 . * Chu SL , Schlegel R , Quek F , Christy A , Chen K ( 2017 ) “I Make , Therefore I Am” : The Effects of Curriculum - Aligned Making on Children’s Self - Identity . In : Pro - ceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 109 – 120 20 . * Clarkson E , Clawson J , Lyons K , Starner T ( 2005 ) An empirical study of typing rates on mini - QWERTY keyboards . In : CHI ’05 extended abstracts on Human fac - tors in computing systems - CHI ’05 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1288 21 . Clarkson E , Lyons K , Clawson J , Starner T ( 2007 ) Revisiting and validating a model of two - thumb text entry . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’07 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 163 – 166 22 . Clawson J , Lyons K , Rudnick A , Iannucci RA , Starner T ( 2008 ) Automatic white - out + + : correcting mini - QWERTY typing errors using keypress timing . In : Pro - ceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference on Human factors in compu - ting systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 573 23 . Constantinides M ( 2015 ) Apps with Habits : Adaptive Interfaces for News Apps . In : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’15 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 191 – 194 24 . * Cook GJ , Grabski S V . ( 1992 ) An empirical examination of software - mediated in - formation exchange and communication richness . In : Posters and short talks of the 1992 SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’92 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 46 25 . Courage C , Jain J , Rosenbaum S ( 2010 ) Best practices in longitudinal research . In : Proceedings of the 28th of the international conference extended abstracts on Hu - man factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 3167 26 . Courage C , Jain J , Rosenbaum S ( 2009 ) Best practices in longitudinal research . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 4791 23 27 . * Dantec CA Le , Farrell RG , Christensen JE , Bailey M , Ellis JB , Kellogg WA , Ed - wards WK ( 2011 ) Publics in practice : ubiquitous computing at a shelter for home - less mothers . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1687 28 . * Dantec C Le ( 2012 ) Participation and publics : supporting community engagement . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1351 29 . * Day J , Foley J ( 2006 ) Evaluating web lectures : a case study from HCI . In : CHI ’06 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’06 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 195 30 . * Ducheneaut N , Yee N , Nickell E , Moore RJ ( 2006 ) “Alone together ? ” : exploring the social dynamics of massively multiplayer online games . In : Proceedings of the 2006 SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems - CHI ’06 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 407 31 . Dudley C , Jones SL ( 2018 ) Fitbit for the Mind ? : An Exploratory Study of “Cogni - tive Personal Informatics . ” In : Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 6 32 . * Erete S , Burrell JO ( 2017 ) Empowered Participation : How Citizens Use Technol - ogy in Local Governance . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 2307 – 2319 33 . * Erickson T ( 1996 ) The design and long - term use of a personal electronic notebook : a reflective analysis . In : Proceedings of the 1996 SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems common ground - CHI ’96 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 11 – 18 34 . * Fan X , Luo W , Wang J ( 2017 ) Mastery Learning of Second Language through Asynchronous Modeling of Native Speakers in a Collaborative Mobile Game . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 4887 – 4898 35 . Fiorani M , Mariani M , Minin L , Montanari R ( 2008 ) Monitoring time - headway in car - following task . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference ex - tended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2143 36 . * Fiore AT , Cheshire C , Shaw Taylor L , Mendelsohn GA ( 2014 ) Incentives to par - ticipate in online research : an experimental examination of “surprise” incentives . In : Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in com - puting systems - CHI ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 3433 – 3442 37 . * Fitchett S , Cockburn A , Gutwin C ( 2014 ) Finder highlights : field evaluation and design of an augmented file browser . In : Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 3685 – 3694 38 . * Flounders C ( 2001 ) “Are you there Margaret ? It’s me , Margaret” : speech recogni - tion as a mirror . In : CHI ’01 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’01 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 459 39 . Friess E ( 2008 ) Defending design decisions with usability evidence : a case study . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference extended abstracts on 24 Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2009 40 . * Garzonis S , Jones S , Jay T , O’Neill E ( 2009 ) Auditory icon and earcon mobile ser - vice notifications : intuitiveness , learnability , memorability and preference . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1513 41 . * Gerken J , Bieg H - J , Dierdorf S , Reiterer H ( 2009 ) Enhancing input device evalua - tion : longitudinal approaches . In : Proceedings of the 27th international confer - ence extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 4351 42 . * Gerken J , Jetter H , Reiterer H ( 2010 ) Using concept maps to evaluate the usability of APIs . In : Proceedings of the 28th of the international conference extended ab - stracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 3937 43 . * Gerken J , Jetter H , Zöllner M , Mader M , Reiterer H ( 2011 ) The concept maps method as a tool to evaluate the usability of APIs . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 3373 44 . * Ghosh S , Joshi A , Joshi M , Emmadi N , Dalvi G , Ahire S , Rangale S ( 2017 ) Shift + Tap or Tap + LongPress ? : The Upper Bound of Typing Speed on InScript . In : Proceed - ings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 2059 – 2063 45 . * Gray CM ( 2014 ) Evolution of design competence in UX practice . In : Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1645 – 1654 46 . * Gupta A , Balakrishnan R ( 2016 ) DualKey : Miniature Screen Text Entry via Finger Identification . In : Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 59 – 70 47 . * Harada S , Takagi H , Asakawa C ( 2011 ) On the audio representation of radial di - rection . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in com - puting systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2779 48 . * Harada S , Wobbrock JO , Malkin J , Bilmes JA , Landay JA ( 2009 ) Longitudinal study of people learning to use continuous voice - based cursor control . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 347 49 . * Harrison J , Chamberlain A , McPherson AP ( 2019 ) Accessible Instruments in the Wild : Engaging with a Community of Learning - Disabled Musicians . In : Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 6 50 . Hass C , Rosenzweig E ( 2017 ) Rivet Counting and Ocean Crossing : Case Examples Illuminating the Fracticality of the Theory - Practice Cycle and the Importance of Horizon Expansion . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Ab - stracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1012 – 1017 25 51 . * Hoggan E , Brewster SA ( 2010 ) Crosstrainer : testing the use of multimodal inter - faces in situ . In : Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human fac - tors in computing systems - CHI ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 333 52 . Houben S , Weichel C ( 2013 ) Overcoming interaction blindness through curiosity objects . In : CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems on - CHI EA ’13 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1539 53 . * Howard S , Kjeldskov J , Skov MB , Garnæs K , Grünberger O ( 2006 ) Negotiating presence - in - absence : contact , content and context . In : Proceedings of the 2006 SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems - CHI ’06 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 909 54 . * Hsu C - Y , Hristov R , Lee G - H , Zhao M , Katabi D ( 2019 ) Enabling Identification and Behavioral Sensing in Homes using Radio Reflections . In : Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1 – 13 55 . * Hutto CJ , Yardi S , Gilbert E ( 2013 ) A longitudinal study of follow predictors on twitter . In : Proceedings of the 2013 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 821 – 830 56 . * Irons DM ( 1982 ) Cognitive correlates of programming tasks in novice program - mers . In : Proceedings of the 1982 conference on Human factors in computing sys - tems - CHI ’82 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 219 – 222 57 . * Jain J , Boyce S ( 2012 ) Case study : longitudinal comparative analysis for analyzing user behavior . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference extended ab - stracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts - CHI EA ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 793 58 . * Jain J , Ghosh R , Dekhil M ( 2008 ) Multimodal capture of consumer intent in retail . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 3207 59 . * Jain M , Balakrishnan R ( 2012 ) User learning and performance with bezel menus . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2221 60 . * Jensen C , Lonsdale H , Wynn E , Cao J , Slater M , Dietterich TG ( 2010 ) The life and times of files and information : a study of desktop provenance . In : Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 767 61 . Jones W , Bellotti V , Capra R , Dinneen JD , Mark G , Marshall C , Moffatt K , Teevan J , Van Kleek M ( 2016 ) For Richer , for Poorer , in Sickness or in Health . . . : The Long - Term Management of Personal Information . In : Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Con - ference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’16 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 3508 – 3515 62 . * Ju WG , Lee BA , Klemmer SR ( 2007 ) Range : exploring proxemics in collaborative whiteboard interaction . In : CHI ’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in com - puting systems - CHI ’07 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2483 26 63 . * Kantner L , Goold SD , Danis M , Nowak M , Monroe - Gatrell L ( 2006 ) Web tool for ealth insurance design by small groups : usability study . In : CHI ’06 extended ab - stracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’06 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 141 64 . * Karapanos E , Hassenzahl M , Martens J - B ( 2008 ) User experience over time . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference extended abstracts on Hu - man factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 3561 65 . Karapanos E , Jain J , Hassenzahl M ( 2012 ) Theories , methods and case studies of longitudinal HCI research . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference extended abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts - CHI EA ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2727 66 . Karapanos E , Martens J , Hassenzahl M ( 2010 ) On the retrospective assessment of users’ experiences over time . In : Proceedings of the 28th of the international con - ference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 4075 67 . Khan MT , Hyun M , Kanich C , Ur B ( 2018 ) Forgotten But Not Gone : Identifying the Need for Longitudinal Data Management in Cloud Storage . In : Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1 – 12 68 . * Kim S , Paulos E , Mankoff J ( 2013 ) inAir : a longitudinal study of indoor air quality measurements and visualizations . In : Proceedings of the 2013 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 2745 – 2754 69 . Kirman B , Linehan C , Lawson S ( 2012 ) Get lost : facilitating serendipitous explo - ration in location - sharing services . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual con - ference extended abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts - CHI EA ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2303 70 . * Kleek MG Van , Bernstein M , Panovich K , Vargas GG , Karger DR , Schraefel M ( 2009 ) Note to self : examining personal information keeping in a lightweight note - taking tool . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1477 71 . * Kleek MG Van , Styke W , Schraefel M c . , Karger D ( 2011 ) Finders / keepers : a lon - gitudinal study of people managing information scraps in a micro - note tool . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing sys - tems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2907 72 . * Költringer T , Van MN , Grechenig T ( 2007 ) Game controller text entry with alpha - betic and multi - tap selection keyboards . In : CHI ’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’07 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2513 73 . * Kristensson PO , Denby LC ( 2009 ) Text entry performance of state of the art un - constrained handwriting recognition : a longitudinal user study . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 567 74 . * Larsen SB , Bardram JE ( 2008 ) Competence articulation : alignment of competences and responsibilities in synchronous telemedical collaboration . In : Proceeding of 27 the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 553 75 . * Latulipe C , Carroll EA , Lottridge D ( 2011 ) Evaluating longitudinal projects com - bining technology with temporal arts . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual confer - ence on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1835 76 . Lee K , Kim S , Myaeng S - H ( 2013 ) Measuring touch bias of one thumb posture on direct touch - based mobile devices . In : CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems on - CHI EA ’13 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 241 77 . * Lee MK , Kiesler S , Forlizzi J , Rybski P ( 2012 ) Ripple effects of an embedded social agent : a field study of a social robot in the workplace . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 695 78 . * Lee U , Kim J , Yi E , Sung J , Gerla M ( 2013 ) Analyzing crowd workers in mobile pay - for - answer q & a . In : Proceedings of the 2013 CHI Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 533 – 542 79 . * Lyons K , Starner T , Plaisted D , Fusia J , Lyons A , Drew A , Looney EW ( 2004 ) Twid - dler typing : one - hand chording text entry for mobile phones . In : Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’04 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 671 – 678 80 . * MacKenzie IS , Zhang SX ( 1999 ) The design and evaluation of a high - performance soft keyboard . In : Proceedings of the 1999 SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems the CHI is the limit - CHI ’99 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 25 – 31 81 . * Macvean A , Robertson J ( 2013 ) Understanding exergame users’ physical activity , motivation and behavior over time . In : Proceedings of the 2013 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1251 – 1260 82 . * Majaranta P , Ahola U , Š pakov O ( 2009 ) Fast gaze typing with an adjustable dwell time . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 357 83 . * Maldonado H , Lee B , Klemmer S ( 2006 ) Technology for design education : a case study . In : CHI ’06 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’06 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1067 84 . * Mann A - M , Hinrichs U , Read JC , Quigley A ( 2016 ) Facilitator , Functionary , Friend or Foe ? : Studying the Role of iPads within Learning Activities Across a School Year . In : Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Compu - ting Systems - CHI ’16 . pp 1833 – 1845 85 . * Mariakakis A , Parsi S , Patel SN , Wobbrock JO ( 2018 ) Drunk user interfaces : De - termining blood alcohol level through everyday smartphone tasks . Proc 2018 CHI Conf Hum Factors Comput Syst - CHI ’18 2018 - April : 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173808 86 . Marquardt N , Greenberg S ( 2015 ) Sketching User Experiences : The Hands - on Course . In : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts 28 on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’15 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 2479 – 2480 87 . * Masliah MR , Milgram P ( 2000 ) Measuring the allocation of control in a 6 degree - of - freedom docking experiment . In : Proceedings of the 2000 SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’00 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 25 – 32 88 . * Mattingly SM , Gregg JM , Audia P , Bayraktaroglu AE , Campbell AT , Chawla N V . , Das Swain V , De Choudhury M , D’Mello SK , Dey AK , Gao G , Jagannath K , Jiang K , Lin S , Liu Q , Mark G , Martinez GJ , Masaba K , Mirjafari S , Moskal E , Mulukutla R , Nies K , Reddy MD , Robles - Granda P , Saha K , Sirigiri A , Striegel A ( 2019 ) The Tesserae Project : Large - Scale . Longitudinal , In Situ , Multimodal Sensing of Infor - mation Workers . In : Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 8 89 . * McLachlan P , Munzner T , Koutsofios E , North S ( 2008 ) LiveRAC : interactive vis - ual exploration of system management time - series data . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1483 90 . * Meyer J , Wasmann M , Heuten W , El Ali A , Boll SCJ ( 2017 ) Identification and Clas - sification of Usage Patterns in Long - Term Activity Tracking . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 667 – 678 91 . Millen DR , Yang M , Warner M ( 2013 ) Best practices for enterprise social software adoption . In : CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems on - CHI EA ’13 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2349 92 . * Molapo M , Densmore M , DeRenzi B ( 2017 ) Video Consumption Patterns for First Time Smartphone Users : Community Health Workers in Lesotho . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 6159 – 6170 93 . * Mott ME , Williams S , Wobbrock JO , Morris MR ( 2017 ) Improving Dwell - Based Gaze Typing with Dynamic , Cascading Dwell Times . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 2558 – 2570 94 . * Ni T , Bowman D , North C ( 2011 ) AirStroke : bringing unistroke text entry to free - hand gesture interfaces . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2473 95 . * Niemantsverdriet K , van de Werff T , van Essen H , Eggen B ( 2018 ) Share and Share Alike ? Social Information and Interaction Style in Coordination of Shared Use . In : Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems - CHI ’18 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1 – 14 96 . * Nilsen E , Jong H , Olson JS , Biolsi K , Rueter H , Mutter S ( 1993 ) The growth of software skill : a longitudinal look at learning & performance . In : Proceedings of the 1993 SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’93 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 149 – 156 97 . * Oviatt S , Lunsford R , Coulston R ( 2005 ) Individual differences in multimodal in - tegration patterns : what are they and why do they exist ? In : Proceedings of the 29 2005 SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’05 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 241 98 . * Parkes AJ , Raffle HS , Ishii H ( 2008 ) Topobo in the wild : longitudinal evaluations of educators appropriating a tangible interface . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1129 99 . * Pasquetto I V , Sands AE , Darch PT , Borgman CL ( 2016 ) Open Data in Scientific Settings : From Policy to Practice . In : Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1585 – 1596 100 . * Pfeifer LM , Bickmore T ( 2011 ) Is the media equation a flash in the pan ? : the du - rability and longevity of social responses to computers . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 777 101 . Rector K ( 2014 ) The development of novel eyes - free exercise technologies using participatory design . In : Proceedings of the extended abstracts of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 327 – 330 102 . Ren J , Schulman D , Jack B , Bickmore TW ( 2014 ) Supporting longitudinal change in many health behaviors . In : Proceedings of the extended abstracts of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1657 – 1662 103 . Richter H ( 2002 ) Understanding meeting capture and access . In : CHI ’02 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’02 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 558 104 . * Robinson S , Rajput N , Jones M , Jain A , Sahay S , Nanavati A ( 2011 ) TapBack : to - wards richer mobile interfaces in impoverished contexts . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2733 105 . * Saha K , Bayraktaroglu AE , Campbell AT , Chawla N V . , De Choudhury M , D’Mello SK , Dey AK , Gao G , Gregg JM , Jagannath K , Mark G , Martinez GJ , Mattingly SM , Moskal E , Sirigiri A , Striegel A , Yoo DW ( 2019 ) Social Media as a Passive Sensor in Longitudinal Studies of Human Behavior and Wellbeing . In : Extended Ab - stracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 8 106 . * Sato M , Puri RS , Olwal A , Ushigome Y , Franciszkiewicz L , Chandra D , Poupyrev I , Raskar R ( 2017 ) Zensei : Embedded , Multi - electrode Bioimpedance Sensing for Implicit , Ubiquitous User Recognition . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 3972 – 3985 107 . * Schwartz T , Denef S , Stevens G , Ramirez L , Wulf V ( 2013 ) Cultivating energy literacy : results from a longitudinal living lab study of a home energy manage - ment system . In : Proceedings of the 2013 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1193 – 1202 108 . Seay AF , Jerome WJ , Lee KS , Kraut RE ( 2004 ) Project massive : a study of online gamin communities . In : Extended abstracts of the 2004 conference on Human 30 factors and computing systems - CHI ’04 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1421 109 . * Seay AF , Kraut RE ( 2007 ) Project massive : self - regulation and problematic use of online gaming . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’07 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 829 – 838 110 . * Settles B , Dow S ( 2013 ) Let’s get together : the formation and success of online creative collaborations . In : Proceedings of the 2013 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 2009 – 2018 111 . * Shami NS , Nichols J , Chen J ( 2014 ) Social media participation and performance at work : a longitudinal study . In : Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 115 – 118 112 . * Sillence E , Briggs P , Harris P , Fishwick L ( 2006 ) Changes in online health usage over the last 5 years . In : CHI ’06 extended abstracts on Human factors in compu - ting systems - CHI EA ’06 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1331 113 . * Son J , Ahn S , Kim S , Lee G ( 2019 ) Improving Two - Thumb Touchpad Typing in Virtual Reality . In : Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 6 114 . * Sporka AJ , Felzer T , Kurniawan SH , Polá č ek O , Haiduk P , MacKenzie IS ( 2011 ) CHANTI : predictive text entry using non - verbal vocal input . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2463 115 . * Sporka AJ , Kurniawan SH , Mahmud M , Slavik P ( 2007 ) Longitudinal study of con - tinuous non - speech operated mouse pointer . In : CHI ’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’07 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2669 116 . * Tak S , Cockburn A ( 2010 ) Improved window switching interfaces . In : Proceedings of the 28th of the international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2915 117 . * Tan A , Kondoz AM ( 2008 ) Barriers to virtual collaboration . In : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2045 118 . * Taylor N , Cheverst K , Wright P , Olivier P ( 2013 ) Leaving the wild : lessons from community technology handovers . In : Proceedings of the 2013 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1549 – 1558 119 . * Teevan J , Dumais ST , Liebling DJ ( 2010 ) A longitudinal study of how highlighting web content change affects people’s web interactions . In : Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1353 120 . * Tossell C , Kortum P , Rahmati A , Shepard C , Zhong L ( 2012 ) Characterizing web use on smartphones . In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on 31 Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2769 121 . * Tullis TS , Tedesco DP , McCaffrey KE ( 2011 ) Can users remember their pictorial passwords six years later . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1789 122 . * Vance A , Kirwan B , Bjornn D , Jenkins J , Anderson BB ( 2017 ) What Do We Really Know about How Habituation to Warnings Occurs Over Time ? : A Longitudinal fMRI Study of Habituation and Polymorphic Warnings . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 2215 – 2227 123 . Vaughan M , Courage C ( 2007 ) SIG : capturing longitudinal usability . In : CHI ’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’07 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2149 124 . * Vaughn LJ , Bortnick MJ , Carey J , Orgovan VR , Munko J ( 2018 ) Measuring Re - sponse Rate and Increasing Satisfaction in Innovative Environments : The Impact of Feedback . In : Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 7 125 . * Voida S , Mynatt ED ( 2009 ) It feels better than filing : everyday work experiences in an activity - based computing system . In : Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 259 126 . * Wang EJ , Zhu J , Jain M , Lee T - J , Saba E , Nachman L , Patel SN ( 2018 ) Seismo : Blood Pressure Monitoring using Built - in Smartphone Accelerometer and Camera . In : Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems - CHI ’18 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1 – 9 127 . * Wang Y , Kraut R ( 2012 ) Twitter and the development of an audience : those who stay on topic thrive ! In : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1515 128 . * White RW , Richardson M , Liu Y ( 2011 ) Effects of community size and contact rate in synchronous social q & a . In : Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Hu - man factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 2837 129 . Williamson JR , Williamson J , Kostakos V , Hamilton K , Green J ( 2016 ) Mobile Phone Usage Cycles : A Torus Topology for Spherical Visualisation . In : Proceed - ings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems - CHI EA ’16 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 2751 – 2757 130 . Wilson G , Carter T , Subramanian S , Brewster SA ( 2014 ) Perception of ultrasonic haptic feedback on the hand : localisation and apparent motion . In : Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 1133 – 1142 131 . * Wobbrock J , Myers B , Rothrock B ( 2006 ) Few - key text entry revisited : mnemonic gestures on four keys . In : Proceedings of the 2006 SIGCHI conference on Human 32 Factors in computing systems - CHI ’06 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 489 132 . * Xu Q , Casiez G ( 2010 ) Push - and - pull switching : window switching based on win - dow overlapping . In : Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 1335 133 . * Yee N , Ducheneaut N , Yao M , Nelson L ( 2011 ) Do men heal more when in drag ? : conflicting identity cues between user and avatar . In : Proceedings of the 2011 an - nual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , p 773 134 . * Yeo H , Phang X , Castellucci SJ , Kristensson PO , Quigley A ( 2017 ) Investigating Tilt - based Gesture Keyboard Entry for Single - Handed Text Entry on Large De - vices . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Compu - ting Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 4194 – 4202 135 . Yu B ( 2016 ) Adaptive Biofeedback for Mind - Body Practices . In : Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems - CHI EA ’16 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 260 – 264 136 . * Yürüten O , Zhang J , Pu PHZ ( 2014 ) Predictors of life satisfaction based on daily activities from mobile sensor data . In : Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM con - ference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , pp 497 – 500 137 . Zhang LH , Bucci P , Cang XL , MacLean K ( 2018 ) Infusing CuddleBits with Emo - tion : Build your Own and Tell Us About it . In : Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 4