An Extended Filament Based Lamellipodium Model Produces Various Moving Cell Shapes in the Presence of Chemotactic Signals Angelika Manhart ∗ Christian Schmeiser † Nikolaos Sfakianakis ‡ Dietmar Oelz § February 10 , 2015 Abstract The Filament Based Lamellipodium Model ( FBLM ) is a two - phase two - dimensional continuum model , describing the dynamcis of two in - teracting families of locally parallel actin ﬁlaments [ 31 ] . It contains accounts of the ﬁlaments’ bending stiﬀness , of adhesion to the sub - strate , and of cross - links connecting the two families . An extension of the model is presented with contributions from nucleation of ﬁlaments by branching , from capping , from contraction by actin - myosin interaction , and from a pressure - like repulsion between parallel ﬁlaments due to Coulomb interaction . The eﬀect of a chemoat - tractant is described by a simple signal transduction model inﬂuencing the polymerization speed . Simulations with the extended model show its potential for describing various moving cell shapes , depending on the signal transduction procedure , and for predicting transients be - tween nonmoving and moving states as well as changes of direction . Keywords : Chemotaxis , Actin , Mathematical Model , Cytoskeleton Acknowledgments : Financial support by the Austrian Science Fund ( FWF ) through the doctoral school Dissipation and Dispersion in Nonlinear PDEs ( project W1245 , A . M . ) and the Schrödinger Fellowship ( J3463 - N25 , D . O . ) as well as the Vienna Science and Technology Fund ( WWTF ) ( project LS13 / 029 ) . ∗ Faculty of Mathematics , University of Vienna , Oskar - Morgenstern Platz 1 , 1090 Vienna , Austria , University of Vienna , Email : angelika . manhart @ univie . ac . at , Tel : + 431427750716 † Faculty of Mathematics , University of Vienna , Oskar - Morgenstern Platz 1 , 1090 Vi - enna , Austria , Email : christian . schmeiser @ univie . ac . at ‡ Johannes Gutenberg University , Staudingerweg 9 , 55099 , Mainz , Germany , Email : sfakiana @ uni - mainz . de § Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences , New York University , 251 Mercer Street , New York , N . Y . 10012 - 1185 , Email : dietmar @ cims . nyu . edu 1 a r X i v : 1502 . 02442v1 [ q - b i o . CB ] 9 F e b 2015 1 Introduction In contact to ﬂat adhesive substrates , many cell types tend to develop thin protrusions , called lamellipodia [ 45 ] . These are very dynamic structures , supported by a network of ﬁlaments of polymerized actin , which is continu - ously remodelled by polymerization and depolymerization as well as by the building and breaking of cross - links and adhesive bonds to the substrate . Po - larization of cells due to internal instabilities [ 47 , 56 ] or to external signals [ 37 , 8 , 12 , 57 ] might lead to crawling movement along the substrate . This movement serves as a model for the motility of various cell types in natural environments , such as ﬁbroblasts , tumor cells , leukocytes , keratocytes , and others . The dynamics of the ﬁlament network is a complicated process , and ef - fects to be taken into account , additionally to what has been mentioned above , include the nucleation of new ﬁlaments by branching oﬀ existing ﬁla - ments , deactivation of ﬁlaments by capping , and contraction by actin - myosin interaction ( [ 16 ] , references therein , and more references below ) . Various attempts have dealt with the formulation of mechanical and , consequen - tially , mathematical models for the involved subprocesses as well as for the whole integrated system ( [ 24 ] and references therein ) . On the level of in - dividual actin ﬁlaments , polymerization , depolymerization , branching , and capping are typically modeled as stochastic processes , where the regulation of polymerization as the key process pushing the lamellipodium outward has received the biggest attention [ 26 , 35 ] . Models based on individual ﬁl - aments have provided possible explanations for various phenomena , such as the motility of pathogens in host cells [ 27 ] . For the description of the morphology dynamics of whole lamellipodia these models are too complex , however . Therefore , continuum models for the mechanics of the ﬁlament net - work have been used , where the choice of model is typically guided by the expected rheological properties , such as viscoelasticity or active contraction due to actin - myosin interaction [ 41 , 25 , 1 , 10 ] . This work is a continuation of previous eﬀorts [ 31 ] to systematically de - rive a continuum model from ﬁlament based descriptions by an averaging process similar to homogenization of materials with microstructure . This allows to include detailed knowledge or assumptions on all subprocesses . We discuss the modeling assumptions of the Filament Based Lamellipodium Model ( FBLM ) , starting with those aspects , which are taken from [ 31 ] with - out changes . Geometry : As common in homogenization , the averaging process is fa - cilitated by idealizing assumptions on the microstructure . For lamellipodia , the two main assumptions are a restriction to a two - dimensional model mo - tivated by the observed small aspect ratios ( 100 – 200 nm thickness , tens of microns lateral extension , [ 45 ] ) and the idealization to a network consisting 2 of two families of locally parallel ﬁlaments crossing each other transversally . The latter assumption is supported by experimental evidence for steadily moving cells [ 55 ] . It has to be conceded , however , that it is questionable in certain conditions such as retracting lamellipodia [ 15 ] . It is assumed that the whole cell is surrounded by the lamellipodium , whose width might vary along the cell periphery . Mathematically speaking , the lamellipodium has the topology of a ring lying between two curves , the outer one representing the leading edge and the inner one an artiﬁcially drawn boundary between the lamellipodium and the rest of the cell , roughly deﬁned by a minimum actin density . More precisely , two non - identical inner boundaries for the two ﬁlament families are allowed . Actin ﬁlaments are polar with so called barbed and pointed ends . All barbed ends are assumed to meet the leading edge [ 44 ] . Filament mechanics : Filaments are assumed to resist bending . More precisely , they are modeled as quasi - stationary Euler - Bernoulli beams . They are assumed to be inextensible [ 9 ] . Cross - links : The mechanical stability of the network largely relies on the existence of cross - links between the two families . Candidates for cross - linkers are proteins such as ﬁlamin [ 29 ] , but also the Arp2 / 3 complex providing the connection between ﬁlaments at branch points [ 28 ] . It is assumed that cross - linking is dynamic with the building and breaking of cross - links as stochastic processes . While attached , cross - links are assumed as elastic , providing re - sistance against relative translational as well as rotational movement ( away from an equilibrium angle ) of the two ﬁlament families [ 43 ] . Characteristic life times of cross - links are assumed to be small compared to the dynamics induced by actin polymerization . The corresponding limiting process , which has been carried out in [ 31 ] , leads to a friction model for the interaction between the ﬁlament families . Adhesion to the substrate : Transmembrane protein complexes with in - tegrins as their most important constituent provide adhesive connections be - tween the cytoskeleton and the substrate [ 18 , 36 ] . Similarly to cross - links it is assumed that these adhesions are transient with relatively small recycling times , such that the averaged eﬀect is friction between the actin network and the substrate . The short life time of adhesions is another questionable as - sumption , only satisﬁed for fast moving cells , where so called focal adhesions , i . e . large and very stable adhesion complexes , do not occur . The FBLM of [ 31 ] is still rather far from a complete description of all rel - evant processes . Some of these gaps are ﬁlled by the extensions below . Most importantly , the total number of ﬁlaments is kept ﬁxed and their length dis - tribution is prescribed in [ 31 ] . Here , ﬁlaments will be added by branching 3 and removed by capping and subsequent decomposition . The length distribu - tion will be determined by a quasi - equilibrium between polymerization and severing . In [ 31 ] cell size is regulated by a model for the eﬀect of membrane tension . Here , this will be replaced by a contractive force in the cell center due to actin - myosin interaction . In certain applications it might be appropri - ate to combine these two eﬀects . A further extension is a little speculative from a modeling point of view , but stabilizes the FBLM : We introduce a repulsive eﬀect between parallel ﬁlaments of the same family , motivated by Coulomb interaction caused by the signiﬁcant charges distributed along ﬁl - aments . Finally , instead of a given ﬁxed polymerization speed as in [ 31 ] , a model will be formulated involving both the eﬀect of a chemotactic signal and of local leading edge bending . More details about these extensions are given in the following paragraphs . Polymerization and degradation : A desired polymerization speed is determined between a minimal and a maximal value , depending on the lo - cal concentration of an activator like PIP 3 , determined by a simple signal transduction model for a given chemoattractant distribution along the lead - ing edge . The desired polymerization speed is modiﬁed by the pushing force depending on the curvature of the leading edge ( see Fig . 1B ) . Several degradation processes of ﬁlaments are known . Aided by proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family , they can depolymerize at the pointed ends [ 2 ] , or bigger pieces of actin can be removed by severing proteins like gelsolin [ 3 ] . We assume a severing process ( see Fig . 1A ) , a mathematical description of which will lead to formulas for the ﬁlament length distribution , replacing the ad hoc approximations used in [ 31 ] . Branching and capping : In a lamellipodium , new ﬁlaments need to be created in order to maintain a polarized state . New ﬁlaments are nucle - ated by branching oﬀ existing ﬁlaments of the other family at or near to the leading edge ( dentritic nucleation model [ 28 , 46 ] ) . To form a branch the presence of the Actin - Related Protein - 2 / 3 Complex ( Arp 2 / 3 ) at the mem - brane is necessary . Arp 2 / 3 needs to be activated by nucleation promoting factors . Activated Arp 2 / 3 is incorporated in the branches and later ( e . g . upon ﬁlament degradation ) reenters the cytoplasm , from which it is again recruited to the membrane [ 19 ] . Finally ﬁlaments can be capped at their branched ends by capping proteins [ 53 ] , which blocks further polymerization ( see Fig . 1A ) . The addition and removal of ﬁlaments had not been taken into account in [ 31 ] . Conﬁnement : As a consequence of polymerization and adhesion , cells would spread indeﬁnitely according to the model components described so far . In [ 31 ] cell conﬁnement has been modeled as a consequence of membrane 4 tension . However , there is some experimental evidence [ 47 ] that conﬁnement is mostly due to contractive eﬀects caused by actin - myosin interaction in the rear of the lamellipodium . Myosin has the ability to utilize energy to move towards the barbed ends of actin and because of its bipolar structure this leads to contraction of antiparallel actin ﬁlaments . This mechanism plays an important role in cell movement , because it allows the cell to pull its rear parts [ 51 , 23 , 13 , 4 ] . We assume that the artiﬁcial inner boundary of the simulated lamel - lipodium is chosen such that the actin - myosin interaction takes place in the interior region not covered by the lamellipodium model . The lamellipodial actin network is assumed to be connected to an interior network of acto - myosin bundles providing a contractive eﬀect ( see Fig . 1D ) . Coulomb interaction : So far the model assumed no direct interaction be - tween ﬁlaments of the same family . Upon trying to understand the bundling of F - actin , it was discovered that F - actin , similarly to DNA , behaves like a polyelectrolyte [ 48 , 49 , 50 ] . This means that F - actin is negatively charged ( about 4 e / nm ) at physiological conditions , hence there exists a repulsive force between the ﬁlaments . On the other hand , it has been shown that certain positively charged polycations , like divalent metal ions and basic polypeptides [ 49 ] , which act as counterions and neutralize the negative charges along the ﬁlament , promote ﬁlament bundling . As a modeling assumption , we introduce a repulsive eﬀect between ﬁl - aments of the same family ( see Fig . 1C ) . The consequential inhibition of bundle formation in the lamellipodium is desired , since this is not our mod - eling goal at present ( although it will be in future work ) . An additional motivation is the fact that a lack of coupling between ﬁlaments of the same family may lead to numerical instabilities , which can be avoided by the dif - fusive eﬀect caused by repulsion . 5 Figure 1 : New ingredients to the FBLM . The rest of this work is structured as follows . In the following Section 2 the model of [ 31 ] will be recalled . The new aspects will be introduced in Section 3 , and the complete new model will be summarized in Section 4 . Finally in Section 5 we will demonstrate the eﬀect of the new terms and the potential of the full new model numerically . The power and ﬂexibility of the model will become especially evident in simulations of the polariza - tion process induced by a chemotactic signal , of steady movement , and of a turning process . Movies of these simulations including visualizations of the stochastic ﬁlament dynamics are contained in the Supplementary Ma - terial . Examples of moving cell shapes , inﬂuenced by the response to the chemotactic signal , are shown . 2 The Filament Based Lamellipodium Model Detailed derivations of the FBLM presented in this section can be found in [ 31 , 34 ] , ﬁrst simulation results in [ 33 ] , and analytical results for the rotationally symmetric case in [ 32 ] . In the following , the superscripts + and − refer to the two ﬁlament families , also called clockwise and , respectively , anti - clockwise . These super - scripts will however be omitted , whenever we concentrate on one ﬁlament family . Quantities related to the other family will then be indicated by the superscript ∗ . A semi - Lagrangian description of each family is used , where one coordi - nate α is a ﬁlament index varying on a torus ( represented by α ∈ [ 0 , 2 π ) ) because of the ring topology , and the other coordinate is the negative arc - 6 length s along a ﬁlament measured from the leading edge , i . e . s ∈ [ − L , 0 ] with the maximal ( simulated ) ﬁlament length L . Because of the inextensi - bility of ﬁlaments , s can also be seen as a material coordinate . However , this is only true for ﬁxed time since , by polymerization at the leading edge with speed v ( α , t ) ≥ 0 and the consequential inward ﬂow of actin relative to the leading edge , a Lagrangian coordinate would be σ = s + (cid:82) tt 0 v ( α , τ ) d τ . For this reason the material derivative ( i . e . the time derivative at ﬁxed ( α , σ ) ) D t = ∂ t − v∂ s will be used below . The main unknown in the model is F ( α , s , t ) ∈ R 2 which , for ﬁxed α and t , represents a parametrization of the ﬁlament with index α at time t . By the inextensibility assumption | ∂ s F ( α , s , t ) | ≡ 1 , for ( α , s ) ∈ B : = [ 0 , 2 π ) × [ − L , 0 ] , t ≥ 0 , ( 1 ) it is an arc - length parametrization . More precisely , F represents the de - formation of all ﬁlaments in an inﬁnitesimal α - interval , where the length distribution of the ﬁlaments is determined by the given function η ( α , s , t ) , whose value ( between 0 and 1 ) is the fraction of ﬁlaments with length at least | s | . The assumption that all barbed ends meet the leading edge implies that η ( α , 0 , t ) = 1 and that η is monotonically increasing as a function of s . Note that η ( α , s , t ) d ( α , s ) can be interpreted as the total ﬁlament length in the inﬁnitesimal coordinate volume d ( α , s ) . At time t , the lamellipodium is represented by the set L ( t ) = L + ( t ) ∪ L − ( t ) with L ± ( t ) = { F ± ( α , s , t ) : ( α , s ) ∈ B } . Note that L + ( t ) and L − ( t ) do note have to be identical . We request , however , that they share the leading edge , which can be motivated by the assumption of tethering of barbed ends to the membrane ( " acto - clamping model " , [ 5 ] ) : (cid:8) F + ( α , 0 , t ) : 0 ≤ α < 2 π (cid:9) = (cid:8) F − ( α , 0 , t ) : 0 ≤ α < 2 π (cid:9) . ( 2 ) The artiﬁcial inner boundaries ( s = − L ) might be diﬀerent . For the interaction between the two families , the points where ﬁlaments cross each other have to be described . This is done on the basis of two assumptions : First , there are no crossings of ﬁlaments of the same family , i . e . the map F ± ( · , · , t ) : B → L ± ( t ) is invertible . In particular , we assume that det ( ∂ α F ± , ∂ s F ± ) > 0 ( 3 ) holds , corresponding to a clockwise parametrization by α . Second , for each pair of ﬁlaments from diﬀerent families there is at most one crossing , which 7 is transversal . We need representations of the set L + ( t ) ∩ L − ( t ) in the coordinate domains . First we identify all pairs of crossing ﬁlaments : C ( t ) : = (cid:8)(cid:0) α + , α − (cid:1) ∈ [ 0 , 2 π ) 2 : ∃ s ± ( α + , α − , t ) : F + ( α + , s + ( α + , α − , t ) , t ) = F − ( α − , s − ( α + , α − , t ) , t ) (cid:9) . Then we deﬁne the parameter domains for both families such that F ± ( B ±C ( t ) , t ) = L + ( t ) ∩ L − ( t ) : B ±C ( t ) : = (cid:8)(cid:0) α ± , s ± ( α + , α − , t ) (cid:1) : (cid:0) α + , α − (cid:1) ∈ C ( t ) (cid:9) ⊆ B . Note that , by our assumptions , the transformations ( α + , α − ) (cid:55)→ (cid:0) α ± , s ± ( α + , α − , t ) (cid:1) ( 4 ) from C ( t ) to B ± C ( t ) are invertible and can be combined to transformations ψ ± : B ∓C ( t ) → B ±C ( t ) with the property F ∓ = F ± ◦ ψ ± on B ∓C ( for ﬁxed t ) . ( 5 ) The positions and deformations of the ﬁlaments are computed on the basis of a quasi - stationary force balance obtained by minimizing a potential energy functional , which contains contributions from the bending of ﬁlaments , the stretching and twisting of cross - links , the stretching of substrate adhesions , and the membrane tension . This is coupled to age - structured population models for the distributions of cross - links and adhesions , assuming the build - ing and breaking of these connections as stochastic processes . The resulting model involves continuous delay terms , since , for the computation of the stretching forces , past deformations of the ﬁlaments are needed . With the model in this form , numerical simulations would be very expensive , partially also because it mixes diﬀerent length scales . Whereas the eﬀects of interest occur on the ( µ m ) scale of the width of the lamellipdium , the stretching of cross - links and adhesions occurs on molecular ( nm ) scales . This implies that motion on the lamellipodium scale of the two ﬁlament families relative to each other and relative to the substrate is only possible , if the turnover of cross - links and adhesions is fast compared to other mechanisms ( e . g . poly - merization and depolymerization ) . The corresponding limit has been carried out formally [ 31 ] and rigorously for a simpliﬁed model problem [ 22 ] . It leads to a friction model . The original idea seems to be more than 50 years old and has been formulated ﬁrst for the derivation of models for rubber friction [ 42 ] . Recently it has been used for the modeling of the plastic reorganization of tissues due to cell - cell adhesion dynamics [ 38 ] . The assumption of fast turnover of substrate adhesions is reasonable for fast moving cells such as ﬁsh keratocytes , but certainly not satisﬁed for focal 8 adhesions , i . e . large stable and long lived adhesion complexes as found , e . g . , in ﬁbroblasts . The limiting procedure removes not only the delay terms , but also the coupling to the population models , which can be solved explicitly in the limit . The variational procedure involves the formulation of a Lagrangian func - tional where , besides the potential energy , also an account of the constraints ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) is included . Its variation leads to a weak formulation of the problem for F : 0 = (cid:90) 2 π 0 (cid:20) µ M ( C − C 0 ) + ∂ α F | ∂ α F | · ∂ α ( δF ) ∓ λ tether ν · δF (cid:21) s = 0 d α + (cid:90) B (cid:2) µ B ∂ 2 s F · ∂ 2 s ( δF ) + µ A D t F · δF + λ inext ∂ s F · ∂ s ( δF ) (cid:3) η d ( α , s ) + (cid:90) C ( t ) (cid:2) µ S ( D t F − D ∗ t F ∗ ) · δF ∓ µ T ( ϕ − ϕ 0 ) ∂ s F ⊥ · ∂ s ( δF ) (cid:105) ηη ∗ d ( α , α ∗ ) , ( 6 ) for all variations δF , where the ﬁrst line contains contributions from the leading edge , and the convention ( F 1 , F 2 ) ⊥ = ( − F 2 , F 1 ) is used . The ﬁrst term corresponds to the tension of the membrane with the total length of the leading edge , C : = (cid:90) 2 π 0 | ∂ α F + ( α , 0 , t ) | d α = (cid:90) 2 π 0 | ∂ α F − ( α , 0 , t ) | d α , its prescribed equilibrium value C 0 , and an elasticity coeﬃcient µ M . The La - grange multiplier for the constraint ( 2 ) is a function deﬁned along the leading edge denoted by λ tether , and ν is the unit outward normal along the leading edge . The second line of ( 6 ) deals with forces within individual ﬁlaments : resistance against bending with bending modulus µ B , friction with the sub - strate caused by adhesions with a friction coeﬃcient µ A , and a tangential force due to the inextensibility constraint ( 1 ) with Lagrange multiplier λ inext . The third and fourth lines of ( 6 ) describe the eﬀects of cross - links between the two families with a friction term caused by resistance against stretching of cross - links with friction coeﬃcient µ S and a turning force term caused by resistance of twisting cross - links away from the equilibrium angle ϕ 0 . The angle between the ﬁlaments is determined by cos ϕ ( α + , α − , t ) = ∂ s F + (cid:0) α + , s + (cid:0) α + , α − , t (cid:1) , t (cid:1) · ∂ s F − (cid:0) α − , s − (cid:0) α + , α − , t (cid:1) , t (cid:1) , and µ T is the corresponding stiﬀness parameter . The above mentioned limit of fast adhesion and cross - link turnover provides explicit formulas for the coeﬃcients µ A , µ S , and µ T in terms of mechanical and chemical properties of adhesion and cross - link molecules . 9 A strong formulation of the Euler - Lagrange equations requires to trans - form the domain of the last integral in ( 6 ) to B . For this purpose , we use the maps from C ( t ) to B C ( t ) described above and introduce the modiﬁed friction coeﬃcient and stiﬀness parameter (cid:99) µ S = (cid:26) µ S (cid:12)(cid:12) ∂α ∗ ∂s (cid:12)(cid:12) in B C ( t ) , 0 else , (cid:99) µ T = (cid:26) µ T (cid:12)(cid:12) ∂α ∗ ∂s (cid:12)(cid:12) in B C ( t ) , 0 else . ( 7 ) The strong formulation is then given by 0 = µ B ∂ 2 s (cid:0) η∂ 2 s F (cid:1) + µ A ηD t F − ∂ s ( ηλ inext ∂ s F ) + (cid:99) µ S ηη ∗ ∆ V ± ∂ s (cid:16)(cid:99) µ T ηη ∗ ( ϕ − ϕ 0 ) ∂ s F ⊥ (cid:17) , where the computation of the relative velocity ∆ V = D t F − D ∗ t F ∗ ◦ ψ ∗ and of the angle between the families , cos ϕ = ∂ s F · ( ∂ s F ∗ ◦ ψ ∗ ) , requires the transformation ψ ∗ between the coordinate domains . The corresponding boundary conditions are − µ B ∂ s (cid:0) η∂ 2 s F (cid:1) + ηλ inext ∂ s F ∓ (cid:99) µ T ηη ∗ ( ϕ − ϕ 0 ) ∂ s F ⊥ = (cid:40) 0 for s = − L , ± λ tether ν + µ M ( C − C 0 ) + ∂ α (cid:16) ∂ α F | ∂ α F | (cid:17) for s = 0 , η ∂ 2 s F = 0 for s = − L , 0 . 3 Modiﬁcations and Extensions Length Distribution and Filament Number Regulation In the model of [ 31 ] , the ﬁlament number was conserved and the length distribution of ﬁlaments was prescribed with a ﬁxed maximum length . In this section the model will be extended to include the eﬀects of capping , branching , and severing on the ﬁlament number and length distribution . The results partially depend on the polymerization speed , the choice of which will be discussed below . The changes in ﬁlament numbers by branching and capping require a dif - ferent interpretation of the length distribution η ( α , s , t ) . For ﬁxed s , η ( α , s , t ) will be considered as the number density of ﬁlaments of length at least − s in terms of α . Instead of the uniform distribution η ( α , 0 , t ) d α = d α of barbed ends , values of η ( α , 0 , t ) diﬀerent from one are allowed . The density of barbed ends per leading edge length is then given by ρ ( α , t ) = η ( α , 0 , t ) | ∂ α F ( α , 0 , t ) | 10 For the other family , the barbed end density ρ ∗ ( α ∗ , t ) is deﬁned analogously . With s = 0 , the map between the coordinate domains ( see ( 5 ) ) reduces to a map α ∗ ( α , t ) , and in the following ρ ∗ means ρ ∗ ( α ∗ ( α , t ) , t ) . In the rest of this subsection we shall deal with ﬁxed values of α . The dependence on α will therefore be suppressed for ease of reading . We start with the evolution of the number of barbed ends and assume that it depends on the barbed end densities per unit length : ∂ t η ( 0 , t ) = f ( ρ , ρ ∗ ) | ∂ α F ( 0 , t ) | ( 8 ) where f ( ρ , ρ ∗ ) is the change of barbed end number per unit length and time , modeling the eﬀects of branching and capping at the barbed ends . Capped ﬁlaments become inactive and are assumed to be depolymerized very fast , such that they can be eliminated from the system immediately . It is instructive to rewrite ( 8 ) in terms of the length x = (cid:82) | ∂ α F | d α along the leading edge , instead of the Lagrangian variable α . With the lateral ﬂow velocity v l = (cid:82) ∂ t | ∂ α F | d α ( implicitly given as part of the ﬁlament dynamics ) , it can be written as ∂ t ρ + ∂ x ( v l ρ ) = f . ( 9 ) Branching is assumed to be limited by the availability of activated Arp2 / 3 complex at the leading edge with density a ( t ) ( number / leading edge unit length ) . Its equilibrium value in the absence of branching is denoted by a 0 , the branching rate at equilibrium Arp2 / 3 density by κ br , and the capping rate by κ cap . This leads to the model f = κ br a a 0 ρ ∗ − κ cap ρ . With the rate c rec of recruitment and activation of Arp2 / 3 from the cyto - plasm , the evolution of Arp2 / 3 at the leading edge is governed by da dt = c rec (cid:18) 1 − a a 0 (cid:19) − κ br a a 0 ( ρ + ρ ∗ ) , The second term reﬂects the fact that activated Arp 2 / 3 is incorporated into branches of both families . We assume that the Arp 2 / 3 dynamics is fast compared to branching and capping and use the quasi steady ( Michaelis - Menten ) approximation a = a 0 c rec c rec + κ br ( ρ + ρ ∗ ) , f ( ρ , ρ ∗ ) = κ br c rec ρ ∗ c rec + κ br ( ρ + ρ ∗ ) − κ cap ρ . The model ( 9 ) has already been used in [ 11 ] with a prescribed lateral ﬂow velocity and with f = βρ ∗ / ( ρ + ρ ∗ ) − γρ . A signiﬁcant diﬀerence between our model and [ 11 ] is in the branching rate : For ρ = 0 and small values of 11 ρ ∗ , the branching rate of [ 11 ] is constant , i . e . , not limited by the number of barbed ends of the other family , while in our model it is approximately κ br ρ ∗ . An indication of the qualitative behavior of the model can be obtained from considering a situation , where the barbed end densities do not vary along the leading edge and are governed by the ODE system ˙ ρ = f ( ρ , ρ ∗ ) , ˙ ρ ∗ = f ( ρ ∗ , ρ ) . ( 10 ) It is easily seen that for κ br < κ cap , i . e . capping exceeds branching , the densities converge to 0 , otherwise the non - trivial steady state ρ = ρ ∗ = c rec 2 (cid:18) 1 κ cap − 1 κ br (cid:19) , ( 11 ) is stable . In separate work [ 21 ] we prove that this qualitative behavior carries over to the corresponding transport - reaction system with prescribed lateral ﬂow velocities . The length distribution η ( s , t ) of ﬁlaments is inﬂuenced by branching and capping through the model ( 8 ) for η ( 0 , t ) , but also directly by capping , which removes whole ﬁlaments by our above assumptions . We make the modeling decision that newly branched ﬁlaments are capped preferentially . This means that if branching exceeds capping , i . e . , f ( ρ , ρ ∗ ) ≥ 0 , we interpret f as an eﬀective net rate of production of new branches without further capping , whereas in the opposite case no new ﬁlaments are nucleated and − f is an eﬀective rate of capping , aﬀecting already existing ﬁlaments with a probability independent of their length . Degradation of ﬁlaments is also assumed to be facilitated by the action of severing proteins such as gelsolin [ 3 ] or ADF / coﬁlin [ 40 ] , cutting ﬁlaments at random positions . Similarly to the capping process , we assume that rear parts of ﬁlaments , which have been cut oﬀ , are completely decomposed im - mediately . Instead of using η as unknown , it is more intuitive to write the model in terms of the density u ( s , t ) = ∂ s η ( s , t ) of ﬁlaments with respect to their length − s . Following [ 6 , 7 , 40 ] for the severing part , we use the model D t u = κ sev (cid:90) 0 −∞ (cid:2) H ( s − s (cid:48) ) u (cid:48) − H ( s (cid:48) − s ) u (cid:3) d s (cid:48) − κ cap , eﬀ u = κ sev (cid:18)(cid:90) s −∞ u (cid:48) d s (cid:48) + su (cid:19) − κ cap , eﬀ u , where u (cid:48) abbreviates u ( s (cid:48) , t ) . Cutting of a ﬁlament of length − s at the new length − s (cid:48) occurs with the rate κ sev H ( s (cid:48) − s ) leading to a total severing rate − κ sev s proportional to the length . This is the simplest possible model . More elaborate severing rates , e . g . , with an account of aging of actin ﬁlament subunits [ 40 ] , could be included easily . 12 The eﬀective capping rate is given , according to the discussion above , by κ cap , eﬀ = ( − f ( ρ , ρ ∗ ) ) + ρ . It remains to rewrite the model in terms of η ( s , t ) = (cid:82) s −∞ u ( σ , t ) d σ : D t η = κ sev s η − κ cap , eﬀ η . For a constant polymerization speed v this equation can be solved explicitly by the method of characteristics : η ( s , t ) = η ( 0 , t + s / v ) exp (cid:32) − κ sev s 2 2 v − (cid:90) t t + s / v κ cap , eﬀ ( τ ) d τ (cid:33) , ( 12 ) where η ( 0 , t ) is given as the solution of ( 8 ) . Assuming that the changes of the polymerization velocity are slow compared to the ﬁlament dynamics , this formula is a valid approximation also for time dependent velocities v ( t ) . Finally , the maximum simulation length L of ﬁlaments is deﬁned by a cut - oﬀ at small actin densities , i . e . a value η min for η . With the rough ap - proximations of replacing η ( 0 , t + s / v ) by η ( 0 , t ) and κ cap , eﬀ ( τ ) by κ cap , eﬀ ( t ) , L can be computed explicitly : L ( t ) : = − κ cap , eﬀ ( t ) κ sev + (cid:115) κ cap , eﬀ ( t ) 2 κ 2 sev + 2 v ( t ) κ sev log (cid:18) η ( 0 , t ) η min (cid:19) , ( 13 ) resulting in the time dependent coordinate domain B ( t ) = { ( α , s ) : 0 ≤ α < 2 π , − L ( α , t ) ≤ s ≤ 0 } . ( 14 ) Most notably , faster polymerization leads to wider lamellipodia . Myosin contraction We model the eﬀect of interior contractile acto - myosin bundles as forces pulling the ( artiﬁcial ) pointed ends of lamellipodial actin ﬁlaments . Neglect - ing the eﬀect of substrate adhesion of the interior region , the pulling forces are assumed to add up to zero by the action - reaction principle . The question of an appropriate direction for the pulling forces arises . We consider two scenarios : One where the contractile bundles pull the ﬁlaments tangentially , and one where they pull towards a central point , chosen as the center of actin mass ( without having particularly strong arguments for this choice ) . Although one can argue for tangential pulling , which does not perturb the directional order of ﬁlaments in the lamellipodium , this choice has two disadvantages : If ﬁlaments get too tangential to the inner boundary of the lamellipodium , tangential pulling fails to control the size of the cell . 13 Secondly , tangential pulling is a slightly unstable process , since it might reinforce any small deﬂections of the pointed ends . For those reasons and in order to allow more ﬂexibility of the model , we include a mixture of both choices . We again use the notation of dropping the superscript ± for the family under discussion and using ∗ for the other one . The magnitude of the tan - gential force acting on the ﬁlament with index α is denoted by f tan ( α ) and that of the centripetal force by f in ( α ) . We deﬁne V ( α ) as the normalized vector pointing from the center of mass C M : = (cid:90) B ηF d ( s , α ) (cid:18)(cid:90) B η d ( s , α ) (cid:19) − 1 to the end F ( α , − L ( α ) ) of ﬁlament α . The forces can be included in the boundary conditions as − µ B ∂ s (cid:0) η∂ 2 s F (cid:1) + ηλ inext ∂ s F ∓ η η ∗ µ T ( φ − φ 0 ) ∂ s F ⊥ = η ( f tan ∂ s F + f in V ) , s = − L . We postulate a scalar positive quantity A , which measures the size of the contraction eﬀect and which is chosen as A : = µ IP ( A c − A 0 ) + with the area A c encircled by the lamellipodium and its equilibrium value A 0 . The forces f tan ( α ) and f in ( α ) are determined by the conditions that 1 . the total force should be close to the current contractility A , 2 . it should be split between the tangential and centripetal contributions according to a weight γ ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] , and 3 . the sum of all forces has to be zero . Mathematically this is realized by minimizing (cid:90) 2 π 0 η ( s = − L ) (cid:20) ( f tan − γA ) 2 γ + ( f in − ( 1 − γ ) A ) 2 1 − γ (cid:21) d α with the constraint (cid:90) 2 π 0 η ( s = − L ) [ f tan ∂ s F ( s = − L ) + f in V ] d α = 0 , ( 15 ) giving f tan ( α ) = γA [ 1 − µ · ∂ s F ( α , − L ( α ) ) ] , f in ( α ) = ( 1 − γ ) A [ 1 − µ · V ( α ) ] , ( 16 ) with µ = (cid:18)(cid:90) 2 π 0 η [ γ∂ s F ⊗ ∂ s F + ( 1 − γ ) V ⊗ V ] d α (cid:19) − 1 (cid:90) 2 π 0 η [ γ∂ s F + ( 1 − γ ) V ] d α . In Section 5 it will be shown that myosin pulling can eﬀectively control cell size , and that the contraction force allows to produce moving cells . For these reasons we neglect the contribution of membrane tension . 14 Filament repulsion We consider a repulsive eﬀect between parallel ﬁlaments caused by Coulomb interaction . The presence of mobile charge carriers in the cytoplasm leads to Debye screening with a typical Debye length in the range of a few nm , such that only local Coulomb interaction can be assumed , leading to a pressure - like repulsion eﬀect . The electrostatic energy U pressure = (cid:90) L ρ Φ d A is added to the potential energy , where L ( t ) is the area covered by the ﬁla - ment family under discussion at time t ( again dropping the superscript ± ) , ρ d A is the ﬁlament length in the inﬁnitesimal area element d A , with ρ = η det ( ∂ α F , ∂ s F ) , ( 17 ) ( where ( 3 ) has been used ) and Φ is the electrostatic potential ( see [ 39 ] for a derivation from a microscopic model based on individual ﬁlaments ) . A quasineutral approximation ( justiﬁed by the relative smallness of the Debye length ) and an equilibrium assumption for the mobile charge carriers result in a model for the electrostatic potential of the form Φ = Φ ( ρ ) . As example , the Boltzmann - Poisson model for the mobile carrier density leads to Φ = µ P log ( ρ ) , µ P > 0 . For the purpose of computing its variation , the electrostatic energy is written in terms of the quasi - Lagrangian coordinates , U pressure [ F ] = (cid:90) B ( t ) Φ ( ρ ) η d ( α , s ) , with the variation in the direction δF , δU pressure [ F ] δF = − (cid:90) B p ( ρ ) [ det ( ∂ α F , ∂ s ( δF ) ) + det ( ∂ α ( δF ) , ∂ s F ) ] d ( α , s ) . The considerations below will show that for stability reasons the pressure p ( ρ ) = Φ (cid:48) ( ρ ) ρ 2 has to be a nondecreasing function of the density ρ , which holds for the Boltzmann - Poisson model p ( ρ ) = µ P ρ . Although we expect the pressure only to act in the direction orthogonal to the ﬁlaments , this con - sideration has not entered the discussion so far . However , the action of the pressure along ﬁlaments is eliminated by the ( incompressibility ) constraint ( 1 ) . Model problem : It is instructive to look at a one - dimensional model prob - lem , where points with Lagrangian label α ∈ R move along a line with positions x ( α , t ) ∈ R ( assumed a strictly increasing function of α ) . The den - sity of points is then given by ρ = 1 / ∂ α x . The electrostatic energy takes 15 the form U pressure [ x ] = (cid:82) Φ ( 1 / ∂ α x ) d α . Its ( L 2 - ) gradient is given by ∂ α p ( ρ ) . If only the Coulomb interaction and friction ( i . e . adhesions ) are taken into account , the dynamics is governed by the gradient ﬂow ∂ t x = − ∂ α p ( ρ ) . With the continuity equation ( in Eulerian coordinates ) ∂ t ρ + ∂ x ( ρ ∂ t x ) = 0 , this can be rewritten in Eulerian coordinates as ∂ t ρ = ∂ 2 x p ( ρ ) = ∂ x ( p (cid:48) ( ρ ) ∂ x ρ ) . This is a nonlinear diﬀusion equation , where nonnegativity of the diﬀusivity p (cid:48) ( ρ ) is necessary for stability . For the lamellipodium model , we may hope that the pressure term , by causing diﬀusion in the α - direction , avoids intersections within a family and thereby stabilizes the system by ensuring that the modeling assumptions are not destroyed by the dynamics . This stabilizing eﬀect is sometimes useful for numerical simulations as demonstrated in Section 5 . Polymerization Rate Polymerization rates and , consequentially , polymerization speeds v ( α , t ) are subject to diﬀerent regulatory mechanisms . We consider reaction to chemo - tactic signals , where the cell senses concentration gradients of a chemoat - tractant and translates them to varying polymerization rates . This leads to cell polarization and directed movement . The chemoattractant binds to receptors on the cell membrane that can trigger signaling pathways produc - ing intracellular gradients along the membrane reﬂecting the distribution of occupied receptors . For example , higher concentrations of PIP 3 have been observed towards chemotactic signals at the leading edge of Dictyostelium discoideum and of neutrophils [ 14 ] . This in turn is expected to induce a local upregulation of actin polymerization [ 12 , 54 ] . We consider constant planar chemoattractant gradients with the chemoat - tractant concentration S ( x , y ) = S 0 + S 1 ( x cos ( ϕ ca ) + y sin ( ϕ ca ) ) , where S 1 determines the strength of the gradient and ϕ ca its direction . We model a chemotactic response independent of the strength of the chemoattractant gradient . A normalized internal quantity deﬁned along the leading edge is given by d ca ( α , t ) = S ( F ( α , 0 , t ) ) − min β ∈ [ 0 , 2 π ) S ( F ( β , 0 , t ) ) max β ∈ [ 0 , 2 π ) S ( F ( β , 0 , t ) ) − min β ∈ [ 0 , 2 π ) S ( F ( β , 0 , t ) ) Typically , PIP 3 is only observed at a part of the leading edge , possibly as consequence of a thresholding phenomenon of the signaling pathway . To 16 account for this , we choose a threshold c ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] and deﬁne I ( α , t ) = (cid:40) d ca ( α , t ) − c 1 − c for d ca ( α , t ) > c , 0 else , ( 18 ) which can be interpreted as a normalized PIP 3 concentration . The desired polymerization speed is chosen between prescribed minimal and maximal values : v opt ( α , t ) = v min + I ( α , t ) ( v max − v min ) . Finally , the polymerization speed is reduced by the force required to bend the leading edge outwards . On the other hand , due to ﬁlament tethering , we expect some acceleration of polymerization at leading edge segments which are curved inwards . These eﬀects are described by an ad - hoc model for the polymerization speed v , depending on the signed local curvature κ ( α ) ( positive for convex leading edge regions ) : v = 2 v opt 1 + exp ( κ / κ ref ) 4 Full New Model The functions and variables used are the same as in the original model de - scribed in Section 2 . To account for the diﬀerent width of the lamellipodium for diﬀerent ﬁlament indices α , we replace B by B ( t ) : = { ( α , s ) | α ∈ [ 0 , 2 π ) , s ∈ [ − L ( α , t ) , 0 ] } where L ( α , t ) is given by ( 13 ) , as already introduced in ( 14 ) . The full weak formulation reads 0 = (cid:90) B ( t )   µ B ∂ 2 s F · ∂ 2 s δF (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) bending + µ A D t F · δF (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) adhesion + λ inext ∂ s F · ∂ s δF (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) in - extensibility   η d ( α , s ) − (cid:90) B ( t ) p ( ρ ) (cid:104) det ( ∂ α F , ∂ s δF ) + det ( ∂ α δF , ∂ s F ) (cid:105) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) pressure d ( α , s ) + (cid:90) C ( t )   µ S ( D t F − D ∗ t F ∗ ) · δF (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) cross link stretching ∓ µ T ( φ − φ 0 ) ∂ s F ⊥ · ∂ s δF (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) cross link twisting   ηη ∗ d ( α , α ∗ ) + (cid:90) ( 0 , 2 π ] ( f tan ∂ s F + f in V ) · δF η (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) s = − L d α (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) myosin contraction ∓ (cid:90) ( 0 , 2 π ] λ tether ν · δF (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) s = 0 d α (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) tethering . 17 The ﬁlament dependent magnitude of the inner pulling force f tan and f in are given by ( 16 ) and ρ is deﬁned by ( 17 ) . The ﬁlament densities η ( α , s , t ) are determined by ( 8 ) and ( 12 ) . For the strong form , i . e . the Euler Lagrange Equations , the modiﬁed stiﬀness parameters are deﬁned analogously as in ( 7 ) . 0 = µ B ∂ 2 s (cid:0) η∂ 2 s F (cid:1) − ∂ s ( ηλ inext ∂ s F ) + µ A ηD t F ( 19 ) + ∂ s (cid:16) p ( ρ ) ∂ α F ⊥ (cid:17) − ∂ α (cid:16) p ( ρ ) ∂ s F ⊥ (cid:17) ± ∂ s (cid:16) ηη ∗ (cid:99) µ T ( φ − φ 0 ) ∂ s F ⊥ (cid:17) + ηη ∗ (cid:99) µ S ( D t F − D ∗ t F ∗ ) , where in the equation for F + , the derivatives of F − are evaluated at ( α − ( α , s , t ) , s − ( α , s , t ) ) and vice versa . The corresponding boundary condi - tions are − µ B ∂ s (cid:0) η∂ 2 s F (cid:1) − p ( ρ ) ∂ α F ⊥ + ηλ inext ∂ s F ∓ ηη ∗ (cid:99) µ T ( φ − φ 0 ) ∂ s F ⊥ ( 20 ) = (cid:26) η ( f tan ( α ) ∂ s F + f in ( α ) V ( α ) ) for s = − L , ± λ tether ν for s = 0 , η∂ 2 s F = 0 for s = − L , 0 . 5 Numerical Approach and Simulation Results In this section we sketch the numerical method for the solution of ( 19 ) , ( 20 ) , described in more detail in [ 20 ] . Simulations of model problems will demonstrate the eﬀect of the new ingredients to the model introduced in this work . Finally , the full model is used to simulate the reaction of a cell to a chemotactic signal . Numerical Method The numerical approximation of ( 19 ) , ( 20 ) is a formidable task . Filament families as described here are a new type of continuum , where both analytical and numerical approaches are still in early states of development ( see [ 32 , 33 ] for ﬁrst results ) . The new numerical method used here will be described only brieﬂy , since it is the subject of parallel work [ 20 ] , which we refer to for details . Instead of dealing with the time - dependent domains B ± ( t ) , the equations for both families are transformed to the rectangular and time - independent computational domain [ 0 , 2 π ] × [ − 1 , 0 ] by rescaling the variable s . A rectan - gular grid with uniform steplengths is used . The grid lines in the s - direction can be interpreted as computational ﬁlaments , each discretized by the same number of grid points , independent of its ( time dependent ) length . 18 The strong anisotropy in ( 19 ) is reﬂected in the choice of the ﬁnite element space for the spatial discretization . A tensor product space is used , where on each grid cell each component of F is represented by a fourth order polynomial , linear in α and cubic in s . These interpolate positions and ﬁrst s - derivatives at the nodes . In other words , each computational ﬁlament is approximated by a cubic spline with linear interpolation in between . The ﬁnite element space is conforming for the weak formulation of ( 19 ) , being continuous in α and C 1 in s and , thus , a subspace of H 1 α ( ( 0 , 2 π ) , H 2 s ( − 1 , 0 ) ) . An implicit - explicit time discretization is used , based on a linearization . The evaluation of the interaction terms between the two ﬁlament families requires approximations of the mappings ψ ± , derived from ( 4 ) , in order to represent ﬁlaments of one family on the grid of the other . The inextensibility constraint has been implemented by an Augmented Lagrangian approach . Eﬀects of new model ingredients Filament Number Regulation : Branching and capping regulate the number of barbed ends . This is of particular importance when the poly - merization rate varies along the leading edge . For an explanation the lateral ﬂow phenomenon is needed , i . e . the movement of barbed ends along the leading edge , caused by polymerization and the inclination of ﬁlaments . In our model , the ( + ) - family ﬁlaments typically move to the left ( relative to the protrusion direction ) , and the ( − ) - family ﬁlaments to the right . Since bigger polymerization speeds increase the lateral ﬂow , this would lead to ﬁlament depletion in regions with higher polymerization activity without the regu - latory eﬀect of branching and capping . This typically reduces cell motility ( see the paragraph on chemotaxis below and Figure 7 ) . To observe the regulation more directly , we started with a radially sym - metric cell , where the barbed end density along the leading edge is constant and equal to the equilibrium value ( 11 ) . Then the density of barbed ends of the ( + ) - family is perturbed locally . In the subsequent simulation a constant polymerization speed is used . Figure 2 shows the evolution of the barbed end densities ρ ± for both families . If there is no branching and capping , the perturbation in η + is simply moved to the left by lateral ﬂow without any changes ( data not shown ) . The situation for ρ + is somewhat more compli - cated , because the geometry changes brought about by the higher number of ﬁlaments aﬀects the number of ﬁlaments per length . Both ρ + and ρ − decrease initially because the membrane is locally pushed outward , making the cell slightly larger . The lateral ﬂow is also visible here by the shift of the maximum ﬁlament number of ρ + . For the case where branching and capping are active , one can see how initially the number of ( − ) - family ﬁlaments increases because of branching . Additionally ρ ± drops everywhere , again because the cell becomes slightly larger . However the dynamics eventually force the number of ﬁlaments to 19 return to its equilibrium value everywhere . Figure 2 : Barbed end density perturbation with and without branching / capping : The density of left - moving ﬁlaments ( red ) is perturbed initially , that of right - moving ﬁlaments ( dashed , blue ) not . Thick lines represent the current state , thin lines represent the state at time t = 0 . The left column shows the evolution in the absence of branching and capping , i . e . κ br = κ cap = 0 . In the right column branching and capping are active with parameters as shown in Table 1 , except µ P = 0 . Actin - Myosin Interaction : Constraint ( 15 ) ensures that the myosin pulling on the inside of the lamellipodium is an internal force . We deﬁne A 0 = r 20 π . Figure 3 shows the evolution of the inner radius of a rotational symmet - 20 ric cell in time for diﬀerent values of r 0 and µ IP . It can be observed that smaller equilibrium areas and a stronger myosin force ( i . e . larger µ IP ) leads to smaller cell sizes . This shows that the actin - myosin interaction helps to control the cell size . In the section on chemotaxis below it will be shown that a moving cell can pull its rear due to this eﬀect . Figure 3 : Eﬀect of the actin - myosin interaction : Comparison of the evolution of the radius of a circular cell for diﬀerent values of r 0 and µ IP . The horizontal lines mark the values of r 0 . All parameters as in Table 1 except the polymerization speed v opt = 0 . 5 . Pressure : The pressure term is a force acting only within one family . To demonstrate its eﬀect we therefore look at a simpliﬁed model for one family only : We assume constant η , i . e . all ﬁlaments of the same length , no poly - merization or bending , and only the tangential component of the myosin force ( γ = 1 ) . Then the Euler - Lagrange equations simplify to µ A ∂ t F + ∂ s (cid:16) p ( ρ ) ∂ α F ⊥ (cid:17) − ∂ α (cid:16) p ( ρ ) ∂ s F ⊥ (cid:17) − ∂ s ( λ inext ∂ s F ) = 0 ( 21 ) − p ( ρ ) ∂ α F ⊥ + λ inext ∂ s F = (cid:26) 0 for s = 0 f tan ( α ) ∂ s F for s = − L ( α ) with the constraint | ∂ s F | ≡ 1 . To enable the computation of an analytical solution that can be compared to numerical results , we additionally assume the cell to be rotationally symmetric . This implies that the system can be fully described by a reference ﬁlament z ( s , t ) . All other ﬁlaments are created by rotations . With the rotation matrix R ( α ) for the rotation angle 21 α , F ( α , s , t ) = R ( α ) z ( s , t ) , leading to ρ = ( z · ∂ s z ) − 1 . Lastly we use the Boltzmann - Poisson model p ( ρ ) = µ P ρ . For the pulling force we get f tan = µ IP ( πr 2 − πr 20 ) + . We introduce polar coordinates z = r exp ( i ϕ ) and denote by ˙ r and r (cid:48) diﬀerentiation w . r . t . time and s respectively . This leads to the system µ A ˙ r − µ P (cid:18) r (cid:48)(cid:48) ( r (cid:48) ) 2 + 1 r (cid:19) − λ (cid:48) inext r (cid:48) − λ inext (cid:0) r (cid:48)(cid:48) − r ( ϕ (cid:48) ) 2 (cid:1) = 0 , ( 22 ) µ A r ˙ ϕ − λ (cid:48) inext ϕ (cid:48) r − λ inext (cid:0) 2 ϕ (cid:48) r (cid:48) + ϕ (cid:48)(cid:48) r (cid:1) = 0 , ( r (cid:48) ) 2 + ( ϕ (cid:48) ) 2 r 2 = 1 , − µ P r (cid:48) + λ inext r (cid:48) = (cid:26) 0 for s = 0 , µ IP ( πr 2 − πr 20 ) + r (cid:48) for s = − L , λ inext rϕ (cid:48) = (cid:26) 0 for s = 0 , µ IP ( πr 2 − πr 20 ) + rϕ (cid:48) for s = − L . The ﬁrst two equations come from the Euler - Lagrange equations , the third is the in - extensibility constraint and the last lines stem from the boundary conditions . A stationary solution with straight radial ﬁlaments can be given explic - itly : ϕ ( s ) = 0 , r ( s ) = s + L + r I , λ ( s ) = µ P (cid:18) 1 + ln L + r I s + L + r I (cid:19) , ( 23 ) where the inner radius r I is the unique solution in ( r 0 , ∞ ) of ln (cid:18) L + r I r I (cid:19) = µ IP π ( r 2 I − r 20 ) . As initial conditions in a simulation , we take a radially symmetric situation with straight , but not radial ﬁlaments . We then compare the numerical results to the analytical steady state given by ( 23 ) . Figure 4 shows that convergence to the steady state is observed . This has been supported by a linearized stability analysis [ 17 ] . Experiment with various initial conditions ( data not shown ) indicate that there might be an instability with respect to nonsymmetric perturbations . Since such an instability has never been observed in the full model , it was not investigated further . 22 Figure 4 : Pressure . The upper pictures shows the evolution of the inner radius with time . The analytical steady state result r I ( thick , dashed , red ) and the parameter r 0 ( thin , red ) are also depicted . The stars mark times , where details are shown below : Here the ﬁlaments and λ inext at three diﬀerent times are shown . Again the analytical steady state solutions of the ﬁlament positions and of λ inext are shown ( thick , dashed , red ) . µ B = µ T = µ S = 0 , L = 10 , A 0 = r 20 π = 157 , µ P = 1 . Other parameters as in Table 1 . Chemotaxis Finally we want to demonstrate the potential of the full new model , in par - ticular its ability to simulate directed cell movement in the presence of a chemotactic signal , direction changes , and various cell shapes under diﬀer - ent assumptions on the internal signalling network . We want to point out that we are aiming at a proof of principle and that serious comparisons with and ﬁtting to experimental observations are the subject of ongoing work . In particular , although our parameter values ( discussed below ) and results are 23 in realistic ranges , we do not claim the simulated cell shapes to be close to experiments for any particular cell type . Starting to move : The following experiment mimics chemotaxis , i . e . a situation where the cell , in reaction to a chemical stimulus ( chemoattractant ) increases its polymerization rate ( [ 12 ] , [ 54 ] ) . For the eﬀect of the chemotactic signal on the polymerization speed we use the model introduced in Section 3 . A time evolution starting with a rotationally symmetric cell put in a chemical gradient oriented to the right is shown in Figure 5 . The ﬁrst visible eﬀect is that the lamellipodium on the right grows wider . The reason is that the increased polymerzation rate also increases the maximum ﬁlament length as modeled in ( 13 ) . Next the cell starts moving , because ﬁlaments grow faster on the right . Additionally , the wider lamellipodium at the cell front exerts more friction than the thinner one at the cell rear . Eventually the cell shape remains constant and the cell moves steadily towards the right with a speed of about 3 . 9 µm / min , which is in the biologically observed range ( [ 47 ] , [ 12 ] ) . In Figure 6 the two ( numerical ) steady states , the stationary cell and the moving cell , are shown together with some data . For the stationary cell the number of barbed ends is constant along the leading edge , whereas in the moving cell more ﬁlaments can be found at the back . To maintain this distribution the cell has to balance branching , capping and movement of ﬁlaments . For the stationary cell this simply means having branching and capping rates equal everywhere . For the moving cell , branching dominates at the front , whereas capping exceeds branching in the back . Additionally , the F - actin ﬂow , i . e . the velocity of polymerized actin relative to the substrate is depicted in Figure 6 . For the stationary cell , the ﬂow is rather slow and uniform . For the moving cell one can observe small retrograde ﬂow at the cell front and faster ﬂow in the movement direction at the back , where retraction takes place . The ﬂow speeds and distributions found are similar to those observed in [ 11 ] . 24 Figure 5 : Polarization and movement in the presence of a chemical gradient : A time series is shown , where the shading represents ﬁlament number , thin dashed lines show ﬁlament shape , and the thick ﬁlaments show the movement of a left moving ( red ) and right moving ( blue ) ﬁlament with time . Parameter values as in Table 1 with the internal signal threshold c = 0 . For a movie of the simulation including a visualization of the stochastic ﬁlament dynamics see the Supplementary Material . 25 Figure 6 : Nonmoving vs . moving steady state : Left side pictures show data along the leading edge . On the horizontal axes , 0 and 1 correspond to the cell front and 0 . 5 to the cell rear . The upper left picture shows the barbed end density for the stationary steady state ( blue ) and the moving steady state ( red ) . The lower left picture shows the branching ( solid ) and capping ( dashed ) rates . The two pictures on the right show the F - actin ﬂow ﬁeld , i . e . the velocity of polymerized actin relative to the substrate . Top : Stationary steady state . Botton : Moving steady state . Arrow length and color ( values of the colorbars in µm / min ) represent speed . Parameters as in Table 1 . Why ﬁlament number regulation ? Figure 7 demonstrates the impor - tance of ﬁlament number regulation by branching and capping . The upper picture shows how for a cell with ﬁlament number regulation the ﬁlament densities at the rear and at the front remain close to each other and quite steady over time , whilst in the unregulated case they move away from each other . This is because in a cell where regulation is absent , ﬁlaments are transported to the back by lateral ﬂow , which leads to an accumulation of 26 ﬁlaments at the cell rear , whereas the pulling front is depleted of ﬁlaments . The middle picture shows how this aﬀects protrusion speed : In the regulated case rear retraction and front protrusion speeds approach the same value , as is necessary for constant movement , whilst in the unregulated case rear re - traction is slower and protrusion velocities decrease with time . In the time series below , one can see that this also aﬀects cell shape : In the unregulated case ﬁlaments accumulate in the back , leading to a more prolonged shape . 27 Figure 7 : Movement with and without ﬁlament number regulation : First row : Retraction speed at the rear ( dashed ) and protrusion speed ( solid ) at the font of the cell . Red lines ( thick ) show a cell , which can regulate ﬁlament number , blue ( thin ) lines a cell which cannot . Second row : Same as above , but showing the barbed end densities at the rear ( dashed ) and the front ( solid ) for the regulated ( thick ) and unregulated ( thin ) case . Third and fourth row of pictures : Cell shapes at diﬀerent times . Shading represents actin density , thin gray lines the ﬁlament shape . Third row ( blue , thin leading edge ) : Cell without regulation . Fourth row ( red , thick leading edge ) : Cell with regulation . Parameters as in Table 1 , except in the unregulated case κ br = κ cap = 0 . A turning cell : One can ask the question if the steady state shape of a moving cell is aﬀected by the initial conditions . A reasonable scenario for investigating this question , is a situation where the chemoattractant gradient 28 is gradually turned by 45 deg . Figure 8 shows the corresponding evolution . The ﬁnal shape is very close to the original shape turned by 45 deg . Figure 8 : A turning cell . The picture shows the cell shapes of a turning cell over 9 min . Top left inset : The direction of the chemoattractant gradient as a function of time . Bottom right inset : The initial state ( red , dashed ) and the turned ﬁnal state ( blue , solid ) are compared . Parameter values as in Table 1 . For a movie of the simulation including a visualization of the stochastic ﬁlament dynamics see the Supplementary Material . Various moving shapes : The shape of the moving cell strongly depends on the transduction of the chemotactic signal . In Figure 9A – C three sce - narios are depicted , where only a certain fraction of the leading edge senses the stimulus . The more " local " the eﬀect of the stimulus is , the longer the cell gets , because a smaller fraction of ﬁlaments pull the cell forward . The diﬀerences have been created in the model by variation of the threshold parameter c in ( 18 ) . The fourth shape in Figure 9D shows results of an al - ternative mechanism , where not the polymerization speed but the branching rate is upregulated by the signal . The upregulating mechanism is as in 9A with a maximally threefold increase of the branching rate leading to a much denser actin network at the front . 29 Figure 9 : Diﬀerent shapes of moving cells : Left pictures , A – C : Polymerization velocity along the leading edge ( 0 and 1 representing the cell front and 0 . 5 the cell rear ) . Left picture , D : Barbed end density along the leading edge . Right pictures : Final shapes . Shading represents actin density , thin lines in the cells ( black , dotted ) the ﬁlament shapes and lines at the leading edge ( thick , blue ) indicate the regions aﬀected by the stimulus . A – C : The polymerization rate is aﬀected , A : c = 0 , B : c = 0 . 5 , C : c = 0 . 7 . D : The branching rate is aﬀected , c = 0 . Parameter values as in Table 1 . 30 Parameters values : The parameter values used for the simulation are the ones summarized in Table 1 unless stated diﬀerently . Where availabe , values available in the literature have been used ( e . g . for µ B , µ A , A 0 , v ± ) . Values for the branching and capping parameters κ br , κ cap , c rec have been chosen in order to give 2 ρ ref = 90 ﬁlaments per µm leading edge , which has been observed in real cells ( [ 15 ] ) . κ sev has been chosen in order to give a lamellipodial width in the relevant range of several µm [ 45 ] . Other param - eters however ( µ S , µ T , µ P , µ IP , κ ref ) result from averaging processes in the derivation of the model ( see [ 31 ] ) . In principle they can be derived from molecular properties , but they depend in a complicated way on quantities , where not much experimental data is available , such as mechanical proper - ties of cross - linker molecules , their binding and unbinding rates , and their densities . These parameters can be used in a ﬁtting process . Values within reasonable ranges have been chosen here . 31 Table 1 : Parameter Values Var . Meaning Value Comment µ B bending elasticity 0 . 07 pNµm 2 [ 9 ] µ A macroscopic friction caused by adhesions 0 . 14 pNminµm − 2 measurements in [ 18 , 30 ] , estimation and cal - culations in [ 34 , 32 , 31 ] κ br branching rate 10 min − 1 order of magnitude from [ 11 ] , chosen to ﬁt 2 ρ ref = 90 µm − 1 [ 45 ] κ cap capping rate 5 min − 1 order of magnitude from [ 11 ] , chosen to ﬁt 2 ρ ref = 90 µm − 1 [ 45 ] c rec Arp 2 / 3 recruitment 900 µm − 1 min − 1 chosen to ﬁt 2 ρ ref = 90 µm − 1 [ 45 ] κ sev severing rate 0 . 38 min − 1 µm − 1 chosen to give lamel - lipodium widths similar as described in [ 45 ] µ IP actin - myosin interaction strength 0 . 1 pNµm − 2 A 0 equilibrium inner area 450 µm 2 order of magnitude as in [ 52 , 44 ] v min minimal polymerization speed 1 . 5 µm / min − 1 in biological range v max maximal polymeriza - tion speed 8 µm / min − 1 in biological range µ P pressure constant 0 . 05 pNµm µ S cross - link stretching constant 7 . 1 × 10 − 3 pN min µm − 1 µ T cross - link twisting con - stant 7 . 1 × 10 − 3 µm κ ref reference leading edge curvature for polymer - ization speed reduction ( 5 µm ) − 1 References [ 1 ] W . Alt and M . Dembo . Cytoplasm dynamics and cell motion : two - phase ﬂow models . Mathematical biosciences , 156 ( 1 - 2 ) : 207 – 28 , 1999 . [ 2 ] M . F . Carlier , V . Laurent , J . Santolini , R . Melki , D . Didry , G . X . Xia , Y . Hong , N . H . Chua , and D . Pantaloni . Actin depolymerizing fac - tor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication 32 in actin - based motility . The Journal of Cell Biology , 136 ( 6 ) : 1307 – 22 , March 1997 . [ 3 ] C . Chaponnier , P . A . Janmey , and H . L . Yin . The actin ﬁlament - severing domain of plasma gelsolin . Journal of Cell Biology , 103 : 1473 – 81 , 1986 . [ 4 ] W . T . Chen . Mechanism of retraction of the trailing edge during ﬁbrob - last movement . The Journal of Cell Biology , 90 ( 1 ) : 187 – 200 , 1981 . [ 5 ] R . B . Dickinson . A multi - scale mechanistic model for actin - propelled bacteria . Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering , 1 ( 2 - 3 ) : 110 – 121 , 2008 . [ 6 ] L . Edelstein - Keshet and G . B . Ermentrout . Models for the length distri - bution of actin ﬁlaments : I . Simple polymerization and fragmentation . Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 60 : 449 – 475 , 1998 . [ 7 ] G . B . Ermentrout and L . Edelstein - Keshet . Models for the length dis - tribution of actin ﬁlaments : II . Polymerization and fragmentation by gelsolin acting together . Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 60 : 477 – 503 , 1998 . [ 8 ] G . Gerisch and H . U . Keller . Chemotactic reorientation of granulocytes stimulated with micropipettes containing fMet - Leu - Phe . Journal of Cell Science , 52 : 1 – 10 , 1981 . [ 9 ] F . Gittes , B . Mickey , J . Nettleton , and J . Howard . Flexural rigidity of microtubules and actin ﬁlaments measured from thermal ﬂuctuations in shape . The Journal of Cell Biology , 120 ( 4 ) : 923 – 34 , 1993 . [ 10 ] M . E . Gracheva and O . G . Hans . A continuum model of motility in ame - boid cells . Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 66 ( 1 ) : 167 – 93 , 2004 . [ 11 ] H . P . Grimm , A . B . Verkhovsky , A . Mogilner , and J . - J . Meister . Analysis of actin dynamics at the leading edge of crawling cells : implications for the shape of keratocytes . European Biophysics Journal , 32 : 563 – 577 , 2003 . [ 12 ] M . Iijima , Y . E . Huang , and . Devreotes . Temporal and spatial regula - tion of chemotaxis . Developmental Cell , 3 ( 4 ) : 469 – 478 , 2002 . [ 13 ] P . Y . Jay , P . A . Pham , S . A . Wong , and E . L . Elson . A mechanical function of myosin II in cell motility . Journal of Cell Science , 108 ( 1 ) : 387 – 393 , 1995 . [ 14 ] J . S . King and R . H . Insall . Chemotaxis : ﬁnding the way forward with dictyostelium . Trends in Cell Biology , 19 ( 10 ) : 523 – 530 , 2009 . 33 [ 15 ] S . Koestler , S . Auinger , M . Vinzenz , K . Rottner , and J . V . Small . Diﬀer - entially oriented populations of actin ﬁlaments generated in lamellipodia collaborate in pushing and pausing at the cell front . Nature Cell Biology , 10 ( 3 ) : 306 – 13 , 2008 . [ 16 ] D . A . Lauﬀenburger and A . F . Horwitz . Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell , 84 ( 3 ) : 359 – 69 , 1996 . [ 17 ] O . Leingang . Stability analysis of an actin - driven lamellipodium model with pressure . masters thesis , University of Vienna , 2015 . [ 18 ] F . Li , S . D . Redick , H . P . Erickson , and V . T . Moy . Force measure - ments of the α 5 β 1 integrin - ﬁbronectin interaction . Biophysical Journal , 84 ( 2 ) : 1252 – 1262 , 2003 . [ 19 ] L . M . Machesky and R . H . Insall . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Current Biology , 8 ( 25 ) : 1347 – 1356 , 1998 . [ 20 ] A . Manhart , D . Oelz , C . Schmeiser , and N . Sfakianakis . A ﬁnite el - ement method for the ﬁlament based lamellipodium model . 2015 . in preparation . [ 21 ] A . Manhart and C . Schmeiser . Decay to equilibrium of the ﬁlament end density along the leading edge of the lamellipodium . in preparation , 2015 . [ 22 ] V . Milišić and D . Oelz . On the asymptotic regime of a model for friction mediated by transient elastic linkages . J . Math . Pures Appl . , 96 ( 5 ) : 484 – 501 , 2011 . [ 23 ] T . J . Mitchison and L . P . Cramer . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell , 84 ( 3 ) : 371 – 379 , 1996 . [ 24 ] A . Mogilner . Mathematics of cell motility : have we got its number ? Journal of mathematical biology , 58 ( 1 - 2 ) : 105 – 34 , 2009 . [ 25 ] A . Mogilner , E . Marland , and D . Bottino . A minimal model of lo - comotion applied to the steady gliding movement of ﬁsh keratocyte cells . Mathematical Models for Biological Pattern Formation , 121 : 269 – 293 , 2001 . [ 26 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophysical journal , 71 ( 6 ) : 3030 – 45 , 1996 . [ 27 ] J . Mueller , J . Pfanzelter , C . Winkler , A . Narita , C . Le Clainche , M . Nemethova , M . - F . Carlier , Y . Maeda , M . D . Welch , T . Ohkawa , C . Schmeiser , G . P . Resch , and J . V . Small . Electron tomography and 34 simulation of baculovirus actin comet tails support a tethered ﬁlament model of pathogen propulsion . PLoS biology , 12 ( 1 ) : e1001765 , 2014 . [ 28 ] R . D . Mullins , J . A . Heuser , and T . D . Pollard . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : Nucleation , high aﬃnity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences , 95 ( 11 ) : 6181 – 6186 , 1998 . [ 29 ] F . Nakamura , T . M . Osborn , C . A . Hartemink , J . H . Hartwig , and T . P . Stossel . Structural basis of ﬁlamin A functions . The Journal of Cell Biology , 179 ( 5 ) : 1011 – 25 , December 2007 . [ 30 ] A . F . Oberhauser , C . Badilla - Fernandez , M . Carrion - Vazquez , and J . M . Fernandez . The mechanical hierarchies of ﬁbronectin observed with single - molecule AFM . Journal of Molecular Biology , 319 ( 2 ) : 433 – 47 , 2002 . [ 31 ] D . Oelz and C . Schmeiser . Cell mechanics : from single scale - based mod - els to multiscale modeling . , chapter How do cells move ? Mathematical modeling of cytoskeleton dynamics and cell migration . Chapman and Hall , 2010 . [ 32 ] D . Oelz and C . Schmeiser . Derivation of a model for symmetric lamel - lipodia with instantaneous cross - link turnover . Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis , 198 : 963 – 980 , 2010 . [ 33 ] D . Oelz and C . Schmeiser . Simulation of lamellipodial fragments . J . Math . Biol . , 64 ( 3 ) : 513 – 528 , 2012 . [ 34 ] D . Oelz , C . Schmeiser , and J . V . Small . Modeling of the actin - cytoskeleton in symmetric lamellipodial fragments . Cell Adhesion and Migration , 2 : 117 – 126 , 2008 . [ 35 ] C . S . Peskin , G . M . Odell , and G . F . Oster . Cellular motions and thermal ﬂuctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophysical journal , 65 ( 1 ) : 316 – 324 , 1993 . [ 36 ] L . M . Pierini , M . A . Lawson , R . J . Eddy , B . Hendey , and F . R . Max - ﬁeld . Oriented endocytic recycling of αβ 1 in motile neutrophils . Blood , 95 ( 8 ) : 2471 – 2480 , 2000 . [ 37 ] A . E . Postlethwaite and J . Keski - Oja . Stimulation of the chemotactic migration of human ﬁbroblasts by transforming growth factor beta . The Journal of Experimental Medicine , 165 ( 1 ) : 251 – 256 , 1987 . [ 38 ] L . Preziosi and G . Vitale . A multiphase model of tumor and tissue growth including cell adhesion and plastic reorganization . Math . Models Methods Appl . Sci . , 21 ( 9 ) : 1901 – 1932 , 2011 . 35 [ 39 ] J . Ramic . On a model for a lamellipodial actin ﬁlament layer including pressure . diploma thesis , University of Vienna , 2011 . [ 40 ] J . Roland , J . Berro , A . Michelot , L . Blanchoin , and J . - L . Martiel . Stochastic severing of actin ﬁlaments by actin depolymerizing fac - tor / coﬁlin controls the emergence of a steady dynamical regime . Bio - phys . Journal , 94 ( 6 ) : 2082 – 2094 , 2008 . [ 41 ] B . Rubinstein , K . Jacobson , and A . Mogilner . Multiscale two - dimensional modeling of a motile simple - shaped cell . Multiscale Model - ing and Simulation , 3 ( 2 ) : 413 – 439 , 2005 . [ 42 ] A . Schallamach . A theory of dynamic rubber friction . Wear , 6 ( 5 ) : 375 – 382 , 1963 . [ 43 ] I . Schwaiger , A . Kardinal , M . Schleicher , A . Noegel , and M . Rief . A me - chanical unfolding intermediate in an actin - crosslinking protein . Nature Structural and Molecular Biology , 11 ( 1 ) : 81 – 5 , 2004 . [ 44 ] J . V . Small , G . Isenberg , and J . E . Celis . Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature , bf 272 : 638 – 639 , 1978 . [ 45 ] J . V . Small , T . Stradal , E . Vignal , and K . Rottner . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends in Cell Biology , 12 ( 3 ) : 112 – 20 , 2002 . [ 46 ] T . M . Svitkina and G . G . Borisy . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymer - izing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . The Journal of Cell Biology , 145 ( 5 ) : 1009 – 1026 , 1999 . [ 47 ] T . M . Svitkina , A . B . Verkhovsky , K . M . McQuade , and G . G . Borisy . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . The Journal of Cell Biology , 139 ( 2 ) : 397 – 415 , 1997 . [ 48 ] J . X . Tang , T . Ito , T . Tao , P . Traub , and P . A . Janmey . Opposite eﬀects of electrostatics and steric exclusion on bundle formation by F - actin and other ﬁlamentous polyelectrolytes . Biochemistry , 36 : 12600 – 12607 , 1997 . [ 49 ] J . X . Tang and P . A . Janmey . The polyelectrolyte nature of F - actin and the mechanism of actin bundle formation . Journal of Biological Chem - istry , 271 ( 15 ) : 8556 – 8563 , 1996 . [ 50 ] J . X . Tang , S . Wong , P . T . Tran , and P . A . Janmey . Counterion induced bundle formation of rodlike polyelectrolytes . Berichte der Bunsenge - sellschaft für physikalische Chemie , 100 ( 6 ) : 796 – 806 , 1996 . 36 [ 51 ] S . Tojkander , G . Gateva , and P . Lappalainen . Actin stress ﬁbers - assem - bly , dynamics and biological roles . Journal of Cell Science , 125 ( 8 ) : 1855 – 1864 , 2012 . [ 52 ] A . B . Verkhovsky , T . M . Svitkina , and G . G . Borisy . Self - polarisation and directional motility of cytoplasm . Current Biology , 9 ( 1 ) : 11 – 20 , 1999 . [ 53 ] A . Weeds and S . Maciver . F - actin capping proteins . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 5 : 63 – 69 , 1993 . [ 54 ] O . D . Weiner , G . Servant , M . D . Welch , T . J . Mitchison , J . W . Sedat , and H . R . Bourne . Spatial control of actin polymerization during neutrophil chemotaxis . Nature Cell Biology , 1 ( 2 ) : 75 – 81 , 1999 . [ 55 ] C . Winkler , M . Vinzenz , J . V . Small , and C . Schmeiser . Actin ﬁlament tracking in electron tomograms of negatively stained lamellipodia using the localized radon transform . Journal of Structural Biology , 178 ( 1 ) : 19 – 28 , 2012 . [ 56 ] P . T . Yam , C . A . Wilson , L . Ji , B . Herbert , E . L . Barnhart , N . A . Dye , P . W . Wiseman , G . Danuser , and J . A . Theriot . Actin - myosin network reorganisation breaks symmetry at the cell rear to sponaneously initiate polarized cell motility . The Journal of Cell Biology , 178 ( 7 ) : 1207 – 1221 , 2007 . [ 57 ] S . H . Zigmond and J . G . Hirsch . Leukocyte locomotion and chemotaxis . The Journal of Experimental Medicine , 137 : 387 – 410 , 1973 . 37