Technology for Promoting Scientific Practice and Personal Meaning in Life - Relevant Learning Tamara Clegg , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Jason Yip , Helene Gelderblom , Alex Kuhn , Tobin Valenstein , Becky Lewittes , Emily Rhodes , Evan Golub and Allison Druin { tclegg , ebonsign , jasonyip , tvalenst , charley , eerhodes , egolub , allisond } @ umd . edu , geldejh @ unisa . ac . z , kuhnalex @ umich . edu University of Maryland , Human - Computer Interaction Lab www . cs . umd . edu / hcil Introduction Policy makers and science educators advocate for “Science for all” ( AAAS , 1990 ; NRC , 1996 ) , but traditional science learning is irrelevant , boring , alien , and disconnected from learners’ lives ( e . g . , Basu & Barton , 2007 ; Bouillion & Gomez , 2001 ; Lee & Fradd , 1998 ) . We have developed Life - relevant Learning ( LRL ) environments to help learners understand the relevance that scientific thinking , processes , and experimentation can have in their everyday lives . ? Problem : We need to better understand the process and effects of incorporating the technologies that are already personally meaningful in learners’ daily lives into learners’ experiences in science . We aim to understand how the scaffolding for scientific inquiry and the support for telling personally meaningful stories in two mobile software systems , Zydeco and StoryKit , influence learners’ scientifically meaningful experiences . Context of the study Kitchen Chemistry is an informal LRL program held at a local private school . A total of nine learners ( ages 9 - 13 ) participated in the program , six of whom participated consistently each day . Research Question How did Zydeco and StoryKit support or inhibit learners’ scientific practice and their personal meaning ? Zydeco • Prompts learners to create tags of photo , video , or audio data that they capture . • The tags and entries are added to their library of data for a particular investigation . • StoryKit enabled learners to create sequential and personal , free - form stories . • However , there was no mechanism for helping learners to look at data collected across groups . Papers Clegg , T . L . , Bonsignore , E . , Yip , J . C . , Gelderblom , H . , Kuhn . A . , Valenstein , T . & Druin , A . ( 2012 , June ) . Technology for promoting scientific practice and personal meaning in life - relevant learning . Proc . International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ) . Yip , J . C . , Clegg , T . L . , Bonsignore , E . , Gelderblom , H . , Lewites , B . , Guha , M . L . , & Druin , A . ( 2012 , July ) . Kitchen Chemistry : Supporting learners’ decisions in science . Proc . International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( ICLS ) . StoryKit • Learners create electronic storybooks by typing in text , recording sounds , taking pictures , and / or drawing on the device ' s touch screen . • They can also share their creations by uploading them to a server . Findings • Zydeco supported learners’ scientific practice quite well . • However , its tighter control of creation of artifacts limited learners’ ability to integrate media forms . Implications and Future Work • Technology for LRL must strike a balance between structured scaffolds and flexible , personalized designs to support learners’ scientifically meaningful experiences . • Based on this analysis , we are developing ScienceKit , a mobile software system that combines the scaffolds needed to guide learners through the inquiry process and the flexibility to support learners’ own personal interests Methods • Data Collection included stories and investigative reasoning artifacts that learners created using Zydeco and StoryKit during Kitchen Chemistry sessions . • Data Analysis entailed a Grounded Theory approach . We developed an initial coding frame through open coding of a random 25 % of artifacts that learners created . We compared , contrasted and adjusted these themes in individual learner creations , within sets of artifacts created with the same technology ( StoryKit and Zydeco ) , and finally , across both technologies to establish the final coding scheme .