Why HCI and Creativity Research Must Collaborate to Develop New Creativity Support Tools Jonas Frich Center for Digital Creativity , Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark frich @ cc . au . dk Michael Mose Biskjaer Center for Digital Creativity , Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark mmb @ cavi . au . dk Peter Dalsgaard Center for Digital Creativity , Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark dalsgaard @ cavi . au . dk ABSTRACT Digital creativity support tools ( CST ) are an integrated part of many professions in the creative industries . While CST play a cen - tral role in the daily practices of creative professionals , we have limited understanding of how these tools affect the creative process . This lack is problematic , as the need for designing new CST to help leverage societal challenges continues to grow . Part of the reason for our scarce understanding of CST is an untapped poten - tial for collaboration between two research communities whose joint effort is key to increasing our understanding of the role and nature of CST in creative practices . We review seminal work from creativity - oriented Human - Computer Interaction research ( HCI ) and psychology - based Creativity Research ( CR ) to demonstrate a discrepancy between a ) HCI’s insight into CST practices and tech - nologies , but rather limited awareness of current relevant studies in CR , and , conversely , b ) CR’s long expertise in psychological studies of creative processes and cognition , but rather limited insight into CST technologies and practices . To help enable mutually comple - mentary collaboration between the two disciplines , we propose four CST - based research initiatives : integration and development of theory , adaptation and development of methods , collection of ex - emplars and cases , and prototyping of novel CST . We discuss these initiatives in the light of trends in the two research communities , we and suggest potential next steps . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → HCI theory , concepts and models ; Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; KEYWORDS Creativity support tool ( CST ) , creativity , Human - Computer Inter - action , psychology ACM Reference Format : JonasFrich , MichaelMoseBiskjaer , andPeterDalsgaard . 2018 . WhyHCIand Creativity Research Must Collaborate to Develop New Creativity Support Tools . In TechMindSociety ’18 : AP AScience ’18 : Technology , Mind , and Society , Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . TechMindSociety ’18 , April 5 – 7 , 2018 , Washington , DC , USA © 2018 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to the Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5420 - 2 / 18 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3183654 . 3183678 April 5 – 7 , 2018 , Washington , DC , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 4 , 6 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3183654 . 3183678 1 INTRODUCTION The invention of microprocessors in the late 1960s paved the way for less expensive computers to enter into broader commercial do - mains and work practices [ 15 ] . Since then , the pervasiveness of technology and digital tools in almost all aspects of human work has increased . This also holds true for the creative industries where many work practices now partly or fully revolve around the use of digital tools . Such practices can be characterized as creative processes in which people interact with digital technology to ac - complish creative tasks . Since digital technologies serve as tools to underpin creative practices , they are generally referred to as Creativity Support Tools ( CST ) . CST are often designed to support rapid exploration , experimentation , collaboration , and composi - tion [ 32 ] . Examples range from e . g . Adobe’s Photoshop in which users can work with visual layers as a powerful way to explore and experiment , to niche - oriented , novel digital tools , which we will return to shortly . Two academic disciplines , Creativity Research ( CR ) rooted in psychology , and Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , are relevant for understanding how CST are embedded in and affect creative practices . Independently , CR and HCI have provided rich insights into the nature of human creativity [ 26 , 29 ] , and develop - ment of digital CST [ 32 , 33 ] . Still , there have been surprisingly few attempts at integrating the two disciplines in order to establish a coherent understanding of the role and nature of CST in actual creative work . This research lacuna is problematic in terms of the need to im - prove our understanding of contemporary creative work practices , and with regard to developing new digital CST to help facilitate , accelerate , and augment creative work . Also , and no less important , this lacuna represents a domain with great potential for CR and HCI researchers and practitioners to further collaboration in the spirit of the Technology , Mind , and Society conference theme . Using this thematic triad of the conference as a prism , we would argue that CR , driven by psychologists with a long tradition , represents a focus on the mind , especially as cognition . Also , creativity - oriented HCI research , which , despite its relatively young age , is growing rapidly , may represent technology . Finally , the creative industries as the arena of study ensure the link to society where creative industries comprise an economic growth factor , and where the use of tech - nology and digital CST are expanding and becoming increasingly pervasive in most aspects of creative work practices . Informed by this outline , this paper 1 ) offers an overview of the current state of research into understanding the role of digital CST TechMindSociety ’18 , April 5 – 7 , 2018 , Washington , DC , USA Jonas Frich , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard in creative work as seen from CR and HCI , and 2 ) proposes con - crete opportunities for extended , mutually rewarding collaboration between the two disciplines . 2 THE RISE OF CREATIVITY - ORIENTED HCI RESEARCH Since the early 1980s , human factors in computing have been a topic for scholars and practitioners with ever more activities being covered and included under the umbrella term ’HCI’ [ 15 ] . Inevitably , the topic of creativity has been added to this growing assemblage of human activity . While this interest picked up in the late 1990s , Fischer noted in 1992 that few computational environments sup - ported creativity although " Computers have the potential to be creativity enhancing tools " [ 9 ] . A few years later , Shneiderman contributed his four - phased framework for supporting creativity , presented in his 1999 Creativity and Cognition paper [ 33 ] . This conference was the first of its kind under SIGCHI ( Special Interest Group on Computer - Human Interaction ) . In the introduction to the conference proceedings , Edmonds and Candy [ 3 ] stressed a shift from automating to augmenting creativity alongside integration of HCI as key issues . Since then , the interest in creativity - oriented HCI research has been growing [ 11 ] . This lively expansion may in part have been fueled by what Shneiderman has pronounced one of the grand challenges of HCI - the development of CST [ 33 ] . We argue that there are still potential for more research in both designing and assessing CST , insofar as the former focus area is still at an early stage , and the latter is only starting to really pick up . 2 . 1 Current HCI Research on Creativity Support Tools ( CST ) The growing interest in creativity in HCI has been most vivid during the past two decades [ 11 ] . It has predominantly focused on collab - orative creativity and its relation to support tools in an in - vitro perspective , i . e . , with artificial ( instructed ) tasks in a controlled lab environment [ 11 ] . Still , some studies in HCI do address the inter - play between tools and creativity in naturalistic ( real - life ) settings . In general , it is important to observe that there is a tendency in HCI to propose and develop new digital CST rather than study existing tools [ 11 ] . This is unsurprising given the practice - oriented research traditions in HCI . One example is The Choreographer’s Notebook , a collaborative tool that offers multimodal annotation of dance re - hearsal videos to address the limited opportunity for exploration in dance productions due to scarce rehearsal time [ 34 ] . Idea Expander is another example of a CST targeting a wider domain . This tool is designed to provide pictorial stimuli in group ideation sessions to overcome inhibiting socio - cognitive processes that often lead to a shortage in stimuli [ 35 ] . Such examples and their key characteristics are fascinating in the sense that the majority of new CST are introduced through con - ference presentations and in journal papers . While this diversity in CST ( and often accompanying methods ) is inciting in terms of how each CST crystallizes its originator’s individual perception of cre - ativity , it complicates discussions of and comparisons across studies . A major reason for this is the fact that the creativity - oriented com - munity in HCI has never been fond of defining what is meant or understood by the term ’creativity’ itself [ 11 ] . One example is the compelling ShadowStory [ 24 ] , a novel CST for digital storytelling with children , inspired by traditional Chinese shadow puppetry . This study states that " Findings illustrated that ShadowStory pro - moted creativity " [ 24 ] , and while this might well be true , it is hard to determine . Firstly , no explicit account or definition of creativity is given . Secondly , the evaluation of the CST offers no indication of what is understood by creativity or indeed measured . Instead , the study concludes : " These rich creative behaviors assured us that creativity is inherent in children’s minds . ShadowStory provided an opportunity for them to more easily express such creativity " [ 24 ] . We wish to stress that our aim is certainly not finger - pointing at a paper published at a leading HCI conference . Rather , our aim is to show a taken - for - grantedness in how creativity is treated in the HCI community based on nebulous concepts , which does a disservice to continuous research on creativity in general and CST in particular within the HCI research community . We speculate that this lack of theoretical and conceptual grounding might influence the diversity of CST and pertaining methods in HCI in a recursive manner since the design of tools and choice of methods might establish precedent for subsequent creativity - oriented HCI research that in turn does not prioritize a firm basis in theory . 2 . 2 Limited Insight into Current Creativity Research ( CR ) HCI is a technology - focused newcomer to creativity studies and this entails refreshing perspectives on understanding and developing CST . We embrace this intriguing focus on human activity by HCI , however , we are concerned about the lack of theoretical grounding with regard to the actual subject , creativity ; a complex term that may be reduced to a buzzword if simply added ad - hoc to an HCI study or tool . Althoughcreativity - orientedHCIresearchattributesmuchneeded attention to digital tools , focus is often on proposing new tools and studying how they might affect one isolated aspect of creativity in a controlled setting . This reduction in methodology tends to lead to a weakened understanding of creativity and CST . In addition , many tools developed and methods applied build on a vague , implicit , or completely absent definitions of creativity . This makes it problem - atic to develop a scientific understanding of the phenomenon of creative professionals using CST in real life ( in - vivo ) in a manner that enables integration with existing knowledge in the field . In other words , by not conforming to established definitions from the rich , longstanding tradition of studying creativity , valuable insights from CR in the past 70 years or more become hard to incorporate in creativity - oriented HCI in a fruitful way . By not defining creativity or specifying the components of creativity that are being addressed in an HCI study , the possible connection to and collaboration with CR become cumbersome , if not unfeasible altogether . Our point is that the creativity - oriented HCI community cer - tainly has great insight into many central aspects of CST practices and technologies , but remains impaired by a limited awareness of state - of - the - art work in CR . While this situation is clearly inexpe - dient , it also invites ideas on how such disciplinary interchange could be realized . Why HCI and Creativity Research Must Collaborate to Develop New Creativity Support Tools TechMindSociety ’18 , April 5 – 7 , 2018 , Washington , DC , USA 3 THE RISE OF CREATIVITY RESEARCH ( CR ) In his inaugural presidential address in APA , the American Psycho - logical Association , Guilford advocated the idea that psychology should direct more attention to the study of creativity [ 29 ] . This 1950 event is often seen as the catalyst for modern CR [ 29 ] , and ush - ered in a new area of research in psychology . Since then , psychology has contributed the vast majority of studies to CR in general , mak - ing it the predominant discipline for creativity research although other academic disciplines have begun offering a growing number of valuable insights , including management theory , philosophy , aesthetics , social sciences , design , and HCI . 3 . 1 Different Waves and Understandings of Creativity The evolution of modern CR has been described as being com - posed of waves [ 29 ] . This might to some extent be seen through Rhodes’ [ 27 ] classic four p model of research foci , person , product , process , and press ( from the milieu ) . While the first wave investi - gated personality and exceptionally creative individuals , the second wave shifted focus to the underlying processes occurring while indi - viduals embarked on creative endeavors [ 29 ] . The second wave has now been complemented by a third wave , bringing socio - cultural and interdisciplinary approaches to the fore by examining " groups of people in social and cultural contexts " [ 29 ] . To characterize the different types of creativity , Kaufman & Beghetto [ 20 ] have offered a four c model of creativity with little - c ( everyday creativity ) , Big - C ( eminent creativity ) , mini - c ( creativ - ity in a learning process ) , and Pro - c ( professional - level expertise in a creative field ) . By distinguishing between these types of cre - ativity , the authors emphasize the importance of not " minimizing professional - level creative productions of expert creators " [ 20 ] , but instead " consider creative ability , interest , and pursuits at an ap - propriate level of specificity " [ 20 ] . While the model’s distinctions underline the importance of specifically looking at creative profes - sionals , the four c model posits neither instrumentalized knowledge nor the use of creative tools as key concepts in studying professional creative practice . The definition of creativity itself is a central topic in CR [ 26 , 28 ] , and while it lies beyond the scope of this paper to delve into this discussion , we consider it important to state our position in terms of defining this conceptual basis . In our research , we adopt a definition of creativity that goes beyond merely being original and appropriate ( often also called novel and useful ) , which is the ’standard definition of creativity’ [ 28 ] . Instead , we consider the elaborated definition by Plucker et al . [ 26 ] to be more appropriate for capturing the com - plexity of the concept : " Creativity is the interaction among aptitude , process , and environment by which an individual or group pro - duces a perceptible product that is both novel and useful as defined within a social context " [ 26 ] . This definition includes interaction with the environment , which covers CST and systems for a group or an individual in a context . 3 . 2 Focus on the Mechanisms of the Mind When it comes to studying aspects of creativity in practice where creative professionals surround themselves with many types of technology and CST , CR’s current paradigm falls short . This has been pointed out by leading scholars in CR , including Sawyer [ 29 ] who stresses how individualistic approaches that long have directed CR contributions tend to be : " reductionist - they analyze creativity by decomposing it into smaller units of thought and behavior " [ 29 ] . When reading such studies : " you may wonder what this or that experiment has to do with real - world creativity " [ 29 ] . Furthermore , since the mid - 20th century , CR has had a profound interest in the creative process itself as an object of research , but with a distinct focus on an individual’s mental mechanisms and how they affect and shape a creative process . Consequently , psychological concep - tualizations , including monitoring and mapping , of the creative process generally appear to both begin and end with mechanisms of the mind . As Kozbelt et al . assert in an extensive overview of cre - ativity theories : " Theories that focus on the creative process aim to understand the nature of the mental mechanisms that occur when a person is engaged in creative thinking or creative activity . Pro - cess theories typically specify different stages of processing ( . . . ) or particular mechanisms as the components of creative thought " [ 22 ] . Equating research into creative processes with a focus on mental mechanisms of the individual / s involved is problematic since it ig - nores a great number of factors that also affect the creative process , e . g . , cultural variables . This almost omnipresent focus on cognitive aspects of creativity is , however , unsurprising insofar as psychology has been the mainspring of CR since Guilford’s APA address in 1950 . We certainly do not wish to underestimate the many valuable insights that this body of work has yielded . Even so , we argue that it has become increasingly necessary to also note that this emphasis on the intentionality and rationality of the individual human mind might cause a critical blind spot with regard to how the interaction between CST learned and perceived affordances affects real - life use of technology , which in turn influences activities in a creative process . The elaborate understanding of creativity cited above [ 26 ] stresses the interaction of creative process and environment . This enables an inclusion of tools or technology in creativity by consid - ering them an integrated part of the environment . Still , we argue that this interpretation remains an underdeveloped perspective . WHY STUDIES OF CST CALL FOR JOINT EFFORTS With the development of CST as a ’grand challenge for HCI’ [ 33 ] , we find it a bit paradoxical that CR , as an in many ways closely related discipline , holds so much untapped potential for creativity - oriented HCI researchers . Psychologists have studied creativity meticulously for 70 years [ 29 ] , and understanding of creativity has undergone a remarkable evolution from studies on highly gifted creative individuals over underlying cognitive processes to analysis of the sociocultural context for the creative process . Still , the use and influence of digital CST on creativity have yet to be explicitly addressed by the CR community . We speculate that one reason for this might be the fact that the prevailing view on creativity is encased in an understanding of creative practice that begins and ends with mechanisms of the mind . In our view , neither HCI nor CR can alone accomplish the challenge of furthering understanding of CST and how creative professionals use such technology . Instead , as Table 1 shows , we advocate an interdisciplinary joint effort : combining HCI’s expertise in advanced digital technology and how TechMindSociety ’18 , April 5 – 7 , 2018 , Washington , DC , USA Jonas Frich , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard Table 1 : HCI and CR as to complementary disciplines HCI Expertise in studying digital technology in creative practice Less insight into state - of - the - art creativity the - ory and studies CR Less insight into digital technology in creative practice Expertise in creativity theory and studies , longstanding tradition it is used in professional creative practice and CR’s expertise in studying creative processes based on frameworks , terminology , and insights . To explore this idea , we discuss four CST - based research initiatives . 4 DISCUSSION : FOUR AVENUES FOR COLLABORATION Creativity is a foundational mode of human inquiry , and we con - sider an improved understanding of the interplay between digital technologies and human activity a critical conceptual challenge for research . It is an area where novel insights are likely to have significant societal impact , e . g . , through developing new methods and digital interactive tools to better scaffold creative work . The real - life work of creative professionals already involves technology and digital tools , but research is lagging behind in exposing and understanding the complex interplay between humans and CST in actual creative practice . In our research center , we have studied the use of digital CST in creative work practices , e . g . , in design , architecture , and digital arts production , for more than a decade . In our HCI - based research , the aim has been to push technological development , e . g . , how to design novel systems to support collaboration and reflection in interdisciplinary design teams [ 6 ] . We have become increasingly aware that there is a need to root the development of digital sys - tems for creative work in a more strongly CR - informed foundation . As indicated in the overview of CR , it has , however , also become clear that there is still little research in this area that can help us understand how CST influence collaborative , creative processes . This is rather paradoxical , as the work practices we observe empir - ically are precisely characterized by practitioners using an array of digital tools and almost always in collaborative processes . We are thus motivated to propose a set of CST - based research initiatives to promote more fruitful interchange and collaboration between HCI and CR since the expertise of both disciplines are needed for improving current understanding of CST in professional creative practice , and how even better CST can be designed in the future . The four collaborative initiatives we suggest are theoretical integra - tion , exemplars , development of new methods and constructions of novel prototypes . We consider theoretical integration and develop - ment to be central since this will drive and direct the other three types of activities . 4 . 1 Theoretical Integration and Development Establishing a sturdy theoretical integration of HCI and CR is no trivial task , and it is beyond this paper’s scope to address this in full . Still , we wish to suggest directions for what we deem an accessible path for developing theoretical CST - based research to benefit both HCI and CR . One direction for improved theoretical grounding is the research perspective of distributed cognition . This offers a paradigm for thinking about cognition as distributed across individuals , artifacts such as CST , and representations instead of seeing information processing on an individual level only [ 18 ] . While it would seem almost destined for HCI to pick up distributed cognition , this per - spective has also been influential in some parts of CR . We consider the distributed cognition - inspired idea of distributed creativity as proposed by [ 14 , 25 , 29 ] to be a valuable step toward stronger inte - gration of the core perspectives of technology and mind currently residing in HCI and CR . A second possible direction for theoretical grounding is activity theory , which is considerably related to distributed cognition [ 30 ] and firmly established in the field of HCI . AT goes beyond a tra - ditional subject - object dichotomy in that objects refer not only to tangible entities , but also to motivations . Subjects may internalize tools via use whereby mental concepts and ideas can become ex - ternalized in tools or materials [ 19 ] . This object - focused analysis contains three layers : activity ( motives or the object ) , action , and operation . To our knowledge , no effort has yet been put into the integration of AT with classic theories of creativity such as , for instance , Amabile’s [ 1 ] componential theory of creativity , which also deals with individual motivation ( i . e . , intrinsic motivation ) and operationalizability ( i . e . , domain - relevant skills ) [ 1 , 19 ] . A third direction for improved theoretical integration of HCI and CR is pragmatism . Pragmatism , especially the strand developed by Dewey [ 8 ] , has found footing in HCI in terms of understanding the creative design processes in which new interactive systems are developed [ 31 ] . The pragmatist idea of inquiry [ 7 ] holds particu - lar promise for understanding explorative , constructive creative processes . Given that pragmatism emphasizes the role of tools and technologies in inquiry [ 4 , 16 ] , it could serve as a basis for develop - ing theory about how CST affect and guide creative processes in professional practice . 4 . 2 Adaptation and Development of Methods A recurring challenge for studying IT - mediated creative work in practice is that no method has yet been developed for this purpose . Current work relies on adaptation of more generic approaches , e . g . , ethnographically inspired field studies [ 2 ] , cultural probes [ 13 ] , and interviews [ 23 ] . These methods can be viable , but they do not guide studies toward aspects that are especially salient for observ - ing and understanding the role of CST in creative work . We thus see a need for developing novel methods that offer a more focused approach . These methods could be inspired by the theoretical in - tegration and development of HCI and CR as proposed above . For instance , observations guided by a pragmatic understanding of cre - ative inquiry would focus on the extent to which CST in use spur knowledge generation through construction of concepts , and an activity - theoretical approach could offer a framework for analyzing the dynamics between CST internalization and externalization . Why HCI and Creativity Research Must Collaborate to Develop New Creativity Support Tools TechMindSociety ’18 , April 5 – 7 , 2018 , Washington , DC , USA 4 . 3 Collecting Exemplars and Cases Höök and Löwgren [ 17 ] and Dalsgaard and Dindler [ 5 ] show that research generates knowledge on multiple levels : the concrete level of singular cases , the abstract level of theories , and at intermediary levels in between these two extremes . In addition to theoretical and methodological common ground , sustainable research programs typically assemble , and sometimes take part in creating , exemplars and cases that demonstrate aspects of particular salience to the program . As Flyvbjerg [ 10 ] states : " a scientific discipline without a large number of thoroughly executed case studies is a discipline without systematic production of exemplars , and a discipline with - out exemplars is an ineffective one " [ 10 ] . In terms of CST , this might be distinct tools or systems that show core concepts such as the Dynabook [ 21 ] , which demonstrated and inspired the development of laptop computers ; annotated collections of artifacts , such as An - notated Portfolios [ 12 ] , which in addition to the artifacts themselves describe the knowledge and processes that led to their creation ; and it can be case studies [ 10 ] offering detailed examinations of phenomena in situ . 4 . 4 Prototyping Novel Tools For years , much work in HCI has been prototype - driven [ 36 ] , lead - ing to the exploration of new concepts through the design and development of novel systems and prototypes . The best - known example of this might be Engelbart’s mother of all demos from 1968 where he showcased a highly innovative system built on ideas presented in 1962 in the report Augmenting Human Intellect : A Conceptual Framework [ 15 ] . When a hypothesis - driven develop - ment of prototypes is intertwined with theoretical development and understanding , it presents the perhaps strongest possible argu - mentation for ( or against ) a given model from a pragmatic point of view , i . e . , to what extent a model lends itself to provide meaningful alternatives to the current . This methodology does obviously not have the same resonance in psychology - founded CR as in HCI ; however , a thorough theoretical integration of the two disciplines together with a collection of CST - relevant exemplars will greatly help relieve this methodological issue . 5 CONCLUSION This paper has been motivated by the observation that research still has much work to do in trying to understand the complex interplay between creative professionals and digital CST . This might not necessarily be interpreted as an acute societal problem if compared directly to the United Nations’ list of global societal issues , e . g . , climate change or lack of drinking water for everyone . However , the point we wish to make is that solving such grand challenges requires extensive creative thinking and dedicated effort , which will be carried out in concrete processes in which skillful use of appropriate digital tools and technology such as CST will be critical . The development of new CST thus represents a great opportunity for both supporting and enhancing one of human beingsâĂŹ most potent abilities : creativity . We have shown how creativity - oriented HCI research offers valuable insight into technologies and practices , and how psychology - based CR with its long tradition of studying creative processes and its cognitive aspects is equally important for developing new CST . We have further argued that HCI’s limited insight into state - of - the - art creativity studies , and , similarly , CR’s limited insight into the use of digital technology in creative practice calls for deeper integration and collaboration between the two disciplines in order to strengthen our scarce insight into CST in creative practice . On this basis , we have proposed four avenues through which such constructive collaboration might be realized in order to address the pressing need for understanding current , and developing even better , CST . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research has been funded by The Velux Foundations grant : Dig - ital Tools in Collaborative Creativity , and The Danish Innovation Foundation grant 1311 - 00001B : CIBIS . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Teresa M Amabile . 1983 . The social psychology of creativity : A componential conceptualization . Journal of personality and social psychology 45 , 2 ( 1983 ) , 357 . [ 2 ] Paul Atkinson , Amanda Coffey , Sara Delamont , John Lofland , Lyn Lofland , et al . 2001 . Handbook of ethnography . Elsevier . [ 3 ] Linda Candy and Ernest Edmonds . 1999 . Introducing Creativity to Cognition . In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Creativity & # 38 ; Cognition ( C & # 38 ; C ’99 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 317561 . 317562 [ 4 ] Peter Dalsgaard . 2017 . Instruments of inquiry : Understanding the nature and role of tools in design . International Journal of Design 11 , 1 ( 2017 ) . [ 5 ] Peter Dalsgaard and Christian Dindler . 2014 . Between Theory and Practice : Bridging Concepts in HCI Research . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1635 – 1644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557342 [ 6 ] Peter Dalsgaard and Kim Halskov . 2012 . Reflective Design Documentation . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 428 – 437 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318020 [ 7 ] John Dewey . 1938 . Logic - The theory of inquiry . Read Books Ltd . [ 8 ] John Dewey . 2008 . The Later Works of John Dewey , Volume 7 , 1925 - 1953 : 1932 , Ethics . Vol . 7 . SIU press . [ 9 ] Gerhard Flscher . 1992 . Creativity Enhancing Design Environments . ( 1992 ) . [ 10 ] Bent Flyvbjerg . 2006 . Five misunderstandings about case - study research . Quali - tative inquiry 12 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 219 – 245 . [ 11 ] Jonas Frich , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard . 2018 . Twenty Years of Creativity in Human - Computer Interaction . In Conference paper under review . 10 . [ 12 ] Bill Gaver and John Bowers . 2012 . Annotated portfolios . interactions 19 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 40 – 49 . [ 13 ] Bill Gaver , Tony Dunne , and Elena Pacenti . 1999 . Design : Cultural Probes . inter - actions 6 , 1 ( Jan . 1999 ) , 21 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 291224 . 291235 [ 14 ] Vlad Petre Glăveanu . 2014 . Distributed creativity : Thinking outside the box of the creative individual . Springer . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 05434 - 6 [ 15 ] Jonathan Grudin . 2017 . From tool to partner : The evolution of human - computer interaction . Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Interaction 10 , 1 ( 2017 ) , i – 183 . [ 16 ] Larry A Hickman . 2001 . Philosophical tools for technological culture : Putting pragmatism to work . Indiana University Press . [ 17 ] Kristina Höök and Jonas Löwgren . 2012 . Strong Concepts : Intermediate - level Knowledge in Interaction Design Research . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 19 , 3 , Article 23 ( Oct . 2012 ) , 18 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2362364 . 2362371 [ 18 ] Edwin Hutchins and Tove Klausen . 1996 . Distributed cognition in an airline cockpit . Cognition and communication at work ( 1996 ) , 15 – 34 . [ 19 ] Victor Kaptelinin . 2017 . Activity Theory . ( feb 2017 ) . Retrieved Feb 15 , 2018 from https : / / www . interaction - design . org / literature / book / the - encyclopedia - of - human - computer - interaction - 2nd - ed / activity - theory [ 20 ] James C Kaufman and Ronald A Beghetto . 2009 . Beyond big and little : The four C model of creativity . Review of general psychology 13 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0013688 [ 21 ] Alan C Kay . 1972 . A personal computer for children of all ages . In Proceedings of the ACM annual conference - Volume 1 . ACM , 1 . [ 22 ] AaronKozbelt , RonaldABeghetto , andMarkARunco . 2010 . Theoriesofcreativity . The Cambridge handbook of creativity 2 ( 2010 ) , 20 – 47 . [ 23 ] Steinar Kvale . 2007 . Doing interviews . ( 2007 ) . [ 24 ] Fei Lu , Feng Tian , Yingying Jiang , Xiang Cao , Wencan Luo , Guang Li , Xiaolong Zhang , Guozhong Dai , and Hongan Wang . 2011 . ShadowStory : Creative and Collaborative Digital Storytelling Inspired by Cultural Heritage . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1919 – 1928 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979221 TechMindSociety ’18 , April 5 – 7 , 2018 , Washington , DC , USA Jonas Frich , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard [ 25 ] Reijo Miettinen . 2006 . The sources of novelty : A cultural and systemic view of distributed creativity . Creativity and Innovation Management 15 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 173 – 181 . [ 26 ] Jonathan A Plucker , Ronald A Beghetto , and Gayle T Dow . 2004 . Why isn’t creativity more important to educational psychologists ? Potentials , pitfalls , and future directions in creativity research . Educational psychologist 39 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 83 – 96 . [ 27 ] Mel Rhodes . 1961 . An analysis of creativity . The Phi Delta Kappan 42 , 7 ( 1961 ) , 305 – 310 . [ 28 ] Mark A Runco and Garrett J Jaeger . 2012 . The standard definition of creativity . Creativity Research Journal 24 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 92 – 96 . [ 29 ] R Keith Sawyer . 2011 . Explaining creativity : The science of human innovation . Oxford University Press . [ 30 ] R Keith Sawyer and Stacy DeZutter . 2009 . Distributed creativity : How collective creations emerge from collaboration . Psychology of aesthetics , creativity , and the arts 3 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 81 . [ 31 ] DonaldASchon . 1984 . Thereflectivepractitioner : Howprofessionalsthinkinaction . Vol . 5126 . Basic books . [ 32 ] Ben Shneiderman . 1999 . User Interfaces for Creativity Support Tools . In Proceed - ings of the 3rd Conference on Creativity & # 38 ; Cognition ( C & # 38 ; C ’99 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 317561 . 317565 [ 33 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2009 . Creativity support tools : A grand challenge for HCI researchers . In Engineering the User Interface . Springer , 1 – 9 . [ 34 ] Vikash Singh , Celine Latulipe , Erin Carroll , and Danielle Lottridge . 2011 . The Choreographer’s Notebook : A Video Annotation System for Dancers and Chore - ographers . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & # 38 ; C ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 197 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2069618 . 2069653 [ 35 ] Hao - Chuan Wang , Dan Cosley , and Susan R . Fussell . 2010 . Idea Expander : Sup - porting Group Brainstorming with Conversationally Triggered Visual Think - ing Stimuli . In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 103 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1718918 . 1718938 [ 36 ] Mikael Wiberg and Erik Stolterman . 2014 . What Makes a Prototype Novel ? : A Knowledge Contribution Concern for Interaction Design Research . In Pro - ceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational ( NordiCHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 531 – 540 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2639189 . 2639487