 yoo @ kyudai . jp Spatial distributions of airborne transmission risk on commuter buses : Numerical case study using computational fluid and particle dynamics with computer - simulated persons Sung - Jun Yoo 1 (  ) , Akira Kurokawa 2 , Kazuhiko Matsunaga 3 , Kazuhide Ito 1 1 . Faculty of Engineering Sciences , Kyushu University , 6 - 1 Kasuga - koen , Kasuga , Fukuoka 816 - 8580 , Japan 2 . Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Engineering Science , Kyushu University , 6 - 1 Kasuga - koen , Kasuga , Fukuoka 816 - 8580 , Japan 3 . Kanagawa Prefectural Junior College for Industrial Technology , 2 - 4 - 1 Nakao , Asahi - ku , Yokohama , Kanagawa 241 - 0815 , Japan Abstract Commuter buses have a high passenger density relative to the interior cabin volume , and it is difficult to maintain a physical / social distance in terms of airborne transmission control . Therefore , it is important to quantitatively investigate the impact of ventilation and air - conditioning in the cabin on the airborne transmission risk for passengers . In this study , comprehensive coupled numerical simulations using computational fluid and particle dynamics ( CFPD ) and computer - simulated persons ( CSPs ) were performed to investigate the heterogeneous spatial distribution of the airborne transmission risk in a commuter bus environment under two types of layouts of the ventilation system and two types of passenger densities . Through a series of particle transmission analysis and infection risk assessment in this study , it was revealed that the layout of the supply inlet / exhaust outlet openings of a heating , ventilation , and air - conditioning ( HVAC ) system has a significant impact on the particle dispersion characteristics inside the bus cabin , and higher infection risks were observed near the single exhaust outlet in the case of higher passenger density . The integrated analysis of CFPD and CSPs in a commuter bus cabin revealed that the airborne transmission risk formed significant heterogeneous spatial distributions , and the changes in air - conditioning conditions had a certain impact on the risk . Keywords computational fluid and particle dynamics ( CFPD ) computer - simulated person ( CSP ) airborne transmission droplet and droplet nuclei dispersion ventilation Article History Received : 8 April 2022 Revised : 27 June 2022 Accepted : 7 September 2022 Research Article © Tsinghua University Press 2023 1 Introduction A number of pandemics have occurred throughout human history , and the recent corona virus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) has infected over 460 million people worldwide as of mid - March 2022 . High passenger densities in enclosed cabin spaces can increase the risk of airborne infection . Bagshaw and Illig ( 2019 ) reported that person - to - person spread cannot be completely prevented in highly crowded spaces such as public transportation cabins , even though airborne pathogens can be filtered by heating , ventilation , and air - conditioning ( HVAC ) systems . Therefore , it is necessary to predict the transport paths and dispersion characteristics of droplets in public transportation cabins . Public transportation plays an important role in the social activities of people today . As public transportation continues to develop , there is a growing demand for the improvement of indoor environments in public transportation cabins . Buses are one of the most widely used forms of public transportation owing to their advantages regarding using dense networks of conventional roads , low cost , and good accessibility compared with large - scale transportation like railways . A bus cabin can be considered as a moving glass atrium based on the large surface area of transparent materials , namely , windows made of glass . Therefore , solar radiation plays a dominant role in the HVAC load of a bus cabin . Additionally , a bus cabin has a relatively high passenger density , meaning that the huge sensible and latent heat generation from passengers ( e . g . , 0 . 4 m 2 per person ) also constitutes a large HVAC load and can lead to the deterioration of interior environmental quality , particularly Vol . 5 , No . 3 , 2023 , 304 – 318 Experimental and Computational Multiphase Flow https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s42757 - 022 - 0146 - 6 Spatial distributions of airborne transmission risk on commuter buses 305 during rush hours . Passengers often complain about the thermal and air quality in buses despite the various improvements adopted by designers and operators . The environmental quality of a bus cabin , including the thermal and air quality distributions , may be controlled uniformly in the design stage . However , non - uniform airflow , temperature , and contaminant concentration distributions are generated in bus cabins owing to the heterogeneity of various heat source distributions in such cabins ( Shek and Chan , 2008 ) . These heterogeneities must be utilized actively , and the local / personal environment of each passenger should be optimized in terms of operational effectiveness and energy saving based on these heterogeneities . Several research groups have reported field measurement results for air quality and thermal comfort in the cabin environments of buses . Praml and Shierl ( 2000 ) conducted field measurements of PM 10 concentration levels in bus and tram cabins and revealed that the concentration level was dependent on the outdoor concentration stemming from the traffic scenario around the vehicle . In contrast , regarding CO 2 , which is a representative human - derived pollutant , Chan ( 2003 ) found that its concentration is mainly determined by the number of passengers in the vehicle and can be effectively controlled by ventilation . This indicates that it is crucial to identify the origins of contaminants to improve the indoor air quality in bus cabins . Based on these findings , numerical analysis techniques have been widely used for environmental quality assessments based on data from field measurements and experiments in bus cabins . Guevara Luna et al . ( 2019 ) reported the results of computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) analyses and tracer gas experiments on a school bus and discussed the deterioration of indoor air quality based on combustion gas emissions from the tailpipe . They used a simplified model of a school bus interior with no passengers . Chan et al . ( 2002 ) discussed the impact of outdoor air quality on the interior air quality of buses by considering door operation and elucidated the insufficient ventilation rates of most buses . This poor ventilation increases the risk of airborne transmitted diseases in popular public transportation systems , which was evaluated through experimental and CFD investigations of micro - environments in public transportation buses . Zhu et al . ( 2010 ) conducted field measurement experiments and numerical investigations on micro - environmental conditions in public transportation buses and reported the ventilation efficiency in passenger breathing zones . These previous studies have demonstrated that numerical analysis techniques based on CFD are highly useful for predicting the air quality inside bus cabins because there are no experimental constraints in terms of time , cost , and space . Notably in bus cabins , various positional relationships between occupants and seating layouts are important factors affecting the micro - climate formation around the human body . Furthermore , a detailed reproduction of the human body , including geometry , heat generation , droplet generation , and exposure , is essential for accurately predicting the infection risk caused by droplet dispersion in bus cabins . CFD analysis coupled with computer - simulated persons ( CSPs ) is a promising technique for comprehensively predicting the non - uniformity of the environmental quality and thermal comfort of each passenger ( Ito , 2016 , 2017 ) . These technologies also made it possible to estimate the interactions between indoor environment in bus cabins and human physiological responses ( Yoo and Ito , 2018a , 2018b , 2020 ; Wang et al . , 2020 ) . If a “digital twin” of a real bus cabin , including both detailed bus cabin geometry and the geometry and functionality of the human body , is successfully developed , it could contribute to optimizing the environmental design and advanced infection risk assessment in bus cabins based on numerical analysis . In this study , we developed a comprehensive analytical model that integrates the detailed geometry of a commuter bus cabin with passengers represented by CSPs . The commuter bus cabin geometry was prepared as an analysis target domain , and CSPs were placed inside the cabins in standing and seated positions . Next , we conducted a computational fluid and particle dynamics ( CFPD ) analysis to clarify the heterogeneity of the interior environmental quality and characteristics of droplet dispersion inside bus cabins . Finally , we quantitatively investigated the overall infection probability assuming SARS - CoV - 2 infection with variations in the supply inlet and exhaust outlet layout of the HVAC system and operational conditions . 2 Methods 2 . 1 CSP We originally developed a passenger model , i . e . , the CSP model , for integrating CFD analysis . Based on the geometric data from adult males , simplified CSP models for standing ( upright ) and seated postures were created . To predict the heat generation of the human body and skin surface temperature , Fanger’s model ( Fanger , 1973 ) , a one - node thermoregulation model , was integrated as a skin surface boundary condition for CSPs . Figure 1 shows the developed CSPs , and the boundary conditions of the CSPs are summarized in Table 3 . The surface areas of the standing and seated models are 1 . 45 and 0 . 91 m 2 , respectively , and their heights are 1 . 7 and 1 . 2 m , respectively . An unstructured grid ( tetrahedral mesh ) was arranged around the CSPs to generate an analytical grid around the sophisticated geometry of a human body . For the seated models , the human body geometries were smoothly connected to the geometry of the seats to control the quality of the grid design . S . - J . Yoo , A . Kurokawa , K . Matsunaga , et al . 306 Fig . 1 Developed CSPs in standing and seated postures . 2 . 2 Commuter bus interior Figure 2 shows the geometry of the target commuter bus cabin containing CSPs . The details of the commuter bus cabins considered in this study are summarized in Table 1 . Commuter cabins , which are widely used by commuters in cities , were considered . Generally , in a bus cabin , an HVAC system optimized for bus cabins is used to control indoor air quality and the thermal environment . As shown in Fig . 2 ( c ) , the original bus cabin model has an evenly spaced layout of supply inlets to cover the entire cabin space , and an exhaust outlet in the center portion of the ceiling . Direct supply of fresh air at multiple inlets with a fixed flow rate and one exhaust outlet was assumed in this study , and recirculation in the HVAC system was not considered . The maximum cabin capacity for passengers was 79 persons in total , including the driving crew and standees . In this study , the bus cabin was assumed to face north and at stopped state to conduct a short - wave radiation heat transfer analysis . For a series of numerical analysis in this study , sophisticated grid design with sufficient grid number was Fig . 2 Geometry of the target commuter bus cabin containing CSPs : ( a ) full seat condition ( Case 1 ) , ( b ) full load condition ( Case 2 ) , ( c ) standard HVAC layout ( Case A ) , ( d ) alternative HVAC layout assuming displacement ventilation concept ( Case B ) , and ( e ) grid design inside bus cabin model . Table 1 Parameters of the bus cabins and analytical cases considered in this study Size of domain 2 . 28 m ( depth ) × 2 . 33 m ( height ) × 10 . 24 m ( width ) Volume of domain 38 . 7 m 3 Maximum capacity 79 persons ( 78 passengers + 1 driver ) Number of seats 31 HVAC layout 12 supply inlets and 1 exhaust outlet Cases analyzed Case 1 - A : full seat ( 30 passengers ) / standard HVAC layout ( ceiling - level inflow ) Case 1 - B : full seat ( 30 passengers ) / HVAC layout assuming displacement ventilation concept ( floor - level inflow ) Case 2 - A : full load ( 78 passengers ) / standard HVAC layout ( ceiling - level inflow ) Case 2 - B : full load ( 78 passengers ) / HVAC layout assuming displacement ventilation concept ( floor - level inflow ) Spatial distributions of airborne transmission risk on commuter buses 307 prepared for accurate flow field analysis of the bus cabin , and the grid independence was also carefully checked . 2 . 3 Coupled analysis of airflow , temperature , humidity , and particle transport The governing equations of fluid flow are presented in Eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) for an incompressible flow , assuming numerical analysis using the Reynolds - averaged Navier – Stokes model ( RANS model ) . 0 i i U x ¶ = ¶ ( 1 ) ( ) t 1 Δ i j i j j i i i j j i U U U t x U P U v v g β T ρ x x x x ¶ ¶ + ¶ ¶ é æ öù ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶ ÷ ç ê ú÷ = - + + + - ç ÷ ç ê ú÷ ç ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶ è ø ë û ( 2 ) 2 t μ μ k v C f ε = ( 3 ) j k k j U k k D P ε t x ¶ ¶ + = + - ¶ ¶ ( 4 ) ( ) 1 1 2 2 j ε ε k ε j U ε ε ε D C f P C f ε t x k ¶ ¶ + = + - ¶ ¶ ( 5 ) The overlines indicate the ensemble averages . x i and x j are the i - th and j - th cartesian coordinate variables . U i ( m / s ) represents the velocity for the u , v , and w components ; ρ ( kg / m 3 ) is the air density ; P ( kg / ( m·s 2 ) ) is the pressure ; v and v t ( m 2 / s ) indicate the kinematic viscosity and turbulent viscosity of air , respectively ; Δ T ( K ) is the temperature difference relative to the representative temperature ; g i ( m / s 2 ) is the gravitational component of the acceleration vector in the i direction ; and β ( 1 / K ) denotes the thermal expansion coefficient of air . The continuity equation shown in Eq . ( 1 ) represents the density preservation law ( mass conservation law ) . The Navier – Stokes equation represented in Eq . ( 2 ) denotes the momentum law derived from Newton’s second law considering the buoyancy effect . Additionally , based on Eqs . ( 3 ) – ( 5 ) , the indoor turbulent flow was analyzed using the low - Reynolds - number k – ε model to improve the prediction of the flow field in the vicinity of the wall surfaces . Here , P k ( m 2 / s 3 ) denotes the production term of turbulent kinetic energy , and D k ( m 2 / s 3 ) and D ε ( m 2 / s 3 ) represent the diffusion terms of turbulent kinetic energy ( k ) and dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy ( ε ) , respectively . f μ , f 1 , and f 2 indicate the model functions that account for near - wall and low - Reynolds - number effects . C μ , C ε 1 , and C ε 2 denote the constants of the k – ε model . In this study , all model functions and constants were set based on the Abe – Kondo – Nagano model ( Abe et al . , 1994 , 1995 ) . By using damping functions in the Abe – Kondo – Nagano model , the separating and reattaching flows downstream of a backward - facing step that involves most of the essential physics of complex turbulent flows can be successfully predicted . For a non - isothermal flow field , the thermal energy and species transport can be expressed by Eqs . ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) , respectively . t T j j j j U T T v T α S t x x σ x é ù ¶ ¶ ¶ æ ö¶÷ çê ú + = + + ÷ ç ÷ çê ú è ø ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶ ë û ( 6 ) t j φ j j φ j U φ φ φ v D S ' t x x σ x éæ ö ù ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶ ÷ çê ú ÷ + = + + ç ÷ çê ÷ ú ç ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶ è ø ë û ( 7 ) where T ( K ) is the air temperature , α ( m 2 / s ) is the thermal diffusivity , σ T indicates the turbulent Prandtl number , S ( K / s ) is the heat generation term ( heat source ) , φ ( kg / kg ) denotes the water vapor concentration in air , D φ ( m 2 / s ) is the diffusivity of water vapor and contaminants in air , φ σ in dicates the turbulent Schmidt number , and S ' ( kg / ( kg·s ) ) is the water vapor generation term . The thermal energy and species transport equations represent energy and mass conservation laws . The airflow with heat and humidity transfer was analyzed by performing a coupled analysis using Eqs . ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) . Additionally , droplet dispersion was analyzed based on Euler – Lagrange particle transport analysis ( Yan et al . , 2020 ) . The particle force balance equation is shown in Eq . ( 8 ) , where the first term on the right - hand side denotes the drag force , and the second term on the right - hand side is the gravitational force . ( ) ( ) p p D p p p 1 24 g ρ ρ U C Re U u ' U t τ ρ - ¶ = + - + ¶    ( 8 ) 2 p p 18 1 μ τ ρ d = ( 9 ) ( ) D p p 24 18 2 . 367 18 ω C Re Re = + ( 10 ) p p p ρd U U Re μ - =   ( 11 ) Here , U p ( m / s ) is the particle velocity , τ ( s ) is the particle relaxation time , C D is the drag coefficient , and the general correlation for spherical particles is defined by Eq . ( 10 ) . Re p is the relative Reynolds number , which is defined by Eq . ( 11 ) . u ' is the fluctuation component of velocity . μ ( kg / ( m·s ) ) is the dynamic viscosity of air , and d p ( m ) and ρ p ( kg / m 3 ) are the diameter and density of the particles , respectively . When p 20 , Re < 10 p 0 . 82 0 . 05log ω Re = - ( 12 ) S . - J . Yoo , A . Kurokawa , K . Matsunaga , et al . 308 In this study , a discrete random walk ( DRW ) was also considered to reproduce turbulent particle dispersion owing to turbulent fluctuations in the flow . The fluctuating component of the instantaneous flow velocity ʹ i ( ) u was obtained using Eq . ( 13 ) . 2 i i u ' u ' = ¹ ( 13 ) 2 2 2 2 3 k ' ' ' u v w = = = ( 14 ) Here , ¹ denotes a Gaussian random number . The remaining right - hand side is the local root mean square ( RMS ) velocity fluctuation , which can be obtained through Eq . ( 14 ) , assuming isotropic behavior . The particle diameter and temperature changes resulting in vaporization , which are defined in Eqs . ( 15 ) and ( 16 ) , were also considered in the coupled analysis of the humidity distribution in a bus cabin . ( ) ( ) 1 / 2 1 / 3 p w p air p 1 0 . 3 d d D M Re Sc r φ φ t r + = - - ( 15 ) ( ) p p p p p air p fg d d d d T m m c hA T T h t t = - + ( 16 ) Here , r ( m ) is the droplet radius , D p ( m 2 / s ) is the diffusion coefficient of water vapor , M w ( kg / ( kg·mol ) ) is the molecular weight of the particles , and Sc is the Schmidt number . φ air and φ p ( kg / kg ) denote the water vapor concentrations in the ambient air and droplet surfaces , respectively . m p ( kg ) is the mass of the particles , c p ( J / ( kg·K ) ) is the specific heat capacity of the particles , h ( W / ( m 2 ·K ) ) is the convective heat transfer coefficient , A p ( m 2 ) is the surface area of the particles , and T air and T p ( K ) are the ambient air and particle surface temperatures , respectively . h fg ( J / kg ) is the latent heat of water . The temperature and humidity distribution analysis results for the bus cabins are reflected in Eqs . ( 15 ) and ( 16 ) as φ air and T air , respectively . In this study , radiative heat transfer from the particle surfaces was not reproduced because it should have a negligible impact based on the very small surface areas of the particles . Based on a previous study , the distribution of the number of particles , initial particle diameter ( d pi ) , and particle nuclei diameter ( d pc ) summarized in Table 2 were considered for particle trajectory analyses ( Xie et al . , 2009 ) . The size of the particle nuclei was set based on the component ratio of water ( 98 . 2 % ) and non - volatile solid compounds ( 1 . 8 % ) , assuming a saliva / phlegm droplet ( Nicas et al . , 2005 ) . In this study , a total of 10 , 000 particles were generated by coughing , considering the limited calculation capacity . Particles were released from the mouth of a coughing person with the coughing velocity profile proposed by Gupta et al . ( 2009 ) , as shown in Fig . 3 . The exhalation temperature was set to 309 . 4 K , which is the core temperature of the human body . Trap boundary conditions at the wall surfaces were applied to analyze the deposition locations and number of particles . 2 . 4 Cases analyzed In this study , considering the characteristics of the commuter bus cabin , which has frequent entry and exit of passengers , we implemented a variation in the loading rate as a function of passenger density : ( i ) full - seat condition ( Case 1 ) and ( ii ) full - load condition with standing and seated passengers ( Case 2 ) . The change in loading rate can influence the location relationship between passengers and the inner spatial form in the bus cabin , which are directly related to infection risk changes . In addition , a modification of the supply inlet / exhaust outlet layout of the HVAC system was considered to confirm its influence on the flow and particle transport in the bus cabin . Here , two types of HVAC models are discussed : ( i ) a standard layout of supply inlets / exhaust Table 2 Summary of particle diameter distributions d pi ( μm ) 1500 750 375 225 175 137 . 5 112 . 5 87 . 5 62 . 5 45 36 20 d pc ( μm ) 393 . 1 196 . 6 98 . 3 59 . 0 45 . 9 36 . 0 29 . 5 22 . 9 16 . 4 11 . 8 9 . 43 5 . 24 Number of droplet particles generated 20 240 450 340 740 590 1500 2340 3080 620 50 30 Fig . 3 Coughing velocity profile ( Gupta et al . , 2009 ) . Spatial distributions of airborne transmission risk on commuter buses 309 outlets intended to create a perfect mixing field ( Case A ) , and ( ii ) an alternative layout based on the displacement ventilation concept ( Case B ) . The displacement ventilation ( DV ) system enables the effective discharge of indoor pollutants thanks to the HVAC layout of floor - level inflow / ceiling - level outflow with buoyancy forces in the space and is widely used in the field of indoor environmental design . In both cases , the total ventilation rates ( total fresh air supply ) and inlet temperatures were set to the same values . The detailed analytical / boundary conditions are summarized in Table 3 . To set a suitable boundary condition for solar radiation , which is essential for accurate prediction of the thermal environment in the bus cabin , a preliminary analysis of solar radiation was conducted . Here , a summer solstitial day in Tokyo ( 12 : 00 PM ) was considered for outdoor conditions . Figure 4 shows the wall heat flux distribution in the bus cabin as an analysis result of the solar radiation . A higher solar load was observed in the rear window because the bus cabin was heading north . The results of the solar load in each window were adopted as the inner window surface boundary conditions for long - wave radiative heat transfer analysis using the surface - to - surface ( S2S ) model ( ANSYS , 2011 ) . In addition to flow , convective / radiative heat transfer , humidity transfer analyses inside the bus cabin , and CSP analysis with human heat generation and coughing were conducted . Particle generation via coughing was assumed for both passengers and driver . Before performing the coupled analysis , we conducted grid independence checks on six types of grid generation methods around the CSP , and an optimal grid generation method was determined based on the analysis result of the coefficient of variation of the root mean square error ( CV ( RMSE ) ) , coefficient of determination ( R 2 ) , and grid convergence index ( GCI ) ( Roy , 2003 ) . The prediction accuracy of the micro - climate around the CSP was validated based Table 3 Analytical and boundary conditions Turbulence model Low - Reynolds - number type k – ε model Algorithm SIMPLE algorithm Numerical discretization scheme Second - order upwind scheme for convection Inflow boundary ( bus cabin ) Q in = 1 . 2 m 3 / s , turbulence intensity ( TI ) = 10 % , T in = 295 . 26 K , humidity : RH = 50 % Inflow boundary ( coughing ) U in = transient cough profile ( Fig . 3 ( a ) ) , T in = 309 . 4 K Outflow boundary ( bus cabin ) Both U out and T out are gradient zero Wall treatment ( cabin ) Velocity : no slip Temperature : adiabatic Wall treatment ( human body ) Velocity : no slip Temperature : calculated by thermoregulation model ( Fanger’s one - node model ( Fanger , 1973 ) , clothing : 0 . 57 clo = 0 . 088 m 2 ·K / W ) Humidity : X skin = 0 . 01449 kg vapor / kg air ( constant ) Solar load and long - wave radiation S2S model with solar ray tracing model Window treatment : absorptivity = 0 . 1 , transmissivity = 0 . 75 Particle component ( droplet ) Water : 98 . 2 % ; non - volatile solid compounds : 1 . 8 % Initial temperature T p , i = 309 . 4 K Fig . 4 Wall heat flux distribution in the bus cabin analysis result of the solar radiation . S . - J . Yoo , A . Kurokawa , K . Matsunaga , et al . 310 on experimental results obtained using a thermal manikin ( Nielsen et al . , 2003 ) . Finally , an optimal grid generation method was adopted for grid generation in the bus cabin . For accurate indoor CFD analysis using CSP , the analytical methods including the choice of governing equations , numerical and boundary conditions , and grid distribution have been suggested in previous studies , and are considered in this study to minimize the numerical errors ( Nielsen , 1990 , 2015 ; Sørensen and Nielsen , 2003 ; Li and Ito , 2014 ; Ito et al . , 2015a , 2015b , 2015c , 2015d ; Foat et al . , 2018 ) . For discrete - phase particle transport analysis , a sufficiently small time - step size ( 0 . 001 s ) was used . 3 Results and discussion 3 . 1 Flow field and temperature distribution The airflow and temperature distributions in the bus cabin for each case are shown in Figs . 5 and 6 , respectively . Complex non - uniform distributions of airflow and temperature were confirmed around the CSPs . The complex distributions of scalar velocity and temperature in the entire cabin space were also confirmed in all cases , based on the irregular seat layout and uneven cabin geometry . However , completely different flow field structures were observed between Cases 1 - A / 2 - A and 1 - B / 2 - B as a result of significant changes in the HVAC layout . In the case of the standard HVAC layout , downward airflow from the inlets in the ceiling was clearly observed , whereas upward airflow from the floor was observed in the case of the displacement ventilation - type HVAC layout . In the front space of the bus cabin , a stagnant flow - field region was formed because this region is far from the HVAC layout . A high - temperature distribution and thermal plume were formed around the CSPs based on human heat generation . Additionally , significantly higher temperatures were observed in the rear area of the bus cabin because of the severe solar load on the rear window facing south . A higher overall temperature in the bus cabin was confirmed in Cases 2 - A / 2 - B , which had a higher number of passengers and total human heat generation . 3 . 2 Scale for Ventilation Efficiency 3 ( SVE3 ) age of air analysis To discuss the relationship between the layout of the HVAC system and ventilation effectiveness inside a bus cabin , the age of air distribution can be calculated based on the SVE3 concept proposed by Kato and Murakami ( 1988 ) . SVE3 indicates the mean traveling time required by the supplied air mass to reach the point concerned , which corresponds to the age of air . By reproducing the uniform generation of Fig . 5 Airflow distributions in the bus cabin for each case : ( a ) Case 1 - A , ( b ) Case 1 - B , ( c ) Case 2 - A , and ( d ) Case 2 - B . Spatial distributions of airborne transmission risk on commuter buses 311 Fig . 6 Temperature distributions in the bus cabin for each case : ( a ) Case 1 - A , ( b ) Case 1 - B , ( c ) Case 2 - A , and ( d ) Case 2 - B . tracer gas ( here , passive scalars ) in the bus cabin , the travel time of fresh air required to reach a specific zone can be estimated . Equation ( 17 ) represents the passive scalar transport equation used for the SVE3 analysis , where C a ( kg vapor / kg air ) and D a ( m 2 / s ) represent the concentration and diffusion coefficient of the passive contaminant in air , respectively . σ C in dicates the turbulent Schmidt number of passive contaminant . Uniform generation of tracer gas in the entire space of the bus cabin was applied by defining the source term ( S " ) . a a a a t a C j j j C U C v C D S ' ' t x x σ x é ù æ ö ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶÷ ê ú ç + = + + ÷ ç ÷ çê ú è ø ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶ ë û ( 17 ) The SVE3 results for each case are shown in Fig . 7 . An SVE3 value of 1 . 0 can be converted into a nominal time constant ( τ p ) calculated at 0 . 54 min in all analytical cases . The results for all cases revealed both low - SVE3 regions near the ventilation inlets and high - SVE3 regions representing stagnant regions in the bus cabins . Slight differences in the SVE3 distributions in certain areas were observed under the influence of HVAC layout changes in Cases 1 - B / 2 - B . However , there were no significant differences in ventilation efficiency in the occupied zones between all analytical cases . The volume - averaged SVE3 values in the bus cabins were 0 . 98 and 0 . 97 in Cases 1 - A and 1 - B , respectively , and 0 . 98 and 0 . 95 in Cases 2 - A and 2 - B , respectively , implying that there are no significant differences between the analytical cases . This was also confirmed by the results of the SVE3 distributions in all analytical cases , which indicated that the indoor air in the bus cabins , particularly in occupied zones , was well mixed by an appropriate layout of supply inlets . High - age air regions can be observed in the front of the bus cabin based on the layouts of the supply inlets . In other words , the HVAC design applied in these Fig . 7 SVE3 results for each case : ( a ) Case 1 - A , ( b ) Case 1 - B , ( c ) Case 2 - A , and ( d ) Case 2 - B . simulations yields a state in which the gaseous and particle contaminants generated in the cabin space can be easily replaced by fresh air . 3 . 3 Airborne particle transport analysis and infection risk assessment Prior to the particle trajectory analyses considering the diameter change by vaporization of the droplets , preliminary examination of the particle trajectory and droplet diameter change were conducted . Figure 8 shows the result of the particle trajectory in the bus cabin and diameter changes of droplets for the representative droplet diameters of 50 , 100 , and 150 μm over the floating time . The droplet nuclei sizes were 13 . 1 , 26 . 2 , and 39 . 3 μm for droplet diameters of 50 , 100 , and 150 μm , respectively . Consequently , satisfactory consistency for the results of diameter changes was confirmed between the experimental results of the previous study and the analysis results of this study ( Redrow et al . , 2011 ; Shang et al . , 2022 ) . Water components in 50 and 100 μm particles were entirely vaporized within approximately 2 . 5 and 10 . 0 s , respectively . All 150 μm particles were deposited on the wall boundary before complete vaporization . The representative particle trajectory analysis results for Cases 2 - A / 2 - B are summarized in Fig . 9 . Based on the Fig . 8 Result of the particle trajectory in the bus cabin and diameter changes . S . - J . Yoo , A . Kurokawa , K . Matsunaga , et al . 312 differing flow field distributions caused by different HVAC layouts , these results revealed significant differences in particle transport paths . It was assumed that the flow field in the bus cabin was predominantly reflected in the transport characteristics of the particles . All particles were released toward the front of the coughing passenger , and transport and dispersion in the direction of the exhaust outlet were observed . Droplets smaller than 150 μm in initial diameter floated in the cabin for a long time and easily reached the exhaust outlet of the cabin in all analytical cases . Droplets bigger than 150 μm in initial diameter were deposited near the coughing person and in the lower region , based on gravitational settling effects . Regarding the impact of the improvement schemes on droplet dispersion , upward airflow based on the alternative HVAC layout in Case 2 - B promoted the transport of relatively smaller droplets to the exhaust outlet , whereas there was no critical impact on the larger droplets . To estimate airborne infection risks in a commuter bus cabin , the particle behavior characteristics in the human micro - environment and the inhalation probability of particles should be carefully considered . Kuga et al . ( 2022 ) proposed a method to define the human breathing zone through Scale for Ventilation Efficiency 5 ( SVE5 ) analysis targeting CSP with unsteady breathing . SVE5 indicates the contribution ratio of an exhaust opening to air to be exhausted at a point and has been widely used in the field of indoor ventilation design ( Kobayashi et al . , 1998 ) . A previous study reported the SVE5 analysis result with detailed dimensional information when the CSP was in inhalation mode . In this study , hexahedral zones with 7 cm × 4 . 7 cm × 13 . 7 cm in size as described in Fig . 10 were set in front of each person’s face as the breathing zone , which falls into the zone of greater than 90 % in inhalation probability . For the overall estimation of infection risk targeting all passengers and the driver in a bus cabin , a series of particle transport analyses assuming droplet generation and diffusion by each passenger’s and driver’s cough were conducted . This was to calculate the airborne infection risk distribution in a cabin space , i . e . , a spatial distribution of the expectation of airborne infection , by performing a Lagrangian particle tracking analysis when all passengers , including the driver , cough only once . All results were averaged over all analytical cases ( 31 for Cases 1 - A / 1 - B and 79 for Cases 2 - A / 2 - B ) to estimate the overall tendency of the individual infection risks . The average number of droplets reaching the human body surface and breathing zone are summarized in Figs . 11 and 12 , respectively . The left parts of the figures indicate the front zone of the cabin with the driver , and the right side is the rear zone of the cabin . A non - uniform distribution of the average number of droplets was found in the entire cabin space under different location relations between passengers and the complex flow field distribution in a cabin . Under the full - load condition , more droplets reached the passengers in the central region of the bus cabin near the exhaust outlet . In particular , standing passengers close to seated passengers in the center region had a large number of Fig . 10 Breathing zone assumed in this study . Fig . 9 Analysis results of representative particle trajectory for ( a ) Case 2 - A and ( b ) Case 2 - B . Spatial distributions of airborne transmission risk on commuter buses 313 droplet depositions on the body surface in Cases 2 - A / 2 - B . This was likely the result of the location of passengers in the main paths of droplets heading to the exhaust outlet and the approaching airflow caused by the HVAC inflow in both Cases 2 - A and 2 - B , although fresh air was supplied from the HVAC inlet . The extremely high passenger density in the central region also caused exposure to more droplets . This indicates that an intense airflow directed toward the passenger can promote exposure to more droplets , whereas there were no considerable differences between passengers in the number of droplets reaching the breathing zone . It was also observed that the change in HVAC layout resulted in differences in the distribution of droplets in the bus cabin . A slight decrease in the number of droplets reaching each breathing zone was found in the cases of alternative HVAC layouts . To investigate individual infection risks , the number of inhaled RNA copies was analyzed , as shown in Fig . 13 , using the total volume of inhaled droplets V ( mL ) and a viral load of c v = 10 9 RNA copies / mL , which was investigated in a previous study ( Buonanno et al . , 2020a ) . In this study , all droplets that reached the breathing zone were assumed to be inhaled into the human airway , considering the worst - case scenario in airborne infection risk assessment . Because of the diameter deviation of inhaled droplets among passengers , a different tendency between the number of inhaled droplets and inhaled RNA copies was confirmed . Especially in the full - load condition , relatively higher risks were observed in a few standing passengers in the center of the bus cabin , which was not observed in the analysis of the number of droplets . This implies that a very close distance between passengers can cause direct exposure to droplets of larger diameter and leads to an increased number of inhaled RNA copies . Under the full - seat condition , there was no significant difference in the distribution pattern between the number of inhaled droplets and the number of RNA copies . Finally , individual infection risks in the bus cabin were estimated based on the analysis results of the total volume of inhaled droplets and Eqs . ( 18 ) – ( 20 ) . q v i D c c V = ( 18 ) q I 1 e D P - = - ( 19 ) Fig . 11 Average number of droplets reaching the human body surface : ( a ) Case 1 - A , ( b ) Case 2 - A , ( c ) Case 1 - B , and ( d ) Case 2 - B . Fig . 12 Average number of droplets reaching the breathing zone : ( a ) Case 1 - A , ( b ) Case 2 - A , ( c ) Case 1 - B , and ( d ) Case 2 - B . S . - J . Yoo , A . Kurokawa , K . Matsunaga , et al . 314 q I D R P P = ( 20 ) Here , D q ( quanta ) indicates the dose of quanta for infection , and c v ( RNA copies / mL ) and c i ( quanta / RNA copies ) are the viral load in the sputum and the conversion factor , respectively , defined as the ratio between one infectious quantum and the infectious dose expressed in viral RNA copies , respectively . In this analysis , c v and c i values of 10 9 and 0 . 02 were used , respectively , based on the estimation results in a previous study assuming SARS - CoV - 2 infection ( Buonanno et al . , 2020b ) . V ( mL ) is the total volume of droplets inhaled by passengers . Equation ( 19 ) is an exponential dose – response model ( Wells – Riley equation ) used to estimate the probability of infection , P I . R is the average infection risk calculated by the average infection probability , I P , and the probability of occurrence of each D q value , q . D P In this study , q D P was set to 1 . 0 , assuming the occurrence of infection by a single cough . Figure 14 shows distributions of the averaged risk of infection ( R ) in the bus cabin . For the HVAC layout which assumed the displacement ventilation concept , the results of more than half of the passengers showed decreased infection risk compared to the result of standard HVAC layout under both full - seat and full - load conditions , although increased infection risk were observed in some passengers . Decreases in infection risks were observed in 20 people in Case 1 - B and 52 people in Case 2 - B . Similar to the results shown in Figs . 11 , 12 , and 13 , higher infection risks were observed in the center region of the bus cabin , close to the exhaust outlet . A non - linear relationship between the average number of RNA copies and average infection risk was also observed as a result of Eq . ( 19 ) . In recent studies on infected patients , it was revealed that the viral load ( c v ) ranged 10 8 – 10 9 RNA copies / mL during infection , and infectious patients with c v < 10 7 RNA copies / mL had lower emissions of quanta ( Buonanno et al . , 2020b ; Pan et al . , 2020 ) . To clarify the contribution of varying c v on infection risk , parametric analyses were conducted with c v = 10 8 , 10 7 , and 10 6 RNA copies / mL . From the results shown in Fig . 15 , a similar relative pattern of infection risk for the various c v values was confirmed , and gradually decreasing infection risk distributions with decreasing c v values were observed . Similar to the results when c v = 10 9 RNA copies / mL , a decreased infection risk was confirmed in all cases of lower viral load with the HVAC layout of displacement ventilation compared to the standard layout . These overall results indicate that : ( 1 ) a change in flow pattern with an alternative design of HVAC system could Fig . 13 Number of inhaled RNA copies : ( a ) Case 1 - A , ( b ) Case 2 - A , ( c ) Case 1 - B , and ( d ) Case 2 - B in the case of c v = 10 9 RNA copies / mL . Fig . 14 Distributions of the averaged risk of infection in the bus cabin : ( a ) Case 1 - A , ( b ) Case 2 - A , ( c ) Case 1 - B , and ( d ) Case 2 - B in the case of c v = 10 9 RNA copies / mL . Spatial distributions of airborne transmission risk on commuter buses 315 be considered as an improvement scheme for infection risk reduction in the bus cabin , and ( 2 ) an appropriate layout of the exhaust outlet might be considered for the effective discharge of droplets generated by passengers . 5 Limitation of this study This study has several limitations . To reflect the human heat generation and its impact on the micro - climate around passengers , the temperature on the surface of the human body was calculated using the one - node thermoregulation model proposed by Fanger ( 1973 ) . This model is a basic and fundamental thermoregulation model , meaning that it is difficult to obtain detailed information regarding thermal comfort based on the simple modeling of heat generation from the human body . Additionally , the latent heat loss from human body was reproduced using a boundary condition with fixed humidity . To accurately predict the human micro - climate , including the breathing zone , it is necessary to integrate multi - node and high - level human thermoregulation models ( such as the Fiala or Stolwijk model ) , which we will consider in the future ( Stolwijk , 1971 ; Smith , 1991 ; Fiala , 1998 ; Kobayashi and Tanbe , 2013 ) . In addition , all CSPs representing passengers were reproduced under naked condition . Additionally , we conducted a steady - state analysis of the flow field , temperature , and age of air under static conditions . Reproducing the detailed geometry of clothed humans and the movement of human bodies would enable the prediction of more realistic micro - climate formation around human body , which could influence particle transport in the occupied zones and breathing zones . A more detailed inhalation risk can also be estimated by reproducing unsteady breathing in the respiratory tracts of CSPs . Our future task includes overcoming the large calculation loads associated with these enhancements . In this study , an alternative HVAC layout , assuming the displacement ventilation method , was examined as an active improvement scheme in terms of the environmental design of bus cabins . The impact of passive schemes for infection risk reduction , including partition wall installation between seats , could be investigated in further studies using the estimation method of this study . The numerical prediction results for the flow and temperature in the bus cabin were not directly validated in this study based on experimental results . In addition , direct validation of our airborne infection risk analysis results targeting real human body has much difficulty because of medical and ethical problem / limitations of subject experiment . Regarding the parametric study of airborne transmission risk using comprehensive prediction method introduced in this study , the most important point is prediction accuracy of particle transport in the bus cabin , and considering this , we have confirmed the prediction accuracy of micro - climate around human body , based on the experimental result using thermal manikin . The quality of the CSP – CFD simulation in this study was carefully controlled according to guidelines and benchmark tests for indoor CFD applications . In the future , experimental data of a real bus cabin and thermal manikin will be useful for verifying the prediction accuracy . In this study , only stopped - state condition for a bus cabin was assumed . In moving bus cabins , pressure difference between inside and outside of cabin would occur due to airflow around the bus cabin , and this causes air infiltration / Fig . 15 Infection risk distribution : ( a ) Case 2 - A and ( b ) Case 2 - B in the case of c v = 10 8 RNA copies / mL ( c ) Case 2 - A and ( d ) Case 2 - B in the case of c v = 10 7 RNA copies / mL , ( e ) Case 2 - A and ( f ) Case 2 - B in the case of c v = 10 6 RNA copies / mL . S . - J . Yoo , A . Kurokawa , K . Matsunaga , et al . 316 exfiltration through the gaps in the cabin wall . In the previous study , it was revealed that the air exchange rate caused by air infiltration / exfiltration reached 2 . 3 – 2 . 5 h – 1 in the same type of bus cabin as that of our study , in the case the bus cabin is in moving - state at 30 km / s ( Shinohara et al . , 2022 ) . Although this has certain influence on airflow pattern and age of air distribution in the bus cabin , the value is very low compared to the airflow rate ( air exchange rate ) for HVAC system in this study , which is around 110 h – 1 , and it was assumed that there was no significant impact on the main structure of flow pattern in the bus cabin which is crucial for the particle transport . Therefore , we considered stopped - state condition only as the fundamental condition . However , the change of solar radiation caused by transient change of temporal condition and driving direction may significantly affect airflow pattern in the bus cabin . This can be investigated in future study . The full - load condition at 12 : 00 PM adopted in this study may not be general . However , in certain circumstances , especially in Japan , e . g . , after school for many university students who have classes in the morning only , or huge transportation of shift workers for mega factories , fully - loaded commuter buses during rush hour are often seen , especially near universities and transportation hubs in metropolis . In our further study , parametric studies considering various temporal conditions could be conducted assuming realistic operational condition of commuter bus all day round . In this study , emission and exposure of wild strain SARS - CoV - 2 was assumed as a first stage . Recently , numerous studies have reported the analysis result of emission / exposure parameters for recent variants of concerns ( VOCs ) including alpha , beta , gamma , delta , and omicron ( Da Silva et al . , 2021 ; Puhach et al . , 2022 ) . Based on this information and emission / exposure modeling used in this study , infection risks in the case of emission of VOCs could be estimated in further research . 6 Conclusions In this study , a CFPD – CSP coupled analysis was conducted to investigate the non - uniformity of airflow and temperature distributions in a typical commuter bus cabin . Additionally , the characteristics of droplet dispersion inside bus cabins and infection risk were examined by modifying the passenger density and HVAC layout as an active improvement scheme . The main findings of this study are summarized as follows : ( 1 ) The layout of the supply inlet / exhaust outlet openings of an HVAC system has a significant impact on the flow and temperature distribution in a commuter bus cabin and influences the particle dispersion characteristics inside . ( 2 ) A change in passenger density in the bus cabin influences both droplet dispersion characteristics and overall infection risks , and higher infection risks are observed in the region near the single exhaust outlet with higher passenger density . ( 3 ) The change in ventilation system , i . e . , from standard mixing ventilation type to displacement ventilation type in a bus cabin , showed the possibility of reducing infection risk by controlling droplet dispersion in bus cabins , and a detailed strategy in HVAC design could be discussed through the methodology used in this study . We believe that the CFPD with CSP analysis for targeting a real commuter bus cabin and the infection risk estimation method adopted in this study can be widely applied for the optimization of environmental quality and the reduction of infection risk in bus cabins . Acknowledgements The computation was performed using the computer resources offered under the category of IntensivelyPromoted Projects by the Research Institute for Information Technology , Kyushu University , Japan . This research was partially funded by the Japan Science and Technology ( JST ) , CREST Japan ( Grant No . JP20356547 ) , the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science ( JSPS ) Grants - in - Aid for Scientific Research ( KAKENHI ) ( Grant Nos . JP18H03807 , JP20KK0099 , JP21K14306 ) , Health Labour Sciences Research Grant ( Grant No . JP21KD2002 ) , MEXT as “Program for Promoting Researches on the Supercomputer Fugaku” ( Grant No . JPMXP1020210316 ) , and The Taisei Foundation Research Grant ( Grant No . 20015 ) . The authors would like to express special thanks to the benefactors . Declaration of competing interest The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article . References Abe , K . , Kondoh , T . , Nagano , Y . 1994 . A new turbulence model for predicting fluid flow and heat transfer in separating and reattaching flows—I . Flow fields calculations . International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer , 37 : 139 – 151 . Abe , K . , Kondoh , T . , Nagano , Y . 1995 . A new turbulence model for predicting fluid flow and heat transfer in separating and reattaching flows—II . Thermal field calculations . International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer , 38 ( 8 ) : 1467 – 1481 . ANSYS . 2011 . ANSYS FLUENT User’s guide . Canonsburg , PA , 15317 . Available at http : / / www . pmt . usp . br / academic / martoran / notasmodelosgrad / ANSYS % 20Fluent % 20Users % 20Guide . pdf . Spatial distributions of airborne transmission risk on commuter buses 317 Bagshaw , M . , Illig , P . 2019 . The aircraft cabin environment . In : Travel Medicine . Elsevier : 429 – 436 . Buonanno , G . , Morawska , L . , Stabile , L . 2020a . Quantitative assessment of the risk of airborne transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 infection : Prospective and retrospective applications . Environment International , 145 : 106112 . Buonanno , G . , Stabile , L . , Morawska , L . 2020b . Estimation of airborne viral emission : Quanta emission rate of SARS - CoV - 2 for infection risk assessment . Environment International , 141 : 105794 . Chan , A . T . 2003 . Commuter exposure and indoor – outdoor relationships of carbon oxides in buses in Hong Kong . Atmospheric Environment , 37 ( 27 ) : 3809 – 3815 . Chan , L . Y . , Lau , W . L . , Zou , S . C . , Cao , Z . X . , Lai , S . C . 2002 . Exposure level of carbon monoxide and respirable suspended particulate in public transportation modes while commuting in urban area of Guangzhou , China . Atmospheric Environment , 36 ( 38 ) : 5831 – 5840 . Da Silva , S . J . R . , de Lima , S . C . , da Silva , R . C . , Kohl , A . , Pena , L . 2021 . Viral load in COVID - 19 patients : Implications for prognosis and vaccine efficacy in the context of emerging SARS - CoV - 2 variants . Frontiers in Medicine , 8 : 836826 . Fanger , P . O . 1973 . Thermal Comfort . New York : McGraw - Hill Inc . Fiala , D . 1998 . Dynamic simulation of human heat transfer and thermal comfort . Sustainable Development , 45 : 1 – 237 . Foat , T . G . , Parker , S . T . , Castro , I . P . , Xie , Z . T . 2018 . Numerical investigation into the structure of scalar plumes in a simple room . Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics , 175 : 252 – 263 . Guevara Luna , F . A . , Guevara Luna , M . A . , Belalcázar Cerón , L . C . 2019 . CFD modeling and validation of tracer gas dispersion to evaluate self - pollution in school buses . Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment , 13 ( 1 ) : 1 – 10 . Gupta , J . K . , Lin , C . H . , Chen , Q . 2009 . Flow dynamics and characterization of a cough . Indoor Air , 19 ( 6 ) : 517 – 525 . Ito , K . 2016 . Toward the development of an in silico human model for indoor environmental design . Proceedings of the Japan Academy Series B , Physical and Biological Sciences , 92 ( 7 ) : 185 – 203 . Ito , K . 2017 . In silico human model for fluid - initiated indoor environmental design . Indoor and Built Environment , 26 ( 3 ) : 295 – 297 . Ito , K . , Inthavong , K . , Kurabuchi , T . , Ueda , T . , Endo , T . , Omori , T . , Ono , H . , Kato , S . , Sakai , K . , Suwa , Y . , et al . 2015a . CFD benchmark tests for indoor environmental problems : Part 1 isothermal / non - isothermal flow in 2D and 3D room model . International Journal of Architectural Engineering Technology , 2 ( 1 ) : 1 – 22 . Ito , K . , Inthavong , K . , Kurabuchi , T . , Ueda , T . , Endo , T . , Omori , T . , Ono , H . , Kato , S . , Sakai , K . , Suwa , Y . , et al . 2015b . CFD benchmark tests for indoor environmental problems : Part 2 cross - ventilation airflows and floor heating systems . International Journal of Architectural Engineering Technology , 2 ( 1 ) : 23 – 49 . Ito , K . , Inthavong , K . , Kurabuchi , T . , Ueda , T . , Endo , T . , Omori , T . , Ono , H . , Kato , S . , Sakai , K . , Suwa , Y . , et al . 2015c . CFD benchmark tests for indoor environmental problems : Part 3 numerical thermal manikins . International Journal of Architectural Engineering Technology , 2 ( 1 ) : 50 – 75 . Ito , K . , Inthavong , K . , Kurabuchi , T . , Ueda , T . , Endo , T . , Omori , T . , Ono , H . , Kato , S . , Sakai , K . , Suwa , Y . , et al . 2015d . CFD benchmark tests for indoor environmental problems : Part 4 air - conditioning airflows , residential kitchen airflows and fire - induced flow . International Journal of Architectural Engineering Technology , 2 ( 1 ) : 76 – 102 . Kato , S . , Murakami , S . 1988 . New ventilation efficiency scales based on spatial distribution of contaminant concentration aided by numerical simulation . ASHRAE Transactions , 94 : 309 – 330 . Kobayashi , H . , Kato , S . , Murakami , S . 1998 . Scales for evaluating ventilation efficiency as affected by supply and exhaust openings based on spatial distribution of contaminant by means of numerical dimulation . Transactions - Society of Heating Air Conditioning and Sanitary Engineers of Japan , 23 ( 68 ) : 29 – 36 . Kobayashi , Y . , Tanabe , S . I . 2013 . Development of JOS - 2 human thermoregulation model with detailed vascular system . Building and Environment , 66 : 1 – 10 . Kuga , K . , Wargocki , P . , Ito , K . 2022 . Breathing zone and exhaled air re - inhalation rate under transient conditions assessed with a computer - simulated person . Indoor Air , 32 ( 2 ) : e13003 . Li , C . , Ito , K . 2014 . Numerical and experimental estimation of convective heat transfer coefficient of human body under strong forced convective flow . Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics , 126 : 107 – 117 . Nicas , M . , Nazaroff , W . W . , Hubbard , A . 2005 . Toward understanding the risk of secondary airborne infection : Emission of respirable pathogens . Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene , 2 ( 3 ) : 143 – 154 . Nielsen , P . V . 1990 . Specification of a Two - Dimensional Test Case : ( IEA ) . Aalborg : Institut for Bygningsteknik , Aalborg Universitet . Gul serie , No . 8 , Vol . R9040 . Available at https : / / vbn . aau . dk / en / publications / specification - of - a - two - dimensional - test - case - iea . Nielsen , P . V . 2015 . Fifty years of CFD for room air distribution . Building and Environment , 91 : 78 – 90 . Nielsen , P . V . , Murakami , S . , Kato , S . , Topp , C . , Yang , J . H . 2003 . Benchmark tests for a computer simulated person . Aalborg University , Indoor Environmental Engineering . Available at https : / / www . cfd - benchmarks . com / digitalAssets / 600 / 600027 _ benchmark - tests _ 071103 . pdf . Pan , Y . , Zhang , D . , Yang , P . , Poon , L . L . M . , Wang , Q . 2020 . Viral load of SARS - CoV - 2 in clinical samples . The Lancet Infectious Diseases , 20 ( 4 ) : 411 – 412 . Praml , G . , Schierl , R . 2000 . Dust exposure in Munich public transportation : A comprehensive 4 - year survey in buses and trams . International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health , 73 ( 3 ) : 209 – 214 . Puhach , O . , Adea , K . , Hulo , N . , Sattonnet , P . , Genecand , C . , Iten , A . , Jacquérioz , F . , Kaiser , L . , Vetter , P . , Eckerle , I . , Meyer , B . 2022 . Infectious viral load in unvaccinated and vaccinated individuals infected with ancestral , Delta or Omicron SARS - CoV - 2 . Nature Medicine , 28 ( 7 ) : 1491 – 1500 . Redrow , J . , Mao , S . L . , Celik , I . , Posada , J . A . , Feng , Z . G . 2011 . Modeling the evaporation and dispersion of airborne sputum droplets expelled from a human cough . Building and Environment , 46 ( 10 ) : 2042 – 2051 . Roy , C . J . 2003 . Grid convergence error analysis for mixed - order numerical schemes . AIAA Journal , 41 ( 4 ) : 595 – 604 . S . - J . Yoo , A . Kurokawa , K . Matsunaga , et al . 318 Shang , Y . D . , Dong , J . L . , Tian , L . , He , F . J . , Tu , J . Y . 2022 . An improved numerical model for epidemic transmission and infection risks assessment in indoor environment . Journal of Aerosol Science , 162 : 105943 . Shek , K . W . , Chan , W . T . 2008 . Combined comfort model of thermal comfort and air quality on buses in Hong Kong . Science of the Total Environment , 389 ( 2 – 3 ) : 277 – 282 . Shinohara , N . , Tatsu , K . , Kagi , N . , Kim , H . , Sakaguchi , J . , Ogura , I . , Murashima , Y . , Sakurai , H . , Naito , W . 2022 . Air exchange rates and advection – diffusion of CO 2 and aerosols in a route bus for evaluation of infection risk . Indoor Air , 32 ( 3 ) : e13019 . Smith , C . E . 1991 . A transient , three - dimensional model of the human thermal system . Ph . D . Thesis . Kansas State University . Sørensen , D . N . , Nielsen , P . V . 2003 . Quality control of computational fluid dynamics in indoor environments . Indoor Air , 13 ( 1 ) : 2 – 17 . Stolwijk , J . A . J . 1971 . A mathematical model of physiological temperature regulation in man . No . NASA - CR - 1855 . NASA . Available at https : / / ntrs . nasa . gov / citations / 19710023925 . Wang , C . , Yoo , S . J . , Ito , K . 2020 . Does detailed hygrothermal transport analysis in respiratory tract affect skin surface temperature distributions by thermoregulation model ? Advances in Building Energy Research , 14 ( 4 ) : 450 – 470 . Xie , X . , Li , Y . , Sun , H . , Liu , L . 2009 . Exhaled droplets due to talking and coughing . Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 6 ( Suppl _ 6 ) : S703 – S714 . Yan , Y . H . , Li , X . D . , Ito , K . 2020 . Numerical investigation of indoor particulate contaminant transport using the Eulerian – Eulerian and Eulerian – Lagrangian two - phase flow models . Experimental and Computational Multiphase Flow , 2 ( 1 ) : 31 – 40 . Yoo , S . J . , Ito , K . 2018a . Assessment of transient inhalation exposure using in silico human model integrated with PBPK – CFD hybrid analysis . Sustainable Cities and Society , 40 : 317 – 325 . Yoo , S . J . , Ito , K . 2018b . Numerical prediction of tissue dosimetry in respiratory tract using computer simulated person integrated with physiologically based pharmacokinetic – computational fluid dynamics hybrid analysis . Indoor and Built Environment , 27 ( 7 ) : 877 – 889 . Yoo , S . , Ito , K . 2020 . Multi - stage optimization of local environmental quality by comprehensive computer simulated person as a sensor for HVAC control . Advances in Building Energy Research , 14 ( 2 ) : 171 – 188 . Zhu , S . W . , Demokritou , P . , Spengler , J . 2010 . Experimental and numerical investigation of micro - environmental conditions in public transportation buses . Building and Environment , 45 ( 10 ) : 2077 – 2088 .