The probabilistic analysis of language acquisition : Theoretical , computational , and experimental analysis Anne S . Hsu a , ⇑ , Nick Chater b , Paul M . B . Vitányi c a Department of Cognitive , Perceptual and Brain Sciences , University College London , 26 Bedford Way , London , WC1H 0AP , UK b Behavioural Science Group , Warwick Business School , University of Warwick , Coventry , CV4 7AL , UK c National Research Center for Mathematics and Computer Science in the Netherlands ( CWI ) , Science Park 123 , 1098 XG Amsterdam , The Netherlands a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Available online 26 March 2011 Keywords : Child language acquisition Poverty of the stimulus No negative evidence Bayesian models Minimum description length Simplicity principle Natural language Probabilistic models Identiﬁcation in the limit a b s t r a c t There is much debate over the degree to which language learning is governed by innate language - speciﬁc biases , or acquired through cognition - general principles . Here we exam - ine the probabilistic language acquisition hypothesis on three levels : We outline a novel theoretical result showing that it is possible to learn the exact generative model underlying a wide class of languages , purely from observing samples of the language . We then describe a recently proposed practical framework , which quantiﬁes natural language learnability , allowing speciﬁc learnability predictions to be made for the ﬁrst time . In previous work , this framework was used to make learnability predictions for a wide variety of linguistic constructions , for which learnability has been much debated . Here , we present a new experiment which tests these learnability predictions . We ﬁnd that our experimental results support the possibility that these linguistic constructions are acquired probabilisti - cally from cognition - general principles . (cid:2) 2011 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Much research suggests children can learn language from mere exposure , without relying on other’s feedback about their own utterances , i . e . , from positive evidence alone . How children thus learn language has been a heavily researched topic . Two main perspectives on language acquisition can be understood through the distinction between discriminative and generative learning models ( Hsu & Grifﬁths , 2009 ) . A discriminative model learns by establishing a boundary between categories by mapping inputs to categories from a set of input - category pairs . For language , these are categories of grammatical and ungrammatical sentences . From the discriminative per - spective , the ability to learn from only positive examples seems puzzling : with only positive examples , i . e . , gram - matical sentences , a discriminative learner has no basis on which to determine the boundary between grammatical and ungrammatical sentences . Under discriminative based perspectives , theoretical analyses of learnability from only positive examples tend to be discouraging ( Gold , 1967 ; Nowak , Komarova , & Niyogi , 2002 ) . Indeed , thinking about language learning as a classiﬁcation problem has led many theorists to conclude that language acquisition faces fun - damental ‘‘logical’’ problems ( Baker & McCarthy , 1981 ; Horning , 1969 ) . The Bayesian approach to cognitive development , ex - plored in this special issue , and the cognitive sciences more generally , e . g . , Grifﬁths , Chater , Kemp , Perfors , and Tenen - baum ( 2010 ) , suggest a different perspective on learning : generative models learn by making inferences about the probability distribution that produces the language input . Thus , from a generative perspective , language acquisition is not a matter of discriminating ‘‘good’’ from ‘‘bad’’ linguis - tic forms ; instead the aim is to model the underlying regu - larities that give rise to the language . The key assumption 0010 - 0277 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2011 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2011 . 02 . 013 ⇑ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : ahsu @ gatsby . ucl . ac . uk ( A . S . Hsu ) , n . chater @ ucl . ac . uk ( N . Chater ) , paul . vitanyi @ cwi . nl ( P . M . B . Vitányi ) . Cognition 120 ( 2011 ) 380 – 390 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cognition journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / COGNIT