HAL Id : jpa - 00208725 https : / / hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / jpa - 00208725 Submitted on 1 Jan 1977 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entific research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche , publiés ou non , émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers , des laboratoires publics ou privés . Light scattering spectroscopy of pulydimethylsiloxane - toluene gels J . P . Munch , P . Lemaréchal , S . Candau , J . Herz To cite this version : J . P . Munch , P . Lemaréchal , S . Candau , J . Herz . Light scattering spectroscopy of pulydimethylsiloxane - toluene gels . Journal de Physique , 1977 , 38 ( 12 ) , pp . 1499 - 1509 . < 10 . 1051 / jphys : 0197700380120149900 > . < jpa - 00208725 > 1499 LIGHT SCATTERING SPECTROSCOPY OF PULYDIMETHYLSILOXANE - TOLUENE GELS J . P . MUNCH , P . LEMARÉCHAL , S . CANDAU Laboratoire d’Acoustique Moléculaire ( * ) , Université Louis - Pasteur , 4 , rue Blaise - Pascal , 67070 Strasbourg Cedex , France and J . HERZ Centre de Recherches sur les Macromolécules , C . N . R . S . , 6 , rue Boussingault , 67083 Strasbourg Cedex , France ( Reçu le 1 er juillet 1977 , accepté le 18 août 1977 ) Résumé . 2014 La fonction d’autocorrélation de la lumière diffusée a été mesurée pour des gels de polydiméthylsiloxane - toluène formés soit par gonflement de réticulats permanents , soit par dissolu - tion de macromolécules linéaires à des concentrations moyennes . Dans les deux cas le coefficient de diffusion coopératif varie avec la concentration en polymère selon une loi de puissance avec un exposant plus élevé que celui qui avait été obtenu précédemment pour des systèmes polystyrène - benzène . Par ailleurs , il est montré que les modules de compression uniaxiale n’obéissent plus à des lois d’échelle simples avec la concentration pour des réseaux gonflés par un liquide moins bon solvant que celui dans lequel a été réalisée la réticulation . Abstract . 2014 The autocorrelation function of scattered light has been measured for polydimethyl - siloxane - toluene gels formed either by swelling permanent networks or by dissolving linear macro - molecules at moderate concentrations . In both cases , the cooperative diffusion constant varies with concentration according to a power law with an exponent larger than that obtained previously for polystyrene - benzene systems . On the other hand , it is shown that uniaxial compression moduli do not obey simple scaling laws with the equilibrium concentration for networks swollen by a diluent of less quality than the solvent in which the crosslinking has been made . LE JOURNAL DE PHYSIQUE TOME 38 , DÉCEMBRE 1977 , Classification Physics Abstracts 61 . 40K201362 . 00201366 . 10 1 . Introduction . - Traditional methods for measur - ing the viscoelastic properties of gels generally depend on mechanical devices . It has been shown recently that optical mixing spectroscopy yields valuable information concerning the hydrodynamic properties of both permanent swollen networks [ 1 - 8 ] and semi - dilute or concentrated polymer solutions [ 8 - 11 ] . A theoretical model has been proposed which assumes that the light scattered from a gel arises from collective excitations of the network [ 1 , 12 , 13 ] . From this model , the correlation function of the polarized scattered light for a longitudinal fluctuation of wavevector K is predicted to have the form of an exponential decay . The decay rate is given by T = De K2 where Dp is the cooperative diffusion constant of the chains of the network . On the other hand , a corpuscular model has been proposed by Mc Adam et al . [ 2 ] and Carlson et al . [ 3 , ( * ) Equipe de Recherche Associée au C . N . R . S . 4 ] , which assumes that each macromolecule in the gel state behaves as a harmonically bound particle executing independent Brownian motion about a stationary mean . The resulting theory predicts a non - exponential intensity autocorrelation function given in terms of a chain elastic constant and the conventional translational diffusion coefficient . In previous papers , we have reported autocorre - lation measurements on benzene - swollen model net - works of polystyrene and shown that the hydro - dynamic model fits the observed data . The cooperative diffusion constant of gels has been investigated as a function of the method of synthesis of the networks and their characteristics . In a first attempt , we have assumed ideality of networks , i . e . absence of structure defects such as pendant chains , cycles , or entangle - ments , and interpreted the results obtained within the framework of the rubber elasticity theory [ 5 - 7 ] . From this analysis , we were led to the conclusion that the so - called memory term , which relates the dimension of the elastic chain in the swollen state and the reference swollen state respectively , is strongly Article published online by EDP Sciences and available at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1051 / jphys : 0197700380120149900 1500 dependent on the functionality of the cross - linking agent . Recently , we have reanalyzed the data by allowing the presence of entanglements trapped between two permanent junction points and assum - ing , according to a suggestion of de Gennes , that the average distance between the cross - links was in the first approximation identical to the dynamical screening length [ 8 ] . This assumption implies that both the cooperative diffusion constant and the extensional modulus should obey scaling laws with swelling equilibrium concentration . Such behaviour has been effectively observed for polystyrene - benzene gels . Most of the networks investigated were prepared by anionic block - copolymerization of styrene with small . amounts of divinylbenzene . In this type of network , each linear chain element is connected with two different branch points constituted by polydivinylbenzene nodules . The chain elements have the characteristic sharp molecular weight distribution of polymers prepared by anionic polymerization . A drawback of the method used here is that the actual functionality of the crosslinks is unknown . In the present paper we report measurements of the cooperative diffusion constant of a homologous series of polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) networks swollen in toluene . In many respects these gels are very different from the polystyrene networks investi - gated previously : - Both the average molecular weight of the elastic chains and the functionality of the permanent cross - links are known parameters . - Branch points are formed by single pluri - functional molecules instead of nodules of appreciable dimensions as was the case for the branch points of the polystyrene networks described above . - The elastic properties of PDMS networks are very different from those of polystyrene networks since the glass transition of PDMS occurs at a tempe - rature far below room temperature ( - 120 °C ) . - In all synthesis the precursor polymer concen - tration during network formation was much higher than the equilibrium concentration of the swollen networks . Thus the networks do not contain any macropores . - The swelling degree of the PDMS networks in toluene is considerably lower than that of polysty - rene networks swollen at equilibrium in benzene . 2 . Theoretical . - The essential feature of a gel is that each macromolecule linked to the network by both chain - ends is no longer free to diffuse through the whole network structure but is confined to a region of the network compatible with the number of effective crosslinks . Two different approaches have been used to described the viscoelastic behaviour of gels . Mc Adam , et al . [ 2 ] , Carlson , et al . [ 3 , 4 ] have proposed a simple model of scattering molecules in the gel state which assumes each molecule to be harmonically bound and executing brownian motion around a stationary mean position . Upon application of the Ornstein and Uhlenbeck distribution function for such a particle [ 14 ] , Carlson and Fraser [ 3 ] have derived an expression for the non - normalized optical field autocorrelation function G ( l ) ( T ) : . where I is the average intensity of the field , D is the translational diffusion constant of the particle , K is the scattering wavevector and y ( sec - l ) the ratio of the chain elastic constant k ( dyne / cm ) to the fric - tional constant f ( dyne s / cm ) . From equation ( 1 ) it follows that the line profiles in a self - beating experiment will not be simple lorent - zian with a linear relationship between line - width and K2 . Furthermore , the initial amplitude of the normalized intensity autocorrelation function g ( 2 ) ( O ) will have a K - dependent value which is always less than 2 , in contrast to the freely diffusing particle whose g ( 2 ) ( O ) = 2 . In the derivation of equation ( 1 ) , uncorrelated Rayleigh scattering has been assumed , neglecting the presence of a large component of static scattering by the gels which is due to micro - scopic inhomogeneities . Then in a later paper [ 4 ] Wun and Carlson have included in the intensity an additional term to account for the additional static scattering which contributes to the lowering of the initial amplitude of g ( 2 ) ( - r ) . In the second model , developed by Tanaka , et al . [ 1 ] , and de Gennes [ 12 ] , the gel is considered as a continuum and the light scattering is assumed to arise from longitudinal deformation modes of the network . The deformation of the swollen network has been shown to obey a diffusion equation and the correlation function of the polarized scattered light is given by : The cooperative diffusion constant De of the chains of the network is given by : 1 " B il ) ’B wnere p ( clyne / cm - ) is tne longitudinal compressionai modulus and 0 ( dyne s / cm4 ) the frictional force per unit volume of the network as it moves with unit velocity relative to the surrounding liquid . p and 0 are given respectively by [ 12 ] : - , , vo being number density of network chains in the swollen state , 17 the viscosity of the swelling liquid and Rh hydrodynamic radius of one chain . 1501 By combining equations ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) one obtains : where Df stands for the translational diffusion coefficient for a dilute solution of free macromolecules having the hydrodynamic radius Rh . This hydrodynamic theory leads to results which are quite different from those derived from the har - monically bound particle model , since it predicts an exponential time decay of the autocorrelation function of the optical field with a linear relationship between decay rate and K2 . Uncorrelated Rayleigh scattering has been assumed so that no account has to be taken of the static scattering due to spatial non - randomness of the crosslinking . This additional component acts as a local heterodyning source . Therefore , if Io stands for the intensity of the static component ( including dust trapped in the network ) and 7g for the intensity scattered from longitudinal fluctuations , the normalized intensity autocorrelation function is given by [ 15 ] : When Io & # x3E ; I , , , equation ( 7 ) reduces to : In previous papers , we have shown that g2 ( z ) obeys equation ( 8 ) for polystyrene - benzene gels [ 7 ] . According to equation ( 6 ) , the cooperative diffusion constant depends on the dimension of the elastic chains joining two crosslinks which in tum depends on the swelling equilibrium concentration Ce . The Flory theory of swelling predicts the following dependence of Ce on the molecular weight Me of the elastic chain [ 16 ] However , this result has been derived from an expres - sion of the free energy which has been shown to be incorrect and which leads to correct results only in dilute solutions [ 17 ] . A new approach , based on scaling law theories has been recently proposed , describing static and dynamical properties of both dilute and semi - dilute solutions [ 13 , 17 , 18 ] . Semi - dilute solutions can be considered as net - , t works with a finite lifetime . The average distance between neighbouring crosslinks is given by the screening length ç which depends only on the concen - tration , according to the following scaling law [ 13 ] Therefore , the diffusion constant D , is given by In swollen networks at the equilibrium state , the average distance between neighbouring cross - links depends on the swelling equilibrium concen - tration Ce . De Gennes suggested that this distance is given as in the case of interpenetrated solutions by the screening length j . This assumption implies that : The equilibrium concentration is given in the first approximation by : where Me represents the molecular weight of the elastically effective chains connecting two junction points regardless of their nature , entanglements or permanent crosslinks . For ideal networks prepared from a precursor polymer of known molecular weight M p’ ç is equal to the radius of gyration RF of the precursor polymer . Therefore : where C * is the cross - over concentration between dilute and semi - dilute regions for a solution of macromolecules of molecular weight Mp . Combination of equations ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) leads to the following concentration dependence of Dc Then , one can predict the same exponent for both scaling laws D , , = f ( C ) and De = f ( Ce ) relative to semi - dilute solutions and swollen networks , res - pectively . This result has been verified experimentally in polystyrene gels [ 8 ] . It is also interesting to consider the concentration dependence of the compressional modulus E . In Flory’s theory , E is proportional to the number density of elastically effective chains in the dry state [ 16 ] . As a consequence , E oc Ce2 . On the other hand , scaling law theory predicts that E is proportional to the number density of elastic chains in the swollen state , resulting in the following scaling law for E [ 13 ] Such a dependence of E on Ce has been observed in polystyrene networks swollen by benzene . 1502 3 . Expérimental . - 3 . 1 PREPARATION AND CHA - RACTERISTICS OF SAMPLES . - Polydimethylsiloxane networks were obtained by the addition reaction of ( a - co ) dihydropolydimethylsiloxane precursor polymers with plurifunctional allyloxy compounds , using H2PtC’ , , as a catalyst . The method has been described earlier [ 19 ] . These crosslinking reactions were carried out in the presence of toluene at 60 OC . Triallyloxy - 1 , 2 , 3 propane , tetraallyloxyethane , and bis allyloxy - 3 dimethylallyloxy - 2 , 2 propane oxide [ 20 ] were used as 3 , 4 and 6 functional crosslinking agents . The precursor polymers were chosen in a molecular weight range between 4 500 and 17 000 . The volume swelling degree of the networks at equilibrium has been determined with an accuracy of about 5 % , using a procedure already described [ 21 ] . The experimental technique and the apparatus [ 22 , 23 ] used for unidirectional compression measurements have also been described elsewhere [ 24 ] . All compres - sion measurements were carried out on networks swollen at equilibrium in toluene at small deformation ratios 0 . 8 A 1 . In table 1 are listed the network - samples and their characteristics . Table II shows the molecular weights Mn of the linear PDMS samples used in our experiments , determined by chemical endgroup analysis . Sample 1 is a linear PDMS obtained by an anionic polyme - rization method ( 1 ) . Samples 2 - 5 are ( a - co ) hydro - genosilane polydimethylsiloxanes ( 2 ) , which have been used for the preparation of networks . TABLE 1 PDMS swollen in toluene ( a ) e ) The networks have been prepared in toluene at 70 °C at a concentration of 83 % . ( b ) Number average molecular weight of the precursor polymer determined by endgroup analysis . ( C ) Functionality of the crosslinking agent . ( a ) Data of Belkebir Mrani et al . [ 24 ] . ( E is related to the para - meter G * of the authors through the relationship E = G * q¡Õ 1 / 3 , where qio is the swelling equilibrium ratio . ) ( e ) Determined from light scattering spectroscopy . ( 1 ) The authors are grateful to Dr . S . Boileau who has prepared this high molecular weight polymer . ( 2 ) These polymers were prepared by the Silicon Division of Rhône - Poulenc . TABLE II Linear PDMS ( 1 ) The weight average molecular weight , the radius of gyration and the second virial coefficient in toluene , have been determined by conventional light scattering . We have no exact information concerning the polydispersity of the samples . However , an analysis of the autocorrelation function of the photocurrent , performed by the method of cumulants [ 25 , 26 , 15 ] showed that the polydispersity index ( ratio of weight average molecular weight to the number average molecular weight ) does not exceed 1 . 3 . Such a value of Mw / Mn is not negligible , but this point is not of great importance for the purposes of our study . 3 . 2 LIGHT SPECTROSCOPY . - The spectrometer and autocorrelator for intensity autocorrelation measure - ments have been described before [ 15 ] . The light source was an argon ion laser ( Spectra Physics Model 165 ) with a wavelength of 488 nm . The cubic shaped gel samples ( - 1 cm3 ) were put into standard glass cells containing an excess of swelling liquid . The scattered light was collected at a pre - determined angle by a lens aperture system and focused onto the sensitive part of a photomultiplier ( ITT FW 130 ) cathode . The photocurrent was analyzed after passing through an amplifier - discriminator by a 24 - channel digital autocorrelator ( Precision Devices and Systems , Ltd Malvem system 4300 ) . The data from the corre - lator were analyzed by the method of cumulants [ 25 , 26 , 15 ] which allows for a distribution of decay rates G ( F ) and makes it possible to calculate the average decay rate F and the second - order norma - lized moment ( Jl2 / f2 ) about the mean of f . We have mentioned in the theoretical section that the intensity scattered from longitudinal fluctua - tions of swollen networks must be heterodyned to some extent by the static component due to micro - scopic heterogeneities . Furthermore , no special care has been taken to eliminate dust in the reagents and the solvent used for the network synthesis ; the dust trapped in the gel will also contribute to the heterodyn - ing . As a consequence , the initial amplitude 1 gl2 @ ( 0 ) 1 of the normalized photocount clipped correlation function must be lower than that obtained for polymer solutions in an homodyne self - beating experiment , which in practice is about 1 . 75 on account of incom - plete spatial coherence . As a matter of fact , it turns out that for all the investigated gels , gk2 ( O ) 1 = 1 . 01 - 1 . 1 . These very 1503 small values of 1 gL2 ) ( O ) indicate that the heterodyne component dominates the homodyne component and hence equation ( 8 ) must apply . In order to check this last point we have measured the autocorrelation function obtained by mixing the scattered signal with an external signal . In the scattering angle range of 60 - 900 , the initial amplitude of the normalized autocorrelation function has been found to be reduced further , but the decay time is not affected . Alternatively , a two hundred - channel real time wave analyzer ( Saicor Model SAI 21 B ) was used to measure the spectrum of the photocurrent from the photomultiplier . In all cases where the experimental data were described by a single decay rate r , both wave analyzer and autocorrelator led to identical values of r within 2 % . All the measurements were performed at room temperature ( 23 OC ) . The polydimethylsiloxane net - works swollen by toluene were allowed to stand at room temperature for at least one day to allow the sample to stabilize in the cell . The stability could be checked by monitoring the intensity of the DC component . The solutions of PDMS in toluene were made dust free by centrifugation ( 15 000 rev / min . ) . For concentrations larger than 0 . 5 x 10 - 2 g . cm - 3 , the FIG . 1 . - Semi - dilute solutions of linear PDMS Mw = 6 x 106 in toluene . a ) c = 3 x 10 - 2 g . cm - 3 ; b ) c = 1 . 42x 10 - 2 g . cm - 3 ; 0 A Scattered signal alone ; 1 à Scattered signal mixed with external oscillator . solutions of sample 1 were too viscous to allow such a procédure ; therefore , the solutions were made with a previously clarified toluene . However , some dust remains in the solutions giving rise to a hetero - dyning of the scattered signal . The rate of hetero - dyning varies with both concentration and scattering angle , as illustrated in figure 1 . This point is of great practical importance since it could lead to an incorrect analysis of the concentration dependence and wave - vector dependence of the decay rate of the correlation function . For this reason we have checked the scatter - ing mode ( homodyne or heterodyne ) by mixing the scattered signal with an external oscillator , using a Michelson type interferometer . In all cases where the heterodyning from dust was only partial , we have measured the decay rate by using the Michelson geometry . Table III gives the scattering modes experimentally observed for the different concen - trations . 4 . Results . - 4 . 1 SOLUTIONS OF PDMS IN TOLUENE . - In polymer solutions of given concentration c , the shape of the correlation function for scattered light g ( i ) and the K dependence of the decay rate r depend on the following four parameters : the radius of gyration RF of the chain , the cross - over concen - tration c * , the scattering wavevector K , and the minimum wavevector Km ; n at which the relaxation time iK of a longitudinal mode of wavevector K is equal to the relaxation time T , for complete disen - tanglement of one macromolecule . FIG . 2 . - Various regimes for longitudinal fluctuations of wave vector K in solutions of polymer in a good solvent . TABLE III Scattering modes for solutions of sample 1 ( Mw = 6 x 106 ) in toluene 1504 Because of the large ranges of concentration , molecular weight and scattering wavevector investi - gated in our experiments , we have obtained data in various regimes defined by the relative values of these parameters . For the clarity of the discussion we have reproduced in figure 2 the diagram given by de Gennes [ 13 ] showing the range of concentration and momentum transfer for the predicted existence of the different types of modes . One can summarize the possible experimental situations on the following way . 4 . 1 . 1 Dilute regime c c * . - a ) Region II g ( i ) is exponential Do is the self diffusion of one chain b ) Region III g ( i ) is non exponential r is the average decay rate . One probes inner modes of a single chain . 4 . 1 . 2 Semi - dilute regime c & # x3E ; c * . - a ) Region 1 g ( il is exponential De is the cooperative diffusion constant in the gel regime b ) Région II’ g ( i ) is exponential Dfree is the diffusion constant in the disentangled regime The différence between D free and De amounts to a change of prefactors . c ) Region III’ g ( i ) is non exponential r oc K3 . One probes inner modes within a coherence length . The behaviour which is of interest for a quantitative comparaison between cooperative modes of swollen permanent networks and semi - dilute solutions is the concentration dependence of De in the region I . In order to determine accurately the concentration dependence of the diffusion constant in both regions 1 and II , one must determine the ranges of scattering wavevector where the two following conditions are fulfilled : i ) the autocorrelation function decays exponentially ; ii ) the decay rate follows a K2 depen - dence . It is not easy to characterize with accuracy the range of K values where the autocorrelation function departs from an exponential . On the other hand , the procedure which consists of detecting a departure from the K2 dependence of the decay rate obtained by fitting g ( z ) to an exponential is quite sensitive . Figure 3 shows the ranges of K values where r varies like K2 , for different polymer concen - trations . In these domains , an analysis using the method of cumulants shows that the correlation function is well described by a single exponential , except for the dilute solutions where a slight distri - bution of exponentials occurs . The average decay rate of this distribution is about the same ( within 3 % ) as the decay rate determined by force fitting a single exponential and the value of the second - order moment ( / 12 / r2 ) is about - 0 . 1 . Such a value of / 12 / r2 would indicate a polydispersity index M , , IM . - 1 . 3 . However , one must point out that the measurements have been performed at low scattering angles ( 7° 9 15° ) where the effect of the non - negligible acceptance angle for scattered light may lead to an overestimation of Mw / Mn . The solid line Kç = 1 ( where ç has been calculated from D / Do = RF / ç ) reported on figure 3 represents the transition line from regions II and 1 to regions III and III’ respectively . The experimentally observed deviation of T from the K2 dependence indicates the existence of the concentration dependent corre - FIG . 3 . - Semi - dilute solutions of linear PDMS MW = 6 x 106 in toluene . Q c = 0 . 47 x 10 - 4 g . cm - 3 ; x c = 4 . 5 x 10 - 4 g . cm - 3 ; o c = 9 x 10 - 4 g . cm - 3 ; + c = 0 . 18 x 10 - 2 g . cm - 3 ; Z c = 0 . 36 x 10 - 2 g . cm - 3 ; 0 c = 0 . 72 x 10 - 2 g . cm - 3 . 1505 lation length j ( c ) and confirms previous conventional light scattering data [ 27 ] . In the regions III and III’ , the correlation function has been found to deviate significantly from single exponential behaviour . The decay time obtained by force fitting a single exponential depends on the sampling time . On the other hand , the average decay time determined from the cumulant analysis is insensitive to a change of the sampling time . The second - order moment is of the order of magnitude of 0 . 2 . We have not attempted a rigorous analysis of the correlation function , using the exact expression given by de Gennes and Dubois - Violette [ 28 ] . Such an analysis has been performed by Adam , et al . [ 10 ] on the system polystyrene - benzene . Figure 4 shows the concentration dependence of both Do and Dc obtained from the data of figure 3 . FIG . 4 . - Semi - dilute solutions of linear PDMS samples in toluene . + Mw = 6 X 106 ; 0 Mn = 17 100 ; x Mn = 4 500 . The behaviour of the diffusion constant is quite different from that observed in other polymeric systems in many respects : - In the dilute domain , Do is independent of the concentration . - Within the experimental accuracy , the exponent of the power law De = f ( c ) is that predicted by the theory - There is quite a sharp transition between dilute and semi - dilute solutions , which defines with a fairly good accuracy the cross - over concentration c * . The concentration cé p at which Do = f ( c ) and Dc = f ( c ) intersect is found to be : The cross - over concentration calculated from ( NA : Avogadro number ) is : In figure 4 we have also plotted the diffusion constant as a function of concentration for PDMS of small molecular weights . In the dilute range , Do varies significantly with c . In the semi - dilute range the experimental points lie on the same curve De = f ( c ) as that for the high molecular weight sample . These data represent the free diffusion constant D free in the disentangled regime ( region II’ ) , since they have been obtained for a range of K values much smaller than Kmin which can be calculated from [ 13 ] : Typically for c * / c = 1 / 2 and M = 17 100 One can , therefore , conclude that for the system investigated , the diffusion constant follows the same scaling law with the concentration in both the gel and the disentangled regimes without change of the numerical value of the prefactor . 4 . 2 PDMS NETWORKS SWOLLEN IN TOLUENE TO THEIR EQUILIBRIUM STATE . - 4 . 2 . 1 Shape of the auto - correlation function . - The results reported in previous papers , related to the light spectroscopy of polystyrene networks swollen by benzene and ethyl - acetate , demonstrated the validity of the hydro - dynamic model . On the other hand , the results of Wun and Carl - son on polyacrylamide gels supported the harmoni - cally bound particle model [ 4 ] . Therefore we have proceeded to a careful investi - gation of the autocorrelation function and of the K dependence of the decay rate for PDMS networks . We have found that the autocorrelation function can be described by a single exponential with the same statistical accuracy as for dilute solutions of mono - disperse polymers . The cumulant analysis leads to a value of ( P2 / r2 ) of about 0 . 02 . The decay rate varies as K2 for scattering angles ranging from 60 to 900 . In this range , the scattered signal is fully heterodyned by the inhomogeneities present in the sample , as evidenced by experiments performed using an external oscillator . 4 . 2 . 2 The cooperative diffusion constant . - The experimental values of Dc for PDMS networks are listed in table I . Figure 5 shows the variation of Dc as a function of the polymer concentration of the gel swollen to equilibrium . The data obey approximately the same scaling law as the semi - dilute solutions , with a change of the prefactor value . However a close inspection of figure 5 shows that the data are 1506 FIG . 5 . - Plot of De versus Ce for PDMS networks swollen in toluene . + f = 3 ; 0 f = 4 ; · f = 6 . f refers to the functionality of the crosslinking agent . The straight line represents De = f ( c ) for semi - dilute solutions . rather best accounted for by fitting the data of each series of networks of given functionality separately . One obtains then three slightly shifted straight lines of slopes ranging from 0 . 9 to 1 . 4 . 2 . 3 The compressional modulus . - The data obtained by Belkebir , et al . [ 24 ] for compressional modulus E of PDMS networks swollen in toluene are listed in table I . Figure 6 shows a log - log plot of E versus the equilibrium concentration . The data can be fitted roughly with two slightly shifted straight lines , one line corresponding to the f6 networks , the other one to the f3 and f4 networks . The slope of these straight lines is about 4 . 5 . FIG . 6 . - Compressional modulus E versus ce . + f = 3 ; 01 = 4 ; tbf = 6 . 5 . Discussion . - In the following discussion , we shall summarize the main results of our study , which are quite different from those obtained on polystyrene - benzene systems in many respects , and we shall attempt a conjectural description of the topology of the networks which is able to account for the experimental observations . a ) For semi - dilute solutions of high molecular weight PDMS in toluene , the exponent of the scaling law Dc = f ( c ) is in good agreement with the predicted value , contrary to the results previously obtained in polystyrene systems . This observation may be related to the elastomeric nature of the PDMS chain , which is much more flexible than that of the polysty - rene . An alternative explanation can be inferred from the rather poor solvent quality of the toluene for PDMS , as shown by the low value of the second virial coefficient ( cf . Table II ) , which is of the same order of magnitude as that of polystyrene in cyclo - hexane at a temperature of approximately 200 above the theta temperature . In theta solvent , the coherence length is proportional to the concentration . It may be possible that the behaviour of PDMS solutions in toluene is intermediate between those of theta regime and good solvent regime , resulting in a value of the critical exponent between 0 . 67 and 1 . An unequi - vocal answer would be given by a study of self - diffusion coefficient Do as a function of molecular weight for a series of monodisperse samples in dilute solutions . Indeed , if the system PDMS - toluene obeys the good solvent scaling laws theory , then Do should vary according to MO . 6 . The exponent b of the power law Do oc M - b can also be obtained from the expo - nent a in the viscosity Mark - Houwink equation [ 1 ] oc Ma through the relationship [ 16 ] : b = ( a + 1 ) / 3 . Values of b calculated from literature viscosity data range from 0 . 57 [ 29 ] to 0 . 61 [ 30 ] for PDMS samples of high molecular weights ( & # x3E ; 20 000 ) in toluene . These results give strong evidence that in PDMS toluene systems one observes good solvent behaviour , the values of critical exponents being those predicted by the theory . On the other hand , for PDMS of low molecular weights ( 20 000 ) the measured values of b range from 0 . 5 [ 31 ] to 0 . 53 [ 24 ] , indicating poor solvent behaviour . b ) For swollen networks one observes , in the first approximation , a scaling law for Dc = f ( ce ) . This result , which confirms those previously obtained from polystyrene gels , implies that the collective modes of networks swollen at their equilibrium state are also controlled by the correlation length j associated with the equilibrium concentration Ce , There is , however , a systematic upward shift of the curve Dc = f ( ce ) relative to the networks , with respect to the De = f ( c ) curve of the semi - dilute solutions . This shift may be attributed to a différence in the equilibrium conditions : swollen networks are studied in the presence of an excess of solvent and as a conse - quence the chemical potential of the solvent within the network is the same as that of the pure solvent . On the other hand , in the semi - dilute solution the 1507 chemical potential of the solvent is lowered with respect to that of the pure solvent . Experimental investigations of self - diffusion of polymers have shown that the ratio of hydrodynamic radius to radius of gyration of a coil was quite sensitive to the quality of the solvent [ 32 ] . Such an effect could be at the origin of the observed change of the prefactor in the concentration dependence of Dc . c ) The static compressional modulus does not follow the scaling law predicted by the theory . First , let us recall the basic assumptions leading to the E oc C2 . 2 5law . The compressional modulus is pro - portional to the number of elastic chains per unit volume , that is : For good solvents ce oc Me - O’s if one assumes that all the elastic chains are mutually excluded , and therefore E oc c ; ’ 25 . Deviations from the predicted law may result from the presence of pendant chains attached by one end to the network , since these chains would not contribute to the elasticity of the network . Such an effect can be ruled out , at least partially , for the samples investigated here , since the compressional modulus of the same PDMS networks swollen by a good solvent ( heptane ) approximately obey the c2 - 21 law [ 8 ] . We should therefore look for another explanation which would probably involve the quality of the solvent . As a matter of fact one expects a larger value of the exponent of E ( c , , ) for networks swollen in a poor solvent . Let us consider for instance a gel in which we have replaced the good solvent by a theta solvent . The new swelling equilibrium ce ( in ’the presence of an excess of solvent ) will vary as Me - o . 5 , if one assumes that the elastic chains do not inter - penetrate each other . Then from equation ( 17 ) , E oc cé . However , there is some experimental evi - dence of interpenetration of chains in networks swollen by poor solvents . Neutron scattering experi - ments performed by Duplessix , et al . [ 33 ] on labelled polystyrene networks have shown that the deswelling , resulting from an interchange of a good solvent by a poor solvent is much larger than the variation of the cubic power of the radius of gyration of the elastic chains . In other words , the macroscopic deswelling of the gel exceeds that of the individual chains , resulting in an interpenetration of the equi - valent spheres of radius RF . Therefore , one could not predict anymore the variation of ce as a function of Me . The influence of the quality of the diluent on the behaviour of ce is demonstrated in the PDMS net - works by the variations of Ce as a function of the mole - cular weight Mp of the polymer precursor . In figure 7 we have plotted ce versus Mp for PDMS networks swollen in heptane and in toluene , respectively . FIG . 7 . - Plot of ce versus the molecular weight of the polymer precursor , for tetrafunctional PDMS networks swollen in to - luene ( + ) and heptane ( 0 ) . These networks have been prepared at a concentration c ; = 67 % . The lines are guides for the eye . Although Mp may differ from Me because of trapped entanglements , the relative behaviour of the two sets of data is still significant . One clearly sees that the exponent of ce = f ( Mp ) is much smaller when the diluent is toluene . It is reasonable to assume that ce = f ( Mp ) and ce = f ( M , , ) are correlated . Accord - ing to equation ( 17 ) , a smooth decrease of ce as a function of Me , would result in a sharp increase of E with ce , as observed experimentally . Furthermore , equation ( 17 ) predicts that , for a given network , the ratio Elce should not depend on the nature of the swelling diluent . We have compared the experimental values of ( E / ce ) for a series of tetrafunctional networks swollen in toluene and in heptane , respectively , and we have obtained the following relationship : ( E / ce ) toluene = ( 1 . 2 ± 0 . 1 ) ( E / ce ) heptane . The interpenetration of the chains in the PDMS networks swollen by toluene is presumably favoured by the low molecular weights of the precursor poly - mers ( 4 500 - 17 100 ) . We have seen earlier that in this range of molecular weights , the toluene behaves as a poor solvent of PDMS . Furthermore , the influence of the cross - links on the chain dimensions may also be non - negligible as discussed below . d ) Influence of the experimental conditions of preparation of the networks . Previous investigations of gel elasticity have shown that the elastic properties of swollen networks are strongly dependent on the experimental conditions of crosslinking [ 34 ] . It is generally believed that the crosslinking process exerts an influence on the chain dimensions and a reference state has been defined , in which the chain dimensions are such that they do not exert any elastic forces on the cross - links [ 34 ] . This state must depend on the experimental proce - dure of cross - linking and also on the nature of the swelling diluent . In general , the chains in a network 1508 may not actually be in the relaxed state at the swelling equilibrium . It has been assumed that the reference state refers to the conditions of the network for - mation : thus , the reference degree of swelling is equal to the state of dilution at crosslinking [ 35 ] . The influence of the concentration c ; of polymer at the gel point is illustrated in figure 8 where we have plotted the modulus E and the diffusion constant D , , as a function of c ; for a series of tetrafunctional networks prepared from a precursor polymer of molecular weight 4 500 and swollen in toluene . These results , which show a decrease of the dimensions of the elastically effective chains as the initial concen - tration ci increases , are consistent with our basic assumption which - stipulâtes that the equilibrium elastic properties are mainly accounted for by the amount of trapped entanglements rather than by FIG . 8 . - Plots of D , , , and E for tetrafunctional PDMS networks swollen in toluene , as a function of the polymer concentration at the gel point . The lines are guides for the eye . chain déformation ; the number of trapped entangle - ments presumably increases with the number of labile entanglements existing prior to crosslinking , which in turn increases with the initial concentration c ; . The amount of trapped entanglements also increases with the functionality of the crosslinking agent . However , one cannot discard the existence of déformation of the chains due to memory effects . These effects could be at the origin of the difference discussed above , between the macroscopic deswelling of the gel and the deswelling of the individual chain , when one replaces a good diluent by a poor diluent . 6 . Conclusion . - The overall conclusion from this study is that networks formed in the presence of a good diluent show a behaviour markedly dependent on the nature of the swelling agent . For PDMS networks swollen in toluene the dimensions of the elastically effective chains can no longer be identified with the correlation length relative to a semi - dilute solution at a concentration ce equal to that of swelling equilibrium , as in the case of a good diluent . Both number density of elastic chains and dynamical correlation length associated with the diffusion cons - tant De depend on the stage of dilution at cross - linking . This effect can be related to the amount of trapped entanglements . A systematic study of the influence of the nature of both the solvent of preparation and the swelling diluent on the properties of the networks swollen to equilibrium should allow a more comprehensive description of the topology of gels . Acknowledgments . - The authors wish to thank Professor H . Benoit for very helpful discussions . References [ 1 ] TANAKA , T . , HOCKER , L . and BENEDEK , G . B . , J . Chem . Phys . 59 ( 1973 ) 5151 . [ 2 ] MC ADAM , J . D . G . , KING , T . A . and KNOX , A . , Chem . Phys . Lett . 26 ( 1974 ) 6 . [ 3 ] CARLSON , F . D . and FRASER , A . , J . Mol . Biol . 89 ( 1974 ) 273 . [ 4 ] WUN , K . L . and CARLSON , F . D . , Macromolecules 8 ( 1975 ) 190 . [ 5 ] MUNCH , J . P . , CANDAU , S . , DUPLESSIX , R . , PICOT , C . and BENOIT , H . , J . Physique Lett . 35 ( 1974 ) L - 239 . [ 6 ] MUNCH , J . P . , CANDAU , S . , DUPLESSIX , R . , PICOT , C . , HERZ , J . and BENOIT , H . , J . Polym . Sci . 14 ( 1976 ) 1097 . [ 7 ] MUNCH , J . P . , CANDAU , S . and HILD , G . , J . Polym . Sci . 15 ( 1977 ) 11 . [ 8 ] MUNCH , J . P . , CANDAU , S . , HERZ , J . and HILD , G . , J . Physique 38 ( 1977 ) 971 . [ 9 ] ADAM , M . , DELSANTI , M . and JANNINK , G . , J . Physique Lett . 37 ( 1976 ) L - 53 . [ 10 ] ADAM , M . and DELSANTI , M . , Macromolecules , to be published . [ 11 ] GEISSLER , E . and HECHT , A . M . , J . Chem . Phys . 65 ( 1976 ) 103 . [ 12 ] DE GENNES , P . G . , Cours , Collège de France , 1973 , unpu - blished . [ 13 ] DE GENNES , P . G . , Macromolecules 9 ( 1976 ) 587 . [ 14 ] ORNSTEIN , L . S . and UHLENBECK , G . E . , Reprinted in Selected Papers on Noise and Stochastic Processes ( N . Wax , Ed . Dover , New York ) 1974 , p . 93 - 112 . [ 15 ] See , for instance , Photon Correlation and Light Beating Spec - troscopy , H . Z . Cummins and E . R . Pike , Ed . ( Plenum Press , New York ) 1974 . [ 16 ] FLORY , P . , Principles of Polymer Chemistry ( Cornell Un . Press , Ithaca N . Y . ) 1967 . [ 17 ] DES CLOIZEAUX , J . Physique 31 ( 1970 ) 715 . [ 18 ] DE GENNES , P . G . , Phys . Lett . 38A ( 1972 ) 339 . [ 19 ] HERZ , J . , BELKEBIR - MRANI , A . and REMPP , P . , Eur . Polym . J . 9 ( 1973 ) 1165 . [ 20 ] BELKEBIR - MRANI , A . , HERZ , J . and REMPP , P . , Makromol . Chem . 178 ( 1977 ) 485 . [ 21 ] WEISS , P . , HERZ , J . and REMPP , P . , Makromol . Chem . 141 ( 1971 ) 145 . [ 22 ] CLUFF , E . F . , CLADDING , E . K . and PARISER , R . , J . Polym . Sci . 45 ( 1960 ) 341 . [ 23 ] VAN DE KRAATS , E . J . , Thesis , Delft ( 1967 ) . 1509 [ 24 ] BELKEBIR - MRANI , A . , BEINERT , G . , HERZ , J . and REMPP , P . , Eur . Polym . J . 13 ( 1977 ) 277 . See also A . BELKEBIR - MRANI , Thesis , Strasbourg 1976 . [ 25 ] KOPPEL , D . E . , J . Chem . Phys . 57 ( 1972 ) 4814 . [ 26 ] BROWN , J . C . , PUSEY , P . N . and DIETZ , R . , J . Chem . Phys . 62 ( 1975 ) 1136 . [ 27 ] DAOUD , M . , COTTON , J . P . , FARNOUX , B . , JANNINK , G . , SARMA , G . , BENOIT , H . , DUPLESSIX , R . , PICOT , C . and DE GENNES , P . G . , Macromolecules 8 ( 1975 ) 804 . [ 28 ] DUBOIS - VIOLETTE , E . , DE GENNES , P . G . , Physics 3 ( 1967 ) 181 . [ 29 ] TAKIMOTO , H . H . , FORBES , C . T . and LANDENSCHLAGER , R . K . , J . Appl . Polym . Sci . 5 ( 1961 ) 153 . [ 30 ] VON HAUG , A . and MEYERHOFF , G . , Makromol . Chem . 53 ( 1962 ) 91 . [ 31 ] BIANCHI , U . , DALPIAZ , M . and PATRONE , E . , Makromol . Chem . 80 ( 1964 ) 112 . [ 32 ] ALLEN , G . , VASUDEVAN , P . , HAWKINS , Y . and KING , T . A . , J . Chem . Soc . Faraday Trans . II 4 ( 1977 ) 449 . [ 33 ] BENOIT , H . , DECKER - FREYSS , D . , DUPLESSIX , R . , PICOT , C . , REMPP , P . , COTTON , J . P . , FARNOUX , B . , JANNINK , G . and OBER , R . , J . Polym . Sci . A2 14 ( 1976 ) 2119 . [ 34 ] DUSEK , K . and PRINS , W . , Adv . Polym . Sci . 6 ( 1 ) ( 1969 ) 1 . [ 35 ] LUTZ , , P . , PICOT , C . , HILD , G . and REMPP , P . , Br . Polym . J . , to be published .