Accepted Manuscript Title : Facilitating design thinking : A comparison of design expertise Authors : Genevieve Mosley , Natalie Wright , Cara Wrigley PII : S1871 - 1871 ( 17 ) 30224 - 9 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2018 . 02 . 004 Reference : TSC 480 To appear in : Thinking Skills and Creativity Received date : 18 - 8 - 2017 Revised date : 9 - 1 - 2018 Accepted date : 3 - 2 - 2018 Please cite this article as : Mosley , Genevieve . , Wright , Natalie . , & Wrigley , Cara . , Facilitating design thinking : A comparison of design expertise . Thinking Skills and Creativity https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2018 . 02 . 004 This is a PDF ﬁle of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its ﬁnal form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . Page 1 of 28 Facilitating design thinking : A comparison of design expertise Genevieve Mosley & Natalie Wright School of Design The Queensland University of Technology Cara Wrigley Sydney School of Architecture , Design & Planning The University of Sydney Research Highlights  First paper to explore the role of the facilitator in the teaching of design thinking to non - designers  Establishes a framework to determine the facilitation expertise of Design Thinking based on problem complexity  Reports on the learning experience of design thinking for a non - design audience Abstract Design thinking – as a problem - solving approach - has been taught in informal and formal education settings across various disciplines globally ( within both academia and industry ) , yet little research has focused on what level of design expertise facilitators require to educate non - design students . This paper analyses two informal immersive learning experience case studies from Australia and the Netherlands to explore the role of the facilitator in the teaching of design thinking to non - designers . Therefore , the aim of this paper is to explore the level of design expertise of the facilitator , as well as the complexity of the problem being addressed and how these impact the value of the learning experience of design thinking for a non - design audience . A C C E P T E D M A N U S C R I P T