editorial Wien Med Wochenschr 2016 · 166 : 193 – 195 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10354 - 016 - 0454 - 1 Endocytosis in health and disease—a thematic issue dedicated to Renate Fuchs Isabella Ellinger · Peter Pietschmann Published online : 10 May 2016 © Springer - Verlag Wien 2016 Endocytosis is the process of internalization of ex - tracellular material . Endocytic pathways include clathrin - dependent uptake , caveolae - dependent up - take , macropinocytosis , and phagocytosis . Endocyto - sis enables uptake of nutrients and helps to control the composition of the plasma membrane . The pro - cess is important for the regulation of major cellular functions such as antigen presentation or intracellular signaling cascades . Moreover , it is required to remove aged and dead cells from the body and is part of the defense against microbes . Of importance , perturba - tion of endocytosis has been reported in numerous human diseases including cancer , neurodegenera - tive diseases , diabetes mellitus , and cardiovascular disease , to name but a few . Finally , endocytosis repre - sents an important cellular route for delivery of ther - apeutic substances . Due to this functional diversity , endocytosis is a very active research area . At the mo - ment , almost 100 , 000 published articles are retrieved by PubMed upon entry of the term “endocytosis” and , over the years , many researches have contributed to our understanding of endocytic pathways . This thematic issue of the Wiener Medizinische Wochenschrift ( wmw ) on “Endocytosis in health and disease” is dedicated to our colleague Renate Fuchs from the Department of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research at the Medical University of Vienna , Austria , on the occasion of her retirement in October 2016 . Renate Fuchs studied Food - and Biotechnology at the University of Agriculture , Vienna , Austria . She con - I . Ellinger , PhD Associate Professor ( (cid:2) ) · P . Pietschmann Department of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research , Center for Pathophysiology , Infectiology and Immunology , Medical University of Vienna , Währinger Gürtel 18 – 20 , 1090 Vienna , Austria e - mail : isabella . ellinger @ meduniwien . ac . at ducted her PhD studies on the “Inﬂuence of vitamin D on chick small intestinal transport systems” at the Department of General and Experimental Pathology ( University of Vienna , Austria ) under the supervision of Meinrad Peterlik . From 1984 to 1986 she joined the Department of Cell Biology at Yale University , New Haven , USA , as a postdoctoral fellow . In the lab of Ira Mellman and Ari Helenius , who were recruited to Yale by George Palade [ 1 ] , she got into contact with endocytosis . In 1986 , Renate returned to Vienna and the Department of General and Experimental Pathol - ogy ; ﬁrst as a research associate , later as assistant professor . In 1990 she obtained the venia docendi in Experimental Pathology and founded her own re - search group . Throughout her career , Renate Fuchs was fascinated by the many aspects of cellular uptake mechanisms . With more than 60 scientiﬁc publi - cations , she signiﬁcantly extended our knowledge on transporters , endosome acidiﬁcation , endosome subpopulations , endocytic and transcytotic pathways of macromolecules , and cell entry mechanisms of viruses . Paying tribute to her work , collaborators and former students of Renate Fuchs contribute to this wmw issue . It being impossible to entirely cover the broad range of endocytic topics , our scope is to give a ﬂavor of the multifaceted world of endocytosis . The term “endocytosis” was coined by Christian de Duve in 1963 , but the concept of endocytosis dates back to the end of the nineteenth century . The zool - ogist Élie Metchnikoff was the ﬁrst to identify phago - cytes and he recognized the importance of phagocy - tosis as part of the immune system for the defense against microbes . His work was honored with a No - bel Prize in medicine in 1908 . Metchnikoff was also the ﬁrst to observe that endosomes were acidic com - partments , as , during uptake of litmus particles , the cells turned from blue to red . Almost 100 years later , K Endocytosis in health and disease—a thematic issue dedicated to Renate Fuchs 193 editorial it was shown that endosomes maintain an acidic in - ternal pH as the result of the action of a membrane proton pump and that this acidiﬁcation was required for proper endosomal sorting function . Renate Fuchs was among the ﬁrst researchers who investigated the mechanism of endosomal acidiﬁcation and demon - strated that subpopulations of endosomes maintain distinct pH values [ 2 ] . In contrast to phagocytosis ( “cell eating” ) , endocy - tosis of molecules and solutes , also termed pinocy - tosis ( “cell drinking” ) , can be observed in all cells . This universal occurrence of endocytosis was proven in the 1950s by electron microscopic studies of George Palade . For about two decades , however , pinocytosis was assumed to be a nonspeciﬁc process that trans - ported bulk ﬂuid and solutes into cells . In the 1970s , the observation that nutrients and hormones bound to cells led to the assumption that cells have spe - ciﬁc receptors on their surfaces designated for the uptake of extracellular molecules . A milestone in en - docytic research was the discovery of the Low - Den - sity Lipoprotein ( LDL ) - receptor and the description of ( LDL - ) receptor - mediated endocytosis . The driv - ing force behind the identiﬁcation of this endocytic mechanism by Goldstein and Brown was the wish to unravel a human genetic disease , namely familial hy - percholesterolemia ( FH ) . Finally , FH turned out to be caused by mutations in the LDL - receptor and a result - ing inability to internalize cholesterol into cells , and Goldstein and Brown were honored with a Nobel Prize for their important discovery . Meanwhile , endocytosis has been recognized as a multifactorial process , and the term now embraces distinct receptor - mediated as well as non - receptor - mediated uptake mechanisms . Moreover , various en - docytic subcompartments involved in many distinct functions have been characterized . An overview of the known endocytic pathways and subcompartments is given in the article “Endocytic pathways and endo - somal trafﬁcking : a primer” contributed by Sarah R . Elkin , Ashley M . Lakoduk , and Sandra Schmid from the UT Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , Texas , USA . Sandy Schmid and Renate Fuchs met at Yale University and collaborated on identiﬁcation of en - dosome subpopulations and their acidiﬁcation [ 2 , 3 ] . Klaus - Peter Zimmer from the UKGM / Justus - Liebig - Universität , Gießen , Germany and Renate Fuchs be - came collaborators with the entry into the new mil - lennium . In this issue of wmw , Klaus - Peter Zimmer , along with J . de Laffolie , M . V . Barone , and H . Y . Naim , describes “Endocytosis in enterocytes . ” The short - , but intensely living enterocytes are not only involved in uptake and secretion of nutrients , but also have important immune functions . These include en - docytosis and transcytosis of immunoglobulins and antibody – antigen complexes , a topic which was also of interest to Renate Fuchs [ 4 ] . In their article , Klaus - Peter Zimmer et al . detail why exploration of the endocytic mechanisms in enterocytes is important for the understanding and design of future therapeu - tic strategies against endocytosis - related diseases of enterocytes , such as food allergy , celiac disease , or microvillus inclusion disease . Viruses , the smallest infectious agents , replicate only inside living cells of other organisms . While some animal viruses have the capacity to penetrate into the cytosol directly from the plasma membrane , most hijack the endocytic machinery of the host cell to enter the cytoplasm or nucleus depending on the replication strategy of the particular virus . The com - mon cold or AIDS are examples of human diseases caused by viruses , which affect many individuals . In his contribution to this wmw issue , Dieter Blaas from the Medical University of Vienna , Austria , summa - rizes early steps of viral infection including receptor recognition , diverse mechanisms of cellular uptake , and the uncoating of the viral genome . In the 1990s , Dieter Blaas and Renate Fuchs started a long - term collaboration to explore the entry mechanisms of viruses , with a special focus on the main cause of the common cold , human rhinoviruses ( HRV ; [ 5 ] ) . The last section of Dieter Blaas’ article therefore focuses speciﬁcally on cell entry and uncoating of HRV . Aritz Perez Ruiz de Garibay from the Institut de Bi - ologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire , Strasbourg , France , joined Renate Fuchs’s research group for a research stay during his PhD thesis . Their common explo - ration of the cellular uptake mechanisms of nanopar - ticle - based nonviral vectors resulted in a publication in 2013 [ 6 ] . For this issue of wmw , Aritz Perez Ruiz de Garibay reviewed “Endocytosis in gene therapy with non - viral vectors . ” Although the use of nonviral car - riers is safer than with viral vectors , this approach is usually poorer in terms of transfection efﬁciency . In order to improve transfection rates , decoding of the entry pathways of the nanoparticles is essential to un - derstand why some vectors fail , while others are suc - cessful . This review summarizes the different stages of the transfection process and indicates the strate - gies employed to overcome all barriers that hinder an efﬁcient transfection of cells with nonviral vectors . Johannes A . Schmid from the Medical University of Vienna , Austria , was the ﬁrst PhD student in Re - nate Fuchs’s newly founded research group in the early 1990s . From the beginning , Renate Fuchs fos - tered independence and creative thinking among her students . Hannes Schmid’s contribution enti - tled “Endoplasmosis and exoplasmosis : the evolu - tionary principles underlying endocytosis , exocytosis and vesicular transport” presents an innovative con - cept about two principle mechanisms of membrane fusion , namely endoplasmosis ( trans - membrane fu - sion ) and exoplasmosis ( cis - membrane fusion ) , to the readership . Many diploma and doctoral students , supervised by Renate Fuchs , followed . In addition to training students in her laboratory , Renate Fuchs also 194 Endocytosis in health and disease—a thematic issue dedicated to Renate Fuchs K editorial participated in numerous teaching activities , both at the undergraduate and the graduate level . Renate looks back on an interesting and fruitful scientiﬁc career . For the editors of this thematic is - sue , all principle investigators , and many students at the Department of Pathophysiology and Allergy Re - search , she has been a critical and supportive super - visor , mentor , partner , and colleague . We would like to thank Renate for her enthusiasm , her creativity , her achievements , and her excellent collaborations over the many years . We wish the very best for the years to come . Conﬂict of interest I . Ellinger and P . Pietschmann state that there are no conﬂicts of interest . References 1 . WellsWA . IraMellman : fromendosomestoindustry . JCell Biol . 2007 ; 177 ( 4 ) : 570 – 571 . 2 . FuchsR , SchmidS , MellmanI . ApossibleroleforNa + , K + - AT - PaseinregulatingATP - dependentendosomeacidiﬁcation . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA . 1989 ; 86 ( 2 ) : 539 – 543 . 3 . Schmid SL , Fuchs R , Male P , Mellman I . Two distinct sub - populationsofendosomesinvolvedinmembranerecyclingandtransporttolysosomes . Cell . 1988 ; 52 ( 1 ) : 73 – 83 . 4 . Ellinger I , Fuchs R . HFcRn - mediated transplacental im - munoglobulin G transport : protection of and threat to the human fetus and newborn . Wien Med Wochenschr . 2012 ; 162 ( 9 – 10 ) : 207 – 213 . 5 . Fuchs R , Blaas D . Uncoating of human rhinoviruses . Rev MedVirol . 2010 ; 20 ( 5 ) : 281 – 297 . 6 . Ruiz de Garibay AP , Rodriguez Gascon AHG , Fuchs R , Ángeles Solinís Aspiazu M , Ángeles Solinís Aspiazu M . Roleof endocytic uptake in transfection efﬁciency of solid lipid nanoparticles - based nonviral vectors . J Gene Med . 2013 ; 15 ( 11 – 12 ) : 427 – 440 . K Endocytosis in health and disease—a thematic issue dedicated to Renate Fuchs 195