Development of Time - Integrated Multipoint Moment Analysis for Spatially Resolved Fluctuation Spectroscopy with High Time Resolution Doogie Oh , †‡ § Alexandra Zidovska , † { k Yangqing Xu , k and Daniel J . Needleman †‡ § * † School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , ‡ Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology , § FAS Center for Systems Biology , and { Department of Physics , Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts ; and k Department of Systems Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts ABSTRACT Spatial gradients in the behaviors of soluble proteins are thought to underlie many phenomena in cell and devel - opmental biology , but the nature and even the existence of these gradients are often unclear because few techniques can adequately characterize them . Methods with sufﬁcient temporal resolution to study the dynamics of diffusing molecules can only sample relatively small regions , whereas methods that are capable of imaging larger areas cannot probe fast timescales . To overcome these limitations , we developed and implemented time - integrated multipoint moment analysis ( TIMMA ) , a form of ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy that is capable of probing timescales down to 20 m s at hundreds of different locations simultaneously in a sample . We show that TIMMA can be used to measure the diffusion of small - molecule dyes and ﬂuorescent colloids , and that it can create spatial maps of the behavior of soluble ﬂuorescent proteins throughout mammalian tissue culture cells . We also demonstrate that TIMMA can characterize internal gradients in the diffusion of freely moving proteins in single cells . INTRODUCTION The spatial regulation of signaling controls a variety of bio - logical phenomena ( 1 ) ranging from the self - organization of subcellular structure ( 2 ) to embryonic development ( 3 ) . Many of these patterns are thought to form from a combina - tion of protein activities , interactions , and diffusion , but few such processes have been analyzed in detail . One difﬁculty is a lack of tools for studying the spatial regulation of soluble proteins , which are thought to underlie many of these phenomena . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) is the most widely used method for measuring spa - tial variations in protein interactions , but it is difﬁcult to obtain quantitative data with this technique , and it does not provide information on diffusion . Fluorescence ﬂuctua - tion spectroscopy ( FFS ) is a powerful collection of methods that are capable of quantitatively measuring the concen - trations , diffusion coefﬁcients , and binding constants of soluble molecules in vivo ( 4 ) . The most frequently used form of FFS is ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) , in which the autocorrelation function of the ﬂuores - cence ﬂuctuations is calculated and analyzed . FFS experi - ments are typically performed with point detectors , with the resulting limitation that the system is only probed at a single diffraction - limited spot at a time . Therefore , although FFS can provide relevant quantitative information about the behaviors of diffusing proteins , it is difﬁcult to use this method to characterize the spatial variations in these behav - iors , which are thought to be crucial for biological pattern formation . A variety of methods have been developed to increase the number of spatial locations that can be probed with FFS . The conceptually simplest approach is to employ multiple point detectors ( 5 – 7 ) , but it is impractical to probe a large number of locations with this method due to the difﬁculty of aligning the system . Another method is to use a single point detector and repetitively scan the observation volume over the sample ( 8 , 9 ) , but this approach is limited to studying relatively closely spaced locations because of the time it takes to complete a scan cycle . Recently , a number of groups have used electron - multiplying charge - coupled devices ( EMCCDs ) as detectors for FCS - style measure - ments ( 10 – 14 ) . EMCCDs are true area detectors with thousands to millions of pixels , so they can be used to simul - taneously probe a massive number of locations . However , even the fastest EMCCDs take ~ 2 ms to acquire an image when the entire detector is used at full resolution . This speed is far too slow to access timescales of tens of microseconds , which are necessary to study freely diffusing small mole - cules in aqueous solution . One can achieve faster readout of EMCCDs by limiting the area of interest , binning pixels , and using alternative acquisition modes . It is possible to obtain a time resolution of 20 m s if only a single line of pixels is used ( 11 ) , but this effectively reduces the EMCCD to a line detector instead of an area detector , which makes it difﬁcult to characterize larger systems such as mammalian cells . Here we describe time - integrated multipoint moment analysis ( TIMMA ) , a method that allows an EMCCD to be used in FFS experiments with a time resolution down to 20 m s while employing up to half the area of the detector . Our approach makes use of the time - integrated cumulant analysis ( TICA ) formalism developed by Mu¨ller and Submitted February 15 , 2011 , and accepted for publication August 9 , 2011 . * Correspondence : dan _ needleman @ harvard . edu Editor : Petra Schwille . (cid:1) 2011 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 11 / 09 / 1546 / 9 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 08 . 013 1546 Biophysical Journal Volume 101 September 2011 1546 – 1554 colleagues ( 15 , 16 ) , which was originally used with point detectors . We vary the exposure time of the camera and mea - sure the mean and variance of the signal at each location of interest . The dependence of these ﬁrst two moments on expo - sure time contains the same information as the correlation function measured in FCS experiments . However , whereas the fastest timescale that can be probed by a correlation anal - ysis is limited by the readout speed of the EMCCD , the smallest timescale that can be probed with a cumulant anal - ysis is determined by the minimum possible exposure time ( ~ 20 m s in our setup ) and is unrelated to the readout speed of the detector . TIMMA is a generalization of the number and brightness ( N & B ) method with an EMCCD , as previ - ously described by Unruh and Gratton ( 10 ) , which extracts information from measurements of the signal mean and vari - ance at a ﬁxed exposure time . Unruh and Gratton ( 10 ) also performed related proof - of - principle experiments in their study . A number of challenges are associated with the use of an EMCCD for TIMMA . First , multiple well - deﬁned optical volumes must be created . We used a stationary spinning disk confocal microscope , as described previously ( 17 ) , to simultaneously generate hundreds of points suitable for FFS analysis . Second , the exposure time of the EMCCD must be precisely controlled and light must be prevented from striking the chip while the data are being transferred and read out . We gated the laser light to the sample with an acousto - optic tunable ﬁlter ( AOTF ) and ensured synchroni - zation of the EMCCD by triggering both devices with a high - speed signal generator . Third , EMCCDs are intrinsi - cally noisy detectors ( 10 ) , and if the noise is not corrected for , it can artiﬁcially inﬂate the measured signal variance . We split the signal to create two identical images on the two halves of the EMCCD and computed the covariance of corresponding mirror points . This procedure removes the contribution of the readout noise to the variance in a manner similar to cross - correlating the output of two APDs , which is commonly used to prevent the afterpulsing of these detectors from contaminating FCS measurements . We used an addi - tional background subtraction technique to remove a slight residual additive noise that was correlated over the entire EMCCD . Fourth , the ﬁnite dynamic range of the EMCCD limits the range of exposure times that can be investigated for a given particle brightness and concentration . Therefore , we decreased the gain as necessary to avoid saturating the detector when exposure time increased . At each transition region , we recorded the same exposure time with the higher and lower gains and used this overlap to rescale the measure - ments to correct for the reduction in apparent brightness . By combining these modiﬁcations , we were able to use TIMMA to study a wide variety of samples . We calibrated our system with a freely diffusing dye , vali - dated it by characterizing ﬂuorescent colloidal particles , and used it to perform hundreds of FFS measurements simulta - neously on ﬂuorescent proteins in tissue - culture cells . We employed a microﬂuidics device to demonstrate that TIMMA can quantify internal gradients in the behavior of soluble proteins in single cells . Finally , we used TIMMA to monitor spatial variations in the concentration and dyn - amics of a ﬂuorescently labeled signaling protein , Ran . MATERIALS AND METHODS Microscope Experiments were carried out on a Nikon eclipse TE2000 - E with an apo - chromat 60 (cid:2) water immersion objective ( 1 . 2 NA ) and additional 1 . 5 (cid:2) magnifying optics . A Yokogawa ( Tokyo , Japan ) CSU - X1 was used for imaging ( in spinning mode ) and TIMMA measurements ( in stationary mode ) . The diameter of the pinholes on the disk was 50 m m and their phys - ical spacing was 250 m m . We used a total of 90 (cid:2) magniﬁcation , so the spacing between observation volumes in the sample was 2 . 78 m m . The laser power per illumination spot was typically 10 m W ( adjusted for each sample to minimize photobleaching ) . No additional modiﬁcations were needed to use the CSU - X1 in stationary mode . A dual view device ( DV2 ; Photomet - rics , Tucson , AZ ) with a 50 / 50 beam splitter divided the emitted light into two identical images ( for noise removal , see above ) in front of a demagnify - ing optics ( (cid:2) 0 . 38 ) to increase the ﬁeld of view , and detected with an EMCCD ( DV860 ; Andor Technology , Belfast , Northern Ireland ) . Control of laser and camera for data acquisition Fluorescence excitation was provided by a 488 nm laser ( Cyan Scientiﬁc CW Laser 100 mW ; Spectra - Physics , Santa Clara , CA ) modulated by an AOTF ( model 48078 - 2 . 5 - . 55 ; Gooch and Housego , Somerset , UK ) with a response time of 12 m s . The AOTF and EMCCD were synchronized by means of a high - speed digital signal generator ( NI PCIe - 6535 ; National Instruments , Austin , TX ) to ensure a proper exposure time and prevent light from hitting the EMCCD during the readout stage . We acquired data from all locations simultaneously by taking images of the pinhole array with the spinning disk stationary . The ﬂuorescence intensity from multiple neigh - boring pixels selected from 3 (cid:2) 3 pixels was integrated to capture most of the light coming from each observation volume . We obtained mean and covariance curves by acquiring data with different exposure times , typically 25 logarithmically spaced times . We acquired a series of images for each exposure time using the kinetic mode of the EMCCD . In TICA , the signal / noise ratio of a measurement increases with increasing integration time ( 16 ) . To decrease acquisition times while maintaining similar errors for all exposure times , we reduced the number of images acquired inversely proportional to the exposure time , ranging from ~ 1000 images for a 50 m s exposure to ~ 10 images for a 50 ms exposure time . To prevent saturation , the EMCCD gain was periodically decreased as the exposure time was increased . For each of these transitions between gain levels , we acquired two kinetic series : one with the lower gain and one with the higher gain . We then used this overlap to rescale the mean and covari - ance curves by matching the mean intensity values taken with different gain levels . We averaged 10 – 15 individual mean and covariance curves together to obtain the ﬁnal mean and covariance curves . To prevent changes in camera parameters during an exposure series ( 10 ) , we performed a dummy scan before each series consisting of 60 acquisitions during which the sample was not exposed to light . A background scan was acquired after each measurement series to correct for the nonstationary camera offset ( 10 ) . We also corrected for a small residual correlation in multiplicative noise , which was present across the entire EMCCD chip and typically had an amplitude ~ 30 - fold smaller than the covariance measured at a pinhole . After accounting for this correlated multiplicative noise , we found that the covariance between neighboring pinholes was ~ 100 times smaller than the covariance at a pinhole , indicating that the cross - talk between Biophysical Journal 101 ( 6 ) 1546 – 1554 Time - Integrated Multipoint Moment Analysis 1547 pinholes is quite small . The entire acquisition process typically took 2 – 4 min , during which time the sample was exposed to light for 30 – 40 s . Fits were performed to Eqs . 3 and 4 with weights given by the error asso - ciated with the measurements for each exposure time , determined by the standard deviations ( SDs ) from multiple scanning . Fits that produced R 2 - values below a determined number were deemed to be not reliable , and the resulting ﬁt parameters are not plotted in the maps shown in Fig . 3 , C – E , Fig . 4 , B and C , and Fig . 5 . Custom - written Labview codes ( National Instruments ) were used for all device control , data acquisition , and data analysis . Sample preparation A 1 m M stock solution of Molecular Probes Alexa 488 dye ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) in dimethyl sulfoxide and a polymer microsphere ( 38 nm diameter ; Duke Scientiﬁc ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) , Waltham , MA ) were diluted in water to the desired concentrations . These in vitro samples were imaged between a glass slide and a coverslip ( No . 1 . 5 ) sealed with nail polish . HeLa cells stably expressing EGFP were cultured in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ; Mediatech , Manassas , VA ) with 5 % CO 2 at 37 (cid:3) C . The HeLa cells were grown on a 25 mm coverslip and trans - ferred to phenol - red free DMEM 12 h before imaging . A custom - built water - heated stage was used to maintain the temperature of the cells on the microscope during the measurements . Microﬂuidic device fabrication Soft lithography was used to fabricate microﬂuidics devices in polydime - thylsiloxane ( PDMS , Sylgard 184 silicone elastomer ; Dow Corning , Midland , MI ) as described elsewhere ( 18 ) . Devices were bonded to round coverslips ( No . 1 . 5 , diameter ¼ 25 mm ) . Microﬂuidics channels were coated with 0 . 1 % ﬁbronectin solution ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) before the cell suspension was injected . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Theory behind ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation analysis The analysis of ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuations in TIMMA is based on TICA , which uses the time - integrated cumulants of the ﬂuctuating ﬂuorescence signal to extract information about labeled molecules ( 15 , 16 ) . This procedure is concep - tually different from that performed in FCS . In FCS , infor - mation is extracted by explicitly analyzing the time course of the ﬂuctuating signal . Therefore , the fastest timescale that can be probed is determined by how rapidly the signal can be continuously recorded , which for an EMCCD is limited by the readout speed . In contrast , with a cumulant analysis , the actual time course of the signal is not analyzed . Rather , the sample is probed by measuring how the mean and variance ( and possibly higher cumulants ) vary with ex - posure time . Fluctuations due to the dynamics of the sample that occur during an exposure will be manifested by in - creasing the variance of the signal . The timescale of the ﬂuc - tuations that are probed is given by the timescale of the exposure , which for an EMCCD is limited by the speed at which the illumination can be shuttered , independently of the readout speed . One must acquire multiple images for each exposure time to obtain an accurate estimate of the cumulants . In this approach , only the cumulants ( and not the temporal correlations in between the sequential images ) are analyzed . Here we provide an overview of the relevant equations for measuring ﬂuctuations in the ﬁrst two cumulants , i . e . , the mean and the variance ( 15 , 16 ) . A noise - free detector ex - posed to time - varying light with intensity I ( t ) for a period of time T produces a signal S ¼ R T = 2 (cid:4) T = 2 I ð t Þ dt : If the statistics of the intensity ﬂuctuation are stationary , then the average signal produced from multiple such measurements is S avg ð T Þ h h S i ¼ * Z T = 2 (cid:4) T = 2 I ð t Þ dt + ¼ h I i T ( 1 ) And the variance of these measurements will be S var ð T Þ h (cid:2) ð D S Þ 2 (cid:3) ¼ * Z T = 2 (cid:4) T = 2 Z T = 2 (cid:4) T = 2 D I ð t 1 Þ D I ð t 2 Þ dt 1 dt 2 + ¼ h I i 2 Z T = 2 (cid:4) T = 2 Z T = 2 (cid:4) T = 2 g ð t 1 (cid:4) t 2 Þ dt 1 dt 2 ; ( 2 ) where D S ¼ S (cid:4)h S i , the averages are performed over dif - ferent instances for the time period , T , and g ð t 1 (cid:4) t 2 Þ ¼ h D I ð t 1 Þ D I ð t 2 Þi = h I i 2 is the intensity correlation function that is normally measured in FCS experiments . The form of g ( t 1 (cid:4) t 2 ) depends on the experimental setup and the behavior of the ﬂuorophores . For particles freely diffusing in three dimensions through a Gaussian observation volume , g ð t 1 (cid:4) t 2 Þ¼ 1 = N ð 1 þð t 1 (cid:4) t 2 Þ = t D Þ (cid:4) 1 ð 1 þð t 1 (cid:4) t 2 Þ = r 2 t D Þ (cid:4) 1 = 2 ; where N is the average number of molecules in the observa - tion volume , r ¼ w z = w xy is the ratio of the observation volume’s axial width to its radial width , and t D ¼ w 2 xy = 4 D is the average time it takes a particle to diffuse through the observation volume , which is determined by the parti - cle’s diffusion coefﬁcient , D . Using this model for the optical system and ﬂuorophore behavior with Eqs . 1 and 2 gives ( 15 , 16 ) S avg ð T Þ ¼ l NT ( 3 ) S var ð T Þ ¼ 4 r l 2 t 2 D N g 0 BBB @ r (cid:4) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r 2 þ T t D r (cid:4) (cid:5) 1 þ T t D (cid:6) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r 2 (cid:4) 1 p (cid:2) ln 2 6664 1 (cid:4) r 2 þ r ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r 2 (cid:4) 1 p (cid:4) (cid:7) r (cid:4) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r 2 (cid:4) 1 p (cid:8) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ r 2 þ T t D r ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ T t D r 3 7775 1 CCCA ; ( 4 ) where l is the brightness per unit time for an individual molecule and g is the second moment of the observation Biophysical Journal 101 ( 6 ) 1546 – 1554 1548 Oh et al . volume . Thus , for an ideal camera , the average signal increases linearly with exposure time , T , with a slope that depends on the number , N , and brightness , l , of the mole - cules being observed , whereas the variance increases in a more complex fashion , given by Eq . 4 . Equation 4 is derived assuming a 3D Gaussian observation value , which would result in g ¼ g G ¼ 1 = 2 ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p z 0 : 35 ( 19 ) , but the true observation volume contains wider tails ( 17 ) . This deviation is expected to have a minimal inﬂuence on the form of the variance curve ( Eq . 4 does accurately describe the data ; see below ) , but it could greatly modify g . We thus continue to use Eq . 4 , but treat g as an empirical parameter that we measure during a calibration step ( see below ) . EMCCDs are not ideal detectors . For linear , nonideal detectors , the actual measured signal , S ms , is related to the signal that an ideal detector would exhibit , S , by S ms ¼ a ( t ) S þ b ( t ) , where a ( t ) is the multiplicative noise and b ( t ) is the additive noise . To overcome this noise and extract the desired , uncorrupted signal , S , we use a 50 / 50 beam splitter to divide the signal onto the two halves of the camera . The multiplicative noise is uncorrelated at distant locations on the EMCCD ( 10 ) , and we have found that the additive noise has weak correlations across the entire camera . Therefore , by both comparing corresponding pixels on the two halves of the chip and performing background subtractions , one can eliminate the contribution of the detector noise . For a point located at i , with its mirror image located at j ( producing measured signals S i , ms and S j , ms ) , we calculate the desired corrected signal as S ij ; avg ð T Þ ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ðh S i ; ms i (cid:4) h b i iÞ (cid:9)(cid:2) S j ; ms (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:2) b j (cid:3)(cid:10) q S ij ; cov ð T Þ ¼ (cid:2) D S i ; ms D S j ; ms (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:2) D b i D b j (cid:3) ; where the background signals b i and b j are measured in a separate scan with the camera shutter closed . S ij , avg ( T ) and S ij , cov ( T ) can then be ﬁt with Eqs . 3 and 4 to determine the relevant parameters at each location in the sample . In practice , this is accomplished by taking multiple images with a ﬁxed exposure time , T , varying the exposure time , and determining how the averages and covariances depend on exposure time ( see Materials and Methods ) . Dye and colloid sample analysis To calibrate the microscope system , one must know three numbers that characterize the optical setup : the width of the observation volume , w xy ; the asymmetry of the observa - tion volume , r ¼ w z = w xy ; ; and the second moment of the observation volume , g . We use r ¼ 6 , as previously deter - mined for a similar experimental system using a correlation analysis ( 17 ) , and we measure w xy and g using a 50 nM Alexa 488 solution as a standard . Fig . 1 shows the mean , S avg ( T ) , and covariance , S cov ( T ) , curves for Alexa 488 from T ¼ 20 m s to T ¼ 20 ms , ﬁt to Eqs . 3 and 4 . Using a diffusion coefﬁcient for Alexa 488 of 435 m m 2 / s ( 20 ) and the measured diffusion time of t D ¼ 22 . 5 5 3 . 2 m s gives w xy ¼ 0 . 198 5 0 . 020 m m , which , within error , is equivalent to what was determined for a similar setup with a correlation analysis of slower diffusion particles ( 17 ) . The known concentration of Alexa 488 ( 50 nM ) allows a ﬁt to Eq . 4 to determine g ¼ 0 . 060 5 0 . 090 . This g is much smaller than expected for a 3D Gaussian , g G ¼ 1 = 2 ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p z 0 : 35 ( 19 ) , which is consistent with the known extended tails of the observation volume in this system ( 17 ) , and is similar to the value expected for a Gaussian - Lorentzian , g GL ¼ 3 = 4 p 2 z 0 : 078 ( 19 ) . These calibration results yield an observation volume of 0 . 26 5 0 . 045 fL . Having calibrated the system by determining w xy , r , and , g , we can in - vestigate novel systems with TIMMA , ﬁt the mean and covariance curves with Eqs . 3 and 4 , and thereby measure the concentration , diffusion coefﬁcient , and brightness of particles . We ﬁrst tested the calibrated system using another well - characterized in vitro sample : ﬂuorescent colloids . We FIGURE 1 Mean and covariance curves of ﬂuorescence intensities of Alexa 488 in aqueous solution as a function of exposure time . Top : Mean curve ( blue dots ) with a best ﬁt to Eq . 3 ( red line ) . Bottom : Covariance curve ( blue dots ) with a best ﬁt to Eq . 4 ( red line ) . Biophysical Journal 101 ( 6 ) 1546 – 1554 Time - Integrated Multipoint Moment Analysis 1549 obtained data simultaneously from 50 different locations with exposure times ranging from T ¼ 20 m s to T ¼ 20 ms . The mean and variance curves at one location are shown in Fig . 2 A , with corresponding ﬁts to Eqs . 3 and 4 . Fits were performed for each of the 50 locations ( Fig . 2 B ) . The ﬂuorescent colloid sample is homogeneous , so the spread in the ﬁt parameters provides an indication of the precision of the measurement ( as the optical properties of the spinning disk pinholes are quite uniform ( 17 ) ) . The SD of each of the ﬁt parameters is < 15 % of the mean , demonstrating the good reproducibility of the method , with l ¼ 5 . 3 5 0 . 75 AU , a concentration 63 . 1 5 7 . 8 nM , and a diffusion coefﬁcient of 9 . 8 5 1 . 4 m m 2 / s . This measured diffusion coefﬁcient is close to the expected value of 11 . 6 m m 2 / s , given the manufacturer’s speciﬁed diameter of 0 . 038 m m for these colloids . We further validated the system by conﬁrming that changing the concentration of colloids produced a linear change in the measured concentration of colloids , but did not affect the measured diffusion coefﬁcient ( Fig . 2 C ) . Diffusion of EGFP in vivo We next tested the utility of the system for in vivo measure - ments by studying the diffusion of EGFP in mammalian tissue - culture cells . We took data from nine cells , with 90 – 200 observation volumes per cell , to obtain a mean dif - fusion coefﬁcient ( and SD ) of 34 . 7 5 2 . 5 m m 2 / s for EGFP in these cells , which is similar to what has been determined previously ( 21 , 22 ) . The ﬁeld of view that can be investigated in a single measurement is large enough to allow multiple cells to be probed simultaneously . Fig . 3 A shows an image of three HeLa cells expressing soluble EGFP taken with the Nipkow disk spinning . The disk was stopped for TIMMA measurements , and mean and covariance curves were ob - tained for 150 locations covering all three cells . Representa - tive mean and covariance data , with corresponding ﬁts , for two of these locations are shown in Fig . 3 B . Similar ﬁts were performed for all locations , which allowed us to create maps of the diffusion , concentration , and brightness of EGFP throughout these cells ( Fig . 3 , C – E ) . The maps of FIGURE 2 Analysis of data obtained with colloid sample . ( A ) Mean and covariance curves from an individual pinhole ( blue dots ) with ﬁts to Eqs . 3 and 4 ( red lines ) . ( B ) Histograms of ﬁt parameters from 50 different observation volumes showing the measured concentration , diffusion coefﬁcient , and particle brightness . ( C ) Measured concentration and diffusion coefﬁcient as a func - tion of inverse dilution from the stock solution . Biophysical Journal 101 ( 6 ) 1546 – 1554 1550 Oh et al . diffusion coefﬁcient ( Fig . 3 D ) and brightness ( Fig . 3 E ) show that these quantities are similar in all three cells , with an average ( and SD ) across all points of 32 . 1 5 10 . 4 m m 2 / s and 10 . 6 5 2 . 4 AU . In contrast , the concentra - tion of EGFP in these three cells is signiﬁcantly different , with one cell having a concentration of ( mean and standard error ) 12 . 6 5 0 . 3 nM , another cell having 8 . 0 5 0 . 3 nM , and the third cell having 6 . 4 5 0 . 2 nM . Thus , as expected , the differences in brightness among the three cells observed in imaging ( Fig . 3 A ) were caused by the different concen - trations of EGFP in these cells , not by any change in the brightness of individual EGFP molecules . Spatial gradients of soluble proteins in single cells One of our motivations for developing a system capable of high - speed , multipoint FFS was to study spatial variations in the behaviors of soluble proteins in individual cells , which have been proposed to be important for cell organization and signaling ( 1 ) . We therefore sought to demonstrate that our method is capable of measuring such internal gradients by studying a simple model system . As shown above , the diffusion coefﬁcient of EGFP in HeLa cells is spatially homogeneous . This diffusion coefﬁ - cient is a function of the osmolarity of the media in which the cells are immersed , changing from 34 . 7 5 2 . 5 m m 2 / s for cells in DMEM ( see above ) to 18 . 8 5 1 . 6 m m 2 / s for cells in DMEM with 10 % PEG ( molecular weight ¼ 400 ) . We used this difference to create cells with internal gradients in the diffusion of EGFP by employing a microﬂuidics device to expose regions of cells to different osmotic stresses ( Fig . 4 A ) . The device contained channels that were 10 m m (cid:2) 10 m m (cid:2) 500 m m . Cells were loaded into the microﬂuidic devices by ﬂow and , after settling for 30 min , they completely occluded the channels . Cells loaded into these microﬂuidics channels and exposed to buffer without osmo - lite on both ends exhibited spatially uniform diffusion of EGFP ( Fig . 4 B ) . However , if one end of the cell is exposed to buffer with 10 % PEG while the other end is exposed to buffer without PEG , an internal gradient of the diffusion of EGFP develops ( Fig . 4 ) . The behavior of EGFP varies from point to point due to the complex internal structure of the cell ( Fig . 4 C ) . A clear pattern emerges when the average diffusion coefﬁcient is calculated in different regions of the cell ( Fig . 4 D ) : the diffusion coefﬁcient gradually increases across the cell . The diffusion coefﬁcient at the rightmost side of the cell partially exposed to PEG is 17 . 8 5 2 . 5 m m 2 / s , similar to the value obtained for cells entirely immersed in 10 % PEG , whereas the diffusion coefﬁcient at the leftmost side is 26 . 7 5 2 . 8 m m 2 / s , still somewhat less than obtained for cells solely in DMEM . This result demon - strates that our technique can measure even relatively subtle internal gradients in the behavior of soluble proteins , and thus should be highly useful for studying a variety of prob - lems in cell and developmental biology . Spatial dynamics of the GTPase Ran in single cells One of the most promising uses of TIMMA is to charac - terize spatial variations in the behaviors of biologically relevant fusion proteins in single cells . To demonstrate the capabilities of TIMMA in this regard , we performed FIGURE 3 Analysis of EGFP diffusion in HeLa cells . ( A ) Image of three HeLa cells taken with spinning - disk confocal in imaging mode . Scale bar : 10 m m . ( B ) Mean and covariance curves with associated ﬁts for two dif - ferent locations ( indicated in A and C – E ) : cell 1 and cell 2 . ( C ) Map of concentration measured at the each location corresponding to an observa - tion volume . ( D ) Map of diffusion coefﬁcient . ( E ) Map of single ﬂuoro - phore brightness . Biophysical Journal 101 ( 6 ) 1546 – 1554 Time - Integrated Multipoint Moment Analysis 1551 measurements on U2OS cells transiently expressing EGFP - Ran , a GTPase involved in nuclear import and mitosis ( 23 ) . Fig . 5 ( top ) shows an image of EGFP - Ran in a cell ( left ) , along with spatial maps of the concentration , diffusion coef - ﬁcient , and brightness . We separately analyzed the behavior of EGFP - Ran in the nucleus and the cytoplasm . In the nucleus , the mean ( and standard error ) of the concentration of EGFP - Ran was 20 . 8 5 0 . 8 nM , whereas its diffusion coefﬁcient was 16 . 5 5 1 . 4 m m 2 / s and its brightness was 3 . 8 5 0 . 6 AU . In the cytoplasm , these values were 5 . 7 5 0 . 4 nM , 24 . 7 5 1 . 6 m m 2 / s , and 4 . 1 5 0 . 2 AU , respectively . This approximately fourfold increase in the concentration of Ran in the nucleus , and the uniform molecular brightness of labeled Ran throughout cells , was previously observed with the N & B technique ( 24 ) , and the decreased mobility of Ran in the nucleus was studied with FCS ( 24 ) . These results demonstrate that TIMMA can be used to study biologically functional ﬂuorescently tagged proteins . CONCLUSIONS In this work , we developed TIMMA , a high - speed , highly parallel form of FFS that is capable of measuring dynamics at timescales down to 20 m s at hundreds of locations simul - taneously . We calibrated our system using a freely diffus - ing small molecule and demonstrated its performance by studying ﬂuorescent colloids . We showed that TIMMA can simultaneously measure the diffusion of EGFP at hundreds of locations in multiple tissue - culture cells , and can even map internal gradients in the behaviors of soluble proteins in single cells . TIMMA makes use of a stationary spinning disk confocal system ( 17 ) to generate hundreds of observa - tion volumes , and an EMCCD area detector with an acquisi - tion protocol based on TICA ( 15 , 16 ) to investigate the dynamics of ﬂuctuations at timescales orders of magnitude faster than the readout speed of the camera . Implementation of this method required a number of developments , most signiﬁcantly procedures to deal with the noise and limited dynamic range of the detector . TIMMA can access timescales orders of magnitude faster than is possible with conventional correlation analysis with an EMCCD ( 12 , 13 , 17 , 25 ) , and thus has a clear advantage for studying rapidly diffusing , soluble molecules . Use of the fast kinetic mode of EMCCDs allows similar timescales to be probed ( 11 ) , but that technique is limited to reading out at most a few rows of pixels . An FCS measurement obtained with an EMCCD in fast kinetic mode typically has an acqui - sition time of ~ 1 . 5 min or longer ( 11 , 26 , 27 ) , which is some - what more rapid than the 2 – 4 min acquisition time of TIMMA , but TIMMA can be used to probe an area ~ 40 times larger in that time frame . In a previous study , Unruh and Grat - ton ( 10 ) used EMCCDs to measure the mean and variance at a ﬁxed exposure time , and thus were able to extract the number and brightness of molecules . TIMMA can be viewed as a generalization of this previous method , called N & B , FIGURE 4 Analysis of EGFP diffusion in HeLa cells subjected to an osmotic gradient . ( A ) Schematics of the experimental setup . ( B ) Top : An image of a cell in the microﬂuidic device without exposure to PEG , with the PDMS walls ( blue lines ) and cell boundary ( red dotted line ) indicated . Bottom : A map of the measurements of EGFP diffusion coefﬁcient at different locations . ( C ) Top : An image of a cell in the microﬂuidics device exposed to PEG from one end , with the PDMS walls ( blue lines ) and cell boundary ( red dotted line ) indicated . Bottom : A map of the measurements of EGFP diffusion coefﬁcient at different locations . Scale bar : 10 m m . ( D ) The average diffusion coefﬁcient in these two cells as a function of position along the cell . The red lines are guides to the eye . Biophysical Journal 101 ( 6 ) 1546 – 1554 1552 Oh et al . with the advantage that it can extract more - detailed informa - tion about the dynamics of molecules , but the disadvantage that it requires more - complex experimental setup and data analysis . Typical acquisition times for TIMMA are 2 – 4 min ( during which the sample is exposed to light for ~ 30 – 40 s ) , and in this time period hundreds of locations can be probed in multiple cells . Single point measurements can obtain high - quality data in ~ 30 s ( 28 ) ; therefore , if < ~ 8 points are being investigated , it takes less time to use sequential point measurements , whereas TIMMA is more rapid for larger number of locations . Repetitive point scan - ning can extract information from spatial correlations ( 8 ) and is less prone to artifacts ( 9 ) , but such techniques are typi - cally limited to probing spatial scales of afew microns or less , due to the time it takes the scan to complete one cycle . TIMMA is a powerful new method for studying internal gradients in the behaviors of soluble proteins in cells . A promising future direction would be to develop a two - color version ( 29 ) for mapping gradients in protein interactions or to extend the method to higher cumulants ( 16 ) to mea - sure homo - oligomerization . It will also be possible to use a similar acquisition protocol with different illumination schemes such as total internal reﬂection ( 13 ) or single - plane illumination microscopy ( 14 ) , which have advantages for studying very thin and thick samples , respectively . We thank Philippe Cluzel and Jeff Mofﬁtt for advice and comments on the manuscript , and Paul Clarke ( University of Dundee ) for the gift of the EGFP - Ran plasmid . We thank Andor Technology for assistance with the software development kit . This work was supported by National Science Foundation grant 0959721 to D . J . N . A . Z . is a Damon Runyon Fellow supported by the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation ( DRG 2040 - 10 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Kholodenko , B . N . 2006 . Cell - signalling dynamics in time and space . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 165 – 176 . 2 . Bastiaens , P . , M . Caudron , . , E . Karsenti . 2006 . Gradients in the self - organization of the mitotic spindle . Trends Cell Biol . 16 : 125 – 134 . 3 . Lander , A . D . 2007 . Morpheus unbound : reimagining the morphogen gradient . Cell . 128 : 245 – 256 . 4 . Vukojevi (cid:1) c , V . , A . Pramanik , . , G . Bakalkin . 2005 . Study of molecular events in cells by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 62 : 535 – 550 . 5 . Brinkmeier , M . , K . Do¨rre , . , M . Eigen . 1999 . Two - beam cross - correlation : ca method to characterize transport phenomena in microm - eter - sized structures . Anal . Chem . 71 : 609 – 616 . 6 . Dittrich , P . S . , and P . Schwille . 2002 . Spatial two - photon ﬂuorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy for controlling molecular transport in microﬂuidic structures . Anal . Chem . 74 : 4472 – 4479 . 7 . Ohsugi , Y . , and M . Kinjo . 2009 . Multipoint ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy with total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscope . J . Biomed . Opt . 14 : 014030 . 8 . Ruan , Q . Q . , M . A . Cheng , . , W . W . Mantulin . 2004 . Spatial - temporal studies of membrane dynamics : scanning ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy ( SFCS ) . Biophys . J . 87 : 1260 – 1267 . 9 . Digman , M . A . , C . M . Brown , . , E . Gratton . 2005 . Measuring fast dynamics in solutions and cells with a laser scanning microscope . Biophys . J . 89 : 1317 – 1327 . 10 . Unruh , J . R . , and E . Gratton . 2008 . Analysis of molecular concentration and brightness from ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation data with an electron multiplied CCD camera . Biophys . J . 95 : 5385 – 5398 . 11 . Burkhardt , M . , and P . Schwille . 2006 . Electron multiplying CCD based detection for spatially resolved ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . Opt . Express . 14 : 5013 – 5020 . 12 . Kannan , B . , J . Y . Har , . , T . Wohland . 2006 . Electron multiplying charge - coupled device camera based ﬂuorescence correlation spectros - copy . Anal . Chem . 78 : 3444 – 3451 . 13 . Kannan , B . , L . Guo , . , T . Wohland . 2007 . Spatially resolved total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence correlation microscopy using an electron multiplying charge - coupled device camera . Anal . Chem . 79 : 4463 – 4470 . 14 . Wohland , T . , X . K . Shi , . , E . H . Stelzer . 2010 . Single plane illu - mination ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy ( SPIM - FCS ) probes inhomogeneous three - dimensional environments . Opt . Express . 18 : 10627 – 10641 . 15 . Mu¨ller , J . D . 2004 . Cumulant analysis in ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spec - troscopy . Biophys . J . 86 : 3981 – 3992 . 16 . Wu , B . , and J . D . Mu¨ller . 2005 . Time - integrated ﬂuorescence cumulant analysis in ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 89 : 2721 – 2735 . FIGURE 5 Analysis of EGFP - Ran diffusion in U2OS cells . Upper left : Confocal image of an EGFP - Ran - transfected U2OS cell . Scale bar : 10 m m . Top : Three maps of concentration , diffusion coefﬁcient , and brightness are shown ( the dashed blue line encircles the nucleus ) . Bottom : Covari - ance curves from EGFP - Ran in the nucleus and cytoplasm . Biophysical Journal 101 ( 6 ) 1546 – 1554 Time - Integrated Multipoint Moment Analysis 1553 17 . Needleman , D . J . , Y . Q . Xu , and T . J . Mitchison . 2009 . Pin - hole array correlation imaging : highly parallel ﬂuorescence correlation spectros - copy . Biophys . J . 96 : 5050 – 5059 . 18 . Duffy , D . C . , J . C . McDonald , . , G . M . Whitesides . 1998 . Rapid pro - totyping of microﬂuidic systems in poly ( dimethylsiloxane ) . Anal . Chem . 70 : 4974 – 4984 . 19 . Chen , Y . , J . D . Mu¨ller , . , E . Gratton . 1999 . The photon counting histo - gram in ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 77 : 553 – 567 . 20 . Petra´sek , Z . , and P . Schwille . 2008 . Precise measurement of diffusion coefﬁcients using scanning ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 94 : 1437 – 1448 . 21 . Kim , S . A . , and P . Schwille . 2003 . Intracellular applications of ﬂuores - cence correlation spectroscopy : prospects for neuroscience . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 13 : 583 – 590 . 22 . Dragestein , K . A . , W . A . van Cappellen , . , N . Galjart . 2008 . Dynamic behavior of GFP - CLIP - 170 reveals fast protein turnover on microtu - bule plus ends . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 729 – 737 . 23 . Weis , K . 2003 . Regulating access to the genome : nucleocytoplasmic transport throughout the cell cycle . Cell . 112 : 441 – 451 . 24 . Abu - Arish , A . , P . Kalab , . , C . Fradin . 2009 . Spatial distribution and mobility of the Ran GTPase in live interphase cells . Biophys . J . 97 : 2164 – 2178 . 25 . Kolin , D . L . , and P . W . Wiseman . 2007 . Advances in image correlation spectroscopy : measuring number densities , aggregation states , and dynamics of ﬂuorescently labeled macromolecules in cells . Cell Biochem . Biophys . 49 : 141 – 164 . 26 . Heuvelman , G . , F . Erdel , . , K . Rippe . 2009 . Analysis of protein mobilities and interactions in living cells by multifocal ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation microscopy . Eur . Biophys . J . 38 : 813 – 828 . 27 . Yu , S . R . , M . Burkhardt , . , M . Brand . 2009 . Fgf8 morphogen gradient forms by a source - sink mechanism with freely diffusing molecules . Nature . 461 : 533 – 536 . 28 . Kim , S . A . , K . G . Heinze , and P . Schwille . 2007 . Fluorescence correla - tion spectroscopy in living cells . Nat . Methods . 4 : 963 – 973 . 29 . Schwille , P . , F . J . Meyer - Almes , and R . Rigler . 1997 . Dual - color ﬂuo - rescence cross - correlation spectroscopy for multicomponent diffu - sional analysis in solution . Biophys . J . 72 : 1878 – 1886 . Biophysical Journal 101 ( 6 ) 1546 – 1554 1554 Oh et al .