Jointly published by Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest Scientometrics , and Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht Vol . 53 , No . 2 ( 2002 ) 241 – 248 Impact measures of interdisciplinary research in physics E D J . R INIA , 1 T HED N . VAN L EEUWEN , 2 A NTHONY F . J . VAN R AAN2 1 Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter ( FOM ) , Utrecht ( The Netherlands ) 2 Centre for Science and Technology Studies ( CWTS ) , Leiden University , Leiden ( The Netherlands ) In an evaluation of physics research programs in the Netherlands , held in 1996 , assessments of research by expert panels were supplemented with bibliometric analysis . This latter analysis included the calculation of several bibliometric indicators , among which some taking journal impact measures as a baseline . Final outcomes of this evaluation provided an opportunity to re - examine the results of this assessment from the perspective of the degree of interdisciplinarity of programs involved . In this paper we discuss results of this latter analysis , in particular with respect to the relation between several citation based indicators and interdisciplinary research in Dutch physics . Introduction Should interdisciplinary research be reviewed the same way as disciplinary research ? And if the answer is negative , which methods and indicators give reliable assessments of performance in interdisciplinary fields ? This topic becomes increasingly important as in research policy more emphasis is put on problem oriented research which often encompasses traditional boundaries between disciplines . The topic has also been discussed in the context of a nation wide evaluation of research programs in academic physics and related subfields , held in the Netherlands in 1996 . 1 This evaluation was part of a regular quality assessment procedure of the universities in the Netherlands , which consists of a discipline wise judgement of research performance by international committees of independent experts . As part of the physics evaluation procedure , results of a bibliometric analysis had been supplemented to the expert committee , during the review procedure . 2 After the evaluation , the outcomes were examined more closely . Among others the expert judgements for each program were compared with the outcomes of the bibliometric study . 0138 – 9130 / 2002 / US $ 15 . 00 Copyright © 2002 Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest All rights reserved E . J . R INIA et al . : Impact measures of interdisciplinary research in physics Figure 1 . Scatterplot of expert judgements and relative citation rates for research programs in physics in the Netherlands . In Figure 1 the correlation between the expert judgements for the criterion quality for programs in Dutch physics and the bibliometric indicator CPP / FCSm is shown . * The latter indicator normalises citation rates of publications of a program by the mean citation rates of the fields involved . Fields are defined by ISI journal categories . Quality scores given by the committee range from 1 - 5 , with 5 being excellent . In this plot the scores of 95 physics programs at universities are given . In general , final expert judgements were found to be rather well in agreement with the outcomes of the selected bibliometric indicator , though not perfect . It should be noted , that the bibliometric data were made available to the committee during the review procedure . So , final judgements of the committee were not obtained independently from bibliometric results . In spite of a general correlation , in some cases remarkable discrepancies between outcomes of the two methods are shown . Because such discrepancies may give insight in * The bibliometric indicators used in this study are : the number of publications ( P ) , the total number of citations ( C ) , the average number of citations per paper ( CPP ) , the average number of citations of journals in which is published ( JCSm ) , the average number of citations of the fields in which is published ( FCSm ) , the comparison of the citation average of publications with citation averages of journals involved ( CPP / JCSm ) , the comparison of the citation average of publications with citation averages of the fields involved ( CPP / FCSm ) and the comparison of the citation averages of journals involved with those of the fields involved ( JCSm / FCSm ) . 242 Scientometrics 53 ( 2002 )