Georgia State University ScholarWorks @ Georgia State University Music Faculty Publications School of Music 2008 An Instructional Approach for Improving the Writing of Literature Reviews Patrick K . Freer Georgia State University , pfreer @ gsu . edu Angela Barker Silver Lake College , abarker @ silver . sl . edu Follow this and additional works at : https : / / scholarworks . gsu . edu / music _ facpub Part of the Music Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the School of Music at ScholarWorks @ Georgia State University . It has been accepted for inclusion in Music Faculty Publications by an authorized administrator of ScholarWorks @ Georgia State University . For more information , please contact scholarworks @ gsu . edu . Recommended Citation Freer , Patrick K . and Barker , Angela , " An Instructional Approach for Improving the Writing of Literature Reviews " ( 2008 ) . Music Faculty Publications . 9 . https : / / scholarworks . gsu . edu / music _ facpub / 9 AN INSTRUCTIONAL APPROACH FOR IMPROVING THE WRITING OF LITERATURE REVIEWS Patrick K . Freer , Georgia State University Angela Barker , Silver Lake College The modeling of effective instructional techniques is an essential component of college instruction . This modeling encompasses both the pedagogical choices that are evidenced during teaching and the decision process that leads toward broader change ( Freer & Craig , 2003 ) . In the case of college faculty members , such pedagogical decisions are often based on intuition and emotion rather than on the diagnosis of problems , analysis of evidence , and systematic evaluation of adjustments to course content and / or instructional techniques ( Weimer , 2001 ) . In this article , we outline a project undertaken with two graduate classes in music education . We first identified a problem that our students were having , developed an instructional plan to address the problem , examined evidence about the effectiveness of the plan , and drew implications for teaching and learning in our other courses . For our students to learn our intended content ( in this case , about literature reviews ) , we realized that we needed to begin with what students knew and build from that point . Taking students from the known to the unknown required us to connect the content to instructional techniques , continually assessing and adjusting those techniques in response to the learning we saw in our classrooms ( Meyer - Mork , 2007 ) . Weimer ( 2003 ) writes , “We have stopped assuming that learning is the automatic , inevitable outcome of teaching . Certainly , good teaching and learning are related . However , when we . . . start with learning , connecting what is known about how people learn to instructional practice , we come at teaching and its improvement from a very different direction” ( p . 49 ) . Literature Reviews - 2 Weimer ( 2003 ) has also developed a list of “Five Key Changes to Practice , ” of which two are especially pertinent to our project . First , the balance of power within the classroom cannot be too focused on faculty decisions ; faculty need to share decision - making with students . Second , college classrooms tend to feature teachers , though a heightened level of student agency is necessary for knowledge acquisition . We decided to approach these two areas of potential change by highlighting our own recent experiences as graduate students . We often commented that the collegiality we felt as graduate students stood in marked contrast to the isolation we had previously felt as music teachers . Since all of the students in our classes were music educators who traveled to campus for night classes , we decided to model collaboration and scholarship utilizing a team - teaching approach . Clandinin and Connelly ( 1995 ) write , “The possibilities for reflective awakenings and transformations are limited when one is alone . Teachers need others in order to engage in conversations where stories can be told , reflected back , heard in different ways , retold , and relived in new ways . . . ” ( p . 13 ) . Our approach to team - teaching was grounded in the continuous professional development ( CPD ) model of Harwood and Clark ( 2006 ) who noted , “Evidence . . . indicates that a team approach can result in a more continuous engagement in professional development through open channels of communication which foster a supportive and collegial environment” ( p . 37 ) . Put more succinctly , “Managerialism doesn’t work in higher education , but collegiality does” ( Ramsden , 2004 ) . Background Among the central responsibilities of leaders are synthesis of information , communication of that information to the field , and identification of viable routes toward Literature Reviews - 3 obtaining additional , necessary information . Most graduate programs in music education focus at least some attention on written communication , given that much of the professional knowledge is archived in reports , articles , theses and books . At our university , the early courses in the MM - level sequence are designed to promote the ability to read scholarly materials with understanding , synthesize contents across a broad spectrum of sources , and critically analyze the methods and results of current research . When preparing to teach our separate MM - level courses during a recent fall semester , we noticed that the same students were enrolled in both of our introductory classes . This presented us with an opportunity to coordinate our instruction such that students might more easily view their courses as elements of a unified experience rather than discreet requirements to be completed . Our courses were already somewhat related , the first presenting an introduction to research in music education and the second incorporating an in - depth view of the teaching practices of the students via action research . Since both courses were to culminate in student papers containing extended literature reviews , we decided to create a series of parallel preparatory assignments in the two courses and planned multiple opportunities for team - teaching , instructor modeling and student reflection . Our purpose was four - fold . We wanted students to 1 ) understand the value of literature reviews ; 2 ) know how literature reviews might be organized ; 3 ) experience how literature reviews can assist readers of research ; and 4 ) apply specific criteria when evaluating literature reviews . The five student participants were all practicing music educators at the time . Three students were employed as full - time public school music teachers : Christopher was a high school band director , Shawn taught high school choral music , and Roy was an elementary general music teacher . The other two students were involved in music ministry as they pursued Literature Reviews - 4 their studies on a full - time basis : Monique had taught elementary school music and Beth had taught choral music at the high school level . Each class met once weekly for 150 minutes . The two classes were scheduled to meet on consecutive evenings . We centered our instruction on an article by Boote and Beile ( 2005 ) in the then - current issue of Educational Researcher concerning the structure and content of literature reviews . The article itself is an extended literature review , with attention given to the roles and purposes of reviews , how graduate course work incorporates reviews , and the perceptions of instructors , librarians and students concerning these issues . As reported in the article , Boote and Beile drew upon the work of Hart ( 1999 ) as the basis for a “literature review scoring rubric” that addressed the concerns they had identified . The authors then used their rubric to analyze a series of dissertations from three universities . Among the recommendations drawn from the results was the suggestion that “…we , the education community…must begin to value the literature review in our own work” ( Boote & Biele , 2005 , p . 12 ) . From this statement sprang the component of our coordinated instruction that became the most interesting for all involved : each instructor “graded” the dissertation literature review of the other and critiqued it according to Boote and Beile’s rubric . The remainder of the present article places this critique process within the context of the events that preceded and followed , reports student comments about the process , and concludes with recommendations for using these strategies within other introductory course work in music education . Literature Reviews - 5 Pedagogical Sequence We began our project by designing an open - ended questionnaire to elicit information about how our students perceived literature reviews . The identical questionnaire was given to students on three occasions . Because the first half of the semester was used for foundational instruction related to the course topics , the initial administration of the questionnaire took place at the midpoint of the semester . This occurred after students had read a number of research studies but before any specific discussion of quality , scope and organization of literature reviews . The questionnaire comprised four items : “What is the value of a literature review to a researcher ? , ” “How can ( or should ) a literature review be organized ? , ” “What is the purpose of a literature review to a reader ? , ” and “On what criteria should a literature review be evaluated ? ” Following the initial completion of the questionnaire in one of the courses involved , the Boote and Beile article was assigned as a reading for the other course . This prompted a general discussion about the nature and purpose of literature reviews , how literature reviews have been commonly situated within articles published in varying types of music education journals , and how the students had previously used existing literature to ground their scholarly papers . Specific attention was given to the scoring rubric contained in the Boote and Beile article ; terminologies were discussed and the weighting of the categories was deliberated . Because the terminologies and categories of Boote and Beile’s rubric were based on the work of Hart , one instructor presented a lecture about Hart’s approach to the structure and content of literature reviews . In summary , Hart ( 1999 ) argued that the traditional format of a literature review does not necessarily promote relevance , synthesis , or evaluation on the part of the author . Using a variety of examples and scenarios , Hart argued that the literature review ought to assist scholars in at least eleven areas : distinguishing what has been done from what Literature Reviews - 6 needs to be done ; discovering important variables relevant to the topic ; synthesizing and gaining a new perspective ; identifying relationships between ideas and practices ; establishing the context of the topic or problem ; rationalizing the significance of the problem ; enhancing and acquiring the subject vocabulary ; understanding the structure of the subject ; relating ideas and theory to applications ; identifying the main methodologies and research techniques that have been used ; and placing the research in a historical context to show familiarity with state - of - the - art developments . Students then applied Hart’s concepts to two literature reviews in the then - current issue of Update : Applications of Research in Music Education , both of which were related to topics being explored by students in the class . The two articles represented different examples of how literature reviews might be structured . The review by Abrahams ( 2005 ) was constructed as a persuasive argument about the role of critical pedagogy in music education ; topics were presented from general to specific , concluding with practical applications and implications for music education . In contrast , the review by Ferguson ( 2005 ) systematically presented the extant research about movement in elementary music education settings without drawing specific conclusions for the reader . Students were asked to prepare outlines of both articles for presentation during the next class session . During that session , students worked in collaborative groups to achieve consensus about the content of the outline . The outlines were then written on white boards , allowing for comparison and contrast during a subsequent large - group discussion . Students then “graded” both reviews using the previously discussed scoring rubric of Boote and Beile . At the close of class , students were informed that their own final projects would be evaluated using a variant of Literature Reviews - 7 the Boote and Beile rubric . As an assignment , they were asked to study the rubric and make any suggestions for modification . In the next class session , students were given examples of rubrics that one of the instructors had used to assess final papers in other graduate classes . These rubrics had been developed with student collaboration over several years and had their origins in numerous rubrics widely available through the Internet . The students were first asked to compare the Boote and Beile scoring rubric with these examples , noting differences and similarities in both content and format . This enlivened a discussion about the benefits of using rubrics as assessment tools ( versus simple checklists ) , the need for terminology that is clear and precise , and , finally , clarification of the Boote and Beile terminology for use within music education settings . The class members made three decisions regarding the rubric that was eventually adopted : 1 ) for matters of content , they decided to maintain the Boote and Beile rubric but modify the format to match the rubrics used in the instructor’s previous graduate classes ; 2 ) for matters of writing style , they decided to retain the portions of the rubric that had been used in previous classes ; and 3 ) since category weights had not been specified in the Boote and Beile rubric , these were added by consensus of the class and incorporated within the final version of the rubric . The final version of the rubric appears in Figure 1 . Now that we felt the students were ready to “field - test” their rubric , we embarked on what proved to be the most interesting part of our teaching process . We ( the two instructors ) had exchanged copies of our dissertations several weeks earlier ( Barker , 2003 ; Freer , 2003 ) . We read the literature review chapters carefully and evaluated them using the rubric that had emerged during class discussion . We discussed the results privately before the next class meeting and decided to present the critiques without modification in the format of a scholarly dialogue . Literature Reviews - 8 We also decided to use this presentation format when providing feedback to students about their own literature reviews that would be submitted at the end of the semester . The class meeting where we presented our critiques began with descriptions of how we had each decided upon our dissertation research topics , what the experience of writing had been like , and what steps we had taken to discover the relevant literature for our topics . We then took turns presenting the basic outline of our research , following the format of a 15 - minute conference research presentation . The literature review critiques were then presented by the other instructor , with the incorporation of many questions and requests for clarification typical of a scholarly exchange . The completed scoring rubrics were then distributed , prompting further comments and questions by the students . Students were especially curious to know what we had learned about writing literature reviews since the completion of our dissertations . This proved to be one of the most collegial conversations we have ever had with students . At the end of this class session , students completed the four - item questionnaire for the second time . Three weeks passed as students worked on their own literature reviews . Along with the primary document , students self - assessed their work and submitted a completed scoring rubric When students met for the final class session , they completed the four - item questionnaire for a third time . We then gathered with the students for an exit interview that was recorded , transcribed and coded for related themes . Responses to the Student Questionnaires Student responses to the questionnaire prompts were gathered at the beginning of the process , following the presentation of the instructors’ dissertation materials , and again after the students wrote their final literature review paper . The first and second administrations of the Literature Reviews - 9 questionnaire were separated by about three weeks , as were the second and third administrations . A comparison of student comments on the three questionnaires demonstrates how students refined their thoughts about literature reviews . The first question , “what is the value of a literature review to the researcher ? ” generated more thoughtful answers at the beginning and end of the process than at the midpoint . Because the middle questionnaire was distributed following the critique of our colleague’s work , students may not have had enough time to absorb the content from that class session . Responses from the first questionnaire were basic , stating that the literature review “allows the researcher to gain a large knowledge base of the topic” ( Shawn ) , “situates the study within the larger body of knowledge” ( Roy ) , “shows how the study relates to previous methodologies” ( Monique ) , and “can be structured to inform about what has been done” ( Christopher ) . Responses at the end of the semester were more nuanced , noting that the literature review should prompt the researcher to construct a “careful investigation of present and past research , with…insights…through the eyes of other researchers” ( Shawn ) , present a “tool to set up the methodology for a study or experiment” ( Roy ) while “assuring that you don’t simply ‘reinvent the wheel’” ( Beth ) and should “provide a grounding for research by generatively building on past efforts” ( Christopher ) . Question two invited students to consider how a literature review might be structured . Initial responses simply referred to chronologies and the exclusion of non - essential items , with no detail about how these decisions were to be made . The interim responses – those that followed the critique of instructor - written literature reviews – each included statements about the importance of connectivity and transition statements within the review structure . This theme was prevalent during the critiques of instructor - written reviews , no doubt leading to its appearance in Literature Reviews - 10 the survey responses . Responses at the end of the semester were more complex , including the following statements : • “It should first be very easy to follow . It should take the reader through a timeline of research while relating that research to the current study . It should flow like chapters in a good book , making smooth connections from one topic to another” ( Christopher ) . • “It should identify problems and sub - problems , justify delimitations , provide definitions , and explain assumptions and hypotheses” ( Monique ) . • “It should serve as an introduction to the larger topic . It should include a treatment of the historical data , a review of the most recent research , and it should act as a bridge to the methodology” ( Roy ) . • “It should answer the following questions : ‘What has been done in relation to this topic ? , ’ ‘How was it handled ? , ’ ‘What is left to be done ? , ’ and ‘How might the research base be improved upon and furthered ? ’” ( Beth ) . The third question dealt with how readers might view the importance of literature reviews . The basic responses were not wholly unexpected since the students were simultaneously taking two perspectives – that of the reader and that of the emerging researcher . Excerpts from Monique’s comments were typical of the way in which the class responded : • Beginning : “The literature review is important to familiarize readers with extant , relevant research that has been done or not done ; to situate the ( current ) research in relation to the broader field / body of knowledge ( to give the study some context ) . ” • Following Presentation of Instructor - Written Literature Reviews : “Readers need literature reviews to provide a clear understanding of the purpose for the study . ” Literature Reviews - 11 • End : “The literature review helps readers put the topic in a perspective with other research ; it might help readers by suggesting new insights or new approaches to the topic / issue . Reviews should help expand – critically – a reader’s knowledge of the relevant literature . ” Though each of this student’s comments is similar , there is a sense of refinement in the thought process by the final statement . Whereas the beginning statement focuses on breadth and awareness , the final comment alludes to the analytical , evaluative , and methodological perceptions that can be advanced by literature reviews . Perhaps the most informative response came at the end of the semester from Christopher : “ [ literature reviews ] give the reader confidence in the researcher’s knowledge of the subject area…readers must believe you , and your ability to gain their confidence helps your case throughout the study that is to follow . ” The final question , dealing with the criteria for evaluating literature reviews , did not prompt responses that differed substantially from one another . This might have been because criteria - driven rubrics are commonly used throughout our MM program and students may have already been accustomed to their use . Several differences were evident in the student responses across time , however . Shawn initially responded that the evaluation criteria should include only writing style and breadth . At the close of the semester , she broadened those criteria to ask , “How did the researcher show that the studies related to the current research topic ? ” Roy asked , “Does the literature review present a new or fresh perspective ? ” and included the statement that “Rhetoric should be central – listing components in an un - engaging form is not acceptable . ” Literature Reviews - 12 Student Exit Interview Comments Students met during final exam week to discuss the project as a group . The hour - long exit interview was audio - recorded for later transcription . During this interview , we explained why we had chosen the literature review project , we discussed what we had intended from a pedagogical perspective , and we shared our thoughts about how the project had succeeded in the goal of creating a collegial , collaborative academic atmosphere . We were especially interested in how the students viewed the project . From this discussion , four broad categories of comments emerged concerning the pedagogical process , the team - teaching instructional approach , the result on the relationship between student and teacher , and the students’ growth as scholars . Representative comments for each category appear in the sections below . The Pedagogical Process As seen in the following dialog , it was clear that students were able to retrospectively view the project and analyze it for both content and instructional approach . But , there was some concern about how effective the rubric was as a tool for ensuring a quality review when papers were due at the end of the semester : • Beth : “It was very helpful when we used the reviews in Update , but as I was writing my paper to meet the deadline , I didn’t leave time to grade it on the rubric . I waited to think about the rubric until the last minute . It would have been helpful to have us grade a draft and then revise it before handing in the final version . ” • Monique : “But , I think that fact that we went through the process of grading someone else’s work first created a safe zone where we could look at literature reviews for both Literature Reviews - 13 strengths and weaknesses . I went beyond thinking that I ‘liked’ what a person wrote . I began to think about what was effective and what was not effective . ” • Roy : “You know , we’ve never really looked at other person’s work for the quality of the writing – we usually look for the content instead of the writing . This semester , we looked at how the reviews were written instead of just looking at the content . Seeing different examples and comparing them was helpful , whether they were yours or the ones from Update . Perhaps presenting them sooner in the semester would have been even more helpful . The rubric was helpful . ” • Christopher : “I don’t quite agree that we should see examples early in the semester . Instead , I’d say that we should see examples like these more frequently in all of our classes . Looking at your dissertations , analyzing the Update articles , then applying the information in different ways was very enlightening . ” • Roy : “It was initially much easier to read reviews of people we didn’t know than to critique our own work . Reading the Boote and Beile article in Educational Researcher was where I began to get engaged in these courses and see the connection to what I want to do in music education . The language of that article is especially provocative for the music education community , saying basically , ‘you’re doing a bad job’ [ with the standard literature review ] and ‘here’s what you can do about it . ’” • Beth : “Yes , the Boote and Beile article was eye - opening . But , at first read , it just established the problems commonly found in literature reviews . My schema at the time couldn’t even comprehend the rubric that the authors proposed . It was these classes , the presentation of [ the professors’ work ] , and the analysis of the Update reviews that helped me understand the rubric criteria and how it might apply to my writing . ” Literature Reviews - 14 • Shawn : “OK – I’ll admit it . I had never considered looking at the work of others as a guideline for how I should write ! ” The Team - Teaching Approach The fact that we reinforced the importance of literature reviews within two distinct courses made our teaching more interdisciplinary . The students , who also indicated a desire to see other teaching models where both instructors taught the same classes simultaneously , appreciated this approach : • Roy : “It all blurred together . Sometimes I didn’t know which class I was in , but I think that was a good thing . The literature review project seemed like one big topic covered in the same way within two distinct classes . ” • Shawn : “I think that using the same rubric in both classes was very helpful . It helped me keep track of what I was doing on the projects for both classes . But , since we were working on two distinct literature reviews , I only saw overlap , not redundancy . I think it would have been better if y’all could have team - taught all of the time…an impossibility , I know ! ” Teacher - Student Relationship We have long been interested in how students become independent scholars and thinkers . We modeled the kinds of conversations that scholars have with each other when we critiqued our dissertation literature reviews in the presence of the students . We wondered if the students enjoyed the academic dialogue that emerged as much as we did . Their comments reinforced our Literature Reviews - 15 developing awareness that academic collegiality commences at the beginning of graduate school rather than at the end : • Christopher : “I liked that there was an attempt to break down the barriers between professor and student . It allowed us to think about how ideas work in the world . When you taught together , it was like ‘we’ll put ourselves out there and see what happens . ’ I appreciated the risks you took in doing that ! ” • Beth : “Sometimes our small graduate classes involve ‘the intellect’ so much that we don’t get to see the professors as people . This can be extremely uncomfortable . I liked how friendly this was – and that you were able to laugh at yourselves along the way . Oh – and modeling how to respond to criticism was a good idea , too . ” • Roy : “It was nice to see teamwork on the part of the professors . ” • Monique : “My experience this semester has been completely different than what I thought graduate school would be like . I thought I’d be completely on my own . Instead , I liked the integration of the coursework and how you [ the two professors ] discussed your reviews and critiqued them publicly . That helped me feel part of a community . ” Scholarly Growth As was our hope from the beginning of this project , the students’ comments indicated that they benefited from the process of applying discernable criteria when writing or reading literature reviews . No more did students regard the literature review as a perfunctory requirement of academic papers , but as a means of refining scholarly inquiry : Literature Reviews - 16 • Monique : “I am much more pleased with these papers than with any others I’ve written in my academic life . They are more well - written , they flow more carefully , and they tell a story that makes sense . I am especially pleased about the writing style of my literature reviews , which is far better than a forced , academic - sounding list of citations . ” • Beth : “Long before you start the literature search , you understand that you need to ‘sing a new song’ when piecing it together . ” • Roy : “The literature review is , basically , your research project ‘put in the dryer . ’ You’re choosing the topic , you’re formulating the research problem , you’re designing methodology , you’re thinking about analysis , and you’re already thinking about issues of importance and relevance . ” • Shawn : “The relationship between the literature review and the research project now makes more sense to me . There’s a purpose to the literature review ; it’s not just an academic exercise or requirement . ” Conclusions and Implications This project was intended to provide instruction regarding the style and content of literature reviews , and to draw students into a collaborative process of scholarship and inquiry . While we won’t know for certain whether the first aim has had a sustained benefit until these students progress further in their studies , we believe that the foundation has been established for the writing of literature reviews that are rigorously coherent , theoretically provocative , and methodologically grounded . We expect to build upon this foundation as these students progress toward their masters - level theses and possible work on doctoral research projects with our guidance . Literature Reviews - 17 We recommend that instructors of graduate music education courses model the process of self - critique within their introductory courses . At least two goals may be filled by utilization of these techniques . First , instructors will have the opportunity to create a collaborative classroom environment where students are welcomed into the broad community of music education researchers and teachers who employ research - supported pedagogy . The establishment of these types of collaborative communities has been advocated for teams of librarians and course instructors ( Isbell & Broaddus , 1995 ) , teams of instructors and students ( Cambridge , 1996 ) , and many variations of these teams within music education ( Luce , 2001 ) . Second , these types of collaborative experiences may assist new faculty members during the transition from graduate student to university instructor . We found that this project encouraged us to overtly incorporate characteristics of mentorship , guidance and facilitation within our teaching personas . This process also allowed us to seamlessly integrate our own doctoral work into our present roles as instructors , helping us more clearly define our roles as faculty members . This project involved changes to our instruction in response to a problem of scholarship that we identified in our students . Our approach toward addressing this problem matched our broader philosophy of teaching such that the teaching techniques were logical steps within a complex pedagogical sequence . Weimer ( 2002 ) states , “We need something in addition to techniques . We need an approach that comes to reflect an integrated , coherent philosophy of education and one with enough intellectual muscle to work on the problems we face” ( p . 186 ) . We further offer our narrative as a response to the profession’s need for “stories of music teachers engaged in change” ( Conway , 2003 , p . 35 ) . Although this report contains elements of narrative inquiry , we do not propose that we undertook the project with the rigor befitting any Literature Reviews - 18 sort of methodological label . Referring to the processes of narrative inquiry however , Bowman ( 2006 ) provides a rationale that seems apropos to our literature review project : Narrative inquiry also attempts to understand music and music education from the bottom up and the inside out – offering to restore some of the power and significance of which they have been deprived by off - the - rack , one - size - fits - all accounts . It draws its force from daily detail that highlights events and experience rather than logic . . . It offers profound insights into the ways actual people build and drape their lives around musical engagements ( pp . 13 - 14 ) . We intend to integrate more of these modeling and self - critique techniques , sharing stories of scholarship and pedagogical change with our future graduate classes . Most importantly , we look forward to engaging our students in rigorous academic work as we build upon the collaborative spirit that this project engendered . Literature Reviews - 19 References Abrahams , F . ( 2005 ) . The application of critical pedagogy to music teaching and learning : A literature review . Update : Applications of Research in Music Education , 23 ( 2 ) , 12 - 22 . Barker , A . ( 2003 ) . Children’s musical thinking skills and creative processes during a composition task ( Doctoral dissertation , University of Oklahoma ) . Boote , D . N . & Beile , P . ( 2005 ) . Scholars before researchers : On the centrality of the dissertation literature review in research preparation . Educational Researcher , 34 ( 6 ) , 3 - 15 . Bowman , W . ( 2006 ) . Why narrative ? Why now ? Research Studies in Music Education , 27 , 5 - 20 . Cambridge , B . L . ( 1996 ) . The paradigm shifts : Examining quality of teaching through assessment of student learning . Innovative Higher Education , 20 ( 4 ) , 287 - 297 . Clandinin , D . J . , & Connelly , F . M . ( 1995 ) . Teachers’ professional knowledge landscapes : Secret , sacred , and cover stories . In D . J . Clandinin & F . M . Connelly ( Eds . ) , Teachers’ professional knowledge landscapes ( pp . 1 - 15 ) . New York : Teachers College Press . Literature Reviews - 20 Conway , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Story and narrative inquiry in music teacher education research . Journal of Music Teacher Education , 12 ( 2 ) , 29 - 39 . Ferguson , L . ( 2005 ) . The role of movement in elementary music education : A literature review . Update : Applications of Research in Music Education , 23 ( 2 ) , 23 - 33 . Freer , P . K . ( 2003 ) . Rehearsal discourse of choral conductors : Meeting the needs of young adolescents ( Doctoral dissertation , Teachers College , Columbia University ) . Freer , P . K . & Craig , C . ( 2003 ) . The art of groupwork : Honoring multiple intelligences in the college classroom . In C . Coriel ( Ed . ) , Multiple intelligences , Howard Gardner and new methods in college teaching ( pp . 71 - 74 ) . Jersey City , NJ : New Jersey City University . Hart , C . ( 1999 ) . Doing a literature review : Releasing the social science research imagination . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Harwood , T . & Clarke , J . ( 2006 ) . Grounding continuous professional development ( CPD ) in teaching practice . Innovations in Education and Teaching International , 43 ( 1 ) , 29 - 39 . Isbell , D . & Broaddus , D . ( 1995 ) . Teaching writing and research as inseparable : A faculty - librarian teaching team . Reference Services Review , 23 ( 4 ) , 51 - 62 . Literature Reviews - 21 Luce , D . W . ( 2001 ) . Collaborative learning in music education : A review of the literature . Update : Applications of Research in Music Education , 19 ( 2 ) , 20 - 25 . Meyer - Mork , J . ( 2007 ) . ( My ) situated learning and teaching . Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association , Chicago , IL . Ramsden , P . ( 2004 ) . The higher education academy . Paper presented at the Learning and Teaching Conference , University of Hertfordshire . Weimer , M . ( 2001 ) . Learning more from the wisdom of practice , ” New Directions for Teaching and Learning , 86 , 45 - 56 . Weimer , M . ( 2002 ) . Learner - centered teaching : Five key changes to practice . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Weimer , M . ( 2003 ) . Focus on learning , transform teaching . Change , 35 ( 5 ) , 48 - 54 . Literature Reviews - 22 Figure 1 – Literature Review Rubric Coverage – 10 Possible Points Justified criteria for inclusion and exclusion Justified inclusion & exclusion of literature 10 Discussed literature included & excluded 7 Did not discuss the criteria for inclusion or exclusion 0 Synthesis – 35 Possible Points Distinguished what has been done from what needs to be done Critically examined the state of the field 4 Discussed what has and has not been done 2 Did not distinguish what has and has not been done 0 Placed the topic or problem in the broader scholarly literature Topic clearly situated in broader scholarly literature 8 Some discussion of broader scholarly literature 5 Topic not placed in broader scholarly literature 0 Placed the research in the historical context of the field Critically examined history of topic 8 Some mention of history of topic 5 History of topic not discussed 0 Acquired and enhanced the subject vocabulary Discussed & resolved ambiguities in definitions 5 Key vocabulary defined 4 Key vocabulary not discussed 0 Articulated important variables and phenomena relevant to topic Noted ambiguities in literature & proposed new relationships 5 Reviewed relationships among variables , phenomena 4 Key variables and phenomena not discussed 0 Synthesized and gained perspective on literature Offered new perspective 5 Some critique of literature 4 Accepted literature at face value 1 Methodology – 10 Possible Points Identified & critiqued the main methodologies and techniques in field Introduced new methods to address problems with dominant methods ( 5 Bonus Pts ) Critiqued research methods 5 Some discussion of research methods to produce claims 4 Research methods not discussed 0 Related ideas and theories in the field to research methodologies Critiqued appropriateness of methods to claims 5 Some discussion of appropriateness of methods to claims 4 Research methods not discussed 0 Significance – 15 Possible Points Rationalized the practical significance of the research problem Critiqued practical significance of research 10 Practical significance discussed 7 Practical significance of research not discussed 0 Rationalized the scholarly significance of the research problem Critiqued scholarly significance of research 5 Scholarly significance discussed 4 Scholarly significance of research not discussed 0 Rhetoric – 10 Possible Points Coherent , clear structure supports the review Well developed , coherent 10 Some coherent structure 6 Poorly conceptualized , haphazard 2 Style – 10 Possible Points Feel Writing is compelling . It hooks the reader and sustains interest throughout . 2 Writing is generally engaging , but has some dry spots . In general , it is focused and keeps the reader’s attention . 1 Writing is dull and unengaging . Though the paper has some interesting parts , the reader finds it difficult to maintain interest . 0 . 5 The writing has little personality . The reader quickly loses interest and stops reading . 0 Literature Reviews - 23 Tone The tone is consistently professional and appropriate for an academic research paper . 2 The tone is generally professional ; it is appropriate for an academic research paper . 1 The tone is not consistently professional or appropriate for an academic research paper . 0 . 5 The tone is unprofessional . It is not appropriate for an academic research paper . 0 Sentence Structure Sentences are well - phrased and varied in length and structure . They flow smoothly from one to another . 2 Sentences are well - phrased ; some variety in length and structure . Flow from sentence to sentence is generally smooth . 1 Some sentences are awkwardly constructed so that the reader is occasionally distracted . 0 . 5 Errors in sentence structure are frequent enough to be a major distraction to the reader . 0 Word Choice Word choice is consistently precise and accurate . 2 Word choice is good ; goes beyond generic to be more precise and effective . 1 Word choice is merely adequate ; range of words limited ; some used inappropriately . 0 . 5 Many words are used inappropriately , confusing the reader . 0 Grammar , Spelling , Writing Mechanics The writing is free or almost free of errors . 2 Occasional errors that don’t represent a major distraction or obscure meaning . 1 The writing has many errors ; reader is distracted by them . 0 . 5 There are so many errors that meaning is obscured . The reader is confused and stops reading . 0 Format – 10 Possible Points Length Paper is the number of pages specified in the assignment . 1 Paper length exceeds the framework of the assignment 0 . 5 Paper length does not meet the framework of the assignment . 0 Citation Within the Paper Compelling evidence from professionally legitimate sources is given ; attribution is clear & fairly represented . 3 Professionally legitimate sources that support claims are generally present ; attribution is clear & fairly represented . 2 Attributions occasionally given ; many statements unsubstantiated ; confusion about sources & ideas . 1 References are seldom cited to support statements . 0 Quality of References References are primarily peer - reviewed professional journals or other approved sources ( e . g . , government documents , agency manuals , … ) . The reader is confident that the information and ideas can be trusted . 3 Although most of the references are professionally legitimate , a few are questionable ( e . g . , trade books , internet sources , popular magazines , … ) . The reader is uncertain of the reliability of some of the sources . 2 Most of the references are from sources that are not peer - reviewed and have uncertain reliability . The reader doubts the accuracy of much of the material presented . 1 There are virtually no sources that are professionally reliable . The reader seriously doubts the value of the material and stops reading . 0 APA Use APA format is used accurately and consistently in paper & on “References” page . 3 APA format is used with minor errors . 2 There are frequent errors in APA format . 1 Format of the document is not recognizable as APA . 0 Table Totals : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ / 100 Letter Grade : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _