The EMBO Journal Vol . 17 No . 10 pp . 2767 – 2776 , 1998 Neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein is implicated in the actin - based motility of Shigella ﬂexneri Toshihiko Suzuki , Hiroaki Miki 1 , Tadaomi Takenawa 1 and Chihiro Sasakawa 2 Department of Bacteriology and 1 Department of Biochemistry , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , Minato - ku , Tokyo 108 , Japan 2 Corresponding author e - mail : sasakawa @ ims . u - tokyo . ac . jp Shigella , the causative agent of bacillary dysentery , is capable of directing its own movement in the cytoplasm of infected epithelial cells . The bacterial surface protein VirG recruits host components mediating actin polymerization , which is thought to serve as the propulsive force . Here , we show that neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) , which is a critical target for ﬁlopodium formation downstream of Cdc42 , is required for assembly of the actin tail generated by intracellular S . ﬂexneri . N - WASP accumulates at the front of the actin tail and is capable of interacting with VirG in vitro and in vivo , a phenomenon that is not observed in intracellular Listeria monocytogenes . The verprolin - homology region in N - WASP was required for binding to the glycine - rich repeats domain of VirG , an essential domain for recruitment of F - actin on intracellular S . ﬂexneri . Overexpression of a dominant - negative N - WASP mutant greatly inhibited formation of the actin tail by intracellular S . ﬂexneri . Further - more , depletion of N - WASP from Xenopus egg extracts shut off Shigella actin tail assembly , and this was restored upon addition of N - WASP protein , suggesting that N - WASP is a critical host factor for the assembly of the actin tail by intracellular Shigella . Keywords : actin polymerization / N - WASP / Shigella / VirG Introduction The abilities of Shigella to enter colonic epithelial cells and subsequently to spread within and between the cells are a prerequisite for causing dysentery . The capacity of the bacteria to spread in the cytoplasm and then to move into adjacent epithelial cells is mediated by the bacterial functions encoded by the virG ( icsA ) gene ( Makino et al . , 1986 ; Bernardini et al . , 1989 ; Lett et al . , 1989 ) . After invasion of epithelial cells , Shigella become surrounded by ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) . This F - actin ‘clot’ then rearranges into a tail ( also known as a ‘comet’ ) which remains stationary in the cytoplasm and is left behind by bacteria moving ahead ( Bernardini et al . , 1989 ; Pre´vost et al . , 1992 ; Goldberg et al . , 1993 ) . When the spreading bacterium contacts the inner surface of the host cell plasma membrane , a long membrane protrusion ( ﬁlopodium ) develops with the F - actin tail behind it that is endo - © Oxford University Press 2767 cytosed by the adjacent cells , resulting in the bacterium being surrounded by a double membranous vacuole ( Kadurugamuwa et al . , 1991 ; Allaoui et al . , 1992 ; Goldberg et al . , 1993 ; Suzuki et al . , 1994 ) . After disruption of the vacuole , bacteria are released into the new host cell cytoplasm and multiply again . Thus , this actin - based bacterial motility is critical for allowing invading Shigella to spread horizontally among colonic epithelial cells . VirG is a surface - exposed outer membrane protein , and the sequence of the virG gene revealed that VirG is a 1102 amino acid protein ( Lett et al . , 1989 ) . VirG protein consists of three distinctive domains , the N - terminal signal sequence ( amino acids 1 – 52 ) , the 706 amino acid α - domain ( amino acids 53 – 758 ) and the 343 amino acid C - terminal β - core ( amino acids 759 – 1102 ) ( Goldberg et al . , 1993 ; Suzuki et al . , 1995 ) . The α - domain is presented on the surface of Shigella and contains repetitive sequences rich in glycine residues , while the β - core is embedded in the outer membrane ( Suzuki et al . , 1995 ) . The assembly of F - actin near the surface of intracellular Shigella is absolutely dependent on the surface presenta - tion of VirG α - domain , and the formation of an actin tail depends on the asymmetric distribution of VirG ( Goldberg et al . , 1993 ; Rajakumar et al . , 1994 ; Sandlin et al . , 1995 ; Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) . Recently , to demonstrate that VirG is the sole bacterial factor needed for movement in infected mammalian cells , experiments on actin - based movement were carried out using Xenopus laevis egg extracts ( Goldberg and Theriot , 1995 ; Kocks et al . , 1995 ) . In these studies , heterologous VirG expression in Escherichia coli K - 12 was achieved by exploiting an OmpT – ( OmpT is a trypsin - like outer membrane protease ) VirG - expressing strain , in which the cleavage of VirG and , thus , the release of the α - domain into the bacterial environment , was prevented ( Nakata et al . , 1993 ) . This strain displayed an asymmetric distribution of VirG on the bacterial body similar to Shigella , and was capable of intra - and inter - cellular movement ( Kocks et al . , 1995 ) . The movement of S . ﬂexneri ( and Listeria monocyto - genes ) within the host cells resembles the formation of ﬁlopodia of locomoting cells , since those are mediated by actin polymerization and cause membrane protrusions ( Bernardini et al . , 1989 ; Pre´vost et al . , 1992 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . However , no known protein has yet been reported to be involved speciﬁcally in both phenomena . Several host proteins such as vinculin ( Kadurugamuwa et al . , 1991 ; Suzuki et al . , 1996 ; Laine et al . , 1997 ) , plastin ( ﬁmbrin ) ( Pre´vost et al . , 1992 ) , ﬁlamin ( Pre´vost et al . , 1992 ) , α - actinin ( Zeile et al . , 1996 ) and vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) ( Chakraborty et al . , 1995 ) have been identiﬁed as being associated with the F - actin tail generated by intracellular S . ﬂexneri . Amongst these proteins , only vinculin can interact directly with VirG ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ; Laine et al . , 1997 ) , in which T . Suzuki etal . Fig . 1 . N - WASP accumulation at one pole of intracellular Shigella . HeLa cells were infected with S . ﬂexneri YSH6000 ( A – D ) or L . monocytogenes 1 / 2a EGD ( E – G ) . Triple immunoﬂuorescence stainings ( A – D ) were performed with rhodamine – phalloidin ( A ) , Cy2 - labeled anti - N - WASP antibody ( B ) and Cy5 - labeled rat VRG - N2 antibodies ( C ) . Double immunoﬂuorescence stainings ( E – G ) were performed with rhodamine – phalloidin ( E ) and Cy2 - labeled anti - N - WASP antibody ( F ) . The yellow color in the combined image shown in ( D ) and ( G ) indicates co - localization between F - actin ( red ) and N - WASP ( green ) . Arrows indicate an intracellular bacterium recruiting N - WASP and F - actin . Bar , 10 μ m . the 95 kDa vinculin head domain interacting with the VirG α - domain is involved in promoting the formation of actin tail from intracellular Shigella . However , vinculin is not only associated with Shigella actin tail but is also distributed widely in focal adhesions , ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia . Recently , neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) was identiﬁed as the Ash / Grb2 - binding protein in brain , but its expression was also noted in other tissues including the colon ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . The sequence of N - WASP is homologous to WASP ( Derry et al . , 1994 ) , and they both possess various functional motifs , such as a pleckstrin - homology ( PH ) domain , an IQ motif , a GBD / CRIB motif , a proline - rich region ( P - region ) , a verprolin - homology region ( V - region ) and an ADF / coﬁlin - homology region ( C - region ) ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . Importantly , when N - WASP or WASP is over - expressed in mammalian cells , only N - WASP induces long ﬁlopodia ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . These data led us to investigate whether N - WASP is involved directly in actin comet formation by intracellular Shigella . Results IntracellularS . ﬂexnericanrecruitN - WASPatone poleofthebacterium HeLa , Cos - 7 , PtK2 or Caco - 2 cells and Xenopus egg extracts , which all have been used for studies of bacterial motility , were investigated for their expression of N - WASP . Although expression of N - WASP in each cell lysate , as assayed by an immunoblot with an anti - N - WASP antibody , varied slightly , they expressed signiﬁcant amounts of the protein ( data not shown ) . HeLa cells infected with wild - type S . ﬂexneri 2a strain YSH6000 were examined further for the cellular distribution of N - WASP 2768 by triple immunostainings with rhodamine – phalloidin , Cy2 - labeled rabbit anti - N - WASP antibody and Cy5 - labeled rat anti - VirG antibody . After 60 min of infection , N - WASP was highly concentrated at one pole of the bacterium , from which F - actin was also assembled as a comet tail ( Figure 1A , B and D ) . Under the same condi - tions , N - WASP did not accumulate at all on the surface of M94 , a virG - deﬁcient derivative of YSH6000 unable to form an actin comet tail ( data not shown ) . Indeed , the N - WASP accumulated at one pole of intracellular YSH6000 was always conﬁned to the area expressing VirG on the bacteria ( Figure 1C ) . Similar results were obtained with human Caco - 2 cells ( data not shown ) . To assess further the role of N - WASP in the Shigella - induced actin tail , HeLa cells were infected with YSH6000 for 20 , 40 and 60 min , and then examined for changes in the distributions of N - WASP , VirG and F - actin on the bacteria by confocal microscopy . After 20 min of infection , all intracellular YSH6000 accumulated VirG at one pole of bacterium and approximately half of the bacteria had detectable F - actin and N - WASP accumulation . At 60 min after infection , ~ 90 % of bacteria possessed an assembled F - actin . At this time point , the N - WASP associated with Shigella was still conﬁned to the front of the tail , suggesting that N - WASP plays a role in assembly of F - actin in infected cells . N - WASPcannotberecruitedbyintracellular Listeria Like Shigella , L . monocytogenes , a Gram - positive bac - terium , moves in mammalian cells by generating an actin comet ( for reviews , see Lasa and Cossart , 1996 ; Machesky , 1997 ) , an ability which requires the expression of ActA protein on the bacterial surface ( Domann et al . , 1992 ; Role of N - WASP in S . ﬂexneriactin - based motility Kocks et al . , 1992 ) . Hence , we infected HeLa cells with L . monocytogenes 1 / 2a EGD and examined its ability to recruit N - WASP on the bacterial surface by double immunostaining with Cy2 - labeled anti - N - WASP antibody and rhodamine – phalloidin . As shown in Figure 1E – G , at 120 min after infection , none of the bacteria in the HeLa cells had recruited localized N - WASP in the region of the actin comet tail , suggesting that accumulation of N - WASP at one pole of the intracellular bacterium is a Shigella - speciﬁc event . ShigellaVirGbindstotheverprolin - homology regionofN - WASP Since N - WASP accumulated at the site of VirG expression on intracellular Shigella , the ability of N - WASP to interact with VirG was ﬁrst investigated by co - precipitation experiments . HeLa cell lysates were incubated with GST – α 1 and GST – Ash / Grb2 fusion proteins or GST alone immobilized to glutathione – Sepharose . GST – α 1 contained residues Thr53 – Arg779 of the VirG peptide , an essential portion for eliciting actin comet tail formation ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) , while GST – Ash / Grb2 ( Lowenstein et al . , 1992 ; Matuoka et al . , 1992 ) was exploited originally for the isolation of N - WASP ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . Proteins co - precipitating with the GST beads were analyzed by immunoblots with anti - N - WASP antibody . As shown in Figure 2B , N - WASP co - precipitated with GST – α 1 as well as with GST – Ash / Grb2 , but not with GST alone , suggesting that N - WASP was capable of interacting with VirG in vitro . To assess which domains in N - WASP are responsible for interacting with VirG , Cos - 7 transfectants ( Figure 2A ) , that overexpressed either the full - length N - WASP ( Met1 – Asp505 ) , Δ VCA protein ( lacking the verprolin - and coﬁlin - homology regions ) or Δ V protein ( lacking the verprolin - homology region ) , were lysed and incubated with GST – α 1 . The proteins precipitated by GST – α 1 beads were then analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - N - WASP antibody . The full - length N - WASP , but not the other products , Δ VCA and Δ V , were precipitated with GST – α 1 ( Figure 2C ) , indicating that the verprolin - homology region of N - WASP could be involved in the interaction with VirG . To investigate further whether this verprolin - homology region can interact directly with VirG , we constructed four GST fusion proteins containing various portions of the VCA region of N - WASP ( Figure 2A ) and examined their ability to interact with the VirG α - domain . The resulting GST fusion proteins were blotted onto a membrane ﬁlter , overlaid with VirG - α 1 ( see Materials and methods ) , and its binding to the VCA segments was examined by immunostaining with rabbit VRG - N2 anti - body ( a VirG - speciﬁc antibody ) . The results showed that GST – VCA , GST – VC and GST – V , but not GST – CA or GST alone , were bound by VirG - α 1 ( Figure 2D ) . We thus concluded that the 58 amino acids of the verprolin - homology region of N - WASP take part in the interaction with VirG . Theverprolin - homologyregionofN - WASP interactswithVirGinvivo To investigate whether the verprolin - homology region of N - WASP is able to interact with VirG in vivo , PtK2 cells infected with S . ﬂexneri M94 ( a virG mutant of YSH6000 ) 2769 Fig . 2 . Association of N - WASP with VirG is mediated by its verprolin - homology region . ( A ) Schematic representation of the structure of N - WASP and its variants . Bars indicate deleted constructs expressed in Cos - 7 or recombinant GST fusion proteins . ( B ) Cell lysates from HeLa cells were incubated with Sepharose - immobilized GST – fusion proteins ( 20 μ g ) . Proteins bound to the beads were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - N - WASP antibody . ( C ) Cell lysates from Cos - 7 cells expressing N - WASP variants were used for a binding assay with GST – α 1 . Immunoblots of whole cell lysates are shown in the left panel . The 65 kDa protein bands appearing in all the lanes indicate endogenous N - WASP expressed in Cos - 7 cells . The thick 65 , ~ 47 and ~ 59 kDa bands correspond to full - length , Δ VCA and Δ V constructs , respectively . Immunoblots of N - WASP bound to GST – α 1 beads are shown in the right panel . ( D ) Recombinant GST fusion proteins of N - WASP ( 5 μ g / lane ) were analyzed by a gel blot overlay assay with VirG - α 1 . Coomassie blue staining and immunoblots with anti - GST antibody are shown in the left and middle panel , respectively . Proteins transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane were overlaid with recombinant VirG - α 1 ( 10 μ g / ml ) , and bound protein was detected with rabbit VRG - N2 antibody . carrying pD10 - 1 , a plasmid expressing VirG at a high level ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) , were microinjected with puriﬁed GST – V . Fifteen minutes after microinjection , the PtK2 cells were immunostained with Cy2 - labeled goat anti - GST antibody , Cy5 - labeled rabbit VRG - N2 anti - body and rhodamine – phalloidin . As shown in Figure 3 , the injected GST – V was accumulated around the VirG - expressing area on Shigella ( Figure 3A and B ) , where the actin tail was generated ( Figure 3C ) . When GST – V was injected into Ptk2 cells infected with L . monocytogenes , it did not accumulate at all on the intracellular bacteria T . Suzuki etal . Fig . 3 . Targeting of GST – verprolin - homology region of N - WASP to surface - exposed VirG on intracellular Shigella . PtK2 cells infected with S . ﬂexneri ( M94 carrying pD10 - 1 ) were microinjected with GST – V fusion protein and immunostained using Cy2 - labeled anti - GST ( A ) , Cy5 - labeled rabbit VRG - N2 antibodies ( B ) and rhodamine – phalloidin ( C ) . Bar , 10 μ m . ( data not shown ) . These data further conﬁrmed that the verprolin - homology region of N - WASP is involved in speciﬁc interaction with VirG expressed on intracellular Shigella . IdentiﬁcationoftheVirGdomaininteractingwithN - WASP Our recent studies have indicated that the VirG α - domain ( the surface - exposed VirG sequence ) consists of two distinct regions , an N - terminal portion corresponding to amino acids 53 – 508 , and the remaining C - terminal portion corresponding to amino acids 509 – 758 ( Suzuki et al . , 1995 , 1996 ) . The N - terminal region contains eight glycine - rich repeats , and is essential for eliciting an actin comet tail in intracellular Shigella , while the following C - terminal region is required for the unipolar deposition of VirG on the bacterium ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) . In order to identify which VirG portion takes part in the interaction with N - WASP , we constructed various GST – α - domain derivatives , named GST – α 1 to GST – α 8 ( see Figure 4A ) , and tested each of them for their ability to interact with N - WASP by incubating them in HeLa cell lysates followed by precipitation with the beads to which the GST derivatives were attached . Analysis of the precipitated proteins by immunoblotting with anti - N - WASP antibody indicated that GST – α 1 , GST – α 3 and GST – α 7 constructs containing all of the eight glycine - rich repeats could be bound by N - WASP ( Figure 4B ) . To conﬁrm that these three VirG α - domain portions were capable of binding N - WASP in infected cells , Shigella strain M94 carrying pD10 - 1 ( the whole VirG α - domain ) , pD10 - virG3 ( VirG3 , lacking amino acids 509 – 729 of the VirG α - domain ) or pD10 - virG4 ( VirG4 , lacking amino acids 104 – 506 of the VirG α - domain ) ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) was examined for its ability to recruit an N - WASP clot as well as recruit an F - actin assembly on the intracellular bacterium . The results showed that bacteria expressing wild - type VirG and VirG3 but not VirG4 were capable of eliciting accumulation of N - WASP and F - actin assembly in the infected cells as examined by immunostaining ( data not shown ) . These results indicated that the minimum VirG domain required for the interaction with N - WASP lies within the Arg103 – Ala433 region in the VirG polypeptide . 2770 Fig . 4 . VirG interacts with N - WASP via its glycine - rich repeat region . ( A ) Schematic representation of the construction of GST – α domain fusion proteins and summary of N - WASP binding assays . ( B ) Cell lysates from HeLa cells were incubated with GST – VirG α fusions immobilized on Sepharose beads . Proteins bound to the beads were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - N - WASP antibody . Adominant - negativeN - WASPaffectsactin assemblyonintracellularShigella It has been indicated that activated N - WASP promotes the depolymerization activity of actin ﬁlaments through its ADF / coﬁlin - homology region , and that overexpression of Δ cof , a mutant lacking four amino acids highly con - served in coﬁlin - family members , can inhibit ﬁlopodium formation , thus indicating that the Δ cof mutant functions in a dominant - negative manner ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , we exploited the Δ cof mutant to check the observed interaction of N - WASP with VirG involved in the assembly of F - actin on Shigella in infected mammalian cells . As shown in Figure 5A , the Δ cof mutant was capable of interacting with VirG in vitro . The effect of overexpression Role of N - WASP in S . ﬂexneriactin - based motility Fig . 5 . Actin assembly by Shigella is inhibited by transient expression of dominant - negative N - WASP in Cos - 7 cells . ( A ) Cell lysates from Cos - 7 cells expressing N - WASP variants were used for a binding assay with GST – α 1 . Immunoblots of whole cell lysates are shown in the upper panel . Immunoblots of N - WASP bound to GST – α 1 beads are shown in the lower panel . ( B ) Quantitation of the actin - associated intracellular bacteria in transfected cells . The transfected cells were infected with S . ﬂexneri ( M94 carrying pD10 - 1 ) or L . monocytogenes 1 / 2a EGD . The data shown are the means of triplicate experiments . The top bars show the standard deviation of the mean . ( C ) Cos - 7 cells overexpressing full - length N - WASP ( a , c and e ) or Δ cof mutant ( b , d and f ) were infected with Shigella and immunostained using anti - N - WASP antibody ( a and b ) and rhodamine – phalloidin ( c and d ) . The yellow color in the combined image shown in ( e ) and ( f ) indicates co - localization between N - WASP ( green ) and F - actin ( red ) . Bars , 10 μ m . of the Δ cof mutant on the formation of actin comet tail by Shigella infecting Cos - 7 cells was examined by count - ing the number of actin assemblies associated with the intracellular bacteria in Cos - 7 cells overexpressing Δ cof or the full - length N - WASP . As shown in Figure 5B and C , after 60 min of infection , the intracellular bacterium had an actin tail in Cos - 7 cells overexpressing the full - length N - WASP , whereas it was almost abolished in Cos - 7 cells overexpressing the Δ cof mutant . Approximately 90 % ( 92 . 8 (cid:2) 7 . 2 % , n (cid:3) 85 ) of intracellular bacteria possessed an actin clot in Cos - 7 cells overexpressing the full - length N - WASP , whereas only ~ 16 % ( 16 . 4 (cid:2) 4 . 9 % , n (cid:3) 138 ) had an actin assembly in Cos - 7 cells overexpressing the Δ cof mutant , even though Δ cof accumulation at one pole of the bacteria was observed ( Figure 5C , panel b ) . The overexpression of Δ cof or the full - length N - WASP had no effect on actin comet formation from intracellular L . monocytogenes ( Figure 5B ) . These results show that the overexpression of a dominant - negative N - WASP mutant greatly inhibits formation of actin tail by intracellular S . ﬂexneri . 2771 DepletionofN - WASPfromXenopuseggextracts affectstheabilityofVirG - expressedbacteriato recruitactinassembly To investigate further the functional requirement for N - WASP for the assembly of an actin tail by intracellular Shigella , we depleted N - WASP from Xenopus egg extracts by immunoprecipitation with anti - N - WASP antibody immobilized on protein A beads . The immunodepleted extracts were then tested for their ability to support the possession of an actin clot or tail from E . coli MC1061 ompT : : Km carrying pD10 - 1 , according to the methods described by Goldberg and Theriot ( 1995 ) . Upon depletion of N - WASP , generation of an actin tail was shut off , and only 17 . 6 (cid:2) 5 . 0 % ( n (cid:3) 229 ) of the bacteria associated with a weak actin clot around the bacterial body ( Figure 6B and C , panel b ) , whereas ~ 80 % of bacteria ( 82 . 9 (cid:2) 2 . 3 % , n (cid:3) 198 ) possessed an actin clot or tail in a mock - depleted extract ( Figure 6B and C , panel a ) , this level being similar to that in the untreated extract ( 83 . 7 (cid:2) 4 . 8 % , n (cid:3) 135 ) . When a similar amount of N - WASP , prepared by a baculovirus system , to that in the T . Suzuki etal . Fig . 6 . N - WASP is essential for VirG - induced actin assembly in Xenopus egg extracts . ( A ) Pre - immune IgG and anti - N - WASP antibody were used for immunodepletion of N - WASP from Xenopus egg extracts . Depleted extracts and precipitated proteins bound to the beads were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - N - WASP antibody . ( B ) Quantitation of the actin - associated bacteria in N - WASP - depleted extracts . The data shown are the means of triplicate experiments . The top bars show the standard deviation of the mean . ( C ) Tail formation in N - WASP - depleted Xenopus egg extracts . Bacteria and actin tails were visualized by adding DAPI - labeled E . coli expressing VirG ( blue ) and rhodamine - labeled G - actin ( red ) , respectively : ( a ) mock - depleted extracts , ( b ) N - WASP - depleted extracts , ( c ) N - WASP - depleted extracts plus puriﬁed N - WASP . Insets in ( c ) show that the bacteria possessed a short actin tail . Bar , 1 μ m . original extracts ( ~ 45 nM ) was added to the N - WASP - depleted extracts , although the formation of a long actin tail from the bacteria was less efﬁcient than in the original extract ( Figure 6C , panels a and c ) , the bacterial population associated with an actin clot was greatly increased ( 88 . 0 (cid:2) 1 . 1 % , n (cid:3) 233 ) ( Figure 6B and C , panel c ) . These data demonstrate that N - WASP is functionally involved in the promotion of actin assembly by Shigella . Discussion Recent studies have shown that some bacteria such as Shigella , Listeria and Rickettsia or viruses such as vaccinia virus have gained an ability to control dynamic remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton in order to achieve actin - based motility in mammalian cells in their efforts to spread within and between the cells and evade the host defense system ( Lasa and Cossart , 1996 ; Higley and Way , 1997 ; Machesky , 1997 ) . Although the precise mechanisms under - lying actin - based motility still remain to be elucidated , the systems exploited by such pathogens have provided a simpliﬁed model that mimics the actin ﬁlament dynamics 2772 involved in lamellipodial or ﬁlopodial protrusions . To gain further insights into Shigella actin - based motility , we investigated the possibility of N - WASP involvement in actin tail formation by intracellular Shigella , since N - WASP has been shown to bind actin directly , de - polymerize actin ﬁlaments and regulate cortical cyto - skeletal rearrangement , including formation of ﬁlopodia ( Miki et al . , 1996 , 1998 ) . Furthermore , although N - WASP is expressed predominantly in brain , it is also distributed in other tissues including the colon ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . In this study , we found that N - WASP can interact with VirG under in vitro and in vivo conditions and plays a critical role in eliciting Shigella actin tail formation in infected cells . This conclusion was deduced from the following results : ( i ) N - WASP accumulation at one pole of intra - cellular Shigella is always conﬁned to the VirG deposition area on the bacterial surface ; ( ii ) N - WASP is able to interact with a VirG domain ( α - domain ) , which we pre - viously showed to be required for assembly of F - actin on intracellular Shigella ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) ; ( iii ) over - expression of a dominant - negative N - WASP mutant in Cos - 7 cells infected with Shigella resulted in a decrease in actin tail formation ; and ( iv ) actin tail formation by Role of N - WASP in S . ﬂexneriactin - based motility Fig . 7 . Hypothetical model for VirG - induced actin polymerization on Shigella in infected mammalian cells . The VirG α - domain exposed on the bacterial surface binds vinculin and N - WASP . The vinculin could then interact with actin ﬁlaments and / or other signaling molecules such as VASP . The actin ﬁlaments recruited may be partially depolymerized by N - WASP and the uncapped barbed ends become exposed . At the uncapped barbed ends , actin polymerization would occur , possibly promoted by proﬁlin . In this model , we are not sure whether or not the vinculin and N - WASP are recruited by VirG at the same time and by the same polypeptide . Shigella supported by Xenopus egg extracts was shut off upon depletion of N - WASP . N - WASP contains at least six distinct domains : a PH domain ; an IQ motif ; a GBD / CRIB motif ; a proline - rich region ; a verprolin - homology region ; and an ADF / coﬁlin - homology region ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . The proline - rich region ( P - region ) , verprolin - homology region ( V - region ) and ADF / coﬁlin - homology region ( C - region ) are likely to participate directly in generation of the actin tail from the surface of intracellular Shigella . The V - region was shown to be able to bind directly to VirG under in vitro and in vivo conditions . The amino acid sequence of the P - region , which contains four Gly ( Pro ) 5 sequences , was equivalent to the putative proﬁlin - binding motifs distributed among the VASP ( Haffner et al . , 1995 ) , WASP ( Derry et al . , 1994 ) and Mena ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ) proteins , although the number of motifs varied . Since it has been indicated that those proline - rich repeats interact with proﬁlin ( Reinhard et al . , 1995 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Higley and Way , 1997 ) , and the P - region of N - WASP can interact with proﬁlin in vitro ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) , we presume that N - WASP - bound proﬁlin could mediate local actin polymerization on the surface of intracellular Shigella ( Figure 7 ) . Recent studies have indicated that activation of N - WASP by binding of Cdc42 to the GBD / CRIB motif results in exposure of the VCA actin - depolymerizing region , which is thought to be masked in unstimulated full - length N - WASP through the intramolecular interaction between the acidic residues at the C - terminal end and the basic region near the GBD / CRIB motif region ( Miki et al . , 1996 , 1998 ) . In this context , the VCA region of N - WASP may be important for the formation of actin tail from intracellular Shigella , in that the stable capped actin ﬁlaments may be partially depolymerized by N - WASP and the uncapped barbed ends become exposed to serve as sites for actin polymerization ( Zigmond , 1996 ; Welch 2773 et al . , 1997 ) . At the uncapped barbed ends , actin poly - merization would occur and it could be promoted by proﬁlin ( Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ) . It has been postulated that host cytoskeletal proteins responsible for promoting actin ﬁlament nucleation and elongation from intracellular Shigella and Listeria should be localized only at the front of the tail , and perhaps associated with the surface of the bacterium ( Sanger et al . , 1992 ; Theriot et al . , 1992 ; Goldberg and Theriot , 1995 ) . Hence , we investigated the distribution of N - WASP together with that of VASP in Shigella actin tail in infected cells and compared it with that of intracellular Listeria . Although the N - WASP clot appearing on intracellular Shigella was always immediately adjacent to the back half of the bacterium , it was never detected on intra - cellular Listeria . However , VASP has been reported to be accumulated around the area expressing ActA on intracellular L . monocytogenes , and the VASP protein was shown to bind directly to the proline - rich repeats domain in ActA ( Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ) . In contrast to Listeria , VASP was shown to be unable to bind to VirG in vitro , perhaps due to the absence of proline - rich repeats in the VirG polypeptide ( Chakraborty et al . , 1995 ) . Examination of the distribution of VASP in HeLa cells infected by S . ﬂexneri or L . monocytogenes using immunostaining con - ﬁrmed that the distribution of VASP in the actin tail generated by Shigella and Listeria was different ( T . Suzuki , unpublished data ) . In the experiment , we noted that the distribution of VASP , but not of N - WASP , was similar to the distribution of vinculin in the Shigella actin tail ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ; Laine et al . , 1997 ) . Since it has been shown that VASP is bound by the proline - rich domain in vinculin ( Brindle et al . , 1996 ; Reinhard et al . , 1996 ) , it is thus possible that vinculin and VASP could be co - localized in the actin tail in Shigella - infected cells . Based on our results together with other studies ( Chakraborty et al . , 1995 ; Zeile et al . , 1996 ) , we assume that the role of VASP in the assembly of actin in Listeria is different from that in Shigella . In this study , we have identiﬁed the VirG region involved in interacting with N - WASP , which corresponds to Arg103 – Ala433 in the VirG polypeptide . This region contains eight glycine - rich repeats ( G - region ) and is essen - tial for recruiting F - actin assembly on intracellular Shigella ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) . In our previous study , we found that the G - region of VirG had a capacity to interact with the vinculin head in vitro . Indeed , we observed that the ability of the vinculin head to bind to to GST – α 1 , which contains the G - region of VirG , was reduced upon addition of the V - region of N - WASP in a dose - dependent manner in vitro , suggesting that the domains in VirG binding to N - WASP and vinculin could overlap at least in part ( T . Suzuki , unpublished data ) . The vinculin head has been shown to bind talin , while the vinculin tail portion can bind and cross - link F - actin ( Johnson and Craig , 1994 , 1995 ) . Micro - injection studies have indicated that injection into PtK2 cells infected with S . ﬂexneri of one of the proline - rich sequences of ActA ( FEFPPPPTDE ) or that of VASP ( GPPPPPGPPPPPGPPPPP ) results in decreased Shigella movement that is restored upon co - injection of proﬁlin ( Zeile et al . , 1996 ) . Therefore , in this way , vinculin may serve as an adaptor protein for VirG on intracellular bacteria , in which the vinculin may recruit VASP - bound T . Suzuki etal . proﬁlin or another host protein that facilitates elongation from the barbed end of nascent actin ﬁlaments at the bacterial surface ( Figure 7 ) . Alternatively , the VirG - bound vinculin might serve as an actin ﬁlament recruiter ( Johnson and Craig , 1994 ; Jockusch and Ru¨diger , 1996 ) so that actin ﬁlament elongation on the Shigella surface with the aid of other VirG - bound host proteins such as N - WASP would be feasible ( Figure 7 ) . Since the afﬁnity of GST – α 1 for the vinculin head portion , as measured by its K d value ( ~ 0 . 3 μ M ) ( T . Suzuki , unpublished data ) , is similar to the afﬁnity of the vinculin tail for F - actin ( 0 . 6 – 0 . 8 μ M ) ( Johnson and Craig , 1995 ) , it is possible that the vinculin , once having interacted with VirG , could in turn be diffused into the elongated actin tail , leaving the N - WASP bound by VirG on the Shigella surface . Although we have discussed an important role for vinculin in Shigella actin - based motility , there have been two controversial reports on the requirement for vinculin . Goldberg ( 1997 ) examined the functional role of vinculin in Shigella actin - based motility in a vinculin - deﬁcient F9 cell line variant 5 . 51 , and observed that Shigella are able to form actin tails and are motile as in the F9 cells , suggesting that vinculin is not the essential factor . In contrast , Laine et al . ( 1997 ) found that vinculin proteolysis occurred in Shigella - infected cells and that the cleaved head portion of vinculin is a rate - limiting factor in Shigella motility . In the latter study , they proposed that the cleaved vinculin head bound by VirG can interact with VASP , through which proﬁlin could be recruited , thus promoting assembly of actin on the Shigella surface . In this regard , it should be noted that cleavage of vinculin in HeLa cells infected by S . ﬂexneri 2a YSH6000 or M94 ( a virG mutant of YSH6000 ) strains was not detected after 60 min of infection in our study ( T . Suzuki , unpublished data ) . At present , therefore , we are not sure how these discrepant observations were made in each study , whether they merely reﬂect the different cell types or the absence of appropriate control . In any case , we must await further studies to elucidate the exact role of VirG - bound vinculin and N - WASP in generating a Shigella actin tail . In this study , we performed the functional assay for the requirement for N - WASP for the assembly of an actin clot and tail by intracellular Shigella by using Xenopus egg extracts , and revealed that depletion of N - WASP from the Xenopus egg extracts affected the ability of VirG - expressed bacteria to recruit actin assembly . Although the puriﬁed N - WASP was sufﬁcient to support the assembly of dense actin clouds and sometimes a short actin tail ( insets in Figure 6C , panel c ) , it was still less efﬁcient than in the original extract for the formation of a long actin tail by the bacteria . This may result from the elimination of other host factor ( s ) required for facilitating the elongation of actin tail which could have been co - precipitated together with N - WASP , or it may result from the use of heterogenous N - WASP which was added to the depleted extract ( see Materials and methods ) . In conclusion , our results show that N - WASP is required to trigger both actin assembly and movement of Shigella in mammalian cells , although this was not the case in intracellular Listeria . Although the precise role of N - WASP in assembly of actin ﬁlaments on the Shigella surface still awaits further study , the results presented in this study will provide some insight into understanding the systems 2774 underlying actin - based motility of other pathogens as well as the formation of ﬁlopodia from locomoting mamma - lian cells . Materials and methods Bacterialstrains , cellcultureandmedia The S . ﬂexneri 2a YSH6000 and L . monocytogenes serotype 1 / 2a EGD strains have been described previously ( Sasakawa et al . , 1986 ; Domann et al . , 1992 ) . M94 ( S . ﬂexneri virG : : Tn 5 ) carrying pD10 - 1 , pD10 - 1 virG3 or pD10 - 1 virG4 were prepared as described previously ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) . All strains were grown routinely in brain – heart infusion ( BHI ) broth ( Difco ) at 37°C . HeLa cells were maintained in minimal essential medium ( MEM ) ( Nissui , Tokyo , Japan ) with 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) ( Nichirei , Tokyo , Japan ) , Caco - 2 cells were grown in MEM supplemented with 10 % FCS and 0 . 1 mM non - essential amino acids ( Gibco ) , and Cos - 7 cells and PtK2 cells ( ATCC CCL 56 ) were grown in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) ( Sigma ) containing 10 % FCS . Antibodies The anti - N - WASP - speciﬁc rabbit antibody has been described previously ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . The rabbit VRG - N2 and anti - GST antibodies were prepared as described by Suzuki et al . ( 1996 ) . The rat VRG - N2 was obtained by immunization of rats with the same synthesized peptides as for rabbit antibody . Infectionofculturedcellsandimmunoﬂuorescencemicroscopy All cells were grown on glass coverslips to ~ 60 % conﬂuency in the absence of antibiotics . Cells were infected with bacteria at a multiplicity of infection of 100 per cell . In the case of S . ﬂexneri , the plates were centrifuged at 700 g for 10 min after adding bacteria . After 20 – 60 min , the plates were washed extensively with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and fresh medium supplemented with gentamycin ( 100 μ g / ml ) and kanamycin ( 60 μ g / ml ) added . The infected cells were incubated for an additional 1 h ( S . ﬂexneri ) or 2 h ( L . monocytogenes ) at 37°C before ﬁxation in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min . The coverslips were incubated in 50 mM NH 4 Cl in PBS for 10 min and permeabilization carried out in 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 20 min . After blocking for 30 min in 2 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) in Tris - buffered saline ( TBS ) , the coverslips were incubated with rat VRG - N2 or anti - N - WASP antibody in TBS . CyDye - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Amersham ) were used to visualize VirG and N - WASP , and rhodamine – phalloidin ( Molecular probes ) was used to visualize F - actin . The coverslips were mounted in Vectashield ( Vector ) and observed with a confocal laser - scanning microscope ( MRC - 1024 , Bio - Rad ) . Accumulation of N - WASP or F - actin around the intracellular bacteria was deﬁned as areas where the intensity was higher than an arbitrary threshold of 80 estimated in non - infected cells by using image processing software ( LaserSharp version 2 . 0 , Bio - Rad ) . GSTfusionproteins GST – Ash / Grb2 and GST – VirG α - domain fusion protein series GST – α 1 to α 6 were constructed as described previously ( Miki et al . , 1994 ; Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) . GST fusion proteins of N - WASP were constructed as previously described ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . For preparation of GST – α 7 and α 8 , the DNA fragments encoding the amino acids shown in Figure 4A were generated by PCR and cloned into pGEX - 2T ( Pharmacia ) . These GST fusion proteins were puriﬁed using protocols supplied by the manufacturer . For use in the gel blot overlay assay , the GST fusion proteins were cleaved with 0 . 4 mg / ml human thrombin ( Sigma ) in thrombin buffer [ 100 mM NaCl , 50 mM Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 2 . 5 mM CaCl 2 , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) ] at 37°C for 1 h . The thrombin was removed by adding p - aminobenzamidine – agarose beads ( Sigma ) for 30 min at 4°C . Puriﬁed proteins were dialyzed against TBS and concentrated by ultraﬁltration using Centricon - 10 ( Amicon ) . InvitrobindingassayusingGSTfusionproteins HeLa and Cos - 7 cells grown in 100 mm dishes were lysed in ice - cold RIPA buffer [ 25 mM Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % NP - 40 , 0 . 5 % deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride ( PMSF ) , 10 μ g / ml leupeptin ] . Recombinant GST fusion proteins immobilized on glutathione – Sepharose were incubated with 1 ml of lysate overnight at 4°C . Samples were washed three times in RIPA buffer without deoxycholate and SDS and subjected to immunoblotting . Role of N - WASP in S . ﬂexneriactin - based motility For gel blot overlay assays , proteins to be analyzed were electrophoresed on an SDS – polyacrylamide gel followed by blotting onto a nitro - cellulose membrane . After incubating in blocking solution ( 2 % BSA , 0 . 05 % sodium azide in TBS ) , puriﬁed recombinant VirG - α 1 ( 10 μ g / ml ) in blocking solution was incubated with the ﬁlter . After washing with TBS – 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 , bound protein was detected with rabbit VRG - N2 antibody . TransientexpressionofN - WASPanditsmutantsinCos - 7 cells Full - length and Δ VCA constructs were prepared as described previously ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . For preparation of Δ V and Δ cof constructs , the DNA fragments encoding the amino acids shown in Figure 2A were generated by PCR and cloned into pcDL - SR α II mammalian expression vector . A total of 0 . 5 (cid:4) 10 7 cells were mixed with each puriﬁed plasmid ( 20 μ g ) and transfected by electroporation . The cells were re - plated and cultured for 48 h before bacterial infection . Transfected cells were deﬁned as cells where the total cellular intensity of N - WASP was (cid:5) 10 - fold higher than that of non - transfected cells . Microinjection Puriﬁed GST – V fusion protein was microinjected into the cytoplasm of PtK2 cells infected with bacteria . The needle concentration of proteins was 100 μ M , and ~ 10 % of the total cell volume was injected . Cells were then returned to the incubator for 15 min before ﬁxation . ActintailassayinXenopuseggextracts Meiotically arrested cytoplasmic extracts of X . laevis were prepared as described previously ( Theriot et al . , 1994 ; Rosenblatt et al . , 1997 ) . Pre - immune rabbit IgG or anti - N - WASP antibody was bound to 30 μ l of protein A - conjugated Sepharose 4B ( Sigma ) in TBS . The pellets were washed twice with 1 ml of XB ( 100 mM KCl , 50 mM sucrose , 5 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 7 ) and incubated with 30 μ l of extracts for 1 h at 4°C . The supernatant was removed by centrifugation and treated as the immunodepleted extract . Aliquots of the pellets and supernatant were analyzed by immunoblotting . Puriﬁed G - actin from rabbit skeletal muscle was covalently labeled with tetramethylrhodamine iodoacetamide ( Molecular Probes ) as an actin tail tracer . Escherichia coli MC1060 ompT : : Km carrying pD10 - 1 ( Suzuki et al . , 1996 ) was labeled with 4 (cid:6) , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) ( Sigma ) and ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS . Cells were washed with XB and resuspended in buffer containing 20 % glycerol . Bacterial motility was assayed by mixing 6 μ l of depleted extracts with 0 . 5 μ l each of DAPI - labeled bacteria and 0 . 5 mg / ml of rhodamine - labeled G - actin . Recombinant baculovirus expressing rat N - WASP was prepared by using the BAC - TO - BAC expression system ( Gibco ) ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . Cell lysates of infected Sf9 cells were applied to a HiTrap Heparin column ( Pharmacia ) . After washing , the column was eluted with a gradient of 0 – 1000 mM NaCl . Puriﬁed protein was dialyzed against XB and concentrated by ultraﬁltration . Acknowledgements We are grateful to Brigitte M . Jockusch and Ju¨rgen Wehland for valuable discussions , and to Trinad Chakraborty for providing the L . monocytogenes strain . We thank Timothy J . Mitchison for helpful advice , Eisaku Katayama for image processing and Ruairı´ A . Mac Sı´omo´in for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by ‘Research for the Future’ Program of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science , and Grant - in - aid for Scientiﬁc Research from the Japanese Ministry of Education , Science , Sports and Culture . References Allaoui , A . , Mounier , J . , Pre´vost , C . , Sansonetti , P . J . and Parsot , C . ( 1992 ) icsB : a Shigella ﬂexneri virulence gene necessary for the lysis of protrusions during intercellular spread . Mol . Microbiol . , 6 , 1605 – 1616 . Bernardini , M . L . , Mounier , J . , D’Hauteville , H . , Coquis - Rondon , M . and Sansonetti , P . J . ( 1989 ) Identiﬁcation of icsA , a plasmid locus of Shigella ﬂexneri that governs bacterial intra and intercellular spread through interaction with F - actin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 86 , 3867 – 3871 . Brindle , N . P . J . , Holt , M . R . , Davies , J . E . , Price , C . J . and Critchley , D . R . ( 1996 ) The focal - adhesion vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein 2775 ( VASP ) binds to the proline - rich domain in vinculin . Biochem . J . , 318 , 753 – 757 . Chakraborty , T . et al . ( 1995 ) A focal adhension factor directly linking intracellularly motile Listeria monocytogenes and Listeria ivanovii to the actin - based cytoskeleton of mammalian cells . EMBO J . , 14 , 1314 – 1321 . Derry , J . M . J . , Ochs , H . D . and Francke , U . ( 1994 ) Isolation of a novel gene mutated in Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome . Cell , 78 , 635 – 644 . Domann , E . , Wehland , J . , Rohde , M . , Pistor , S . , Hartl , M . , Goebel , W . , Leimeister - Wachter , M . , Wuenscher , M . and Chakraborty , T . ( 1992 ) A novel bacterial gene in Listeria monocytogenes required for host cell microﬁlament interaction with homology to the proline - rich region of vinculin . EMBO J . , 11 , 1981 – 1990 . Gertler , F . B . , Niebuhr , K . , Reinhard , M . , Wehland , J . and Soriano , P . ( 1996 ) Mena , a relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , is implicated in the control of microﬁlament dynamics . Cell , 87 , 227 – 239 . Goldberg , M . B . ( 1997 ) Shigella actin - based motility in the absence of vinculin . Cell Motil . Cytoskel , 37 , 44 – 53 . Goldberg , M . B . and Theriot , J . A . ( 1995 ) Shigella ﬂexneri surface protein IcsA is sufﬁcient to direct actin - based motility . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 92 , 6572 – 6576 . Goldberg , M . B . , Barzu , O . , Parsot , C . and Sansonetti , P . J . ( 1993 ) Unipolar localization and ATPase activity of IcsA , a Shigella ﬂexneri protein involved in intracellular movement . J . Bacteriol . , 175 , 2189 – 2196 . Haffner , C . , Jarchau , T . , Reinhard , M . , Hoppe , J . , Lohmann , S . M . and Walter , U . ( 1995 ) Molecular cloning , structural analysis and functional expression of the proline - rich focal adhesion and microﬁlament - associated protein VASP . EMBO J . , 14 , 19 – 27 . Higley , S . and Way , M . ( 1997 ) Actin and cell pathogenesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 9 , 62 – 69 . Jockusch , B . M . and Ru¨diger , M . ( 1996 ) Crosstalk between cell adhesion molecules : vinculin as a paradigm for regulation by conformation . Trends Cell Biol . , 6 , 311 – 315 . Johnson , R . P . and Craig , S . W . ( 1994 ) An intramolecular association between the head and tail domains of vinculin modulates talin binding . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 , 12611 – 12619 . Johnson , R . P . and Craig , S . W . ( 1995 ) F - actin binding site masked by the intramolecular association of vinculin head and tail domains . Nature , 373 , 261 – 264 . Kadurugamuwa , J . L . , Rohde , M . , Wehland , J . and Timmis , K . N . ( 1991 ) Intercellular spread of Shigella ﬂexneri through a monolayer mediated by membranous protrusions and associated with reorganization of the cytoskeletal protein vinculin . Infect . Immun . , 59 , 3463 – 3471 . Kocks , C . , Gouin , E . , Tabouret , M . , Berche , P . , Ohayon , H . and Cossart , P . ( 1992 ) Listeria monocytogenes - induced actin assembly requires the actA gene product , a surface protein . Cell , 68 , 521 – 531 . Kocks , C . , Marchand , J . - B . , Goulin , E . , d’Hauteville , H . , Sansonetti , P . J . , Carlier , M . - F . and Cossart , P . ( 1995 ) The unrelated surface proteins ActA of Listeria monocytogenes and IcsA of Shigella ﬂexneri are sufﬁcient to confer actin - based motility on Listeria innocua and Escherichia coli respectively . Mol . Microbiol . , 18 , 413 – 423 . Laine , R . O . , Zeile , W . , Kang , F . , Purich , D . L . and Southwick , F . S . ( 1997 ) Vinculin proteolysis unmasks an ActA homolog for actin - based Shigella motility . J . Cell Biol . , 138 , 1255 – 1264 . Lasa , I . and Cossart , P . ( 1996 ) Actin - based motility : towards a deﬁnition of the minimal requirements . Trends Cell Biol . , 6 , 109 – 114 . Lett , M . - C . , Sasakawa , C . , Okada , N . , Sakai , T . , Makino , S . , Yamada , M . , Komatsu , K . and Yoshikawa , M . ( 1989 ) virG , a plasmid - coded virulence gene of Shigella ﬂexneri : indentiﬁcation of the virG protein and determination of the complete coding sequence . J . Bacteriol . , 171 , 353 – 359 . Lowenstein , E . J . , Daly , R . J . , Batzer , A . G . , Margolis , B . , Lammers , R . , Ullrich , A . and Schlessinger , J . ( 1992 ) The SH2 and SH3 domain - containing protein Grb2 links tyrosine kinases to ras signaling . Cell , 70 , 431 – 442 . Machesky , L . M . ( 1997 ) Complex dynamics at the leading edge . Curr . Biol . , 7 , R164 – R167 . Makino , S . , Sasakawa , C . , Kamata , T . and Yoshikawa , M . ( 1986 ) A genetic determinant required for continuous reinfection of adjacent cells on a large plasmid in Shigella ﬂexneri 2a . Cell , 46 , 551 – 555 . Matuoka , K . , Shibata , M . , Yamakawa , A . and Takenawa , T . ( 1992 ) Cloning of ASH , a ubiquitous protein composed of one Src homology region ( SH ) 2 and two SH3 domains , from human and rat cDNA libraries . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 89 , 9015 – 9019 . T . Suzuki etal . Miki , H . , Miura , K . , Matuoka , K . , Nakata , T . , Hirokawa , N . , Orita , S . , Kaibuchi , K . , Takai , Y . and Takenawa , T . ( 1994 ) Association of Ash / Grb - 2 with dynamin through the Src homology 3 domain . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 , 5489 – 5492 . Miki , H . , Miura , K . and Takenawa , T . ( 1996 ) N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . , 15 , 5326 – 5335 . Miki , H . , Sasaki , T . , Takai , Y . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) Induction of ﬁlopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature , 391 , 93 – 96 . Nakata , N . , Tobe , T . , Fukuda , I . , Suzuki , T . , Komatsu , K . , Yoshikawa , M . and Sasakawa , C . ( 1993 ) The absence of surface protease , OmpT , determines the intercellular spreading ability of Shigella : the relationship between the ompT and kcpA loci . Mol . Microbiol . , 9 , 459 – 468 . Niebuhr , K . et al . ( 1997 ) A novel proline - rich motif present in ActA of Listeria monocytogenes and cytoskeletal proteins is the ligand for the EVH1 domain , a protein module present in the Ena / VASP family . EMBO J . , 16 , 5433 – 5444 . Nobes , C . D . and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell , 81 , 53 – 62 . Pantaloni , D . and Carlier , M . - F . ( 1993 ) How proﬁlin promotes actin ﬁlament assembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell , 75 , 1007 – 1014 . Pre´vost , M . - C . , Lesourd , M . , Arpin , F . , Vernel , F . , Mounier , J . , Hellio , R . and Sansonetti , P . J . ( 1992 ) Unipolar reorganization of F - actin layer at bacterial division and bundling of actin ﬁlaments by plastin correlate with movement of Shigella ﬂexneri within HeLa cells . Infect . Immun . , 60 , 4088 – 4099 . Rajakumar , K . , Jost , B . H . , Sasakawa , C . , Okada , N . , Yoshikawa , M . and Adler , B . ( 1994 ) Nucleotide sequence of the rhamnose biosynthetic operon of Shigella ﬂexneri 2a and role of lipopolysaccharide in virulence . J . Bacteriol . , 176 , 2362 – - 2373 . Reinhard , M . , Giehl , K . , Abel , K . , Haffner , C . , Jarchau , T . , Hoppe , V . , Jockusch , B . M . and Walter , U . ( 1995 ) The proline - rich focal adhesion and microﬁlament protein VASP is a ligand for proﬁlins . EMBO J . , 14 , 1583 – 1589 . Reinhard , M . , Ru¨diger , M . , Jockusch , B . M . and Walter , U . ( 1996 ) VASP interaction with vinculin : a recurring theme of interactions with proline - rich motifs . FEBS Lett . , 399 , 103 – 107 . Rosenblatt , J . , Agnew , B . J . , Abe , H . , Bamburg , J . R . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin ( XAC ) is responsible for the turnover of actin ﬁlaments in Listeria monocytogenes tails . J . Cell Biol . , 136 , 1323 – 1332 . Sandlin , R . C . , Lampel , K . A . , Keasler , S . P . , Goldberg , M . B . , Stolzer , A . L . and Maurelli , A . T . ( 1995 ) Avirulence of rough mutants of Shigella ﬂexneri : requirement of O antigen for correct unipolar localization of IcsA in the bacterial outer membrane . Infect . Immun . , 63 , 229 – 237 . Sanger , J . M . , Sanger , J . W . and Southwick , F . S . ( 1992 ) Host cell actin assembly is necessary and likely to provide the propulsive force for intracellular movement of Listeria monocytogenes . Infect . Immun . , 60 , 3609 – 3619 . Sasakawa , C . , Kamata , K . , Sakai , T . , Murayama , Y . , Makino , S . and Yoshikawa , M . ( 1986 ) Molecular alteration of the 140 - megadalton plasmid associated with loss of virulence and congo red binding activity in Shigella ﬂexneri . Infect . Immun . , 51 , 470 – 475 . Suzuki , T . , Murai , T . , Fukuda , I . , Tobe , T . , Yoshikawa , M . and Sasakawa , C . ( 1994 ) Identiﬁcation and characterization of a chromosomal virulence gene , vacJ , required for intercellular spreading of Shigella ﬂexneri . Mol . Microbiol . , 11 , 31 – 41 . Suzuki , T . , Lett , M . - C . and Sasakawa , C . ( 1995 ) Extracellular transport of VirG protein in Shigella . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 30874 – 30880 . Suzuki , T . , Saga , S . and Sasakawa , C . ( 1996 ) Functional analysis of Shigella VirG domains essential for interaction with vinculin and actin - based motility . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 21878 – 21885 . Theriot , J . A . , Mitchison , T . J . , Tilney , L . G . and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1992 ) The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature , 357 , 257 – 260 . Theriot , J . A . , Rosenblatt , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , Goldschmidt - Clermont , P . J . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1994 ) Involvement of proﬁlin in the actin - based motility of L . monocytogenes in cells and in cell - free extracts . Cell , 76 , 505 – 517 . Welch , M . D . , Mallavarapu , A . , Rosenblatt , J . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) Actin dynamics in vivo . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 9 , 54 – 61 . 2776 Zeile , W . L . , Purich , D . L . and Southwich , F . S . ( 1996 ) Recognition of two classes of oligoproline sequences in proﬁlin - mediated acceleration of actin - based Shigella motility . J . Cell Biol . , 133 , 49 – 59 . Zigmond , S . H . ( 1996 ) Signal transduction and actin ﬁlament organization . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 8 , 66 – 73 . Received December 15 , 1997 ; revised March 9 , 1998 ; accepted March 20 , 1998