A Security Aware Lighting Control System for Public Open Spaces : An IoT Powered Approach Mohamed Fazil Mohamed Firdhous * Dept . of Information Technology University of Moratuwa Moratuwa , Sri Lanka firdhous @ uom . lk ORCID : 0000 - 0002 - 3807 - 2435 Walid Elbreiki Dept . of Computer Science College of Computer Technology Benghazi , Libya elbreiki @ cctben . edu . ly ORCID : 0009 - 0001 - 4331 - 3109 Ibrahim Abdullahi Dept . of Computer Science Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida University Lapai , Niger State , Nigeria ibrojay01 @ ibbu . edu . ng ORCID : 0000 - 0002 - 3467 - 1203 Wesam Briki Dept . of Computer Science Higher Institute of Engineering Technologies Benghazi , Libya wesam brike @ cten . edu . ly ORCID : 0009 - 0002 - 6628 - 4993 Shivaleela Arlimatti Dept . of Computer Science and Engineering Dr . D Y Patil Prathisthan’s College of Engineering Salokhenagar , Kolhapur , Maharashtra , India sarlimatti @ gmail . com ORCID : 0000 - 0002 - 8177 - 6569 Abstract —Cities world over are becoming more congested as people moving into them for better living conditions . Such fast migration towards cities puts heavy demands on city resources . One of the resources that suffers an impact almost immediately is the open spaces in cities . Open spaces are the public spaces that are accessed by people freely for different purposes . Open spaces help citizens maintain a healthy life by relieving stresses . The open spaces visited by people at night must provide adequate lighting for them to engage in their activities . It is seen that many open spaces waste energy as the lights have been on throughout the nights irrespective of usage of the space . In this paper , the authors propose a security aware lighting control system that helps minimize the energy waste without compromising on security . A prototype implementation was tested and the results were positive promising real field implementations . Index Terms —cities , electricity usage , intelligent ICT systems , public open spaces , security lighting I . I NTRODUCTION During the last few decades , there has been a tremen - dous increase in urbanization coupled with large migration of rural population towards cities [ 1 ] . The main reason for such migration has been identified as the availability of better facilities and opportunities for development in urban centers compared to rural areas . Traditionally , rural population living in far away from urban centers face several challenges in their life compared to their urban counterparts . The rural population suffers from poverty , high unemployment rates , lack of access to proper infrastructure and social services etc [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] . In some areas , the poverty is so widespread that the majority of the population lives on less than USD 2 . 15 per person per a day below the absolute poverty level set by the World Bank [ 4 ] . The growth of urban population has been phenomenal in the last two centuries all over the world . In 1800 only 3 percent * corresponding author of the world’s population lived in urban areas which grew to almost 14 percent in 1900 then to 30 percent in 1950 [ 1 ] . This unprecedented growth of urban population has accelerated in the recent decades reaching 50 percent in 2008 and expected to grow to become 70 percent by 2050 [ 1 ] . Parallel to this , cities have also grown in numbers as well as in size . In 1900 only 12 cities all over the world had over 1 million inhabitants which grew to 83 by 1950 and in the next 50 years to more than 400 cities and out of this , 19 cities had more than 10 million population , which are commonly known as megacities or megalopolises in the common parlance [ 5 ] . Such unplanned migration creates many problems for those who are already living there as well as the newly arrived ones while placing heavy demands on the limited resources available in the urban areas [ 6 ] – [ 8 ] . In order to overcome the existing problems and improving the quality of life of their citizens , many countries have launched several projects under the broad banner of smart city initiatives [ 9 ] . The main objective of these initiatives is leveraging the recent developments of Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) for improving the existing services and developing new services for providing better quality of life for the citizens through managing the resources efficiently and delivering these services efficiently and effectively . One of the most important resources that suffers an im - mediate impact from the inward migrations towards cities is the urban open space . The urban open spaces are the places within and near the cities that have been developed with an objective of providing the people a place to relax and enjoy relieving their stresses [ 10 ] . Some open spaces are used by people only during the day time while others have been used both during daytime as well as in the nights up to a certain time [ 10 ] . When the open spaces are used by the people , 2023 I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n C o m pu t a t i o n a l I n t e lli g e n c e , N e t w o r k s a nd S e c u r i t y ( I CC I N S ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 1379 - 6 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / I CC I N S 58907 . 2023 . 10450098 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . they have to be well lit and be secure for them to engage in their social activities without hindrance . Hence , these open spaces are provided with artificial lighting so that people can patronize these places without any problem . But , the downside of these lighting arrangements is that they illuminate places where there are hardly anybody wasting resources . Also , it is very common to see that these lights are still on even after people have totally vacated the places . Hence , there is a need for an intelligent solution that can effectively manage the use of lighting without compromising the security of the patrons . In this paper , the authors present a security aware lighting control system for public open spaces by leveraging the advances in the field of ICT . The proposed system uses advanced ICT to detect the presence of people and control the amount of light used while maintaining the light at the minimum levels saving electricity . The rest of this paper is organized as follows : Section II presents a review of background discussing the importance of public open spaces in cities , their features and possible issues . Further , Section II establishes the main issue of safety and security in public open spaces while presenting the proposed solution . Section III presents related work with a critical eval - uation focusing on their strengths and weaknesses establishing the need for the work proposed in this paper . Section IV and V present the design of the proposed security aware lighting control system describing the functions of each of the main components and the prototype implementation along with the tests carried out and a discussion on the results . Finally Section VI concludes the paper along with suggestion for future work . II . B ACKGROUND Public open spaces such as parks , beaches , lakes ( or banks of them ) and public squares or plazas are important and integral parts of any city irrespective of its size or population [ 11 ] . Also the importance of open spaces in city development has been well researched and reported in literature [ 12 ] . The open spaces within and near cities increase livability especially in term of quality of living while enhancing the property values in the surrounding areas . The mental and physical health benefits gained by visiting parks and other open spaces have been well investigated and proved to be acting as a preventative measure that impacts positively on health of people [ 13 ] . Researchers have equated the open green spaces to be the lungs of a city as they help reduce the air pollution in cities by generating more oxygen while reducing carbon dioxide [ 14 ] . Also , green spaces enhance the water retention capacity of an area reducing the water - related environmental problems . The benefits provided by urban open spaces can be broken into five basic forms as given below [ 13 ] . - Functional benefits : provides opportunities for citi - zens to engage in human activities . - Environmental benefits : helps keep an environmental balance by reducing pollution . - Social benefits : create opportunities for people to interact with each other . - Aesthetic benefits : enhances the beauty of a city . - Economic benefits : provides a place for people to engage in limited economic activities , increase the property values in surrounding areas . The services provided by public spaces can be more elab - orated as they provide passage to move from one place to another , a place for meeting friends and acquaintances , a place for engaging in recreational activities , a space for relaxing and a place engaging in limited economic activities for some [ 15 ] . In order to provide these services , the public spaces are expected to meet certain requirements and have some features including the ability for users to roam freely , presence of basic facilities including clean drinkable water , clean toilet facilities , well maintained space and equipment , properly lit , secure and free from anti - social behavior and sufficient space to accommodate all the expected users [ 16 ] . Despite the benefits of open spaces , they also have certain negative effects if not managed properly . The negative side of the urban open spaces include that it may provide spaces for squatters to move in , a place for engaging in anti - social behavior for some people and may become a place of crime [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] . When people feel that a certain open space is not safer for them to patronize , they abandon those spaces defeating the main objective of creating such spaces . Hence , it is necessary to improve the safety and security of open spaces for making the people to use them effectively [ 16 ] . Researchers have also shown that there is a relationship between the lighting conditions in an open area and the security [ 18 ] . Researchers have coined the term ”bad lighting” to categorize light conditions or levels that help miscreants to engage in their nefarious activities creating problems to legiti - mate users of these spaces as well as to the spaces themselves [ 19 ] . Bad lighting may be the result of inappropriate design , implementation , improper maintenance or no maintenance at all of the system . Bad lighting may also have a negative impact on the environment affecting the livelihood of the flora and fauna in the area as well as the people patronizing and living in those areas . The recommendations for improving the safety and security of people using public open spaces include the provision of adequate lighting facility within the open spaces , employing security guards for routine patrolling of the property , and the provision for safe routes for cycling and walking [ 16 ] , [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] . From the above recommendations , it can be seen that proper lighting along with constant monitoring for illegal activities play an important role in making public open spaces for safer and secure . But , continuous monitoring using security personnel is very expensive or impractical as the size of the open space becomes larger in size . On the other hand , having lights on at the highest possible luminance throughout the night wastes energy . Hence , it is necessary to find a way to find a method that will both reduce the cost of surveillance , waste of energy without compromising the safety and security provided to people using public open spaces . In this paper , the authors propose a technique using advanced ICT to handle this issue effectively using cameras for continuously monitoring the spaces and controlling the lights . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . III . R ELATED W ORK Many of the work published in the literature in the area of energy saving by controlling light mainly deals with public in - door environments [ 22 ] – [ 27 ] . This section reviews the articles that were published on controlling light in open public spaces with special emphasis on energy management . Adriansyah et al in [ 28 ] have presented a street light controlling system using Internet of Things . Though it is a good attempt at using modern technology for managing light in a public space , the main objective of the proposed work is reducing maintenance effort rather than energy management . Hence , this work falls short of improving energy efficiency in public spaces . In [ 29 ] , Huang and Zhang have presented an intelligent lighting control in landscape public space based on cloud computing and data mining that is capable of remote monitoring controlling . This article starts with comparing the Chinese landscaped public spaces with that of other countries and then continues to discuss how the presentation of Chinese landscaped open spaces can be improved through the control of lighting . Hence , the objective of the article is improvement of presentation rather than conserving energy or reducing light pollution in public open spaces . Skandali and Lambiri in their article title ”Optimization of Urban Street Lighting Conditions Focusing On Energy Saving , Safety and Users’ Needs” focus on the multiple aspects of street lighting from the users’ point of view [ 20 ] , [ 30 ] – [ 32 ] . This article discusses only the need for an optimized solution meeting the needs of the users and reducing the energy consumed with the help of published literature rather than putting forward a solution powered by modern technologies supported by a prototype implementation . From the above discussion , it can be seen that a strong proposal for the implementation of an intelligent lighting control system powered by modern technologies has not been done yet . This is one of the areas that needs immediate attention of urban planners and technologies if we are to achieve sustainable urban development that meets the needs of the population while conserving natural resources . This paper is the first attempt by the authors in that direction . IV . D ESIGN OF THE P ROPOSED S ECURITY A WARE L IGHTING C ONTROL S YSTEM Fig . 1 shows the high level architecture of the proposed se - curity aware lighting control system with its main components . The main components of the system include the surveillance cameras , the object detection module , communication module , ambient light detection unit , the sensor panel , light control unit and the controllable lights . The sensor panel is a flexible arrangement that can include different types of sensors irre - spective of its nature of sensing method or construction for detecting the ambient light conditions . The cameras and the lights are Internet of Things ( IoT ) enabled devices that can be individually managed , controlled and monitored through the Internet . The IoT powered devices in the system make the whole system resilient to failures as the devices themselves are intelligent . The operation of this system is as follows . When the ambient light falls below a certain preset value , the ambient light detection unit creates a trigger signal to the light control unit . On receiving the trigger signal , the light control unit will switch the controllable lights and will maintain them at the lowest required power level . Meanwhile the surveillance cameras continue to monitor the area under control for any objects moving in . When the object detection unit detects any movement of objects , it simply assumes that it is human activity and sends a positive signal to the light control unit to increase the power of the light . The increase of the power is carried out in few steps depending on the number of people in the given area . Similarly , when people vacate the area , the light power will be slowly brought down to the lowest levels saving energy . When the ambient light detection unit receives sufficient ambient light indicating daytime , it will send another trigger signal to the light control unit to switch the lights off . During the daytime , activity detection by the object detection unit will not trigger the lights on as the trigger signal from the ambient light detection unit overrides all the other trigger signals . On the other hand , the cameras and the object detection units are designed to work continuously irrespective of the time of the day . The images captured by the cameras will be continuously transmitted to the control center through the public data network as shown in Fig . 1 . The continuous transmission of images ensures that any anti - social activity happening at the open space is detected immediately and the appropriate action is taken . The control center can be designed in such a manner that it receives signals from many open spaces in the city ensuring the security of the entire city at the minimal cost . The main design principle of the object detection unit is that it works is two different modes simultaneously . During the object detection mode for controlling the lights , it employs an algorithm that works fast generating crude results as to if an object is present within the area of interest . The algorithm is not capable of identifying specific persons or even whether they are males , females or children or what they are doing . The algorithm can crudely identify the number of people in the area as it is necessary for controlling lights . In the other mode , the high resolution images received from the cameras are coded in such a manner that they can be transmitted to the central control efficiently . At the central control , these images will be stored for future use , if necessary and monitored by officers for detecting any anti - social activities taking place . V . P ROTOTYPE I MPLEMENTATION , E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION For testing purposes , a laboratory scale prototype was implemented with limited capabilities . Fig . 2 ( a ) shows the prototype implementation of the light control system and Fig . 2 ( b ) shows the temporary light pole mounted with flash lights , the cameras and the ambient light detection sensors . The communication module was not implemented as all the processing were carried out within the same laboratory . The Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Fig . 1 . High level architecture of the proposed system Fig . 2 . Prototype implementation of the proposed system video captured by the camera was stored locally on a personal computer with a timestamp for later analysis . This will no way affect the objective of the overall project as only the captured video was to be stored remotely and the processing Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . to be carried out remotely is a complete manual process to be carried out by human operators . For the purpose of testing , the pole was mounted just outside the laboratory while keeping the control units inside on the breadboard itself . The light pole was installed next to a local road inside the university in a location that was less illuminated by the street lighting . The cameras were focused onto this road , so that it can capture the movement of pedestrians on this road that can be used to control the lights on the pole . Instead of measuring the strength of the light directly , the power drawn by the lights was measured as they both have a direct relationship with each other . Data collection was carried out continuously for several days and analyzed for ensuring the internal consistency of the data . Only a set of representative data collected over a single 24 - hour period has been displayed in Fig . 3 . Fig . 3 . Power drawn by the lights over a period of 24 hours against ambient light intensity In order to minimize fluctuations of the lights , a timer was used to maintain the light intensity level . Once an object is detected , the light intensity level is upped full power and this intensity will be maintained for at least the next 30 minutes , even if the object has moved away from the place during this time . Every time an object is detected , the timer is reset to start from the beginning . Fig . 3 shows the power drawn by the lights over a period of 24 hours starting from 9AM to next day 9AM . On the same figure , the ambient sunlight intensity is drawn using a secondary axis to make the results more clear and realistic . From Fig . 3 , it can be clearly seen that the lights get activated when the ambient light levels fall below a preset threshold . When the light comes up , it is at a low level so as to just illuminate the area . The light goes to a higher level when an object ( generally moving in ) is detected within the area . This was verified using the camera images at corresponding time slots . The light level again goes down saving energy when the object is no longer to be seen within the area . Thus , the above results prove that the lights in an open space can be controlled saving energy while not compromising the security by using advanced ICT . Calculation of Energy Saving with the Light Control System With the light control : Amount of energy = power * time consumed = 10 ∗ 13 + ( 40 − 10 ) ∗ 4 + ( 40 − 10 ) ∗ 1 = 130 + 120 + 30 = 280 Watt Hours Without the light control : Amount of energy = 40 ∗ 13 consumed = 520 Watt Hours Energy savings Energy saving with light control = 520 – 280 = 240 Watt Hours Percentage savings = 240 520 ∗ 100 = 46 . 15 % The calculation on the amount of energy saved above clearly shows that the energy saving potential of the intelligent lighting control system is very high . It is also understood that the amount of energy saving will vary depending on the place as well as the amount of usage . But , it is a common understanding that many of the public open spaces are totally deserted after certain time in the nights . Hence , every public open space has the potential of saving energy irrespective of the nature and location , if they all are fitted with intelligent lighting controls coupled with intelligent security systems . VI . C ONCLUSIONS In this paper , the authors presented a security aware light control system for public open spaces using advanced ICT . The simple tests and the calculations carried out using a prototype clearly show the potential of the proposed system in saving energy . The other advantage of the system is , it equally considers the security of the users using the public spaces through remote monitoring using IoT enabled cameras . The cameras play dual roles in the system as to detecting objects within the open space and transmitting this information to a central control for further analysis to detect any anti - social activity taking place . When any anti - social activity takes place in the open space , the officials can be alerted immediately . The other important aspect of the proposed design is the use of the open design philosophy enabling it to be adapted , modified or extended to cover other uses with relative ease . During the testing period , data was collected at 30 minute intervals , this can be modified with minor changes to the control software depending on the requirements . But , the system was continuously monitoring the space and controlling the lights . As future work , it is proposed improve the system using machine learning and artificial intelligence and test the system in the real field under different conditions . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] R . Jedwab and D . Vollrath , “The urban mortality transition and poor - country urbanization , ” American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics , vol . 11 , pp . 223 – 275 , 2019 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / mac . 20170189 . [ 2 ] N . Sakalasooriya , “Regional development disparities in Sri Lanka , ” Open Journal of Social Sciences , vol . 9 , pp . 62 – 91 , 2021 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4236 / jss . 2021 . 97006 . [ 3 ] O . N . O . Nwankwo , C . I . Ugwu , G . I . Nwankwo , M . A . Akpoke , C . Anyigor , U . Obi - Nwankwo , S . Andrew Jr , K . Nwogu , and N . Spicer , “A qualitative inquiry of rural - urban inequalities in the distribution and retention of healthcare workers in southern Nigeria , ” PLoSONE , vol . 17 , no . 3 , pp . 1 – 17 , 2022 . [ 4 ] G . E . Halkos and P . - S . C . Aslanidis , “Causes and measures of poverty , inequality , and social exclusion : A review , ” Economies , vol . 11 , no . 4 , pp . 1 – 25 , 2023 . [ 5 ] C . Ding , X . He , and Y . Zhu , “Megacity growth , city system and urban strategy , ” Chinese Journal of Urban and Environmental Studies , vol . 10 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 19 , 2022 . [ 6 ] M . A . Kuddus , E . Tynan , and E . McBryde , “Urbanization : A problem for the rich and the poor ? ” Public Health Reviews , vol . 41 , pp . 1 – 4 , 2020 . [ 7 ] R . S . Kookana , P . Drechsel , P . Jamwal , and J . Vanderzalm , “Urbanisation and emerging economies : Issues and potential solutions for water and food security , ” Science of the Total Environment , vol . 732 , pp . 1 – 14 , 2020 . [ 8 ] A . Zucaro , G . Maselli , and S . Ulgiati , “Insights in urban resource management : A comprehensive understanding of unexplored patterns , ” Frontiers in Sustainable Cities , vol . 3 , pp . 1 – 16 , 2021 . [ 9 ] S . E . Bibri and J . Krogstie , “The emerging data – driven smart city and its innovative applied solutions for sustainability : The cases of London and Barcelona , ” Energy Informatics , vol . 3 , pp . 1 – 42 , 2020 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s42162 - 020 - 00108 - 6 . [ 10 ] A . Addas and A . Maghrabi , “A proposed planning concept for public open space provision in Saudi Arabia : A study of three Saudi cities , ” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , vol . 17 , no . 16 , pp . 1 – 33 , 2020 . [ 11 ] C . Garau and A . Annunziata , “Public open spaces : Connecting people , squares and streets by measuring the usability through the Villanova district in Cagliari , Italy , ” Transportation Research Procedia , vol . 60 , pp . 314 – 321 , 2022 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . trpro . 2021 . 12 . 041 . [ 12 ] H . M . Azhar , D . Hardilla , and P . Kurniawan , “Public open space as unifying aspect of society : San Francisco City case , ” IOP Conference Series : Earth and Environmental Science , vol . 780 , pp . 1 – 6 , 2021 , doi : http : / / www . doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 780 / 1 / 012027 . [ 13 ] D . Lin , Y . Sun , Y . Yang , Y . Han , and C . Xu , “Urban park use and self - reported physical , mental , and social health during the COVID - 19 pandemic : An on - site survey in Beijing , China , ” Urban Forestry & Urban Greening , vol . 79 , pp . 1 – 9 , 2023 . [ 14 ] R . El Sayed , “Design against vandalism as a new approach to landscape maintenance in urban open spaces , ” Journal of Engineering Sciences , vol . 47 , pp . 218 – 235 , 2019 . [ 15 ] J . Moravcova , J . Pecenka , D . Pekna , V . Moravcova , and N . Novakova , Sustainability in Urban Planning and Design . IntechOpen , 2020 , ch . The role of public spaces in small municipality , pp . 1 – 21 . [ 16 ] F . Bahriny and S . Bell , “Patterns of urban park use and their relationship to factors of quality : A case study of Tehran , Iran , ” Sustainability , vol . 12 , pp . 1 – 33 , 2020 . [ 17 ] H . Kamalipour , “Improvising places : The fluidity of space in informal settlements , ” Sustainability , vol . 12 , pp . 1 – 14 , 2020 . [ 18 ] J . Kaplan and A . Chalfin , “Ambient lighting , use of outdoor spaces and perceptions of public safety : Evidence from a sur - vey experiment , ” Security Journal , vol . 35 , p . 694 – 724 , 2022 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41284 - 021 - 00296 - 0 . [ 19 ] T . Wang , N . Kaida , and K . Kaida , “Effects of outdoor artificial light at night on human health and behavior : A literature review , ” Environmental Pollution , vol . 323 , 2023 . [ 20 ] A . Svechkina , T . Trop , and B . A . Portnov , “How much lighting is required to feel safe when walking through the streets at night ? ” Sustainability , vol . 12 , pp . 1 – 19 , 2020 . [ 21 ] Y . Liu , C . Yu , K . Wang , M . - P . Kwan , and L . A . Tse , “Linking artificial light at night with human health via a multi - component framework : A systematic evidence map , ” Environments , vol . 10 , no . 3 , pp . 1 – 24 , 2023 . [ 22 ] C . de Bakker , M . Aries , H . Kort , and A . Rosemann , “Occupancy - based lighting control in open - plan office spaces : A state - of - the - art review , ” Building and Environment , vol . 112 , pp . 308 – 321 , 2017 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . buildenv . 2016 . 11 . 042 . [ 23 ] C . T . Lee , L . B . Chen , H . M . Chu , and C . J . Hsieh , “Design and implementation of a leader - follower smart office lighting control system based on IoT technology , ” IEEE Access , vol . 10 , pp . 28066 – 28079 , 2022 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2022 . 3158494 . [ 24 ] Y . Jin , D . Yan , and H . Sun , “Lighting system control in office building using occupancy prediction based on historical occupied ratio , ” IOP Conf . Series : Earth and Environmental Science , vol . 238 , pp . 1 – 8 , 2019 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1755 - 1315 / 238 / 1 / 012009 . [ 25 ] Y . Cho and A . Choi , “Proposal of smart lighting control scenar - ios for public offices for energy saving - focused on local gov - ernment offices , ” Journal of the Korean Institute of Illuminating and Electrical Installation Engineers , vol . 35 , pp . 1 – 11 , 2021 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5207 / jieie . 2021 . 35 . 12 . 001 . [ 26 ] S . Afzali , S . Mosharafian , M . W . van Iersel , and J . M . Velni , “Devel - opment and implementation of an IoT - enabled optimal and predictive lighting control strategy in greenhouses , ” Plants , vol . 10 , pp . 1 – 23 , 2021 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / plants10122652 . [ 27 ] W . Kim , S . Lee , Y . Chang , T . Lee , I . Hwang , and J . Song , “Hive - mind : Social control - and - use of iot towards democratization of public spaces , ” in 19th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems , Applications , and Services , Wisconsin , USA , 2021 , p . 467 – 482 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3458864 . 3466626 . [ 28 ] A . Adriansyah , A . W . Dani , and G . I . Nugraha , “Automation control and monitoring of public street lighting system based on Internet of Things , ” in International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Computer Science ( ICECOS ) , Palembang , Indonesia , 2017 , pp . 231 – 236 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICECOS . 2017 . 8167140 . [ 29 ] Y . Huang and Y . Zhang , “Research on digital application of lighting design in public space based on cloud computing and data mining , ” Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing , vol . 2021 , pp . 1 – 12 , 2021 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2021 / 8802458 . [ 30 ] C . Skandali and Y . S . Lambiri , “Optimization of urban street lighting conditions focusing on energy saving , safety and users’ needs , ” Jour - nal of Contemporary Urban Affairs , vol . 2 , p . 112 – 121 , 2018 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 25034 / ijcua . 2018 . 4726 . [ 31 ] T . Sciezor , “Effect of street lighting on the urban and rural night - time radiance and the brightness of the night sky , ” Remote Sensing , vol . 13 , no . 9 , pp . 1 – 41 , 2021 . [ 32 ] M . Liu , B . Zhang , T . Luo , Y . Liu , B . A . Portnov , T . Trop , W . Jiao , H . Liu , Y . Li , and Q . Liu , “Evaluating street lighting quality in residential areas by combining remote sensing tools and a survey on pedestrians’ perceptions of safety and visual comfort , ” Remote Sensing , vol . 14 , no . 4 , pp . 1 – 25 , 2022 . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .