Review of General Psychology 2001 . Vol . 5 . No . 2 , 100 - 122 Copyright 2001 by the Educational Publishing Foundation 1089 - 2680 / 0I / $ 5 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / / I089 - 2680 . 5 . 2 . 100 The Psychology of Life Stories Dan P . McAdams Northwestern University Recent years have witnessed an upsurge of interest among theorists and researchers in autobiographical recollections , life stories , and narrative approaches to understanding human behavior and experience . An important development in this context is D . P . McAdams ' s life story model of identity ( 1985 , 1993 , 1996 ) , which asserts that people living in modern societies provide their lives with unity and purpose by constructing internalized and evolving narratives of the self . The idea that identity is a life story resonates with a number of important themes in developmental , cognitive , personality , and cultural psychology . This article reviews and integrates recent theory and research on life stories as manifested in investigations of self - understanding , autobiographical memory , personality structure and change , and the complex relations between individ - ual lives and cultural modernity . Once upon a time , psychologists viewed life stories as little different from fairy tales : charm - ing , even enchanting on occasion , but funda - mentally children ' s play , of little scientific value for understanding human behavior . Psy - choanalysts might ponder the dream stories their clients told ( Freud , 1900 / 1953 ) and a few maverick researchers might ask a participant to tell a story in response to a picture cue now and again ( H . A . Murray , 1938 ) , but serious scien - tists did not concern themselves with fantasies , stones , and myths . The notion of a " life story " might conjure up associations with case studies ( e . g . , Allport , 1965 ) , psychobiographies ( Erik - son , 1958 ) , and other highly suspect ventures in idiographic speculation . Although there might be nothing wrong , in principle , with a scientist ' s trying to understand the story of an entire hu - man life ( Runyan , 1982 ; R . White , 1952 ) , what should a scientist do next once he or she under - stood one ? Everybody knows that the idiosyn - cratic vagaries of the single case cannot be generalized to a population ( Holt , 1962 ) . In sum , stories are too soft and human lives too big , as well as too singular . One should not be surprised , therefore , if life stories attracted only the most romantic of psychological investigators . Correspondence concerning this article should be ad - dressed to Dan P . McAdams , Foley Center for the Study of Lives . Northwestern University . 2115 North Campus Drive , Evanston . Illinois 60208 . Electronic mail may be sent to dmca @ noithwestem . edu . But things began to change in the 1980s . After a series of searching critiques ( e . g . , Carl - son , 1971 ; Mischel , 1968 ) , the field of person - ality psychology began to look beyond the vi - cissitudes of the single , narrowly defined trait to explore broader issues of central concern for human lives . This shift was evidenced in re - search on the structural organization of all traits ( e . g . , McCrae & Costa , 1990 ) , personalized mo - tivations and intrinsic goals ( e . g . , Cantor & Zir - kel , 1990 ; Emmons , 1986 ) , social - cognitive contingencies and dynamics of human behavior ( e . g . , Mischel & Shoda , 1995 ) , and the role of autobiography and life narrative in understand - ing lives in general ( e . g . , McAdams & Ochberg , 1988 ; Singer & Salovey , 1993 ) and the single case in particular ( e . g . , McAdams & West , 1997 ; Nasby & Read , 1997 ) . As personality psychologists began to turn their attention to people ' s lives , they found notions such as " story " and " narrative " to be especially useful in conveying the coherence and the meaning of lives . Tomkins ( 1979 ) , McAdams ( 1985 ) , and Hermans and Kempen ( 1993 ) articulated new narrative theories of personality , adapting con - cepts from dramaturgical and literary discourses to the psychology of persons . At the same time , scientists in developmental ( McCabe & Peterson , 1991 ) , social ( S . L . Mur - ray & Holmes , 1994 ) , cognitive ( Schank & Abelson , 1995 ) , clinical ( Howard , 1991 ) , coun - seling ( Polkinghorne , 1988 ) , and industrial - or - ganizational ( Pondy , Morgan , Frost , & Dan - dridge , 1983 ) psychology became increasingly 100 SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 101 interested in story concepts and narrative meth - odologies . Psychotherapists began using narra - tive therapies ( M . White & Epston , 1990 ) , es - pecially in clinical work with families . Eventu - ally , the psychological lexicon became filled with such terms as life scripts , self - narratives , story schemas , story grammars , personal myths , personal event memories , self - defining memo - ries , nuclear scenes , gendered narratives , nar - rative coherence , narrative complexity , and the like . Today , psychologists investigate stories of individual lives ( MeAdams , 1999 ) , stories of intimate relationships ( Sternberg , 1998 ) , and family stories ( Fiese et al . , 1999 ) , and they are newly sensitized to the power of societal myths and cultural narratives in shaping human behav - ior in social contexts ( Gregg , 1991 ) . The pro - liferation of methods and concepts related to stories and narratives suggests that Sarbin ( 1986 ) may have been correct when he pre - dicted that the general idea of narrative could provide a new root metaphor for the field of psychology as a whole . In his life story model of identity , McAdams ( 1985 , 1993 , 1996 ) has argued that identity it - self takes the form of a story , complete with setting , scenes , character , plot , and theme . In late adolescence and young adulthood , people living in modern societies begin to reconstruct the personal past , perceive the present , and an - ticipate the future in terms of an internalized and evolving self - story , an integrative narrative of self that provides modern life with some modicum of psychosocial unity and purpose . Life stories are based on biographical facts , but they go considerably beyond the facts as people selectively appropriate aspects of their experi - ence and imaginatively construe both past and future to construct stories that make sense to them and to their audiences , that vivify and integrate life and make it more or less mean - ingful . Life stories are psychosocial construc - tions , coauthored by the person himself or her - self and the cultural context within which that person ' s life is embedded and given meaning . As such , individual life stories reflect cultural values and norms , including assumptions about gender , race , and class . Life stories are intelli - gible within a particular cultural frame , and yet they also differentiate one person from the next . People differ from each other with respect to their self - defining life stories in ways that are not unlike how they differ from each other on more conventional psychological characteristics such as traits , motives , intelligence , and so on . For example , life stories may be compared and contrasted with respect to the salience of such thematic lines as agency versus communion ( Bakan , 1966 ; Singer , 1997 ) and redemption versus contamination ( Maruna , 1997 , 2001 ; McAdams & Bowman , 2001 ) . Life stories dif - fer from each other with respect to their struc - tural complexity ( McAdams , 1985 ; Woike , Gersekovich , Piorkowski , & Polo , 1999 ) and their coherence and intelligibility ( Baerger & McAdams , 1999 ) . A person ' s evolving and dy - namic life story is a key component of what constitutes the individuality of that particular person , situated in a particular family and among particular friends and acquaintances ( Thorne , 2000 ) and living in a particular society at a particular historical moment ( Gregg , 1991 ) . The purpose of this article is to more fully articulate the concepts and implications of the life story model of identity in the contexts of contemporary research and theory in develop - mental , cognitive , personality , and cultural psy - chology . The idea that identity is an internalized life story resonates with a number of important themes in these subdisciplines of psychology and dovetails in synergistic ways with research on the development of self - understanding , au - tobiographical memory , personality structure and change , and the complex relations between individual lives and cultural modernity . No longer a fanciful notion , the psychology of life stories may be well situated today to play an important integrative role in the scientific study of human behavior and experience . Developmental Psychology : From Self to Identity What Is Identity ? The point of departure for McAdams ' s ( 1985 ) life story model is Erikson ' s ( 1963 ) de - velopmental concept of ego identity . It is in late adolescence and young adulthood ( the fifth of eight stages in his developmental scheme ) , Erikson maintained , that people first confront the problem of identity versus role confusion . It is at this time in the human life course that people first explore ideological and occupa - tional options available in society and experi - ment with a wide range of social roles , with the 102 McADAMS aim of eventually consolidating their beliefs and values into a personal ideology and making provisional commitments to life plans and projects that promise to situate them meaning - fully into new societal niches ( Marcia , 1980 ) . It is during this developmental period that people first seek to integrate their disparate roles , tal - ents , proclivities , and social involvements into a patterned configuration of thought and activity that provides life with some semblance of psy - chosocial unity and purpose ( Breger , 1974 ) . Identity , then , is an integrative configuration of self - in - the - adult - world . This configuration integrates in two ways . First , in a synchronic sense , identity integrates the wide range of dif - ferent , and probably conflicting , roles and rela - tionships that characterize a given life in the here and now : " When I am with my father , I feel sullen and depressed ; but when I talk with my friends I feel a great surge of optimism and love for humankind . " Identity needs to integrate those two things so that although they appear very different , they can be viewed as integral parts of the same self - configuration . Second , identity must integrate diachronically , that is , in time : " I used to love to play baseball , but now I want to be a social psychologist , " " I was a born - again Christian but now I feel that I am agnostic . " Identity needs to integrate these kinds of contrasts so that although self - elements are separated in time ( and in content quality ) , they can be brought meaningfully together into a temporally organized whole . Put starkly , iden - tity becomes a problem when the adolescent or young adult first realizes that he or she is , has been , or could be many different ( and conflict - ing ) things and experiences a strong desire , en - couraged by society , to be but one ( large , inte - grated , and dynamic ) thing . Of course , perfect unity and puipose in life is only an ideal and may itself not be fully desirable anyway ( K . J . Gergen , 1992 ; McAdams , 1997 ) . But Erikson ' s concept of identity underscores an integrative tendency in selfhood that becomes especially salient for the first time in that period of life ( late teenage years through the mid - 20s ) that Arnett ( 2000 ) has recently labeled emerging adulthood . Before this developmental period , there is no identity . But this is not to say that there is no " self . " Nor is it to say that people do not " know who they are " before late adolescence . Ask any 10 - year - old or 3 - year - old . They can tell you who they are . They will tell you their name . They may list traits , roles , relationships , favorite foods , things they do not like , and on and on . It would be absurd to suggest that children have no sense of self . But , in Erikson ' s terms , chil - dren typically have no identity because the in - tegration of selfhood is not yet a psychosocial problem for them . Erikson ' s ( and McAdams ' s ) use of the term identity , therefore , is rather more technical and delimited than its common usage in psychology , sociology , and everyday par - lance . In McAdams ' s life story model , identity is not synonymous with the " self or the " self - concept " or even with " who I am " ; rather , it refers to a particular quality or flavoring of people ' s self - understandings , a way in which the self can be arranged or configured . To the extent that a person ' s self - understanding is in - tegrated synchronically and diachronically such that it situates him or her into a meaningful psychosocial niche and provides his or her life with some degree of unity and purpose , that person " has " identity . Identity , then , is not something people begin to " work on " and have until the emerging adulthood years . At this time , McAdams has argued , people begin to put their lives together into self - defining stories . It is an internalized and evolving story of self that integrates the self synchronically and diachron - ically , explaining why it is that I am sullen with my father and euphoric with my friends and how it happened—step by step , scene by scene—that I went from being a born - again Christian who loved baseball to an agnostic social psychologist . Why does identity wait so long ? Why is it not until the emerging adulthood years that people first construct life stories to provide their lives with unity and purpose ? Showing his Freudian roots , Erikson suggested that the timing is linked to sex . The eruption of genital sexuality in adolescence helps to launch the identity project , Erikson maintained , because it signals the coming of full - fledged adult status in love and work . As a qualitative change in how the body looks and feels , furthermore , puberty may usher in a realization that one is no longer a child and , with it , a new apprehension of one ' s personal history : " I don ' t know what I am now , but I am no longer what I was " ( McAdams , 1985 ) . Childhood becomes the remembered past and adulthood the anticipated future . Just as important , Erikson ( 1959 ) asserted , are SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 103 changing social relationships and societal ex - pectations : " It is of great relevance to the young individual ' s identity formation that he be re - sponded to , and be given function and status as a person whose gradual growth and transforma - tion make sense to those who begin to make sense to him " ( p . 111 ) . Parents , high school teachers , siblings , friends , college admissions counselors , the business world , the media , and many other aspects of modern society explicitly and implicitly urge adolescents and young adults to " get a life " ( Habermas & Bluck , 2000 ) . It is time to make some decisions about the future , about school , the armed services , work , and ( for some ) marriage and family . In general , Western societies " expect " adolescents and young adults to begin to examine the occupa - tional , interpersonal , and ideological offerings of society and , eventually , to make commit - ments , even if only temporary , to personalized niches in the adult world . This is to say that both society and the emerging adult are ready for the individual ' s identity experiments by the time he or she has in fact become an emerging adult . Accordingly , Erikson ( 1959 ) wrote : The period can be viewed as a psychosocial morato - rium during which the individual through free role experimentation may find a niche in some section of his society , a niche which is firmly defined and yet seems to be uniquely made for him . In finding it the young adult gains an assured sense of inner continuity and social sameness which will bridge what he was as a child and what he is about to become , and will reconcile his conception of himself and his communi - ty ' s recognition of him . ( p . Ill ) Instrumental for the emergence of identity at this time in the life course , furthermore , may be advances in cognitive development . Following Breger ( 1974 ) and Elkind ( 1981 ) , McAdams ( 1985 ) argued that formal operational thinking in adolescence helps to supply the cognitive wherewithal for identity exploration . With the advent of formal operations , the young person is able to engage in hypothetico - deductive think - ing and to entertain systematically an infinite range of hypothetical scenarios and ideals as they might apply to his or her own life . Identity becomes an especially engaging abstraction for the abstract thinker . According to Breger ( 1974 ) , The idea of a unitary or whole self in which past memories of who one was , present experiences of who one is , and future expectations of who one will be , is the sort of abstraction that the child simply does not think about . [ But ] with the emergence of formal oper - ations in adolescence , wholeness , unity , and integra - tion become introspectively real problems , ( p . 330 ) The idea that one ' s life , as complex and dy - namic as it increasingly appears to be , might be integrated into a meaningful and purposeful whole may represent , therefore , an especially appealing possibility to the self - reflective emerging adult . In McAdams ' s view , the emerging adult begins to work on such an inte - gration by putting his or her life together into a culturally meaningful story . Accordingly , Habermas and Bluck ( 2000 ) argued that the construction of integrative life stories requires cognitive tools to which people do not have full access until adolescence and young adulthood . According to Habermas and Bluck , the full ar - ticulation of an integrative life story requires the understanding and use of four types of coher - ence : temporal , biographical , causal , and the - matic coherence . The four begin to emerge in childhood , but they emerge at different points and develop at different rates , and it is not until adolescence that they are fully achieved and ready to be used in the service of identity formation . Development of the Life Story Stories are fundamentally about the vicissi - tudes of human intention organized in time ( Bruner , 1986 ; Ricoeur , 1984 ) . In virtually all intelligible stories , humans or humanlike char - acters act to accomplish intentions , generating a sequence of actions and reactions extended as a plot in time . Human intentionality is at the heart of narrative , and therefore the development of intentionality in humans is of prime importance in establishing the mental conditions necessary for storytelling and story comprehension . Re - cent research with infants suggests that , by the end of the 1 st or early in the 2nd year of life , humans come to understand other persons as intentional agents and so engage in joint atten - tional interactions with them ( Stern , 1985 ; To - masello , 2000 ) . For example , 16 - month - old in - fants will imitate complex behavioral sequences exhibited by other human beings only when those activities appear intentional . As Toma - sello ( 2000 ) wrote , " Young children do not just mimic the limb movements of other persons ; rather , they attempt to reproduce other persons ' 104 McADAMS intended , goal - directed actions in the world " ( p . 38 ) . With the emergence of what Dennett ( 1987 ) has called the intentional stance , chil - dren in the 2nd year of life can experience the world from the subjective standpoint of an in - tentional , causal agent . At this time , the indi - vidual is able to assume the existential position of a motivated human subject who appropriates experience as his or her own ( Kagan , 1994 ; McAdams , 1997 ) . In the most general sense , what is being consolidated in the 2nd year of life is what William James ( 1892 / 1963 ) referred to as the subjective self , that is , the sense of " self - as - I . " This existential sense of " I - ness " is tacitly and immediately grasped in and through intentional action ( Blasi , 1988 ) . As intentional agents , human beings act on their desires and their beliefs to accomplish goals . Stories organize and convey these moti - vated action sequences extended in time . A ba - sic understanding of motivated human action appears to develop in early childhood , as doc - umented in the empirical literature on children ' s theory of mind ( Baron - Cohen , 1995 ; Wellman , 1993 ) . Theory of mind refers to the ability of normal children to attribute mental states ( such as beliefs , desires , and intentions ) to themselves and to other people as a way of making sense of and predicting behavior . In the 3rd and 4th years of life , children come to understand that people ( like themselves ) formulate desires and beliefs in their minds and then translate those mentalistic phenomena into motivated action . Our simple folk theory of people ' s minds says that people act for the sake of what they want and what they believe . Interpreting the actions of others ( and oneself ) in terms of their predis - posing desires and beliefs is a form of mind reading , according to Baron - Cohen ( 1995 ) , a competency that is critical for effective social interaction . By the time children enter kinder - garten , mind reading seems natural and easy . Indeed , it makes intuitive sense that a girl should eat an ice - cream cone because " she wants to " ( desire ) or that a boy should look for a cookie in the cookie jar because " he believes that the cookies are there . " But autistic children often find mind reading to be extraordinarily difficult , as if they had never developed this intuitive sense about what aspects of mind are involved in the making of motivated human behavior . Characterized by what Baron - Cohen ( 1995 ) called mindblindness , children with au - tism do not understand people as intentional agents or do so only to a limited degree . Their lack of understanding applies to the self as well , suggesting that at the heart of severe autism may reside a disturbing dysfunction in " I - ness " and a corresponding inability to formulate and convey sensible narratives of the self ( Bruner , 1994 ; Sacks , 1995 ) . Human selfhood is reflexive . With the con - solidation of the agential " I " comes the formu - lation of the " me . " What James called the ob - jective self , or the " self - as - me , " consists of all of those features and aspects that the I attributes to itself : how the self ( as a knower ) sees ( knows , imagines , conceives , formulates ) the self ( as known ) . In the 2nd year of life , children begin to attribute various distinguishing charac - teristics to themselves , including their names , their favorite toys , their likes and dislikes , and so on . With the development of language , the self - as - object grows rapidly to encompass a wide range of things " about me " that can be verbally described . To be included in the mix eventually are memories of events in which the self was involved . According to Howe and Courage ( 1997 ) , autobiographical memory emerges toward the end of the 2nd year of life when children have consolidated a basic sense of I and reflexively begun to build up a primi - tive understanding of the me . Although infants can remember events ( basic episodic memory ) before this time , it is not until the end of the 2nd year , Howe and Courage contended , that epi - sodic memory becomes personalized and chil - dren begin to organize events that they experi - ence as " things that happened to me . " From this point onward , the me expands to include auto - biographical recollections , recalled as little sto - ries about what has transpired in " my life . " Autobiographical memory emerges and de - velops in a social context ( Nelson , 1988 ; Welch - Ross , 1995 ) . Parents typically encourage children to talk about their personal experiences as soon as children are verbally able to do so ( Fivush & Kuebli , 1997 ) . Early on , parents may take the lead in stimulating the child ' s recollec - tion and telling of the past by reminding the child of recent events , such as this morning ' s breakfast or yesterday ' s visit to the doctor . Tak - ing advantage of this initial conversational scaf - folding provided by adults , the young child soon begins to take more initiative in sharing personal events . By the age of 3 years , children SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 105 are actively engaged in co - constructing their past experience in conversations with adults . By the end of the preschool years , they are able to give a relatively coherent narrative account of their past experiences independent of adult guidance ( Fivush , 1994 ) . In conversations with adults about personal memories , young children become acquainted with the narrative structures through which events are typically discussed by people in their world . The sharing of personal experiences functions as a major mechanism of socialization ( Miller , 1994 ) and helps to build an organized personal history from a growing base of autobiographical memories ( Fivush , 1994 ) . By the time children are able to generate their own narrative accounts of personal memories , they also exhibit a good understanding of the canonical features of stories themselves . Five - year - olds typically know that stories are set in a particular time and place and involve characters that act on their desires and beliefs over time . They expect stories to entail suspense and cu - riosity and will dismiss as " boring " a narrative that fails to live up to these emotional conven - tions ( Brewer & Lichtenstein , 1982 ) . They ex - pect stories to conform to a conventional story grammar ( Applebee , 1978 ; Mandler , 1984 ) or generic script concerning what kinds of events can occur and in what order . In a simple goal - directed episode , for example , an initiating event may prompt the protagonist to attempt some kind of action that will be followed by a consequence of some sort and then a reaction to the consequence on the part of the protagonist ( Mandler , 1984 ) . Stories are expected to have definite beginnings , middles , and endings . The ending is supposed to provide a resolution to the plot complications that developed over the course of the story . If a story does not conform to conventions such as these , children may find it confusing and difficult to remember , or they may recall it later with a more canonical struc - ture than it originally had . As children move through the elementary school years , they come to narrate their own personal experiences in ways that conform to their implicit understandings of how good sto - ries should be structured and what they should include . In this way , they imbue their personal experience with a sense of temporal coherence . But Habermas and Bluck ( 2000 ) maintained that between the ages of 5 and about 10 years , temporal coherence applies mainly to single autobiographical events rather than to the causal connections between different events . During this time , children begin to internalize their cul - ture ' s norms concerning what the story of an entire life should itself contain . As they learn , for example , that a telling of a single life typi - cally begins with , say , an account of birth and typically includes , say , early experiences in the family , eventual emergence out of the family , geographical moves , and so on , they acquire an understanding of what Habermas and Bluck ( 2000 ) called biographical coherence . Cultural norms define conventional phases of the life course and suggest what kinds of causal expla - nations make sense in the telling of a life ( Den - zin , 1989 ) . As children learn the culture ' s bio - graphical conventions , they begin to see how single events in their own lives might be se - quenced and linked to conform to the culture ' s concept of biography . Still , it is not until adolescence , according to Habermas and Bluck , that individuals craft causal narratives to explain how different events are linked together in the context of a biogra - phy . Causal coherence is exhibited in the in - creasing effort across adolescence to provide narrative accounts of one ' s life that explain how one event caused , led to , transformed , or in some other way is meaningfully related to other events in one ' s life . Traits , attitudes , beliefs , and preferences may now be explained in terms of the life events that may have caused them . An adolescent girl may , for example , explain why she rejects her parents ' liberal political values , or why she feels shy around members of the opposite sex , or how it came to be that her junior year in high school represented a turning point in her understanding of herself in terms of personal experiences from the past that have been selected and , in many cases , reconstructed to make a coherent explanation . In thematic coherence , furthermore , she may identify an overarching theme , value , or principle that in - tegrates many different episodes in her life and conveys the gist of who she is and what her biography is all about . Studies reported by Habermas and Bluck ( 2000 ) suggest that causal and thematic coherence are rare in autobio - graphical accounts in early adolescence but in - crease substantially through the teenage years and into young adulthood . By the time individ - uals have reached the emerging adulthood 106 McADAMS years , therefore , they are typically able and ea - ger to construct stories about the past and about the self that exhibit temporal , biographical , causal , and thematic coherence . Autobiograph - ical memory and narrative understanding have now developed to the level whereby they can be called into service in the making of identity . The Life Story and the Life Course Although the cognitive and psychosocial pre - requisites for full life story making may not be in place until late adolescence and early adult - hood , it is not as if the individual suddenly begins working on the story at this time , with no preparation or background . Versions of the life story may emerge earlier , as documented by Elkind ( 1981 ) in work on the . personal fable . As indicated in diaries and other personal sources , young adolescents may construct fantastical au - tobiographical stories about their own potential greatness or uniqueness that embody a high degree of coherence but that may have little relation to the reality of their lives . Elkind sug - gested that personal fables fade over the course of adolescence , but they may be viewed as initial rough drafts of life stories ( McAdams , 1985 ) . Long before adolescence , moreover , children relate personal memories in story form , as studies of parent - child conversations show ( Fivush , 1994 ) , and children are collecting and processing experiences of all kinds that will eventually make their way or have some impor - tant influence on the integrative life stories they later construct to make sense of their lives . McAdams ( 1993 ) argued that even early attach - ment patterns with caregivers may ultimately be reflected in the overall narrative tone and qual - ity that adult life stories show . Children are not explicitly making identity , in the sense of con - structing integrative life stories that provide their lives with unity and purpose and position them meaningfully within psychosocial niches in the modem world , but they are still implicitly gathering material for the identities they will someday make . The dominant images and themes of adult life stories , therefore , may re - flect influences from the earliest years of life . Although full - fledged life stories may begin to reveal themselves as identity formats in the adolescent and young adult years , identity con - struction does not end when this developmental epoch is over . Erikson ' s ( 1963 ) original stage model confined identity formation to a single psychosocial stage ( emerging adulthood ) , but McAdams ' s life story model emphasizes the continuation of identity work across the adult years . Life stories develop and change across the life course , reflecting various on - time and off - time happenings and transitions ( Cohler , 1982 ) . McAdams ( 1993 ) has argued that people may work on different facets or qualities of the story at different times in life . For example , individuals in late adolescence and young adult - hood are likely to focus some of their identity work on crystallizing the basic values and be - liefs that ground their stories within an ideolog - ical setting ( Erikson , 1958 ; Perry , 1970 ) . Being able to identify a clear and compelling belief system that organizes a person ' s life proves to be a powerful mechanism for establishing what Habermas and Bluck ( 2000 ) called thematic coherence in the life story . In early to middle adulthood , many American men and women appear to focus their identity work on articulating , expanding , and refining the story ' s main characters , or personal ima - goes . An imago is an idealized personification of the self that functions as a protagonist in the narrative ( McAdams , 1984 ) . Akin to what Markus and Nurius ( 1986 ) called " possible selves , " imagoes personify important motiva - tional trends in the life story , such as strong needs for power , achievement , or intimacy ( Mc - Adams , 1985 ) . The construction of imagoes helps to integrate a life by bringing into the same narrative format different personifications of the me : the self - as - loving - wife , the self - as - ardent - feminist , the self - as - devoted - mother , the self - as - the - young - girl - who - longed - to - escape - the - suburbs , the self - as - future - retiree - who - will - escape - to - that - country - home , and so on . By constructing a single life story that integrates a wide range of self - characterizations as imagoes , the adult can resolve what William James first identified as the " one - in - many - selves paradox " ( Knowles & Sibicky , 1990 , p . 676 ) . The midlife years may be occasioned by con - siderable identity work for many modern adults . Life span theorists have written about how the realization that one ' s life is more than half over can bring to the psychological fore concerns about loss and mortality and can stimulate the actualization of long - suppressed tendencies , such as traditionally masculine tendencies among women and feminine tendencies among SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 107 men ( Gutmann , 1987 ; Levinson , 1978 ) . Life course theories emphasize changing social roles and relationships in the midlife years and shift - ing contingencies in the ecology of everyday life ( Elder , 1995 ) . Theorists of different stripes tend to agree that midlife can be the psychoso - cial prime of life for many people , because it is during this period that they assume their most influential roles in families , the workplace , and society . In Erikson ' s ( 1963 ) view , adults ideally realize their greatest powers of generativity dur - ing the midlife years , as they focus time , atten - tion , and resources on caring for and contribut - ing to the well - being of the next generation . A recent flurry of empirical research documents the psychological and social importance of gen - erativity in midlife ( e . g . , McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1998 ; Peterson & Klohnen , 1995 ) . In two different but related senses , generat - ivity becomes an increasingly important issue in life story making during the midlife years . First , as men and women move into and through midlife , themes of caring for the next genera - tion , of leaving a positive legacy for the future , of giving something back to society for the benefits one has received , and other generative motifs become increasingly salient in life sto - ries ( McAdams , de St . Aubin , & Logan , 1993 ) . Second , as adults move into and through midlife , they may become more and more con - cerned with the " endings " of their life stories . It is in the nature of stories that beginnings and middles lead inevitably to endings and that end - ings provide a sense of closure and resolution ( Kermode , 1967 ) . The imagery and rhetoric of generativity provide adults with an especially appealing way to conceive of " the end , " even as they are deeply immersed in the middle of the life course . By suggesting that one ' s own efforts may generate products and outcomes that will outlive the self , by framing a life story in terms of those good things ( and people ) that become the self ' s enduring legacy , life narrations that emphasize generativity implicitly provide sto - ries with what may be perceived as good and satisfying endings ( Kotre , 1984 ; McAdams , 1985 ) . These endings , in turn , feed back to influence beginnings and middles . Conse - quently , it should not be surprising to observe considerable revising and reworking of one ' s life story , even the reimaging of the distant past , in light of changing psychosocial concerns in the adult years and changing understandings of what the near and distant future may bring . Cognitive Psychology : Autobiographical Memory and the Self Over the past 15 years , cognitive psycholo - gists have expressed increasing interest in how people encode , store , and retrieve information pertaining to real - life events and personal expe - riences ( e . g . , Neisser & Winograd , 1988 ; Pille - mer , 1998 ; Stein , Ornstein , Tversky , & Brain - erd , 1997 ) . Much of this work falls under the rubric of autobiographical memory . Cognitive psychologists have focused their attention on the relative veridicality of remembered events , the reasons some events are remembered and others forgotten , and the organization of auto - biographical knowledge . An emerging theme in this literature is that autobiographical memory helps to locate and define the self within an ongoing life story that , simultaneously , is strongly oriented toward future goals . From the time of Bartlett ( 1932 ) to the present day , students of human memory have debated the issue of veridicality . To what extent are memories for personal events accurate ren - ditions of what really happened or biased recon - structions of the past ? The issue is important in a scientific sense , to be sure , but it has also garnered wide public attention in the past two decades with the raging controversy over re - pressed memories and growing concern in legal circles over the reliability of eyewitness testi - mony . On one side of the intellectual ledger are veridical copy theories , such as Brown and Ku - lik ' s ( 1977 ) conceptualization of flashbulb memories , which argue that certain kinds of personal events , especially those that are sur - prising or consequential , are remembered in vivid and accurate detail . On the other side are reconstructive theories ( e . g . , Barclay , 1996 ) that point to the many instances in which individuals misremember personal events in ways that re - flect strong schema - based processing . For ex - ample , Barclay ( 1996 ) construed autobiograph - ical memory as a form of improvisation whereby the person puts together a more or less plausible account of the past that functions pri - marily to maintain personal coherence rather than provide an objective report of what has transpired in that person ' s life . Research can be garnered to support both kinds of theories . 108 McADAMS A number of investigators seem to adopt an intermediate position . Brewer ( 1986 ) , for exam - ple , argued that recent personal memories retain a relatively large amount of specific information from the original phe - nomenal experience ( e . g . , location , point of view ) but that with time , or under strong schema - based pro - cesses , the original experience can be reconstructed to produce a new nonveridical personal memory that re - tains most of the phenomenal characteristics of other memories , ( p . 44 ) Similarly , Thompson , Skowronski , Larsen , and Betz ( 1996 ) contended that memory for recent events is largely reproductive but that memory for more distant events tends to be reconstruc - tive . Schachter ( 1996 ) concluded that memory systems in general , and autobiographical mem - ory in particular , do a remarkably good job of preserving the contours of our pasts and recording correctly many of the impor - tant things that have happened to us . [ And yet , ] our [ autobiographical ] stories are built from many different ingredients : snippets of what actually happened , thoughts about what might have happened , and beliefs that guide us as we attempt to remember , ( p . 308 ) Ross ( 1997 ) pointed out that society would not function effectively if people could not count on some significant degree of accuracy in their own and others ' personal memories . Yet , Ross also suggested that people are sometimes too confi - dent in the veracity of their own and others ' recollections of the past . The latter was borne out in a recent study showing remarkable de - cline over a 32 - month span in the accuracy of college students ' recollections of hearing the news of the O . J . Simpson verdict ( Schmolk , Buffalo , & Squire , 2000 ) and another study showing that midlife men ' s recollections of ad - olescent experiences were grossly inconsistent with the documented realities of those experi - ences , even though the midlife men insisted on the veridicality of their accounts ( Offer , Kaiz , Howard , & Bennett , 2000 ) . How is autobiographical knowledge orga - nized ? Conway and Pleydell - Pearce ( 2000 ) pro - vided an integrative , hierarchical model of a self - memory system ( SMS ) that links an auto - biographical knowledge base to personal goals . According to Conway and Pleydell - Pearce , au - tobiographical memories contain information at three different levels of specificity : lifetime pe - riods , general events , and event - specific knowl - edge . Similar in scope to what McAdams ( 1985 ) referred to as chapters in a life story , lifetime periods mark off relatively large seg - ments of autobiographical time : " when I was in elementary school , " " during my first marriage , " " when the kids were little , " and so on . Within a lifetime period may be represented " general knowledge of significant others , common loca - tions , actions , activities , plans , and goals " ( Con - way & Pleydell - Pearce , 2000 , p . 262 ) , as well as evaluative attitudes toward the period ( e . g . , " This is a time when things did not go well for me " ) . At a second level of specificity are gen - eral events , which mainly represent knowledge gleaned from categories of similar events ( e . g . , " parties I attended in college " and " evenings I spent babysitting " ) . Barsalou ( 1988 ) and others have found that many autobiographical memo - ries are summarized events , containing general - ized or blended information from a number of related autobiographical episodes . One promi - nent feature of general event clusters is that they highlight memories of events relating to the attainment of or failure to attain goals . Finally , Conway and Pleydell - Pearce ( 2000 ) identified event - specific knowledge as particular details of specific scenes from the past . In scope and specificity , autobiographical knowledge at this third level parallels what McAdams ( 1985 ) has identified as nuclear episodes , or specific and consequential scenes in the life story such as high points , low points , and turning points . Conway and Pleydell - Pearce argued that a person ' s goals function as control processes in the SMS , modulating the construction of mem - ories . Autobiographical memories are encoded and later retrieved in ways that serve the self ' s goal agendas . As such , current goals influence how autobiographical information is absorbed and organized in the first place , and goals gen - erate retrieval models to guide the search pro - cess later . Relatedly , the autobiographical knowledge base helps to ground the self ' s goals . People formulate goals for the future that are reasonably in line with the information encoded as lifetime periods , general events , and event - specific knowledge . " The idea of this grounding is that goals cannot simply be adopted on de - mand or be unrealistic ; instead they are embed - ded in the SMS with representation in the work - ing self and archival connections in the knowl - edge base " ( Conway & Pleydell - Pearce , 2000 , p . 271 ) . SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 109 The involvement of goals in autobiographical memory is a central idea in Stein ' s theory of understanding and remembering emotional events ( Stein , Wade , & Liwag , 1997 ) . Stein has advanced " a theory of intelligent , motivated re - membering that is driven by a person ' s goals and desires as well as by dynamic working knowledge about external reality and the ways in which this reality constrains or facilitates goal achievement " ( Stein , Wade , & Liwag , 1997 , p . 15 ) . To illustrate the point that goals affect the encoding of event memory , Stein et al . related a study conducted by Anderson and Pitchert ( 1978 ) in which participants read a passage describing the contents of a house un - der instructions to take the perspective of either a home buyer or a burglar . When taking the burglar ' s perspective , participants remembered more items that were valuable and portable , such as a color television set . When taking the perspective of the buyer , they remembered more items that affected the value of the house , such as a leak in the roof . In both cases , the rememberer provides an accurate account , but goals at the time of encoding determine what is selected as worth remembering . Goals typically link up with emotion , furthermore , and memo - ries of emotional events typically entail the vi - cissitudes of goal striving . In Stein ' s view , the experience of emotion in a given event almost always activates a causal inference process , the outcome of which becomes part of the repre - sentation of the emotional event . In other words , when a person experiences emotion in a given life scene , he or she has already made an im - plicit appraisal of the scene ' s meaning in terms of its causes and probable consequences and the extent to which goal attainment may be fur - thered or frustrated . In this way , emotion lends coherence to autobiographical memory by help - ing to organize events as goal - based stories . Emotions and goals may be especially salient in the construction of what Singer ( 1995 ; Singer & Salovey , 1993 ) called self - defining memories . A self - defining memory is a remembered epi - sode from the past that is " vivid , affectively charged , repetitive , linked to other similar memories , and related to an important unre - solved theme or enduring concern in an indi - vidual ' s life " ( Singer & Salovey , 1993 , p . 13 ) . Moffitt and Singer ( 1994 ) collected narrative accounts of self - defining memories and reports of personal strivings or goals from college stu - dents . They found that students who recalled more self - defining memories relevant to the at - tainment of their goals expressed greater levels of positive affect about their memories . In ad - dition , students who reported a high number of goals involving avoiding undesirable outcomes , rather than approaching desirable outcomes , re - called fewer self - defining memories with posi - tive emotional themes . Singer ( 1997 ) also doc - umented the role of self - defining memories in the life stories of men addicted to alcohol and drugs . He found that recovery from addiction involves recrafting a life story to include self - defining memories affirming personal agency and interpersonal connection . Self - defining memories are one class of epi - sodic memories that fit under Pillemer ' s ( 1998 ) rubric of personal event memories . Pillemer listed five criteria for defining a personal event memory . The personal event memory must ( a ) present a specific event that took place at a particular time and place , rather than a summary event or extended series of events ; ( b ) contain a detailed account of the rememberer ' s own per - sonal circumstances at the time of the event ; ( c ) evoke sensory images or bodily sensations that contribute to the feeling of " re - experiencing " or " reliving " the event ; ( d ) link its details and images to a particular moment or moments of phenomenal experience ; and ( e ) be believed to be a truthful representation of what actually transpired . Personal event memories come in many dif - ferent varieties . Some are especially vivid or consequential ; others may seem mundane or of little relevance for self - definition . Among the personal event memories that seem to be most instrumental in self - definition are ( a ) memora - ble messages , or memories that contain an ex - plicit communication that has become a guiding statement or moral directive for the remem - berer ; ( b ) symbolic messages , or remembered events that are interpreted by the rememberer as providing implicit lessons or guidelines ; ( c ) originating events , or memories that contain the genesis of an interest , vocation , relationship , life goal , and so on ; ( d ) anchoring events , or memories that affirm and reinforce an ongoing interest , attitude , or commitment held by the rememberer ; and ( e ) analogous events , or epi - sodes that are readily compared with similar other events to suggest a pattern or theme that 110 McADAMS runs through the person ' s life story ( Pillemer , 1998 ) . Singer ' s concept of self - defining memory and Pillemer ' s enumeration of the kinds of au - tobiographical recollections that are likely to occupy important positions within the life story reinforce the idea that some remembered epi - sodes are more privileged for self - definition than are others . In this regard , Robinson and Taylor ( 1998 ) made an important distinction between autobiographical memories and self - narratives . They pointed out that people remem - ber many episodes in life that are mundane and appear to have little relevance to their self - concepts . Autobiographical memory , therefore , comprises a vast range of personal information and experience . Self - narratives , in contrast , " consist of a set of temporally and thematically organized salient experiences and concerns that constitute one ' s identity " ( Robinson & Taylor , 1998 , p . 126 ) . It is not even clear , according to Robinson and Taylor , that self - narratives are a true subset of all that exists in autobiographical memory . Self - defining events and certain other salient episodes may be viewed as part of the self - narrative , but the self - narrative may also include knowledge that is not technically part of the autobiographical knowledge base . This po - sition is consistent with McAdams ' s claims concerning identity as a life story . The internal - ized and evolving story that provides a person ' s life with some degree of unity and purpose contains within it self - defining information re - lated to lifetime periods , general events , and event - specific knowledge ( Conway & Pleydell - Pearce , 2000 ) . But the life story does not en - compass all of the vast storehouse that makes up autobiographical memory , and it contains ma - terial that would not explicitly exist in the au - tobiographical knowledge base , such as the in - dividual ' s imagined future : " how I see myself in 10 years , " " what events I believe I will ex - perience one day , " " what I will leave behind . " Still , there is significant overlap between the episodic knowledge that cognitive psycholo - gists position within autobiographical memory and the personal scenes and chapters that Mc - Adams includes within the life story as identity . Like many cognitive psychologists , McAdams ( 1985 ) has adopted a moderately reconstructive view of autobiographical recollections . Personal goals and other concerns shape the encoding and recollection of self - defining memories and other important features of the life story . Re - construction exerts a distorting effect , espe - cially with regard to memories from long ago . But for life stories the greatest degree of recon - struction may involve selection and interpreta - tion rather than outright distortion of the truth ( Bluck & Levine , 1998 ) . People select and in - terpret certain memories as self - defining , pro - viding them with privileged status in the life story . Other potential candidates for such status are downgraded ; relegated to the category of " Oh yes , I remember that , but I don ' t think it is very important " ; or forgotten altogether . To a certain degree , then , identity is a product of choice . We choose the events that we consider most important for defining who we are and providing our lives with some semblance of unity and purpose . And we endow them with symbolic messages , lessons learned , integrative themes , and other personal meanings that make sense to use in the present as we survey the past and anticipate the future . The power of selection is apparent in the well - documented phenomenon of the memory bump ( Fitzgerald , 1988 ; Rubin , Wetzler , & Nebes , 1986 ) . People tend to recall a dispropor - tionately large number of autobiographical events from the ages of approximately 15 to 25 years . There is some indication , furthermore , that episodic memories from this period are especially rich in emotional and motivational content ( Thome , 2000 ) . Fitzgerald ( 1988 ) and Conway and Pleydell - Pearce ( 2000 ) have ar - gued that adults are wont to select events from this particular period in the life course because it is during adolescence and young adulthood that people are most preoccupied with forming their identities ( Erikson , 1963 ) . From the stand - point of McAdams ' s life story model of iden - tity , this interpretation makes good sense . As intimated by Fitzgerald ( 1988 ) , it is indeed roughly during the period of the reminiscence bump that young people are first confronting the identity problem in modern society and actively formulating integrative life stories to address the psychosocial challenges they face . Conse - quently , they may be more likely to encode personal events occurring during these years as relevant to their psychosocial goal of formulat - ing an identity . Furthermore , it is probably true that in adolescence and young adulthood a dis - proportionately large number of episodic candi - dates for what Pillemer ( 1998 ) identified as SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 111 symbolic messages , originating events , anchor - ing events , and other self - defining memories are likely to emerge . It may indeed be true , more - over , that these are the kinds of autobiographi - cal events that make for especially good stories . In this regard , it should not be surprising that the " coming of age story " is such a staple in contemporary fiction and cinema and that the myth of the hero —the adventurous transition from childhood innocence to young adult - hood—is a timeless and universally beloved mythic form ( Campbell , 1949 ) . Personality Psychology : Traits , Adaptations , and Stories Among the many classic theories of person - ality formulated in the first half of the 20th century ( e . g . , Hall & Lindzey , 1957 ) , only a few valued people ' s stories as windows into person - ality dynamics and dispositions . For example , Freud ( 1900 / 1953 ) used storied dream reports as cues for free association , which itself was aimed at bringing to the conscious surface the latent meanings of dreams . Adler ( 1927 ) viewed narrative accounts of earliest memories as sym - bolizations of a person ' s overall style of life . H . A . Murray ( 1938 ) used imaginative stories told in response to picture cues to assess indi - vidual differences in human motivation . But in all three of these examples , stories were viewed as methodological means to conceptual ends . Put simply , traditional approaches to personal - ity suggested that personality psychologists might use stories to get at other ( more impor - tant ) things about persons , things such as traits , motives , complexes , conflicts , and the like . Beginning with Silvan Tomkins ' s ( 1979 ) script theory , however , personality psycholo - gists began to consider the possibility that the story itself is " the thing . " Tomkins proposed that the central structural elements of human personality are internalized scenes and scripts . From the early years of life onward , Tomkins maintained , the person approaches life as a dra - matist , unconsciously constructing self - defining scenes and arranging them into storied patterns guided by the rules of scripts . Individual differ - ences might be conceptualized , then , in terms of the kinds of scenes and scripts that shape con - sciousness and guide behavior . Following Tomkins ' s lead , personologists generated new narrative - based theories of the person , high - lighting life stories , myths , plots , episodes , characters , voices , dialogue , and the like ( e . g . , Gregg , 1991 ; Hermans , 1996 ; Me Adams , 1985 ) . Among personality psychologists , inter - est in narrative constructs and narrative methods increased steadily in the 1980s and 1990s ( Mc - Adams , 1999 ) . During the same period of time , it should be noted , the field of personality psy - chology witnessed significant theoretical and empirical advances on a number of other fronts as well , including evolutionary approaches to studying persons , investigations into disposi - tional traits , and research and theory on social - cognitive schemas and goals ( McAdams , 2001 ) . Where do life stories fit within the broad gamut of personality ? McAdams ( 1995 , 2001 ) has argued that personality may be viewed from three different standpoints or levels . Each stand - point or level provides its own unique discourse for understanding human individuality and specifies its own preferred methodological op - erations . The first level is dispositional traits . Traits are those global , stable , linear , and com - parative dimensions of human individuality that go by such names as " extraversion , " " conscien - tiousness , " and " depressiveness . " In that traits account for consistencies in behavior , thought , and feeling across different situations and over time , they are commonly and appropriately viewed as relatively decontextualized and non - contingent aspects of personality . At a second level are characteristic adaptations , such as personal goals and motives , defense mecha - nisms and coping strategies , mental representa - tions of self and other , values and beliefs , de - velopmental tasks and stage - related concerns , domain - specific skills and interests , and other personal characteristics that are contextualized in time , place , or social role . If traits provide a dispositional sketch for human individuality , characteristic adaptations fill in many of the details . Neither traits nor characteristic adaptations , however , speak directly to the problem of iden - tity as conceptualized in this article . What does a person ' s life mean in the overall ? How is a person ' s psychosocial world arranged in such a way as to provide life with some modicum of unity and purpose ? As has been suggested , these issues are best addressed through the lan - guage of narrative ( Bruner , 1986 ; Polkinghorne , 1988 ) . Giddens ( 1991 ) wrote : " A person ' s iden - tity is not to be found in behavior , nor—impor - 112 McADAMS tant though this is—in the reactions of others , but in the capacity to keep a particular narra - tive going " ( p . 54 ) . The third level of personal - ity , therefore , is the level of integrative life stories . A full scientific accounting of human individuality involves the exploration and inte - gration of psychological phenomena existing at three different levels . To understand an individ - ual person , the personality psychologist should have some sense of ( a ) where that person stands on a series of dispositional traits that speak to general tendencies in behavior across situations and over time ; ( b ) how the person is confronting and adapting to motivational , social - cognitive , and developmental tasks and concerns that are contextualized in place , time , or social role ; and ( c ) what kind of identity the person is working on through the construction of stories about the self . Personality is a complex patterning of traits , adaptations , and stories . As with traits and characteristic adaptations , life stories may be categorized and classified with respect to individual differences . Some people are more extraverted than other people ( Level 1 of personality ) . Some people use de - nial as a defense mechanism when threatened by authority , whereas others prefer to cope through intellectualization ( Level 2 of person - ality ) . And some people construct life stories that are modeled on classical tragedy , whereas others convey their identities as television sit - coms ( Level 3 of personality ) . Although it is usually labor intensive and time consuming , research on individual differences in life stories has grown substantially in the past 10 years . Researchers have been especially interested in using narrative methods and concepts to inves - tigate the issues of personality coherence and personality change and in examining the rela - tions between characteristic adaptations ( Level 2 ) on the one hand and life stories ( Level 3 ) on the other ( MeAdams , 1999 ; Thome , 2000 ) . Among the many kinds of characteristic ad - aptations that can be found at Level 2 of per - sonality , social motives for power ( Winter , 1973 ) and intimacy ( McAdams , 1980 ) have proven especially relevant for their relations to life stories . McAdams ( 1982 ; McAdams , Hoff - man , Mansfield , & Day , 1996 ) and Woike ( 1995 ; Woike et al . , 1999 ) have conducted a series of studies demonstrating that individual differences in Thematic Apperception Test - based motives for power and intimacy are sig - nificantly related to content themes of agency and communion ( Bakan , 1966 ) , respectively , as manifest in people ' s life stories . People high in power motivation emphasize the agentic themes of self - mastery , status and victory , achievement and responsibility , and empowerment in self - defining memories , and they tend to conceive of the story ' s main characters ( imagoes ) in highly agentic terms relative to people low in power motivation . By contrast , people high in inti - macy motivation emphasize the communal themes of friendship and love , dialogue , caring for others , and sense of community in the sig - nificant scenes in their life stories , and they formulate highly communal imagoes such as personifications of the self as " the caregiver , " " the loyal friend , " and " the lover . " Woike ( 1995 ; Woike et al . , 1999 ) has shown that social motives are linked not only to the content of life stories but also to the cognitive style that the storyteller displays when describing a most memorable autobiographical event . People with strong power motivation tend to use an analytic and differentiated style when describing agentic events , perceiving more differences , separa - tions , and oppositions in the significant scenes of their life stories . By contrast , people with strong intimacy motivation tend to use a syn - thetic and integrated style when describing communal events , detecting similarities , con - nections , and congruence among different ele - ments in significant life story scenes . Individual differences in the structural com - plexity of life stories have been linked to Loev - inger ' s ( 1976 ) concept of ego development , which is a Level 2 personality construct . In Loevinger ' s scheme , people at relatively high stages of ego development adopt a more nu - anced and individualistic framework for making sense of subjective experience , whereas people low in ego development tend to view experi - ences in more black - and - white and conformist terms . McAdams ( 1985 ) found that , in compar - ison with adults low in ego development , adults high in ego development tended to include more different kinds of plots in their life stories , sug - gesting greater narrative complexity . Helson and Roberts ( 1994 ) found that midlife women high in ego development were more likely than those scoring low to narrate negative life scenes to suggest that they had changed considerably through the adversity . More complex life stories may involve greater levels of change in the SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 113 characters . In a study of how college students narrate their own religious development , Mc - Adams , Booth , and Selvik ( 1981 ) found that students high in ego development were more likely to articulate a story of transformation and growth , suggesting that they had gone through significant religious doubts and uncertainties and were developing toward a new and more personalized ideological perspective . In Pille - mer ' s ( 1998 ) terms , students high in ego devel - opment centered their faith stories around orig - inating events , making dramatic turning points in the narrative . By contrast , students low in ego development tended to deny that they had ever gone through a crisis in faith or described a period of questioning in their lives that was then abandoned as they returned to their original beliefs . The students low in ego development , therefore , tended to construct faith narratives of stability and consistency , showcasing what Pil - lemer ( 1998 ) called anchoring events . McAdams , Diamond , de St . Aubin , and Mansfield ( 1997 ) compared the life stories con - structed by adults scoring high on objective ( behavioral and self - report ) indexes of generat - ivity with those constructed by a matched sam - ple of adults scoring in the intermediate to low range on generativity . As a developmentally anchored concern for the well - being of the next generation , generativity falls within Level 2 of personality . The investigators found that , as a group , the highly generative adults tended to formulate life narratives that more closely ap - proximated a commitment story in comparison with their less generative counterparts . In the prototypical commitment story , the protagonist ( a ) enjoys an early family blessing or advan - tage , ( b ) is sensitized to the suffering of others at an early age , ( c ) is guided by a clear and compelling personal ideology that remains rel - atively stable over time , ( d ) transforms or re - deems bad scenes into good outcomes { redemp - tion sequences ) , and ( e ) sets goals for the future to benefit society . As an internalized narrative of the self , the commitment story may help to sustain and reinforce the generative adult ' s ef - forts to contribute in positive ways to the next generation . Although many different kinds of life stories might be constructed by highly generative peo - ple , the adult who works hard to guide and foster the next generation may make sense of his or her strong commitment in terms of an internalized narrative that suggests that he or she was " called " or destined to do good things for others , that such a personal destiny is deeply rooted in childhood , reinforced by a precocious sensitivity to the suffering of others , and bol - stered by a clear and convincing belief system that remains steadfast over time . Perceiving one ' s life in terms of redemption sequences ( bad scenes are transformed into good out - comes ) , furthermore , provides the hope that hard work today will yield positive dividends for the future , a hope that may sustain genera - tive efforts as private as raising one ' s child and as public as committing oneself to the advance - ment of one ' s own society ( Kotre , 1999 ) . Sto - ries in literature , myth , and folklore that cele - brate generativity often display the kinds of themes identified as part of the commitment story ( McAdams , 1993 ) . A prominent theme in the commitment story is the transformation of bad events into good outcomes , which McAdams et al . ( 1997 ) called a redemption sequence . The theme of redemp - tion is a powerful motif , as well , in life stories of reformed drug addicts ( Singer , 1997 ) and ex - convicts who have renounced a life of crime ( Maruna , 1997 ) . McAdams , Reynolds , Lewis , Patten , and Bowman ( 2001 ) coded narrative accounts of key life story scenes among stu - dents and adults for redemption sequences and for the contrasting narrative form of contami - nation sequences . In a contamination sequence , an emotionally positive event goes suddenly bad . Their results show that redemption se - quences in life stories are positively associated with self - report measures of life satisfaction , self - esteem , and sense of life coherence and negatively associated with depression . By con - trast , contamination sequences are positively as - sociated with depression and negatively associ - ated with the three indexes of well - being . The results are consistent with the literature in health psychology showing that people who construe benefits as having followed from their injuries , illnesses , or misfortunes tend to show faster recovery from their setbacks and more positive well - being overall ( Affleck & Tennen , 1996 ) . Therefore , whereas life storytelling functions to provide the self with ego identity , it is also instrumental in mood repair ( Josephson , Singer , & Salovey , 1996 ) and in the overall mainte - nance of mental health . 114 McADAMS Cultural Psychology : Social Context and the Problems of ( Post ) Modernity In all human cultures , people tell stories to other people . The very concept of a story is inherently social in that stories exist to be told in a social context . " The narrative structure of autobiographical memory appears indistin - guishable from the narrative structure of other social communications , " according to Rubin ( 1998 ) , " and the recall of autobiographical memories is usually a social act that can define a social group " ( p . 54 ) . As noted earlier , devel - opmental psychologists such as Fivush ( 1994 ) and Nelson ( 1988 ) have emphasized the ways in which children and adults share personal mem - ories in conversation , how autobiographical memory is socially constructed . Thorne ( 2000 ) argued that the term personal memory is a mis - nomer , because the majority of important mem - ories are shared with other people . She sug - gested that a better term might be intimate mem - ories . For Thorne ( 2000 ) , the construction of self - defining memories and life stories is always a social enterprise , and " families and friends collude in self - making " ( p . 45 ) . Even when families and friends are absent , however , life stories may retain their social character . Her - mans ( 1996 ) viewed the self as akin to a poly - phonic novel , containing within it a multitude of internalized voices that " speak " to each other in dialogue . Me Adams ( 1998 ) contended that all life stories are formulated with both external and internalized audiences in mind . Someone is always listening or watching , be it friends and acquaintances , parents and children , or be it Freud ' s superego , Mead ' s generalized other , in - ternalized attachment objects , or God . Life stories mirror the culture wherein the story is made and told . Stories live in culture . They are born , they grow , they proliferate , and they eventually die according to the norms , rules , and traditions that prevail in a given so - ciety , according to a society ' s implicit under - standings of what counts as a tellable story , a tellable life . As Rosenwald ( 1992 ) put it , " When people tell life stories , they do so in accordance with the models of intelligibility specific to the culture " ( p . 265 ) . As noted earlier , Habermas and Bluck ( 2000 ) contended that before a per - son can formulate a convincing life story , he or she must become acquainted with the culture ' s concept of biography . In modern Western cul - tures , Denzin ( 1989 ) and Me Adams ( 1996 ) sug - gested biographies are expected to begin in the family , to involve growth and expansion in the early years , to trace later problems back to earlier conflicts , to incorporate epiphanies and turning points that mark changes in the protag - onist ' s quest , and to be couched in the discourse of progress versus decline . But other societies tell lives in different ways and have different views of what constitutes a good story to tell ( Gregg , 1991 ) . Even in a given society , furthermore , differ - ent stories compete for dominance and accep - tance . Feminists such as Heilbrun ( 1988 ) argue that , in Western societies , many women " have been deprived of the narratives , or the texts , plots , or examples , by which they might assume power over—take control over—their lives " ( p . 17 ) . It is painfully clear that life stories echo gender and class constructions in society and reflect , in one way or another , prevailing pat - terns of hegemony in the economic , political , and cultural contexts wherein human lives are situated . Power elites in society privilege cer - tain life stories over others , and therefore a number of narrative researchers and clinicians seek to give voice and expression to forms of life narrative that have traditionally been sup - pressed or marginalized ( Franz & Stewart , 1994 ; M . M . Gergen & Gergen , 1993 ; M . White & Epston , 1990 ) . A wide - ranging and loosely coordinated movement in the social sciences , the narrative study of lives , has emerged in recent years as an interdisciplinary effort to write , interpret , and disseminate people ' s life stories , with special attention paid to the accounts of women , people of color , and representatives of other groups whose lives and stories have historically been ignored or even suppressed ( Josselson & Lieb - lich , 1993 ) . Many of the studies undertaken by scholars in this arena use inductive and herme - neutical methods to examine in depth small samples of life stories collected from clearly defined sociodemographic and cultural groups . For instance , Modell ( 1992 ) identified common themes and narrative strategies in the stories that birth parents tell about why they gave up their children for adoption . Walkover ( 1992 ) found that married couples on the edge of par - enthood crafted stories about their imagined future in which they romanticized and idealized the children they were about to have , suggesting SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 115 an implicit ( but irrational ) belief in the perfect - ibility of childhood . Linn ( 1997 ) identified com - mon life narrative types among Israeli soldiers who refused to engage in what they believed to be immoral acts of aggression . Gregg ( 1996 ) identified a hybrid life narrative form that mixes themes of modernity and traditional Islamic faith among contemporary young Moroccans . Cohler , Hostetler , and Boxer ( 1998 ) analyzed conflicts , frustrations , and potentialities in gen - erativity in the life stories of gay couples . Crossley ( 2001 ) explored how HIV patients the - matize the sense of place and the meaning of home in their life stories . Anthropologists and cross - cultural psycholo - gists have long been interested in what stories can reveal about the similarities and differences among cultures . Folk tales , legends , sacred myths , and biographical stories have been viewed as windows into patterns of culture and into the complex ( and sometimes contested ) relations between culture and self ( Geertz , 1973 ; Shweder & Sullivan , 1993 ) . What has sometimes gone unrecognized , however , is how psychosocially crucial life storytelling is in con - temporary modern cultures . Following Giddens ( 1991 ) and Taylor ( 1989 ) , McAdams ( 1996 , 1997 ) has argued that the unique problems that cultural modernity poses for human selfhood require modern men and women to become especially adept at assimilating their lives to culturally intelligible stories . In the modern world , the self is a reflexive project that a per - son is expected to " work on , " to develop , im - prove , expand , and strive to perfect . Modern people see the self as complex and multifaceted , as containing many layers and depth , and as changing relentlessly over time . At the same time , they feel a strong urge to find some co - herence in the self , to fashion a self that is more or less unified and purposeful within the discor - dant cultural parameters that situate their lives . From the media to everyday discourse , modern life is filled with models and examples of how to live a meaningful life and how not to . Yet , virtually every positive model has its draw - backs , nothing close to a consensus exists , and even if some modest level of cultural consensus could be reached , modern people are socialized to find their own way , to craft a self that is true to who one " really " is . As a consequence , peo - ple pick and choose and plagiarize selectively from the many stories and images they find in culture to formulate a narrative identity . Identity is not a problem unique to cultural modernity , but it is especially characteristic of it . In modern life , constructing one ' s own meaningful life story is a veritable cultural imperative . As we move today into what some observers have deemed a postmodern world , the problem of fashioning an identity may become even more challenging ( K . J . Gergen , 1992 ) . On first blush , the concept of narrative is especially ap - pealing in considering the problems of selfhood under the cultural conditions of postmodernity . The postmodern self is like a text , a narrative that continues to be written and rewritten over time . Shotter and Gergen ( 1989 ) wrote that , in the postmodern world , the " primary medium within which identities are created and have their currency is not just linguistic but textual ; persons are largely ascribed identities according to the manner of their embedding within a dis - course—in their own or in the discourses of others " ( p . ix ) . Identities are ascribed by culture rather than constructed by the individual . The wild mix of cultural narratives and discourses determines a person ' s identity from one mo - ment to the next . Each moment of discourse brings with it a new expression of the self . Over time , expressions are collected and patched to - gether into a montage - like text whose develop - ment from one moment to the next can never be predicted . But what are texts ? They are nothing but patterns of words , pictures , signs , and other sorts of representations . There is nothing sub - stantive about them , nothing real ; nor is there any sense in which a text can be said to be really " true " or " good . " As Derrida ' s ( 1972 ) decon - structionist agenda would have it , texts have no inherent and stable meanings . Language is in - determinate . Every word is ambiguous in and of itself , and its particular meaning in a particular moment is dependent on its relation to other equally ambiguous words with which it is spo - ken or written . Identity would appear to be a near - insoluble problem for the postmodern self . Because all texts are indeterminate , no single life can really mean a single thing , no organizing pattern of identity can be validly discerned in any single human life . K . J . Gergen ( 1992 ) made the point forcefully : The postmodern condition more generally is marked by a plurality of voices vying for the right to re - ality—to be accepted as legitimate expressions of the 116 McADAMS true and the good . As the voices expand in power and presence , all that seemed proper , right - minded , and well understood is subverted . In the postmodern world we become increasingly aware that the objects about which we speak are not so much " in the world " as they are products of perspective . Thus , processes such as emotion and reason cease to be real and significant essences of persons ; rather , in the light of pluralism we perceive them to be imposters , the outcomes of our ways of conceptualizing them . Under postmodern con - ditions , persons exist in a state of continuous construc - tion and reconstruction ; it is a world where anything goes that can be negotiated . Each reality of self gives way to a reflexive questioning , irony , and ultimately the playful probing of yet another reality . The center fails to hold . ( p . 7 ) When Gergen wrote " the center fails to hold , " what he meant ( among other things ) was that ( a ) the subjective " I " ( human agency ) is no longer central to human life and can no longer hold together and appropriate subjective expe - rience as its own , and ( b ) the objective " me " ( the self - concept ) can no longer be held together because , as an indeterminate text , it is changing from one moment to the next . Just how true this is today is a matter of interesting cultural debate ( Holstein & Gubrium , 2000 ; Me Adams , 1997 ) . With respect to the alleged breakdown of the agential I , research in developmental psychol - ogy , reviewed earlier , shows that young chil - dren develop a strong sense of the agential I by the time they have reached their second birthday and that this generally taken - for - granted aspect of human selfhood has a considerable integra - tive effect on human experience . In autism and schizophrenia , the center may not hold , but it is hard to believe that most normal people do not experience life from the standpoint of a cen - tered , integrative I , even in highly collectivist and nonindustrial societies ( Holland , 1997 ) . With respect to the difficulty the I may have in fashioning a life story that centers the me and gives the person ' s life a sense of unity and purpose , the postmodern view underscores the dynamic nature of the me and provides a valu - able counterpoint to the naive American view that ( with hard work ) a person can be anything that he or she wishes to be . Identity is not an individual achievement but a work of ( and in ) culture . In a sense , the person and the person ' s social world coauthor identity . Identity is a psy - chosocial construction ( MeAdams , 1996 ) . Still , Gergen and other postmodern theorists may have exaggerated the extent to which contem - porary Westerners believe they have little con - trol over identity and the extent to which they experience their lives as in constant flux . And Gergen may have underestimated the integra - tive power of stories . " It overstates things to imply that the only stability and continuity in life narratives derives from recurrent features of [ sociocultural ] tasks and circumstances , " wrote Robinson and Taylor ( 1998 , p . 141 ) . " This is not to say that self - narratives never change , only that at any given time there is some select subset of experiences that is regarded as most relevant to one ' s identity " ( p . 141 ) . Another important emphasis in postmodern approaches is the multiplicity of selfhood ( K . J . Gergen , 1992 ) . The self is or can be many different things at any given point in time or period in a person ' s life . With respect to life stories , then , postmodern approaches suggest that there is not one integrative narrative to be found in any given life but , rather , a multiplicity of narratives . Furthermore , these narratives are likely to contradict and compete with each other and , more generally , to relate to one another in a complex and constantly changing manner . In that postmodern lives are always in flux and in that no single story can possibly bring together the many different and everchanging features of postmodern life , it would be naive to think that each person crafts an unproblematic and self - consistent grand narrative that organizes his or her entire life into a pattern of perfect unity and clear purpose . As Me Adams ( 1997 ) has shown , the post - modern emphasis on multiplicity is consistent with a number of trends in social , cognitive , developmental , and evolutionary psychology today , all emphasizing the particularity , modu - larity , and domain specificity of human func - tioning . Nonetheless , a totally modular view of selfhood would seem too extreme , given peo - ple ' s phenomenological experiences of , at min - imum , some degree of integration in daily life and given the naturally integrative power of narrative itself ( Bruner , 1986 ; Gregg , 1991 ; McAdams , 1997 ; Robinson & Taylor , 1998 ; Sacks , 1995 ) . McAdams ' s life story model of identity tends to emphasize the integrative na - ture of stories , how it is that any given narrative can bring together disparate features and ten - dencies in a given life into a more or less unifying and purpose - giving whole . Nonethe - less , it would certainly be wrong to maintain that such integration in identity is fully and SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 117 unproblematically captured in one large story for each life . People carry with them and bring into conversation a wide range of self - stories , and these stories are nested in larger and over - lapping stories , creating ultimately a kind of anthology of the self . Although no single story may encompass all of the many narratives that any given person can use to make sense of his or her life , some stories are larger and more inte - grative than others and come closer , therefore , to functioning as identity formats for a given person . Thus identity may not be captured in a single grand narrative for each person , but iden - tity nonetheless is accomplished through narra - tive . People create unity and purpose in their lives , and they make sense of the psychosocial niches they inhabit in adulthood through stories , even if they must rely on more than one story to do so . Despite disagreements , then , over the degree of integration that characterizes contemporary social life in the industrialized West and the extent to which any single story can integrate a single life , postmodern approaches to selfhood share with the life story model of identity ( as well as a number of other approaches reviewed in this article ) a strong and abiding belief in the importance of human narratives . Human life is storied , conceived in terms of settings , scenes , characters , plots , and themes . Stories are ideally suited to capture how a human actor , endowed with consciousness and motivated by intention , enacts desires and beliefs and strives for goals over time and in social context ( Barresi & Juckes , 1997 ) . Life stories are psychosocial texts that are jointly crafted by the individual himself or herself and the culture within which the individual ' s life has meaning . Our autobio - graphical stories reflect who we are , and they also reflect the world in which we live . Conclusion The idea that identity is an internalized and evolving life story ties together a number of important theoretical and empirical trends in developmental , cognitive , personality , and cul - tural psychology . In late adolescence and young adulthood , people living in modern societies begin putting their lives together into integra - tive narratives of the self , reconstructing the past and imaginatively anticipating the future in such a way as to provide their lives with some sense of unity and purpose . It is at this time in the life course that young men and women are first motivated by cultural demands and encour - agement to embark on the identity project and first able to construe their lives as full - fledged narratives expressing temporal , biographical , causal , and thematic coherence . Nonetheless , the developmental precursors to life story mak - ing can be traced all the way back to the 1 - year - old ' s emergent understanding of intentionality , the development of the agential " I " and the objective " me " in the 2nd year of life , the mat - uration of a theory of mind in Years 3 and 4 , and the early conversations that children enjoy with their parents , siblings , and friends as they co - construct the remembered past . On the other end of the spectrum , life story making continues well beyond the early adult years , as midlife and older men and women continue to refashion themselves and renarrate their lives in the wake of predictable and unpredictable life changes . In the midlife years and beyond , the issue of gen - erativity may move to the front and center of a person ' s life story as he or she seeks to fashion an appealing story " ending " that will generate new and good beginnings . The psychology of life stories ties neatly to contemporary research and theory on autobio - graphical memory . Autobiographical memory helps to locate and ground the self within an ongoing life story featuring extended lifetime periods or chapters , knowledge about typical or characteristic life events , and specific and some - times vivid details of particularly well - remem - bered scenes . Like the life story , autobiograph - ical memory is contoured by the person ' s cur - rent goals and anticipations of what future chapters and scenes are likely to bring . Yet , autobiographical memory and the life story are not exactly the same phenomena . Autobio - graphical memory encompasses a vast range of personal information and experience , whereas the life story consists of a more delimited set of temporally and thematically organized scenes and scripts that together constitute identity . Life stories provide a view of human person - ality that cannot be accessed through disposi - tional traits or characteristic adaptations . In - deed , personality may be seen as a unique pat - terning of traits , adaptations , and stories . Dispositional traits , such as those presented in the Big Five trait taxonomy ( McCrae & Costa , 1990 ) , provide an initial sketch of human indi - 118 McADAMS viduality ; characteristic adaptations , such as motives and developmental tasks , fill in the details ; and life stories provide integration and meaning . Individual differences in life stories are just as rich and interesting as individual differences in any other aspect of human indi - viduality . Among the more important individ - ual - differences dimensions are content themes of agency and communion , narrative sequences of redemption and contamination , and structural complexity and organization of life stories . Stories live to be told to others . Life stories , therefore , are continually made and remade in social relationships and in the overall social context provided by culture . As psychosocial constructions , life stories reflect the values , norms , and power differentials inherent in the societies wherein they have their constitutive meanings . The construction of coherent life sto - ries is an especially challenging problem for adults living in contemporary modern ( and postmodern ) societies , wherein selves are viewed as reflexive projects imbued with com - plexity and depth , ever - changing and yet de - manding a coherent framing . Given the central - ity of life story making and life storytelling in contemporary social life , it is heartening to see that empirical psychologists have recently turned their attention to life stories and autobio - graphical memories . Stories always have audi - ences , explicit or implied . Developmental , cog - nitive , personality , and cultural psychologists have recently joined in as audiences for peo - ple ' s life stories , bringing their theories and their hypotheses to the performance and , we surely hope , their wisdom and insight as well . References Adler , A . ( 1927 ) . The practice and theory of individ - ual psychology . New York : Harcourt , Brace & World . Affleck , G . , & Tennen , H . ( 1996 ) . Construing bene - fits from adversity : Adaptational significance and dispositional underpinnings . Journal of Personal - ity . 64 , 899 - 922 . Allport , G . W . ( 1965 ) . Letters from Jenny . New York : Harcourt , Brace & World . Anderson , R . C , & Pitchert , J . W . ( 1978 ) . Recall of previously unrecalled information following a shift in perspective . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 17 , 1 - 12 . Applebee , A . N . ( 1978 ) . The child ' s concept of story . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Arnett , J . J . ( 2000 ) . Emerging adulthood : A theory of development from the late teens through the twen - ties . American Psychologist , 55 , 469 - 480 . Baerger , D . , & McAdams , D . P . ( 1999 ) . Life story coherence and its relation to psychological well - being . Narrative Inquiry , 9 , 69 - 96 . Bakan , D . ( 1966 ) . The duality of human existence : Isolation and communion in Western man . Boston : Beacon Press . Barclay , C . R . ( 1996 ) . Autobiographical remember - ing : Narrative constraints on objectified selves . In D . Rubin ( Ed . ) , Remembering our past : Studies in autobiographical memory ( pp . 94 - 125 ) . Cam - bridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Baron - Cohen , S . ( 1995 ) . Mindblindness : An essay on autism and theory of mind . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Barresi , J . , & Juckes , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Personology and the narrative interpretation of lives . Journal of Personality , 65 , 693 - 719 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1988 ) . The content and organization of autobiographical memories . In U . Neisser & E . Winograd ( Eds . ) , Remembering reconsidered : Ecological and traditional approaches to the study of memory ( pp . 193 - 243 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Bartlett , F . C . ( 1932 ) . Remembering . New York : Cambridge University Press . Blasi , A . ( 1988 ) . Identity and the development of the self . In D . K . Lapsley & F . C . Power ( Eds . ) , Self , ego , identity : Integrative approaches ( pp . 226 - 242 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Bluck , S . , & Levine , L . J . ( 1998 ) . Reminiscence as autobiographical memory : A catalyst for reminis - cence theory development . Ageing and Society , 18 , 185 - 208 . Breger , L . ( 1974 ) . From instinct to identity : The development of personality . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Brewer , W . F . ( 1986 ) . What is autobiographical memory ? In D . Rubin ( Ed . ) , Autobiographical memory ( pp . 25 - 49 ) . New York : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Brewer , W . F . , & Lichtenstein , E . H . ( 1982 ) . Stories are to entertain : A structural - affect theory of sto - ries . Journal of Pragmatics , 6 , 473 - 486 . Brown , R . , & Kulik , J . ( 1977 ) . Flashbulb memories . Cognition , 3 , 73 - 99 . Bruner , J . S . ( 1986 ) . Actual minds , possible worlds . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Bruner , J . S . ( 1994 ) . The " remembered " self . In U . Neisser & R . Fivush ( Eds . ) , The remembering self ( pp . 41 - 54 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Campbell , J . ( 1949 ) . The hero with a thousand faces . New York : Bollingen Foundation . Cantor , N . , & Zirkel , S . ( 1990 ) . Personality , cogni - tion , and purposive behavior . In L . Pervin ( Ed . ) , SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 119 Handbook of personality : Theory and research ( pp . 135 - 164 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Carlson , R . ( 1971 ) . Where is the person in personal - ity research ? Psychological Bulletin , 75 , 203 - 219 . Cohler , B . J . ( 1982 ) . Personal narrative and the life course . In P . Bakes & O . G . Brim Jr . ( Eds . ) , Life span development and behavior ( Vol . 4 , pp . 205 - 241 ) . New York : Academic Press . Cohler , B . J . , Hostetler , A . J . , & Boxer , A . ( 1998 ) . Generativity , social context , and lived experience : Narratives of gay men in middle adulthood . In D . P . McAdams & E . de St . Aubin ( Eds . ) , Gener - ativity and adult development ( pp . 265 - 309 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Associ - ation . Conway , M . A . , & Pleydell - Pearce , C . W . ( 2000 ) . The construction of autobiographical memories in the self - memory system . Psychological Review , 107 , 261 - 288 . Crossley , M . ( 2001 ) . Sense of place and its import for life transitions : The case of HIV positive individ - uals . In D . P . McAdams , R . Josselson , & A . Lieb - lich ( Eds . ) , Turns in the road : Narrative studies of lives in transition ( pp . 279 - 296 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Dennett , D . ( 1987 ) . The intentional stance . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Denzin , N . ( 1989 ) . Interpretive biography . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Derrida , J . ( 1972 ) . Positions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Elder , G . H . Jr . ( 1995 ) . The life course paradigm : Social change and individual development . In P . Moen , G . H . Elder Jr . , & K . Luscher ( Eds . ) , Ex - amining lives in context ( pp . 101 - 139 ) . Washing - ton , DC : American Psychological Association . Elkind , D . ( 1981 ) . Children and adolescents ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Emmons , R . A . ( 1986 ) . Personal strivings : An ap - proach to personality and subjective well - being . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 1058 - 1068 . Erikson , E . H . ( 1958 ) . Young man Luther : A study in psychoanalysis and history . New York : Norton . Erikson , E . H . ( 1959 ) . Identity and the life cycle : Selected papers . Psychological Issues , 1 , 5 - 165 . Erikson , E . H . ( 1963 ) . Childhood and society ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Norton . Fiese , B . H . , Sameroff , A . J . , Grotevant , H . D . , Wam - boldt , F . S . , Dickstein , S . , & Fravel , D . L . ( 1999 ) . The stories families tell : Narrative coherence , nar - rative interaction , and relationship beliefs . Mono - graphs of the Society for Research in Child Devel - opment , 64 , ( 2 , Serial No . 257 ) . Fitzgerald , J . M . ( 1988 ) . Vivid memories and the reminiscence phenomenon : The role of a self - nar - rative . Human Development , 31 , 261 - 273 . Fivush , R . ( 1994 ) . Constructing narrative , emotion , and self in parent - child conversations about the past . In U . Neisser & R . Fivush ( Eds . ) , The re - membering self ( y < p . 136 - 157 ) . New York : Cam - bridge University Press . Fivush , R . , & Kuebli , J . ( 1997 ) . Making everyday events emotional : The construal of emotion in par - ent - child conversations about the past . In N . L . Stein , P . A . Ornstein , B . Tversky , & C . Brainerd ( Eds . ) , Memory for everyday and emotional events ( pp . 239 - 266 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Franz , C , & Stewart , A . J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1994 ) . Women creating lives : Identities , resilience , and resis - tance . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . Freud , S . ( 1953 ) . The interpretation of dreams . In J . Strachey ( Ed . ) , The standard edition of the com - plete psychological works of Sigmund Freud ( Vols . 4 - 5 ) . London : Hogarth Press . ( Original work published 1900 ) . Geertz , C . ( 1973 ) . The interpretation of cultures . New York : Basic Books . Gergen , K . J . ( 1992 ) . The saturated self : Dilemmas of identity in contemporary life . New York : Basic Books . Gergen , M . M . , & Gergen , K . J . ( 1993 ) . Narratives of the gendered body in popular autobiography . In R . Josselson & A . Lieblich ( Eds . ) , The narrative study of lives ( Vol . 1 , pp . 191 - 218 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Giddens , A . ( 1991 ) . Modernity and self - identity : Self and society in the late modern age . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Gregg , G . ( 1991 ) . Self - representation : Life narrative studies in identity and ideology . New York : Green - wood Press . Gregg , G . ( 1996 ) . Themes of authority in life - histo - ries of young Moroccans . In S . Miller & R . Bourgia ( Eds . ) , Representations of power in Mo - rocco . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Gutmann , D . ( 1987 ) . Reclaimed powers . New York : Basic Books . Habermas , T . , & Bluck , S . ( 2000 ) . Getting a life : The emergence of the life story in adolescence . Psy - chological Bulletin , 126 , 748 - 769 . Hall , C . S . , & Lindzey , G . ( 1957 ) . Theories of per - sonality . New York : Wiley . Heilbrun , C . G . ( 1988 ) . Writing a woman ' s life . New York : Norton . Helson , R . , & Roberts , B . W . ( 1994 ) . Ego develop - ment and personality change in adulthood . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 66 , 911 - 920 . Hermans , H . J . M . ( 1996 ) . Voicing the self : From information processing to dialogical interchange . Psychological Bulletin , 119 , 31 - 50 . Hermans , H . J . M . , & Kempen , H . J . G . ( 1993 ) . The dialogical self : Meaning as movement . New York : Academic Press . 120 McADAMS Holland , D . ( 1997 ) . Selves as cultured : As told by an anthropologist who lacks a soul . In R . D . Ashmore & L . Jussim ( Eds . ) , Self and identity : Fundamental issues ( pp . 160 - 190 ) . New York : Oxford Univer - sity Press . Holstein , J . A . , & Gubrium , J . F . ( 2000 ) . The self we live by : Narrative identity in a postmodern world . New York : Oxford University Press . Holt , R . R . ( 1962 ) . Individuality and generalization in the psychology of personality : An evaluation . Journal of Personality , 30 , 377 - 402 . Howard , G . S . ( 1991 ) . Culture tales : A narrative approach to thinking , cross - cultural psychology , and psychotherapy . American Psychologist , 46 , 187 - 197 . Howe , M . L . , & Courage , M . L . ( 1997 ) . The emer - gence and early development of autobiographical memory . Psychological Review , 104 , 499 - 523 . James , W . ( 1963 ) . Psychology . Greenwich , CT : Fawcett . ( Original work published 1892 ) Josephson , B . R . . Singer , J . A . , & Salovey , P . ( 1996 ) . Mood regulation and memory : Repairing sad moods with happy memories . Cognition and Emo - tion , 10 , 437 - 444 . Josselson , R . , & Lieblich , A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1993 ) . The narrative study of lives ( Vol . 1 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Kagan , J . ( 1994 ) . Galen ' s prophecy . New York : Ba - sic Books . Kermode , F . ( 1967 ) . The sense of an ending . New York : Oxford University Press . Knowles , E . S . , & Sibicky , M . E . ( 1990 ) . Continuity and diversity in the stream of selves : Metaphorical resolutions of William James ' s one - in - many - selves paradox . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 16 , 676 - 687 . Kotre , J . ( 1984 ) . Outliving the self : Generativity and the interpretation of lives . Baltimore : Johns Hop - kins University Press . Kotre , J . ( 1999 ) . Make it count . New York : Free Press . Levinson , D . J . ( 1978 ) . The seasons of a man ' s life . New York : Alfred A . Knopf . Linn , R . ( 1997 ) . Soldiers ' narrative of selective moral resistance : A separate position of the connected self ? In A . Lieblich & R . Josselson ( Eds . ) , The narrative study of lives ( Vol . 5 , pp . 94—112 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Loevinger , J . ( 1976 ) . Ego development . San Fran - cisco : Jossey - Bass . Mandler , J . M . ( 1984 ) . Stories , scripts , and scenes : Aspects of schema theory . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Marcia , J . E . ( 1980 ) . Identity in adolescence . In J . Adelson ( Ed . ) , Handbook of adolescent psychol - ogy ( pp . 159 - 187 ) . New York : Wiley . Markus , H . , & Nurius , P . ( 1986 ) . Possible selves . American Psychologist , 41 , 954 - 969 . Maruna , S . ( 1997 ) . Going straight : Desistance from crime and life narratives of reform . In A . Lieblich & R . Josselson ( Eds . ) , The narrative study of lives ( Vol . 5 , pp . 59 - 93 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Maruna , S . ( 2001 ) . Making good : How ex - convicts reform and rebuild their lives . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . McAdams , D . P . ( 1980 ) . A thematic coding system for the intimacy motive . Journal of Research in Personality , 14 , 413 - 432 . McAdams , D . P . ( 1982 ) . Experiences of intimacy and power : Relationships between social motives and autobiographical memory . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 42 , 292 - 302 . McAdams , D . P . ( 1984 ) . Love , power , and images of the self . In C . Z . Malatesta & C . E . Izard ( Eds . ) , Emotion in adult development ( pp . 159 - 174 ) . Bev - erly Hills , CA : Sage . McAdams , D . P . ( 1985 ) . Power , intimacy , and the life story : Personological inquiries into identity . New York : Guilford Press . McAdams , D . P . ( 1993 ) . The stories we live by : Personal myths and the making of the self . New York : Morrow . McAdams , D . P . ( 1995 ) . What do we know when we know a person ? Journal of Personality , 63 , 365 - 396 . McAdams , D . P . ( 1996 ) . Personality , modernity , and the storied self : A contemporary framework for studying persons . Psychological Inquiry , 7 , 295 - 321 . McAdams , D . P . ( 1997 ) . The case for unity in the ( post ) modern self : A modest proposal . In R . Ash - more & L . Jussim ( Eds . ) , Self and identity : Fun - damental issues ( pp . 46 - 78 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . McAdams , D . P . ( 1998 ) . The role of defense in the life story . Journal of Personality , 66 , 1125 - 1146 . McAdams , D . P . ( 1999 ) . Personal narratives and the life story . In L . Pervin & O . John ( Eds . ) , Handbook of personality : Theory and research ( 2nd ed . , pp . 478 - 500 ) . New York : Guilford Press . McAdams , D . P . ( 2001 ) . The person : An integrated introduction to personality psychology ( 3rd ed . ) . Fort Worth , TX : Harcourt . McAdams , D . P . , Booth , L . , & Selvik , R . ( 1981 ) . Religious identity among students at a private col - lege : Social motives , ego stage , and development . Merrill - Palmer Quarterly , 27 , 219 - 239 . McAdams , D . P . , & Bowman , P . T . ( 2001 ) . Narrating life ' s turning points : Redemption and contamina - tion . In D . P . McAdams , R . Josselson , & A . Lie - blich ( Eds . ) , Turns in the road : Narrative studies of lives in transition ( pp . 3 - 34 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . McAdams , D . P . , & de St . Aubin , E . ( Eds . ) . ( 1998 ) . Generativity and adult development : How and why SPECIAL ISSUE : PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE STORIES 121 we care for the next generation . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . McAdams , D . P . , de St . Aubin , E . , & Logan , R . ( 1993 ) . Generativity among young , midlife , and older adults . Psychology and Aging , 8 , 221 - 230 . McAdams , D . P . , Diamond , A . , de St . Aubin , E . , & Mansfield , E . ( 1997 ) . Stories of commitment : The psychosocial construction of generative lives . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 72 , 678 - 694 . McAdams , D . P . , Hoffman , B . J . , Mansfield , E . D . , & Day , R . ( 1996 ) . Themes of agency and commun - ion in significant autobiographical scenes . Journal of Personality , 64 , 339 - 378 . McAdams , D . P . , & Ochberg , R . L . ( Eds . ) . ( 1988 ) . Psychobiography and life narratives . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . McAdams , D . P . , Reynolds , J . , Lewis , M . L . , Patten , A . , & Bowman , P . T . ( 2001 ) . When bad things turn good and good things turn bad : Sequences of re - demption and contamination in life narrative , and their relation to psychosocial adaptation in midlife adults and in students . Personality and Social Psy - chology Bulletin , 27 , 472 - 483 . McAdams , D . P . , & West , S . ( 1997 ) . Introduction : Personality psychology and the case study . Jour - nal of Personality , 65 , 757 - 783 . McCabe , A . , & Peterson , C . ( Eds . ) . ( 1991 ) . Devel - oping narrative structure . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . McCrae , R . R . , & Costa , P . T . Jr . ( 1990 ) . Personality in adulthood . New York : Guilford Press . Miller , P . J . ( 1994 ) . Narrative practices : Their role in socialization and self - construction . In U . Neisser & R . Fivush ( Eds . ) , The remembering self ( pp . 158 - 179 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Mischel , W . ( 1968 ) . Personality and assessment . New York : Wiley . Mischel , W . , & Shoda , Y . ( 1995 ) . A cognitive - affec - tive systems theory of personality : Reconceptual - izing situations , dispositions , dynamics , and in - variance in personality structure . Psychological Review , 102 , 246 - 268 . Model ] , J . ( 1992 ) . " How do you introduce yourself as a childless mother ? " Birthparent interpretations of parenthood . In G . C . Rosenwald & R . L . Ochberg ( Eds . ) , Storied lives : The cultural politics of self - understanding ( pp . 76 - 94 ) . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Moffitt , K . H . , & Singer , J . A . ( 1994 ) . Continuity in the life story : Self - defining memories , affect , and approach / avoidance personal strivings . Journal of Personality , 62 , 21 - 43 . Murray , H . A . ( 1938 ) . Explorations in personality . New York : Oxford University Press . Murray , S . L . , & Holmes , J . G . ( 1994 ) . Storytelling in close relationships : The construction of confi - dence . Personality and Social Psychology Bulle - tin , 20 , 650 - 663 . " Nasby , W . , & Read , N . ( 1997 ) . The life voyage of a solo circumnavigator : Theoretical and method - ological perspectives [ Special issue ] . Journal of Personality , 65 ( 4 ) . Neisser , U . , & Winograd , E . ( Eds . ) . ( 1988 ) . Remem - bering reconsidered : Ecological and traditional approaches to the study of memory . New York : Cambridge University Press . Nelson , K . ( 1988 ) . The ontogeny of memory for real events . In U . Neisser & E . Winograd ( Eds . ) , Re - membering reconsidered ( pp . 244 - 276 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Offer , D . , Kaiz , M . , Howard , K . I . , & Bennett , E . ( 2000 ) . The altering of reported experiences . Jour - nal of the American Academy of Child and Ado - lescent Psychiatry , 39 , 735 - 742 . Perry , W . C . ( 1970 ) . Forms of intellectual and ethical development in the college years . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . Peterson , B . E . , & Klohnen , E . C . ( 1995 ) . Realization of generativity in two samples of women at midlife . Psychology and Aging , 10 , 20 - 29 . Pillemer , D . B . ( 1998 ) . Momentous events , vivid memories . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Polkinghorne , D . ( 1988 ) . Narrative knowing and the human sciences . Albany : State University of New York Press . Pondy , L . R . , Morgan , G . , Frost , P . J . , & Dandridge , T . C . ( Eds . ) . ( 1983 ) . Organizational symbolism . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Ricoeur , P . ( 1984 ) . Time and narrative . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Robinson , J . A . , & Taylor , L . R . ( 1998 ) . Autobio - graphical memory and self - narratives : A tale of two stories . In C . P . Thompson , D . J . Hermann , D . Bruce , J . D . Read , D . G . Payne , & M . P . Toglia ( Eds . ) , Autobiographical memory : Theoretical and applied perspectives ( pp . 125 - 143 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Rosenwald , G . C . ( 1992 ) . Conclusion : Reflections on narrative self - understanding . In G . C . Rosenwald & R . L . Ochberg ( Eds . ) , Storied lives : The cultural politics of self - understanding ( pp . 265 - 289 ) . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Ross , M . ( 1997 ) . Validating memories . In N . L . Stein , P . A . Ornstein , B . Tversky , & C . Brainerd ( Eds . ) , Memory for everyday and emotional events ( pp . 49 - 81 ) . Mahwah , NJ : " Erlbaum . Rubin , D . C . ( 1998 ) . Beginnings of a theory of au - tobiographical remembering . In C . P . Thompson , D . J . Hermann , D . Bruce , J . D . Read , D . G . Payne , & M . P . Toglia ( Eds . ) , Autobiographical memory - Theoretical and applied perspectives ( pp . 47 - 67 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Rubin , D . C , Wetzler , S . E . , & Nebes , R . D . ( 1986 ) . Autobiographical memory across the lifespan . In 122 McADAMS D . C . Rubin ( Ed . ) , Autobiographical memory . New York : Cambridge University Press . Runyan , W . M . ( 1982 ) . Life histories and psycho - biography . New York : Oxford University Press . Sacks , O . ( 1995 , January 9 ) . Prodigies . New Yorker , pp . 44 - 65 . Sarbin , T . ( 1986 ) . The narrative as root metaphor for psychology . In T . Sarbin ( Ed . ) , Narrative psychol - ogy : The storied nature of human conduct ( pp . 3 - 21 ) . New York : Praeger . Schachter , D . L . ( 1996 ) . Searching for memory : The brain , the mind , and the past . New York : Basic Books . Schank , R . C , & Abelson , R . P . ( 1995 ) . Knowledge and memory : The real story . In R . S . Wyer Jr . ( Ed . ) , Advances in social cognition ( Vol . 8 , pp . 1 - 86 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Schmolk , H . , Buffalo , E . A . , & Squire , L . R . ( 2000 ) . Memory distortions develop over time : Recollec - tions of the O . J . Simpson verdict after 15 and 32 months . Psychological Science , 11 , 39 - 45 . Shotter , J . , & Gergen , K . J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1989 ) . Texts of identity . London : Sage . Shweder , R . A . , & Sullivan , M . A . ( 1993 ) . Cultural psychology : Who needs it ? Annual Review of Psy - chology , 44 , 497 - 523 . Singer , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Seeing one ' s self : Locating narrative memory in a framework of personality . Journal of Personality , 63 , 429 - 457 . Singer , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Message in a bottle : Stories of men and addiction . New York : Free Press . Singer , J . A . , & Salovey , P . ( 1993 ) . The remembered self . New York : Free Press . Stein , N . L . , Ornstein , P . A . , Tversky , B . , & Brainerd , C . ( Eds . ) . ( 1997 ) . Memory for everyday and emo - tional events . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Stein , N . L . , Wade , E . , & Liwag , M . C . ( 1997 ) . A theoretical approach to understanding and remem - bering emotional events . In N . L . Stein , P . A . Ornstein , B . Tversky , & C . Brainerd ( Eds . ) , Mem - ory for everyday and emotional events ( pp . 15 - 47 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Stern , D . ( 1985 ) . The interpersonal world of the human infant . New York : Basic Books . Sternberg , R . ( 1998 ) . Love is a story : A new theory of relationships . New York : Oxford University Press . Taylor , C . ( 1989 ) . Sources of the self : The making of the modern identity . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Thompson , C . P . , Skowronski , J . J . , Larsen , S . F . , & Betz , A . L . ( Eds . ) . ( 1996 ) . Autobiographical mem - ory : Remembering what and remembering when . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Thorne , A . ( 2000 ) . Personal memory telling and per - sonality development . Personality and Social Psy - chology Review , 4 , 45 - 56 . Tomasello , M . ( 2000 ) . Culture and cognitive devel - opment . Current Directions in Psychological Sci - ence , 9 , 37 - 40 . Tomkins , S . S . ( 1979 ) . Script theory . In H . E . Howe Jr . & R . A . Dienstbier ( Eds . ) , Nebraska Sympo - sium on Motivation ( Vol . 26 , pp . 201 - 236 ) . Lin - coln : University of Nebraska Press . Walkover , B . C . ( 1992 ) . The family as an over - wrought object of desire . In G . C . Rosenwald & R . L . Ochberg ( Eds . ) , Storied lives : The cultural politics of self - understanding ( pp . 178 - 191 ) . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Welch - Ross , M . K . ( 1995 ) . An integrative model of the development of autobiographical memory . De - velopmental Review , 15 , 338 - 365 . Wellman , H . M . ( 1993 ) . Early understanding of mind : The normal case . In S . Baron - Cohen , H . Tager - Flusberg , & D . J . Cohen ( Eds . ) , Under - standing other minds : Perspectives from autism ( pp . 10 - 39 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . White , M . , & Epston , D . ( 1990 ) . Narrative means to therapeutic ends . New York : Norton . White , R . ( 1952 ) . Lives in progress . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . Winter , D . G . ( 1973 ) . The power motive . New York : Free Press . Woike , B . A . ( 1995 ) . Most - memorable experiences : Evidence for a link between implicit and explicit motives and social cognitive processes in everyday life . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 68 , 1081 - 1091 . Woike , B . A . , Gersekovich , I . , Piorkowski , R . , & Polo , M . ( 1999 ) . The role of motives in the content and structure of autobiographical memory . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 76 , 600 - 612 . Received September 13 , 2000 Revision received January 2 , 2001 Accepted January 2 , 2001