Intuitive judgments of social statistics : How exhaustive does sampling need to be ? ☆ Thorsten Pachur a , ⁎ , Ralph Hertwig a , Jörg Rieskamp b a Center for Adaptive Rationality ( ARC ) , Max Planck Institute for Human Development , Berlin , Germany b Center for Economic Psychology , Department of Psychology , University of Basel , Switzerland H I G H L I G H T S • We examine the role of noncompensatory processing in instance - based inference . • We propose a heuristic for judging the relative frequency of events . • The heuristic performs competitively in describing people ' s frequency judgments . • In computer simulations we examine the ecological rationality of the heuristic . • The heuristic performs competitively in clustered and skewed environments . a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 25 June 2012 Revised 1 July 2013 Available online 13 July 2013 Keywords : Sampling Frequency Decision strategy Heuristics Availability One way to make inferences about social statistics , such as the frequencies of health risks in the population , is to probe relevant instances in one ' s social network . People can infer , for instance , the relative frequency of different diseases by probing how many members of their social network suffer from them . How are such instance - based inferences cognitively implemented ? Noncompensatory strategies based on lexicographic and limited search have been extensively examined in the context of cue - based inference . Their role in instance - based inference , by contrast , has received scant attention . We propose the social - circle heuristic as a model of noncompensatory instance - based inference entailing lexicographic and limited search , and test its descriptive and prescriptive implications : To what extent do people rely on the social - circle heuristic ? How accurate is the noncompensatory heuristic relative to a compensatory strategy when inferring event fre - quencies ? Two empirical studies show that the heuristic accurately predicts the judgments of a substantial portion of participants . A response time analysis also supports the assumption of lexicographic search : The earlier the heuristic predicted search to be terminated , the faster participants classi ﬁ ed as using the social - circle heuristic responded . Using computer simulations to systematically investigate the heuristic ' s prescriptive implications , we ﬁ nd that despite its limited search , the heuristic can approximate the accuracy of a compensatory strategy in skewed and in spatially clustered environments — both common properties of distributions in real - world social environments . © 2013 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Introduction In myriad domains of social life , people ' s decisions are in ﬂ uenced by their observations of others . In fact , imitating the behavior of others is a powerful and versatile heuristic that helps us to navigate the trials and tribulations of complex social environments ( e . g . , Hertwig & Herzog , 2009 ; Hertwig , Hoffrage , & the ABC Research Group , 2013 ; Richerson & Boyd , 2005 ) . Knowing what others do , want , like , or have can help us make decisions in the face of such diverse issues as whether or not to adopt “ green ” behavior ( Goldstein , Cialdini , & Griskevicius , 2008 ) , whether to engage in helping behavior ( Fischer et al . , 2011 ) , which cultural products ( e . g . , books , movies , TV shows , and music ) to purchase and consume , and how satis ﬁ ed we are with our income ( Boyce , Brown , & Moore , 2010 ) . In Salganik , Dodds , and Watts ' s ( 2006 ) investigation of simulated cultural markets , for in - stance , individuals ' music preferences were substantially altered when given frequency information about the choices of other individ - uals in the market . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 ☆ We thank Florian Steinmann for collecting the data in Study 1 , Henrik Olsson and Lael Schooler for their many constructive comments , and Laura Wiles , Valerie Chase , and Susannah Goss for editing the manuscript . This research was supported by a grant from the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) as part of the priority program “ New Frameworks of Rationality ” ( SPP 1516 ) to Ralph Hertwig and Thorsten Pachur ( HE 2768 / 7 - 1 ) . ⁎ Corresponding author at : Center for Adaptive Rationality , Max Planck Institute for Human Development , Lentzeallee 94 , 14195 Berlin , Germany . E - mail address : pachur @ mpib - berlin . mpg . de ( T . Pachur ) . 0022 - 1031 / $ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jesp . 2013 . 07 . 004 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Experimental Social Psychology journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jesp Sometimeswehavethebene ﬁ t ofexplicit informationaboutthefre - quency of others ' behaviors ( e . g . , how many people have visited a website or seen a movie on the openingweekend ) . In manyreal - life sit - uations , however , we have no such objective social statistics at hand , and thus need to rely on much more limited counts of experiences stored in memory . In May 2011 , for instance , German consumers may have wondered whether to stop consuming raw tomatoes , fresh cu - cumbers , and leafy salads , as recommended by the German Federal Institute of Risk Assessment after a sudden increase in life - threatening infections caused by Shiga - toxin - producing Escherichia coli ( STEC ; ECDC , 2011 ) . Unable to look up an of ﬁ cial count of others ' choices in the same situation , consumers could gauge the frequency of recommendation - compliant behaviors among the members of their close social network ( e . g . , friends and family ) . Compensatory and noncompensatory processing Accessingfrequency informationin terms of instances experienced by one ' s proximate social network has been proposed as a key men - tal tool for inferring the frequency of behaviors or characteristics in the population ( Fiedler & Juslin , 2005 ; Galesic , Olsson , & Rieskamp , 2012 ; Tversky & Kahneman , 1973 ) . It is implicitly or explicitly as - sumed that this instance knowledge is processed in a compensatory fashion . Compensatory strategies consider all available informa - tion and process it such that con ﬂ icting pieces of evidence can be traded off against each other . Undeniably , compensatory strategies have been successful in describing people ' s frequency judgments ( e . g . , Hertwig , Pachur , & Kurzenhäuser , 2005 ; Pachur , Hertwig , & Steinmann , 2012 ) . However , also noncompensatory strategies play a major role in human judgment and decision making ( Ford , Schmitt , Schechtman , Hults , & Doherty , 1989 ; Gigerenzer , Hertwig , & Pachur , 2011 ) . Noncompensatory strategies ignore parts of the information , with the consequence that a piece of evidence that supports one option cannot be compensated for by another piece that favors the other option but is ignored ( e . g . , Katsikopoulos , Pachur , Machery , & Wallin , 2008 ) . Due to their limited search , noncompensatory strategies respect the boundaries of human information processing ( Gigerenzer , Todd , & the ABC Research Group , 1999 ; Simon , 1990 ) . To date , the comparison of compensatory and noncompensatory strategies has been limited to cue - based inference 1 ( Gigerenzer et al . , 1999 ; Rieskamp & Hoffrage , 2008 ; see also Payne , Bettman , & Johnson , 1993 ; Tversky , 1972 ) . Yet evidence for the use of noncompensatory strategies in cue - based inference ( Einhorn , 1970 ; Gigerenzer et al . , 2011 ) raises the question of whether and to what extent noncompen - satory processingalso occursin thecontextof instance - basedinference . Limitedsearch andnoncompensatory processingmayplay a role in instance - based inference for several reasons . First , it can reduce processing cost . Indeed , noncompensatory processes are particularly evident in decisions involving information cost , such as cue - based in - ference from memory ( e . g . , Bröder & Schiffer , 2003 , 2006 ) ; instance - based inferences are often memory - based . Second , due to information redundancy in natural environments , limited search can result in deci - sions that coincide with those based on more extensive search . As shown by Gigerenzer and Goldstein ( 1996 ) in the context of cue - based inference , structural aspects of the environment ( e . g . , intercor - relations between cues ) permit simple mechanisms to approximate the accuracy of more complex strategies . Similarly , in a risky choice context , Hertwig and Pleskac ( 2008 , 2010 ) found that increases in inferential accuracy level off relatively quickly with increasing sample sizes . This decreasing marginal utility of more information may also hold for instance - based inferences of event frequencies . Moreover , Hertwig and Pleskac ( 2010 ) demonstrated that small sam - ples facilitate decision making because they permit decision makers to discriminate among options more easily . A ﬁ nal advantage of noncompensatory processing of instance - based knowledge is reliabil - ity of knowledge . Speci ﬁ cally , sample spaces may differ in terms of how reliable a decision maker ' s knowledge of them is . Ordered and noncompensatory processing of these sample spaces elegantly en - ables the decision maker to prioritize sample spaces with more reli - able knowledge . Our goals in this article are the following . First , we propose a model of a heuristic that represents noncompensatory processing of instances : the social - circle heuristic . Second , we investigate to what extent this heuristic is a descriptively accurate model of people ' s judgments of social statistics ( frequencies ) . Third , from a prescriptive perspective , we determine the price ( in terms of accuracy ) the heu - ristic pays for ignoring part of the information . To these ends , we ex - amine how well the social - circle heuristic fares in accounting for people ' s inferences , relative to a compensatory instance - based heu - ristic ( Studies 1 and 2 ) and to three cue - based strategies ( Study 2 ) . In Study 3 , we turn to a systematic analysis of the prescriptive ques - tion by addressing the ecological rationality of the social - circle heuris - tic ( Todd , Gigerenzer , & the ABC Research Group , 2012 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , we use computer simulations to investigate the environmental struc - tures fostering and hampering the heuristic ' s performance , relative to that of a compensatory strategy . We begin by describing the established compensatory models of instance - based inference . Models of compensatory processing of instance - based inference Perhaps the most prominent account of how people infer the fre - quency of a class of events ( or the probability of an event ) is Tversky and Kahneman ' s ( 1973 ) availability heuristic . It assumes that when judging the frequency with which an event category occurs in the world ( e . g . , heart attacks among middle - aged people ) , people recall the event ' s occurrences from memory . The likelihood that an occurrence ( instance ) stored in memory is sampled is a function of its “ availability , ” and this ease of retrieval depends on , for instance , how “ vivid ” or “ dramatic ” the instance is . In principle , how - ever , the mnemonic sample space is limited only by the bounds of the decision maker ' s knowledge and can include directly experienced as well as “ virtual ” instances ( e . g . , media reports about a person killed in a shark attack ) . Another way to model instance - based frequency judgments is in terms of exemplar models ( e . g . , Nosofsky , 1986 ; Pachur & Olsson , 2012 ) . In these models , memory representations contribute to judg - ments of frequency as a function of their similarity to the class of tar - get events . For instance , Dougherty , Gettys , and Ogden ' s ( 1999 ) MINERVA - DM model assumes that each individual encounter with an instance — regardless of whether the instance is real or virtual — is stored and that the target event category ( e . g . , heart attack ) is com - pared with these memory traces using a global matching process . Event categories that result in a stronger activation , or “ echo , ” in memory are inferred to be more frequent . Dougherty et al . ( 1999 ) showed that phenomena that are usually explained in terms of the availability heuristic can also be accounted for by MINERVA - DM . 2 Like the availability heuristic , exemplar models assume that the sam - pling space is restricted only by the bounds of a person ' s knowledge . 1 In contrast to instance - based inference , cue - based inference relies on semantic properties of an event or object to make an inference . For instance , to judge whether there are more people in Germany who belong to a basketball or a tennis club , a cue - based strategy would consider properties of the respective sports ( e . g . , whether it is a team sport or an individual sport ) as cues . 2 According to another exemplar model , Juslin and Persson ' s ( 2002 ) PROBEX , infer - ences about the population frequency of event categories can be made by retrieving knowledge about other , similar event categories . For instance , in order to infer wheth - er tuberculosis or bladder cancer occurs more frequently , PROBEX would retrieve cri - terion knowledge about the frequencies of other infectious diseases and cancers and integrate this knowledge as a function of their similarity to tuberculosis and bladder cancer , respectively . Because instance knowledge does not enter the processing direct - ly , we will not treat PROBEX as a genuine instance - based model . 1060 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 Hertwig et al . ( 2005 ) proposed a compensatory strategy that as - sumed a more constrained sample space . Availability - by - recall , a spe - ci ﬁ c instantiation of the availability heuristic ( see also Sedlmeier , Hertwig , & Gigerenzer , 1998 ) , restricts the sampling space to directly experiencedinstancesandexcludesvirtualones . 3 Toinfer , say , wheth - er more people in the general population suffer from tuberculosis or bladder cancer , availability - by - recall searches for instances of both diseases within a person ' s proximate social environment — de ﬁ ned as his or her family , friends , and acquaintances . Disease instances be - yond this close network , such as those involving strangers or those featured in the media , will not be sampled . Hertwig et al . compared availability - by - recall with three alternative cognitive strategies and found that , side - by - side with another strategy ( which assumed an automatic processing of actual frequencies ) , it provided the best de - scription of people ' s judgments of risk frequencies . Relatedly , Pachur et al . ( 2012 ) found that a strategy that — like the availability heuristic — additionally recruits instance knowledge from the media ( e . g . , news , movies , internet ) was much less predictive of people ' s judgments than was availability - by - recall . Therefore , we will not consider the availability heuristic here . Like the availability heuristic and exemplar models , availability - by - recall entails compensatory processing : it sums up the relevant in - stancesin the de ﬁ ned sample space ( i . e . , a person ' ssocial network ) . As a consequence , the non - occurrence of instances of , say , bladder cancer in a person ' s close family can be compensated for by a case of bladder cancer among his or her friends . Despite the empirical support for the compensatory mechanism of availability - by - recall in Hertwig et al . ( 2005 ) , there are indicators that ( at least some ) people process in - stances in a noncompensatory fashion . Take , for instance , the false consensus effect . In the classic demonstration by Ross , Greene , and House ( 1977 ) , students estimated the percentage of other students who agreed with a statement as being higher ( lower ) when they themselves agreed ( vs . disagreed ) with it ( 63 . 5 % vs . 23 . 3 % ; for an overview , see Marks & Miller , 1987 ) . Importantly , this pattern also emerged when respondents were informed about others ' opinion re - garding the statement ( e . g . , Krueger & Clement , 1994 , Experiment 3 ) , that is , when they enjoyed explicit instance knowledge . One inter - pretation of these results is that some people may rely on a very small sample of instances ( a sample that ﬁ rst and foremost includes them - selves ) rather than considering their entire store of instance knowl - edge . Assuming that judgments of event frequencies sometimes stem from limited search within a person ' s mnemonic repertoire of instances , how can such limited search and noncompensatory pro - cessing of instances be modeled ? In the following , we propose one possible model . 4 Noncompensatory processing of instances : the social - circle heuristic Thesocial - circleheuristicaimstomodelhowpeoplejudgetherelative frequency of others ' beliefs , preferences , behaviors , and characteristics in the population . Speci ﬁ cally , it predicts which of two event categories is inferred to occur more frequently in a reference class . Fig . 1 depicts the heuristic ' s processing steps . In order for the heuristic to be applica - ble , the names of both event categories need to be recognized . If only one category is recognized , the inference is assumed to be based on the recognition heuristic ( see Pachur , Todd , Gigerenzer , Schooler , & Goldstein , 2011 ) ; if none is recognized , an inference is made by guess - ing . Like availability - by - recall , the social - circle heuristic searches for instances of both events within a person ' s proximate social envi - ronment . Unlike availability - by - recall , however , the heuristic entails lexicographic and limited search . Speci ﬁ cally , it exploits the well - documented hierarchical structure of social networks , which consist of discrete subgroups ( “ circles ” ) of increasing size ( e . g . , Hill & Dunbar , 2003 ; Milardo , 1992 ; Zhou , Sornette , Hill , & Dunbar , 2005 ) — in line with the increasing evidence of a link between the structure of the ex - ternal world and search in memory ( e . g . , Hills , Todd , & Goldstone , 2008 ; Pirolli & Card , 1999 ) . These circles are sequentially probed for critical instances . Search within a circle is not limited , and all relevant instances in a circle enter the ﬁ nal tally for this circle . Search across cir - cles can be limited ( this appears plausible because it has been found that people employ social categories to probe social memory ; Bond & Brockett , 1987 ; Fiske , 1995 ; Hills & Pachur , 2012 ) . What are these circles ? Consistent with the observation that people consider their own behaviors when inferring the prevalence of behaviors at large ( Ross et al . , 1977 ) , the social - circle heuristic begins by probing information about the self ( circle 1 ) . From this starting point , two alternative social dimensions may guide further search : ( a ) altruism or ( b ) frequency of contact . Altruism typically manifests itself in kin relationships ( Hamilton , 1964 ) and in recipro - cal relationships ( Singer , 1981 ) . Using the dimension of altruism to describe social network structure , one can hypothesize three circles beyond the “ self ” circle : family ( circle 2 ) , friends ( circle 3 ) , and ac - quaintances ( circle 4 ) , with family encompassing kin relationships ( including nongenetic relationships , that is , with one ' s partner and his or her family ) and friends and acquaintances encompassing nonkin reciprocal relationships ( see Geary & Bjorklund , 2000 ; Kahn & Antonucci , 1980 ; Moreno , 1936 ) . Based on this structure , our ﬁ rst instantiation of the social - circle heuristic implements search in terms of a hierarchy of altruism - based circles ( Fig . 1 ) . One advantage of this lexicographic order is that people are likely to have the most reliable , extensive , and easily retrievable instance knowledge about themselves , followed by family members , close friends , and acquain - tances , respectively ( Henrich & Henrich , 2007 , p . 58 ) . Our second implementation of the social - circle heuristic assumes that a person ' s social network is partitioned according to frequency of contact . This structure acknowledges that the individuals about whom a person has the most extensive knowledge need not be fam - ily . They could , for instance , be close friends or colleagues . Using frequency of contact as the dimension structuring social networks , the social - circle heuristic F ( with F for frequency ) assumes , beyond the self circle , the circles of people with whom one has contact at least once a week ( circle 2 ) , about once a month ( circle 3 ) , and no more than once in six months ( circle 4 ) . The rationale of this lexico - graphic order is that frequency of contact has been demonstrated to be a key determinant of the retrieval probability of memory records ( Anderson & Lebiere , 1998 ; Anderson et al . , 2004 ) . Studying search in social memory , Hills and Pachur ( 2012 ) found evidence suggesting that both search orders ( altruism and contact frequency ) are consistent with how people sequentially retrieve the individuals they know . Speci ﬁ cally , in a free recall task , participants tended to name their family members earlier than their friends and acquaintances , but they also named people earlier , the more frequent their contact with them . We now turn to the architecture of the noncompensatory social - circle heuristic . For illustration , consider the following inference task : “ In Berlin , do more people drink ( a ) Coca - Cola or ( b ) Pepsi ? ” This task 3 Inlightofevidenceformentalcontamination ( e . g . , Wilson & Brekke , 1994 ) , onemayask howthistargetedsamplingprocessisimplemented . Onepossibilityisthatsearchinmemory isrestrictedbytheuseofcontextualcues ( e . g . , family , friends ) . Throughthosecues , relevant instancesoutsidetheintendedsamplingspace ( e . g . , thoseencounteredinthemedia ) receive little or below - threshold activation ( e . g . , Dougherty et al . , 1999 ) . In general , people making frequency judgments seem well able to discount information from sources deemed nonrepresentative ( e . g . , Oppenheimer , 2004 ) , indicatingthatcontextualinformationshapes the searchprocess . 4 ItisworthpointingoutthatexemplarmodelssuchasMINERVA - DMcouldinprinciple implement a noncompensatory processing of instances by attaching noncompensatory weights to relevant instances ( cf . Martignon & Hoffrage , 2002 ) . However , for the sake of conceptual clarity and because no exemplar model has yet been proposed that weights relevant instances in such a way , we do not include exemplar models in the class of noncompensatory instance - basedstrategies . Foradiscussionofexemplarprocessingbased on limited search in categorization , see De Schryver , Vandist , and Rosseel ( 2009 ) and Juslin and Persson ( 2002 ) . 1061 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 isanexampleofthegeneralproblemofinferringwhichpreferences , be - haviors , or social events are more frequent in a population . Let us as - sume that a person has heard of both brands and so cannot apply the recognition heuristic . According to the social - circle heuristic , this per - son will search her instance knowledge ( e . g . , consumers of Coca - Cola vs . Pepsi in her social network ) and use the respective tallies within each circle to select alternative a or b . The architecture of both instanti - ations of the social - circle heuristic ( based on altruism vs . contact frequency ) can be described by the following three building blocks : a search rule , a stopping rule , and a decision rule . Table 1 describes these building blocks , which specify how search proceeds , how search is terminated , and how a ﬁ nal decision is made . Due to its stopping rule , the heuristic embodies limited search . Speci ﬁ cally , search is stopped as soon as within a circle the tally ( i . e . , the number of instances ) for one alternative differs from the tally for the other alternative , irrespective of the size of the difference . The tallies for the individual circles are not integrated across circles . Therefore , unlike ( fully ) compensatory strategies such as availability - by - recall ( which integrates instances across all circles ) , the social - circle heuristic is a noncompensatory strategy ( although it is locally compensatory in its exhaustive within - circle search ) . Instances accessible in later circles cannot reverse an inference based on earlier circles . Thus , the social - circle heuristic and availability - by - recall recruit instances from the same sample space — individuals in a person ' s proximate social network — but , unlike availability - by - recall , the social - circle heuristic may leave some social circles uninspected . Next , we test the social - circle heuristic in terms of ( a ) how well it describes people ' s inferences , and ( b ) how well it approximates the accuracy achieved by the compensatory availability - by - recall strate - gy . In Study 1 , we investigate the descriptive power of the social - circle heuristic relative to availability - by - recall ; in Study 2 , we extend the model comparison to the social - circle heuristic F and three cue - based strategies . Study 1 : compensatory versus noncompensatory processing of instances in inferences about cancer mortality Participants were asked to judge the relative mortality rates of different types of cancer , a domain in which Hertwig et al . ( 2005 ) have found support for compensatory availability - by - recall ( see also Pachur et al . , 2012 ) . We also probed participants ' instance knowledge of cases of death from cancer in their social networks . As the target cri - terion in the inference task refers to deaths resulting from cancer , the ﬁ rst circle ( i . e . , the self circle ) of the social - circle heuristic never dis - criminated here . Importantly , in constructing the test bed for examin - ing the strategies , we aimed to implement a representative design ( cf . Brunswik , 1955 ; Dhami , Hertwig , & Hoffrage , 2004 ) encompassing a broad set of events instead of focusing on a small and selective one . To that end , we employed all 24 types of cancer tracked in the Swiss national statistics ( e . g . , Bundesamt für Statistik , 2004 ; see Hertwig et al . , 2005 ) . By using this full set of cancers , we were also able to Recognition Which event category is more frequent in the population : A or B ? A + B - A - B + A + B + Choose A Choose B Guess A = B A = B A = B Choose A Choose B A > B A < B Choose A Choose B A > B A < B Choose A Choose B A > B A < B Choose A Choose B A > B A < B Circle 1 ( e . g . , family ) ( e . g . , friends ) ( e . g . , acquaintances ) ( self ) Start Guess ( or recruit cue - based strategy ) Circle 2 Circle 3 Circle 4 A - B - A = B Fig . 1 . Flow chart showing the social - circle heuristic and the relationship of its sampling process to the recognition principle and inferences based on other cues . Table 1 The three building blocks of the social - circle heuristic . Search rule Search the social circles for occurrences of the target events ( e . g . , people who drink Coca - Cola and Pepsi , respectively ) , proceeding sequentially from the ﬁ rst circle ( “ self ” ) through the other circles . Within each circle , tally the number of instances of each of the two target events . Stopping rule If the tally of relevant instances of the two target events is unequal within the ﬁ rst circle ( e . g . , I drink only Coca - Cola ) , then stop search and go on to the decision rule . Otherwise , search subsequent circles one by one , and proceed to the decision rule as soon as the tally of instances of the two events is unequal within a circle . If circle 4 does not yield unequal tallies , proceed to the decision rule . Decision rule Infer that the event category with the higher tally is the more frequent one in the reference class . If the tallies of sampled instances do not differ in circle 4 , then guess ( or proceed to cue knowledge ; see Appendix C ) . 1062 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 gauge how accurately the instance - based strategies discriminate across a wide range of real - world risks and how often they are applicable . Method Participants Thirty - three students participated . The study was conducted at the University of Basel , Switzerland . In addition to course credits , par - ticipants received performance - contingent payment , earning 0 . 04 Swiss francs ( = US $ 0 . 05 ) for every correct inference and losing the same amount for every incorrect inference . Materials Table 2 shows the 24 types of cancer and their respective annual frequencies of death in Switzerland , averaged across six consecutive years ( 1999 – 2004 ) to smooth out year - to - year ﬂ uctuations . We constructed a set of all possible 276 pairs of cancers . Participants completed two different tasks . In the inference task , they were asked to infer which of two cancers has a higher annual mortality rate in Switzerland . In the retrieval task , they indicated , for each type of can - cer and for each of three social circles ( family , friends , and acquain - tances ) , how many people ( if any ) they knew who had died from the respective cancer ( instance knowledge ) . Procedure After reading an introductory text explaining the relevance of accurate judgments of the relative frequencies of different cancers , participants were instructed as follows : “ We ask you to judge the annual mortality rate of different types of cancers in Switzerland . … Each item lists two different types of cancer . The question you are to answer is : For which of the two cancers is the number of deaths per year higher ? ” Pairs of cancer types were displayed sequentially on a computer screen in 12blocksof 23pairs . After completingeachblock , participants took a short break ( without leaving the laboratory ) . They indicated theirjudgmentbypressingoneoftwodesignatedkeys onthekeyboard . The order in which the cancer types appeared within a pair was deter - mined at random for each participant , as was the order in which pairs were presented . The retrieval task was administered as a paper - and - pencil questionnaire . It included all 24 types of cancer and always followed the inference task . Sessions lasted about 60 min . Results On average , participants selected the cancer with the higher mor - tality rate in 62 . 2 % ( SD = 4 . 5 ) of cases . The resulting bonus was , on average , 7 . 68 Swiss francs ( = US $ 9 . 18 ) . The modest level of accuracy indicates that participants most likely did not possess direct knowl - edge of the different cancers ' mortality rates , thus providing a good test bed for comparing strategies that make inferences under condi - tions of limited knowledge . Each participant reported , on average , 4 . 2 ( SD = 3 . 4 ) members of their social network who had died from one of the 24 types of cancer . To analyze how good a proxy these retrieved samples were for judg - ing which of two cancers has a higher mortality rate in the popula - tion , we correlated them ( collapsed across participants ; see Table 2 ) with the actual mortality rates . The number of reported instances and actual frequencies were strongly correlated ( r = . 68 , p = . 001 ; Spearman ' s rank correlation r s = . 63 , p = . 001 ) . How well do the strategies predict people ' s inferences ? We used each participant ' s reported instance knowledge to deter - mine the predictions of the compensatory availability - by - recall and the noncompensatory social - circle heuristic . The two strategies made predictions in , on average , 25 . 2 % and 26 . 1 % of all 276 pair com - parisons , respectively . ( The strategies made no prediction when a per - son recalled no or the same number of instances for both cancers in a pair comparison . ) Among those cases and separately for each partici - pant , we computed the percentage of correctly predicted inferences . On average , the social - circle heuristic correctly predicted 74 . 5 % ( SD = 15 . 8 ) of people ' s inferences , slightly less than availability - by - recall , at 75 . 2 % ( SD = 11 . 9 ) . One key reason for this nearly identical level of performance is that , although the social - circle heuristic relied on less information than did availability - by - recall ( see below ) , they nearly always made the same prediction ( M = 99 . 5 % , SD = 1 . 1 ) . Con - sequently , when we classi ﬁ ed each participant to the two strategies using a maximum likelihood approach ( see Appendix A for details ) , availability - by - recall and the social - circle heuristic showed identical ﬁ t for 25 of the 29 participants who reported instance knowledge ( 86 . 2 % ) . Three participants ' ( 10 . 3 % ) inferences were best described by availability - by - recall , and one participant ' s ( 3 . 5 % ) by the social - circle heuristic . Four participants reported no instance knowledge and thus were not considered in this analysis . How accurate and how frugal are the strategies ' inferences ? Of all cases in which they made a prediction , the social - circle heu - ristic correctly predicted the more frequent cancer type in 71 . 4 % of cases ( SD = 17 . 9 ) and availability - by - recall in 71 . 9 % ( SD = 18 . 0 ) of cases . How often did the social - circle heuristic truncate search ? To an - swer this question , we determined ( based on the instance knowledge reported by each participant ) the stopping rate for each circle , de ﬁ ned as the proportion of cases in which the social - circle heuristic stopped search at this circle ( given it led to an unambiguous prediction ) . The heuristic terminated search at the second , third , and fourth circles in 43 % , 12 % , and 45 % , respectively , of those cases in which it made a pre - diction . Thus , although the social - circle heuristic and availability - by - recall often made identical predictions , in 55 % of cases the former inspected only part of the available instance knowledge . Due to its limited search , the social - circle heuristic considered ( slightly ) less in - formationthanavailability - by - recall , with , onaverage , 1 . 13 ( SD = 0 . 23 ) versus 1 . 17 ( SD = 0 . 29 ) retrieved instances per inference , respectively , t ( 33 ) = − 2 . 14 , p = . 04 . Table 2 The24typesofcancerusedinStudy1 , theirrespectivefrequenciesofdeathinSwitzerland ( averagedacrosstheyears1999 – 2004 ; e . g . , BundesamtfürStatistik , 2004 ) , andthenum - ber of instances participants recalled from their own social networks . Type of cancer Annual mortality rate Number of recalled instances Lung cancer 2756 . 0 17 Breast cancer 1347 . 3 29 Leukemia and lymphoma 1331 . 7 13 Prostate cancer 1312 . 3 11 Colon cancer 1172 . 2 3 Pancreatic cancer 897 . 8 9 Stomach cancer 572 . 2 6 Liver cancer 513 6 Cancer of the central nervous system 455 11 Ovarian cancer 453 . 2 1 Bladder cancer 450 . 5 1 Rectal cancer 437 . 2 0 Esophageal cancer 384 . 5 3 Cancer of the mouth and throat 351 0 Renal cancer 339 . 2 1 Cervical cancer 295 . 8 5 Skin cancer 242 8 Gall bladder cancer 196 . 5 3 Cancer of the connective tissue 94 . 3 0 Laryngeal cancer 94 . 2 8 Thyroid cancer 69 . 3 1 Bone cancer 37 . 5 4 Testicular cancer 17 . 2 1 Penile cancer 10 . 2 0 1063 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 The similar levels of accuracy achieved by the social - circle heuris - tic and availability - by - recall hint at an important property of the en - vironment : information redundancy , which enables a strategy that limits search to approximate the performance of a compensatory strategy ( see also Dieckmann & Rieskamp , 2007 ) . Sampling the entire social network provided little additional information for availability - by - recall . Table 3 shows the circle validity for each search space as - sumed by the social - circle heuristic . It is de ﬁ ned as the proportion of correct inferences when an inference is made based solely on the tallies within a given circle . Surprisingly , the circle validities decreased from circle 2 to circle 4 . This suggests that limiting search when the retrieved tallies in a given circle discriminate ( see Table 3 for discrim - ination rates ) does not need to exact costs in terms of lower accuracy . One possible reason is that circles ranked high in the hierarchy ( i . e . , self and family ) discriminated in those comparisons that included one very common event category ; thus , the high - ranked circles si - phoned off the “ easy ” comparisons ( i . e . , where the difference in ob - jective frequency is large ) . We return to this possibility in Study 3 . In sum , we obtained three results : First , the noncompensatory social - circle heuristic described people ' s judgments of social statistics about as well as the compensatory availability - by - recall strategy . Sec - ond , despite lexicographic and limited search , the social - circle heuris - tic often made the same inference as availability - by - recall and thus achieved nearly the same level of accuracy . This suggests that — due to information redundancy in the environment — searching more is not inevitably better . Third , more proximate social circles offered higher validity than more peripheral social circles , even though the latter are likely to represent larger sample spaces than the former ( e . g . , a person ' s circle of friends is likely to be larger than her family circle ; Hills & Pachur , 2012 ; Zhou et al . , 2005 ) . In Study 1 , we examined the social - circle heuristic in inferences re - garding cancer mortality , a domain in which previous studies have found support for a compensatory instance - based strategy ( Hertwig et al . , 2005 ; Pachur et al . , 2012 ) . One limitation of this domain , howev - er , is that respondents were often unable — luckily for them and for the people in their social networks — to retrieve multiple instances of the respective risks . In fact , for 17 % of the events in the reference class , no instances at all were retrieved , resulting in a relatively low applica - bility for both availability - by - recall and the social - circle heuristic . This ﬁ nding reveals that instances often cannot be recruited across a whole range of events . Although this is an important result , the low applica - bility of the strategies in the cancer domain may have limited our abil - ity to contrast them . Study 2 : compensatory versus noncompensatory processing of instances in inferences about popularity of sports We now investigate the social - circle heuristic in a context in which respondents are likely to have a richer repertoire of instance knowl - edge : the relative popularity of participative sports . Again we test the social - circle heuristic against the availability - by - recall strategy , but to the end of a more encompassing model comparison test we also test it against the social - circle heuristic F ( where search is guided by frequency of contact rather than an altruism structure ) and against three cue - based strategies ( Gigerenzer et al . , 1999 ; see Appendix B for a more detailed description of these strategies ) . Rather than drawing on known instances of the event categories , cue - based strategies use generic properties of the categories ( e . g . , whether a sport is a ball game ) to infer their frequencies . The cue - based take - the - best heuristic is a noncompensatory strategy that searches for cues in the order of their perceived validity ( i . e . , the subjective probability that the cue leads to a correct response ; Appendix B ) and , when a discriminating cue is found , chooses the alternative with the positive cue value . The compensatory tallying heuristic considers all cues and tallies up the number of positive cue values , subtracts the number of negative values , and chooses the alternative with the higher sum . The compen - satory Franklin ' s rule assumes that before the values of all cues are summed , they are multiplied by their respective validities ; it chooses the alternative with the larger sum . Finally , we also investigate the social - circle heuristic ' s assumed lexicographic processing of instances by inspecting response times . Method Participants Forty students of various disciplines in Berlin universities were recruited . The study was conducted at the Max Planck Institute for Human Development . In addition to a ﬂ at fee of € 9 ( = US $ 11 . 10 ) , all participants received the same performance - contingent payment as in Study 1 . Materials Table 4 lists the 25 most popular participative sports in Germany . Popularity is de ﬁ ned in terms of the number of of ﬁ cially registered members of clubs for the respective sport . Information about sports club participation was taken from of ﬁ cial statistics ( e . g . , Statistisches Bundesamt , 2002 ) and averaged across ﬁ ve consecutive years ( 1997 – 2001 ) to smooth out year - to - year ﬂ uctuations . In the inference task , participants were asked to judge , for each of the 300 possible pairs of sports , which of the two sports is more popular in Germany . In addition , we asked participants to complete three other tasks , each necessary to derive predictions for the models tested . In the rec - ognition task , participants indicated whether they had previously heard of the sport . 5 In the retrieval task , they indicated how many people ( if any ) in their social network were members of a club for each sport . Speci ﬁ cally , they reported for each of the four network cir - cles ( self , family , friends , and acquaintances ) how many instances of sports club members they could recall . In order to instantiate the social - circle heuristic F , we also asked participants to indicate for each recalled instance how often they typically had contact with that person . “ Having contact ” was de ﬁ ned as talking to the person for at least 5 min or sending to or receiving from the person a message of at least 100 words in length ( see Pachur , Schooler , & Stevens , 2013 ) . Frequency of contact was rated on a ﬁ ve - point scale with the catego - ries “ several times a week , ” “ once a week , ” “ approximately once a month , ” “ around once in six months , ” and “ less than once in six Table 3 Circle validities and discrimination rate ( DR ) for the social - circle heuristic in Study 1 and for the social - circle heuristic and its variant , the social - circle heuristic F , in Study 2 . Study 1 ( cancer mortality ) Study 2 ( sports popularity ) Social - circle heuristic Social - circle heuristic Social - circle heuristic F Circle Validity ( SD ) DR ( SD ) Validity ( SD ) DR ( SD ) Validity ( SD ) DR ( SD ) 1 – – 0 . 51 ( 0 . 19 ) 0 . 04 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 51 ( 0 . 19 ) 0 . 04 ( 0 . 05 ) 2 0 . 78 ( 0 . 18 ) 0 . 11 ( 0 . 12 ) 0 . 66 ( 0 . 24 ) 0 . 11 ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 60 ( 0 . 20 ) 0 . 23 ( 0 . 16 ) 3 0 . 76 ( 0 . 13 ) 0 . 04 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 60 ( 0 . 18 ) 0 . 29 ( 0 . 18 ) 0 . 60 ( 0 . 22 ) 0 . 22 ( 0 . 13 ) 4 0 . 69 ( 0 . 20 ) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 15 ) 0 . 55 ( 0 . 17 ) 0 . 38 ( 0 . 21 ) 0 . 55 ( 0 . 16 ) 0 . 40 ( 0 . 21 ) 5 In Study 1 , we assumed that our student participants recognized the different types of cancer ( but did not test this assumption ) . 1064 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 months . ” ( Responses were later collapsed to conform to the circle de ﬁ nition of the social - circle heuristic F . ) Finally , the cue assessment task consisted of four components . First , participants assessed each of the 25 sports on eight cues ( cues were obtained in a supplementary study described shortly ) . Speci ﬁ cally , they assigned a ( binary ) cue value to each sport . For instance , they stated whether , in their opinion , soccer is a team sport or an individ - ual sport . Second , they assessed the directionality of the cues , stating which of the two values on each cue ( e . g . , team sport or individual sport ) is indicative of a higher number of club members . Third , partic - ipants rank - ordered the cues according to their perceived validity . Fi - nally , they estimated the validity of each cue ( “ In how many of 100 pairs in which one sport has a positive cue value and the other a neg - ative cue value does this cue make a correct prediction concerning the popularity of the sport ? ” ) . We identi ﬁ ed the cues that may be used to infer the popularity of different sports by surveying 30 students prior to Study 2 . They were presented with a list of the 25 sports and asked to generate properties of the sports that they deemed to be indicative of which of two sports is more popular . The eight most frequently generated properties ( cues ) are reported in Table 5 and were used in the cue assessment task . Procedure Theinference , recognition , andcueassessmenttaskswerepresented on a computer screen , and the retrieval task was administered as a paper - and - pencil questionnaire . For the inference task , participants read the following instruction : “ We ask you to judge the popularity of various sports in Germany . … Each item lists two different sports . The question you are to an - swer is : For which of the two sports is the number of club mem - bers in Germany higher ? ” Three hundred pairs of sports were presented sequentially in 12 blocks of 25 pairs . After completing each block , participants could take a short break . The elements of each pair were presented on the left versus right side of a computer screen , with the order being deter - mined randomly . Participants indicated each judgment by pressing one of two designated keys on the keyboard , and we recorded the time they took to make their inferences . In the recognition task , sports were presented sequentially in random order . The inference , recognition , retrieval , and cue assessment tasks were always adminis - tered in this ﬁ xed order . Results On average , respondents selected the sport with the higher num - ber of club members in 62 . 9 % ( SD = 6 . 3 ) of cases and earned a bonus of , on average , € 3 . 10 ( = US $ 3 . 8 ; SD = 1 . 52 ) . This level of accuracy is similar to that observed in Study 1 , and again provides a good test bed for comparing the strategies . With the exception of two sports ( shooting and sports ﬁ shing ) , all participants recognized all sports ; only pairs in which both sports were recognized ( on average , 97 . 2 % of the 300 pairs ) were included in the analyses . Table 5 reports the results for the cue assessment task . Respon - dents strongly agreed about the directionality of the cues , indicated by a Kendall ' s W of . 59 ( p = . 001 ) calculated across all cues . 6 When respondents were asked to rank - order cues according to their validi - ty , no such consensus emerged . Kendall ' s W across participants was . 02 ( p = . 60 ) . We next calculated the validities of the eight cues ( Table 5 ) : Using each participant ' s stated cue values and cue direc - tions , we determined the cues ' validities and their discrimination rates . A cue ' s validity is the proportion of times in which a sport with a positive cue value is objectively more popular than a sport with a negative value on the same cue . A cue ' s discrimination rate is the relative frequency with which it discriminates between the two sports in a pair . The mean validities ( across participants ) ranged from . 67 ( ball games ) to . 49 ( team sports ) , with an average validity of . 59 . 7 How valid are participants ' samples of instances relative to this cue knowledge ? The numbers of club members that participants recalled from their social networks are reported in Table 4 . On aver - age , each participant recalled 25 . 6 relevant instances ( SD = 19 . 1 ) , about six times as many as in Study 1 . To analyze how predictive these samples were for judging which of two sports is more popular , we compared the distribution of recalled instances across the dif - ferent sports ( collapsed across all participants ) with the distribution in the population . The two were moderately correlated ( r = . 53 , p = . 006 ; r s = . 26 , p = . 20 ) ; the correlation was lower than in Study 1 ( r = . 68 ) . Second , we calculated for each participant how often each individual circle would lead to an accurate inference and how often it would render possible a prediction . Table 3 shows the average circle validities and discrimination rates separately for the 6 For the model comparison reported below , cues were recoded ( for each partici - pant ) such that a positive cue value pointed in the direction deemed to be indicative of a higher number of sports club members . 7 The validities appear relatively low . Note , however , that these subjective cue validities are likely to differ from ecological validities , which are based on objective cue values ( Gigerenzer , Hoffrage , & Goldstein , 2008 ) . We estimated the ecological validities of the cues using the modal response obtained in the cue assessment task . For all eight cues , the ecological validity was higher than the average cue validity . For instance , the ecological validities of the cues “ national star , ” “ school sport , ” and “ seasonal dependency ” were . 76 , . 74 , and . 72 , respectively . Thus , the low cue validities based on participants ' cue knowledge were due to individual differences in the cue as - sessment task rather than to a genuine lack of predictive power in the cues . Did partic - ipants ' estimates of the cues ' validities match the calculated ecological validities ? The answer clearly seems to be no . Across participants , we found no correlation between the estimated and the ecological cue validities ( average correlation : r = − . 03 ; r s = . 07 ) . The mean estimated validities ranged from . 72 ( team sports ) to . 60 ( outdoor sports ) , with an average validity of . 65 . Table 4 The 25 most popular participative sports in Germany , the number of active and passive club members ( averaged across the years 1997 – 2002 ; e . g . , Statistisches Bundesamt , 2002 ) , and the number of club members participants recalled from their own social networks . Sport Number of club members Number of recalled instances Soccer 6 , 234 , 883 180 Gymnastics 4 , 800 , 199 12 Tennis 2 , 085 , 327 58 Shooting 1 , 584 , 931 10 Athletics 851 , 075 29 Handball 833 , 345 70 Equestrian 735 , 229 48 Table tennis 710 , 267 12 Skiing 677 , 556 18 Sports ﬁ shing 650 , 921 22 Water sports 633 , 652 90 Volleyball 530 , 399 34 Golf 320 , 630 41 Judo 268 , 475 49 Bowling 266 , 538 25 Dancing 255 , 190 57 Badminton 230 , 058 27 Basketball 202 , 938 93 Sailing 190 , 577 42 Ice sports 173 , 625 21 Cycling 153 , 141 27 Canoe 111 , 545 8 Karate 106 , 582 26 Chess 94 , 172 5 Rowing 78 , 746 21 Note : Eight participants indicated that they were members of a sports club themselves ( three for water sports , two for basketball , two for judo , one each for soccer , sports ﬁ shing , athletics , and dancing ; three participants reported being a member of two sports clubs ) . 1065 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 two variants of the social - circle heuristic . The circle validities were considerably lower than in Study 1 . In fact , circle 1 did not exceed chance level ( . 51 ) . As in Study 1 , the circle validities decreased from circle 2 ( . 66 ) to circle 4 ( . 55 ) . These ecological analyses show that participants ' personal samples of instances were less valid than their cue knowledge . How well do the strategies predict peoples ' inferences ? Table 6 shows that the three instance - based and three cue - based strategies predicted participants ' inferences equally well ( with the exception of take - the - best , which fared worse ) . The same pattern of results emerged when we included only those pairs in which ( per participant ) each of the six strategies arrived at a prediction ( on average , 39 % of all pairs ; Table 6 ) . The strategies differed considerably with regard to how often they made a prediction . Instance - based strategies did not make a predic - tion when a person recalled no or the same number of instances for both sports in a pair comparison . Cue - based strategies did not make a prediction when both sports had identical cue patterns . On average , the social - circle heuristic , the social - circle heuristic F , and availability - by - recall made predictions in 56 % , 57 % , and 53 % of cases , respectively . In contrast , the take - the - best heuristic , tallying , and Franklin ' s rule made predictions in 95 % , 81 % , and 94 % of cases , respectively ( the rec - ognition heuristic discriminated in 2 . 8 % , SD = 3 . 9 , of cases ) . One possible reason for the strategies ' similar levels of descriptive accuracy is that they often made identical predictions . Table 7 shows that there was , in particular , substantial overlap within the instance - based strategies and within the cue - based strategies . This overlap repli - cates the results for availability - by - recall and the social - circle heuristic in Study 1 . It indicates that predictive information is strongly correlated in natural environments ( see Brunswik , 1952 ) , such that strategies using limited search can be on par with compensatory ones ( see Dieckmann & Rieskamp , 2007 ; Gigerenzer & Goldstein , 1996 ) . Even between the two strategy classes , the overlap was 60 – 64 % . Notwithstanding the overlap in predictions , the best instance - based strategy — availability - by - recall — was slightly better at predicting people ' s inferences than were the best cue - based strategies , Franklin ' s rule and tallying : M s = 72 . 3 % vs . 70 . 1 % , t ( 39 ) = 1 . 08 , p = . 29 ( Table 6 ) . Finally , the social - circle heuristic ( 71 . 9 % ) achieved nearly the same descriptive accuracy as availability - by - recall ( 72 . 3 % ) , but did so with limited search . The heuristic stopped search after the ﬁ rst , second , third , and fourth circles in , on average , 7 . 3 % , 16 . 2 % , 40 . 3 % , and 36 . 2 % of the cases in which it made a prediction ( the respective stopping rates for the social - circle heuristic F were 7 . 2 % , 34 . 5 % , 21 . 6 % , and 36 . 7 % ) . Thus , the social - circle heuristic was substantially more frugal than availability - by - recall . Averaged across all inferences ( in which the strategies did not guess ) , the social - circle heuristic considered half as many relevant instances as availability - by - recall : M s = 1 . 7 vs . 3 . 4 , t ( 39 ) = − 6 . 79 , p = . 001 . As in Study 1 , we used a maximum likelihood approach to classify each participant to one of the six strategies . When no unambigu - ous classi ﬁ cation was possible , the participant was “ split up ” among the tied strategies . With one exception , ties occurred only within instance - or within cue - based strategies . Fig . 2 shows the resulting distribution . More than two - thirds of participants were classi ﬁ ed as using an instance - based strategy , with the social - circle heuristic ( 25 % ) and availability - by - recall ( 23 % ) emerging as front - runners . The proportions of participants applying the other strategies were smaller , with 17 % each for tallying and Franklin ' s rule and 8 % for take - the - best . As a measure of con ﬁ dence , we calculated for each strategy classi ﬁ cation a Bayes factor quantifying the difference be - tween the best ﬁ tting strategy ( strategies ) and the second - best ﬁ tting strategy ( strategies ) . 8 The larger the difference , the more con ﬁ dent one can be in the classi ﬁ cation . A Bayes factor in the range of 1 to 3 , 3 to 10 , and larger than 10 indicates anecdotal , substantial , and strong evidence , respectively , for the classi ﬁ cation ( Jeffreys , 1961 ) . Across participants , the median Bayes factor was 10 . 39 , indicating strong ev - idence . ( For a discussion of the possible interplay between instance - based and cue - based inference , see Appendix C . ) In order to examine how important the postulated hierarchy of circles is for the social - circle heuristic ' s performance , we repeated the classi ﬁ cation analysis but reversed the order of circles assumed by the heuristic . Search now proceeded from acquaintances , friends , family to self . In this order , the descriptive accuracy of the social - circle heuristic ' s dropped considerably , from 26 % to merely 13 . 8 % of participants being classi ﬁ ed as users of the heuristic . In sum , in predicting people ' s inferences about the popularity of sports , instance - based strategies as descriptive models outper - formed various cue - based strategies that have been shown to model inferences in a wide range of tasks ( Gosling , Ko , Mannarelli , & Morris , 2002 ; Hammond , 1955 ; Nosofsky & Bergert , 2007 ; Pachur & Marinello , 2013 ; Persson & Rieskamp , 2009 ; Rieskamp & Hoffrage , 2008 ) . Within the instance - based strategies , about an equal number of participants were best described by the social - circle heuristic and availability - by - recall , respectively . Tests of response time predictions The social - circle heuristic assumes a sequential examination of the decision maker ' s social circles , with search being stopped as soon as the number of instances within a circle discriminates between alter - natives . Therefore , the heuristic predicts that the more circles people are required to examine , the more time they need to make an infer - ence . In availability - by - recall , by contrast , tallies are computed across all circles in a compensatory fashion . This strategy therefore does not predict different response times as a function of whether or not a cir - cle discriminates . Similarly , the response times for users of cue - based strategies should not be a function of instances in memory . We tested these response time predictions as follows : Based on the classi ﬁ cation 8 The Bayes factor ( BF ) is de ﬁ ned based on the Bayesian Information Criterion ( BIC ) differences between the best - ﬁ tting strategy ( strategies ) and the second - best ﬁ tting strategy ( strategies ) , BF ¼ exp − 12 Δ BIC (cid:1) (cid:3) ( for details , see Wasserman , 2000 ) . The BIC for each strategy is de ﬁ ned as BIC = G 2 + k × log ( n ) , with k being the number of free parameters ( which equals 1 for all strategies ) and n being the number of choices . Table 5 Predictive directions , validities , and discrimination rates ( DR ) of the cues in Study 2 . The cue directions indicate participants ' modal response and the values in brackets are the proportions of participants giving that response . Cue Direction Validity ( SD ) DR ( SD ) Estimated validity ( Mdn ) Estimated rank ( Mdn ) National star ( Are there any famous German names in the sport ? ) + ( 0 . 93 ) 0 . 65 ( 0 . 12 ) 0 . 48 ( 0 . 04 ) 65 5 School sport ( Is the sport offered at schools ? ) + ( 0 . 85 ) 0 . 66 ( 0 . 18 ) 0 . 45 ( 0 . 05 ) 64 . 5 5 Seasonal dependency ( Is the sport season - dependent ? ) − ( 0 . 98 ) 0 . 64 ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 40 ( 0 . 10 ) 65 4 Ball game ( Is the sport a ball game ? ) + ( 0 . 95 ) 0 . 67 ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 41 ( 0 . 07 ) 65 5 Special equipment ( Does the sport require special equipment ? ) − ( 0 . 93 ) 0 . 57 ( 0 . 09 ) 0 . 49 ( 0 . 04 ) 65 4 . 5 Olympic sport ( Is the sport an Olympic discipline ? ) + ( 0 . 80 ) 0 . 57 ( 0 . 13 ) 0 . 43 ( 0 . 08 ) 65 4 Outdoor sport ( Is the sport played mostly outdoors or indoors ? ) + ( 0 . 60 ) 0 . 51 ( 0 . 09 ) 0 . 50 ( 0 . 03 ) 60 6 Team sport ( Is the sport a team sport or an individual sport ? ) + ( 0 . 85 ) 0 . 49 ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 40 ( 0 . 08 ) 72 3 . 5 1066 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 described above ( Fig . 2 ) , we distinguished between users of the social - circle heuristic , users of availability - by - recall ( excluding participants who were equally well described by both strategies ) , and users of cue - based strategies . To reduce the usual skew in the distribution of response times , they were natural log - transformed ( e . g . , Whelan , 2008 ) . We tested the response time predictions using mixed - effects linear models , with ‘ participants ’ as random effect and ‘ circle ’ as ﬁ xed effect . In this analysis , it is important to take into account simple ‘ symbolic distance effects ’ ( e . g . , Moyer & Bayer , 1976 ) : because of the skewed frequencydistributionof the sports ' popularity ( Table 4 ) , comparisons in which an early circle discriminates will likely be those with rather large objective differences : People make these comparison more swiftly than comparisons between objects with smaller differences ( e . g . , Schweickart & Brown , in press ) . To control for this possible con - found between circle and objective frequency difference , we entered the difference in the actual frequencies between the two sports as a covariate ( ﬁ xed effect ) . Fig . 3 shows the estimated mean response times as a function of the circle at which the social - circle heuristic predicts search to be terminated , separately for the three groups of participants . For partic - ipants classi ﬁ ed as users of the social - circle heuristic there was a main effect of circle , F ( 3 , 1240 . 3 ) = 3 . 12 , p = . 025 , such that response time increased across circles 1 to 4 , consistent with the sequential search policy of the heuristic . The earlier the heuristic predicted search to be stopped , the faster the response time . The other strategies predict - ed no such dependency between circle and response time . Indeed , we obtained only a marginally signi ﬁ cant effect of circle for participants classi ﬁ ed as users of availability - by - recall , F ( 3 , 911 . 3 ) = 2 . 25 , p = . 081 , and no effect for participants classi ﬁ ed as users of a cue - based strategy , F ( 3 , 2813 . 0 ) = 1 . 38 , p = . 246 . 9 Fig . 3 also shows that , perhaps surprisingly , users of the social - circle heuristic tended to show slower response times than users of a compensatory instance - based strategy or of cue - based strategies . Interestingly , the same result has also been found among users of lex - icographic strategies in cue - based inference ( Bröder & Gaissmaier , 2007 ; Persson & Rieskamp , 2009 ) . One possible explanation is that lexicographic search requires the selection of some information and the inhibition of other information , and that such control processes may incur costs in terms of time ( Khader et al . , 2011 ) . How accurate are the strategies ' inferences ? We next computed for each participant and based on the informa - tion he or she provided — that is , cue values , cue directionality , estimat - ed cue validities , instances and contact frequencies — how accurately instance - based and cue - based strategies predicted the relative popu - larity of the sports ( Table 4 ) , separately for each participant . As in Study 1 , we focused on cases where the strategies made an unambig - uous prediction . The two most accurate strategies were tallying and Franklin ' s rule , with 64 % and 62 % correct inferences , respectively ( Table 6 ) . The best cue - based strategy , tallying , was signi ﬁ cantly more accurate than the best instance - based strategy , availability - by - recall ( Kruskal – Wallis test : z = − 2 . 38 , p = . 02 ) . As in Study 1 , availability - by - recall ( 58 % ) and the social - circle heuristic ( 57 % ) reached similar levels of accuracy , despite the latter being more frugal . The same pattern of results was found when the analysis was based on those inferences in which all strategies made a prediction ( Table 6 ) . Summary The results of Studies 1 and 2 offer some evidence for a noncompensatory and limited instance - based search policy . In Study 2 , a quarter of respondents could be classi ﬁ ed as users of the social - circle heuristic ( with the circles ordered by altruism ) . The noncompensatory processing of instances among users of the social - circle heuristic was also evident in an analysis of response times . The more circles needed to be examined , the longer it took for respondents to arrive at an inference . Despite foregoing exhaustive search , the social - circle heuristic often reached the same decision as availability - by - recall , which searches social circles exhaustively . This convergence is an important result . It shows that strategies with very different search policies can achieve similar levels of perfor - mance in inferring environmental quantities such as social statistics . One possible reason is information redundancy in people ' s social envi - ronments — a property that can be exploited by simple heuristics . This result ﬁ ts into a growing body of evidence demonstrating that reliance on ( relatively ) small samples can produce surprisingly competitive judgments and choices ( see Fiedler & Kareev , 2006 ; Gigerenzer & Goldstein , 1996 ; Hertwig & Pleskac , 2008 ; Pachur , 2010 ; but see Juslin , Fiedler , & Chater , 2006 ) . To our knowledge , our investigation is the ﬁ rst to compare the inferential accuracy of instance - based and cue - based strategies . Why did we ﬁ nd compensatory cue - based strategies to be more accu - rate than compensatory and noncompensatory instance - based strate - gies ( Table 6 ) ? One possible reason is that the knowledge recruited by the cue - based strategies refers mainly to generic facts that most 9 The difference in actual frequencies had a signi ﬁ cant effect on response time for the users of availability - by - recall , F ( 1 , 907 . 8 ) = 25 . 7 , p = . 001 , and the users of cue - based strategies , F ( 1 , 2818 . 2 ) = 25 . 3 , p = . 001 , and a marginally signi ﬁ cant effect for the users of the social - circle heuristic , F ( 1 , 1222 . 5 ) = 2 . 76 , p = . 097 . Table 6 Percentage of correct predictions ( of which of two sports people judge to be more popular ) and correct inferences ( of which of two sports is more popular ) by the six strategies tested in Study 2 for the subset of comparisons in which the respective strategy makes a prediction and the subset in which all strategies make a prediction ; standard deviations are in parentheses . Descriptive accuracy Inferential accuracy Strategy The strategy makes a prediction All strategies make a prediction The strategy makes a prediction All strategies make a prediction Availability - by - recall 71 . 1 % ( 10 . 1 ) 72 . 3 % ( 10 . 4 ) 57 . 6 % ( 13 . 6 ) 59 . 5 % ( 13 . 9 ) Social - circle heuristic 70 . 0 % ( 10 . 0 ) 71 . 9 % ( 10 . 2 ) 57 . 1 % ( 13 . 1 ) 58 . 7 % ( 13 . 7 ) Social - circle heuristic F 69 . 2 % ( 9 . 6 ) 71 . 5 % ( 10 . 2 ) 57 . 1 % ( 12 . 9 ) 58 . 6 % ( 13 . 6 ) Franklin ' s rule 66 . 6 % ( 8 . 5 ) 70 . 1 % ( 12 . 3 ) 61 . 5 % ( 5 . 0 ) 66 . 2 % ( 9 . 1 ) Tallying 69 . 0 % ( 9 . 2 ) 70 . 1 % ( 12 . 3 ) 63 . 5 % ( 5 . 5 ) 66 . 2 % ( 9 . 1 ) Take - the - best 62 . 7 % ( 9 . 1 ) 65 . 8 % ( 12 . 5 ) 58 . 5 % ( 7 . 0 ) 62 . 5 % ( 11 . 3 ) Table 7 Proportion of identical predictions of each pair of strategies for the subset of cases for which all strategies made a prediction in Study 2 . Strategy 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 . Availability - by - recall – 2 . Social - circle heuristic 0 . 97 – 3 . Social - circle heuristic F 0 . 94 0 . 94 – 4 . Franklin ' s rule 0 . 64 0 . 64 0 . 62 – 5 . Tallying 0 . 64 0 . 63 0 . 62 1 – 6 . Take - the - best 0 . 62 0 . 61 0 . 60 0 . 86 0 . 86 – 1067 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 participants agree upon ( e . g . , whether a sport is a ball sport ) , where - as the instance - based strategies recruit idiosyncratic knowledge ( whether any of one ' s friends are members of a basketball club ) . As a consequence , the predictions of the instance - based strategies are more variable across participants , which can decrease their accura - cy . 10 Nevertheless , we caution against overgeneralizing the superior - ity of the cue - based strategies to other environments . For instance , as Table 3 shows , the circle validities in the cancer mortality environ - ment are substantially higher than those in the sports popularity environment , and the advantage for cue - based inference may there - fore be smaller or even disappear there . Furthermore , compensatory cue - based inferences are not consistently more accurate than are noncompensatory cue - based inferences ( e . g . , Katsikopoulos , Schooler , & Hertwig , 2010 ) . Study 3 : which environmental properties determine the performance of the social - circle heuristic ? In Studies 1 and 2 , the social - circle heuristic proved to be able to compete with a compensatory instance - based strategy in inferring environmental frequencies . We now analyze this ability in more de - tail by studying the ecological rationality ( Todd et al . , 2012 ) of the social - circle heuristic . The notion of ecological rationality rests on the assumption that “ intelligent behavior in the world comes about by exploiting reliable structures in the world ” ( Todd et al . , 2012 , p . viii ) , thereby directing researchers ' focus to the match between mental mechanisms and environmental properties . Rather than merely observing to what extent a particular strategy fails or succeeds across different environments , the goal is to understand which envi - ronmental properties a strategy exploits and how they foster or ham - per its performance . This approach has led to insights of how simple mental mechanisms , if matched to the right environment , can be sur - prisingly accurate ( see Goldstein & Gigerenzer , 2002 ; Simon , 1990 ) . We used computer simulations to examine the impact of two im - portant properties of real - world social environments on the perfor - mance of the social - circle heuristic . The ﬁ rst ecological property is the skewness of the frequency distribution across the event catego - ries . Many environmental quantities follow highly skewed distribu - tions ( see , e . g . , Clauset , Shalizi , & Newman , 2009 ; Newman , 2005 ) , where very few objects largely dominate all others . Indeed , the two social environments of Studies 1 and 2 — cancer mortality and popu - larity of sports — also display very skewed frequency distributions ( the latter to a somewhat lesser extent than the former ) . Hertwig , Hoffrage , and Martignon ( 1999 ) and Hertwig , Hoffrage , and Sparr ( 2013 ) showed that skewed distributions are conducive to the per - formance of a noncompensatory cue - based heuristic across social and nonsocial environments , respectively . Does the same hold for a noncompensatory instance - based heuristic ? The second ubiquitous property of social environments is spatial clustering of instances : People tend to know and interact with others who have similar characteristics ( see , e . g . , McPherson , Smith - Lovin , & Cook , 2001 ) , even causing genetic homogeneity in friendship net - works ( Fowler , Settle , & Christakis , 2011 ) . Because of contagion or ge - netic inheritability , many diseases are more prevalent among people who frequently interact with each other . Does such spatial autocorre - lation , relative to randomly distributed events , foster or hamper the performance of the social - circle heuristic relative to a compensatory instance - based strategy ? Our computer simulation involved the social - circle heuristic and availability - by - recall . The task of the strategies was to infer which of two event categories occurs more frequently in the population . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁ rst analysis of the ecological rationality of noncompensatory processing of instance knowledge . 10 Our data offer some support for this hypothesis . The average ( across participants ) standarddeviationofthestrategies ' predictions ( averagedacrossstrategies ) waslower for the cue - based strategies ( M = . 51 ) than for the instance - based strategies ( M = 0 . 79 ) . 23 % 25 % 11 % 17 % 17 % 8 % 0 % 5 % 10 % 15 % 20 % 25 % 30 % P e r c en t age o f pa r t i c i pan t s SCH F SCH ABR FR TALLY TTB Fig . 2 . Individual classi ﬁ cation of the 40 participants as following availability - by - recall ( ABR ) , the social - circle heuristic ( SCH ) , the social - circle heuristic F ( SCH F ) , Franklin ' s rule ( FR ) , tallying ( TALLY ) , or take - the - best ( TTB ) ( no participant was classi ﬁ ed as guessing ) . 7 . 2 7 . 3 7 . 4 7 . 5 7 . 6 7 . 7 7 . 8 7 . 9 8 8 . 1 8 . 2 Self Family Friends Acquaintances R e s pon s e t i m e ( n l og ) Critical circle Social - circle heuristic Availability - by - recall Cue - based strategies Fig . 3 . Estimated mean response times ( based on the mixed - effects linear models ) as a function of the number of circles examined prior to an inference ( according to the social - circle heuristic ) in Study 2 , separately for participants classi ﬁ ed as using the social - circle heuristic , availability - by - recall , and cue - based strategies . Error bars indi - cate the standard errors of the mean . Fig . 4 . Representation of the population in the computer simulation in Study 3 ( here simpli ﬁ ed as a 10 × 10 population ) . 1068 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 The strategies We simulated asocial environment inwhicha populationof agents was represented as a two - dimensional grid , with each cell repre - senting an agent . To implement the social - circle heuristic , we divided the social network of each agent into four circles . As shown in Fig . 4 , the circles were de ﬁ ned in terms of the distance , d , to the focal circle ( circle 1 ) , whichconsisted of the agent itself ( d = 0 ) . Circle 2 included all four agents with d = 1 ; circle 3 , all eight agents with d = 2 ; and circle 4 , all 28 agents with d = 3 or d = 4 . An agent ' s social network thus consisted of 40 other agents , allowing her to sample up to 41 agents ( including herself ) . The size of the circles grew with the dis - tance from the network center ( circles 1 – 4 comprise 1 , 4 , 8 , and 28 agents , respectively ) , consistent with analyses of actual social net - works ( Zhou et al . , 2005 ) . The social - circle heuristic searched circles 1 through 4 and terminated search when one circle discriminated . Consequently , it probed between a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 41 agents . The compensatory availability - by - recall , in contrast , always probed all 41 agents . The environments In each environment we created , there were 10 event categories that differed with regard to their frequency in the population . Occur - rences of the event categories were distributed across a population of 2500 agents represented in a 50 × 50 grid ( a common size in agent - based simulations ; e . g . , Rands , Pettifor , Rowcliffe , & Cowlishaw , 2004 ) . Any given agent was an instance of at most one event catego - ry . We examined the strategies ' performances in a total of six different environmental conditions , each of which represented a combination of the two properties under consideration : type of fre - quency distribution ( ﬂ at vs . skewed ) and type of spatial distribution of the instances ( random , medium clustering , or high clustering ) . Flat versus skewed frequency distributions The two frequency distributions are shown in Fig . 5a . In the ﬂ at environment , the distribution was relatively even and followed a lin - ear function , decreasing smoothly from the most to the least frequent event category . In the skewed environment , few event categories oc - curred very frequently and the majority of event categories occurred relatively infrequently ( for a related analysis using a real - world fre - quency distribution , see Pachur , Hertwig , & Rieskamp , 2013 ) . Skewed distributions are often described in terms of a power function ( see e . g . , Hertwig , Hoffrage , & Sparr , 2013 ; Newman , 2005 ) . Therefore , we used a power function to generate the distribution in the skewed environment . 11 Random versus clustered spatial distribution Spatial clustering was manipulated by varying the probability p with which the status of an agent ( i . e . , whether or not it was an in - stance of a particular event category ) affected the status of her neigh - bors . Speci ﬁ cally , p was a function of the distance , d , between an agent and her neighbor : p ( d ) = f ( d / 5 , μ , δ ) , where f was a folded cu - mulative normal distribution with μ = 0 . We varied δ to implement three levels of clustering : no clustering ( δ = 0 ) , medium clustering ( δ = 0 . 7 ) , and high clustering ( δ = 7 ) . Fig . 5b shows examples of distributions in the six conditions that result from crossing the two types of frequency distributions ( ﬂ at vs . skewed ) with the three levels of clustering . To quantify the degree of clustering , we calculated for each environment the resulting clus - tering coef ﬁ cient , expressing the probability that an agent ' s direct neighbor ( de ﬁ ned as having d = 1 ) was an instance of the same event category . The average clustering coef ﬁ cient in each of the six conditions is shown in Table 8 . The population of agents was represented as a toroidal grid ( i . e . , a matrix where each cell is connected to the cell on the same row or column , respectively , on the opposite side of the matrix ) . In each of Spatial Distribution Frequency Distribution F r equen cy F r equen cy a b Fig . 5 . ( a ) Frequency distributions of the 10 event categories in the ﬂ at and skewed environments investigated in Study 3 , and ( b ) visual illustration of the spatial distributions that resulted from combining ﬂ at and skewed environments with different degrees of spatial clustering . 11 For both the ﬂ at and the skewed environments , the respective functions were ad - justed such that the distributions could be well represented in the population of 2500 agents . In the ﬂ at environment , the frequency of the x th category ( with categories or - dered from largest to smallest ) was determined by the linear function f ( x ) = 10 + x × 50 . In the skewed environment , the frequency of the x th category was deter - mined by the power function f ( x ) = x − 1 . 5 × 1200 . Summing across the resulting fre - quencies in the event categories , the total number of all agents who were an instance of one of the 10 event categories was 2350 ( 94 % of the population ) in the lin - ear environment and 2394 ( 95 . 8 % ) in the skewed environment . 1069 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 the six conditions , the simulation was based on 1 , 000 , 000 runs . Spe - ci ﬁ cally , each distribution was repeated 10 , 000 times , and , for each resulting environment , 100 initial agents were sampled randomly . Using the social - circle heuristic or availability - by - recall , each agent inferred in a total of 45 pair comparisons ( i . e . , all pairwise compari - sons of the 10 event categories ) which of two event categories is more frequent in the population . If a strategy could not make an infer - ence based on the instances in an agent ' s network , a random guess was implemented . The strategies ' accuracies were de ﬁ ned as the per - centage of correct inferences ( i . e . , the event category inferred to be more frequent was indeed more frequent in the population ) . Results We analyzed thestrategies ' ( a ) accuracies in thedifferentconditions and ( b ) frugality ( i . e . , number of agents looked up ) . In addition , we examined the incremental value of further sampling more generally , because a key difference between the social - circle heuristic and availability - by - recall consists in limited versus more extended sam - pling ; speci ﬁ cally , we compared ( c ) the circle validities and ( d ) sample size – accuracy trade - off functions between the different environments . Accuracy Fig . 6 plots the strategies ' accuracies . Three main results emerged . First , for both the compensatory availability - by - recall and the noncompensatory social - circle heuristic , accuracy declined with more clustering in the environment . This is primarily because , with more clustering , both strategies were increasingly unable to discrimi - nate between two event categories and therefore resorted to guessing ( Table 8 ) . Second , the accuracy of both strategies was a function of the combination of skewness and clustering : With no clustering , availability - by - recall performed better in a ﬂ at than in a skewed envi - ronment ( 83 . 1 % vs . 81 . 7 % ) ; for the social - circle heuristic , the opposite held ( 75 . 2 % vs . 76 . 3 % ) . With a medium level of clustering , however , both strategies performed better in a skewed than in a ﬂ at environ - ment ( availability - by - recall : 71 . 9 % vs . 69 . 4 % ; social - circle heuristic : 70 . 4 % vs . 68 . 3 % ) . This pattern became even more pronounced with a high level of clustering ( availability - by - recall : 66 . 2 % vs . 61 . 2 % ; social - circle heuristic : 65 . 9 % vs . 61 . 1 % ) . Third , the amount of clustering also had a crucial impact on the degree to which the social - circle heuristic was able to compete with availability - by - recall : Without clustering ( events distributed randomly ) , availability - by - recall by far outperformed the social - circle heuristic ( averaged across ﬂ at and skewed environments , the margin was 6 . 7 percentage points ) . With a high level of clustering , this advantage essentially disappeared ( the margin shrank to 0 . 1 and 0 . 3 percentage points in the ﬂ at and the skewed environments , respectively ) . As Table 8 shows , the impact of clustering on accuracy persisted even when we excluded cases for which an inference was determined randomly ( because strategies could not discriminate between event categories ) . Frugality Availability - by - recall searches exhaustively ( within the de ﬁ ned social network ) , whereas the social - circle heuristic limits search . Table 9 reports how often the heuristic stopped search at various cir - cles ( i . e . , the stopping rates ) . For instance , in the ﬂ at environment with no clustering , in 20 % of cases where it did not have to guess , the social - circle heuristic stopped search after considering only the self circle and , as reported in Table 8 , made an inference based on a sample of , on average , fewer than two relevant instances ( this per - centage held across all six conditions ) . Availability - by - recall , by con - trast , made an inference based on a sample of , on average , between 8 . 5 and 16 relevant instances . Overall , the social - circle heuristic probed ( to ﬁ nd relevant instances ) an average of between 12 and 25 agents , and thus examined between 29 % and 61 % of the number of agents probed by availability - by - recall ( 41 agents ) . The noncom - pensatory social - circle heuristic is thus substantially more frugal than the compensatory availability - by - recall strategy , and the differ - ences in frugality depend partly on the degree of clustering in the environment . Why do skewness and clustering foster the social - circle heuristic ' s competitiveness ? Using less information than availability - by - recall , the social - circle heuristic approximates the former ' s accuracy in clustered environ - ments . Why is that ? To address this question , we analyzed the circle validities . As Table 9 shows , circle validity is affected by the structure of the environment . In ﬂ at environments , circle validity increases across circles ; limiting search thus compromises accuracy here . The bene ﬁ t of more search depends , however , on the degree of clustering : Table 8 The resulting clustering coef ﬁ cient ( CC ) in the six environments in Study 3 as well as frugality , proportion of cases in which the strategy had to guess , and accuracy ( i . e . , proportion of correct inferences ) excluding guessing cases for the six environments , separately for the social - circle heuristic and availability - by - recall . Frequency distribution Spatial distribution CC Social - circle heuristic Availability - by - recall Frugality Guessing Accuracy ( no guessing ) Frugality Guessing Accuracy ( no guessing ) Relevant instances Sample size Relevant instances Sample size Flat Random . 13 1 . 78 12 . 33 0 . 03 0 . 76 8 . 47 41 0 . 09 0 . 86 Clustered ( medium ) . 36 1 . 78 18 . 67 0 . 16 0 . 72 9 . 41 41 0 . 17 0 . 74 Clustered ( high ) . 58 1 . 70 25 . 44 0 . 44 0 . 71 14 . 65 41 0 . 44 0 . 71 Skewed Random . 28 1 . 62 15 . 95 0 . 08 0 . 79 9 . 13 41 0 . 14 0 . 87 Clustered ( medium ) . 47 1 . 66 21 . 45 0 . 26 0 . 78 11 . 03 41 0 . 27 0 . 80 Clustered ( high ) . 57 1 . 65 25 . 29 0 . 46 0 . 81 15 . 91 41 0 . 46 0 . 82 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 Random Clustered ( medium ) Clustered ( high ) A cc u r a cy Spatial Distribution of Instances SCH ( flat ) SCH ( skewed ) ABR ( flat ) ABR ( skewed ) Fig . 6 . Accuracy ( de ﬁ ned as the proportion of correct inferences ) of the social - circle heuristic ( SCH ) and availability - by - recall ( ABR ) in the six simulated environments . 1070 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 The more clustered a ﬂ at environment is , the lower the increase in va - lidity across circles , and therefore the lower the extent to which more search pays off . In skewed frequency distributions , the link between sample size and circle validity even seems reversed . Seemingly defy - ing the law of large numbers , the validity of circle 1 ( n = 1 ) always exceeds that of circle 4 ( n = 28 ) , independent of clustering . How can this counterintuitive phenomenon , already observed in Studies 1 and 2 ( Table 3 ) , be explained ? Skewed frequency environ - ments are skewed because one event category clearly outnumbers others . In such environments , the comparisons in which the smaller circles ( e . g . , circle 1 ) discriminate between two event categories are usually “ easy ” ones — that is , comparisons that involve the most fre - quent event category and where the difference between the objective frequencies in the population is very large . Such cases are unlikely to be harmed by sampling error . More “ dif ﬁ cult ” comparisons , that is , those between event categories of medium or low frequencies , usually cannot be determined based on the initial circles — because they are too rare to occur in the “ self ” or “ family ” circle — and are therefore delegated to later , larger circles , where the risk of sampling error is lower . In ﬂ at environments , by contrast , early ( and small ) circles will more often also discriminate between rather dif ﬁ cult comparisons , and sampling error will often impair the ability to decide accurately in these comparisons . The analysis of circle validities also helps to understand why the social - circle heuristic is less vulnerable to the effect of clustering than is availability - by - recall ( Fig . 6 ) . For ﬂ at environments , the valid - ity of the more peripheral circles , representing larger samples , de - creases with a higher level of clustering ( e . g . , the validity of circle 4 decreases from . 77 to . 71 ; Table 9 ) . That is , for samples of size n N 1 , the statistical principle that event categories that are more frequent in a sample are , ceteris paribus , also more frequent in the population is increasingly less valid as the degree of spatial clustering increases . For illustration , consider a sample consisting of three agents , two of which are instances of event category A and one of category B . The oc - currence of two instances of A in the sample is less likely to be an indicator that this category is more frequent in the population if in - stances of an event category occur in clusters than if they do not . If the sample space consists of one agent only ( circle 1 ) , by contrast , the degree of clustering does not affect the extent to which the con - tent of a sample is indicative of the frequency distribution in the population : A single agent is more likely to be an instance of a fre - quent event category than of a less frequent one , irrespective of whether or not it occurs in a cluster . Consequently , the accuracy of the social - circle heuristic ( which often relies on a sample size of n = 1 ) is less affected by clustering than is that of availability - by - recall ( which relies on larger sample sizes ) . How much information is gained with increasing sample size ? According to the statistical law of large numbers , the accuracy of estimates of population parameters increases with sample size . How - ever , the extent to which ‘ more is better ’ depends on the structure of the environment . In some environments , a substantial increase in sample size does not necessarily yield a large increase in inferential accuracy . This , in turn , enables the social - circle heuristic to compete with availability - by - recall . To quantify the relationship between the utility of more sampling and ecological structure , we determined sample size – accuracy functions ( using computer simulations ) and compared them across the six environments . Speci ﬁ cally , we comput - ed inferential accuracy for sample sizes from 1 to 500 . For each size , we drew the respective number of agents according to their distance to an initial , randomly selected agent ( with close agents sampled ﬁ rst ; from agents with the same distance , we sampled randomly the required number ) . Based on the resulting sample tallies , it was in - ferred which of two event categories was more frequent in the popu - lation ( for each of the 45 pair comparisons ) . When sample tallies did not discriminate , an inference was made randomly . We conducted this analysis across the same six environmental conditions simulated previously . In each condition , 10 , 000 distributions were generated , and for each distribution 100 initial agents were randomly drawn from the population ( yielding a total of 1 , 000 , 000 runs per condition ) . Figs . 7a and b show the results . First , in all environments , accuracy gain as a function of increasing sample size is subject to a diminishing return ( see Hertwig & Pleskac , 2008 , 2010 ) . Second , how quickly the return diminishes depends on the environment : As Fig . 7a shows , in all three skewed frequency distributions ( gray lines ) , accuracy in - creases considerably more steeply at very small sample sizes ( and then quickly levels off ) than in the ﬂ at frequency distributions ( black lines ) . These results further help to understand the contingent competitiveness of the social - circle heuristic : Its policy of limited search is more suitable in environments with skewed frequency distributions . The social - circle heuristic does not mechanically draw small sam - ples , however . It adjusts sampling conditionally upon the evidence encountered . If an inference can be made based on an early circle , sample size will be small . If an early circle does not render an infer - ence possible , search will be extended . Does this conditional sampling policy — more sampling occurs only if more frugal sampling does not permit an inference — pay off relative to an unconditional sampling policy ( i . e . , always drawing a ﬁ xed sample size ) ? To ﬁ nd out , we com - pared the social - circle heuristic ' s accuracy with the accuracy achieved on the basis of a ﬁ xed ( i . e . , unconditional ) sample size . The black dots in Fig . 7b indicate the heuristic ' s performance as a function of the average number of agents it recruited to make an inference in the re - spective environment ( Table 8 ) . The dot lies consistently above the curve for unconditional sampling . This means that with the same av - erage ( but otherwise variable ) sample size , the heuristic achieves higher accuracy than does an unconditional sampling policy . In sum , the simulation results suggest an accuracy – effort trade - off in environments with no or medium clustering : The smaller the num - ber of agents that are probed , the less accurate the inferences ( Fig . 6 ) . In spatially clustered environments , however , limited search does not inevitably come at the price of a decrease in accuracy : Limited search and accuracy go hand in hand insofar as frugality can guard against drawing erroneous inferences from samples whose representativeness Table 9 Average circle validities , discrimination rates ( DR ) , and stopping rates ( SR ) for each of the four circles in the six environments of the computer simulation for the social - circle heuristic ( Study 3 ) ; circles 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 contain 1 , 4 , 8 , and 28 agents , respectively . Frequency distribution Spatial distribution Circle Validity DR SR Flat Random 1 0 . 69 0 . 19 0 . 20 2 0 . 73 0 . 48 0 . 39 3 0 . 75 0 . 65 0 . 27 4 0 . 77 0 . 87 0 . 14 Clustered ( medium ) 1 0 . 69 0 . 19 0 . 23 2 0 . 71 0 . 41 0 . 31 3 0 . 72 0 . 57 0 . 23 4 0 . 73 0 . 80 0 . 24 Clustered ( high ) 1 0 . 70 0 . 19 0 . 33 2 0 . 71 0 . 32 0 . 26 3 0 . 71 0 . 40 0 . 18 4 0 . 71 0 . 54 0 . 23 Skewed Random 1 0 . 83 0 . 19 0 . 21 2 0 . 84 0 . 44 0 . 34 3 0 . 82 0 . 58 0 . 25 4 0 . 80 0 . 82 0 . 21 Clustered ( medium ) 1 0 . 83 0 . 19 0 . 26 2 0 . 84 0 . 38 0 . 28 3 0 . 82 0 . 50 0 . 20 4 0 . 79 0 . 71 0 . 26 Clustered ( high ) 1 0 . 83 0 . 19 0 . 35 2 0 . 84 0 . 33 0 . 29 3 0 . 84 0 . 40 0 . 16 4 0 . 81 0 . 52 0 . 20 1071 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 is compromised inclustered environments . Toanalyzea heuristic ' s eco - logical rationality is to determine the environmental properties that aid or ail performance . Wenow can characterize ( some ) oftheseproperties ( Fig . 6 ) . Limited search can compete with exhaustive search in medium and highly clustered environments . In contrast , limited search is far less accurate than exhaustive search when there is no clustering and when the frequency distribution is ﬂ at . These regularities also explain why , for the skewed natural environments examined in Studies 1 and 2 , the social - circle heuristic proved able to approximate the performance of availability - by - recall . General discussion The ability to infer social statistics in the population — such as the frequency of speci ﬁ c behaviors , opinions , and characteristics — is crucial in a world in which others can represent both our ﬁ ercest competitors and our closest allies . We investigated to what extent people making such inferences rely on a heuristic that recruits in - stances and processes them in a noncompensatory fashion . In so doing , we extended the study of noncompensatory heuristics , which have received much attention in cue - based inference ( Gigerenzer et al . , 1999 ) , to instance - based inference . The social - circle heuristic is the ﬁ rst model of a noncompensatory heuristic that exploits knowl - edge of instances to infer social statistics ( for an illustration of how the heuristic may be applied to the formation of norms and attitudes , see Pachur , Hertwig , et al . , 2013 ) . The heuristic assumes that search for instances in memory proceeds sequentially along the hierarchical circle structure of people ' s social networks ( see also Hills & Pachur , 2012 ) , with the circles ' boundaries serving as stopping rules . Our goals were to study the social - circle heuristic from both ( a ) a descriptive and ( b ) a prescriptive point of view . Investigating infer - ences in two different real - world environments , we found that a size - able proportion of people are well described by the social - circle heuristic . Using response time as a process measure , we further ob - served that people classi ﬁ ed as users of the social - circle heuristic responded more slowly , the more circles the heuristic needed to ex - amine ( Fig . 3 ) ; we found no such regularity for users of other strate - gies . Gauging the inferential accuracy of the social - circle heuristic relative to a compensatory strategy , we found that although the heu - ristic considered , on average , only about half as many instances as availability - by - recall , it drew the same inference 97 % of the time ( Study 2 ) . Using computer simulations , we identi ﬁ ed two environ - mental characteristics — clustering and skewness — as key determi - nants of the competitiveness of the social - circle heuristic . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁ rst analysis of the ecological rationality of an instance - based heuristic . The results also qualify the frequent as - sumption of a domain - general accuracy – effort trade - off , often be - lieved to be one of the few general laws of the human mind . Next , we discuss the differential levels of accuracy observed in Stud - ies 1 and 2 , the risks and potential bene ﬁ ts of relying on small samples ofinstances , andtherelationshipbetweenthesocial - circleheuristicand memory . Determinants of accuracy in instance - based inference Across Studies 1 and 2 , the ability of the social - circle heuristic and availability - by - recall to accurately infer social statistics varied widely . In the cancer mortality environment ( Study 1 ) , availability - by - recall and the social - circle heuristic yielded 71 . 4 % and 71 . 9 % correct infer - ences , respectively ( when they made an unambiguous prediction ) ; in the popularity of sports environment ( Study 2 ) , their accuracy was merely 58 % and 57 % , respectively . Our ecological analyses ( Study 3 ) offer possible explanations for these variations . One possible explanation is environmental clustering . According to our simulation results , the performance of both the social - circle heu - ristic and availability - by - recall strongly declines with increasing degree of spatial clustering ( Fig . 6 ) . Therefore , one may speculate that the spatial distribution of cancers is less clustered than that of sports membership . As membership of a sports club almost by de ﬁ ni - tion leads to strong clustering ( i . e . , one member knows many others who do the same sport ) , a high level of clustering in this domain is in - deed likely . A less likely explanation for the accuracy differences is the skewness of the frequency distribution . Although Fig . 6 shows that skewness can affect accuracy , its impact is much smaller than that of clustering . Moreover , the frequency distributions of cancers and sports are similarly skewed ( Fig . 8 ) , with ﬁ tted power - law exponents of − 1 . 41 ( cancer ) and − 1 . 36 ( sports ) , respectively . Another possible factor behind the different levels of accuracy is the amount of instance knowledge . People retrieved many more instances in Study 2 ( sports ) than in Study 1 ( cancers ) . Counterintuitively , this Fig . 7 . Accuracy in inferring which of two event categories was more frequent in the population as a function of sample size ( i . e . , number of agents probed for relevant instances ) in the six conditions in the computer simulation ( Study 3 ) . The six conditions result from combining two types of frequency distribution ( ﬂ at vs . skewed ) and three degrees of spatial clustering ( random vs . medium clustered vs . highly clustered ) . 1072 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 may have reduced the strategies ' accuracy in Study 2 . The reason is that retrieval of moreinstances may render the strategies applicablein more pair comparisons — and thus also in pair comparisons that are “ dif ﬁ cult . ” To test this hypothesis , we calculated , for each participant and sepa - rately for the two environments , the median effect size in those pair comparisons for which people ' s instance knowledge discriminated . Speci ﬁ cally , we determined the effect size measure h for comparing proportions ( Cohen , 1992 ) . The average effect size ( across participants ) was in fact higher for the cancer environment ( Study 1 ) than for the sports environment ( Study 2 ) , M s = . 28 ( SD = . 11 ) versus . 17 ( SD = . 06 ) , t ( 20 . 1 ) = 4 . 11 , p = . 001 . Thatis , the frequency differences ( in the population ) between the event categories for which partici - pants ' instance knowledge discriminated were larger — and inferences were thus “ easier ”— in the environment in which people knew fewer instances . Limited search for instances : bene ﬁ ts and boundaries Recently , it has been argued that reliance on small samples can have a number of important bene ﬁ ts , such as the early detection of useful bi - nary correlations ( e . g . , Fiedler & Kareev , 2006 ; Kareev , 2000 , 2005 ; but see Gaissmaier , Schooler , & Rieskamp , 2006 ; Juslin & Olsson , 2005 ) , the ampli ﬁ cation of mean differences and , by extension , the easing of choice dif ﬁ culty ( Hertwig & Pleskac , 2008 , 2010 ) . Availability - by - recall relies on samples retrieved from a person ' s social network . Relat - edly , Galesic et al . ( 2012 ) proposed a model that assumes that people infer population statistics by relying on a sample of their personal social network . This model can explain seemingly contradictory patterns in social comparison , such as self - enhancement ( i . e . , evaluating oneself as better than others ) and self - depreciation ( i . e . , evaluating oneself as worse than others ) . Speci ﬁ cally , it suggests that self - enhancement will occur when the distribution of the general population is J - right shaped ( i . e . , most people are doing well ) and that self - depreciation will occur whenthedistributionisJ - leftshaped ( i . e . , mostpeoplearedoingbadly ) . How bene ﬁ cial or dangerous is availability - by - recall ' s and the social - circle heuristic ' s focus on personally experienced instances ? It has been argued that “ disproportionate exposure , memorability , or imaginability of various events ” ( Lichtenstein , Slovic , Fischhoff , Layman , & Combs , 1978 , p . 551 ) can distort estimates of event frequen - cies . Yet this argument builds on the assumption that the search space in memory extends far beyond a person ' s social network to include a virtual circle , populated with incidents conveyed through the mass media ( Lichtenstein et al . , 1978 ) . No doubt , augmenting the search space in memory by a virtual circle comes at the price of systematic error because potential news or entertainment items are selected for their potential to captivate an audience ( see , e . g . , Combs & Slovic , 1979 ) . Incontrast , samplingonly withinone ' ssocialnetwork — although it constrains the sample size — safeguards people against the media ' s selection of rare , vivid , dramatic , emotional , and sensational events ( for a further discussion , see Pachur et al . , 2012 ; Hertwig et al . , 2005 ) . However , reliance on small samples also exacts risks . Our ecological analyses suggest that one such risk is that of miscalibration due to “ clumpiness ” in time or space . Illnesses , for instance , often occur in spa - tial patches or clusters ( “ hot spots ” ) — for example , leukemia near nuclear installations , or increased rates of diseases in underserved areas ( e . g . , Antunes & Waldman , 2002 ) . Similarly , many diseases occur disproportionately in particular age groups . A recent study of the then 229 con ﬁ rmed human cases of avian in ﬂ uenza type A ( H5N1 , or “ bird ﬂ u ” ) found numerous con ﬁ rmed cases among children and young adults , with relatively few cases among older adults ( Smallman - Raynor & Cliff , 2007 ) . Figs . 6 and 7 show that clustering compromises the accuracy of both compensatory and , though to a less extent , noncompensatory instance - based strategies relying on samples from a person ' s social network . Benjamin and Dougan ( 1997 ) and Benjamin , Dougan , and Buschena ( 2001 ) found that people ' s estimates of various mortality risks were more in line with event frequencies in their own age cohort than with those in the general population . Interestingly , we observed the same tendency . Respondents ' inferences about the popularity of sports ( Study 2 ) were somewhat better tuned to the frequencies in their age cohort ( i . e . , number of club members aged 27 years and younger ) than to the populationfrequencies . Speci ﬁ cally , participants ' accuracies were higher when we used cohort rather than population frequencies as a benchmark , 64 . 3 % versus 62 . 9 % , t ( 39 ) = 1 . 7 , p = 0 . 05 ( one - tailed ) . But even this sampling bias may be a blessing in dis - guise . Despite the common notion that the “ world is a village , ” people typically do not navigate in all social spheres . Therefore , as Benjamin and Dougan argued , accurately estimating social statistics in the pop - ulation at large may be less important than estimating the social statistics in one ' s proximate environment . When do people refrain from instance - based inference ? The results reported here and in Hertwig et al . ( 2005 ) suggest that people often rely on instance - based strategies , compensatory and noncompensatory alike . But any heuristic or class of heuristics has boundary conditions . What are those of the social - circle heuristic ? First , as with cue - based heuristics ( e . g . , recognition heuristic , take - the - best ) , people are unlikely to resort to an inferential strategy if they have direct knowledge about the criterion ( see Gigerenzer , Fig . 8 . Frequency distribution of the event categories in the cancer data set and sports data set used in Studies 1 and 2 , respectively . 1073 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 Hoffrage , & Kleinbölting , 1991 ; Pachur & Hertwig , 2006 ) . To illustrate , when a person happens to know that soccer is the most popular sport in Germany , it follows logically that soccer is more popular than any other sport ( irrespective of any instance knowledge ) . Second , people may rely less on instance knowledge sampled in their social environment if they gauge their proximate social environ - ment to be highly unrepresentative . For instance , when judging the relative frequency of various professions , a carpenter working with other carpenters will hardly infer that carpenters are ubiqui - tous ( e . g . , Oppenheimer , 2004 ; but see Hamill , Wilson , & Nisbett , 1980 ; Nisbett & Borgida , 1975 ) . Third , how people generalize from their own status to the popula - tion may also depend on the desirability of the characteristic in ques - tion . For instance , people tend to see themselves as below - average on highly undesirable characteristics ( e . g . , watching less trashy TV than the average person ) and above - average on highly desirable character - istics ( e . g . , being less likely to become unemployed than the average person ; for an overview , see Chambers , 2008 ) . Cases in which people systematically consider themselves as below average or above aver - age are known as false uniqueness effects . In these cases , people seem to see a negative link between their own status and that of others . For instance , if a person is not drawn to trashy TV shows , she may infer that many people in the population are . One way to accommo - date this phenomenon into the social - circle heuristic would be to as - sume that , for highly desirable or undesirable characteristics , people reverse the predictive direction of the self circle ( i . e . , being an instance of an event makes it less likely that it is frequent in the population ) . Fluency - based versus instance - based inferences Availability - by - recall and the social - circle heuristic took their in - spiration from the availability heuristic ( Tversky & Kahneman , 1973 ) ; they represent two ways to turn this heuristic into a computa - tion model . Another strategy related to the availability heuristic is the ﬂ uency heuristic ( e . g . , Hertwig , Herzog , Schooler , & Reimer , 2008 ; Schooler & Hertwig , 2005 ) . Despite a family resemblance , the ﬂ uency heuristic is distinct from availability - by - recall and the social - circle heuristic . It relies on retrieval ﬂ uency , de ﬁ ned as the speed with which the name of an event category ( or object ) is retrieved and rec - ognized . In contrast , availability - by - recall and the social - circle heuris - tic both entail the retrieval of individual instances within the event category . This different input to the strategies has predictable conse - quences . One is that , unlike the instance - based strategies , the ﬂ uency heuristic can distinguish between two event categories ( e . g . , ovarian cancer vs . bladder cancer ) even when no single instance can be re - trieved ( as long as one category name is retrieved more ﬂ uently ) . To what extent might people ' s inferences in Studies 1 and 2 have been driven by the ﬂ uency heuristic ? As we did not measure people ' s recognition speed , we are only able to answer this question indirectly . One answer is that past contests between the ﬂ uency heuristic and availability - by - recall have consistently suggested that the latter is the superior descriptive model ( Hertwig et al . , 2005 ; Pachur et al . , 2012 ; see also Hilbig , Erdfelder , & Pohl , 2011 ) . A second answer concerns the response - time pattern in Fig . 3 . For users of the social - circle heuristic , response time increases systematically as a function of the number of circles probed . This pattern is not easily explained by the ﬂ uency heuristic . Another wayin whichpeoplemay make use of mental ﬂ uency is by assessing how easy or dif ﬁ cult it is to retrieve instances ( e . g . , Schwarz et al . , 1991 ) . As we did not measure ‘ ease of retrieval ’ or manipulate ease and the number of retrieved instances orthogonally , we cannot model their respective impact here . It is possible that people inferring social statistics takeinto account not just the total numberof instances they obtained from their proximate social world , but also the meta - cognitive feeling of ease of retrieval . Yet , because retrieval of instances in the context of the social - circle heuristic is limited to a person ' s proximate social world , it is also possible that ﬂ uency differences are minor and thus dif ﬁ cult to discern . The link between the social - circle heuristic and ﬂ uency is worth modeling in future investigations . Frequency and / or recency Two key factors structuring memory and retrieval are frequency and recency of the encoded material ( Anderson & Milson , 1989 ) . 12 In - terestingly , the distinction between frequency and recency has some parallels with the two social circle de ﬁ nitions we considered . Speci ﬁ - cally , the altruism structure — family , friends , and acquaintances — may align with the frequency distribution of contacts accumulated across the lifetime . The frequency - of - contact structure , by contrast , may re - ﬂ ect the frequencies of contacts in a person ' s more immediate past ; it thus could be closely associated with the recency of a person ' s con - tacts . Assuming this mapping , we can speculate that the poor perfor - mance of the social - circle heuristic F may indicate that recency is a weaker factor driving the accessibility of instances than is ( cumula - tive ) contact frequency . On the other hand , in Hills and Pachur ' s ( 2012 ) investigation of social memory , altruism and frequency of con - tact predicted retrieval probability about equally well . These inconsis - tencies suggest that the memory dynamics behind instance - based inferences are not yet fully understood . Future studies could therefore attempt — if possible — to experimentally manipulate frequency and re - cency in a person ' s mnemonic repository of instances , and examine their respective impact onthe performanceofthesocial - circleheuristic . Conclusion Two commandments that are often considered characteristic of rational judgment are exhaustive search ( “ Thou shalt ﬁ nd all the information available ” ) and compensation ( “ Thou shalt combine all pieces of information ” ; Gigerenzer et al . , 1999 , p . 83 ) . Most psycho - logical models of instance - based inference explicitly or implicitly im - plement these commandments . Our results suggest that — as in cue - based inference — some people rely instead on limited and ordered search in instance - based inference from memory . Moreover , we iden - ti ﬁ ed two environmental properties — spatial clustering and skewness of the frequency distribution — that foster the ability of limited search to compete with exhaustive search . By modeling and analyzing noncompensatory inferences based on instances , our investigations represent a ﬁ rst step toward generalizing the study of ecological ra - tionality ( e . g . , Todd et al . , 2012 ) — so far limited to the context of cue - based inference — to the noncompensatory processing of knowl - edge of social instances . Appendix A . Maximum likelihood classi ﬁ cation procedure The maximum likelihood classi ﬁ cation procedure works as fol - lows ( e . g . , Pachur & Marinello , 2013 ; for a model recovery analysis , see Pachur & Aebi - Forrer , in press ) . For each of the k candidate strat - egies and each individual participant , the likelihood of the observed inferences was determined . For this purpose , we determined the G 2 measure ( see Burnham & Anderson , 1998 ) , de ﬁ ned as : G 2 ¼ − 2 X N i ¼ 1 ln f y i ð j k ½ Þ(cid:2) ; ð A1 Þ where f ( y i | k ) is the likelihood function that expresses the probability of inference y for item i given strategy k . For those items where strat - egy k permits an unambiguous prediction , an inference in line with 12 Pachur , Schooler , andStevens ( 2013 ) showedthatthesetwofactorsalsoplayarole inthe contactdynamics of a person ' ssocial environment . Speci ﬁ cally , itwasfound that the frequency and the recency of previous encounters with a person independently predict the extent to which one is likely to have contact with that person again . 1074 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 strategy k is predicted with a probability of ( 1 − ε k ) , where ε k is a constant application error . Accordingly , an inference inconsistent with strategy k is predicted with probability ε k . The optimal estimate for the application error ε k ( i . e . , the one that leads to the best ﬁ t in terms of G 2 ) can be determined by the proportion of inferences not in line with the strategy ' s predictions : ε k ¼ n k n ; ð A2 Þ where n refers to the number of items for which the strategy makes an unambiguous prediction , and n k refers to the number of inferences of these n items that are in line with the prediction of strategy k . For all strategies , G 2 is computed based on the items where all strategies make an unambiguous prediction . A participant is classi ﬁ ed as using the strategy with the highest likelihood — that is , the lowest G 2 value . If the G 2 of the best - ﬁ tting strategy equals or is higher than the G 2 as - suming guessing ( i . e . , ε = 0 . 5 on all items where all strategies make an unambiguous prediction ) , then the participant is classi ﬁ ed as guessing . Appendix B . Cue - based strategies tested in Study 2 Take - the - best The take - the - best heuristic ( Gigerenzer & Goldstein , 1996 ) as - sumes that a person searches for the most valid cue for judging the relative frequency of two event categories and examines whether the two event categories differ on this cue . The validity v i of a cue i is de ﬁ ned as v i = R i / D i , where R i is the number of correct inferences by cue i , and D i is the number of pairs where the value of cue i differs between event categories ( in the reference class ) . The cue validity ex - presses a cue ' s conditional probability of making a correct inference given that it discriminates ( i . e . , that one event category has a positive cue value and the other a negative cue value ) . If the most valid cue discriminates , a user of take - the - best will terminate search and make an inference accordingly ; otherwise , the second most valid cue will be examined , and so on . By using this stopping rule , the heu - ristic can draw inferences without having to look up the values of all available cues . The heuristic is noncompensatory : No amount of evi - dence contained in the cues not looked up ( i . e . , cues with a validity below the ﬁ rst cue that discriminates ) can reverse the inference based on the discriminating cue . Tallying The tallying heuristic represents a very different hypothesis about how people process cues . Tallying searches for all cues in an un - speci ﬁ ed order and then infers that the event category with the higher number of positive cue values is the more frequent one . Vari - ous versions of tallying with different stopping rules have been discussed in the literature : Either all M cues are looked up , or only the subset of m signi ﬁ cant cues is looked up ( i . e . , search is stopped after m cues , where 1 b m ≤ M ; Dawes , 1979 ) . Here we assume that tallying looks up all cues . Unlike take - the - best , tallying is a compen - satory heuristic : A negative value on one cue can be compensated for by a positive value on another cue . Franklin ' s rule Like tallying , Franklin ' s rule looks up the values of all cues . It then weighs the cues by their validity ( i . e . , the value of cue i is multiplied by v i ) , and sums up the weighted values . It infers that the event cate - gory with the higher sum is the more frequent one . Appendix C . Instance - based versus cue - based inference : how do they relate ? In the model comparison in Study 2 , we assumed for the sake of conceptual clarity that people used either an instance - based or a cue - based strategy . In reality , this strict assumption may not hold . For instance , a person whose tallies of instances do not discriminate between the event categories may switch to cue - based inference in - stead of guessing ( see Table 1 ) . To address this possibility , we exam - ined how the 27 participants in Study 2 who were classi ﬁ ed as users of an instance - based heuristic ( availability - by - recall or one of the social - circle heuristics ) proceeded when their tallies of instances failed to discriminate between a pair of sports . For those cases , we now classi ﬁ ed respondents as “ guessers ” or “ cue users , ” based on the maximum likelihood method used in Studies 1 and 2 , and found that slightly more participants were classi ﬁ ed as cue users ( 15 ; 56 % ) than as guessers ( 12 ; 44 % ) . This ﬁ nding is consistent with the idea that some people proceed from an instance - based to a cue - based approach when the instance - based strategy fails to enable an inference ( see Fig . 1 ) . References Anderson , J . R . , Bothell , D . , Byrne , M . D . , Douglass , S . , Lebiere , C . , & Qin , Y . ( 2004 ) . An in - tegrated theory of the mind . Psychological Review , 111 , 1036 – 1060 . Anderson , J . R . , & Lebiere , C . ( 1998 ) . The atomic components of thought . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Anderson , J . R . , & Milson , R . ( 1989 ) . Human memory : An adaptive perspective . Psycho - logical Review , 96 , 703 – 719 . Antunes , J . L . F . , & Waldman , E . A . ( 2002 ) . Trendsandspatialdistributionofdeathsofchil - dren aged 12 – 60 months in São Paulo , Brazil , 1980 – 98 . Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 80 , 391 – 398 . Benjamin , D . K . , & Dougan , W . R . ( 1997 ) . Individuals ' estimates of the risks of death : Part I — A reassessment of the previous evidence . Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 15 , 115 – 133 . Benjamin , D . K . , Dougan , W . R . , & Buschena , D . ( 2001 ) . Individuals ' estimates of the risks of death : Part II — New evidence . Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 22 , 35 – 57 . Bond , C . F . , Jr . , & Brockett , D . R . ( 1987 ) . Asocialcontextpersonalityindex theoryof mem - ory for acquaintances . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 1110 – 1121 . Boyce , C . J . , Brown , G . D . A . , & Moore , S . C . ( 2010 ) . Money and happiness : Rank of in - come , not income , affects life satisfaction . Psychological Science , 21 , 471 – 475 . Bröder , A . , & Gaissmaier , W . ( 2007 ) . Sequential processing of cues in memory - based multi - attribute decisions . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 14 , 895 – 900 . Bröder , A . , & Schiffer , S . ( 2003 ) . “ Take - the - best ” versussimultaneousfeaturematching : Probabilistic inferences from memory and effects of representation format . Journal of Experimental Psychology . General , 132 , 277 – 293 . Bröder , A . , & Schiffer , S . ( 2006 ) . Stimulus format and working memory in fast and fru - gal strategy selection . Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 19 , 361 – 380 . Brunswik , E . ( 1952 ) . The conceptual framework of psychology . International encyclopae - dia of uni ﬁ ed science , vol . I , no . 10 , Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Brunswik , E . ( 1955 ) . Representativedesignandprobabilistictheoryinafunctionalpsy - chology . Psychological Review , 62 , 193 – 217 . Bundesamt für Statistik ( 2004 ) . Todesursachenstatistik : Ursachen der Sterblichkeit 1999 und2000 [ Statistics oncauses ofdeath : Causesof death in1999and2000 ] . Neuchâtel , Switzerland : Bundesamt für Statistik . Burnham , K . P . , & Anderson , D . R . ( 1998 ) . Model selection and inference : A practical information - theoretic approach . New York , NY : Springer . Chambers , J . R . ( 2008 ) . Explaining false uniqueness : Why we ' re both better and worse than others . Social and Personality Psychology Compass , 2 , 1 – 17 . Clauset , A . , Shalizi , C . R . , & Newman , M . E . J . ( 2009 ) . Power - law distributions in empir - ical data . SIAM Review , 51 , 661 – 703 . Cohen , J . ( 1992 ) . A power primer . Psychological Bulletin , 112 , 155 – 159 . Combs , B . , & Slovic , P . ( 1979 ) . Causes of death : Biased newspaper coverage and biased judgments . Journalism Quarterly , 56 ( 837 – 843 ) , 849 . Dawes , R . M . ( 1979 ) . The robust beauty of improper linear models in decision making . American Psychologist , 34 , 571 – 582 . De Schryver , M . , Vandist , K . , & Rosseel , Y . ( 2009 ) . How many exemplars are used ? Ex - plorations with the Rex Leopold I model . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 16 , 337 – 343 . Dhami , M . , Hertwig , R . , & Hoffrage , U . ( 2004 ) . The role of representative design in an ecological approach to cognition . Psychological Bulletin , 130 , 959 – 988 . Dieckmann , A . , & Rieskamp , J . ( 2007 ) . The in ﬂ uence of information redundancy on probabilistic inferences . Memory and Cognition , 35 , 1801 – 1813 . Dougherty , M . R . P . , Gettys , C . F . , & Ogden , E . E . ( 1999 ) . MINERVA - DM : A memory pro - cesses model for judgments of likelihood . Psychological Review , 106 , 180 – 209 . ECDC Rapid Risk Assessment ( May 27 ) . Outbreak of Shiga toxin - producing E . coli ( STEC ) in Germany . Stockholm : European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control . Einhorn , H . J . ( 1970 ) . The use of nonlinear , noncompensatory models in decision making . Psychological Bulletin , 73 , 221 – 230 . 1075 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 Fiedler , K . , & Juslin , P . ( Eds . ) . ( 2005 ) . Information sampling and adaptive cognition . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Fiedler , K . , & Kareev , Y . ( 2006 ) . Does decision quality ( always ) increase with the size of information samples ? Some vicissitudes in applying the law of large numbers . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 32 , 883 – 903 . Fischer , P . , Krueger , J . I . , Greitemeyer , T . , Vogrincic , C . , Kastenmüller , A . , Frey , D . , et al . ( 2011 ) . The bystander - effect : A meta - analytic review on bystander intervention indangerousandnon - dangerousemergencies . PsychologicalBulletin , 137 , 517 – 537 . Fiske , A . P . ( 1995 ) . Social schemata for remembering people : Relationships and person attributes in free recall of acquaintances . Journal of Quantitative Anthropology , 5 , 305 – 324 . Ford , J . K . , Schmitt , N . , Schechtman , S . L . , Hults , B . H . , & Doherty , M . L . ( 1989 ) . Process tracingmethods : Contributions , problems , andneglectedresearchquestions . Orga - nizational Behavior and Decision Processes , 43 , 75 – 117 . Fowler , J . , Settle , J . , & Christakis , N . ( 2011 ) . Correlated genotypes in friendship net - works . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 , 1993 – 1997 . Gaissmaier , W . , Schooler , L . J . , & Rieskamp , J . ( 2006 ) . Simple predictions fueled by ca - pacity limitations : When are they successful ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 32 , 966 – 982 . Galesic , M . , Olsson , H . , & Rieskamp , J . ( 2012 ) . Social sampling explains apparent biases in judgments of social environments . Psychological Science , 23 , 1515 – 1523 . Geary , D . C . , & Bjorklund , D . F . ( 2000 ) . Evolutionary developmental psychology . Child Development , 71 , 57 – 65 . Gigerenzer , G . , & Goldstein , D . G . ( 1996 ) . Reasoning the fast and frugal way : Models of bounded rationality . Psychological Review , 103 , 650 – 669 . Gigerenzer , G . , Hertwig , R . , & Pachur , T . ( Eds . ) . ( 2011 ) . Heuristics : The foundations of adaptive behavior . New York : Oxford University Press . Gigerenzer , G . , Hoffrage , U . , & Goldstein , D . G . ( 2008 ) . Fast and frugal heuristics are plausible models of cognition : Reply to Dougherty , Franco - Watkins , and Thomas . Psychological Review , 115 , 230 – 239 . Gigerenzer , G . , Hoffrage , U . , & Kleinbölting , H . ( 1991 ) . Probabilistic mental models : A Brunswikian theory of con ﬁ dence . Psychological Review , 98 , 506 – 528 . Gigerenzer , G . , Todd , P . M . , & the ABC Research Group ( 1999 ) . Simple heuristics that make us smart . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Goldstein , N . J . , Cialdini , R . B . , & Griskevicius ( 2008 ) . A room with a viewpoint : Using social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels . Journal of Consum - er Research , 35 , 472 – 482 . Goldstein , D . G . , & Gigerenzer , G . ( 2002 ) . Models of ecological rationality : The recogni - tion heuristic . Psychological Review , 109 , 75 – 90 . Gosling , S . D . , Ko , S . J . , Mannarelli , T . , & Morris , M . E . ( 2002 ) . A room with a cue : Judg - ments of personality based on of ﬁ ces and bedrooms . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 82 , 379 – 398 . Hamill , R . , Wilson , T . D . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 1980 ) . Insensitivity to sample bias : Generaliz - ing from atypical cases . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 39 , 578 – 589 . Hamilton , W . D . ( 1964 ) . The genetical evolution of social behaviour , I and II . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 7 , 1 – 52 . Hammond , K . R . ( 1955 ) . Probabilisticfunctioningandtheclinicalmethod . Psychological Review , 62 , 255 – 262 . Henrich , N . , & Henrich , J . ( 2007 ) . Whyhumans cooperate : A cultural andevolutionaryex - planation . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Hertwig , R . , & Herzog , S . M . ( 2009 ) . Fast and frugal heuristics : Tools of social rational - ity . Social Cognition , 27 , 661 – 698 . Hertwig , R . , Herzog , S . M . , Schooler , L . J . , & Reimer , T . ( 2008 ) . Fluencyheuristic : Amodel of how the mind exploits a by - product of information retrieval . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 34 , 1191 – 1206 . Hertwig , R . , Hoffrage , U . , & Martignon , L . ( 1999 ) . Quickestimation : Lettingtheenviron - ment do the work . In G . Gigerenzer , P . M . Todd , & the ABC Research Group ( Eds . ) , Simple heuristics that make us smart ( pp . 209 – 234 ) . New York , NY : Oxford Univer - sity Press . Hertwig , R . , Hoffrage , U . , & Sparr , R . ( 2013 ) . TheQuickEstheuristic : Howtobene ﬁ tfrom an imbalanced world . In P . M . Todd , G . Gigerenzer , & the ABC Research Group ( Eds . ) , Ecological rationality : Intelligence intheworld . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Hertwig , R . , Hoffrage , U . , & the ABC Research Group ( 2013 ) . Simple heuristics in a social world . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Hertwig , R . , Pachur , T . , & Kurzenhäuser , S . ( 2005 ) . Judgments of risk frequencies : Tests of possible cognitive mechanisms . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 31 , 621 – 642 . Hertwig , R . , & Pleskac , T . J . ( 2008 ) . The game of life : How small samples render choices simpler . In N . Chater , & M . Oaksford ( Eds . ) , The probabilistic mind : Prospects for rational models of cognition ( pp . 209 – 235 ) . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Hertwig , R . , & Pleskac , T . J . ( 2010 ) . How small samples amplify perceived differences in decisions from experience . Cognition , 115 , 225 – 237 . Hilbig , B . E . , Erdfelder , E . , & Pohl , R . F . ( 2011 ) . Fluent , fast , and frugal ? A formal model evaluation ofthe interplay betweenmemory , ﬂ uency , andcomparative judgments . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 37 , 827 – 839 . Hill , R . A . , & Dunbar , R . I . M . ( 2003 ) . Social network size in humans . Human Nature , 14 , 53 – 72 . Hills , T . T . , & Pachur , T . ( 2012 ) . Dynamic search and working memory in social recall . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 38 , 218 – 228 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2008 ) . Search in external and internal spaces . Psychological Science , 19 , 676 – 682 . Jeffreys , H . ( 1961 ) . Theory of probability . Oxford , UK : Clarendon Press . Juslin , P . , Fiedler , K . , & Chater , N . ( 2006 ) . Less is more in contingency assessment . Or is it ? In K . Fiedler & P . Juslin ( Eds . ) , Information sampling and adaptive cognition . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Juslin , P . , & Olsson , H . ( 2005 ) . Capacity limitations and the detection of correlations : Comment on Kareev ( 2000 ) . Psychological Review , 112 , 256 – 267 . Juslin , P . , & Persson , M . ( 2002 ) . PROBabilities from EXemplars ( PROBEX ) : A “ lazy ” al - gorithmforprobabilisticinferencefromgenericknowledge . CognitiveScience , 26 , 563 – 607 . Kahn , R . L . , & Antonucci , T . C . ( 1980 ) . Convoys over the life course : Attachment , roles , and social support . Life Span Development and Behavior , 3 , 253 – 286 . Kareev , Y . ( 2000 ) . Seven ( indeed , plus or minus two ) and the detection of correlations . Psychological Review , 107 , 397 – 402 . Kareev , Y . ( 2005 ) . Andyetthesmall - sampleeffectdoeshold : ReplytoJuslinandOlsson ( 2005 ) and Anderson , Doherty , Berg , and Friedrich ( 2005 ) . Psychological Review , 112 , 280 – 285 . Katsikopoulos , K . , Pachur , T . , Machery , E . , & Wallin , A . ( 2008 ) . From Meehl ( 1954 ) to fast and frugal heuristics ( and back ) : New insights into how to bridge the clinical - actuarial divide . Theory and Psychology , 18 , 443 – 464 . Katsikopoulos , K . V . , Schooler , L . J . , & Hertwig , R . ( 2010 ) . The robust beauty of ordinary information . Psychological Review , 117 , 1259 – 1266 . Khader , P . H . , Pachur , T . , Meier , S . , Bien , S . , Jost , K . , & Rösler , F . ( 2011 ) . Memory - based decision making with heuristics involves increased activation of decision - relevant memory representations . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 23 , 3540 – 3554 . Krueger , J . I . , & Clement , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The truly false consensus effect : An ineradicable andegocentricbiasinsocialperception . JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology , 67 , 596 – 610 . Lichtenstein , S . , Slovic , P . , Fischhoff , B . , Layman , M . , & Combs , B . ( 1978 ) . Judged fre - quency of lethal events . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 4 , 551 – 578 . Marks , G . , & Miller , N . ( 1987 ) . Ten years of research on the false - consensus effect : An empirical and theoretical review . Psychological Bulletin , 102 , 72 – 90 . Martignon , L . , & Hoffrage , U . ( 2002 ) . Fast , frugal and ﬁ t : Simple heuristics for paired comparison . Theory and Decision , 52 , 29 – 71 . McPherson , M . , Smith - Lovin , L . , & Cook , J . ( 2001 ) . Birds of a feather : Homophily in social networks . Annual Review of Sociology , 27 , 415 – 444 . Milardo , R . M . ( 1992 ) . Comparative methods for delineating social networks . Journal of Social and Personal Relationships , 9 , 447 – 461 . Moreno , J . L . ( 1936 ) . Organization of the social atom . Sociometric Review , 1 , 11 – 16 . Moyer , R . S . , & Bayer , R . H . ( 1976 ) . Mentalcomparison andthesymbolicdistance effect . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 228 – 246 . Newman , M . E . J . ( 2005 ) . Power laws , Pareto distributions , and Zip ' s law . Contemporary Physics , 46 , 323 – 351 . Nisbett , R . E . , & Borgida , E . ( 1975 ) . Attributionandthe psychologyof prediction . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 32 , 932 – 943 . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1986 ) . Attention , similarity , and the identi ﬁ cation – categorization re - lationship . Journal of Experimental Psychology . General , 115 , 39 – 57 . Nosofsky , R . M . , & Bergert , F . B . ( 2007 ) . Limitationsof exemplarmodelsof multi - attribute probabilistic inference . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 33 , 999 – 1019 . Oppenheimer , D . ( 2004 ) . Spontaneous discounting of availability in frequency judg - ment tasks . Psychological Science , 15 , 100 – 105 . Pachur , T . ( 2010 ) . Recognition - based inference : When is less more in the real world ? Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 17 , 589 – 598 . Pachur , T . , & Aebi - Forrer , E . ( 2013 ) . Selection of decision strategies after conscious and unconscious thought . Journal of Behavioral Decision Making . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bdm . 1780 ( in press , Advance online publication ) . Pachur , T . , & Hertwig , R . ( 2006 ) . On the psychology of the recognition heuristic : Re - trieval primacy as a key determinant of its use . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 32 , 983 – 1002 . Pachur , T . , Hertwig , R . , & Rieskamp , J . ( 2013 ) . Themindasanintuitivepollster : Frugalsearch insocialspaces . InR . Hertwig , U . Hoffrage , & theABCResearchGroup ( Eds . ) , Simpleheu - ristics in a social world ( pp . 261 – 291 ) . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Pachur , T . , Hertwig , R . , & Steinmann , F . ( 2012 ) . How do people judge risks : Availability heuristic , affect heuristic , or both ? Journal of Experimental Psychology . Applied , 18 , 314 – 330 . Pachur , T . , & Marinello , G . ( 2013 ) . Expert intuitions : How to model the decision strat - egies of airport customs of ﬁ cers ? Acta Psychologica , 144 , 97 – 103 . Pachur , T . , & Olsson , H . ( 2012 ) . Type of learning task impacts performance and strategy selection in decision making . Cognitive Psychology , 65 , 207 – 240 . Pachur , T . , Schooler , L . J . , & Stevens , J . R . ( 2013 ) . When will wemeet again ? Regularities of social connectivity and their re ﬂ ections in memory and decision making . In R . Hertwig , U . Hoffrage , & the ABC Research Group ( Eds . ) , Simple heuristics in a social world ( pp . 199 – 224 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Pachur , T . , Todd , P . M . , Gigerenzer , G . , Schooler , L . J . , & Goldstein , D . G . ( 2011 ) . The rec - ognitionheuristic : Areviewoftheoryandtests . FrontiersinCognitiveScience , 2 , 147 . Payne , J . W . , Bettman , J . R . , & Johnson , E . J . ( 1993 ) . Theadaptivedecision - maker . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Persson , M . , & Rieskamp , J . ( 2009 ) . Inferences from memory : Strategy - and exemplar - based judgment models compared . Acta Psychologica , 130 , 25 – 37 . Pirolli , P . , & Card , S . K . ( 1999 ) . Information foraging . Psychological Review , 106 , 643 – 675 . Rands , S . A . , Pettifor , R . A . , Rowcliffe , J . M . , & Cowlishaw , G . ( 2004 ) . State - dependent foraging rules for social animals in sel ﬁ sh herds . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 271 , 2613 – 2620 . Richerson , P . J . , & Boyd , R . ( 2005 ) . Not by genes alone : How culture transformed human evolution . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Rieskamp , J . , & Hoffrage , U . ( 2008 ) . Inferences under time pressure : How opportunity costs affect strategy selection . Acta Psychologica , 127 , 258 – 276 . 1076 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077 Ross , L . , Greene , D . , & House , P . ( 1977 ) . The “ false consensus effect ” : An egocentric bias in social perception and attribution processes . Journal of Experimental Social Psy - chology , 13 , 279 – 301 . Salganik , M . J . , Dodds , P . S . , & Watts , D . J . ( 2006 ) . Experimental study of inequality and unpredictability in an arti ﬁ cial cultural market . Science , 311 , 854 – 856 . Schooler , L . J . , & Hertwig , R . ( 2005 ) . How forgetting aids heuristic inference . Psycholog - ical Review , 112 , 610 – 627 . Schwarz , N . , Bless , H . , Strack , F . , Klumpp , G . , Rittenauer - Schatka , H . , & Simons , A . ( 1991 ) . Ease of retrieval as information : Another look at the availability heuristic . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 , 195 – 202 . Schweickart , O . , & Brown , N . R . ( 2013 ) . Magnitude comparison extended : How lack of knowledge informs comparative judgments under uncertainty . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology . General . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0031451 ( in press , Advance online publication ) . Sedlmeier , P . , Hertwig , R . , & Gigerenzer , G . ( 1998 ) . Are judgments of the positional fre - quenciesof letters systematically biasedduetoavailability ? Journalof Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 24 , 754 – 770 . Simon , H . A . ( 1990 ) . Invariantsofhumanbehavior . AnnualReviewofPsychology , 41 , 1 – 19 . Singer , P . ( 1981 ) . The expanding circle : Ethics and sociobiology . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Smallman - Raynor , M . , & Cliff , A . D . ( 2007 ) . Avian in ﬂ uenza A ( H5N1 ) age distribution in humans . Emerging Infectious Diseases , 13 , 510 . Statistisches Bundesamt ( 2002 ) . Statistisches Jahrbuch 2001 für die Bundesrepublik . Deutschland [ Statisticalyearbook2001fortheFederalRepublicofGermany ] . Wiesbaden , Germany : Author . Todd , P . M . , Gigerenzer , G . , & theABCResearchGroup ( Eds . ) . ( 2012 ) . Ecologicalrationality : Intelligence in the world . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Tversky , A . ( 1972 ) . Elimination by aspects : A theory of choice . Psychological Review , 79 , 281 – 299 . Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1973 ) . Availability : A heuristic for judging frequency and probability . Cognitive Psychology , 5 , 207 – 232 . Wasserman , L . ( 2000 ) . Bayesian model selection and model averaging . Journal of Math - ematical Psychology , 44 , 92 – 107 . Whelan , R . ( 2008 ) . Effective analysis of reaction time data . Psychological Record , 58 , 475 – 482 . Wilson , T . D . , & Brekke , N . C . ( 1994 ) . Mental contamination and mental correction : Unwanted in ﬂ uences on judgments and evaluations . Psychological Bulletin , 116 , 117 – 142 . Zhou , W . - X . , Sornette , D . , Hill , R . A . , & Dunbar , R . I . M . ( 2005 ) . Discrete hierarchical or - ganization of social group sizes . Proceedings of the Royal Society B , 272 , 439 – 444 . 1077 T . Pachur et al . / Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49 ( 2013 ) 1059 – 1077