Poliński et al . , 2023 A novel regulatory mechanism of actin cytoskeleton dynamics through a neural microexon in DAAM1 is important for proper memory formation Patryk Poliński 1 , 9 , Marta Miret Cuesta 1 , 8 , Alfonsa Zamora - Moratalla 1 , 8 , Federica Mantica 1 , Gerard Cantero - Recasens 1 , 2 , Davide Normanno 1 , 3 , Luis Iñiguez Rabago 1 , Cruz Morenilla - Palao 4 , Patricia Ordoño 4 , Sophie Bonnal 1 , Raúl Gómez Riera 1 , María Martínez De Lagrán Cabredo 1 , Álvaro Fernández - Blanco 1 , Cristina Rodríguez - Marin 1 , Jon Permanyer 1 , Orsolya Fölsz 1 , Cesar Sierra 1 , Diana Legutko 5 , José Wojnacki 1 , Juan Luis Musoles Lleo 1 , Eloisa Herrera 4 , Mara Dierssen 1 , 9 , and Manuel Irimia 1 , 6 , 7 , 9 1 - Centre for Genomic Regulation , Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology , Barcelona , Spain . 2 - Vall d ' Hebron Research Institute ( VHIR ) , Barcelona , Spain 3 - Institute of Human Genetics , Université Montpellier , CNRS , Montpellier , France 4 - Instituto de Neurociencias ( CSIC - UMH ) , Alicante , Spain . 5 - Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology , BRAINCITY , Warsaw , Poland 6 - Universitat Pompeu Fabra , Barcelona , Spain . 7 - ICREA , Barcelona , Spain . 8 - Co - second authors . 9 - Corresponding authors . Patryk Poliński Centre for Genomic Regulation Dr . Aiguader , 88 , 08003 Barcelona , Spain e - mail : patrykpolinski @ gmail . com Phone : + 34933160213 , Fax : + 34933160099 Mara Dierssen Centre for Genomic Regulation Dr . Aiguader , 88 , 08003 Barcelona , Spain e - mail : mara . dierssen @ crg . eu Phone : + 34933160140 , Fax : + 34933160099 Manuel Irimia Centre for Genomic Regulation Dr . Aiguader , 88 , 08003 Barcelona , Spain e - mail : mirimia @ gmail . com Phone : + 34933160212 , Fax : + 34933160099 Abstract Actin cytoskeleton dynamics is crucial for neurogenesis and neuronal function . Precise quantitative and qualitative regulation of actin polymerization is achieved by multiple actin - binding proteins , among which formins are particularly versatile . Here , we investigate how neuronal - specific splicing expands formin ' s functional diversity in the brain . We uncovered a highly conserved microexon in DAAM1 , whose inclusion extends the linker region of the FH2 domain , and leads to remarkable changes in actin polymerization rates and structure . Microexon deletion causes neuritogenesis defects and increased calcium influx in in vitro differentiated neurons , and mice carrying this deletion exhibit deficient memory formation . These memory defects were associated with higher activity of DAAM1 ' s interactor RhoA , increased ARC protein levels , postsynaptic deficiencies , fewer dendritic spines and impaired long - term potentiation . In summary , precise post - transcriptional regulation of DAAM1 ' s FH2 domain is a novel mechanism for modulating actin dynamics in neurons , and is essential for proper brain function . Keywords : Alternative splicing , actin , formin , DAAM1 , memory formation 1 Poliński et al . , 2023 Introduction The higher cognitive functions of mammalian brains are the result of complex interactions among millions of neuronal cells , which are mediated by intercellular connections called synapses . These connections require the development of specialized cellular structures in the presynapse , responsible for the proper storage and turnover of synaptic vesicles filled with neurotransmitters , and in the postsynapse , which receives these signals mainly in the dendritic spines . The precise organization of both the pre - and postsynaptic terminals is to a great extent dependent on the actin cytoskeleton ( Cingolani and Goda 2008 ) . At the presynapse , actin networks are responsible for the spatial segregation and cycling of synaptic vesicles ( Dillon and Goda 2005 ; Papandréou and Leterrier 2018 ) , while in the postsynaptic terminals they drive spine morphology and receptor mobility ( Cingolani and Goda 2008 ) . As a result , the actin cytoskeleton is crucial for multiple brain functions , including memory formation . For example , actin dynamics directly affects experience - dependent plasticity , which induces specific connectivity patterns between the synapses ( Lamprecht 2021 ; McLeod and Salinas 2018 ) . The dynamics and structure of the actin cytoskeleton are controlled by many actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) , whose classification depends mainly on their mode of action . Among them , actin nucleating proteins are both the most important drivers of actin dynamics and the most heterogeneous group of ABPs ( Mattila and Lappalainen 2008 ) . They consist of ( i ) the WH2 - containing nucleators ; ( ii ) the Arp2 / 3 complex , responsible for actin branching ; and ( iii ) the formins , which nucleate linear filament formation and elongation ( Pollard 2016 ) . Formin proteins are particularly diverse and versatile , with 15 members grouped into seven families in humans ( Schönichen and Geyer 2010 ) . All of them are characterized by a conserved Formin - homology - 2 ( FH2 ) domain that forms homodimeric structures directly responsible for processive polymerization of F - actin filaments ( Kühn and Geyer 2014 ; Yamashita et al . 2007 ; Gao and Chen 2010 ) . The FH2 domain - based “tethered dimer” exists at two states in equilibrium that allow either actin binding or dissociation . Importantly , the interconversion between these two states occurs through the dynamic expansion of the FH2 ring , and it is possible thanks to the high flexibility provided by the linker region ( Schönichen and Geyer 2010 ; Yamashita et al . 2007 ) . Alternative splicing , the differential processing of exons and introns in eukaryotic genes , is one of the main mechanisms allowing diversification and specialization of protein function . Nearly 95 % of human multi - exonic genes undergo alternative splicing ( Pan et al . 2008 ; Wang et al . 2008 ) , and its prevalence is particularly high in mammalian brains ( Barbosa - Morais et al . 2012 ) . Neural - specific alternative splicing is highly conserved throughout vertebrate evolution ( Barbosa - Morais et al . 2012 ) , and its misregulation underlies major neurodevelopmental disorders ( Feng and Xie 2013 ) . An extreme example of this is provided by microexons , very short exons with tight neural - specific expression , exceptional evolutionary conservation , and links to autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disabilities ( Irimia et al . 2014 ; Quesnel - Vallières et al . 2016 ; Parras et al . 2018 ; Gonatopoulos - Pournatzis et al . 2018 ; 2022 ) . So far , only a handful of microexons have been studied in detail , mostly in connection with neurite outgrowth or neuronal activity ( Gonatopoulos - Pournatzis and Blencowe 2020 ) . Interestingly , genes harboring neuronal microexons are strongly enriched in functions related to actin filament organization , actin filament - based processes and cytoskeletal protein binding ( Irimia et al . 2014 ; Quesnel - Vallières et al . 2016 ) . However , the impact of microexon inclusion on actin - related neuronal processes remains elusive . In this study , we assessed the impact of neural - specific alternative splicing on formin proteins and actin cytoskeleton dynamics . Among all formin genes , we identified a highly conserved and neuronal - specific microexon in DAAM1 that uniquely impacts its FH2 domain , modifying the length of its linker region . Using biochemical assays and TIRF microscopy we showed that the inclusion / skipping of the microexon modulates actin polymerization dynamics and structure in vitro . Moreover , its correct inclusion during neuronal differentiation is important for proper neuronal function , since its deletion in in vitro differentiated glutamatergic neurons resulted in increased activity of RhoA , higher basal levels of ARC protein , and augmented Ca2 + influx upon depolarization . In line with these results , microexon removal in vivo led to multiple behavioral abnormalities in postnatal and adult mice , including memory defects that were associated with altered dendritic spine morphology and decreased LTP . Results DAAM1 harbors a highly conserved neural - specific microexon within its FH2 domain To investigate the contribution of alternative splicing to the functional specialization of actin polymerization and nucleation in mammalian neurons , we focused on the family of formins , comprising 15 genes in mammals . Using data from VastDB ( Tapial et al . 2017 ) , we found that these genes were widely expressed across cell and tissue types , and eleven of them showed substantial levels of expression ( TPM ≥ 10 ) in brain samples ( Figure 1a ) . Moreover , seven of them increased their expression during neuronal differentiation , Disheveled - associated activator of morphogenesis 1 ( Daam1 ) showing the highest absolute expression in neurons ( Figure 1a , right panel ) . At the level of alternative splicing , we identified six exons in four formin genes with different levels of neural - specific splicing regulation ( Figures 1b , c ; see Methods ) and evolutionary conservation across vertebrates ( Figure 1d ) . In terms of protein impact , one of these exons was predicted to disrupt the open reading frame upon inclusion ( FMNL3 ) , two were second - to - last exons containing stop codons giving rise to alternative C termini ( FMNL1 - B and FMNL2 - B ) , and three corresponded to microexons that preserve the open reading frame ( DAAM1 , FMNL1 - A and FMNL2 - A ) ( Figure 1b ) . As generally described for microexons ( Irimia et al . 2014 ) , these three fall either within a structured domain ( i . e . , the FH2 domain in DAAM1 ) or immediately next to it ( i . e . , the GTPase - binding domain in FMNL1 and the FH2 domain in FMNL2 ) ( Figure 1b ) . In particular , the microexon in DAAM1 lies within the linker region of the FH2 domain and modifies its length ( Figure 1e ) , which has been reported to have a major impact on actin polymerization ( Yamashita et al . 2007 ) . Protein alignments of the FH2 domain of DAAM1 and its linker region across vertebrates revealed that the microexon has been conserved at the orthologous position from sharks to humans , keeping a constant length of 9 - 10 amino acids ( Figure 1f ) . Moreover , transcriptomic data from various vertebrate species available in VastDB ( Tapial et al . 2017 ) showed that inclusion of the microexon in DAAM1 is also tightly restricted to neural tissues in other vertebrates ( Figure 1g ) . This inclusion pattern was validated using RT - PCR assays in mouse and zebrafish tissues ( Figure 1h ) . Additionally , in line with previous studies ( Calarco et al . 2009 ; Raj et al . 2014 ) , we found that the inclusion of the microexon was highly dependent on the action of SRRM3 / 4 in humans , mice and zebrafish ( Figure 1i ) . Because of its higher neural - specificity and evolutionary conservation compared to other formin alternative exons , and its direct impact on the FH2 domain , we decided to focus on the microexon of DAAM1 ( hereafter Daam1 - MIC ) . 2 Poliński et al . , 2023 3 Poliński et al . , 2023 Daam1 - MIC extends the FH2 linker region impacting actin polymerization and structure To gain further insights into the functional impact of Daam1 - MIC , we next generated models of the core structure of DAAM1 ' s FH2 domain ( Figure 2a ) for the inclusion and skipping variants . These models suggest that the microexon is inserted into the disordered linker region of FH2 without causing major structural changes ( red , Figure 2b ) . The linker region is responsible for both the flexibility of the FH2 domain and its processive polymerization of actin ( Otomo et al . 2005 ) . Interestingly , a comparative analysis among human formin proteins revealed that the insertion of the ten amino acids encoded by the microexon makes the linker of DAAM1 the longest among all formins ( Figures 2c , d and S1a ) . Therefore , since the length of the linker is associated with the activity levels of DAAM1 ( Yamashita et al . 2007 ) , we hypothesized that the microexon insertion modulates DAAM1 - mediated actin polymerization specifically in neurons . To test this hypothesis and assess how the microexon insertion affects actin polymerization , we first purified the C - terminal part of the human DAAM1 protein with and without the microexon ( Figure 2a ) . This region ( FH2 - COOH ) encompasses the full FH2 domain and has been previously shown to be functional in vitro ( Lu et al . 2007 ) . After testing different actin and DAAM1 concentrations to select the optimal conditions for the experiment ( Figure S1b - d ) , we compared the actin assembly activities of both splice isoforms . Remarkably , the isoform without microexon ( FH2 - COOH ( - MIC ) ) exhibited a significantly higher actin polymerization rate ( Figure 2e , f ) . These results are in line with a previous study showing that random shortening of the linker region increased DAAM1’s actin polymerization activity ( Yamashita et al . 2007 ) . To further characterize the impact of Daam1 - MIC in actin dynamics and structure , we performed Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy experiments to directly visualize the actin network , which revealed a more complex picture of the functional differences between the two isoforms ( Figures 2g and S2a ) . Consistent with the previous polymerization experiments , the skipping isoform exhibited an overall higher actin polymerization activity , as assessed by total intensity quantification ( Figure S2b ) . Moreover , TIRF experiments showed that the difference between the two isoforms was not solely in polymerization activity , but they also had a qualitatively different behavior resulting in distinct organizations of the actin network ( Figures 2g and S2a - c ) . Detailed comparison of the spatio - temporal evolution of the actin network ' s morphology at the level of individual fibers ( i . e . , bundles of actin filaments ) showed that the microexon - containing isoform led to a higher average length of the actin fibers ( Figure S2e ) and of their individual branches ( Figure S2f ) , with a trend to increase crossing junctions between fibers ( Figure S2g ) resulting in the formation of multiple branches ( Figure S2h ) . Therefore , Daam1 - MIC inclusion leads to an overall more complex network topology in these assays . Previous studies also suggested that DAAM1 is a potent actin - bundling protein ( Jaiswal et al . 2013 ) . Remarkably , microexon removal resulted in significantly higher fiber fluorescence , pointing at higher filament bundling activity for this isoform ( Figures 2h and S2i ) . This suggests that the splice variants of DAAM1 interact with actin differently , in terms of kinetics and / or affinity , which could explain the different behaviors described above . Thus , we next investigated whether the inclusion and skipping isoforms exhibited differences in binding to actin fibers . To do so , we performed dual - color TIRF microscopy experiments using SNAP - tagged DAAM1 FH2 - COOH fragments ( Figure S3a - c ) . Both SNAP - tagged protein isoforms showed strong co - localization with actin fibers ( Figure 2i and S3d ) . However , analysis of individual actin bundles revealed a significantly higher amount of skipping isoform bound to actin fiber ( Figure 2i , j and S3e ) . This is likely due to the intrinsic activity of the isoform , as no major differences in dimerization ability were observed between the two isoforms based on the FPLC profiles ( Figure S3a ) . In summary , these results demonstrate that microexon inclusion has a strong impact on the functionality of the FH2 domain of DAAM1 , quantitatively and qualitatively . Microexon skipping increases actin bundling while its inclusion promotes actin fiber elongation and dynamic turnover , resulting in a different organization of the actin network . Daam1 - MIC deletion leads to altered neuronal excitability in glutamatergic neurons To begin investigating the relevance of Daam1 - MIC in neuronal differentiation and function , we deleted the microexon in mouse embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) using the CRISPR - Cas9 system ( see Methods ) . We selected three independent KO and control ESC clones and differentiated them in vitro into glutamatergic neurons ( Figure 3a ) ( Bibel et al . 2004 ; 2007 ) . RT - PCR assays confirmed the precise microexon deletion in KO cells , with no associated mis - splicing along differentiation , whereas control cells displayed prominent microexon inclusion soon after plating of neuronal precursor cells ( DIV0 ) ( Figures 3b and S4a ) . Since DAAM proteins have been shown to be important for neurite morphology and filopodia integrity ( Jaiswal et al . 2013 ; Matusek et al . 2008 ; Szikora et al . 2017 ) , we first assessed the impact of the microexon removal on filopodia formation and neurite morphology at early stages of neuronal differentiation ( Figure S4b ) . Daam1 - MIC 4 Poliński et al . , 2023 5 Poliński et al . , 2023 morphology . However , we observed a mild , but statistically significant , increase in neurite length ( Figure 3c ) , together with a slight increase in filopodia length ( Figure 3d ) , but no major changes in filopodia number ( Figure S4c ) . Immunostaining of DAAM1 , actin and α - tubulin showed no major changes in the protein signal within the growth cones ( Figure S4d , e ) , with only a small but significant relative reduction of DAAM1 and actin in more distal filopodia ( Figure S4f , g ) . Despite these mild effects on neuritogenesis , microexon deletion did not impair the ability of neurons to fully differentiate , as both WT and KO cell lines successfully generated neuronal networks . Furthermore , calcium imaging showed no major differences in basal calcium influx between WT and KO cell lines throughout differentiation ( Figure S4h ) , nor upon neuronal depolarization with KCl at early and mid differentiation stages ( DIV1 and DIV7 ) ( Figure 3f ) . However , mature KO neurons ( DIV14 and DIV21 ) , which formed synaptic connections , exhibited a strong and significant increase in Ca2 + influx upon depolarization ( Figure 3e , f ) . Thus , we next focused on mature neuronal cultures , where we performed chemical treatments with modulators of various aspects of actin dynamics ( Figure 3g ) . Reduction of F - actin polymerization accomplished by sequestering available G - actin monomers with Latrunculin A ( LatA ) resulted in a strong reduction of calcium influx in both WT and KO cell lines ( Figure 3g , h ) . Importantly , in contrast to control treatments , no major differences were observed between the two genotypes ( Figure 3g , h ) , suggesting that the genotype differences in calcium influx are largely dependent on actin polymerization dynamics . Next , we applied SMIFH2 , a small molecular inhibitor of formin FH2 domains that selectively inhibits formin - driven actin polymerization without impairing the function of other ABPs . We found that exposure of neuronal cultures to SMIFH2 increased Ca2 + influx in WT cell lines , mimicking the KO phenotype ( Figure 3g , h ) . This suggests that microexon removal in neurons may lead to impaired activity of the FH2 domain of DAAM1 , at least in relation to Ca2 + influx upon depolarization . Finally , the increase in Ca2 + influx observed in Daam1 - MIC KO neurons was not due to differences in DAAM1 isoform localization to the synapses , since DAAM1 similarly co - localized with the synaptic marker Syp - 1 in both WT and KO cells ( Figure S4i ) , nor to changes in protein expression since only a small and non - significant decrease in neuronal DAAM1 protein levels was observed upon MIC deletion ( Figure S4j ) . Daam1 - MIC KO mice exhibit neuronal postnatal defects We next generated a mouse KO line for Daam1 - MIC by blastocyst microinjection of one of the CRISPR - Cas9 edited ESC lines ( see Methods ) . RT - PCR assays confirmed the successful microexon deletion in mice ( Figure S5a ) . In contrast to the full gene KO ( Nakaya et al . 2020 ) , Daam1 - MIC KO was not lethal , and mutant mice were born with expected Mendelian ratios ( Figure S5b ) , had normal weight ( Figure S5c ) and did not display gross morphological abnormalities . To assess putative effects on motor development and / or psychomotor impairments during the pre - weaning period , we first performed a neurodevelopmental behavioral screen ( Figure 4a ) ( Feather - Schussler and Ferguson 2016 ; Roper et al . 2020 ) . Mutant mice showed no differences in surface righting ( Figure S5d ) , grasping reflex ( Figure S5e ) , cliff aversion ( Figure S5f ) and Prayer´s reflex ( Figure S5g ) , in comparison to the WT . Moreover , the negative geotaxis test , which allows the simultaneous assessment of vestibular function , paw strength and motor coordination ( Ruhela et al . 2019 ; Feather - Schussler and Ferguson 2016 ; Roper et al . 2020 ) did not reveal significant differences between WT and mutant mice throughout development ( Figure S5h , i ) . However , the forelimb and hindlimb strength of mutant pups were increased compared to WT siblings ( Figure 4b , c ) . In the forelimb suspension test , heterozygous mice showed a significant increase in suspension time at postnatal day 10 ( PD10 ) ( P = 0 . 009 , Wilcoxon rank - sum test ) , with homozygous KO mice displaying the same trend but not reaching statistical significance ( P = 0 . 335 , Wilcoxon rank - sum test ) . Hindlimb suspension was significantly better in KO mice at PD10 , when the majority of homozygous and heterozygous mutants scored the maximum hanging score and showed higher hindlimb separation ( Figure 4c ; PD10 homozygous : P = 0 . 007 , Wilcoxon rank - sum test ) . Additionally , motor development - dependent walking , which results from increased neuromotor strengthening and an increase in limb coordination ( Roper et al . 2020 ) , also exhibited significant differences ( Figure 4d ) , with homozygous KO mice walking significantly earlier ( P = 0 . 010 , PD7 , Wilcoxon rank - sum test ) . However , at PD10 , a significant increase of walking latency was detected in both mutant phenotypes in comparison to the WT ( PD10 : heterozygous P = 0 . 008 , homozygous P = 0 . 001 , Wilcoxon rank - sum test ) . Interestingly , the homing task , which analyzes general psychomotor development , also revealed a significant delay in finding the nesting material in mutant mice ( Figure 4e ; heterozygous P = 0 . 032 , homozygous P = 0 . 018 , Wilcoxon rank - sum test ) . In summary , while motor development seems slightly better , mutant pups show slower development of social cognitive abilities . 6 Poliński et al . , 2023 We next investigated potential cellular abnormalities associated with these postnatal developmental phenotypes . No gross anatomical differences were found in the hippocampus of KO compared to control mice ( Figure S5l ) . Moreover , we found no major defects in neuronal branching as measured by the distance between the cell body and first dendritic branch ( Figure S5m , n ) . However , the subcellular analysis of pre - ( Synapsin 1 / 2 ) and post - ( PSD95 ) synaptic markers showed striking differences between genotypes in the matching of these two proteins ( Figure 4f , g ) . While no changes were observed in the number of presynapses in the CA1 region of the hippocampus , we observed a significant decrease in PSD95 - positive excitatory synapses , suggesting a severe impairment of the postsynaptic densities in KO mice ( Figure S5o , p ) . Furthermore , we observed increased levels of Activity Regulated Cytoskeleton Associated Protein ( ARC ) in the dentate gyrus ( Figure 4h , i ) , with a significantly higher density of ARC positive nuclei in KO compared to WT mice . Thus , altogether , these results suggest potential defects in post - synaptic formation and function . Daam1 - MIC deletion results in learning and memory deficits in adult mice We next assessed a range of potential defects in adult mice , including motor , behavioral and learning phenotypes . No significant differences in forelimb grip strength were observed ( Figure 5a ) , with KO males showing only a mild trend for increased strength . Consistently , the rotating rod test ( Rotarod ) showed no significant differences in the training , coordination ( constant speed ) or acceleration sessions ( Figure S6a - c ) . The lack of major changes in motor function was further 7 Poliński et al . , 2023 8 Poliński et al . , 2023 confirmed by the beam balance test , where no significant point - based score differences were found , and the majority of animals reached the escape route irrespective of their genotype ( Figure S6d ) . Of note , female KO mice displayed an increased number of slips during the tests ( Figure S6e ) . Next , we evaluated anxiety - related phenotypes . In the elevated plus maze test ( Figure 5b ) ( Walf and Frye 2007 ) , no major changes in the relative time spent in the open arms were observed between the genotypes ( Figure 5c ) . However , analyses of additional parameters pointed at a potentially mild anxiety - like behavior only in females , including increased latency to first entering the center of the maze ( Figure S6f ) . Additionally , we used an actimeter to quantify spontaneous locomotor activity for 23h , spanning a day - night cycle . No significant changes were seen in general behavior ( Figure S6g ) , but a trend towards higher activity during the night in KO animals was observed ( Figure S6g , h ) . We then investigated learning and memory formation capabilities upon Daam1 - MIC removal . First , to evaluate recognition memory , we used the novel object recognition ( NOR ) task ( Figure 5d ) , which depends on the prefrontal cortex and hippocampal circuit responsible for cognitive processing ( Leger et al . 2013 ; Warburton and Brown 2015 ; Lueptow 2017 ) . No significant differences in total exploration time were observed during the familiarization or test phases of the experiment ( Figure S7a , b ) . Remarkably , KO mice of both sexes showed significantly impaired recognition memory , as assessed by the discrimination index ( Figure 5e ) . Second , we evaluated spatial memory by employing a modification of the Morris Water Maze ( MWM ) task ( Figures 5f , g and see Methods ) ( Vorhees and Williams 2006 ) . As expected , both KO and WT mice showed a progressive reduction in the escape latency time ( Figures S7e ) . However , spatial learning was impaired in KO males in comparison to WT males between days 4 and 8 ( Figures 5h , i and S7e , f ) . This impairment was not due to motor or motivation defects , as no impairment was detected during the cued session when the platform is visible ( Figure 5h , i ) . In stark contrast , no significant differences were found in KO females ( Figure 5h , i and S7e , f ) . Finally , the contextual fear conditioning test did not show differences in freezing in male KO compared to WT mice ( Figure S7g , h ) . Interestingly , analysis of immediate early genes in dentate gyrus performed 1 . 5 h after this test showed clear downregulation of cFOS but not ARC protein positive nuclei in KO mice ( Figure S7i , j ) . No differences on cFOS positive cells were observed in basal conditions ( Figure S5l - o ) . Importantly , Western Blot analysis did not show differences in DAAM1 protein expression levels in mouse cerebellum , motor cortex , or other tissues ( Figure S7p - r ) . Altogether , these results suggest that Daam1 - MIC removal negatively impacts memory formation in adult mice , which cannot be attributed to impaired motor function or to anxiety - related behaviors . Daam1 - MIC deletion impacts long - term potentiation Our results thus far showed that microexon deletion leads to increased neuronal calcium influx in vitro , and hippocampal - dependent learning and memory defects in vivo . To obtain further mechanistic insights into these phenotypes , we next investigated how Daam1 - MIC deletion affected synaptic function and plasticity in hippocampal slices from WT and KO adult males . Whole - cell voltage - clamp recording in CA1 pyramidal cells of the hippocampus showed a trend for a higher number of spikes in response to suprathreshold depolarizing current ( Figure S8a ) , suggesting a mild increase in the firing rate compared to WT neurons ( Figure S8b ) , which did not reach statistical significance . We also did not observe significant changes in the set of parameters that describe intrinsic membrane properties ( rheobase , membrane resistance , membrane potential and threshold action potential ; Figure S8c - h ) , indicating that ionic permeability was not affected , and there were no major changes in membrane conductance in KO cells . We next studied the effect of Daam1 - MIC deletion on glutamatergic CA3 - CA1 synapses from hippocampal brain slices of adult mice . We induced Long - Term Potentiation ( LTP ) using a theta burst stimulation ( TBS ) . The results showed a strong and significant decrease in field excitatory postsynaptic potential ( fEPSP ) response in KO compared to WT neurons ( Figure 6a , b ) . To explore possible mechanisms behind this phenotype , we then examined basal synaptic transmission in the CA1 region ( input - output relationship of excitatory postsynaptic currents ( EPSC ) ) and the presynaptic release of neurotransmitter , by applying paired - pulse facilitation protocol ( PPF ) and recording miniature EPSCs ( mEPSCs ) . These analyses did not show significant differences between WT and KO mice ( Figures S8i - n ) , suggesting no changes in basal excitatory synaptic transmission at hippocampal ( CA3 - CA1 neuron ) synapses upon Daam1 - MIC deletion , and ruling out major presynaptic changes associated with the LTP deficit in KO slices . In contrast , and consistent with the specific reduction of the postsynaptic densities at PD22 ( Figures 4f and S5o , p ) , biocytin labeling on patch - clamped neurons ( Figure 6c ) revealed a trend towards a reduced number of dendritic spines ( Figure 6c , d ) , reaching statistical significance specifically for thin immature spines in KO neurons ( Figure 6e ) . No significant changes were observed for stubby and mushroom - like spines ( Figures S8o ) . Taken together , these results suggest that Daam1 - MIC deletion alters molecular pathways essential for proper formation of dendritic spines and LTP . Therefore , to investigate possible molecular phenotypes associated with these defects , we performed RNA - seq analysis of five male hippocampi from WT and KO mice used in behavior experiments , which showed only mild , non - significant changes in the expression of individual genes . However , Gene Set Variation Analysis ( GSVA ) ( Hänzelmann , Castelo , and Guinney 2013 ) revealed significant mis - regulation of several pre - and postsynaptic pathways ( Figures S9a ) . For instance , multiple genes involved in the " synaptic vesicle cycle " ( KEGG mmu04721 ) were found to be downregulated in KO compared to WT samples ( Figures S9b - d ) . Furthermore , the level of expression of synaptic vesicle cycle pathway genes in each mouse hippocampus was significantly positively correlated with their individual performance in the NOR task ( Figures S9e ) . This includes some essential genes in synaptic vesicle cycling such as Unc13 , Unc18 , RIMs , VAMPs , Syntaxins , and Rab3a ( Figures S9f ) . In addition , GSVA also revealed mis - regulation of multiple post - synaptic genes , as exemplified with the cholinergic ( which also participates directly in memory and learning by sending information to the hippocampus ) and dopaminergic ( which regulates behavior and reward ) synapse pathways ( KEGG mmu04725 and mmu04728 ; Figures S10a - e ) . Since these changes in gene expression upon DAAM1 - MIC KO were mild overall , we next focused on other molecular players important for dendritic spine morphology . As DAAM1 has been shown to interact with RhoA causing its activation ( Habas , Kato , and He 2001 ; Higashi et al . 2008 ; Kühn and Geyer KO2014 ) and RhoA activity is important to regulate both LTP and dendritic spine formation ( Haorui Zhang et al . 2021 ) , we determined RhoA activity with a FRET - based biosensor ( Fritz et al . 2013 ) using in vitro differentiated mature neuronal cultures . FRET efficiency measured by acceptor photobleaching revealed a robust and significant increase in RhoA activity in protrusions of KO compared to WT neurons ( Figures 6f , g and S10f ) . 9 Poliński et al . , 2023 . 10 Poliński et al . , 2023 Lastly , immunocytochemistry assays in neuronal cultures also revealed consistently higher basal levels of ARC in KO compared to WT cells , in line with the results from P21 mice hippocampal slices in basal conditions Figure 4g , h ) , whereas no changes for cFOS or EGR1 immediate early genes were observed ( Figure 6h , i and S10g ) . Altogether , these results point towards profound alterations in two key molecular components , RhoA and ARC , which are known to interact with DAAM1 and the actin cytoskeleton , respectively . Discussion Tight regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by ABPs is crucial for multiple neurobiological processes , from neurogenesis to higher functions of adult brains , such as memory and learning . Here , we found that Daam1 , the formin gene with the highest expression in mature neurons , harbors a microexon that is highly neural - specific and evolutionarily conserved across vertebrates . Inclusion of this microexon extends the length of the linker region of the FH2 domain , modulating its actin polymerization capabilities , both quantitatively and qualitatively , in controlled in vitro assays . Deletion of Daam1 - MIC in neurons led to a unique pattern of physiological alterations , among them increased calcium influx , while mice without this microexon exhibited diverse phenotypes , including a decreased number of dendritic spines , defects in memory formation and reduced LTP . Neuronal microexon inclusion makes DAAM1 ' s FH2 linker region an outlier with respect to the length of all other formins . Given that the linker region serves as a hinge in FH2 dimers ( Schönichen and Geyer 2010 ) , its uniquely large length likely results in a much more flexible dimer , which we show to bind less to actin filaments compared to the skipping , non - neural isoform . Previous studies ( Yamashita et al . 2007 ; Moseley , Maiti , and Goode 2006 ) reported that the long linker of DAAM1 was associated with the unusually low actin polymerization rate of this protein , and that its artificial shortening enhanced polymerization . Whereas we recapitulate these quantitative findings , our TIRF results revealed a much more complex scenario in which the microexon inclusion does not simply lead to a reduced polymerization rate but also to a dramatic change in how DAAM1 interacts with and remodels the actin cytoskeleton . In particular , we observed that microexon removal significantly increased the actin - bundling capabilities of DAAM1 , probably as a direct result of a higher affinity to actin . Moreover , a detailed structural characterization of these actin bundles showed that the microexon - containing isoform produced consistently longer and more branched fibers , likely due to its less constrained binding to actin . Although these results are based on in vitro assembly assays , it is tempting to speculate that , in vivo , the inclusion or exclusion of the microexon may similarly modulate DAAM1 ' s behavior with actin and hence its function . Why is a different mode of action of DAAM1 favored in neurons versus other cell types ? How does microexon removal impact DAAM1 ' s function in neurons , resulting in decreased dendritic spine number , impaired LTP and memory formation ? Based on our observations , we propose that the inclusion of Daam1 - MIC is preferred because of its impact on actin dynamicity and turnover , which is crucial for the complex morphology of dendritic spines and the functionality of synaptic terminals . Given that the formation , maturation and plasticity of spines are all highly dependent on the actin cytoskeleton remodeling ( Haorui Zhang et al . 2021 ) , it seems plausible that splicing - dependent modulation of DAAM1 ' s mode of action increases its versatility and hence actin dynamics . In this scenario , less dynamic actin networks caused by increased bundling of actin filaments upon microexon removal , as observed in vitro , could be detrimental during LTP consolidation by delaying or even blocking efficient rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton during the learning process . Moreover , microexon deletion in KO neurons could lead to the formation of a distinct submembranous actin cortex that alters the shape and receptor composition of postsynaptic terminals and thus neurotransmitter receiving . In this study , we decided to perform a multi - level characterization of the phenotypes observed upon Daam1 - MIC deletion , while future work should focus on elucidating the specific mechanisms connecting Daam1 - MIC deletion and deregulation of actin dynamics with the observed cellular and organismal phenotypes . However , two molecular phenotypes that we observed in Daam1 - MIC KO neurons , increased RhoA activity and mis - regulation of basal ARC protein levels , provide initial insights into the underlying mechanisms of impaired memory formation . Our results showed a lower number of thin dendritic spines upon Daam1 - MIC removal . These thin , immature spines are characterized by their dynamic structure and can be considered " learning spines " , as they can be consolidated into more stable mushroom spines ( Haorui Zhang et al . 2021 ) . Rho - family GTPases , including RhoA , are key players in the process of memory formation by regulating spine morphology . Growing evidence suggests that RhoA activity modulates immature spine pruning ( Bolognin et al . 2014 ; Haorui Zhang et al . 2021 ) . For instance , expression of constitutively active RhoA in hippocampal neuronal cultures or brain slices resulted in simplified dendritic trees and reduced spine densities ( Nakayama , Harms , and Luo 2000 ; Impey et al . 2010 ) . Conversely , RhoA inhibition specifically increases the number of immature spines ( Nakayama , Harms , and Luo 2000 ) . These findings are consistent with both the increased RhoA activity we observed in cultures upon Daam1 - MIC removal , and the decreased number of PSD95 - positive postsynaptic densities and of thin spines in hippocampal slices of KO mice . How does Daam1 - MIC removal lead to increased RhoA activity ? Interestingly , DAAM1 interacts with RhoA through its amino - terminal GDB domain , causing its activation ( Kühn and Geyer 2014 ; Higashi et al . 2008 ; Habas , Kato , and He 2001 ) . Even though the microexon does not lie in the proximity of the GDB domain , and previous studies did not show significant changes in direct DAAM1 - RhoA interaction upon microexon inclusion or exclusion ( Ellis et al . 2012 ) , it is possible that changes in unbound DAAM1 availability , local protein concentration and / or turnover impact DAAM1 - mediated RhoA activation . Alternatively , higher RhoA activation could be indirectly due to changes in actin turnover caused by the deletion of Daam1 - MIC . Additionally , the immediate early gene Arc is known to regulate actin cytoskeleton and to control spine morphology during the LTP and long - term depression ( LTD ) processes ( Hongyu Zhang and Bramham 2021 ) . Importantly , the translation of ARC is regulated locally in dendritic spines ( Newpher et al . 2018 ) , and newly synthesized ARC impacts actin dynamics by interaction with many ABPs and other actin regulating proteins ( e . g . cofilin , CaMKIIβ and drebrin A ) ( Okuno et al . 2012 ; Messaoudi et al . 2007 ; Nakahata and Yasuda 2018 ) . Moreover , during Arc - dependent LTP consolidation , local ARC protein translation is dependent on actin polymerization ( Huang , Chotiner , and Steward 2007 ) . Our data consistently showed increased ARC protein levels in basal conditions upon Daam1 - MIC removal , with no significant changes at the mRNA level . Thus , it is plausible that enhanced actin bundling upon microexon removal creates the platform for more efficient Arc mRNA docking in dendritic spines and hence higher ARC translation in basal conditions . Interestingly , newly synthesized ARC 11 Poliński et al . , 2023 accumulates in non - stimulated spines and suppresses synaptic potentiation by decreasing the amounts of AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic surface ( Okuno et al . 2012 , Newpher et al . 2018 ) , in line with a role for ARC expression in inhibiting LTP ( Plath et al . 2006 ; Rial Verde et al . 2006 ) . Remarkably , RhoA also plays a role in the regulation of AMPA receptor trafficking , where activation of RhoA is associated with decreased surface AMPA receptors ( Shen et al . 2020 ) . Altogether , these data suggest numerous molecular interplays between RhoA , ARC and the actin cytoskeleton that could determine the fate of dendritic spines and have an effect on LTP . However , the exact role of DAAM1 as a central player regulating these interplays still needs to be investigated in detail . In summary , through a comparative analysis of formin proteins , we found that Daam1 is subject to tight post - transcriptional regulation by a highly neural - specific and evolutionarily conserved microexon that impacts actin polymerization via modulation of its FH2 domain . Moreover , through an in - depth multi - level characterization of this microexon , we unveiled DAAM1 as a new key player for the regulation of neurotransmission and memory formation . 12 Poliński et al . , 2023 Materials and Methods Computational analysis formins and characterization of DAAM1 and RT - PCR assays To investigate the expression of formins across tissues and during neuronal differentiation ( Fig . 1a ) , we used mouse ( mm10 ) data from VastDB ( Tapial et al . 2017 ) . In addition , we extracted the mouse and / or human neural - regulated exons among the 15 mammalian formin genes from Table S2 in ( Irimia et al . 2014 ) and used VastDB to extract the exon ' s protein location and inclusion levels for the six identified neural regulated exons shown in Fig 1b and 1c , respectively . The study of the evolutionary conservation of these six exons was carried out using the VastDB ortholog information and manual exon alignments among the human ( hg38 ) , mouse ( mm10 ) , cow ( bosTau9 ) , opossum ( monDom5 ) , chicken ( galGal4 ) , frog ( xenTro9 ) , zebrafish ( danRer10 ) and shark ( calMil1 ) genomes , downloaded from Ensembl . To investigate the regulation of Daam1 - MIC by SRRM3 / 4 ( Fig . 1i ) , we used data from human HEK293 cells overexpressing human SRRM4 ( GEO : GSE112600 ( Torres - Méndez et al . 2019 ) ) , mouse N2A cells upon Srrm3 / 4 knockdown ( SRA : PRJNA47491 ( Gonatopoulos - Pournatzis et al . 2018 ) ) , and zebrafish retinae extracted from Srrm3 KO 5 days post fertilization larvae ( GEO : GSE180781 ( Ciampi et al . 2022 ) ) . Crystal Structure of human DAAM1 FH2 domain ( 2z6e . pdb ) was used to model the mice Daam1 FH2 domain with and without microexon using Robetta ( http : / / new . robetta . org / ) ( Fig . 2b ) . Visualization was performed using the PyMoL program . To validate the inclusion of Daam1 - MIC through RT - PCR assays in mouse and zebrafish ( Fig . 1h and throughout the manuscript ) , total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Plus Mini kit ( Qiagen , 74136 ) , treated with DNase using TURBO DNA - freeTM Kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and reverse - transcribed with SuperScript III Reverse transcriptase ( Invitrogen , 18080044 ) and oligo ( dT ) 20 as advised by the manufacturer . GoTaq G2 Flexi DNA Polymerase enzyme ( Promega , M7806 ) was used to amplify Daam1 - MIC ' s flanking exons and PCR assays were performed with 25 cycles , 54°C annealing temperature and 120 sec extension . The PCR product was size - fractionated using 2 . 5 % ultrapure agarose ( Invitrogen , 16500500 ) in SB buffer ( 36 . 4 mM of Boric acid and 10 mM NaOH ) , and detected using SYBR Safe ( Life Technologies , S33102 ) . Primer sequences used in this study are provided in Table S1 . Cloning of Daam1 FH2 domain , protein expression and purification To clone the functional FH2 domain of DAAM1 ( residues 594 - 1077 ) , we have used RNA extracted from Human Embryonic Kidney 293 ( HEK293T ) and SH - SY5Y cells . RNA samples were extracted from 1 million cells using the RNeasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen , 74136 ) and treated with TURBO DNA - freeTM Kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , AM2238 ) . Afterwards , 1 μg of RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using High - Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , 4368814 ) . Primers used to amplify the FH2 domains of DAAM1 are provided in Table S1 . The PCR product was cloned in pEMT33 ( for actin polymerization assay and TIRF microscopy experiments ) and in C145 pCoofy17 ( for dual - color TIRF microscopy experiments ) , both vectors have been kindly provided by the Sebastian Maurer lab ( CRG ) . These constructs were expressed as fusion proteins with N - terminal IgG tag plus C - terminal Strep - tag in E . coli strain BL21 - CodonPlus ( DE3 ) - RIL strain ( Agilent Technologies , 230245 ) . Cells were cultured at 37°C until OD600nm reached 0 . 5 , after which the media was cooled to 18°C and Isopropyl β - d - 1 - thiogalactopyranoside ( IPTG ; ROTH , 2316 . 1 ) was added to a final concentration of 0 . 1 mM to induce protein expression . Bacterial cultures were grown overnight at 18°C and subsequently harvested by centrifugation at 4°C ( 15 min , 4000 rpm ) and disrupted by sonication . Sonication was conducted in HEKG 10 buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM EDTA , 50 mM KCl , 10 % glycerol ) with 1 mM DTT supplemented with cOmplete EDTA - free Protease Inhibitor Tablet ( Sigma , 11873580001 ) . After centrifugation ( Eppendorf 5810R Centrifuge ) at 4°C ( 20 min , 20000 rpm ) , proteins were purified using StrepTrap HP column ( GE Healthcare , GE17 - 5248 - 01 ) at 4°C . The N - terminal tag was cleaved with His - C3 protease and the C - terminal tag with His - TEV protease ( in house purified ) . Both proteases were further removed using Ni - NTA Agarose beads . Individual pooled DAAM1 - FH2 proteins , with and without the microexon , were further purified by a passage through a Superose 6 column ( GE Healthcare ) . Their concentration was evaluated using NanoDrop spectrophotometer ( ThermoFisher ) and their purity / integrity was assessed on SDS - PAGE , where coomassie staining ( ThermoFisher , LC6065 ) was used for visualization . Pyrene actin polymerization assays and TIRF microscopy Pyrene - labeled actin protein ( Universal Biologicals ) was prepared as suggested by the manufacturer . In short , actin was equilibrated for 1 h at 4°C in G - buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl2 ) and spun for 30 min at 14 000 rpm before adding 10X Polymerization buffer ( 500 mM KCl , 20 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM ATP ) to a final 1X concentration . Actin assembly was measured in 60 μl reactions using 96 Well Black Polystyrene Microplates ( Corning® , CLS3904 ) . Pyrene fluorescence was monitored over time at 24°C at an excitation of 365 nm and emission of 407 nm in a fluorescence spectrophotometer ( Tecan Infinite 200 PRO ) . Rates of actin assembly were calculated from the slope of the assembly curves at 50 % polymerization ( i . e . , the time at which 50 % of the actin has polymerized : half time ) . As described by ( Doolittle , Rosen , and Padrick 2013 ) , we computed the half time of each experiment based on the intensity values included in a specific interval . First , we calculated the average minimum intensity ( average intensity of the 10 points closer to the minimum intensity ) and the average maximum intensity ( average intensity of the 10 points closer to tmax , where tmax is the average of the 10 points with highest intensity ) . Then , we used these values to compute the lower and higher bounds of the intensity interval used for the half time computation . The lower bound was defined as ( 0 . 5 - delta / 2 ) * ( avg _ max _ intensity - avg _ min _ intensity ) + avg _ min _ intensity , while the higher bound was defined as ( 0 . 5 + delta / 2 ) * ( avg _ max _ intensity - avg _ min _ intensity ) + avg _ min _ intensity ( with delta = 0 . 1 , as recommended in ( Doolittle , Rosen , and Padrick 2013 ) ) . Next , we used the points in each experiment with intensity values included between the lower and higher bounds to fit a linear model ( intensity vs . time ) , and extracted the slope value returned by the fit . Finally , we derived the actin polymerization rate at the halftime by multiplying the slope value by a scaling factor ( SF ) . SF was computed as ( actin _ conc - critical _ conc ) / ( avg _ max _ intensity - avg _ min _ intensity ) , with actin _ conc = 21 . 5 ( actin original concentration ) , critical _ conc = k _ minus / k _ plus . k _ minus and k _ plus represented the on - rate and off - rate constants for filament assembly , and were set at 1 . 4 and 11 . 6 , respectively , as suggested by ( Doolittle , Rosen , and Padrick 2013 ) ) . TIRF - based F - actin polymerization experiments were performed using manually assembled flow - cells consisting of piranha - cleaned , silanized , PEG - passivated glass coverslips ( 22 X 22 mm # 1 . 5 ( i . e . 170 + / - 5 um ) from MARIENFELD ( Cat # 0107052 ) ) and a PLL - PEG passivated slide ( Consolati et al . 2022 ) . Flow cells were primed by flushing 55 ul of a solution of 5 % Pluronic F - 127 ( Sigma - Aldrich , P2443 ) and then incubated for 10 min at room temperature . Next , flow cells were washed twice with 55 ul of kappa - Casein ( 1 : 100 in 1X G - buffer of 5 mg / ml stock in 1X Brb80 buffer ) . Absorptive paper ( Whatman filter paper ) was used to flush the chamber by holding the paper on the outlet side of the channel while adding the solution dropwise in the inlet side . Chambers were then equilibrated with the G - buffer and the reaction mixture was loaded . The actin polymerization reaction mix contained the protein variant of interest ( DAAM1 - FH2 with or without microexon ) and actin , which were diluted in freshly prepared buffer containing 5 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 0 . 2 mM CaCl2 , 50 mM KCl , 2mM MgCl2 , 2mM ATP , 2mM DTT , 1 % ( w / vol ) glucose , 0 . 2 mM Brij - 35 , oxygen scavengers ( 180 mg / ml catalase ( Merck , C40 ) and 752 mg / ml glucose oxidase ( Serva , 22778 . 01 ) ) , 0 . 15 % ( w / vol ) methylcellulose ( Sigma - Aldrich , 4000 cP ) ; actin labeling was achieved using SiR - Actin ( TeuBio , SC001 ) . After loading the reaction mixture , flow cells were finally sealed with vacuum grease and placed onto the microscope stage for observation . In order to minimize the experimental variations between the different conditions to be compared ( actin alone , actin with + MIC and - MIC protein variants ) , experiments have been run in parallel , i . e . the three conditions were run simultaneously during each experiment . To this end , flow cells were divided into three separated channels using double sided tape . TIRF imaging was performed with a custom assembled system ( Cairn Research , Faversham , UK ) built around an automated Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope equipped with a Perfect Focus System and an azimuthal TIRF unit ( Gataca Systems , iLas2 ) using a 100X oil - immersion objective ( Nikon CFI SR Apo , NA = 1 . 49 ) , 488 nm and 640 nm simultaneous laser excitation at a TIRF angle of 80 deg , and two EMCCD cameras ( Andor , iXon 888 Ultra ) for fluorescent detection using a dichroic ( Chroma , T565lpxr ) to split the fluorescence onto the two cameras and a 525 / 50 bandpass filter ( Chroma , 284337 ) for DAAM1 - SNAP - Alexa488 detection and a 655 long - pass filter ( Chroma , 283943 ) for SiR - actin detection . Imaging was performed at room temperature for 2 h taking 1 image every 2 min in 3 to 5 different sample locations chosen randomly and using 100 ms exposure time and 100 and 250 Electron Multiplying gain values , respectively for SiR - actin and DAAM1 - SNAP - Atto488 detection . TIRF - derived actin fluorescence micrographs were first denoised using rolling ball background subtraction ( 10 pixels ) , then contrast enhanced using the Frangi Vesselness filter ( Frangi et al . 1998 ) . From the acquired time series , actin images were skeletonized and analyzed using publicly available plugins ( Arganda - Carreras et al . 2010 ; Polder , Hovens , and Zweers , 2010 ) . The resulting skeleton label maps were used as reference locations for the quantification of the quantity ( intensity ) of protein bound to the actin fibers . SNAP - tag protein fluorescence images were denoised using rolling ball background subtraction ( 50 pixels ) and the pixel statistics were calculated with CLIJ ImageJ / Fiji plugins ( Haase et al . 2020 ) . All the scripts were written in ImageJ / Fiji ( Schindelin et al . 2012 ) , and are available upon request . 13 Poliński et al . , 2023 Western Blot Previously snap - frozen tissues or cell pellets were resuspended in RIPA buffer ( 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Nonidet P - 40 , 1 . 0 mM EDTA , 1 % Sodium Deoxycholate , 50mM Tris ( pH 7 . 4 ) ) . The samples were subjected to sonication ( 1 * 10 sec pulse ) and left on ice for 10 min . After centrifugation 5 min at 14000 rpm , the supernatants were collected and protein quantification determined using Bradford . Samples were resuspended in 4X SDS loading dye ( 200 mM Tris 6 . 8 , 400 mM DTT , 4 % SDS , 0 . 2 % bromophenol blue , 20 % glycerol ) , proteins were resolved by electrophoresis on a 10 % SDS polyacrylamide gel and transferred on a nitrocellulose membrane . Blocking was performed in PBS 0 . 3 % Tween , 5 % milk . First antibody and secondary HRP labeled antibodies were diluted in the blocking buffer at a concentration provided in Table S2 . Immunolabeling was detected by enhanced chemiluminescence and visualized with a digital luminescence image analyser Amersham Imager 600 ( GE Healthcare ) . Deletion of Daam1 - MIC using CRISPR - Cas9 gene - editing Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells ( mESC , 129xC57Bl / 6 background ) were kindly provided by Kyung - Min Noh ( EMBL Heidelberg ) and cultured as described in Supplementary Methods . mESCs Knock - Out ( KO ) for the Daam1 - MIC were generated using the CRISPR - Cas9 system ( Ran et al . 2013 ) with a double guide RNA strategy ( Sakuma et al . 2015 ) . Each guide RNA targeted one of the two flanking introns and three gRNAs at each side were selected based on the proximity to Daam1 - MIC and the quality score provided by ( Doench et al . 2016 ) . The best gRNA pair was chosen after testing all possible combinations and selecting the best editing efficiency . The primer sequences are provided in Table S1 . Gene editing was performed by transfection of 2 ug of Multiplex CRISPR vector ESCs with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen , 11668019 ) . mESCs were plated at 2 - 3 different densities on 100 mm dishes ( 750 000 , 1 500 000 and 3 000 000 cells / dish ) . Transfection of an empty vector was used as control . Six hours after transfection , the media was changed to prevent toxic effects . After 24h , puromycin selection was performed using a concentration of 1 . 5 ug / ml ( Sigma , P8833 ) , during 7 to 10 days . Afterwards , individual colonies were hand - picked into 96 - well plates , expanded and genotyped by PCR and Sanger sequencing . Genotyping primer sequences are provided in Table S1 . The confirmed KO clones and WT controls were further confirmed at the mRNA level using the RT - PCR primers amplifying Daam1 - MIC described above . Immunofluorescence stainings and confocal imaging of cultured neurons Neuronal differentiation from mESCs was done following the protocol reported by Bibel et al . , 2007 , with slight modifications ( see Supplementary Methods ) ( Bibel et al . 2004 ; 2007 ) . For immunofluorescence assays , cells on DIV0 or on DIV21 were washed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min , permeabilized in 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 10 min , blocked for 1 h in 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 , % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) in PBS and incubated in primary antibodies at 4oC overnight with shaking . Following this incubation , cells were incubated with the corresponding secondary antibodies ( see Table S2 ) for 1 h at room temperature and mounted in FluoroShield with DAPI ( Sigma , F6057 - 20ml ) for imaging . Images were taken on an SP8 confocal microscope ( CRG , Advanced Light Microscopy Unit ) using identical settings for each condition in a given experiment . Briefly : for IEG positive nuclei analysis ( Figure ; DIV21 ) and neurite length analysis ( Figure ; DIV0 + 4h´s ) dry 20X objective was used to image the whole span of the neuronal culture ( 17 - 23µm , Z - step size 1µm , zoom factor 2 . 5 ) . For filopodia analysis 63X oil - immersion objective was used to image the whole span of the protrusion ( around 2 µm , Z - step size 0 . 12 µm , zoom factor 2 . 5 ) . Confocal sections were Z stack projected with maximum intensity selection and analyzed in ImageJ / Fiji software . Immediate early genes positive nuclei were counted using Analyze Particles plugin ( nuclei size at least 25 pixel ) , and normalized to DAPI positive nuclei . Neurite and filopodia length were analyzed manually using the Segmented Line plugin . Measurement of intracellular [ Ca2 + ] in cultured neurons Cytosolic Ca2 + signal was determined at room temperature in cells loaded with 4 , 5 mM FURA2 - AM ( 30 min incubation at 37ºC ) . Ca2 + responses were calculated as the ratio of emitted fluorescence ( 510 nm ) after excitation at 340 and 380 nm , relative to the ratio measured prior to cell stimulation ( FURA2 - AM ratio 340 / 380 ) . Briefly , cells were maintained in an isotonic solution containing ( in mM ) : 140 NaCl , 5 KCl , 1 . 2 CaCl2 , 0 . 5 MgCl2 , 5 glucose , 10 HEPES ( 305 mosmol / l , pH 7 . 4 with Tris ) for 2 minutes and then stimulated with a 30 mM KCl isotonic solution ( 115 NaCl , 30 KCl , 1 . 2 CaCl2 , 0 . 5 MgCl2 , 5 glucose , 10 HEPES ) to activate voltage - gated calcium entry . As indicated in the respective figure legends , cells were treated with 5 µM Latrunculin A ( LatA ) , 50 µM small - molecule inhibitor of Formin Homology 2 domains ( SMIFH2 ) or vehicle ( DMSO ) . The treatment was maintained for the duration of the experiment ( 40 minutes ) . In the case of SMIFH2 , its effect on neuronal cultures was measured after 90 min exposure to 50 µM SMIFH2 . All experiments were carried out at room temperature as described previously ( Fernandes et al . 2008 ) . AquaCosmos software ( Hamamatsu Photonics ) was used for capturing the fluorescence ratio at 510 nm obtained post - excitation at 340 and 380 nm , respectively . Images were computed every 5 s . Measurements were processed using SigmaPlot 10 software . Generation of mouse Daam1 - MIC KO mice Chimeric mice were obtained by blastocyst injection of one of the Daam1 - MIC KO mESC lines into B6 albino ( B6 ( Cg ) - Tyrc - 2J / J ) embryos , which were then transferred to pseudopregnant CD1 females . Chimeric males were subsequently crossed to albino B6 females , and all non - albino mice were genotyped to select Daam1 - MIC KO mice . These were backcrossed four times to C57Bl / 6J and heterozygous mice were then crossed to generate Daam1 - MIC KO and wild type ( WT ) littermates for experiments . The colony was maintained at the Animal Facility of the Barcelona Biomedical Research Park ( PRBB ) . All procedures were approved by the PRBB Animal Research Ethics Committee and the Generalitat de Catalunya and were carried out in accordance with the guidelines of the European Union Council ( 2003 / 65 / CE ) and Spanish regulations ( BOE 252 / 34367 - 91 , 2005 ) . WT mice were purchased from Charles River ( references : 709 for albino B6 , 022 for CD1 and 632 for C57Bl / 6 ) . In Utero Cortical Electroporation Cortical electroporation was performed as in García - Frigola et al . 2008 with minor changes . Timed - pregnant mouse females were anesthetized with isoflurane , the abdomen cut open and the uterine horns exposed . E15 wild - type embryos were unipolar injected into the ventricle using a pulled glass micropipette containing a DNA solution ( 1 μg / μl CAG - GFP plasmid ( 11150 , Addgene ) with 0 . 03 % Fast Green in PBS ) . The head of each embryo was placed between tweezer - type electrodes ( CUY650 - P5 Nepa GENE , Chiba , Japan ) and five square electric pulses ( 50 milliseconds ) at 35V were passed at 950 msec . intervals using an electroporator ( CUY21E , Nepa GENE ) . Then , electroporated brain cortex of PD4 mice were analyzed . PD4 mice were perfused with 4 % PFA and brains cut in 70 µm slices using a vibratome device . GFP expressing neurons and their projections were visualized by immunohistochemistry with chicken anti - GFP antibody ( Aves labs ) and anti - chicken Alexa - 488 secondary antibody ( Invitrogene , Molecular Probes ) . 20x images were taken with Leica SPEII confocal microscope ( two ROIs from 3 WT and 3 DAAM1 - MIC ) mice and the length of the primary dendrite was measured manually using FIJI software . Functional synapse quantification in mice hippocampus 7 control mice and 8 DAAM1 - MIC mice of 22 days postnatal ( PD22 ) were perfused 5 minutes with 4 % paraformaldehyde and brains were transferred to Phosphate Buffered Saline immediately . Brains were cut in 70µm sagittal slices , and equivalent slices between animals were selected for immunohistochemistry . Slices were placed in a blocking / permeabilization solution containing 5 % horse serum and 0 . 25 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 1 hour , followed by immunostaining with primary antibodies ( Table S2 ) two days at 4°C . Slices were washed 4 - 5 times in PBS before staining with secondary antibodies ( Table S2 ) overnight at 4°C . Slices were labeled with 4′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , D9542 ) for 5 minutes and washed 3 - 4 times in PBS before being mounted in Mowiol mounting media ( Millipore , 475904 - M ) . CA1 hippocampus was imaged with a 63x oil immersion objective on a Leica SPEII confocal microscope . ROIs with a z - stack of 5µm and a z - step size of 0 . 2µm were captured . Three ROIs per slice , and three slices per animal were analyzed with Imaris software . Images were processed with Background subtraction and Median filter for both channels , followed by segmentation with Imaris models . To quantify the number of functional synapses the “Spots Close To Surface XTension” of MatLab was applied with a threshold of 0 . 5µm . DAAM1 - MIC results were normalized to control mean and unpaired Mann - Whitney nonparametric test was performed for statistical analysis . Immunohistochemical imaging of mice hippocampus Mouse hippocampal sections were prepared as previously described ( Hoeymissen et al . 2020 ) . In brief , mice were euthanized with CO2 , perfused transcardially with 0 . 1 M PBS followed by 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS until tissues were completely cleared of blood . Fixed brains were extracted and stored in 4 % paraformaldehyde at 4 °C for 24 h , and in sucrose 30 % with 0 . 01 % azide in PBS for the following 24 h . Prepared tissues were cut into 40 µm coronal sections , in serial order throughout the dorsal hippocampus ( Bregma sections between - 1 . 34mm to - 2 . 54mm ) . Sectioning was performed by an in house Tissue Engineering Unit ( CRG ) . Immunohistochemistry was done by tissue permeabilization in 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 15 min × 3 times , blocked for 2 h in 10 % normal goat serum ( NGS ) in PBS albumin and incubated primary antibodies in 5 % NGS , Tween 0 . 5 % in PBS at 4oC overnight . Following this incubation , cells were incubated with the corresponding secondary antibodies ( see Table S2 ) for 2 h at room temperature . Washing steps were repeated ( for 15 14 Poliński et al . , 2023 min × 3 times ) and sections were mounted in FluoroShield with DAPI for imaging . Images were taken on a confocal microscope ( SP8 Leica ; CRG , Advanced Light Microscopy Unit ) using identical settings for each condition in a given experiment with a dry 20X objective . Single middle plane of each section was imaged and the images were analyzed in ImageJ / Fiji software . DG size was marked manually with Polygon selections using DAPI stained nuclei as a region of reference marker , and consecutively quantified with the Measure plugin . A detailed list of all stainings and primary antibodies used are provided in Table S2 . Behavioral and locomotor tests in a neonatal mice A battery of behavioral and motor tests to probe early post - natal neurodevelopment was performed as described in Feather - Schussler and Ferguson ( 2016 ) and Roper et al . 2021 , with some adjustments , as detailed in Supplementary Methods . In particular , we performed the following tests at PDs 4 , 7 , 10 and 14 , unless stated otherwise : ( i ) Pivoting and walking , ( ii ) Righting reflex , ( iii ) Preyer’s reflex , ( iv ) Front - limb suspension , ( v ) Hindlimb suspension , ( vi ) Grasping reflex , ( vii ) Cliff aversion , ( viii ) Negative geotaxis , ( ix ) Homing test . Behavioral tests in Adult Mouse We also performed a battery of behavioral and locomotors tests in adult mice . Each test was performed twice , using six animals per sex and genotype in each replicate . All mice were between 2 and 5 months old and siblings were matched when possible . As described in detailed in Supplementary Methods , we performed the following tests : ( i ) Spontaneous basal locomotor activity , ( ii ) Novel Object Recognition ( NOR ) , ( iii ) Elevated Plus Maze , ( iv ) Morris Water Maze , ( v ) Grip strength , ( vi ) Rotarod , ( vi ) Beam Balance , ( vii ) Fear conditioning . Electrophysiology ex vivo Mice ( 8 – 16 week old ) were decapitated immediately , the brain was quickly removed and submerged in artificial cerebrospinal fluid rich in aCSF sucrose buffer ( 2 mM KCl , 1 . 25 mM NaH2PO4 - H2O , 7 mM MgSO4 , 26 mM NaHCO3 , 0 . 5 mM CaCl2 , 10 mM glucose and 219 mM sucrose ) at 4°C , saturated with a 95 % O2 , 5 % CO2 mixture and maintained at pH 7 . 32 - 7 . 4 . Transverse brain slices ( 300 µm thick ) were cut with a vibratome ( VT1200S , Leica ) in oxygenated aCSF sucrose at 4°C and transferred to recovery chamber with oxygenated aCSF buffer 124 mM NaCl , 2 . 5 mM KCl , 1 . 25 mM NaH2PO4 - H2O , 1 mM MgSO4 , 26 mM NaHCO3 , 2 mM CaCl2 and 10 mM glucose and incubated for > 1 h at room temperature ( 21 - 24 ºC ) and pH 7 . 32 - 7 . 4 . Individual slices were transferred to an immersion recording chamber and perfused with oxygenated aCSF at 2 mL / min ( 30 ± 2°C ) . Whole - cell intracellular recordings in voltage clamp ( VC ) and current clamp ( CC ) mode were performed in pyramidal neurons in CA1 stratum pyramidale . Cells were visualized with a water - immersion 40x objective . Patch electrodes were fabricated from borosilicate glass capillaries ( P1000 , Sutter Instrument ) with resistance of 4 – 6 MΩ when filled with the internal solution that contained : 130 mM K - MeSO4 , 10 mM HEPES , 0 . 5 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl2 , 4 mM Mg - ATP , 0 . 4 mM Na - GTP , 10 mM phosphocreatin di ( tris ) salt and 0 . 3 % biocytin , for membrane properties experiments in CC and excitatory postsynaptic currents ( EPSC ) evoked in VC , in pyramidal neurons ; 130 mM Cs - MeSO4 , 5 mM CsCl , 10 mM HEPES , 0 . 5 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl2 , 4 mM Mg - ATP , 0 . 4 mM Na - GTP , 10 mM phosphocreatin di ( tris ) salt and 0 . 3 % biocytin , for miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents ( mEPSC ) in VC recordings from pyramidal neurons . All pipette solutions were adjusted to pH 7 . 2 - 7 . 3 with K - OH or Cs - OH . Membrane currents and voltages were acquired with Multiclamp 700B amplifiers , digitized ( Digidata 1550B ) and controlled by pClamp 10 . 7 ( Molecular Devices Corporation , Sunnyvale , CA , USA ) software . Membrane intrinsic properties of CA1 pyramidal cells were determined by passing hyperpolarizing and depolarizing current steps ( 1 s , with 10 pA increments from - 100 to 140 pA ) in CC . Synaptic responses in CA1 were evoked by monophasic current ( 50 μs duration ) stimulation of the Schaffer collateral fibers ( SCs ) with an extracellular bipolar tungsten electrode via isolated current stimulator ( DS3 ) that was set to deliver monophasic currents of 50 μs duration . Membrane currents and voltages were acquired with Multiclamp 700B amplifiers , digitized ( Digidata 1550B ) and controlled by pClamp 10 . 7 ( Molecular Devices Corporation , Sunnyvale , CA , USA ) software . To study changes in the probability of transmitter release of the presynaptic cell ( e . g . , Bekkers and Stevens 1990 ; Kullmann 1994 ; Malinow and Tsien 1990 ) we applied paired - pulse facilitation ( PPF ) protocol , which consisted of evoking two consecutive EPSC responses at different intervals ( from 20 ms at 160 ms , a 20 ms inter - pulse interval ) . Changes in the PPF were calculated as a PPF ratio from ( R2 - R1 ) / R1 , where R1 and R2 were the peak amplitudes of the first and second EPSCs , respectively ( Martin and Buño , 2002 ) . Extracellular field postsynaptic potentials ( fEPSPs ) were recorded by placing borosilicate glass electrode filled with aSCF sucrose buffer in the stratum radiatum ( SR ) of the CA1 pyramidal layer . Evoked fEPSPs were elicited by stimulation of the SCs fibers as EPSCs . For LTP experiments , the stimulus intensity was adjusted to elicit 50 % of the maximum response signal and kept constant throughout the experiment . Data was stored through an acquisition system ( Axon Instruments ) and the software pClamp 10 . 7 was used to display fEPSP and measurements of fEPSP slopes . After recording stable baseline responses for 30 min , LTP was induced by a single train of theta burst stimulation ( TBS ; 10 bursts of 5 pulses at 100 Hz , with an interval of 200 ms between bursts ) . Potentiation was measured for 1 h after LTP induction at 0 . 033 Hz . Changes in the fEPSP slope were calculated in relation to the baseline fEPSP responses during the last 10 min before TBS , and the time course of LTP values was then normalized to this baseline . Dendritic spine morphology analysis For spine analysis , neurons were filled with biocytin ( Sigma - B4261 ) during whole - cell recordings . Slices ( 300 µm ) with recorded cells were fixed overnight with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4°C and then transferred to 0 . 05 % Na - azide in PBS . After slices were permeabilized and blocked with 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 in PBS and 10 % normal goat serum ( NGS ) for 1 h at room temperature . To reveal biocytin , the slices were incubated overnight at 4°C with streptavidin Alexa Fluor - 488 conjugated ( 1 : 1 000 ) in 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 in PBS . Confocal microscopy ( Leica SP8 ; CRG , Advanced Light Microscopy Unit ) was used to capture fluorescence Z - stacks of dendritic spines from biocytin filled cells with a 0 . 2 µm step using a 63X glycerol immersion objective . Only dendrites with bright and continuous labeling were included for analysis . Primary dendrites were not included in the analysis . Huygens ' essential software was used to deconvolve images . All images were batch processed using the same template ( available upon request ) . Deconvoluted images were imported into NeuronStudio and semi - automatically analyzed blind to experimental conditions . Dendritic spine quantification was performed on a total of 23 CA1 pyramidal cells ( n = 11 - 12 cells per group ; n = 2 groups ) . Spine density was measured at least in 100 µm of secondary apical branches . All dendritic spines were at least 50 µm apart from the neuronal soma . The total number of spines was divided by the total length of the dendritic spines . RhoA2G FRET biosensor analysis of neuronal cells by microscopy To obtain lentivirus for infection of neurons , HEK293T cells were seeded in lentivirus packaging media ( 94 . 99 % Opti - MEM I , 5 % FBS , 0 . 01 % Sodium Pyruvate ) were transfected according to manufacturer instructions using Lipofectamine 2000 with plasmids carrying HIV - 1 Gag / Pol ( pMDLg / pRRE Addgene : 12251 ) , HIV - 1 Rev ( pRSV - Rev Addgene : 12253 ) , and VSV g - glycoprotein Env ( pMD2 . G Addgene : 12259 ) , together with pLentiRhoA2G ( Addgene : 40179 ) . Media was changed after 6 h to neuronal N2 media . The viral particles were harvested from the neuronal N2 media 48 h after the transfection and used for cell infection . Experiment was performed on two separate neuronal differentiations considered as replicates . Each differentiation was performed using three KO and three WT cell lines ( described before ) , and fixed DIV21 neurons were used for FRET analysis . Procedure was performed in accordance with safety rules and approved by the CRG Biosafety committee ( procedure registration number CBS19 _ 015 _ A ) . Relative FRET was calculated automatically using AcceptorPhotobleaching ( confocal microscope SP8 Leica ; CRG , Advanced Light Microscopy Unit ) by dividing the normalized fluorescence intensity of Venus at its emission peak ( 528 nm ) by the normalized fluorescence intensity of mTFP1 at its emission peak ( 492 nm ) . Provided Lookup Table ( LUT ) is linear and covers the full range of the data . RNA - sequencing and transcriptomic analyses Mice ( age 3 - 5 months ) were euthanized with CO2 and decapitated immediately . Hippocampi from 10 mice ( 5 per genotype ) were extracted , snap - frozen in liquid nitrogen and subjected to RNA extraction using the RNeasy Plus Mini kit ( Qiagen , 74136 ) . Library preparation ( polyA - selected , stranded ) and the RNA - seq were performed by the CRG Genomics Core Facility following standard Illumina protocols . An average of 29 . 3 million 50 bp single - end reads were generated for each library on a Illumina HiSeq 2500 machine . Reads were aligned to the Mus musculus transcriptome assembly from Ensembl ( release 104 ; GRCm39 ) with Salmon v . 1 . 4 . 0 ( Patro et al . 2017 ) . Raw gene counts were extracted from Salmon outputs using tximport ( Soneson , Love , and Robinson 2015 ) package from bioconductor and differential gene expression was assessed with DESeq2 ( Love , Huber , and Anders 2014 ) . Log2 fold changes between KO and WT were shrunk using apeglm method ( Zhu , Ibrahim , and Love 2019 ) and used for plotting KEGG pathways with the bioconductor package pathview ( Luo and Brouwer 2013 ) . Gene expression was transformed with variance stabilizing transformations ( VST ) as implemented in DESeq2 and used as input for the Gene Set Variation Analysis ( Hänzelmann , Castelo , and Guinney 2013 ) on KEGG pathways . Gene sets were considered differentially expressed if p - value was lower than 0 . 05 in a linear model modeling for genotype . RNA - seq data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) , and is available at the GSE219244 accession number . 15 Poliński et al . , 2023 End Matter Author Contributions and Notes P . P performed molecular , cellular , and behavioral characterization of the microexon function , with help of M . M . C . A . Z . M generated and analyzed electrophysiology data ( Figure 6 and S8 ) ; F . M . performed the analysis of the actin polymerization assay , provided support with bioinformatic analyses and contributed with critical insights . G . C . R performed calcium imaging experiments and the analysis . D . N . performed TIRF and dual - color TIRF microscopy experiments and R . G . R . wrote ImageJ / Fiji scripts necessary for the downstream analysis . L . I . R . analyzed RNA - seq data , and provided help with animal behavior data analysis . C . M . P and P . O . C . performed functional synapse quantification ( Figure 4 ) and neuronal complexity analysis ( Figure S5 ) . S . B . performed Western Blot analysis and contributed with critical insights . C . R . - M . and J . P . performed RT - PCR assays and genotyping . M . M . De L . C . , Á . F . - B . , C . S . , J . L . M . L . , and O . F . provided support for the animal experiments performed . D . L . and J . I . W . F . helped with FRET acceptor photobleaching experiments . P . P . , E . H . , M . D . , and M . I designed the experiments with input from other authors . P . P . , M . D . and M . I . conceived the study , supervised the work and wrote the manuscript with input from other authors . The authors declare no conflict of interest . Acknowledgments We thank Kyung - Min Noh for providing the mESC line , Miguel Valverde and Francisco Muñoz for their help and feedback with the calcium imaging experiments , and members of the Irimia and Dierssen groups for constant scientific discussion and feedback . We also thank the CRG Genomics , Protein Technologies , Tissue Engineering and Advanced Light Microscopy Units for the RNA sequencing , protein purification , blastocyst injection and microscopy services , respectively . Funding statement The research has been funded by the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union ' s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program ( ERC - StG - LS2 - 637591 and ERCCoG - LS2 - 101002275 to M . I . ) , the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness ( BFU - 2017 - 89201 - P to M . I . ) and the ‘Centro de Excelencia Severo Ochoa 2013 - 2017’ ( SEV - 2012 - 0208 ) . P . P . has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska - Curie grant agreement No 721890 ( ITN circRTrain ) . References Barbosa - Morais , N . L . , M . Irimia , Q . Pan , H . Y . Xiong , S . Gueroussov , L . J . Lee , V . Slobodeniuc , et al . 2012 . “The Evolutionary Landscape of Alternative Splicing in Vertebrate Species . ” Science 338 ( 6114 ) : 1587 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1230612 . Bibel , Miriam , Jens Richter , Emmanuel Lacroix , and Yves - Alain Barde . 2007 . “Generation of a Defined and Uniform Population of CNS Progenitors and Neurons from Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells . ” Nature Protocols 2 ( 5 ) : 1034 – 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2007 . 147 . Bibel , Miriam , Jens Richter , Katrin Schrenk , Kerry Lee Tucker , Volker Staiger , Martin Korte , Magdalena Goetz , and Yves - Alain Barde . 2004 . “Differentiation of Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells into a Defined Neuronal Lineage . ” Nature Neuroscience 7 ( 9 ) : 1003 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nn1301 . Bramham , Clive R . , Maria N . Alme , Margarethe Bittins , Sjoukje D . Kuipers , Rajeevkumar R . Nair , Balagopal Pai , Debabrata Panja , et al . 2010 . “The Arc of Synaptic Memory . ” Experimental Brain Research 200 ( 2 ) : 125 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00221 - 009 - 1959 - 2 . Calarco , John A . , Simone Superina , Dave O’Hanlon , Mathieu Gabut , Bushra Raj , Qun Pan , Ursula Skalska , et al . 2009 . “Regulation of Vertebrate Nervous System Alternative Splicing and Development by an SR - Related Protein . ” Cell 138 ( 5 ) : 898 – 910 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 06 . 012 . Ciampi , Ludovica , Federica Mantica , Laura López - Blanch , Jon Permanyer , Cristina Rodriguez - Marín , Jingjing Zang , Damiano Cianferoni , et al . 2022 . “Specialization of the Photoreceptor Transcriptome by Srrm3 - Dependent Microexons Is Required for Outer Segment Maintenance and Vision . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 ( 29 ) : e2117090119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2117090119 . Cingolani , Lorenzo A . , and Yukiko Goda . 2008 . “Actin in Action : The Interplay between the Actin Cytoskeleton and Synaptic Efficacy . ” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9 ( 5 ) : 344 – 56 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrn2373 . Consolati , Tanja , Gil Henkin , Johanna Roostalu , and Thomas Surrey . 2022 . “Real - Time Imaging of Single ΓTuRC - Mediated Microtubule Nucleation Events In Vitro by TIRF Microscopy . ” In Microtubules , edited by Hiroshi Inaba , 2430 : 315 – 36 . Methods in Molecular Biology . New York , NY : Springer US . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 0716 - 1983 - 4 _ 21 . Dillon , Christian , and Yukiko Goda . 2005 . “THE ACTIN CYTOSKELETON : Integrating Form and Function at the Synapse . ” Annual Review of Neuroscience 28 ( 1 ) : 25 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . neuro . 28 . 061604 . 135757 . Doench , John G , Nicolo Fusi , Meagan Sullender , Mudra Hegde , Emma W Vaimberg , Katherine F Donovan , Ian Smith , et al . 2016 . “Optimized SgRNA Design to Maximize Activity and Minimize Off - Target Effects of CRISPR - Cas9 . ” Nature Biotechnology 34 ( 2 ) : 184 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nbt . 3437 . Doolittle , Lynda K . , Michael K . Rosen , and Shae B . Padrick . 2013 . “Measurement and Analysis of In Vitro Actin Polymerization . ” In Adhesion Protein Protocols , edited by Amanda S . Coutts , 1046 : 273 – 93 . Totowa , NJ : Humana Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 62703 - 538 - 5 _ 16 . Feather - Schussler , Danielle N . , and Tanya S . Ferguson . 2016 . “A Battery of Motor Tests in a Neonatal Mouse Model of Cerebral Palsy . ” Journal of Visualized Experiments , no . 117 ( November ) : 53569 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3791 / 53569 . Feng , Dairong , and Jiuyong Xie . 2013 . “Aberrant Splicing in Neurological Diseases : Aberrant Splicing in Neurological Diseases . ” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews : RNA 4 ( 6 ) : 631 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wrna . 1184 . Fernandes , Jacqueline , Ivan M . Lorenzo , Yaniré N . Andrade , Anna Garcia - Elias , Selma A . Serra , José M . Fernández - Fernández , and Miguel A . Valverde . 2008 . “IP3 Sensitizes TRPV4 Channel to the Mechano - and Osmotransducing Messenger 5′ - 6′ - Epoxyeicosatrienoic Acid . ” Journal of Cell Biology 181 ( 1 ) : 143 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200712058 . Fritz , Rafael D . , Michel Letzelter , Andreas Reimann , Katrin Martin , Ludovico Fusco , Laila Ritsma , Bas Ponsioen , et al . 2013 . “A Versatile Toolkit to Produce Sensitive FRET Biosensors to Visualize Signaling in Time and Space . ” Science Signaling 6 ( 285 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scisignal . 2004135 . Gao , Chan , and Ye - Guang Chen . 2010 . “Dishevelled : The Hub of Wnt Signaling . ” Cellular Signalling 22 ( 5 ) : 717 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2009 . 11 . 021 . García - Frigola , Cristina , Maria Isabel Carreres , Celia Vegar , Carol Mason , and Eloísa Herrera . 2008 . “Zic2 Promotes Axonal Divergence at the Optic Chiasm Midline by EphB1 - Dependent and - Independent Mechanisms . ” Development 135 ( 10 ) : 1833 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 020693 . Gonatopoulos - Pournatzis , Thomas , and Benjamin J Blencowe . 2020 . “Microexons : At the Nexus of Nervous System Development , Behaviour and Autism Spectrum Disorder . ” Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 65 ( December ) : 22 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . gde . 2020 . 03 . 007 . Gonatopoulos - Pournatzis , Thomas , Mingkun Wu , Ulrich Braunschweig , Jonathan Roth , Hong Han , Andrew J . Best , Bushra Raj , et al . 2018 . “Genome - Wide CRISPR - Cas9 Interrogation of Splicing Networks 16 Poliński et al . , 2023 Reveals a Mechanism for Recognition of Autism - Misregulated Neuronal Microexons . ” Molecular Cell 72 ( 3 ) : 510 - 524 . e12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2018 . 10 . 008 . Habas , Raymond , Yoichi Kato , and Xi He . 2001 . “Wnt / Frizzled Activation of Rho Regulates Vertebrate Gastrulation and Requires a Novel Formin Homology Protein Daam1 . ” Cell 107 ( 7 ) : 843 – 54 . Higashi , Tomohito , Tomoyuki Ikeda , Ryutaro Shirakawa , Hirokazu Kondo , Mitsunori Kawato , Masahito Horiguchi , Tomohiko Okuda , et al . 2008 . “Biochemical Characterization of the Rho GTPase - Regulated Actin Assembly by Diaphanous - Related Formins , MDia1 and Daam1 , in Platelets . ” Journal of Biological Chemistry 283 ( 13 ) : 8746 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M707839200 . Irimia , Manuel , Robert J . Weatheritt , Jonathan D . Ellis , Neelroop N . Parikshak , Thomas Gonatopoulos - Pournatzis , Mariana Babor , Mathieu Quesnel - Vallières , et al . 2014 . “A Highly Conserved Program of Neuronal Microexons Is Misregulated in Autistic Brains . ” Cell 159 ( 7 ) : 1511 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 11 . 035 . Jaiswal , Richa , Dennis Breitsprecher , Agnieszka Collins , Ivan R . Corrêa , Ming - Qun Xu , and Bruce L . Goode . 2013 . “The Formin Daam1 and Fascin Directly Collaborate to Promote Filopodia Formation . ” Current Biology 23 ( 14 ) : 1373 – 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 06 . 013 . Kawabata Galbraith , Kelly , Kazuto Fujishima , Hiroaki Mizuno , Sung - Jin Lee , Takeshi Uemura , Kenji Sakimura , Masayoshi Mishina , Naoki Watanabe , and Mineko Kengaku . 2018 . “MTSS1 Regulation of Actin - Nucleating Formin DAAM1 in Dendritic Filopodia Determines Final Dendritic Configuration of Purkinje Cells . ” Cell Reports 24 ( 1 ) : 95 - 106 . e9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2018 . 06 . 013 . Kühn , Sonja , and Matthias Geyer . 2014 . “Formins as Effector Proteins of Rho GTPases . ” Small GTPases 5 ( 3 ) : e983876 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4161 / sgtp . 29513 . Lamprecht , Raphael . 2021 . “Actin Cytoskeleton Role in the Maintenance of Neuronal Morphology and Long - Term Memory . ” Cells 10 ( 7 ) : 1795 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / cells10071795 . Leger , Marianne , Anne Quiedeville , Valentine Bouet , Benoît Haelewyn , Michel Boulouard , Pascale Schumann - Bard , and Thomas Freret . 2013 . “Object Recognition Test in Mice . ” Nature Protocols 8 ( 12 ) : 2531 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2013 . 155 . Love , Michael I , Wolfgang Huber , and Simon Anders . 2014 . “Moderated Estimation of Fold Change and Dispersion for RNA - Seq Data with DESeq2 . ” Genome Biology 15 ( 12 ) : 550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s13059 - 014 - 0550 - 8 . Lu , Jun , Wuyi Meng , Florence Poy , Sankar Maiti , Bruce L . Goode , and Michael J . Eck . 2007 . “Structure of the FH2 Domain of Daam1 : Implications for Formin Regulation of Actin Assembly . ” Journal of Molecular Biology 369 ( 5 ) : 1258 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2007 . 04 . 002 . Lueptow , Lindsay M . 2017 . “Novel Object Recognition Test for the Investigation of Learning and Memory in Mice . ” Journal of Visualized Experiments , no . 126 ( August ) : 55718 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3791 / 55718 . Luo , Weijun , and Cory Brouwer . 2013 . “Pathview : An R / Bioconductor Package for Pathway - Based Data Integration and Visualization . ” Bioinformatics 29 ( 14 ) : 1830 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btt285 . Mattila , Pieta K , and Pekka Lappalainen . 2008 . “Filopodia : Molecular Architecture and Cellular Functions , ” 9 . Matusek , T . , R . Gombos , A . Szecsenyi , N . Sanchez - Soriano , A . Czibula , C . Pataki , A . Gedai , A . Prokop , I . Rasko , and J . Mihaly . 2008 . “Formin Proteins of the DAAM Subfamily Play a Role during Axon Growth . ” Journal of Neuroscience 28 ( 49 ) : 13310 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2727 - 08 . 2008 . McLeod , Faye , and Patricia C Salinas . 2018 . “Wnt Proteins as Modulators of Synaptic Plasticity . ” Current Opinion in Neurobiology 53 ( December ) : 90 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . conb . 2018 . 06 . 003 . Messaoudi , E . , T . Kanhema , J . Soule , A . Tiron , G . Dagyte , B . da Silva , and C . R . Bramham . 2007 . “Sustained Arc / Arg3 . 1 Synthesis Controls Long - Term Potentiation Consolidation through Regulation of Local Actin Polymerization in the Dentate Gyrus In Vivo . ” Journal of Neuroscience 27 ( 39 ) : 10445 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2883 - 07 . 2007 . Nakaya , Masa - aki , Kristibjorn Orri Gudmundsson , Yuko Komiya , Jonathan R . Keller , Raymond Habas , Terry P . Yamaguchi , and Rieko Ajima . 2020 . “Placental Defects Lead to Embryonic Lethality in Mice Lacking the Formin and PCP Proteins Daam1 and Daam2 . ” Edited by Michael Schubert . PLOS ONE 15 ( 4 ) : e0232025 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0232025 . Okuno , Hiroyuki , Kaori Akashi , Yuichiro Ishii , Nan Yagishita - Kyo , Kanzo Suzuki , Mio Nonaka , Takashi Kawashima , et al . 2012 . “Inverse Synaptic Tagging of Inactive Synapses via Dynamic Interaction of Arc / Arg3 . 1 with CaMKIIβ . ” Cell 149 ( 4 ) : 886 – 98 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 02 . 062 . Otomo , Takanori , Diana R Tomchick , Chinatsu Otomo , Sanjay C Panchal , Mischa Machius , and Michael K Rosen . 2005 . “Structural Basis of Actin FIlament Nucleation and Processive Capping by a Formin Homology 2 Domain” 433 : 7 . Pan , Qun , Ofer Shai , Leo J Lee , Brendan J Frey , and Benjamin J Blencowe . 2008 . “Deep Surveying of Alternative Splicing Complexity in the Human Transcriptome by High - Throughput Sequencing . ” Nature Genetics 40 ( 12 ) : 1413 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng . 259 . Papandréou , Marie - Jeanne , and Christophe Leterrier . 2018 . “The Functional Architecture of Axonal Actin . ” Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 91 ( September ) : 151 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mcn . 2018 . 05 . 003 . Parras , Alberto , Héctor Anta , María Santos - Galindo , Vivek Swarup , Ainara Elorza , José L . Nieto - González , Sara Picó , et al . 2018 . “Autism - like Phenotype and Risk Gene MRNA Deadenylation by CPEB4 Mis - Splicing . ” Nature 560 ( 7719 ) : 441 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0423 - 5 . Plath , Niels , Ora Ohana , Björn Dammermann , Mick L . Errington , Dietmar Schmitz , Christina Gross , Xiaosong Mao , et al . 2006 . “Arc / Arg3 . 1 Is Essential for the Consolidation of Synaptic Plasticity and Memories . ” Neuron 52 ( 3 ) : 437 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2006 . 08 . 024 . Polder , Gerrit , Huub Hovens , and Hans Zweers . n . d . “Measuring Shoot Length of Submerged Aquatic Plants Using Graph Analysis , ” 30 . Pollard , Thomas D . 2016 . “Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins . ” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 8 ( 8 ) : a018226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 . Quesnel - Vallières , Mathieu , Zahra Dargaei , Manuel Irimia , Thomas Gonatopoulos - Pournatzis , Joanna Y . Ip , Mingkun Wu , Timothy Sterne - Weiler , et al . 2016 . “Misregulation of an Activity - Dependent Splicing Network as a Common Mechanism Underlying Autism Spectrum Disorders . ” Molecular Cell 64 ( 6 ) : 1023 – 34 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2016 . 11 . 033 . Raj , Bushra , Manuel Irimia , Ulrich Braunschweig , Timothy Sterne - Weiler , Dave O’Hanlon , Zhen - Yuan Lin , Ginny I . Chen , et al . 2014 . “A Global Regulatory Mechanism for Activating an Exon Network Required for Neurogenesis . ” Molecular Cell 56 ( 1 ) : 90 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2014 . 08 . 011 . Ran , F Ann , Patrick D Hsu , Jason Wright , Vineeta Agarwala , David A Scott , and Feng Zhang . 2013 . “Genome Engineering Using the CRISPR - Cas9 System . ” Nature Protocols 8 ( 11 ) : 2281 – 2308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2013 . 143 . Rial Verde , Emiliano M . , Jane Lee - Osbourne , Paul F . Worley , Roberto Malinow , and Hollis T . Cline . 2006 . “Increased Expression of the Immediate - Early Gene Arc / Arg3 . 1 Reduces AMPA Receptor - Mediated Synaptic Transmission . ” Neuron 52 ( 3 ) : 461 – 74 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2006 . 09 . 031 . Roper , Randall J . , Charles R . Goodlett , María Martínez de Lagrán , and Mara Dierssen . 2020 . “Behavioral Phenotyping for Down Syndrome in Mice . ” Current Protocols in Mouse Biology 10 ( 3 ) : e79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cpmo . 79 . Ruhela , Rakesh K , Shringika Soni , Phulen Sarma , Ajay Prakash , and Bikash Medhi . 2019 . “Negative Geotaxis : An Early Age Behavioral Hallmark to VPA Rat Model of Autism . ” Annals of Neurosciences 26 ( 1 ) : 25 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5214 / ans . 0972 . 7531 . 260106 . Sakuma , Tetsushi , Ayami Nishikawa , Satoshi Kume , Kazuaki Chayama , and Takashi Yamamoto . 2015 . “Multiplex Genome Engineering in Human Cells Using All - in - One CRISPR / Cas9 Vector System . ” Scientific Reports 4 ( 1 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep05400 . Schindelin , Johannes , Ignacio Arganda - Carreras , Erwin Frise , Verena Kaynig , Mark Longair , Tobias Pietzsch , Stephan Preibisch , et al . 2012 . “Fiji : An Open - Source Platform for Biological - Image Analysis . ” Nature 17 Poliński et al . , 2023 Methods 9 ( 7 ) : 676 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 . Schönichen , André , and Matthias Geyer . 2010 . “Fifteen Formins for an Actin Filament : A Molecular View on the Regulation of Human Formins . ” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Molecular Cell Research 1803 ( 2 ) : 152 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2010 . 01 . 014 . Shen , Wenjuan , Michaela B . C . Kilander , Morgan S . Bridi , Jeannine A . Frei , Robert F . Niescier , Shiyong Huang , and Yu ‐ Chih Lin . 2020 . “Tomosyn Regulates the Small RhoA GTPase to Control the Dendritic Stability of Neurons and the Surface Expression of AMPA Receptors . ” Journal of Neuroscience Research 98 ( 6 ) : 1213 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jnr . 24608 . Soneson , Charlotte , Michael I . Love , and Mark D . Robinson . 2015 . “Differential Analyses for RNA - Seq : Transcript - Level Estimates Improve Gene - Level Inferences . ” F1000Research 4 ( December ) : 1521 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 12688 / f1000research . 7563 . 1 . Szikora , Szilárd , István Földi , Krisztina Tóth , Ede Migh , Andrea Vig , Beáta Bugyi , József Maléth , et al . 2017 . “The Formin DAAM Is Required for Coordination of the Actin and Microtubule Cytoskeleton in Axonal Growth Cones . ” Journal of Cell Science , January , jcs . 203455 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 203455 . Tapial , Javier , Kevin C . H . Ha , Timothy Sterne - Weiler , André Gohr , Ulrich Braunschweig , Antonio Hermoso - Pulido , Mathieu Quesnel - Vallières , et al . 2017 . “An Atlas of Alternative Splicing Profiles and Functional Associations Reveals New Regulatory Programs and Genes That Simultaneously Express Multiple Major Isoforms . ” Genome Research 27 ( 10 ) : 1759 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gr . 220962 . 117 . Tomás Pereira , Inês , and Rebecca D . Burwell . 2015 . “Using the Spatial Learning Index to Evaluate Performance on the Water Maze . ” Behavioral Neuroscience 129 ( 4 ) : 533 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / bne0000078 . Torres - Méndez . 2022 . “Parallel Evolution of a Splicing Program Controlling Neuronal Excitability in Flies and Mammals . ” SCIENCE ADVANCES , 20 . Torres - Méndez , Antonio , Sophie Bonnal , Yamile Marquez , Jonathan Roth , Marta Iglesias , Jon Permanyer , Isabel Almudí , et al . 2019 . “A Novel Protein Domain in an Ancestral Splicing Factor Drove the Evolution of Neural Microexons . ” Nature Ecology & Evolution 3 ( 4 ) : 691 – 701 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41559 - 019 - 0813 - 6 . Vorhees , Charles V , and Michael T Williams . 2006 . “Morris Water Maze : Procedures for Assessing Spatial and Related Forms of Learning and Memory . ” Nature Protocols 1 ( 2 ) : 848 – 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2006 . 116 . Walf , Alicia A , and Cheryl A Frye . 2007 . “The Use of the Elevated plus Maze as an Assay of Anxiety - Related Behavior in Rodents . ” Nature Protocols 2 ( 2 ) : 322 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2007 . 44 . Wang , Eric T . , Rickard Sandberg , Shujun Luo , Irina Khrebtukova , Lu Zhang , Christine Mayr , Stephen F . Kingsmore , Gary P . Schroth , and Christopher B . Burge . 2008 . “Alternative Isoform Regulation in Human Tissue Transcriptomes . ” Nature 456 ( 7221 ) : 470 – 76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature07509 . Warburton , E . C . , and M . W . Brown . 2015 . “Neural Circuitry for Rat Recognition Memory . ” Behavioural Brain Research 285 ( May ) : 131 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbr . 2014 . 09 . 050 . Xu , Yingwu , James B Moseley , Isabelle Sagot , Florence Poy , David Pellman , Bruce L Goode , and Michael J Eck . n . d . “Crystal Structures of a Formin Homology - 2 Domain Reveal a Tethered Dimer Architecture , ” 13 . Yamashita , Masami , Tomohito Higashi , Shiro Suetsugu , Yusuke Sato , Tomoyuki Ikeda , Ryutaro Shirakawa , Toru Kita , et al . 2007 . “Crystal Structure of Human DAAM1 Formin Homology 2 Domain : DAAM1 FH2 Structure . ” Genes to Cells 12 ( 11 ) : 1255 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2443 . 2007 . 01132 . x . Zhang , Haorui , Youssif Ben Zablah , Haiwang Zhang , and Zhengping Jia . 2021 . “Rho Signaling in Synaptic Plasticity , Memory , and Brain Disorders . ” Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 9 ( October ) : 729076 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2021 . 729076 . Zhang , Hongyu , and Clive R . Bramham . 2021 . “Arc / Arg3 . 1 Function in Long ‐ term Synaptic Plasticity : Emerging Mechanisms and Unresolved Issues . ” European Journal of Neuroscience 54 ( 8 ) : 6696 – 6712 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ejn . 14958 . 18 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary figures Supplementary Figure 1 - Linker region conservation among formins and actin pyrene assay optimization . ( a ) Amino acid sequence alignment of the linker regions of formin proteins . ( b ) Concentration - dependent actin self - assembly . Left : actin self - assembly measured by incubation of the pyrene - labeled actin in various concentrations . Top scheme : Green arrow describes potential incorporation of G - actin monomer into F - actin filament , and red its dissociation . Schematic representation of nucleation , elongation , and steady - state phase of actin filament assembly based on 1μM actin . Right : distribution of actin polymerization rates pero condition calculated based on Doolittle et al . 2013 . ( c , d ) Left : actin assembly activities of various concentrations of the two splice variants of the DAAM1 FH2 - COOH fragment using 0 . 5 μM ( c ) and 1 μM actin ( d ) . Actin assembly was measured by incubation of the pyrene - labeled actin . Right : distribution of actin polymerization rates pero condition calculated based on Doolittle et al . 2013 . 19 Poliński et al . , 2023 20 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Figure 2 - TIRF microscopy of actin polymerization . ( a ) Magnification of the actin fluorescence micrographs shown in Figure 2g used for tracking the behavior of individual actin fibers over time ( examples indicated by the colored arrows ) . Scale bar : 2 μm . ( b ) Quantifications of ROI intensity , fiber number and length from ( Figure 2g ) at the last recorded time point ( 15 min ) . Each dot in the ROI intensity boxplots corresponds to a randomly selected ROI . P - values from Wilcoxon rank - sum tests . ( c ) Magnification of actin fluorescence TIRF images obtained using 0 . 2 μM actin and 200nM FH2 - COOH Daam1 fragments . The right panels show the skeletonized actin fibers ( 90 min skeleton ) as obtained using the AnalyzeSkeleton Fiji plugin ( Schindelin et al . 2012 ; Polder et al . 2010 ) . Scale bar : 2 μm . ( d ) Schematic representation of the morphological features analyzed in ( e - h ) . ( e - i ) Temporal quantifications of F - actin fiber features including fiber total length in μm ( e ) , average length of individual branches in μm ( f ) , number of junctions per object ( g ) , number of branches per object ( h ) , and actin fiber intensity ( i ) . Left : each line describes a different region analyzed in each experimental replicate . Right : Boxplots summarizing the average values of the different F - actin fiber features quantified . Black lines in the box plots connect data points acquired simultaneously during each experimental replicate . P - values from two - way ANOVA tests with replicates as factors . 21 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Figure 3 - Dual - color TIRF microscopy with SNAP labeling . ( a ) FPLC elution profiles of DAAM1 SNAP - FH2 ‐ COOH fragments purified from bacteria . FPLC was performed using a HiLoad® 16 / 600 Superdex® 200 pg column . ( b ) Schematic representation of fluorescence labeling of purified SNAP - FH2 ‐ COOH fragments . Green indicates the DAAM1 fragment , gray the SNAP tag , and orange the fluorescent labeling of SNAP tag with Alexa Fluor 488 . ( c ) Top : Coomassie blue - stained SDS ‐ PAGE gel showing all the proteins used throughout the course of this study . Bottom : Fluorescence image of the SDS - PAGE gel , shown in top panel , using blue light excitation . ( d ) Representative micrographs of dual - color TIRF experiments performed using 0 . 2 μM actin and 200 nM SNAP - tagged proteins . Scale bar : 10 μm . ( e ) Quantification of the mean protein fluorescence intensity per actin fiber throughout the course of the experiment . Data plots show multiple regions analyzed per each experimental replicate and boxplots summarize their averages . Gray lines represent the relationship between the protein isoforms in experimental replicates . P - values from two - way ANOVA tests with replicates as factors . 22 Poliński et al . , 2023 23 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Figure 4 - Increased filopodia and neurite length upon microexon removal in neuronal precursors . ( a ) RT - PCR assays of Daam1 - MIC inclusion during neuronal differentiation in WT and KO cell lines . ( b ) Representative immunocytochemistry image of WT neuronal precursors ( NPCs ; DIV0 + 4h ) . Scale bar : 10 μm . ( c ) Distributions of neurite filopodia number in NPCs ( DIV0 + 4h ) . Dots represent values measured on an individual neurite . ( d ) Representative immunocytochemistry images of derived growth cones from WT and KO NPCs ( DIV0 + 4 h ) . Relative intensity throughout the last 5 μm of the growth cone ( yellow boxes ) were analyzed . ( e ) Distributions of relative intensities of DAAM1 , actin and tubulin . Dots represent individual values per growth cone . ( f ) Top : representative immunocytochemistry images of a filopodia from a WT NPC ( DIV0 + 4 h ) . Bottom : Intensity spectra throughout the filopodia . ( g ) Distributions of relative intensities of DAAM1 , actin and tubulin . Dots represent values measured on the last 5 μm from the tip of individual filopodia . ( h ) Basal calcium flux comparison between WT and KO cell lines , based on FURA 2AM ratio throughout the time - course of neuronal differentiation protocol . ( i ) Representative immunocytochemistry image of a DIV21 neuronal protrusion stained with 𝛃 3 - Tubulin , DAAM1 and synaptic marker Syp - 1 . Arrows highlight overlap between DAAM1 and Syp - 1 puncta . ( j ) Western blot ( left ) and associated quantification ( right ) of the relative intensity of DAAM1 normalized to GAPDH . Protein extract from neuronal cultures DIV21 . Dots represent values measured on individual cell lines . P - values from Wilcoxon rank - sum tests ( h ) , two - way ANOVA tests with replicate and genotype as factors ( c , e , g ) , or Student ' s t test ( j ) . 24 Poliński et al . , 2023 25 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Figure 5 . Results from various neonatal experiments . ( a ) RT - PCR assays of Daam1 - MIC inclusion in WT and KO mice at postnatal day ( PD ) 21 . ( b ) Distribution of Mendelian ratios for all mice used in this study ( N = 406 ) . Numbers in brackets represent the animal number . ( c - k ) Lineplot representation of the animal weight ( c ) or performance in various tests ( d - k ) during the experimental time course ( see Supplementary Methods and Figure 4a for details ) . Thick lines represent mean performance for both sexes , shading represents the standard error mean ( SEM ) . Bottom numbers represent the number of males ( M ) and females ( F ) used . Dots represent values measured per animal . P - values from Wilcoxon rank - sum tests against the WT . ( l ) Quantification of dentate gyrus size across images . One dot represents one animal , where an average of 3 to 6 sections of coronal view of the hippocampus were analyzed . P - values from two - way ANOVA with replicate and genotype as factors . ( m , n ) Representative images of the neuronal complexity ( m ) , and the quantification of the primary dendrite length ( n ) as a complexity measurement derived from Kawabata Galbraith et al . 2018 . CB corresponds to the cell body . P - values from Wilcoxon rank - sum tests . ( o ) Representative images of Synapsin 1 / 2 ( presynaptic ) , PSD95 ( postsynaptic ) markers and 3D Imaris reconstruction of the merged images from the CA1 hippocampal region of a PD22 control mouse . ( p ) Distributions of the percentage of Synapsin 1 / 2 and PSD95 signal normalized to the control mean . P - values from Wilcoxon rank - sum tests . 26 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Figure 6 . Activity , motor coordination and balance tests in adult mice . ( a - c ) Rotarod performance analysis with training trial number needed to perform the task ( a ) , time based performance during the constant speed sessions ( b ) , and performance during the acceleration session ( c ) . ( d , e ) Time needed to perform the beam balance task ( d ) and number of slips from the beam per animal ( e ) . ( f ) Latency for the entrance to the central zone of the plus - maze . ( g ) Spontaneous locomotor activity of WT and KO animals during a continuous 23 h period . Top : Average distance traveled per genotype in 10 min ( sliding window of 1 min ) . Bottom : log10 p - value for each 10 minute interval , calculated through permutation tests . The horizontal red line describes the significance threshold , gray area marks light off / dark phase of the night cycle . X - axis describes time and corresponds to the 24 h notation in the form hh : mm . ( h ) Distance traveled for WT and KO mice during the 12h night period ( lights off ) . P - values from Wilcoxon rank - sum tests ( a - f ) and two - way ANOVA tests with replicate and genotype as factors ( h ) . 27 Poliński et al . , 2023 28 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Fig 7 . Cognition and memory related tests . ( a , b ) Total exploration time defined as object sniffing during the familiarization ( a ) or discrimination ( b ) phases of the NOR experiment performed . ( c , d ) Object climb delay during the NOR familiarization ( c ) or discrimination phase ( d ) . ( e ) Latency to find the escape route ( hidden platform ) in seconds during the acquisition phase for females ( upper panel ) and males ( lower panel ) . ( f ) Quantification of the cumulative index during the 4th and 8th day of the acquisition phase . Dots represent the performance of one mouse during one trial . ( g ) Schematic representation of the contextual fear conditioning test performed . ( h ) Percentage of freezing time during the test phase of the fear conditioning in male mice . ( i - k ) Quantification of ARC ( i ) and cFOS ( j ) positive nuclei in hippocampal dentate gyrus 1 . 5 h after the fear conditioning test and size of the measured dentate gyrus regions ( k ) . Number of positive nuclei in ( i ) and ( j ) was normalized to the dentate gyrus size ( k ) . One dot represents an average of 3 - 6 coronal views of the hippocampus analyzed per animal . ( l - o ) Quantification of EGR1 ( l ) and cFOS ( m ) positive nuclei in hippocampal dentate gyrus at basal conditions . Number of IEG positive nuclei was normalized to the dentate gyrus size ( [ n ] and [ o ] , respectively ) . One dot represents an average of 3 - 6 coronal views of the hippocampus analyzed per animal , performed in males . ( p , q ) Western blot ( p ) and associated quantification ( q ) of DAAM1 protein expression in cerebellum and motor cortex . Asterisk indicates samples derived from male animals . The relative intensity of DAAM1 was normalized to GAPDH . Dots represent values measured on individual cerebellum . ( r ) Western blot of DAAM1 protein isoforms in multiple tissues . P - values from Wilcoxon rank - sum tests ( a - d , h - o , q ) and two - way ANOVA tests with replicate and genotype as factors ( e , f ) . 29 Poliński et al . , 2023 30 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Figure 8 . Intrinsic membrane properties and release of presynaptic neurotransmitter in CA1 pyramidal cells . ( a ) Representative traces of action potential firing frequency induced by depolarizing current steps at 90 pA ( left ) and 130 pA ( right ) ( 1s duration ) in WT ( blue traces ) and KO ( red traces ) cells . ( b ) Average of the firing frequency versus injected current relationship for representative WT and KO cells . No statistically significant differences found by two - way repeated measures ANOVA tests ( WT : n = 10 , N = 4 ; KO : n = 9 , N = 4 ) . Error bars indicate SEM . ( c ) Voltage responses of representative WT ( blue traces ) and KO ( red traces ) cells to hyperpolarizing and depolarizing current steps . ( d ) V / I curves of WT ( blue circles ) and KO ( red circles ) cells . Voltage ( V ) measures in response to hyperpolarizing and depolarizing current ( I ) steps ( WT : n = 10 , N = 4 ; KO : n = 9 , N = 4 ) . Error bars indicate SEM . ( e - h ) Box plots of rheobase ( Rh , [ e ] ) , membrane resistance ( Rm , [ f ] ) , resting membrane potential ( Vm , [ g ] ) and threshold action potential ( th AP , [ h ] ) . P - values from Welch ' s t - test ( e , f ) and Mann - Whitney ( g , h ) . ( WT : n = 10 , N = 4 ; KO : n = 9 , N = 4 ) . ( i ) Example evoked EPSC traces by stimulation of the SC pathway applying different intensities ( pA ) in WT ( top , blue traces ) and KO ( bottom , red traces ) CA1 cells . ( j ) EPSC amplitude values for a given range of stimulus intensities in WT ( n = 7 , N = 3 ) and KO ( n = 8 , N = 3 ) cells . No statistically significant differences found by two - way repeated measures ANOVA tests . Error bars indicate SEM . ( k ) Representative pair of evoked EPSC traces for different intervals ( ms ) of stimulation of the SC axons in WT ( top , blue traces ) and KO ( bottom , red traces ) CA1 cells . ( l ) Paired - pulse ratios calculated from EPSC amplitudes ( ( R2 - R1 ) / R1 , where R1 corresponds with the first response and R2 second response ) across varying inter - stimulus intervals showed unchanged facilitation between WT ( n = 7 , N = 3 ) and KO ( n = 8 , N = 3 ) cells . No statistically significant differences found by two - way repeated measures ANOVA . Error bars indicate SEM . ( m , n ) Cumulative probability plot and box plot of amplitude ( m ) and frequency ( n ) isolated miniature EPSC events recorded in pyramidal cells in WT ( n = 9 , N = 3 , Events = 1703 ) and KO ( n = 6 , N = 3 , Events = 1040 ) CA1 cells . ( o ) Number of stubby ( left ) and mushroom ( right ) spines per 1 μm of neurite from biocytin stained CA1 pyramidal neurons of the hippocampus in WT and KO mice . N = 6 mice for each genotype , 100 μm of dendrites per cell . One dot represents one neuron analyzed . Lines represent the relation between animals analyzed in experimental replicates . P - values from Wilcoxon rank - sum tests . 31 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Figure 9 . Impaired synaptic vesicle cycle upon Daam1 - MIC removal . ( a ) KEGG pathways differentially expressed ( p - value < 0 . 05 of a linear regression on the GSVA - score testing for genotype ) are shown in y - axis . X - axis represents the difference between means of KO and WT GSVA - score , with color and size representing - log10 ( p - value ) . ( b ) Expression z - score for genes from the " Synaptic vesicle cycle " KEGG term ( mmu04721 ) sorted by combined shrinked log2 fold change ( heatmap in the right column ) in the ten RNA - seq samples . ( c ) Violin plots showing log2 fold change distributions of all genes in the synaptic vesicle cycle pathway compared to a random sample of 1000 genes outside the selected pathway . P - value corresponds to the mean p - value of two - sided Wilcoxon rank - sum tests against 100 random sampling . Points are colored based on log2 fold change . ( d ) GSVA score per individual hippocampi . P - value from a general linear model comparing WT and KO mice . ( e ) Pearson correlation between NOR discrimination index d2 and the RNA - seq derived GSVA values for the synaptic vesicle cycle genes ( b ) . ( f ) KEGG pathway for the synaptic vesicle cycle where elements are colored based on shrinked Log2 fold change between WT and KO mice . 32 Poliński et al . , 2023 33 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Figure 10 . Other KEGG synaptic pathways and molecular phenotypes . ( a - d ) Representation of the KEGG " Dopaminergic synapse " ( mmu04728 , [ a ] ) and " Cholinergic synapse " ( mmu04725 and , [ c ] ) , where each element is colored based on shrinked log2 fold change between WT and KO mice . Violin plots ( b , d ; left ) show the corresponding log2 fold change distribution of all genes in these pathways compared to random samples of 1000 genes outside the selected pathways . P - value corresponds to the mean p - value of two - sided Wilcoxon rank - sum tests against 100 random sampling . Points are colored based on log2 fold change . Boxplots ( b , d ; right ) show the GSVA score per hippocampi RNA - seq sample for the corresponding pathway . P - value from a general linear model comparing WT and KO mice . ( e ) Pearson correlation between the Morris Water Maze performance during day 6 and the RNA - seq GSVA for the Dopaminergic ( left ) and Cholinergic synapse genes ( right ) . ( f ) Representative images of RhoA2G acceptor photobleaching in differentiated neuronal cells ( DIV21 ) . ( g ) Immunocytochemistry for ARC , cFOS and EGR1 positive nuclei in glutamatergic neurons ( DIV21 ) . Merge corresponds to IEG , 𝛃 3 - Tubulin and DAPI staining overlap . Scale bar 100 μm . Supplementary Tables 34 Poliński et al . , 2023 35 Poliński et al . , 2023 Supplementary Methods Mouse embryonic stem cell culture mESC were grown on 0 . 1 % gelatine - coated ( Millipore , ES - 006 - B ) plates ( Thermo Scientific Nunc Cell - Culture Treated Multidishes , 140675 ) with mESC media containing 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and leukaemia inhibitory factor ( LIF ) . Gelatine coating was performed for a minimum of 5 minutes before plating the cells . mESC media was generated by the CRG Tissue Engineering Unit and consisted of : Glasgow’s Minimum Essential Medium ( GMEM ) BHK - 21 ( Gibco , 21710 - 025 ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Seralab , A1060013 EU - 000 - H ) , Minimum Essential Medium non - essential amino acids solution ( Gibco , 11140 - 050 ) , 1mM L - Glutamine ( Gibco , 25030 - 024 ) , 0 . 5mM Sodium Pyruvate ( Gibco , 11360 - 070 ) , 0 . 1mM 2 - Mercaptoethanol ( Millipore , ES - 007 - E ) and recombinant mouse LIF protein 1000U / ml ESGRO ( Millipore , ESG1107 ) . mESCs were routinely passaged using 1x TrypLE Express Enzyme ( Gibco , 12605028 ) . Neuronal differentiation We followed the protocol reported by Bibel et al . , 2007 with slight modifications . In brief , mESCs were harvested by trypsinization with TrypLE Express for 5 min at 37°C ( HeracellTM 240i CO2 Incubator ) . Trypsin was quenched with an equal volume of Embryoid Body ( EB ) medium ( 10 % FBS , 1 % Non - Essential Amino Acids , 1 % Penicillin and Streptomycin , 1 % GlutaMax , 1 % Sodium Pyruvate , 0 . 1 % B - mercaptoethanol , 86 % DMEM High Glucose ) and cells were counted manually using a haemocytometer chamber . mESCs were plated at a density of 4x106 cells per low attachment bacteriological petri dish ( 10 cm Ø ) in 15 ml of EB medium . This marks the start of the experiment and is further referred to as Day In Vitro - 8 ( DIV - 8 ) . Cells were cultured at 37°C with 5 % CO2 . On day 2 medium with the Embryoid Bodies ( EB ) was transferred to the falcon tube , and after 5 min supernatant was aspirated and pelleted EBs were resuspended in fresh EB medium ( DIV - 6 ) . Resuspended EBs were dispensed into new bacteriological Petri dishes ( 10 cm diameter ) in EB medium volume up to 15 ml per dish , and incubated as earlier . On day 4 ( DIV - 4 ) and day 6 ( DIV - 2 ) the medium was changed as before but using EB medium supplemented with 5 μM retinoic acid . On day 8 ( DIV0 ) EBs were collected as before and washed twice with 10 ml of PBS . Subsequently , EBs were resuspended in 1 ml of medium ( 0 . 05 % Trypsin , 0 . 05 % EDTA dissolved in PBS ) and incubated with constant shaking for 3 min in a 37°C water bath . Trypsinized EB’s were quenched with 1 ml of EB medium and cells were pelleted down using Eppendorf 5810R Centrifuge ( 180 g for 5 min ) . The supernatant was aspirated and the cells were resuspended in 5 ml of N2 medium and filtered through a 40μm cell strainer . The cells were counted as before and plated at the density of 1 . 5x105 per 13 mm glass coverslip ( VWR 631 - 1578 ) placed in 24 well plates ( Sigma Aldrich , 11243217001 ) coated with poly - D - Lysine followed by laminin ( Roche ) . Cells were cultured as described above in the incubator set up at 37°C with 5 % of CO2 . After 2 , 24 and 48 h from plating , the N2 medium was changed . Consecutively , media was changed to B27 after 72 h and fresh B27 media was provided every second day . Neuronal differentiation was conducted up to DIV23 . Behavioral and locomotor tests in a neonatal mice A battery of behavioral and motor tests to probe early post - natal neurodevelopment was performed as described in Feather - Schussler and Ferguson ( 2016 ) and Roper et al . 2021 , with some adjustments . In particular , we performed tThe following tests were performed at PDs 4 , 7 , 10 and 14 , unless stated otherwise : Pivoting and walking : Pivoting is a voluntary exploratory behavior displayed by young mice before the forward locomotion . To measure pivoting , mice were placed on a flat surface and allowed to move freely for 1 min . The number of times the animals made a 90° turn was recorded . Pivoting was measured based on the body axis with the help of a cross marking 90° angles on the experimental surface . The latency to walk in a straight line after the end of the pivoting behavior was also measured . Two trials were performed per animal . Righting reflex : Mice ( PD4 or PD7 ) were placed on their back on a padded table top . The time taken for the animals to right themselves back to four paws through 180° was measured for a maximum of 1 min . The direction of turning was also recorded . The experiment was performed three times per animal and the mean calculated . Preyer’s reflex : The Preyer’s reflex is a startle response triggered by sharp auditory stimuli and is used to assess hearing in rodents ( Jero , Donald E . Coling , Anil K . Lal 2001 ) . The experimenter made a sharp clapping sound by stretching and releasing a rubber glove onto the hand in the proximity of the mouse and recorded the presence of rapid whole - body movement . Front - limb suspension : To measure forelimb strength , mice were allowed to grasp with both forepaws on a horizontal bar suspended above a padded drop zone . The latency to fall was measured in three trials per animal and the mean was calculated . Hindlimb suspension : To measure hindlimb strength , mice were lowered into a 50 ml conical tube and released with their hindlimbs hung over the rim . The latency to fall was measured for up to 30 s . Hindlimb posture upon falling was scored 0 - 4 based on the limb spread , as described in Feather - Schussler and Ferguson ( 2016 ) . The experiment was performed only once unless the animal fell down immediately due to bad placement . Grasping reflex : The animals were held by the scruff of the neck and each paw was touched by a toothpick to elicit the grasping reflex . Performance was scored 0 - 4 , assigning one point per paw in the presence of grasping . Left and right paw preference was also noted . Cliff aversion : Cliff aversion tests the labyrinth reflexes , as well as normal strength and coordination . Mice were placed on top of a box elevated ~ 10 cm above the surface , with their snout and part of their forepaws just over the edge . The presence of aversive movement away from the cliff within the subsequent 30 s was recorded . If the pup fell down , one additional trial was performed . Negative geotaxis : Negative geotaxis is an automatic vestibular response to geogravitational stimuli and is used to measure motor coordination in pups . Mice were placed head - facing uphill on a plastic platform with an inclination of 45° covered with Surface Protector Paper and spunlace wipes ( VWR ) , except for PD 4 mice , for which the incline was adapted to 30° . After ~ 5 s , the pups were turned by 180° to face downhill , and their movement was observed for 1 min . Two trials were performed , turning the animal in opposite directions to the start position to avoid left - right bias . Animals were given 0 . 5 points per 45° of turning . If a full 180° turn was performed , the latency was also recorded . Left and right turning preferences were also noted . Homing test : Homing was performed as described in Roper et al . 2021 at PD14 with adjustments . A pup is removed from the home cage and is placed in the corner of a new clean cage ( 12 . 5 × 45 cm , w × h ) facing the wall . The new cage is filled with clean wood shavings , and familiar nesting material from its home cage is provided in the opposite corner . The time for the pup to reach the area containing the nesting material is recorded in seconds , with a maximum time of 2 min . Spontaneous basal locomotor activity in adult mice Spontaneous basal locomotor activity during day and night in an open cage was measured for 23 h using an infrared Actimeter ( PANLAB SA , Spain ) . Individual mice were placed in the open field ( 25 × 25 cm ) , and their position in time was recorded based on the disruption of infrared beams in the x and y axes . The arena was covered with a layer of wood shavings , and sufficient water and food was provided . 36 Poliński et al . , 2023 Novel Object Recognition ( NOR ) test The NOR test measures recognition memory based on the visual paired - comparison paradigm ( Leger et al . 2013 ; Lueptow 2017 ) . The experiment consists of three sessions carried out on consecutive days : habituation , familiarisation , and discrimination . The experiment was performed in a 38 . 5 cm × 38 . 5 cm arena with 38 . 5 cm high dark plastic walls and an open top . The arena was illuminated from the top , and the animals were tracked using video recording and the Smart 3 . 0 software ( System Motor Activity Record and Tracking , PANLAB SA , Spain ) . To minimize stressors interfering with the experiment , a curtain was mounted separating the arena from the experimenters . The arena and the objects were cleaned with 70 % ethanol between each mouse to remove odors . Cages were transferred to the experimental room 30 min before the trials to acclimatize . The test was carried out under slightly aversive conditions ( white light 50 lux ) . Habituation : On the first day , animals were placed into the arena facing the wall and were recorded for 5 min . Their movement was measured separately by the Smart 3 . 0 software in a central ( 20 × 20 cm ) and a peripheral zone . Familiarization : On the second day , two identical objects ( A and B ) were placed in the centre of the box , 18 cm apart . Animals were placed into the box facing the wall and were recorded for 10 min . The time spent exploring each object was measured manually using a timer . The latency to climb on top of the objects was also noted . The exploration was defined as the time spent sniffing the object from a close distance , excluding the time spent climbing on the object . Exploration threshold was established at 20 sec . Discrimination : On the third day , one of the objects was replaced with a novel object of a different shapes and colours . Animals were placed into the box facing the wall as before and were recorded for 5 min . The time spent exploring each object was measured manually using a timer . The latency to climb on top of the old and novel objects was noted . Discrimination and preference indices were calculated for familiarisation and discrimination for each animal based on the manual exploration time recordings , as described in Lueptow et al . ( 2017 ) . Elevated Plus Maze test Anxiety - related behavior was measured in the Elevated plus maze , as described by ( Walf and Frye 2007 ) , with some modifications . The apparatus consisted of a cross - shaped platform with four arms ( 30 cm × 5 cm ) , elevated 40 cm off the ground . Two arms were open and two were enclosed by 15 cm high black methacrylate walls . The open arms create an aversive environment for the mouse , while the dark enclosed space of the closed arms is considered safe . The number of open arm entries and the relative time spent in the open arms is indicative of anxiety - related behavior . Animals that avoid open arms are considered more anxious . Mice were lowered onto the end of the same closed - arm facing the walls and their movement was recorded for 5 min using the Smart 3 . 0 software . Separate zones were set up for each arm , the ends of the arms ( 5 cm × 5 cm ) and the center of the cross ( 5 cm × 5 cm ) . Measurements included the percentage of the time , entries , distance traveled , and average speed in each zone . Rearings and head dippings from the central zone were recorded manually . The arena was cleaned with 70 % ethanol between each animal ' s experiment to remove odors . Morris Water Maze test Learning and visual - spatial memory were tested in the Morris water maze ( Morris 1984 ) , with some modifications ( Vorhees and Williams 2006 ) . In this experiment , mice must learn the spatial location of a submerged platform to escape from the water by building a cognitive allocentric map with the help of external visual cues . A metal tank ( 150 cm in diameter ) was filled with water ( 22 - 23°C ) with added white , non - toxic finger paint to conceal the location of the platform . The platform ( 12 cm in diameter ) was submerged 0 . 7 cm below the water surface . Four quadrants ( NE , NW , SE , SW ) and a platform zone were defined using the Smart 3 . 0 software , with the platform located in the center of one quadrant ( NE ) . A curtain was mounted around the tank to separate it from the experimenters and minimize external visual cues . Three distal visual cues , a square , a triangle and a circle were placed on the curtains around the tank at equal distances , ~ 30 cm above the water surface . The experiment consists of the following phases : training trials , removal , cued trials , and reversal training . Training trials : During training , the mice learn the task and the location of the platform . Four 1 - min training trials were performed each day , with an inter - trial interval of ~ 1 h . Nine training days were performed to achieve sufficient learning . Mice were released into the water . The latency to reach the platform was recorded and the animal was removed from the water . 5 to 15 s platform localization learning and positive reinforcement was used by placing the animal on the platform depending on performance ( goal accomplishment or lack of it ) . Removal : the platform is removed from the tank and the animals are tested for 1 min 24 h after the last training . Animals were released from the location furthest away from the original platform ( SW ) . Mice that remember the location of the platform are expected to spend more time in the platform quadrant ( NE ) . Cued trials : In these guided learning trials , the platform is placed back to its original location and is marked by a local visual cue . Animals have an inherent tendency to swim towards the flag . Therefore , these trials can detect issues with swimming , visual perception and / or motivation to perform the task . A flag ( ~ 10 cm above the water surface ) fixed to a metal bar was used as a local cue . Distant visual cues were removed . Two 1 - min cued trials were performed ~ 1 h after the removal session . Reversal training : During a spatial reversal , the platform is placed opposite to its original location ( SW ) . Mice must flexibly re - learn the spatial location of the platform . Four trials were performed for 2 days , as described in the training trials . In all trials , the latency to reach the platform and platform crossovers were measured . Animals were tracked using the Smart 3 . 0 software , allowing measurement of time , speed and distance traveled in each quadrant . Distances from the platform were used to calculate cumulative search error and mean proximity as additional measurements of spatial learning ( Pereira & Burwell , 2015 ) . Floating was also measured manually . Grip strength test The grip strength experiment is a measurement of neuromuscular function and limb muscle strength . Mice were held by the tail and lowered onto the metal grid of the apparatus ( Grip Strength Meter , Bioseb , France ) , allowing them to grip with their paws . Mice were next pulled backwards along the grid at a consistent speed , while the apparatus measured the force exerted by the animals on the grid . Grip strength was measured for forelimbs through 3 consecutive trials . Best , average , and mean grip strengths were calculated . Rotarod test To evaluate coordination and balance , we employed the Rotarod apparatus ( PanLab Rotarod LE8200 , Spain ) based on ( Deacon 2013 ) . First , animals were trained to walk on the rod at 4 rpm . Training sessions were performed until the mouse managed to walk on the rod for 1 min . After training , test sessions were performed at five constant speed settings ( 7 , 14 , 19 , 24 , 34 rpm ) . Two trials were carried out per speed , with a maximum length of 2 min . Finally , two trials were performed where the rotation speed accelerated constantly from 4 to 40 rpm in 60 s . 37 Poliński et al . , 2023 Beam Balance test Balance , coordination , and vestibular function were measured in the Beam Balance experiment ( Luong et al . 2011 ) . Mice were placed in a standing position in the center of a narrow wooden beam ( 1 cm × 50 cm ) elevated 45 cm above the ground . They were scored 0 - 3 based on how far they walked on the beam within 1 min ( 0 : falls off ; 1 : < 10 cm ; 2 : > 10 cm ; 3 : reaches the end ) . Falls and the number of slips were also recorded , as well as the latency to reach one of the ends and the direction of movement ( left / right ) . Fear conditioning test The fear condition test is used to evaluate Pavlovian learning and memory . Experiments are performed in a 30 × 25 × 33cm chamber with grid floors and opaque square ceilings . After each session , the apparatus was cleaned with 70 % ethanol . During the light cycle , 10 - 12 week old male mice were subjected to behavioral trials ( 7 : 30 am to 1 : 00 pm ) . In three successive days , each mouse was handled and habituated to the investigator for five minutes . Handling took place in a separate room from where the CFC apparatus was . Mice were transferred to the handling room by a wheeled trolley prior to each handling session to familiarize them to the journey . Mice were trained in Context A for 300 s , with three 0 . 6 mA shocks of 2 s duration delivered at 120 s , 180 s and 240 s , respectively . After training mice were placed back in their home cages and were placed in the holding room . Context A testing session lasted 180 s . Testing conditions were identical to training conditioning , except that no shocks were delivered . At the end of each session , mice were placed in their home cages and carted back to the holding room . Packwin 2 . 0 software ( Panlab , Harvard Apparatus ) automatically identified freezing behavior ( > 800 ms immobility ) . Every day of the experiment , cages were calibrated in accordance with manufacturer recommendations . 38