Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 116 ( 2014 ) 4199 – 4204 1877 - 0428 © 2013 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Ltd . Selection and / or peer - review under responsibility of Academic World Education and Research Center . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbspro . 2014 . 01 . 916 ScienceDirect 5 th World Conference on Educational Sciences - WCES 2013 The local territory as a resource for learning science : A proposal for the design of teaching - learning sequences in science education Corina González - Weil a , Cristian Merino - Rubilar b * , Germán Ahumada c , Andoni Arenas d , Victor Salinas d , Paulina Bravo a a Laboratorio de Didáctica de las Ciencias , Instituto de Biología , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso ( PUCV ) , Avenida Universidad 330 , Curauma , Placilla , Valparaíso b Laboratorio de Didáctica , Instituto de Química , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso ( PUCV ) , Avenida Universidad 330 , Curauma , Placilla , Valparaíso c Instituto de Física , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso ( PUCV ) , Avenida Universidad 330 , Curauma , Placilla , Valparaíso . d Laboratorio de Didáctica de la Geografía . Instituto de Geografía , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso ( PUCV ) , Avenida Brasil 2241 , Valparaíso . Abstract The present work arises from the need to reform Science Education , particularly through the contextualization of teaching . It is proposed to achieve this through the use of local territory as a resource for the design of teaching - learning - sequences ( TLS ) . To do this , an interdisciplinary group of researchers and teachers from a Secondary School created a Professional Circle for Reflection on Teaching , which constructed an emerging conceptualization of Territory , analyzed the possibilities of the local area and established a relationship with the national curriculum . On this basis the TLS were designed , with an interdisciplinary aspect , and implemented with pupils aged 14 to 17 . The results show that the contextualization of teaching through the use of local territory is possible , and is positive for pupils , and that collaborative work and reflection by teachers are fundamental for this process . © 2013 The Authors Published by Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved Selection and peer review under the responsibility of Prof . Dr . Servet Bayram Keywords : territory , teaching - learning sequence , science education ; 1 . Introduction Science is a strategic axis of human development , since it implies not only strengthening the critical capacity of a society , but also a contribution to social inclusiveness and equality , considering that today scientific literacy is a universal necessity . Scientific literacy is understood as a set of scientific knowledge , capacities and attitudes which will allow a better understanding of the natural - social medium , the realities established there and the power to act in one ' s Territory participatively and on a well - grounded basis . This has become an important issue , both for educational research and for promoting a scientific culture ( AAAS 1989 ; Driver , Newton and Osborne 2000 ; Ratcliffe and Grace 2003 ; Sadler et al 2007 ) . Chile ' s results in international science tests place the country below the international average , and in particular they show great inequality in learning ( González - Weil , et al . , 2009 ) . This is serious , because the inability to understand scientific contents and the implications of these for everyday life also * Corresponding Author . Tel . : + 56 - 032 - 2274946 E - mail address : cristian . merino @ ucv . cl Available online at www . sciencedirect . com © 2013 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Ltd . Selection and / or peer - review under responsibility of Academic World Education and Research Center . 4200 Corina González - Weil et al . / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 116 ( 2014 ) 4199 – 4204 implies that the pupils are unable to understand their natural and social environment . This in turn makes it difficult to create a sense of responsibility towards the environment , leading in the future to a lack of citizens who can play a part in the development of their country . One reason which explains the low level of the results of science learning is a teaching system which does not sufficiently contextualize the contents of school curricula , and does not link them to the environment in which pupil and school exist . This implies that what they are learning often does not make sense to the pupils , and therefore they lack the motivation to learn . At best , the local area is mentioned as a simple example of some topic , without active teaching techniques , instead of being used as a resource for presenting the pupil with problems rooted in known situations which will help towards a real understanding of the Territory in which he / she lives . In general , this lack of connection between the content taught and the pupil ' s environment is expressed not only in classroom teaching , but also in the relative absence and / or irrelevance of any teachers ' science projects which place value on the natural and cultural environment in which the pupils study and live . Less frequent is the integrated presentation of curriculum contents taken from different subjects , and this is one reason why in general there is no collaborative , interdisciplinary work by teachers and little incentive to carry out such work . Thus , even if the intention exists to foment inter - and multi - disciplinarity through the contents and objectives of the Chilean National Curriculum ( MINEDUC , 2009a ; 2009b ) , focuses and materials are required for a more explicit and concrete proposal for such integration . At the same time , school textbooks , like the majority of teaching materials , are generic throughout the country . Because they are for nationwide distribution , they do not contextualize each particular situation , and therefore do not encourage the use of the local territory by the teacher in his / her teaching , nor understanding of it by the pupils . In this situation , it is of fundamental importance to involve teachers in works of collaborative reflection which will enable them to incorporate the use of the local territory , from a multi - disciplinary viewpoint , into their teaching . This underlies the proposal to work with local territory as a resource for the design of Teaching - Learning Sequences ( TLS ) in sciences . 2 . Literature review The use of territory as a source of research , exploration and experimentation allows pupils to observe , describe , hypothesize , record , analyse , evaluate and appreciate . This will help them to develop their scientific literacy and their capacity to express ideas and experiences , propose their points of view and act on an informed basis . Nevertheless , the implementation of the proposal implies a series of changes in the classroom and in teaching practices . It requires teamwork , to promote dialogue and exchange between pupils and teachers , and among pupils . 2 . 1 . Problem - solving as a learning strategy which will help bring the pupil closer to his / her environment The basis for the generation of scientific knowledge is facing problems which demand the generation of new models , languages and techniques / procedures in order to solve them . This may mean extending knowledge to embrace new phenomena , using an inter - or intra - disciplinary approach , and resolving disagreements . Nevertheless , problem - solving as a learning strategy implies re - thinking these problems as learning situations , in other words , it is they that permit the emergence of new knowledge . They must be real problems ( Lee , 2007 ; Norton et al . , 2007 ; Reigosa and Jimenez - Aleixandre , 2007 ) , in the sense that they ask good questions : that make the pupil think , that he / she can understand and share , and formulate in his own words ( Garlick & Laugksch , 2008 ) . Likewise they must be relevant for the pupil in the context of science learning , in other words , relevant to the subject . They must also connect with global ( territorial ) problems which are of interest to specialists , because they are also problems from which the pupils will learn to become scientists ( Dalongeville , 2007 ; Dunn , 2011 ) . In short , the problems which the pupils have to solve must be relevant to the key ideas of the contents and objectives of the curriculum ; they must take into account the pupils ' prior knowledge ( contents and procedures ) , and they must ask good questions . 2 . 2 . The process of transforming teaching practices to incorporate territory as a teaching resource 4201 Corina González - Weil et al . / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 116 ( 2014 ) 4199 – 4204 The design of new ways of teaching ( TLS ) for science learning , which consider the concept of territory , necessarily involves the transformation of the practices used traditionally by teachers to teach science . According to a report by the Chilean Academy of Sciences , the scientific education of the pupil , particularly in secondary schools , is characterised by the learning of disaggregated contents by rote , with a comprehension of science which is decontextualized and unrelated to everyday experience ( Albertini et al . , 2005 ) . There is therefore an imperious need for a change in teaching practices , from being based on the teacher ' s knowledge to concentrating on the pupil ' s learning process , which requires the teacher to reflect on his / her classroom actions . 2 . 3 . Design of teaching - learning sequences ( TLS ) in sciences One of the important lines of research into science teaching , dating back to the 1980s , involves the design and application of science TLS . One distinctive characteristic of a TLS is its inclusion in a gradual , research - based process , in an evolving framework , with the object of interweaving the pupil ' s perspective with the scientific community ( Méheut & Psillos , 2004 ) . In this particular case , TLS have been designed to allow the interdisciplinary teaching of Sciences involving the use of the local territory . Our ideas are based on the proposals of Méheut ( 2004 ) and Viiri & Savinainen ( 2008 ) , both empirical and theoretical , as well as the methodological tools , the classroom validation processes and the focuses proposed to describe the design of these sequences . 3 . Research methodology 3 . 1 . Participants and context TLS focused on problem - solving were drafted in a partially subsidised private school in the city of Viña del Mar , Chile . In this context , a group of researchers from four disciplines ( Biology , Physics , Geography and Chemistry ) worked in a logic of participative observation with the school ' s teaching team in the following subjects : Biology , Physics , History , Geography and Social Sciences , Mathematics and Philosophy . They were all secondary school teachers , with pupils aged between 14 and 18 , from a middle to low socio - economic background . The research process was supported by a group of Science - pedagogy and Geography university students , and by the school directors . 3 . 2 . Focus and design The focus of our work was interpretative . This research assumes that the knowledge gained from teachers ' contributions and what we can learn from them is epistemologically valid . Likewise this knowledge guides teacher training and / or improvements in educational practices , and is more relevant when illuminated by critical reflection and self - reflection ( Imbernón , 2002 ) . The strategy used was a Professional Circle for Reflection on Teaching , which favours collaboration and dialogue concerning beliefs in teaching , questioning of one another ' s beliefs by participants , argumentation , reflection , construction and consensus of a collective agreement , and taking teaching decisions . The work was divided into four phases : 1 ) Formation of the team and Curricular Mapping , 2 ) Design of TLS , 3 ) Implementation of TLS , 4 ) Monitoring and Evaluation . The TLS developed were validated by experts , by application in the classroom , with data from the pupils and against the national curriculum . 3 . 3 . Curricular mapping A curricular map is a graphic representation of one or more curricular disciplines to enable them to be organized and their contents - learning distinguished . Curricular maps show the general structure of a subject , allowing a general overview of the distribution of the elements of which it is composed , and the relations between them . They 4202 Corina González - Weil et al . / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 116 ( 2014 ) 4199 – 4204 are created using a variety of sources , with various curricular instruments being compared and analysed : Curricular Contents and Objectives , and the Learning Progress Map ( MINEDUC , 2009a ; 2009b ) . Construction took account of the concept of Territory , and how the different contents are linked to the local area . 3 . 4 . Design of Teaching - Learning Sequences ( TLS ) Design of the TLS drew on the result of the curricular mapping , and on the characteristics of the local area around the school , which was where the pupils lived ( geo - referencing ) . These data were obtained by surveys . The guiding strategies for drafting the TLS were basically problem - solving and scientific inquiry . Once designed , the TLS were implemented at different levels and evaluated in the final presentations , given by the pupils at a science fair . 4 . Results and discussion 4 . 1 . Curricular mapping The first result of this process was a document with the consensus achieved in the construction of the concept of Territory by all the participants . This concept was of key importance for orienting the course of subsequent work . The pupil surveys produced a geo - referenced map showing the homes of the school ' s pupils , complemented with photographs of places ( urban or rural spaces ) which hold significance for them . Finally , curricular maps were obtained for all the disciplines involved . A concrete example of this may be cited from the History - Geography area , in ninth grade . The contents refer to six study fields . For five of these , the objective is to understand the 20th century as a period in which the roots of the achievements , problems and conflicts of today ' s society can be found : The two World Wars and the New International Political Order , The World in the second half of the 20th century , The Urbanization Processes of the 20th century , World Population Geography , and The Globalized World are its successes and failures . As an example of these contents , the axis of Migratory Processes was linked to the repercussions which this phenomenon has had in the cities of Viña del Mar and Valparaíso ( the local territory where the school is located and the pupils live ) . Based on this information , the pupils talked about the settlement patterns of the immigrant population and their influence on the political , economic , architectural and cultural development of these cities . The curricular maps for each discipline became raw material for developing interdisciplinary teaching sequences . 4 . 2 . Teaching - Learning Sequences ( TLS ) : The teaching sequences were designed and implemented with an interdisciplinary focus . Thus three teams were formed with teachers from different disciplines : 1 ) Biology , Chemistry and Philosophy ; 2 ) Physics , History - Geography and Chemistry ; 3 ) History - Geography and Mathematics . In this dynamic , the concept of Territory acted as a common focus between the disciplines . The three teams developed their TLS following a learning cycle ( Sanmartí , 2002 ) , consistent with problem - solving and scientific inquiry , consisting in carrying out four types of activity : 1 ) Initial activities , which involved presenting problems or hypotheses ; 2 ) Activities to promote the evolution of the initial models , introduce new variables , identify other ways of observing and explaining , and reformulate the problems ; 3 ) Synthesis , drawing conclusions , structuring of knowledge ; 4 ) Application , transfer to other contexts , generalization . Among the various sequences generated , two general types could be distinguished . The first was a sequence which developed interdisciplinarity and the concept of territory around a common concept : the scientific model ( teams 1 and 2 ) . The object was to generate understanding in pupils of how scientists generate explanations of a particular phenomenon . These phenomena were seen in the local area , particularly the beach . The second type of teaching sequence ( team 3 ) adopted a methodological focus . The object was to achieve convergence in the type of activities required of the pupils . These concentrated on processes of collection by pupils of data about the territory , 4203 Corina González - Weil et al . / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 116 ( 2014 ) 4199 – 4204 through interviews . The way in which these elements were processed varied according to the discipline . In mathematics they were processed quantitatively through frequency tables , while in History and Geography they were processed qualitatively by attaching value to the biographical accounts of the interviewees . 5 . Conclusion In general , this experience provides evidence about an innovative and practicable teaching method for teachers in the school system . The focuses of the work were the collaborative relationship between peers , and curricular analysis as a way of making integrating proposals which improve science learning and skills development among our pupils . Curricular Mapping , in particular , allowed all the curricular instruments designed and established by the Education Ministry to be homogenized and integrated , with the object of inter - relating them under certain learning contents and objectives , which become the foundation for the design and implementation of TLS . The process of implementing the TLS showed that the contextualization of teaching as a function of the local territory is possible , even from an interdisciplinary perspective , and that its use is highly positive , both for motivating the pupil to study science and other sub - sectors involved , and for the link that this can create with contents in relation to their local area . In terms of professional development , the project allowed teachers to participate voluntarily in a space for reflection , in which they were directly involved in the process of taking decisions on the curriculum , and moreover committed themselves to an initiative which allowed them to propose a different way of carrying out the teaching - learning process , which takes into account the origins and interests of their pupils . In this way , the generation of interdisciplinary TLS allowed problems to be identified which were common to the disciplines , and this had the direct effect of making it easier to form the teacher work teams . Acknowledgements The present work is financed by Project DII - PUCV 37 . 265 / 2011 , sponsored by the Research Vice rector’s Office of Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso . We are grateful to them for their permanent support . References Albertini , R . , Cárdenas - Jirón , G . , Babel , J . , Díaz , G . , Eyzaguirre , J . , Labra , A . & Lewin , R . ( 2005 ) . Enseñanza de las ciencias a nivel escolar y formación en ciencia en el pregrado universitario . Santiago de Chile : Academia de Ciencias . American Association for the Advancement of Science . ( 1989 ) . Science for all Americans . Project 2061 . New York : Oxford University Press . Dalongeville , A . ( 2007 ) . La reforma de la enseñanza de la Geografía en Quebec . Urge interpretar la Geografía . Enseñanza de las Ciencias Sociales , 6 , 147 - 157 . Driver , R . , Newton , P . & Osborne , J . ( 2000 ) . Establishing the norms of scientific argumentation in classroom . Science Education , 84 ( 3 ) , 287 – 312 . Dunn , J . M . ( 2011 ) . Location knowledge : assessment , spatial thinking , and New National Geography Standards . Journal of Geography , 110 ( 2 ) , 81 - 89 . Garlick , R . & Laugksch , R . C . ( 2008 ) . Teaching children to ask investigable questions in science . School Science Review , 90 ( 331 ) , 119 - 127 . González - Weil , C . , Martínez , M . , Martínez , C . , Cuevas , K . & Muñoz , L . ( 2009 ) . La Educación científica como apoyo a la movilidad social : desafíos en torno al rol del profesor secundario en la implementación de la indagación científica como enfoque pedagógico . Estudios Pedagógicos , 35 ( 1 ) : 63 - 78 Imbernon , F . ( 2004 ) . La investigación educativa como herramienta de investigación del profesorado : reflexión y experiencias de investigación educativa . Barcelona : Graó . Lee , Y . C . ( 2007 ) . From a museum demonstration to problem solving : Promoting the construction of concepts . Physics Education . 42 , ( 4 ) , 378 - 384 . Méheut , M . & Psillos , D . ( 2004 ) . Teaching - learning sequences : aims and tools for science education research . International Journal of Science Education , 26 ( 5 ) , 515 - 535 . Méheut , M . ( 2004 ) . Designing and validating two teaching - learning sequences about particle models . International Journal of Science Education , 26 ( 5 ) , 605 - 618 4204 Corina González - Weil et al . / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 116 ( 2014 ) 4199 – 4204 MINEDUC . ( 2009a ) . Fundamentos del ajuste curricular para el sector de Ciencias Naturales . Ministerio de Educación de Chile . Santiago de Chile . MINEDUC . ( 2009b ) . Fundamentos del ajuste curricular para el sector de Historia , Geografía y Ciencias Sociales . Ministerio de Educación de Chile . Santiago de Chile . Norton , S . J . , Mcrobbie , C . J . & Ginns , I . S . ( 2007 ) . Problem solving in a middle school robotics design classroom . Research in Science Education , 37 ( 3 ) , 261 - 277 . Ratcliffe , M . & Grace , M . ( 2003 ) . Science education for citizenship . Maidenhead : Open University Press Reigosa , C . & Jimenez - Aleixandre , M . P . ( 2007 ) . Scaffolded problem - solving in the physics and chemistry laboratory : Difficulties hindering students ' assumption of responsibility . International Journal of Science Education . 29 ( 3 ) , 307 - 330 . Sadler , T . D . , Barab , S . A . & Scott , B . ( 2007 ) . What do students gain by engaging in socioscientific inquiry ? Research in Science Education , 37 , 371 – 391 . Viiri , J . & Savinainen , A . ( 2008 ) . Teaching - learning sequences : A comparison of learning demand analysis and educational reconstruction . Lat . Am . J . Phys . Educ . 2 ( 2 ) , 80 - 86 .