Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools M . Lyme Markus The John E . Anderson Graduate School of Management at UCLA 405 Hilgard Avenue , Room 5350A Los Angeles , CA 90024 - 1481 Terry Connolly Department of Management and Policy College of Business and Public Administration University of Arizona Tucson , Arizona 85721 INTRODUCTION At CSCW ‘88 , Jonathan Grudin examined a number of applications , such as automatic meeting scheduling and project management tools , the successes of which “have consistently fallen far short of expectations . ” He identified three factors contributing to the failure of CSCW applications 1 ) “the disparity between those who will benefit from an application and those who must do additional work to support it , ” 2 ) a tendency of managerial decision makers to favor CSCW applications that benefit themselves at the expense of other users , and 3 ) the “extreme difficulty of evaluating” the collective benefits and costs of these applications [ GrudSS ] . In this paper , we attempt to extend Grudin’s important analysis of CSCW application failure in two ways . First , we demonstrate that failure may occur even when : 1 ) there are no asymmetries between those who benefit from an application and those who do extra work , and 2 ) decision makers do not confuse their own personal benefits with the collective benefit . We argue that failure may also be due to interdependence in the payoffs derived from CSCW applications : Payoffs to one user may depend on the behavior of others . Second , in the process of making our arguments about payoff interdependence , we employ some simple graphical tools that may help CSCW designers and managerial decision makers evaluate applications and improve their chances for success . The plan of the paper is as follows . We first define some basic concepts and assumptions . Next , using the graphical analysis techniques of Schelling [ Sche78 ] , we consider a simple example of interdependence involving a congested shared text - processing system . This example helps us examine our more interesting examples : “discretionary databases , ” such as automatic meeting schedulingsystems , and “critical mass” technologies , such as electronic mail . CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 371 BASIC CONCEPlS AND ASSUMITIONS CSCW applications provide a variety of benefits and costs to users . Benefits may include financial gains , savings in time or effort , and such intangibles as pleasure in novelty and competitive reputational advantage . Costs may include charges to subunit budgets , out - of - pocket expenses , effort costs such as delays and errors , and intangible expenses such as embarrassment and annoyance . It is often the case that the benefits and costs of CSCW applications to one user are contingent on the behavior of other users - - a situation we call interdependence . At least two types of interdependence are possible . One type occurs when a person’s ability to use an application in one way depends on another individual’s different use of the same application , as when someone who extracts reports from a database depends on others to input the necessary data . This usage interdependence occurs , for example , between the speakers and the listeners of a voice application , and among the managers , secretaries , and subordinates who use an automatic meeting scheduling system differently [ GrudSS ] . When usage interdependence is present , one must assume that different types of users experience different or asymmetrical payoffs from the application . A second type of interdependence is the subject of this paper . Payoff interdependence occurs when one person’s use of an application creates costs or benefits ( negative or positive externalities ) for others who use the application in essentially similar ways . In general , payoff interdependence derives from the proportion or composition of group , subunit , or organizational members who use a particular application . When payoff interdependence is present , one may assume either that all users experience similar , or symmetrical , payoffs , or that the payoffs are asymmetrical . In general , different users will receive different payoffs from CSCW applications [ Grud88 ] . For example , the value of a communication network to a potential adopter is likely to depend , not just on the number of other network users , but also on who those users are [ Roh174 ] . However , for the sake of simplicity , we will consider only symmetrical payoffs in this paper . Symmetrical payoffs might occur when a group of peers , each equally likely to initiate a group meeting , adopt an automatic meeting scheduling system . We also assume that individuals have discretion , that is , freedom to choose whether or not to adopt CSCW applications . Of course , it is possible that decision makers will mandate and enforce usage , regardless of individual preferences [ Mark90 ] . We start , however , with the behavior of potential adopters who have not yet been constrained by organizational policies . This allows us to consider managerial interventions like coercion as a potential response to the outcomes of individuals’ choices , rather than as a starting condition affecting individuals’ behavior . LEAVING A CONGESTED SHARED TDCT - PROCESSING SYSTEM Our first example involves a subunit that has installed a shared minicomputer system for text - processing . The system is being used at near full capacity , so that users are experiencing slow response time and difficulty gaining access during peak hours . In response to this situation , the subunit manager has acquired a second machine and announced that it is available for use . In such a situation , people are likely to behave in ways that may not result in maximum payoffs for the subunit as a whole . The members’ two courses of action are to switch to the new machine ( represented as A for Adopt ) or to remain on the old machine ( D for Don’t Adopt ) . In Figure la , the vertical axis CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 372 represents the payoff associated with either course of action . The horizontal axis represents the number , n , of subunit members who have made the choice to switch , up to a maximum of N , the total membership of the subunit . The line representing the payoff to the switchers ( A ) starts high , since the new machine is initially unoccupied and the first switcher has full use of it . However , as more and more people switch , the payoff declines , because the new machine itself becomes congested . By contrast , the payoff to those who remain on the congested older machine starts out low , but begins to rise as others leave it for the new machine . Eventually , the payoff to those who stay with the old machine exceeds the payoff to those who switch . At the crossover point , where N * individuals have switched and N - N * have stayed , the members of both groups enjoy equal benefits , and no individual has any incentive to switch . Thus , the situation has reached an equilibrium . la Payoff lb Payoff t lc Payoff t D = Don’t Adopt N + N Nmax Number of Adopters d 0 N * Nmax N Number of Adopters d 0 Nmax N’ N Number of Adopters d Figure 1 . Leaving a Congested Text - Processing System CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 373 How would a subunit manager ( assumed , for the moment , to be free of the biases identified by Grudin [ GrudSS ] ) evaluate this outcome ? Our assumptions of symmetrical payoffs allow us to speak meaningfully of the “total” payoff to the subunit at a given level of adoption . For n = N’ adopters , total payoff can be computed as the payoff for the adopters ( A ) at the point where n = N’ multiplied by the number of adopters ( N’ ) , plus the payoff for nonadopters ( D ) at the point where n = N’ multiplied by the number of nonadopters ( N - N’ ) . Dividing this sum by N gives the weighted average payoff for n = N’ . The curved dotted line in Figure la represents the weighted average payoff for all values of n . We call this the collective or subunit payoff . In Figure la , the highest point or maximum ( Nmax ) of the subunit payoff curve happens to occur at the point where the A and D lines cross ( coinciding with point N * ) , so that the equilibrium point also represents the highest payoff for the subunit . This is , however , not the general case . Many factors can affect the A and D lines and the location of the equilibrium point , such as the performance of the new machine relative to the old , the costs associated with learning a new interface , and charging policies established by subunit managers . In Figure lb , equilibrium is reached with fewer adopters ( N * ) than are needed to achieve the greatest subunit payoff ( Nmax ) . By contrast , in Figure lc , the number of switchers exceeds the number that provide the highest payoff to the subunit as a whole . In general , there is no reason to suppose that the equilibrium distribution of users between the two machines will maximize subunit payoff . This suggests that managers may wish to intervene in order to achieve more favorable outcomes . They could , for example , require some people to switch , or impose selective charges or rebates to influence users toward the optimal distribution . It should be noted , however , that the actual costs of misallocation in Figures lb and lc are quite modest . If these payoff curves approximate those found in practice , attempts to shift the distribution of users between the two machines may not be worth the effort . ( Note also that our analysis does not take into account the direct costs of the new machine and other important situational factors which are beyond the scope of our example ) . The key point is that the non - optimaloutcomes in these examples stem from the inherently interdependent nature of shared text - processing systems : Declines in payoff due to increasing numbers of users are intimately linked to the benefits of resource sharing . smwG up A DlscRmorww DATABASE Our second example involves an automatic meeting scheduling system introduced into a task group of peers who are equally likely to arrange group meetings . In this situation , “adopters” are those who routinely input their schedules into the system ; once they do , the information is available to be used by adopters and nonadopters alike . Thus , the payoffs to both adopters and nonadopters increase as the number of adopters increase , but nonadopters are always better off than adopters , because they have not had to pay the contribution costs associated with inputting data . Schelling [ Sche78 ] called such situations multi - person prisoner’s dilemmas ; they are important because they may have the unfortunate effect of leading a group of people , acting in their own self - interests , into behavior that defeats the self - interest of all . We believe that many CSCW applications exhibit similar characteristics ; we refer to them as discretionarv databases [ Thor87 ] , ] Conn90b ] . In Figure 2a , the payoff lines for adopters ( A ) and nonadopters ( D ) are parallel , and the difference P2 - P1 represents the contributions that adopters have to make , for example , the effort required to input their calendars into the meetingschedulingsystem . Regardless of how many others adopt , each individual is always better off not adopting . Thus , the most likely CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 374 outcome is that no one will adopt ( n = O ) , yielding a payoff of P > This is a stable equilibrium , because at this point no one has any incentive to change . What is unfortunate about this situation is that everyone would be better off if they all input their schedules : The payoff where all N members adopt ( P3 ) is greater than the payoff where none adopt ( PI ) . ( In fact , the collective or group payoff - - the dotted line in Figure 2a - - reaches its maximum at the point where n = N . ) It is worth emphasizing that all members in this situation would prefer the payoff they would receive if everyone contributed to the database . However , each member more prefers the outcome where she alone does not contribute . As each individual attempts to realize this outcome , all fail to contribute , and everyone ends up worse off . 2a P3 ? P2 Payoff Pl A = Adopt D = Don’t Adopt 0 N ' Nmax - N Number of Adopters 4 2b D Payoff 0 Nmax N Number of Adopters & Figure 2 . The Discretionary Database Situation An unbiased manager , seeing the unfortunate consequences of letting things take their natural course , might want to intervene in order to increase the chances of a higher group payoff . One such intervention strategy might be to subsidize contributions , for example , by charging CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 375 nonadopters , but not adopters , for using the system . This might , in effect , interchange the A and D payoff lines , making adoption the preferred behavior in all cases . Another strategy takes advantage of an interesting feature of the situation : the possibility of a viable coalition of members who all agree to adopt the system . In Figure 2a , N’ represents the smallest number of adopters required to yield a payoff to adopters that is at least as large as the payoff they would get if no one adopted . With fewer than N’ members , members of such a coalition would be worse off than if they did not adopt , and it would be likely to disband . With N’ or more members , however , the coalition would be viable , once formed . Obviously , however , nonadopters could “ride free” on the contributions of such a coalition , and the coalition would be unlikely to expand beyond size N’ . And , clearly , the magnitude of N’ depends on the steepness or flatness of the A and D payoff curves . Where the payoff curves rise very sharply up to the right , a viable coalition might not require many members , but as the curves flatten out , a viable coalition may approach total group membership in size , and thus would be much harder to form . In Figure 2a , the collective payoff curve reaches its maximum at the point where everyone contributes . But it is perhaps the more usual situation that the collective payoffs reach a maximum and begin to decline before everyone contributes , as in Figure 2b . Such a situation might arise if the costs of contributing to a discretionary database increase with the number of contributors , as when new adopters demand that early adopters supply additional data . Collective payoffs might also peak and decline in situations where the A and D payoff curves increase at a decreasing rate ( not shown ) . For example , since everyone in a group may attend regularly scheduled staff meetings , the information in a scheduling system contains some redundancies . As a result , the first adopters contribute information of higher value than that of later adopters . ( The cynic might argue that this is the case with academic publication : Collective payoffs might increase if contributions were reduced ! ) In situations like this , managerial interventions that increase the number of contributors beyond Nmax may result in a lower collective payoff . Laboratory experiments have confirmed the general prediction that discretionary databases will have low participation rates [ ConnS ) Oa ] , [ Conn90b ] . The most worrying implication is that , without policy interventions , CSCW applications with the characteristics of discretionary databases may not be used , despite the fact that people might be much better off if they used them . Almost as worrying is the fact that the obvious interventions may have the perverse effect of encouraging the contribution of useless or harmful information . As before , these undesirable outcomes derive from the inherent interdependence of discretionary databases , the same characteristic that provides the benefits . CREATlNG A CRlTlCAL MASS Our last example concerns a subunit that has just made available to its members an electronic mail ( email ) system for intra - unit communication . Members of this subunit can communicate among themselves by several means other than emaik face - to - face meetings , the telephone , and interoffice mail . In this situation , the first adopters of the new medium initially receive lower payoffs than those who do not adopt , because they incur contribution costs while receiving limited benefits : Email , like the telephone , provides no benefits to isolated users . However , when there are many other users , the benefits increase , so that the payoffs of using email may significantly exceed the payoffs of using alternative media . The payoffs for adopting and not adopting email cross , producing two equilibria , not one [ Sche78 ] : Which outcome occurs depends on the number of adopters relative to a critical point , hence the term critical mass . As with discretionary databases , it can be difficult to promote adoption in CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 376 critical mass situations , and equilibrium behavior may result in less than optimal payoffs for the subunit as a whole park87 ] , park90 ] . In Figure 3a , the A and D payoff lines cross at the critical point ( n = Ncrit ) . When there are fewer than Ncrit adopters , individuals are better off if they don’t adopt . When there are more than Ncrit adopters , individuals are better off adopting . Thus , rather than converging toward the crossover point , as in Figure 1 , individuals in this situation will tend to diverge toward the extremes in which either no one adopts or everyone does ; which occurs will depend on the number of adopters at the outset . If the starting number of adopters is less than Ncrit , the payoffs to the adopters will be less than if they had not adopted , and they will tend to defect . On the other hand , should the starting number of users exceed the critical point , the payoffs for adoption increase , attracting additional adopters . On both sides of the critical point , adoption or defection is self - reinforcing , and only the extremes are stable . In Figure 3a , the payoffs to adopters ( A ) increase with the number of adopters , and so do the payoffs to nonadopters ( D ) , albeit at a lower rate . This may reflect the fact that as the number of email users increase , they slightly reduce their use of alternative media . Nonadopters , therefore , may have an easier time scheduling conference rooms and may get fewer busy signals when they place telephone calls . In this situation , the collective or subunit payoff , shown by the dotted line , reaches its maximum when everyone adopts : The subunit payoff when no one adopts ( n = 0 ) is worse than the payoffs for many other values of n . Thus , an unbiased subunit manager may be motivated to intervene to achieve the higher payoffs associated with full use of email . One strategy for accomplishing this might be to mandate use of the system . Others might include subsidizing the costs of adopting it or increasing the costs associated with the alternatives , e . g . , raising telephone charges . A factor favoring the use of such strategies is that they are only needed until the critical point is reached ; after that , adoption and use are self - reinforcing . In Figure 3b , the payoffs to nonadopters ( D ) decrease as the number of adopters increase , while the payoffs to adopters ( A ) increase with increasing numbers of adopters . This might occur , for example , when nonadopters of email miss out on important information communicated only through email . An interesting feature of Figure 3b is that the subunit payoffs when no one adopts equal those when everyone does . Thus , an unbiased manager may be indifferent whether email is used in the subunit or not ! Figure 3c illustrates an even more pessimistic scenario . In this case , the subunit as a whole is better off when everyone adopts than when no one does . However , the subunit payoff with no adopters is greater than the payoff from the time the first person adopts until there are substantially more than Ncrit adopters . In other words , unless the number of adopters approaches 100 % of the subunit , the subunit as a whole would be better off if no one adopted . Again , the source of failure in these examples is the inherent interdependence of CSCW applications . CSCW ‘90 Proceedings 377 October 1990 3a Ncrit Nmax = N Number of Adopters _ _ ) 3b Payoff t Nmax = O Ncrit NmaxeN Number of Adopters _ _ ) 3c Payoff t 0 Ncrit Nmru = N Number of Adopters _ _ ) Figure 3 . The Critical Mass Situation CONCLUSION In this paper , we have argued that interdependence in the payoffs to be achieved from CSCW applications represents a classic dilemma for designers and managerial decision makers alike . On the one hand , interdependence is intimately linked with the benefits to be derived from CSCW , as opposed to single - user , applications . On the other hand , inlerdependencecan lead to the failure of these applications to be adopted or to yield full benefits lo individuals , groups , subunits , and organizations . Understanding interdependence may , therefore , enable designers and managers to improve the chances of CSCW application success . CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 378 Fortunately , relatively simple analytical tools are available for initial investigations of interdependence in CSCW applications . An obvious next step in understanding interdependence is to extend the analyses begun here with more realistic starting assumptions than the ones we have used - - that payoffs are symmetric , that individual choice is free , that managers are unbiased , that payoffs are linear and well - specified , and that discretionary databases yield no benefits to independent users , among others . Consider the first assumption . Rather than assuming all members to have the same payoffs , one might assume that all members experience the same kinds of costs and benefits in different quantities . For example , one might assume that individuals have different thresholds [ Gran78 ] for a particular behavior : Some people may want to join an email network even if only one other person does also ; many others may want to join only after a good number have already done so ; and a few may hold out until almost everyone else has adopted . Even small changes in the distribution of thresholds might have large effects upon email adoption . Alternatively , one might assume that members may occupy different structural positions [ Burt871 with respect to CSCW applications , affecting not only the quantity but also the quality of the payoffs they receive from an application . For example , as Grudin [ Grud88 ] has noted , managers , secretaries , and subordinates may experience qualitatively different payoffs from an automatic meeting scheduling program . The number and nature of these structural positions may be important contributors to CSCW application success or failure . Similarly , analyses varying the other assumptions , both singly and in combination , should be conducted as well . At some point , perhaps quickly , the limits of analytic approaches to the study of interdependence in CSCW applications will be reached . Therefore , understanding interdependence will also require basic empirical social research . For example , some of the implications of the theoretical analyses outlined above can be tested in laboratory settings . However , field research is also needed for purposes of behavioral description and theory generation . Such research may not be perceived as immediately useful by CSCW designers struggling with current design problems in state - of - the - art technologies and interfaces . Nevertheless , it is our belief that only basic social research will provide long - run solutions to the problems arising from interdependence in CSCW applications . If we have a recommendation beyond that of further research , it is that designers and managerial decision makers should look carefully at the real costs and benefits of CSCW applications , in the contexts of their use , with a particular eye to interdependence among potential users . As the simplified analyses sketched here suggest , the implications 01 inlerdependencc for individuals , groups , subunits , and organizations using CSCW applications may be far from intuitive and far from those intended . ACKNOWLEDGEMEN - B The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments of Jonathan Grudin , Mark Silver , and several anonymous reviewers . REFERENCES [ Burt871 Burt , R . S . , “Social Contagion and Innovation : Cohesion Versus Structural Equivalence , ” American Journal of Sociology , 92 ( 1987 ) 1287 - 1335 . CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 379 [ Conn90a ] [ Conn90b ] [ Gran78 ] [ Grud88 ] [ Marks71 [ Mark901 [ Roh174 ] [ Sche7S ] [ Thor871 Connolly , T . & Porter , A L . , “Discretionary Databases in Forecasting , ” Journal of Forecasting , 9 ( 1990 ) , 1 - 12 . Connolly , T . & Thorn , B . K . , “Discretionary Databases : Theory , Data and Implications , ” In J . Fulk & C . W . Steinfield ( eds . ) , Perspectives on Organizations and New In & mation Te & . noIogy , Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications , 1990 . Granovetter , M . , “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior , ” American Journal of Sociology 83 ( 1978 ) , 1420 - 1443 . Grudin , J . , “Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Design and Evaluation of Organizational Interfaces , ” & oce & in @ of the Conference on Computer ~ upported Cooperative Work , Portland , OR ( 1988 ) , 85 - 93 . Markus , M . L . , “Toward a ‘Critical Mass’ Theory of Interactive Media : Universal Access , Interdependenceand Diffusion , ” CommunicationResearch , 14 ( 1987 ) , 491 - 511 . Markus , M . L . , “Toward a ‘Critical Mass’ Theory of Interactive Media , ” In J . Fulk & C . W . Steinfield ( eds . ) , Perspecdves on Organizations and New Information Technology , Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications , 1990 . Rohlfs , J . , “A Theory of Interdependent Demand for a Communication Service , ” The Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science , 5 ( 1974 ) , 16 - 37 . Schelling , T . C . , Micromotives and Macrobehavior , New York : W . W . Norton , 1978 . Thorn , B . K . & Connolly , T . , “Discretionary Data Bases : A Theory and Some Empirical Findings , ” CommunicationResearch , 14 ( 1987 ) , 512 - 528 . Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permisssion of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission , 0 1990 ACM 089791 - 402 - 3 / 90 / 0010 / 0380 $ 1 SO CSCW ‘90 Proceedings October 1990 380