Molecular Structure , Function , and Dynamics of Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Tom Kirchhausen 1 , David Owen 2 , and Stephen C . Harrison 3 1 Department of Cell Biology , Harvard Medical School / PCMM , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 2 Department of Clinical Biochemistry , Cambridge Institute for Medical Research , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 2XY , United Kingdom 3 Jack and Eileen Connors Structural Biology Laboratory , Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 Correspondence : kirchhausen @ crystal . harvard . edu Clathrin is a molecular scaffold for vesicular uptake of cargo at the plasma membrane , where its assembly into cage - like lattices underliesthe clathrin - coated pits of classical endocytosis . This review describes the structures of clathrin , majorcargo adaptors , and other proteins that participate in forming a clathrin - coated pit , loading its contents , pinching off the membrane as a lattice - enclosed vesicle , and recycling the components . It integrates as much of the structural information as possible at the time of writing into a sketch of the principal steps in coated - pit and coated - vesicle formation . R eorganization of cellular membranes and transport of components from one lipid - bi - layer - bounded compartment to another deter - mine much of the internal structure of a cell . Clathrin , a principal molecular scaffold for pro - cesses of this kind , forms a lattice - like coat on and around membranes . Its best - studied role is in classical endocytosis—the subject of this col - lection . It also participates in certain phagocytic events ( e . g . , internalization of some bacteria ) . Much of the rest of the membrane - associated molecular apparatus may be different in the two cases . We refer to the clathrin - coated pits and - coated vesicles of classical endocytosis as the “canonical” clathrin pathway and to the clathrin - actin assemblies of phagocytic process - es as a “noncanonical” pathway . Clathrin also operates along some intracellular trafﬁc routes , such as transport between the trans - Golgi net - work ( TGN ) and endosomes . The physiology and the biochemistry of clathrin - scaffolded in - tracellular events are at present less precisely deﬁned than those of transfers originating at the plasma membrane . This review describes the structure of clathrin - coated vesicles and in - troduces the major components that interact to organize clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Based ondirectobservationsofprocessesinthecanon - ical pathway at the plasma membrane , we out - line events that occur during the genesis of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . Many of these processes are discussed in much greater detail in other articles in this collection . What we now call “clathrin - coated pits” were ﬁrst observed by Roth and Porter in their studies of yolk - protein uptake by mosquito oocytes ( Roth and Porter 1964 ) . They found yolk - containing “bristle - coated” pits and vesi - Editors : Sandra L . Schmid , Alexander Sorkin , and Marino Zerial Additional Perspectives on Endocytosis available at www . cshperspectives . org Copyright # 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved ; doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016725 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 1 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from cles at the cell surface and “naked” vesicles at more internal positions , sometimes fusing with large storage granules , and they outlined a path - wayof invagination , pinching , uncoating , trans - port , and fusion . Pearse subsequently identiﬁed the bristle - coated structures with a particular vesicular fraction isolated from brain , character - ized the coat protein , and named it clathrin , because of the cage - like character of its assem - bled state ( Pearse 1976 , 1975 ) . The discovery by Anderson , Brown , and Goldstein that low - den - sity lipoprotein ( LDL ) uptake proceeds through similar vesicles led to a general description of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and to proposals for many of the molecular mechanisms studied subsequently in speciﬁc detail ( Anderson et al . 1977 ; Goldstein et al . 1979 ) . The coated structures isolated from brain vary in diameter from (cid:2) 700 to 1000 A˚ ; the en - docytic - coated vesicles observed in thin sec - tions of insect or vertebrate epithelial cells and ﬁbroblasts are generally slightly larger ( 1000 – 1500 A˚ ) . Heuser ( 1980 ) , using rapid - freeze methods , examined the inner plasma - mem - brane surface of various types of cells adhering to a substrate and found large ( 1000 – 2000 A˚ in diameter ) , ﬂat , hexagonal networks of clathrin , in addition to standard coated pits . Aggeler and Werb ( 1982 ) found similar extended arrays sur - rounding latex beads in the course of phagocytic uptake by macrophages . They detected such ar - rays where the plasma membrane of these cells contacted the substrate , but not elsewhere . The apparent coexistenceof closed or tightly curved structures with open , ﬂat ones led some to suggest that the latter can transform into the former ( Heuser 1980 ) . The molecular organi - zation of clathrin lattices shows that such a pro - cesswould involve too drastic a deconstruction / reconstruction to be a plausible mechanism ( Kirchhausen 2009 ) , and direct observations in living cells now show that canonical coated pits form de novo ( Ehrlich et al . 2004 ; Perrais and Merriﬁeld 2005 ; Saffarian et al . 2009 ; Co - cucci et al . 2012 ; Aguet et al . 2013 ) . Association of the largerarrays with distinct cellular process - es ( some of which may have endocytic function ) resolves the confusion ( Saffarian et al . 2009 ) . Repeated suggestions in the literature that ﬂat arrays can rearrange into curved lattices ignore the molecular properties of the clathrin trimer and the speciﬁcity of contacts between triskeli - ons within a coat ( Kirchhausen 2000 ) . CLATHRIN - REQUIRING PATHWAYS OF LIGAND UPTAKE The Canonical Pathway The uptake of transferrin ( Tf ) by the transferrin receptor ( TfR ) and of LDL by its receptor ( LDLR ) has come to deﬁne the canonical clath - rin - dependent pathway . Early work showed that LDL and epidermal growth factor ( Car - pentieret al . 1982 ) or Tf and asialoorosomucoid ( Neutra et al . 1985 ) bound to their respective receptors could occupy the same coated pit and hence that an individual coated structure could engulf multiple species of cargo . A large number of other receptors transit the same route . Se - quences ( “sorting signals” ) in the receptor cy - toplasmic tails determine inclusion , and vari - ous adaptors , especially the heterotetrameric adaptor complex AP2 , bind speciﬁcally to these signal segments while also associating with clathrin ( Ohnoetal . 1995 ; seealsoTraubandBo - nifacino 2013 ) . Endocytic membrane reuptake after neurotransmitter release from synaptic vesicles appears to follow a closely related mech - anism . Clathrin - coated vesicles from this recy - cling process that have been isolated from mam - malian brain are the principal source of material for most biochemical and structural analyses . The presence of brain - speciﬁc isoforms of clathrin light chains ( Jackson et al . 1987 ; Kirch - hausen et al . 1987 ) , auxilin ( Umeda et al . 2000 ) , dynamin ( Urrutia et al . 1997 ) , AP180 ( Bushlin et al . 2008 ) , and various other proteins of the presynaptic membrane - recycling pathway may reﬂect features of the clathrin cycle in synapses that are not shared with classical , receptor - me - diated endocytosis as studied in epithelial cells and ﬁbroblasts . Noncanonical Pathways Invasion of nonphagocytic cells by certain bac - teria , such as Listeria , Yersinia , and Salmonella , T . Kirchhausen et al . 2 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from requires clathrin ( Veiga and Cossart 2005 ; Veiga et al . 2007 ; Bonazzi et al . 2012 ; see also Cossart and Helenius 2014 ) . These pathogens enter by a so - called “zippering” mechanism , in which as - sembly of actin ﬁlaments pushes the host - cell membrane outward around the bacterium . The actin recruitment depends on formation of extended clathrin patches , which may resem - ble the arrays formed in macrophages during ingestion of latex beads or on the ventral sur - face of cells growing on a glass or plastic sur - face . Assembly of the actin pedestal organized by noninvasive enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) also requires clathrin ( Veiga et al . 2007 ) . The direct association of clathrin recruit - ment with actin assembly is a characteristic of these clathrin - dependent processes that may distinguish them from the canonical endocytic pathway . Although present along with some of its interacting partners such as Abp1 , Arp3 , and cortactin ( Boucrot et al . 2006 ; Boulant et al . 2011 ; Taylor et al . 2011 ) , actin is not ordinarily necessary for uptake of transferrin receptor or normal coated - pit dynamics in various cells in culture ( Boucrot et al . 2006 ; Cureton et al . 2010 ; Boulant et al . 2011 ) . Actin becomes essential , however , if membrane tension or cargo size pre - vents vesicle closure ( Boulant et al . 2011 ) . In yeast cells , in which the clathrin lattice does not close off completely , actin is a constitutive participant in coat maturation ( Engqvist - Gold - stein and Drubin 2003 ) , as it is for uptake of “coated plaques” in mammalian cells ( see be - low ) ( Saffarian et al . 2009 ) . STRUCTURE AND BIOCHEMISTRY OF CLATHRIN - COATED VESICLES The principal components of coated vesicles isolated from various sources are the heavy and light chains of clathrin and the four sub - units of the heterotetrameric “adaptorcomplex - es” ( Kirchhausen 2000 ; Blondeau et al . 2004 ; Girard et al . 2005 ; Borner et al . 2006 , 2012 ) . The heterotetrameric adaptors link the clathrin coat and the membrane bilayer , and they are the principal cargo - recognition molecules . There are also several more - specialized adaptor pro - teins , which recognize particular receptors ; the specialized adaptors often interact with both clathrin and with the heterotetrameric adap - tors , increasing the repertoire of cargo that can be sorted ( see Traub and Bonifacino 2013 ) . Ad - ditional abundant proteins include compo - nents of the uncoating machinery ( auxilin - 1 and - 2 and Hsc70 ) , AP180 / CALM , a molecule that recruits VAMP2 , 7 and 8 , RME - 6 , a Rab5 GEF , and HIP1R ( huntingtin - interacting - pro - tein - 1 related ) , an actin regulator that associates with clathrin light chains . Various “nonstruc - tural” proteins that inﬂuence proper assembly and budding ( e . g . , Eps15 , epsin , intersectin , and FCHo1 / 2 ) are generally excluded from the ma - ture coated vesicle ( Tebar et al . 1996 ; Blondeau et al . 2004 ; Henne et al . 2010 ) . Clathrin Clathrin is a trimer of three heavy chains , each with an associated light chain ( Kirchhausen and Harrison 1981 ; Ungewickell and Branton 1981 ) . The heavy chain has an amino - terminal , b - pro - peller domain with seven WD40 repeats , fol - lowed in the polypeptide chain by 42 a - helical zig - zags of roughly 30 amino acid residues each , a longer a - helix at the threefold contact , and a 45 - residue carboxy - terminal segment with poorly deﬁned structure ( Fig . 1 ) ( Fotin et al . 2004b ) . Thecarboxy - terminalsegmentcontains a short region with an amino acid sequence that is preferentially recognized by Hsc70 and re - quired for Hsc70 - facilitated uncoating ( Rapo - port et al . 2008 ; Bo¨cking et al . 2011 ) . The 42 zig - zags that make up the bulk of the polypep - tide chain create an extended , gently curved “leg” for the clathrin triskelion ( from the Greek for “a three - legged structure” ) , with the b - pro - peller “terminal domain” at its tip . The light chains , of which there are two species in mam - malian cells , each with alternative splice forms , associate with the threefold - proximal segment of the heavy - chain leg , through a long , central a - helix ( Kirchhausen et al . 1987 ; Kirchhausen and Toyoda 1993 ; Kirchhausen 2000 ; Chen et al . 2002 ; Fotinetal . 2004b ; ChenandBrodsky2005 ; Wilbur et al . 2008 ) . The amino - and carboxy - terminallight - chainregionsaredisordered ; they may determine physiological partners , as shown Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 3 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Heavy chain A B D C α Ankle Distalsegment Knee ProximalsegmentTripod helix 1 330 542 838 1133 1279 159716301675 Light chains 1 ~ 230 – 250 Distalsegment Ankle Linker Knee Light chain Terminaldomain QLMLT Proximalsegment Tripod Tripod QLMLT Tripod L i gh t c ha i n L i g h t c h a i n QLMLT Terminal domain Linker Figure 1 . Clathrin . ( A ) Organization of the heavy - and light - chain polypeptide chains . The name or phase designating various segments appears above the corresponding region of the sequence . Human cells have two lightchains ( LCa andLCb ) , eachwithtissue - speciﬁcsplice variants , yielding therangeoflengthsshown . There is no detectable preference of one or the other for association with a heavy chain ; the central , a - helical segment , which mediates heavy - chain association , is almost completely conserved in all light - chain forms . A second heavy - chain gene in human cells encodes a paralog found in muscle and fat and involved in intracellular trafﬁc , but not in endocytosis ; it does not bind light chains . ( B , left ) Full a - carbon ( C a ) representation of a clathrin triskelion , viewed along itsthreefold axis as if from the outside of acoat . The various segments of the heavychain are labeled , andthe central a - helicalregion of thelight chain on each leg is alsoshown . ( C ) Packing of triskelions in a clathrin coat . The structure shown is that of a “D6 barrel , ” one of the simplest and smallest coated - vesicle lattices . Each triskelion is drawn as a “worm” extending from the hook - like representation of the terminal domain on the inside of the shell to the vertex of the triskelion at the outside . ( Blue ) One triskelion , in an orientation similar to the one in B . ( D , left ) Side view of the triskelion , in the same representation and scale as in B . ( Right ) Blowup of the part of a triskelion close to the threefold axis , including the tripod and the disordered , carboxy - terminal segment with a site ( QLMLT ) for Hsc70 binding . ( From Xing et al . 2010 ; adapted , with permission , from the authors . ) T . Kirchhausen et al . 4 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from by recruitment ofHIP1Rby theamino - terminal segment of both species ( Chen and Brodsky 2005 ; Newpher et al . 2006 ) . The Clathrin Lattice Puriﬁed clathrin can reassemble ( at pH , 6 . 5 ) into empty , coat - like structures called “cages” ( Kirchhausen and Harrison 1981 ) . The presence of AP2 or a fragment of one of its components enhances in vitro reassembly and allows it to occur at neutral pH , by forming small amor - phous aggregates , around which clathrin assem - bles stably into “in vitro - assembled coats” ( or , where clear from context , just “coats” ) ( Keen et al . 1991 ; Smith et al . 1998 ; Musacchio et al . 1999 ; Fotin et al . 2004b ) . The enhancement re - quires the b - chain hinge region ( Shih et al . 1995 ) , which protrudes from the AP2 adaptor core and hence projects from a small aggregate of AP2 protein and has a short motif that binds the amino - terminal domain of the clathrin heavy chain ( see below ) . Various other proteins that bind and cluster clathrin can have the same effect . When clathrin assembles , it forms a lattice in which the center of a triskelion is associated with each lattice point ( Fig . 1B ) . The contour length of a leg is such that it reaches around nearly three edges , spiraling clockwise inward ( if we follow it from hub to terminal domain ) as it goes . If all the openings were hexagonal , the lattice would be an essentially ﬂat array . The way the legs associate when forming coats or cages incorporates pentagonal openings as well as hexagonal ones . Exactly 12 pentagons are required for a closed shell , if all the other openings are hexagons . If some are heptagonal , then there must be a corresponding excess of pentagons . The number of hexagonal openings and the distribution of pentagonal openings among them deﬁne the size and shape of the overall structure . Assembly of coats under controlled condi - tions in vitro gives selective yield of a few , simple lattices , which can then be analyzed in molecu - lar detail by single - particle cryoelectron mi - croscopy ( cryoEM ) ( Smith et al . 1998 ; Musac - chio et al . 1999 ; Fotin et al . 2004b ) . Coats with one of these lattices , a barrel - like structure with D6 symmetry , are particularly regular , and the images have yielded a three - dimensional ( 3D ) reconstruction with details extending to a reso - lution of (cid:2) 8 A˚ ( Fig . 2A ) . The crystallographi - cally derived structures and homology models ( in the case of some of the repeats ) can be po - Figure 2 . A D6 clathrin coat . ( A ) Map from electron microscopy of a coat with bound auxilin ( clathrin - binding and J - domain fragment ) and Hsc70 , showing the outer contour of clathrin density ( blue ) , auxilin ( red ) , and Hsc70 ( green ) . ( From Xing et al . 2010 ; with permission from the authors . ) ( B ) Full C a representation of the heavy chains in a coat ( blue ) , with ribbon representation of light chain s - helical region ( yellow ) and volume outline of auxilin clathrin - binding and J - domain fragment ( red ) ( Fotin et al . 2004a , b ) . Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 5 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from sitioned accurately within this reconstruction , and the interactions of various component tri - skelions can be examined . The pattern of inter - digitating legs ( Fig . 1B ) is such that we can imagine the principal building block for each edge of the lattice to be a segment of “proximal leg” closely associated on its inward - facing sur - facewith a segment of “distal” leg ( Fig . 2B ) . ( For nomenclature , see Fig . 1 ; “distal” and “proxi - mal” refer to distance from the threefold center of the triskelion , so that “distal” is amino ter - minal to “proximal” in the polypeptide chain sequence . ) The distal leg segment in an edge , which runs parallel to its associated proximal segment , belongs to a triskelion centered at a second - nearest - neighbor lattice point . The ge - ometry of these interactions appears to be con - served at all edges , even when those edges are not related to each other by the D6 symmetry . The proximodistal contacts are also conserved in small - diameter coats . Thus , we believe that they make a principal contribution to coat as - sembly and stability . In contrast , the side - by - side contacts between antiparallel proximal segments and antiparallel distal segments along an edge appear quite tenuous , and the crossing angle between proximodistal pairs varies de - pending on the overall curvature of the lattice . Near the center of a clathrin trimer , each heavy chain projects inward as a long a - helix , followed by the less - ordered , carboxy - terminal segment . The three long helices ( one from each heavy chain ) splay apart from a set of close con - tacts at the outer radii , so that they form a tri - pod - like structure that holdsthe trimer together and links it noncovalently to more distal parts of other trimers that run beneath it . The “knee” between the proximal and distal legs curves gently enough to avoid the region immediately beneath the center of a neighboring triskelion , so the helical tripod can penetrate inward to contact the “ankles” of triskelions centered on second - nearest - neighbor lattice points , creating an extremely long - range pattern of interactions ( Fig . 1B ) . Only the proximodistal contacts de - scribed in the preceding paragraph have exten - sive surface complementarity , however , and this “spot welding” of the extensively interwoven triskelions is probably one of the properties of the lattice that allows its rapid assembly and disassembly . Clathrin triskelions can form sharply curved , small coats and more extended , ﬂat ar - rays—a polymorphism that requires consider - able ﬂexibility . The pucker at the center of a triskelion appears to be relatively invariant , however , and bendability is instead a property of the a - zig - zag organization of most of the leg . Because only adjacent helices contact each other in this type of structure and because helices can “roll” against each other to some extent without substantially distorting the side - chain packing , iterated a - zig - zags produce readily bendable ( compliant ) rods . In assembled clathrin lattices , variation in curvature is concentrated in the knee regions and in the linker between the ter - minal domain and ankle , because the proximal and distal segments reinforce each other where they form strong contacts . Even within the D6 barrel structure , a range of different knee bends is present . The relatively narrow distribution of curvatures in spontaneously assembled cages in vitro indicates that the triskelion is domed at its vertex , with a preferred arching angle slightly more open than in a D6 barrel . Clathrin - coated “buds” formed on large unilamellar liposomes in vitro have an outer diameter of (cid:2) 900 A˚ , sim - ilar to the mean diameter of membrane - free cages . The wider range of diameters for cargo - incorporating coated pits in vivo shows that the legs can adapt to the nature of the surface against which the lattice is forming . The terminal domain , protruding inward from the clathrin lattice , is free to contact adap - tors and other membrane - interacting compo - nents ( ter Haar et al . 1998 , 2000 ; Drake et al . 2000 ; Drake and Traub 2001 ; Miele et al . 2004 ) . Itprojectstowardtheaxisofavertexthree lattice points removed from the one onwhich its triskelion is centered ( Fig . 2A ) . Although the a - zig - zag linker connecting it to the main part of the clathrin leg is relatively stiff , the “fuzziness” of the terminal domain in the cryoEM recon - struction indicates some variability in its posi - tion with respect to the lattice as a whole , prob - ably because of ﬂexibility in the ankle regions that connect terminal domains to distal legs . The terminal domain interacts with heterotetra - T . Kirchhausen et al . 6 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from meric adaptors through a peptide motif in the long , ﬂexible “hinge” of the b - chain having the consensussequence L F X F D / E ( “clathrinbox” ; F represents a hydrophobic residue ) ( Shih et al . 1995 ; ter Haar et al . 2000 ) . Clathrin - box pep - tides bind in a groove between blades 1 and 2 of the terminal - domain b - propeller ( ter Haar et al . 2000 ; Miele et al . 2004 ) . Additional clath - rin - binding motifs include PWXXW , which is present in about 25 residues carboxy terminal to a clathrin box in amphiphysin and Snx9 and binds to a nonoverlapping site on the “top” face of the b - propeller ( Miele et al . 2004 ) . The clathrin light chains have no marked inﬂuence on coat assembly in vitro or coated vesicle formation in vivo although the 100 A˚ - long helical region might be expected to stiffen the proximal leg ( Fig . 1 ) . The amino - terminal , nonhelical region lies close to the midpoint of an edge ; the carboxy - terminal , nonhelical re - gion is close to a vertex . Coated Vesicles Coated vesicles isolated from cells or tissues are substantially more heterogeneous in size and shape than the coats assembled for cryoEM studies ( Cheng et al . 2007 ; Heymann et al . 2013 ) . Tomographic reconstructions of individ - ual coated vesicles illustrate the varietyof lattices present in a preparation from bovine brain ( Fig . 3 ) ( Cheng et al . 2007 ) . Two of the coats in Figure 3 have a heptagonal opening in the lattice and hence 13 pentagonal ones . Most of these coated vesicles probably represent intermediates in pre - synaptic membrane uptake . Theirclathrin shells average 700 – 800 A˚ in diameter , contain about 35 – 40 triskelions , and enclose a spherical vesi - cle , (cid:2) 400 A˚ in diameter , somewhat eccentrical - ly placed . There are strong bridges of electron density between the coat and the vesicle on the side of closer approach—they are most likely caused by the bulky (cid:2) 300 - kDa heterotetra - meric AP2 adaptors , about 20 – 25 of which are present ( on average ) in each coat and which many proteomic studies have identiﬁed as the second most common CCV protein after clath - rin itself . The asymmetry probably reﬂects the polarity of budding—adaptors arrive selec - tively during early phases of coat assembly as studied in cells in culture ( see below ) . The gap between coat and vesicle can accommodate not only the various adaptors , but also the many other regulatory proteins that participate in car - 1 5 6 7 8 2 3 4 1 5 6 7 8 2 3 4 Figure3 . Coated vesicles , isolated from brain andexamined byelectron cryotomography . ( Top ) Galleryofcentral sections through tomograms of individual coated vesicles . ( Bottom ) Drawing of corresponding lattices , with position of vesicle shown ( Cheng et al . 2007 ) . Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 7 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from go sorting , budding , and uncoating ( see next section ) . Substantially larger coated vesicles can be seen in thin sections of non - neuronal cells taking up ligands , such as transferrin or LDL , that have receptors with large extracellular domains ; most coated vesicles isolated from hu - man placenta , for instance , range between 1000 and 1350 A˚ in diameter ( Turkewitz and Harri - son 1989 ) . Nonclathrin Protein Components in the Coat Nonclathrin proteins in a coated pit include clathrin adaptors , which bind both membrane and clathrin and link the coat with the lipid bi - layer , and nonstructural proteins , which bind either clathrin , adaptors and / or the membrane . Nearly all the nonclathrin protein components have a membrane - proximal , folded domain , frequently with a membrane - interacting site or surface , and one or more segments of un - structured polypeptide chain . Some also have additional folded protein – protein interaction domains . The unstructured segments contain arrays of short , linear motifs that bind folded domains of othercoated - vesicle proteins , gener - ally with moderate afﬁnity , allowing formation of dynamic networks . Clathrin coat assembly at the plasma membrane requires both recruit - ment of clathrin by lipid - associated adaptor proteins and cooperativity of lattice interac - tions . The nonstructural proteins , collectively termed endocytic accessory proteins , ensure ef - ﬁcient coated - pit assembly , cargo recruitment , and prompt coat disassembly after budding ( see Traub and Bonifacino 2013 ; Merriﬁeld and Kaksonen 2014 ) . Heterotetrameric Clathrin Adaptors The heterotetrameric adaptors are the most abundant nonclathrin components of tissue - and cell - derived coated vesicles ( Fig . 4 ) ( for re - view , see Kirchhausen 1999 ; Robinson and Bonifacino 2001 ; Hirst et al . 2013 ) . Vertebrate genomes encode ﬁve types , designated AP1 through AP5 ( the last with a relatively diver - gent sequence and thus found only recently ) ( Hirst et al . 2013 ) . AP2 is the principal type associated with trafﬁc at the plasma membrane and thus with clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; AP1 and AP3 appear to have roles in intracel - lular , clathrin - driven events ( e . g . , in trafﬁc be - tween the TGN and endosomes ) ; AP4 and AP5 may not be coated - vesicle associated . The adap - tors have two distinct , but homologous large chains ( b 1 – 5 ; a , g , @ , 1 , and 6 in AP1 through AP5 , respectively ) ; a medium chain ( m 1 – 5 ) ; and a small chain ( s 1 – 5 ) . Each large chain of AP2 and AP1 has a compactly folded amino - terminal region ( roughly 60 % – 65 % of the polypeptide chain ) , composed of a set of 14 “HEATrepeats , ” a - heli - cal zig - zags closely related to the clathrin zig - zag ( Collins et al . 2002 ; Heldwein et al . 2004 ) . The repeats form two gently curved arcs of seven zig - zags each , with a more sharply curved bend be - tween the two halves , and the two chains are so disposed that they deﬁne a diamond - like frame that enclosesthe small ( s ) chain and the amino - terminal part of the medium ( m ) chain . These lasttwostructuresarehomologoustoeachother . The entire assembly ( referred to as the adaptor “bowl” because of the concavity on one side , that receives the carboxy - terminal part of the m chain in one conformational state ) comprises the initial about 600 residues of the two large chains , the amino - terminal domain of the m - chain ( m N ) , and the entire s - chain . The bowl has an approximate twofold character , with the long diagonal of the diamond - shaped frame as the pseudo - twofold axis ( Fig . 4D – I ) . An extended hinge segment of about 80 – 100 residues connects the stacked HEAT - repeats to an “appendage” domain at the carboxy - termi - nal end of each of the large chains ( Fig . 4B , C ) ( Heuser and Keen 1988 ) . The heterotetramers of AP2 and AP1 have at least two distinct states—a closed or “locked” state and one or more open states ( Rapoport et al . 1997 ; Collins et al . 2002 ; Jackson et al . 2010 ) . In the closed state , two well - studied car - go - binding sites are buried ( Fig . 4D , G ) ; in at least one open state , both cargo - binding sites are exposed ( Fig . 4F , I ) . AP2 also has also been trapped by crystal packing in an intermediate , “unlatched” state , in which only one of the car - go - binding sites is accessible ( Fig . 4E , H ) . In the T . Kirchhausen et al . 8 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from A HEAT repeats B Appendage α β2 μ2 σ2 σ β α μ N μ C Clathrin box C F G v v H D E 25 Å Figure 4 . Heterotetrameric clathrin adaptor , AP2 . ( A ) Domain organization of polypeptide chains of the four componentproteins . Thetwoheavychains , a and b 2 , haveamino - terminalHEAT - repeatdomainsconnectedby a ﬂexible hinge ( dashed line ) to a carboxy - terminal appendage domain ; their total length is about 940 amino acid residues . The arrow in the b 2 diagram shows the approximate position of the clathrin - box motif that binds theclathrinterminaldomain . Thelengthsofthebarsareinapproximateproportiontothenumberofresidues in the corresponding domain . ( B ) Ribbon representation of the complete adaptor in its “locked” state . The ﬂexible hinge regions of the heavy chains are shown as dotted lines . Colors as in A . ( PDB : 2VGL , 1B9K , 1E42 ) ( C – E ) Ribbon representations of the AP2 “core” comprising the HEAT - repeat domains of the heavy chains and the complete m and s chains . The “locked” ( PDB 2VGL ) ( Collins et al . 2002 ) , “unlatched” ( PDB : 2JKR ) ( Kelly et al . 2008 ) , and “open” ( PDB : 2XA7 ) ( Jackson et al . 2010 ) conformations are in C , D , and E , respectively . Arrows in D show directions inwhich theheat - domaindomains bend ( bend concentrated mainlyat theelbow ) to achieve the open conformation , in which the m C domain also rotates substantially . ( F – H ) Diagrams corresponding to the molecular representations above them . ( Gray bar ) Membrane , with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( schematic ) . ( Circles on heavy chains ) Sites for PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 headgroup binding . Yellow “v” in G and H points to the position of the site for dileucine motif binding ; ( red asteriskon m 2 - C domain ) position of site for tyrosine - motif binding . Note that lipid - headgroup and cargo - recognition sites all line up near the membrane in this conformation . Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 9 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from locked state , the diamond - shaped frame is closed at both ends of the long axis , although the contact between the two large chains is con - siderably more intimate at the carboxy - terminal end of the HEAT - repeats than at the amino - ter - minal end , and the unpaired , carboxy - terminal domain of the medium chain ( m 2C ) —a bilobed b - sandwich—rests in the bowl ( Fig . 4D , G ) . In the open state , the amino - terminal halves of the large - chain HEAT - repeat regions bend away from each other , opening up one end of the diamond frame and displacing the m 2C domain outward ( Fig . 4F , I ) . The m 2N domain and the s 2 chain also move away from each other , con - serving their contacts with the amino - terminal parts of the b 2 and a , respectively . The hinge between the two m - chain domains reconﬁgures in the transition between locked and open con - formations , allowing m 2C to rotate into a posi - tion aligned with the open end of the bowl . Packing of m 2C against s 2 and b 2 probably makes this position a minimum energy confor - mation , but m 2C may sample the local environ - ment tethered by the linker that connects it to m 2N , thereby increasing the likelihood that it will encounter and bind cargoes . Association between AP2 and the plasma membrane requires phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bis - phosphate [ PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ] . Interaction of the phospholipid head group with basic patches on the amino - terminal ends of each of the large chains positionsthe heterotetramer with respect to the membrane ( Fig . 4G ) . In the open state , m 2C also presents positively charged patches that probably interact with the negatively charged polar groups on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane bilayer , further stabilizing AP2 on the membrane . The two principal cargo - incorporation signals that AP2 recog - nizes are the so - called “tyrosine - based motif” YXX F ( where F is a large , hydrophobic resi - due ) , found on the cytoplasmic tail of many endocytosed receptors including TfR , and the “acidic dileucine motif” [ ED ] xxxL [ LI ] . The site for the former motif is on the edge of m 2C ( Fig . 4G – I ) ( Owenand Evans1998 ) . Thepocket that receives the tyrosine , occluded in the closed states of AP2 and AP1 , faces outward in the AP2 open state and aligns roughly with the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 contact points . The site for the latter motif is mainly on m 2 , just where it abuts the a - chain , and that position also aligns with the lipid - head - group contacts . Thus , the open state is compatible with all known membrane interactions of the adaptor . Transition to the open state is apparently favored not only by binding to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 at multiple sites but also bybinding tophosphoinositides phosphor - ylated at the 3 0 position ( Rapoport et al . 1997 ) , by the interaction with clathrin ( Matsui and Kirchhausen 1990 ; Rapoport et al . 1997 ) , and by phosphorylation of Thr156 , in the m 2 linker , by the clathrin - activated , a - subunit appendage domain - binding protein kinase AAK1 ( Ricotta et al . 2002 ; Conneret al . 2003 ) . The clathrin - box motif in the b - chain hinge isthe principal site of interaction between heterotetrameric adaptors and clathrin ( Fig . 4A ) ( Shih et al . 1995 ; Traub et al . 1999 ; Owen et al . 2000 ) . The 80 – 100 res - idues of this ﬂexible tether can easily span the gap of (cid:2) 100 A˚ between a clathrin lattice and the lipid bilayer . Heterotetrameric adaptors recruit a great variety of additional components , through con - tacts with their bilobed appendage domains ( Fig . 5 ) ( Owen et al . 1999 , 2000 ; Traub et al . 1999 ; Praefcke et al . 2004 ; Ritter et al . 2004 ; Schmid et al . 2006 ; Schmid and McMahon 2007 ; Keyel et al . 2008 ) . Each of the appendages has binding sites for sequence motifs found in the more than 20 known regulatory / accessory proteins ( Praefcke et al . 2004 ; Schmid et al . 2006 ; Keyel et al . 2008 ) . There is a binding site on each of the two subdomains of the a and b appendages ; each of these sites recognizes a dif - ferent motif ( for examples , see Fig . 5 ) . Other Adaptors There are several other adaptors that interact directly or indirectly with clathrin and select speciﬁc types of cargo for incorporation into coated pits . These include the PTB - domain - containing proteins ARH , Dab2 , and Fe65 , which bind FxNPxY - motif - containing trans - membrane proteins such as the LDL receptor , and members of the arrestin family , which as - sociate with G - protein - coupled receptors ( see T . Kirchhausen et al . 10 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Traub and Bonifacino 2013 ) . A particularly abundant accessory protein in brain - coated ves - icles is AP180 , a 90 - kDa species ; its paralog in other tissues is known as CALM . Both have the (cid:2) 280 residue , AP180 - amino - terminal - homol - ogy ( ANTH ) domain—a set of ﬁve a - helical , HEAT - repeat - like zig - zags of different length ( Fig . 5 ) ( Ford et al . 2001 ; Mao et al . 2001 ) . The loops within the ﬁrst and second zig - zags create a site for binding the head group of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . The carboxy - terminal half of the molecules contains a clathrin - binding seg - ment and motifs that bind the AP2 appendages . Many lower organisms have a single AP180 / CALM ortholog , and deletion of these in Dro - sophila and Caenorhabditis elegans leads to an increase in the size of synaptic vesicles but to a decrease in their number and in transmitter re - lease , causing unregulated movement ( Nonet et al . 1999 ; Bao et al . 2005 ) . Although overex - pression of CALM inhibits clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Tebar et al . 1999 ) , knockdown by RNAi in HeLa cells leads to formation of aber - rant coated structures : very large “coated pits” with some attached tubular structures , rather than the (cid:2) 1000 A˚ budding vesicles seen in con - trol cells ( Meyerholz et al . 2005 ) . Despite this aberration , the knockdown has little effect on endocytic rates of transferrin receptor under normal conditions ( Huang et al . 2004 ; Meyer - holz et al . 2005 ; T Maeda and T Kirchhau - sen , unpubl . ) . CALM / AP180 may select the synaptic - vesicle fusion proteins—the SNAREs VAMP2 , VAMP3 , and VAMP8—to help deﬁne the target membrane with which the uncoated vesicle will fuse and to drive those fusion events ( Miller et al . 2011 ) . Other proteins such as the epsins ( Wendland 2002 ; Hawryluk et al . 2006 ) , eps15 ( Polo et al . 2002 ) , dishevelled ( Yu et al . 2010 ) , b - arrestin ( Lefkowitz and Whalen 2004 ) , and Hrb ( Chaineau et al . 2008 ; Pryor et al . 2008 ) may be classiﬁed as cargo adaptors , but they are present at only low levels in clathrin - coated vesicles . Nonstructural Proteins The nonstructural proteins ( i . e . , those largely excluded from the budded coated vesicle ) ap - pear at varying levels relative to clathrin during the lifetime of a coated pit ( see Merriﬁeld and Kaksonen 2014 ) . For instance , levels of Eps15 and FCHo1 / 2 are maximal at early time points and drop off during late stages of coated - pit Sandwichsubdomains Platform subdomains Dx [ FW ] , FxDxF [ FW ] xx [ FW ] [ DE ] n xFxx [ FL ] xxxR [ FL ] xx ( G ) [ FL ] xDF α Appendage β2 Appendage “Top”site “Top”site “Side”site “Side”site Site α Top α Side β2 Top β2 Side Consensus motifs for binding Figure 5 . AP2 appendages . Ribbon representations of a ( blue ) and b 2 ( green ) appendages with top site and side site cognate peptides ( magenta stick representation ) . The motifs recognized are shown in the table to the right . Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 11 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from assembly ; others such as dynamin , synaptoja - nin , and auxillin , which participate in vesicle pinching and uncoating , appear in substantial quantities only at subsequent stages . BAR - Domain Proteins Several proteins active in membrane trafﬁc con - tain near their amino termini a BAR domain ( named after Bin , amphiphysin , and Rvs—the initial set of proteins in which the conserved sequence signature of this structure was recog - nized ) including the amphiphysins , endophi - lins , Snx9 , and FCHo1 / 2 . The BAR domain is an elongated bundle of three curved a - helices ( Peter et al . 2004 ) . Subgroups , with speciﬁc fea - tures of the BAR - domain modules , bear the des - ignations N - BAR , F - BAR , and I - BAR ( Frost et al . 2009 ; Mim and Unger 2012 ) . Homodime - rizationgeneratesasymmetrical , usuallyarc - like molecule ( that of FCHo1 is shown in Fig . 5 ) . Positively charged residues on the concave faces of N - BAR - and F - BAR - domain arcs interact with negatively charged lipid head groups in thecytosolicfaceofasuitablycurvedmembrane . A number of BAR - domain - containing proteins tubulate liposomes when present at high con - centrations and bind curved membranes prefer - entially . The former property is due to the BAR domain itself ; the latter correlates with the pres - ence of amphipathic helices at the ends or in the center of the BAR - domain arc ( Farsad et al . 2001 ; Gallop et al . 2006 ; Bhatia et al . 2009 ; Mim and Unger 2012 ) . Mammalian amphiphy - sins and endophilins are each a relatively ex - tended set of proteins in which the amphipathic helix precedes the BAR domain ( hence their assignment as N - BARs ) ( Gallop et al . 2006 ; Ma - suda et al . 2006 ) . An unstructured linker has binding sites for AP2 appendages and clathrin ; it connectsthe BAR domain to acarboxy - termi - nal SH3 domain , which binds the proline - rich , carboxy - terminal regions of two membrane - directed enzymes , the dynamin GTPase and the synaptojanin lipid phosphatase ( David et al . 1996 ; Micheva et al . 1997 ; Verstreken et al . 2003 ) . Snx9 , found in most cell types , has the same domain structure and functionalities but arranged in the opposite order and with the ad - dition of a PIP - binding PX domain just amino terminal to the BAR domain ( Pylypenko et al . 2007 ; Wang et al . 2008 ; van Weering et al . 2012 ) . Eps15 / Eps15R , Epsin 1 / 2 / 3 , Intersectin , FCHo1 / 2 These four proteins , each of which has multiple isoforms , coassociate . There are multiple possi - bilities for cross - connections among them , and all have sequences that can bind AP2 append - ages ( Fig . 6 ) . Eps15andFCHo1 / 2localizetothe rim of a growing coated pit ( Tebar et al . 1996 ; Henne et al . 2010 ) . In their absence , coat assem - bly aborts ( Cocucci et al . 2012 ) . Epsin , also present at the rim , may have a somewhat less restricted distribution . FCHo1 / 2 and the epsins contain an F - BAR domain and an ENTH do - main , respectively , that bind preferentially to curved membranes . At high concentrations in vitro , they can drive tubulation of liposomes ( Ford et al . 2002 ; Wu et al . 2010 ; Boucrot et al . 2012 ) . The SH3 domain of intersectin may par - ticipate in dynamin recruitment . Epsin and Eps15 both bind ubiquitin through UIM do - mains and may thus help recruit ubiquitinated cargo molecules into coated pits ( Polo et al . 2002 ) . Synaptojanin Synaptojanins ( of which two isoforms are pres - ent in mammalian cells ) are inositol phospha - tases ( McPherson et al . 1996 ) . They have two separatephosphatasedomains , one ofwhichde - phosphorylates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 or PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 at the 5 0 position of the inositol ring and one that dephosphrylates PI3P or PI4P . A proline - rich , carboxy - terminal tail binds the SH3 do - main of the amphiphysins and the endophilins . One of two splice forms of synaptojanin 1 also has clathrin and AP2 - binding motifs , distal to the proline - rich segment . Dynamin Dynamins are large , multidomain GTPases in which an extended , a - helical bundle , with a PH - domain at its tip , augments a p21 - like cat - T . Kirchhausen et al . 12 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from A B D E Tyr motif ANTH PTB PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Endocytic VAMP Dvl DEP domain C μ 2 - C PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ENTH UIMs Clathrin - binding motif AP2 appendage - binding motif Folded domain of known structure Unstructured region F - BAR MHD Ptdlns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Figure 6 . Adaptors and accessory proteins . A domain diagram of the full protein above the molecular structure shows the relationship of the domain illustrated to the complete polypeptide chain . ( A ) Disheveled ( Dvl ) DEP domain and tyrosine motif , bound to m 2 - C ( PDB 3ML6 ) ( Yu et al . 2010 ) , superposed onto the structure of the open AP2 core ( PDB 2XA7 ) ( Jackson et al . 2010 ) . The tyrosine motif is represented as sticks ; the DEP domain ( dark gray ) and m 2 - C ( lighter gray ) as ribbons ; the rest of the AP2 core as a surface . ( B ) CALM / AP180 ANTH domain , modeled bound with the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 head group ( PDB 1HG2 ) ( Ford et al . 2001 ) , and its complex with peptide from VAMP ( PDB 3GYM ) ( Miller et al . 2011 ) . ( C ) Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ) phosphotyrosine - binding ( PTB ) domain ( ribbons ) bound with peptide ( sticks ) from cytoplasmic tail of LDL receptor and modeled with the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 head group ( PDB 3SO6 ) ( Dviret al . 2012 ) . ( D ) Epsin ENTH domain with the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 head group ( PDB 1H0A ) ( Ford et al . 2002 ) . ( E ) FCHo F - BAR domain and m - homology domain ( MHD ) ; structure of the former from FCHo2 ( PDB 2V0O ) ( Henne et al . 2007 ) and of the latter from theyeast homolog Syp1 ( PDB 3G9H ) ( Reideret al . 2009 ) . The F - BAR domain binds preferentially to a curved membrane bilayer . Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from alytic domain ( Chappie et al . 2009 ; Faelber et al . 2011 ; Ford et al . 2011 ; Chappie and Dyda 2013 ) . In human cells , three isoforms—dyna - mins 1 , 2 , and 3—drive the pinching off of endocytic - coated vesicles at the plasma mem - brane , through a cycle of oligomerization and GTP hydrolysis . Dynamin does not appear to participate in budding of AP1 - containing coat - ed vesicles from internal membranes ( Kural et al . 2012 ) . Structurally related large GTPases participate in mitochondrial ﬁssion . Figure 7A shows the domain organization and structure of a mammalian dynamin 1 . In solution and in the cytosol , dynamin di - merizes readily , and the dimers can associate into tetramers at higher concentrations . From comparisons of various crystal structures and cryoEM reconstructions , two sets of dimer con - tacts appear to be critical ( Chappie et al . 2011 ) . An oblique contact between the stalk - like , a - helical bundles of two protomers yields an X - shaped dimer , with the GTPase domains at one end , projecting away from the mid - plane of the X , and with the PH domains ﬂexibly tethered at the other end ( Fig . 7B ) . GTPase – GTPase con - tacts , stabilized by GTP binding ( Chappie et al . 2010 ) , generate a very different twofold rela - tionship , which coupled with the stem - dimer would produce a repeating polymer ( Fig . 7C ) . GTP binds near the dimer interface , and dime - GTPase GTPase PRD PH Middle PH GED PRD Figure 7 . Dynamin . Domain diagram shows position in polypeptide chain of GTPase domain ( somewhat augmented at both ends from the canonical small GTPase ) , “middle” domain , PH domain , GTPase effector domain ( GED ) , and proline - rich domain ( PRD ) . The large ribbon diagram shows a dynamin monomer , with PRD at the carboxyl terminus removed ( PDB 3ZVR ) ( Ford et al . 2011 ) . Note that the carboxy - terminal part of the GED region abuts the GTPase domain and inﬂuences its conformation . The PH domain interacts with the constricted membrane ( dashed lines ) at the neckofa budding coat . ( Inset ) GTP binding induces dimerization of the GTPase domains of two dynamins and switchesthe relative orientations of GTPase and GED . Two GMPPCP molecules bound at the dimer interface are shown as atomic models ( spheres ) ( PDB 3ZYC ) ( Chappie et al . 2011 ) . The orientation of one of the two GTPase domains ( light gray ) isthe same as in the ﬁgure of the complete molecule ; there distributed conformational changes , in addition to dimer formation , that accompany GTP binding . T . Kirchhausen et al . 14 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from rization of the GTPase domains contributes to nucleotide hydrolysis . Dynamin assembles into helical structures along membrane tubules in vitro ( Sweitzer and Hinshaw 1998 ) , with contacts that include the stem – stem dimer contributing to the principal helical path and GTPase – GTPase dimer con - tacts bridging adjacent helical turns ( Fig . 7D ) ( Zhang and Hinshaw 2001 ; Cheng et al . 2007 ; Chappie et al . 2011 ) . The in vitro helical assem - blies probably reﬂect the properties of the dy - namin “collar” necessary for membrane ﬁssion , at the neck of a budding coated pit . The collar is linked to the constricted membrane bilayer through the dynamin PH domains . GTP hy - drolysis is coupled to conformational changes in the connection between the GTPase domain and the a - helical stalk . The effects of these changes on the orientation of the stalk and on the organization of the collar presumably drive scission of the neck , but data are not yet avail - able to distinguish clearly among various de - tailed models for this process . Auxilin Auxilin is a J - domain - containing protein , re - cruited to an endocytic - coated vesicle immedi - ately after it has pinched off from the plasma membrane ( Lee et al . 2006 ; Massol et al . 2006 ) . The J - domain , in turn , recruits and activates the uncoating ATPase Hsc70 , as described in the section on coated vesicle dynamics below . There are two auxilin isoforms in vertebrates : the brain - speciﬁc auxilin 1 and the ubiquitous aux - ilin 2 or GAK ( Ungewickell et al . 1995 ; Umeda et al . 2000 ) . The J - domain is at the carboxyl terminus of both , preceded by a clathrin - bind - ing segment . At the amino terminus of auxilin 1 is a region with homology to the phosphoinosi - tide phosphatase , PTEN ( Guan et al . 2010 ) . The homology extends to both a catalytic domain and a C2 domain ( Fig . 5 ) . The identity of resi - dues in the catalytic domain critical for PTEN activity are different in auxilin , which is not a phosphatase , but the conserved shape of the pocket that contains these residues suggests that it could retain phosphoinositide - bind - ing activity . In addition to the PTEN - like re - gion , an amino - terminal protein kinase module ( GAK ) augments the polypeptide chain of aux - ilin 2 . A fragment of auxilin that includes both the clathrin - binding and J - domains bind coats with a saturating stoichiometry of one auxilin per heavy chain and is sufﬁcient to support Hsc70 - and ATP - dependent uncoating in vitro ( Holstein et al . 1996 ; Bo¨cking et al . 2011 ) . Speciﬁc Lipids Many of the coat - associated proteins have sites for interaction with polyphosphatidyl ino - sitol polyphosphate ( PIP ) head groups . Spec - iﬁcity for the PIP that labels a particular membrane compartment helps determine in - tracellular localization . The AP2 a - chain recog - nizes PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , the principal species in the plasma membrane ; the corresponding site on the AP1 b - chain binds PtdIns ( 4 ) P , which labels the TGN . Dynamin binds PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 through its PH domain ; AP180 , epsin , endophi - lin , and amphiphysin do so through their ANTH , ENTH , and BAR domains , respectively . Acute elimination of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 from the plasma membrane , either by recruitment of a phosphatase ( using a small - molecule dimer - izer ) or by treatment withbutanol ( whichinhib - its PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 production ) , results in nearly complete loss of clathrin - coated structures ( Boucrot et al . 2006 ; Zoncu et al . 2007 ) . Clathrin assembly at the plasma membrane thus requires both recruitment by lipid - associated adaptor proteins and cooperativity of lattice interac - tions . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 , generated by a type II PI3 kinase C a , is required for coated - pit matura - tion and recruitment of Snx9 in the ﬁnal stages of endocytic - coated vesicle formation ( Posor et al . 2013 ) . STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS OF THE CANONICAL CLATHRIN PATHWAY Coat Assembly The kinetics of coated - pit assembly ( restricting consideration to the diffraction - limited coats of “canonical” coated pits—we discuss largercoat - ed “plaques” below ) suggest that a nucleating Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 15 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from event initiates the process , followed by steady accumulation of clathrin until a closed ( or near - ly closed ) lattice has formed ( Fig . 8 ) . Initiation of coated - pit formation at the plasma mem - brane of cells in culture requires PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , which affords a transient initial docking point for AP2 . Recent live - cell imaging studies with single - molecule detection suggest that assembly generally begins with two AP2s and one clath - rin triskelion , or sometimes with four AP2s and two triskelions ( Cocucci et al . 2012 ) . The simplest model that can account for these data is that AP2s associate transiently with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 on the inner leaﬂet of the plasma mem - brane and that capture of at least two by a clathrin triskelion increases their residency time and enhances the likelihood that further AP2 complexes and clathrin trimers will attach before the ﬁrst ones dissociate . This nucleus can then recruit further untethered clathrin from the cytosolic pool and adaptors , including ad - ditional AP2s , from either the cytosol of the membrane . Any factor that stabilizes AP2 on the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 membrane will enhance ini - tiation , including nonclathrin components that link multiple AP2s . In cells reconstituted with AP2 complexes lacking the appendage domain and therefore defective in recruitment of endo - cytic accessory factors , a large fraction of cla - thrin - coated pits fail to invaginate and rapidly abort ( Aguet et al . 2013 ) . One obvious candi - date for coated - vesicle stabilization is Eps15 , which has about 15 AP2 - appendage - binding sites . Eps15 is itself a dimer ( Tebar et al . 1996 ) , and it could cluster further through interaction with dimeric FCHo1 / 2 . Early recruitment of FCHo1 / 2 , Eps15 , epsin , and intersectin to the rims of assembling coated pits is essential for their stability and further growth ( Cocucci et al . 2012 ; Umasankar et al . 2012 ) . Initiation Growth Stabilization and pit commitment cargo capture BuddingandScission Uncoating ClathrinAP2PIP2 Endocytic accessory proteins : Eps15 , epsin , FCHo 1 / 2 , CALM / AP180 dynamin Actin dynamin Hsc70auxilin ~ 45 – 80 sec ~ 100 proteins Figure 8 . Assembly and disassembly of a canonical , endocytic clathrin - coated pit . AP2 adaptor complexes , associated at the membrane with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( PIP2 ) , recruit clathin triskelions to initiate lattice assembly . Stable growth and lattice closure require endocytic accessory proteins ( Eps15 , epsin , FCHo1 / 2 , intersectin , CALM / AP180 ; some of which are also ancillary cargo adaptors ) . Dynamin , assisted by actin polymerization when the membrane is under tension , drives membrane scission and coated - vesicle release . Hsc70 , recruited by the J - domain protein auxilin , mediates clathrin uncoating and release of a free vesicle , primed to fuse with a target membrane . Text beneath the diagram indicates the overall timescale and the stages at which various components appear to function . Short arcs , Clathrin triskelions ; Tshapes , AP2 . T . Kirchhausen et al . 16 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Clathrin accumulates at a constant rate throughout coat assembly ( roughly one triskel - ion per second in BSC - 1 cells at 37 ˚ C ) , so that the growthtime of acoated pit isproportional to its ﬁnal surface area . The average coat diameter of vesicles containing standard cargo molecules , such as Tf / TfR or EGF / EGFR , is (cid:2) 1000 A˚ , but larger vesicles form to accommodate larger car - go ( such as a reovirus particle ) ( Ehrlich et al . 2004 ) . That is , within certain limits , the curva - ture of the lattice appears to adapt to the con - tents . Resistance from within will decrease the probability of high curvature closing off a ﬁve - sidedrather thanasix - sidedlatticeopening . The rate of AP2 recruitment , relative to clathrin , diminishes substantially during subsequent phases of coat assembly ( Saffarian and Kirch - hausen 2008 ; Loerke et al . 2011 ) . As the coated pit invaginates , the AP2 already incorporated moves away from the initial plane of the mem - brane ( Saffarian and Kirchhausen 2008 ) . AP2 is thereby enriched at one pole of the completed lattice ( Fig . 3 ) ( Cheng et al . 2007 ) . Membrane Invagination When recruited to the surface of a large , unila - mellar liposome by an anchored , unstructured peptide bearing a clathrin - box motif and a membrane attachment site , clathrin generates “coated buds” with nearly complete coats at 37 ˚ C ( Dannhauser and Ungewickell 2012 ) . Thus , contacts within the clathrin lattice are suf - ﬁcient in this minimal system to drive mem - brane deformation , up to the stage of closure and scission of the neck connecting the bud with the parent liposome . The physical proper - ties of lipid bilayers imply a substantial energy cost for invagination and budding of a vesicle . Todivideasingle , sphericalphospholipidbilayer into two smaller vesicles requires (cid:2) 350 kT ( (cid:2) 250 kcal / mol ) , with the details depending onsuchfactorsastheintrinsiccurvatureimpart - ed to the bilayer by its speciﬁc lipid composition ( see Johannes et al . 2014 ) . In a cell , rapid lateral diffusion of lipidsmeansthatsome of theenergy can be supplied byother processes , even at some distance—for example , processes that use or re - move lipids for which the relevant curvature of the invagination is particularly unfavorable . But even 1 . 5 – 2 kcal / mol net favorable free energy of lattice interaction per clathrin heavy chain would be sufﬁcient to recover 250 kcal / mol from a coat containing 60 triskelions—for ex - ample , the “soccer - ball” lattice , roughly 900 A˚ in outer diameter . This is the average diameter ofanendocytic - coatedpitinBSC - 1cellsandofa cage formed by brain clathrin in vitro , when as - sembled ( by lowering the pH ) in the absence of any other protein component , and it therefore probably corresponds to the most stable curva - ture for a clathrin lattice . Molecular crowding from bulky adaptors and cytoplasmic domains of their associated cargo may also favor mem - brane invagination ( Kirchhausen 2012 ; Stacho - wiak et al . 2012 , 2013 ) . The resistance of the membrane to invagination increases as the pit begins to constrict , and membrane tension ap - pears to be an important factor contributing to the requirement in vivo for proteins other than the minimal set sufﬁcient to release acoated ves - icle assembled in vitro on a liposome . The Role of Actin Actin polymerization is not essential for canon - ical coated - pit dynamics in BSC - 1 and HeLa cells under standard growth conditions in cul - ture , nor is it required for normal rates of trans - ferrin uptake ( Fujimoto et al . 2000 ; Boucrot et al . 2006 ; Saffarian et al . 2009 ) . But elevated membrane tension , created by a variety of mechanisms including cytoskeletal attachments and exposure of the cell to a hypo - osmolar me - dium , stalls coated - pit assembly and imposes a requirement for actin dynamics ( Boulant et al . 2011 ) . Uptake of elongated cargo such as a ve - sicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) particle provides a particularly dramatic example ( Cureton et al . 2010 ) . A normally curved coated pit cannot close off around the virion , and growth stalls because of resistance from the effectively inﬁnite tension generated by the particle shaft . Local actin polymerization ﬁnishes the engulfment process , perhaps by pushing the clathrin cap at one end of the invagination away from the mean plane of the surrounding membrane . Smaller , roughly spherical , defective VSV particles do Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 17 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from not need actin to enter the cell , because their diameter is within the range of naturally occur - ring clathrin - coated vesicles . One biochemical link between clathrin and actin is HIP1R ( Bennett et al . 2001 ; Eng - qvist - Goldstein et al . 2001 ) . A central coiled - coil in this protein binds a motif near the amino terminus of all clathrin light chains , a carboxy - terminal , vinculin - like domain binds F - actin , and an amino - terminal ANTH domain binds PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . The coiled - coil in the middle of HIP1R creates long , rod - like homodimers , as well as similar heterodimers with HIP1 , with the ANTH domains at one end , the vinculin - like domains at the other , and the light - chain site between them ( Niu et al . 2008 ) . Thus , they have the properties expected of a membrane – clathrin – actin connector . Another , less - direct link between clathrin and actin is through dyna - min , which can bind cortactin , an activator of Arp2 / 3 ( Merriﬁeldetal . 2005 ; Tayloretal . 2012 ) . Once uncoated , previously clathrin - coated vesicles can engage actin and move rapidly away from the site at which they formed ( Merriﬁeld et al . 2002 ) . The molecular details of this pre - sumably motor - driven , directed motion are not yet deﬁned , although an obvious possibility is myosin VI ( Buss et al . 2001 ; Hasson 2003 ) . The organization and reorganization of cortical ac - tin layers will clearly inﬂuence the fate of cargo molecules entrapped by coated pits . Cargo Loading Coated pits select cargo through interactions with the array of clathrin adaptors . The mo - lecular mechanisms of these interactions are discussed extensively in Traub and Bonifacino ( 2013 ) . For example , transferrin receptors bind AP2 directly , and LDLR binds ARH and Dab2 , which , in turn , bind AP2 . Live - cell imaging shows that these receptors diffuse on the cell surface until collision with an assembling clath - rin lattice ( Ehrlich et al . 2004 ; Cureton et al . 2012 ) . The cargo - capturing pit is generally rel - atively “young” ( e . g . , , 20 sec since initiation in BSC - 1 cells at 37 ˚ C ) . Indeed , it would be sub - stantially less likely that a diffusing transmem - brane protein could enter a constricted , nearly mature pit than a gently domed one or a planar structure . Clathrin binding to AP2 is linked to its transition from a locked to an open confor - mation , and thus can couple cargo capture and lattice assembly ( Rapoport et al . 1997 ; Jackson et al . 2010 ) . Scission Clathrin assembly can provide the net free en - ergy needed to generate a deeply invaginated bud in vitro ( Dannhauser and Ungewickell 2012 ; for review , see Kirchhausen 2012 ) , but membrane scission ( ﬁssion ) still presents a sub - stantial barrier . Release of a coated vesicle thus requires that dynamin enable the neck of a coat - ed pit to reorganize into a transition state that leads to pinching , although the mechanism re - mains unknown ( for recent reviews , see Schmid and Frolov 2011 ; Chappie and Dyda 2013 ; Mor - lot and Roux 2013 ; Johannes et al . 2014 ) . Acute inhibition of the dynamin GTPase activity with the compounddynasorecauses accumulationof coated pits at two stages—pits with a fully con - stricted neck ( “omega” - shaped cross sections ) ( Heuser 1980 ; Macia et al . 2006 ) as might be expected from the properties of dynamin collars and helices on lipid tubes in vitro , and pits just at the point at which a constriction is beginning to form ( “U” - shaped cross sections ) . Thus , in addition to the well - known kinetic barrier be - tween a narrow neck and a budded vesicle , there also appears to be a barrier between an uncon - stricted “dome” and the initial formation of a reentrant ring at its base . Uncoating The positions of uncoated vesicles just interior to membranes with budding coated pits led Roth and Porter ( 1964 ) to conclude that un - coating followed promptly upon pinching off ; live - cell ﬂuorescence microscopy has conﬁrmed this conjecture and shown that uncoating pro - ceeds very rapidly following release of the coated vesicle ( Ehrlich et al . 2004 ; Merriﬁeld et al . 2005 ; Massol et al . 2006 ) . The agent of clathrin un - coating is the cytosolic heat - shock cognate pro - tein Hsc70 ( Rothman and Schmid 1986 ) . Like T . Kirchhausen et al . 18 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from all members of the Hsp70 family , Hsc70 has an actin - like ATPase domain linked to a character - istic “molecularclamp” domain , which can cap - ture hydrophobic peptides , exposed on an un - folded polypeptide chain or projecting from an assembly destined for dissociation ( Jiang et al . 2005 ) . When the enzyme is in the ATP - bound state , the clamp - domain / peptide association is relatively weak , ATP hydrolysis ( to ADP and Pi ) tightens the clamp , and nucleotide exchange ( dissociation of ADPand binding of ATP ) opens the clamp , releases the peptide , and completes the cycle . Hsc70 and its substrate are brought together by a J - domain - containing protein— auxilin in the case of a clathrin coat ( Xing et al . 2010 ) . One part of the J - domain protein associates with the substrate ; the J - domain itself recruits Hsc70 : ATP ( Jiang et al . 2003 ) . Thus , the initial weak encounter is strengthened by the J - domain protein as a bridge . The conformational change in Hsc70 that accompanies ATP hy - drolysis releases the J - domain while closing the clamp on the substrate ( Hartl and Hayer - Hartl 2002 ; Jiang et al . 2007 ) . Within the clathrin carboxy - terminal seg - ment is a short , hydrophobic sequence , neces - sary for Hsc70 - and ATP - dependent uncoating and very similar to an optimal Hsc70 - interact - ing peptide ( Rapoport et al . 2008 ) . Auxilin as - sociates with a clathrin lattice in such a way that an Hsc70 molecule , recruited by the J - domain , can , in turn , bind a nearby clathrin carboxy - terminal segment ( Fig . 9 ) ( Fotin et al . 2004a ) . Hsc70 binding is accompanied by a local dis - tortion of the clathrin lattice , needed to make the interaction site fully accessible ( Xing et al . 2010 ; Bo¨cking et al . 2011 ) . Thus , Hsc70 , recruit - ed by the auxilin J - domain to a location adja - cent to a vertex , can capture a ﬂuctuation in the lattice by binding its target segment and split - ting ATP , thereby fastening the clamp and lock - ing the transient distortion in place . Accumula - tion of local strain at multiple vertices can then lead to disassembly . Auxilin enters a coated vesicle just after membrane pinching ( Lee et al . 2006 ; Massol et al . 2006 ; Taylor et al . 2011 ) . Earlier arrival could lead to Hsc70 - driven uncoating of an in - complete lattice and hence a futile assembly – disassembly cycle . Ongoing lipid modiﬁcation provides a potential mechanism by which aux - ilin could detect thatavesicle has separated from the parent membrane . Only after pinching has generated membrane discontinuity will a lipid modiﬁed by a coat - associated enzyme remain in the vesicle , rather than diffuse rapidly out of the bud ( Massol et al . 2006 ) . The inactive , PTEN - like domain of auxilin , which is required for its recruitment to a budded coated vesicle , is likely to recognize some species of phosphoinositide head group . Moreover , the polyphosphoinosi - tide phosphatase synaptojanin has many of the properties expected for the postulated modify - ing enzyme . In mammalian cells , a neuron - spe - ciﬁc splice form of synaptojanin 1 appears in coated pits just at the time of pinching off , concomitantly with endophilin and dynamin ( Gad et al . 2000 ; Perera et al . 2006 ) ; an alterna - tive , ubiquitously expressed splice form , with carboxy - terminally located clathrin and AP2 - binding motifs , in addition to the phosphatase domains and the endophilin - associating pro - line - rich region present in both forms , accumu - lates more steadily during coat assembly . Endo - philin A and synaptojanin defects in C . elegans give rise to very similar neuronal phenotypes , including depletion of docked synaptic vesicles and apparent accumulation of clathrin - coated vesicles , consistent with an uncoating defect ( Harris et al . 2000 ; Schuske et al . 2003 ) . Deple - tion of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 by synaptojanin will also weaken the afﬁnity of AP2 for the vesicle mem - brane , promoting dissociation of the adaptor layer and reducing the likelihood of triskelion rebinding . LARGER CLATHRIN LATTICES Some cell types in culture ( e . g . , HeLacells ) elab - orate abundant , relatively long - lived clathrin ar - rays at the interface with the substrate on which they are growing ( Saffarian et al . 2009 ) . When studied by deep - etch electron microscopy , the same cell types also show extended clathrin lat - tices , which can be of substantially greaterdiam - eter ( up to 5000 A ˚ ) than the sharply invaginated coated pits seen in the same images . Although described as “puncta” in live - cell imaging stud - Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 19 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from ies and sometimes designated as “coated pits , ” these long - lived objects are often larger than the (cid:2) 2500 A˚ diffraction limit , and they have very different dynamics from the more strict - ly “punctate , ” canonical coated pits . These large noncanonical structures , now termed “coated plaques , ” can engulf membrane , as shown by uptake of transferrin receptor . Actin assembly probably drives membrane engulfment , per - haps by a mechanism related to its role in clath - rin - mediated yeast - cell membrane uptake . Clathrin dissociating from the edge of a coated plaque may also enhance local initiation of ca - nonical coated - pit assembly ( Merriﬁeld et al . 2005 ; Saffarian et al . 2009 ; Taylor et al . 2011 ) . The EM images of extended arrays that correspond , at least in some cases , to coated plaques show some degree of short - range hex - agonal order , but a high concentration of lattice defects ( Heuser 1980 ) . That is , the inherent cur - vature ( pucker ) of the clathrin triskelion limits the extent to which it can assemble into a lattice Auxilin Coat ADP : Pi ATP Clathrin ADP Pi ATP Hsc70 : ATP Hsc70 : ATP Figure 9 . Hsc70 - mediated uncoating . Illustration of proposed mechanism . ( Upper left ) Vertex of a clathrin lattice , with clathrin polypeptide chains as continuous worms . ( Orange ) The hub of a triskelion centered on that vertex ; with the carboxy - terminal Hsc - 70 - binding segment dotted ; ( yellow ) the “knees” of triskelions centered on the neighboring vertices ; ( blue ) the terminal domains and linkers of triskelions centered on second - nearest - neighbor vertices . See Figure 1 to place this vertex in the context of a full lattice . ( Upper right ) Binding of the carboxy - terminal region of auxilin , containing the clathrin - binding segment and the J - domain ; the amino - terminal region , which contains the PTEN - homology domain , would project inward toward the vesicle membrane . ( Lower right ) Auxilin J - domain recruits Hsc70 : ATP . ( Lower left ) Hsc70 , in a conformational change driven by ATP hydrolysis , clamps tightly onto its recognition motif on one of the three clathrin carboxy - terminal segments . This event locks in a local distortion , necessary to expose the recognition motif enough to accommodate the Hsc70 clamp domain . Binding of Hsc70 at a critical number of vertices imposes sufﬁcient distortion to destabilize the entire lattice . Rebinding of ATP to Hsc70 dissociates it from the free triskelions , which can then assemble into a new coat and complete the cycle . ( From Xing et al . 2010 and Bo¨cking et al . 2011 ; adapted , with permission , from the authors . ) T . Kirchhausen et al . 20 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from with only hexagonal facets ( Fotin et al . 2004b ) . If the underlying support resists curvature , lat - tice defects will lead to a patchwork of hexagons with short - range order and long - range disor - der . The same property accounts for the failure of clathrin to form tubular structures—for ex - ample , when engulﬁng VSV ( Cureton et al . 2010 ) : the threefold symmetry and approxi - mately ﬁxed pucker imparts curvature in two dimensions and prevents formation of a singly curved ( tubular ) lattice . 2014 AND BEYOND The clathrin lattice and its heterotetrameric adaptors organize a large array of other molec - ular components—proteins and lipids . The in - teractions among the additional components and their association with clathrin and APs cre - ate a bewilderingly complex network of poten - tial contacts . Not all these contacts can coexist , and we do not yet have the experimental data needed to deﬁne a hierarchy among them . Moreover , properties of tissue - speciﬁc isoforms of many of the associated proteins show that regulated expression modulates which compo - nents are present under speciﬁc physiological conditions or in particular differentiated cells . The interactions among these proteins are , in general , relatively weak , requiring coincident presence of several components to establish a meaningful residence time . The relatively high frequency of abortive events also shows that the contribution of this networkof weak contacts to the stability of an assembling coat compensates for the inevitable stochasticity in arrival times of various proteins , so that absence of one or more critical participants often leads to disso - lution of unstable , partial structures . Expression from endogenous loci of pro - teins bearing genetically encoded ﬂuorescent tags and application of powerful new imaging technologies are likely to provide ways to study patterns of recruitment of particular compo - nents , both in space and in time , and to link their biochemical and structural properties , de - scribed in this review , even more directly with their functional dynamics . Some of the litera - ture cited in this work describes the biological phenomena that such experiments should seek to explain . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS T . K . is funded in part by NIH grant GM36548 ; D . O . is funded by a Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellowship ; and S . C . H . is a Howard Hughes Medical Insitute Investigator . We thank Scottie Robinson for discussion and Phil Evans and Lauren Jackson for help with ﬁgures . We also thank members of our laboratories and our colleagues for the opportunity to share good science and for many enlightening discus - sions . Finally , we apologize to colleagues whose work we have inadvertently failed to quote . REFERENCES (cid:2) Reference is also in this collection . Aggeler J , Werb Z . 1982 . Initial events during phagocytosis by macrophages viewed from outside and inside the cell : Membrane – particle interactions and clathrin . J Cell Biol 94 : 613 – 623 . Aguet F , Antonescu CN , Mettlen M , Schmid SL , Danuser G . 2013 . Advances in analysis of low signal - to - noise images link dynamin and AP2 to the functions of an endocytic checkpoint . Dev Cell 26 : 279 – 291 . Anderson RG , Goldstein JL , Brown MS . 1977 . A mutation thatimpairstheabilityoflipoproteinreceptorstolocaliseincoatedpitsonthecellsurfaceofhumanﬁbroblasts . Nature 270 : 695 – 699 . Bao H , Daniels RW , MacLeod GT , Charlton MP , Atwood HL , Zhang B . 2005 . AP180 maintains the distribution of synaptic and vesicle proteins in the nerve terminal and indirectly regulates the efﬁcacy of Ca 2 þ - triggered exocytosis . J Neurophysiol 94 : 1888 – 1903 . Bennett EM , Chen CY , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Drubin DG , Brodsky FM . 2001 . Clathrin hub expression dissociates the actin - binding protein Hip1R from coated pits and disrupts their alignment with the actin cytoskeleton . Trafﬁc 2 : 851 – 858 . Bhatia VK , Madsen KL , Bolinger P - Y , Kunding A , Hedega˚rd P , Gether U , Stamou D . 2009 . Amphipathic motifs in BARdomainsareessentialformembranecurvaturesens - ing . EMBO J 28 : 3303 – 3314 . Blondeau F , Ritter B , Allaire PD , Wasiak S , Girard M , Hus - sain NK , Angers A , Legendre - Guillemin V , Roy L , Bois - menu D , et al . 2004 . Tandem MS analysis of brain clathrin - coated vesicles reveals their critical involvement in synaptic vesicle recycling . Proc Natl Acad Sci 101 : 3833 – 3838 . Bo¨cking T , Aguet F , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T . 2011 . Sin - gle - molecule analysis of a molecular disassemblase re - vealsthemechanismof Hsc70 - drivenclathrinuncoating . Nat Struct Mol Biol 18 : 295 – 301 . Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 21 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Bonazzi M , Ku¨hbacher A , Toledo - Arana A , Mallet A , Vasu - devan L , Pizarro - Cerda´ J , Brodsky FM , Cossart P . 2012 . A common clathrin - mediated machinery co - ordinates cell – cell adhesion and bacterial internalization . Trafﬁc 13 : 1653 – 1666 . Borner GHH , Harbour M , Hester S , Lilley KS , Robinson MS . 2006 . Comparative proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 175 : 571 – 578 . Borner GHH , Antrobus R , Hirst J , Bhumbra GS , Kozik P , Jackson LP , Sahlender DA , Robinson MS . 2012 . Multi - variate proteomic proﬁling identiﬁes novel accessory proteins of coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 197 : 141 – 160 . Boucrot E , Saffarian S , Massol R , Kirchhausen T , Ehrlich M . 2006 . Role of lipids and actin in the formation of clath - rin - coated pits . Exp Cell Res 312 : 4036 – 4048 . Boucrot E , Pick A , Camdere G , Liska N , Evergren E , McMa - honHT , KozlovMM . 2012 . Membraneﬁssionispromot - edbyinsertionofamphipathichelicesandisrestrictedbycrescentBARdomains . Cell 149 : 124 – 136 . Boulant S , Kural C , Zeeh J - C , Ubelmann F , Kirchhausen T . 2011 . Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 1124 – 1131 . Bushlin I , Petralia RS , Wu F , Harel A , Mughal MR , Mattson MP , Yao PJ . 2008 . Clathrin assembly protein AP180 and CALMdifferentiallycontrolaxogenesisanddendriteout - growth in embryonic hippocampal neurons . J Neurosci 28 : 10257 – 10271 . Buss F , Luzio JP , Kendrick - Jones J . 2001 . Myosin VI , a new force in clathrin mediated endocytosis . FEBS Lett 508 : 295 – 299 . CarpentierJL , GordenP , AndersonRG , GoldsteinJL , Brown MS , Cohen S , Orci L . 1982 . Co - localization of 125 I - epi - dermalgrowthfactorandferritin - lowdensitylipoprotein in coated pits : A quantitative electron microscopic study in normal and mutant human ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 95 : 73 – 77 . Chaineau M , Danglot L , Proux - Gillardeaux V , Galli T . 2008 . Role of HRB in clathrin - dependent endocytosis . J Biol Chem 283 : 34365 – 34373 . Chappie JS , Dyda F . 2013 . Building a ﬁssion machine— Structural insights into dynamin assembly and activa - tion . J Cell Sci 126 : 2773 – 2784 . Chappie JS , Acharya S , Liu Y - W , Leonard M , Pucadyil TJ , Schmid SL . 2009 . An intramolecular signaling element that modulates dynamin function in vitro and in vivo . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 3561 – 3571 . Chappie JS , Acharya S , Leonard M , Schmid SL , Dyda F . 2010 . G domain dimerization controls dynamin’s assem - bly - stimulated GTPase activity . Nature 465 : 435 – 440 . ChappieJS , MearsJA , FangS , LeonardM , SchmidSL , Milli - gan RA , Hinshaw JE , Dyda F . 2011 . A pseudoatomic model of the dynamin polymer identiﬁes a hydrolysis - dependent powerstroke . Cell 147 : 209 – 222 . Chen C - Y , Brodsky FM . 2005 . Huntingtin - interacting pro - tein 1 ( Hip1 ) and Hip1 - related protein ( Hip1R ) bind the conserved sequence of clathrin light chains and thereby inﬂuence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribu - tion in vivo . J Biol Chem 280 : 6109 – 6117 . Chen C - Y , Reese ML , Hwang PK , Ota N , Agard D , Brodsky FM . 2002 . Clathrin light and heavy chain interface : a - Helix - binding superhelix loops via critical tryptophans . EMBO J 21 : 6072 – 6082 . Cheng Y , Boll W , Kirchhausen T , Harrison SC , Walz T . 2007 . Cryoelectron tomography of clathrin - coated vesicles : Structural implications for coat assembly . J Mol Biol 365 : 892 – 899 . CocucciE , AguetF , BoulantS , KirchhausenT . 2012 . Theﬁrst ﬁve seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit . Cell 150 : 495 – 507 . CollinsBM , McCoyAJ , KentHM , EvansPR , OwenDJ . 2002 . Molecular architecture and functional model of the en - docytic AP2 complex . Cell 109 : 523 – 535 . Conner SD , Schro¨ter T , Schmid SL . 2003 . AAK1 - mediated micro2 phosphorylation is stimulated by assembled clathrin . Trafﬁc 4 : 885 – 890 . (cid:2) Cossart P , Helenius A . 2014 . Endocytosis of viruses and bacteria . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016972 . Cureton DK , Massol RH , Whelan SPJ , Kirchhausen T . 2010 . Thelengthofvesicularstomatitisvirusparticlesdictatesaneedforactinassemblyduringclathrin - dependent en - docytosis . PLoS Pathog 6 : e1001127 . Cureton DK , Harbison CE , Cocucci E , Parrish CR , Kirch - hausen T . 2012 . Limited transferrin receptor clustering allows rapid diffusion of canine parvovirus into clathrin endocytic structures . J Virol 86 : 5330 – 5340 . Damke H , Baba T , Warnock DE , Schmid SL . 1994 . Induc - tion of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J Cell Biol 127 : 915 – 934 . Dannhauser PN , Ungewickell EJ . 2012 . Reconstitution of clathrin - coated bud and vesicle formation with minimal components . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 634 – 639 . David C , McPherson PS , Mundigl O , de Camilli P . 1996 . A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis sug - gested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc Natl Acad Sci 93 : 331 – 335 . Drake MT , Traub LM . 2001 . Interaction of two structurally distinct sequence types with the clathrin terminal do - main b - propeller . J Biol Chem 276 : 28700 – 28709 . Drake MT , Downs MA , Traub LM . 2000 . Epsin binds to clathrinbyassociating directlywiththeclathrin - terminal domain . Evidence for cooperative binding through two discrete sites . J Biol Chem 275 : 6479 – 6489 . Dvir H , Shah M , Girardi E , Guo L , Farquhar MG , Zajonc DM . 2012 . Atomic structure of the autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia phosphotyrosine - binding domain in complex with theLDL - receptor tail . Proc NatlAcadSci 109 : 6916 – 6921 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , NibertML , KirchhausenT . 2004 . Endocytosisby random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 : 591 – 605 . Engqvist - Goldstein AEY , Drubin DG . 2003 . Actin assembly and endocytosis : From yeast to mammals . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 19 : 287 – 332 . Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Warren RA , Kessels MM , Keen JH , Heuser J , Drubin DG . 2001 . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of en - docytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J Cell Biol 154 : 1209 – 1223 . T . Kirchhausen et al . 22 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Faelber K , Posor Y , Gao S , Held M , Roske Y , Schulze D , Haucke V , Noe´ F , Daumke O . 2011 . Crystal structure of nucleotide - free dynamin . Nature 477 : 556 – 560 . Farsad K , Ringstad N , Takei K , Floyd SR , Rose K , de Camilli P . 2001 . Generation of high curvature membranes medi - ated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions . J Cell Biol 155 : 193 – 200 . Ford MG , Pearse BM , Higgins MK , Vallis Y , Owen DJ , Gib - son A , Hopkins CR , Evans PR , McMahon HT . 2001 . Si - multaneous binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and clathrin by AP180 in the nucleation of clathrin lattices on mem - branes . Science 291 : 1051 – 1055 . Ford MGJ , Mills IG , Peter BJ , Vallis Y , Praefcke GJK , Evans PR , McMahon HT . 2002 . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 419 : 361 – 366 . Ford MGJ , Jenni S , Nunnari J . 2011 . The crystal structure of dynamin . Nature 477 : 561 – 566 . Fotin A , Cheng Y , Grigorieff N , Walz T , Harrison SC , Kirch - hausen T . 2004a . Structure of an auxilin - bound clathrin coat and its implications for the mechanism of uncoat - ing . Nature 432 : 649 – 653 . Fotin A , Cheng Y , Sliz P , Grigorieff N , Harrison SC , Kirch - hausen T , Walz T . 2004b . Molecular model foracomplete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 432 : 573 – 579 . Frost A , Unger VM , De Camilli P . 2009 . The BAR domain superfamily : Membrane - molding macromolecules . Cell 137 : 191 – 196 . Fujimoto LM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Schmid SL . 2000 . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Trafﬁc 1 : 161 – 171 . Gad H , Ringstad N , Lo¨w P , Kjaerulff O , Gustafsson J , Wenk M , Di Paolo G , Nemoto Y , Crun J , Ellisman MH , et al . 2000 . Fission and uncoating of synaptic clathrin - coated vesicles are perturbed by disruption of interactions with the SH3 domain of endophilin . Neuron 27 : 301 – 312 . Gallop JL , Jao CC , Kent HM , Butler PJG , Evans PR , Langen R , McMahon HT . 2006 . Mechanism of endophilin N - BAR domain - mediated membrane curvature . EMBO J 25 : 2898 – 2910 . Girard M , Allaire PD , McPherson PS , Blondeau F . 2005 . Non - stoichiometric relationship between clathrin heavy and light chains revealed by quantitative comparative proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles from brain and liver . Mol Cell Proteomics 4 : 1145 – 1154 . Goldstein JL , Anderson RG , Brown MS . 1979 . Coated pits , coated vesicles , and receptor - mediated endocytosis . Na - ture 279 : 679 – 685 . Guan R , Dai H , Han D , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T . 2010 . Structure of the PTEN - like region of auxilin , a detector of clathrin - coated vesicle budding . Structure 18 : 1191 – 1198 . Harris TW , Hartwieg E , Horvitz HR , Jorgensen EM . 2000 . Mutations in synaptojanin disrupt synaptic vesicle recy - cling . J Cell Biol 150 : 589 – 600 . Hartl FU , Hayer - Hartl M . 2002 . Molecular chaperones in thecytosol : Fromnascentchaintofoldedprotein . Science 295 : 1852 – 1858 . Hasson T . 2003 . Myosin VI : Two distinct roles in endocyto - sis . J Cell Sci 116 : 3453 – 3461 . Hawryluk MJ , Keyel PA , Mishra SK , Watkins SC , Heuser JE , Traub LM . 2006 . Epsin 1 is a polyubiquitin - selective cla - thrin - associated sorting protein . Trafﬁc 7 : 262 – 281 . Heldwein EE , Macia E , Wang J , Yin HL , Kirchhausen T , HarrisonSC . 2004 . Crystalstructureoftheclathrinadap - tor protein 1 core . Proc Natl Acad Sci 101 : 14108 – 14113 . Henne WM , Kent HM , Ford MGJ , Hegde BG , Daumke O , ButlerPJG , MittalR , LangenR , EvansPR , McMahonHT . 2007 . Structureand analysis of FCHo2 F - BARdomain : A dimerizing and membrane recruitment module that ef - fects membrane curvature . Structure 15 : 839 – 852 . Henne WM , Boucrot E , Meinecke M , Evergren E , Vallis Y , Mittal R , McMahon HT . 2010 . FCHo proteins are nu - cleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 : 1281 – 1284 . Heuser J . 1980 . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 84 : 560 – 583 . Heuser JE , Keen J . 1988 . Deep - etchvisualization of proteins involved in clathrin assembly . J Cell Biol 107 : 877 – 886 . HeymannJB , WinklerDC , YimY - I , EisenbergE , Greene LE , StevenAC . 2013 . Clathrin - coatedvesiclesfrombrainhave small payloads : A cryoelectron tomographic study . J Struct Biol 184 : 43 – 51 . Hirst J , Irving C , Borner GHH . 2013 . Adaptor protein com - plexes AP4 and AP5 : New players in endosomal trafﬁck - ing and progressive spastic paraplegia . Trafﬁc 14 : 153 – 164 . Holstein SE , Ungewickell H , Ungewickell E . 1996 . Mecha - nism of clathrin basket dissociation : Separate functions of proteindomainsoftheDnaJhomologue auxilin . J Cell Biol 135 : 925 – 937 . Huang F , Khvorova A , Marshall W , Sorkin A . 2004 . Analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor by RNA interference . J Biol Chem 279 : 16657 – 16661 . Jackson AP , Seow HF , Holmes N , Drickamer K , Parham P . 1987 . Clathrin light chains contain brain - speciﬁc inser - tion sequences and a region of homology with interme - diate ﬁlaments . Nature 326 : 154 – 159 . Jackson LP , Kelly BT , McCoy AJ , Gaffry T , James LC , Collins BM , Honing S , Evans PR , Owen DJ . 2010 . A large - scale conformational change couples membrane recruitment to cargo binding in the AP2 clathrin adaptor complex . Cell 141 : 1220 – 1229 . JiangJ , TaylorAB , PrasadK , Ishikawa - BrushY , HartPJ , Lafer EM , Sousa R . 2003 . Structure – function analysis of the auxilin J - domain reveals an extended Hsc70 interaction interface . Biochemistry 42 : 5748 – 5753 . Jiang J , Prasad K , Lafer EM , Sousa R . 2005 . Structural basis of interdomain communication in the Hsc70 chaperone . Mol Cell 20 : 513 – 524 . Jiang J , Maes EG , Taylor AB , Wang L , Hinck AP , Lafer EM , Sousa R . 2007 . Structural basis of J cochaperone binding and regulation of Hsp70 . Mol Cell 28 : 422 – 433 . (cid:2) Johannes L , Wunder C , Bassereau P . 2014 . Bending “on the rocks”—A cocktail of biophysical modules to build endocytic pathways . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 : a016741 . Keen JH , Beck KA , Kirchhausen T , Jarrett T . 1991 . Clathrin domains involved in recognition by assembly protein AP2 . J Biol Chem 266 : 7950 – 7956 . Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 23 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from KellyBT , McCoyAJ , Spa¨teK , MillerSE , EvansPR , HoningS , Owen DJ . 2008 . A structural explanation for the binding of endocytic dileucine motifs by the AP2 complex . Na - ture 456 : 976 – 979 . Keyel PA , Thieman JR , Roth R , Erkan E , Everett ET , Watkins SC , Heuser JE , Traub LM . 2008 . The AP2 adaptor b 2 appendage scaffolds alternate cargo endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 5309 – 5326 . KirchhausenT . 1999 . Adaptorsforclathrin - mediatedtrafﬁc . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 15 : 705 – 732 . Kirchhausen T . 2000 . Clathrin . Annu Rev Biochem 69 : 699 – 727 . Kirchhausen T . 2009 . Imaging endocytic clathrin structures in living cells . Trends Cell Biol 19 : 596 – 605 . Kirchhausen T . 2012 . Bending membranes . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 906 – 908 . Kirchhausen T , Harrison SC . 1981 . Protein organization in clathrin trimers . Cell 23 : 755 – 761 . Kirchhausen T , Toyoda T . 1993 . Immunoelectron micro - scopic evidence for the extended conformation of light chains in clathrin trimers . J Biol Chem 268 : 10268 – 10273 . Kirchhausen T , Scarmato P , Harrison SC , Monroe JJ , Chow EP , Mattaliano RJ , Ramachandran KL , Smart JE , Ahn AH , Brosius J . 1987 . Clathrin light chains LCA and LCB are similar , polymorphic , and share repeated heptad mo - tifs . Science 236 : 320 – 324 . KuralC , Tacheva - GrigorovaSK , BoulantS , CocucciE , Baust T , Duarte D , Kirchhausen T . 2012 . Dynamics of intracel - lular clathrin / AP1 - and clathrin / AP3 - containing carri - ers . Cell Rep doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2012 . 09 . 025 . Lee D - W , Wu X , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . 2006 . Recruitment dynamicsofGAKandauxilintoclathrin - coatedpitsdur - ing endocytosis . J Cell Sci 119 : 3502 – 3512 . Lefkowitz RJ , Whalen EJ . 2004 . b - Arrestins : Trafﬁc cops of cell signaling . Curr Opin Cell Biol 16 : 162 – 168 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Schmid SL , Danuser G . 2011 . Mea - suring the hierarchyof molecularevents during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Trafﬁc 12 : 815 – 825 . MaciaE , EhrlichM , MassolR , BoucrotE , BrunnerC , Kirch - hausen T . 2006 . Dynasore , a cell - permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev Cell 10 : 839 – 850 . Mao Y , Chen J , Maynard JA , Zhang B , Quiocho FA . 2001 . A novel all helix fold of the AP180 amino - terminal domain for phosphoinositide binding and clathrin assembly in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Cell 104 : 433 – 440 . Massol RH , Boll W , Grifﬁn AM , Kirchhausen T . 2006 . A burst of auxilin recruitment determines the onset of clathrin - coated vesicle uncoating . Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 : 10265 – 10270 . Masuda M , Takeda S , Sone M , Ohki T , Mori H , Kamioka Y , Mochizuki N . 2006 . Endophilin BAR domain drives membrane curvature by two newly identiﬁed structure - based mechanisms . EMBO J 25 : 2889 – 2897 . Matsui W , Kirchhausen T . 1990 . Stabilization of clathrin coats by the core of the clathrin - associated protein com - plex AP2 . Biochemistry 29 : 10791 – 10798 . McPherson PS , Garcia EP , Slepnev VI , David C , Zhang X , Grabs D , Sossin WS , Bauerfeind R , Nemoto Y , de Camilli P . 1996 . A presynaptic inositol - 5 - phosphatase . Nature 379 : 353 – 357 . (cid:2) Merriﬁeld C , Kaksonen M . 2014 . Endocytic accessory fac - tors and regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshper - spect . a016733 . Merriﬁeld CJ , Feldman ME , Wan L , Almers W . 2002 . Imag - ing actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 691 – 698 . MerriﬁeldCJ , PerraisD , ZenisekD . 2005 . Couplingbetween clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 : 593 – 606 . Meyerholz A , Hinrichsen L , Groos S , Esk P - C , Brandes G , Ungewickell EJ . 2005 . Effect of clathrin assembly lym - phoid myeloid leukemia protein depletion on clathrin coat formation . Trafﬁc 6 : 1225 – 1234 . Micheva KD , Ramjaun AR , Kay BK , McPherson PS . 1997 . SH3 domain - dependent interactions of endophilin with amphiphysin . FEBS Lett 414 : 308 – 312 . Miele AE , Watson PJ , Evans PR , Traub LM , Owen DJ . 2004 . Two distinct interaction motifs in amphiphysin bind two independent sites on the clathrin terminal domain b - propeller . Nat Struct Mol Biol 11 : 242 – 248 . Miller SE , Sahlender DA , Graham SC , Honing S , Robinson MS , Peden AA , Owen DJ . 2011 . The molecular basis for the endocytosis of small R - SNAREs by the clathrin adap - tor CALM . Cell 147 : 1118 – 1131 . Mim C , Unger VM . 2012 . Membrane curvature and its gen - eration by BAR proteins . Trends Biochem Sci 37 : 526 – 533 . Morlot S , Roux A . 2013 . Mechanics of dynamin - mediated membrane ﬁssion . Annu Rev Biophys 42 : 629 – 649 . Musacchio A , Smith CJ , Roseman AM , Harrison SC , Kirch - hausen T , Pearse BM . 1999 . Functional organization of clathrin in coats : Combining electron cryomicroscopy and X - ray crystallography . Mol Cell 3 : 761 – 770 . Neutra MR , Ciechanover A , Owen LS , Lodish HF . 1985 . Intracellular transport of transferrin - and asialooroso - mucoid - colloidal gold conjugates to lysosomes after re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis . J Histochem Cytochem 33 : 1134 – 1144 . NewpherTM , Idrissi F - Z , Geli MI , LemmonSK . 2006 . Nov - elfunctionofclathrinlightchaininpromotingendocyticvesicleformation . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 4343 – 4352 . Niu Q , Niu Q , Ybe JA , Ybe JA . 2008 . Crystal structure at 2 . 8 A˚ of huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) coiled - coil domain reveals a charged surface suitable for HIP1 pro - tein interactor ( HIPPI ) . J Mol Biol 375 : 1197 – 1205 . Nonet ML , Holgado AM , Brewer F , Serpe CJ , Norbeck BA , Holleran J , Wei L , Hartwieg E , Jorgensen EM , Alfonso A . 1999 . UNC - 11 , a Caenorhabditis elegans AP180 homo - logue , regulates the size and protein composition of syn - aptic vesicles . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 2343 – 2360 . Ohno H , Stewart J , Fournier MC , Bosshart H , Rhee I , Miya - takeS , SaitoT , GallusserA , KirchhausenT , Bonifacino JS . 1995 . Interaction of tyrosine - based sorting signals with clathrin - associated proteins . Science 269 : 1872 – 1875 . Owen DJ , Evans PR . 1998 . A structural explanation for the recognition of tyrosine - based endocytotic signals . Sci - ence 282 : 1327 – 1332 . Owen DJ , Vallis Y , Noble ME , Hunter JB , Dafforn TR , Evans PR , McMahon HT . 1999 . A structural explanationfor the T . Kirchhausen et al . 24 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from binding of multiple ligands by the a - adaptin appendage domain . Cell 97 : 805 – 815 . Owen DJ , Vallis Y , Pearse BM , McMahon HT , Evans PR . 2000 . The structure and function of the b 2 - adaptin ap - pendage domain . EMBO J 19 : 4216 – 4227 . Pearse BM . 1975 . Coated vesicles from pig brain : Puriﬁca - tion and biochemical characterization . J Mol Biol 97 : 93 – 98 . PearseBM . 1976 . Clathrin : Auniqueproteinassociatedwith intracellular transfer of membrane by coated vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci 73 : 1255 – 1259 . Perera RM , Zoncu R , Lucast L , De Camilli P , Toomre D . 2006 . Two synaptojanin 1 isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 : 19332 – 19337 . Perrais D , Merriﬁeld CJ . 2005 . Dynamics of endocytic ves - icle creation . Dev Cell 9 : 581 – 592 . Peter BJ , Kent HM , Mills IG , Vallis Y , Butler PJG , Evans PR , McMahon HT . 2004 . BAR domains as sensors of mem - brane curvature : The amphiphysin BAR structure . Sci - ence 303 : 495 – 499 . Polo S , Sigismund S , Faretta M , Guidi M , Capua MR , Bossi G , ChenH , DeCamilliP , DiFiorePP . 2002 . Asinglemotif responsible for ubiquitin recognition and monoubiqui - tination in endocytic proteins . Nature 416 : 451 – 455 . Posor Y , Eichhorn - Gruenig M , Puchkov D , Scho¨neberg J , Ullrich A , Lampe A , Mu¨ller R , Zarbakhsh S , Gulluni F , Hirsch E , et al . 2013 . Spatiotemporal control of endocy - tosis by phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 - bisphosphate . Nature 499 : 233 – 237 . PraefckeGJK , FordMGJ , SchmidEM , OlesenLE , GallopJL , Peak - Chew S - Y , Vallis Y , Babu MM , Mills IG , McMahon HT . 2004 . Evolving nature of the AP2 a - appendage hub during clathrin - coated vesicle endocytosis . EMBO J 23 : 4371 – 4383 . Pryor PR , Jackson L , Gray SR , Edeling MA , Thompson A , Sanderson CM , Evans PR , Owen DJ , Luzio JP . 2008 . Mo - lecular basis for the sorting of the SNARE VAMP7 into endocytic clathrin - coated vesicles by the ArfGAP Hrb . Cell 134 : 817 – 827 . Pylypenko O , Lundmark R , Rasmuson E , Carlsson SR , Rak A . 2007 . The PX - BAR membrane - remodeling unit of sorting nexin 9 . EMBO J 26 : 4788 – 4800 . Rapoport I , Miyazaki M , Boll W , Duckworth B , Cantley LC , ShoelsonS , KirchhausenT . 1997 . Regulatory interactions in the recognition of endocytic sorting signals by AP2 complexes . EMBO J 16 : 2240 – 2250 . RapoportI , BollW , YuA , Bo¨ckingT , KirchhausenT . 2008 . A motif in the clathrin heavychain required for the Hsc70 / auxilin uncoating reaction . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 405 – 413 . Reider A , Barker SL , Mishra SK , Im YJ , Maldonado - Ba´ez L , Hurley JH , Traub LM , Wendland B . 2009 . Syp1 is a con - servedendocyticadaptorthatcontainsdomainsinvolvedincargoselectionandmembranetubulation . EMBOJ 28 : 3103 – 3116 . Ricotta D , Conner SD , Schmid SL , Figura von K , Honing S . 2002 . Phosphorylation of the AP2 m subunit by AAK1 mediateshighafﬁnitybindingtomembraneproteinsort - ing signals . J Cell Biol 156 : 791 – 795 . RitterB , DenisovAY , PhilieJ , DeprezC , TungEC , GehringK , McPherson PS . 2004 . Two WXXF - based motifs in NE - CAPs deﬁne the speciﬁcity of accessory protein binding to AP1 and AP2 . EMBO J 23 : 3701 – 3710 . Robinson MS , Bonifacino JS . 2001 . Adaptor - related pro - teins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 13 : 444 – 453 . Roth TF , Porter KR . 1964 . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti L . J Cell Biol 20 : 313 – 332 . Rothman JE , Schmid SL . 1986 . Enzymatic recycling of clathrin from coated vesicles . Cell 46 : 5 – 9 . Saffarian S , Kirchhausen T . 2008 . Differential evanescence nanometry : Live - cell ﬂuorescence measurements with 10 - nmaxialresolutionontheplasmamembrane . Biophys J 94 : 2333 – 2342 . Saffarian S , Cocucci E , Kirchhausen T . 2009 . Distinct dy - namics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol 7 : e1000191 . Schmid SL , FrolovVA . 2011 . Dynamin : Functionaldesignof a membrane ﬁssion catalyst . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 27 : 79 – 105 . Schmid EM , McMahon HT . 2007 . Integrating molecular and network biology to decode endocytosis . Nature 448 : 883 – 888 . Schmid EM , FordMGJ , Burtey A , Praefcke GJK , Peak - Chew S - Y , Mills IG , Benmerah A , McMahon HT . 2006 . Role of the AP2 b - appendage hub in recruiting partners for clathrin - coated vesicle assembly . PLoS Biol 4 : e262 . Schuske KR , Richmond JE , Matthies DS , Davis WS , Runz S , Rube DA , van der Bliek AM , Jorgensen EM . 2003 . Endo - philin is required for synaptic vesicle endocytosis by lo - calizing synaptojanin . Neuron 40 : 749 – 762 . Shih W , Gallusser A , Kirchhausen T . 1995 . A clathrin - bind - ing site in the hinge of the b 2 chain of mammalian AP2 complexes . J Biol Chem 270 : 31083 – 31090 . SmithCJ , GrigorieffN , PearseBM . 1998 . Clathrincoatsat21 Aresolution : Acellularassemblydesignedtorecyclemul - tiple membrane receptors . EMBO J 17 : 4943 – 4953 . Stachowiak JC , Schmid EM , Ryan CJ , Ann HS , Sasaki DY , Sherman MB , Geissler PL , Fletcher DA , Hayden CC . 2012 . Membrane bending by protein – protein crowding . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 944 – 949 . Stachowiak JC , Brodsky FM , Miller EA . 2013 . Acost - beneﬁt analysis of the physical mechanisms of membrane curva - ture . Nat Cell Biol 15 : 1019 – 1027 . SweitzerSM , HinshawJE . 1998 . DynaminundergoesaGTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 : 1021 – 1029 . Taylor MJ , Perrais D , Merriﬁeld CJ . 2011 . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clath - rin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 9 : e1000604 . Taylor MJ , Lampe M , Merriﬁeld CJ . 2012 . A feedback loop between dynamin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 10 : e1001302 . Tebar F , Sorkina T , Sorkin A , Ericsson M , Kirchhausen T . 1996 . Eps15 is a component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles and is located at the rim of coated pits . J Biol Chem 271 : 28727 – 28730 . Tebar F , Bohlander SK , Sorkin A . 1999 . Clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia ( CALM ) protein : Localiza - tion in endocytic - coated pits , interactions with clathrin , and the impact of overexpression on clathrin - mediated trafﬁc . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 2687 – 2702 . Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 25 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from terHaarE , MusacchioA , HarrisonSC , KirchhausenT . 1998 . Atomic structure of clathrin : A b - propeller terminal do - main joins an a zigzag linker . Cell 95 : 563 – 573 . ter Haar E , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T . 2000 . Peptide - in - grooveinteractionslinktargetproteinstothe b - propeller of clathrin . Proc Natl Acad Sci 97 : 1096 – 1100 . (cid:2) Traub LM , Bonifacino JS . 2013 . Cargo recognition in clath - rin - mediated endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5 : a016790 . Traub LM , Downs MA , Westrich JL , Fremont DH . 1999 . Crystal structure of the a appendage of AP2 reveals a recruitment platform for clathrin - coat assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci 96 : 8907 – 8912 . Turkewitz AP , Harrison SC . 1989 . Concentration of trans - ferrin receptor in human placental coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 108 : 2127 – 2135 . Umasankar PK , Sanker S , Thieman JR , Chakraborty S , Wendland B , Tsang M , Traub LM . 2012 . Distinct and separable activities of the endocytic clathrin - coat com - ponents Fcho1 / 2 and AP2 in developmental patterning . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 488 – 501 . Umeda A , Meyerholz A , Ungewickell E . 2000 . Identiﬁcation of the universal cofactor ( auxilin 2 ) in clathrin coat dis - sociation . Eur J Cell Biol 79 : 336 – 342 . Ungewickell E , Branton D . 1981 . Assembly units of clathrin coats . Nature 289 : 420 – 422 . Ungewickell E , Ungewickell H , Holstein SE , Lindner R , Pra - sad K , Barouch W , Martin B , Greene LE , Eisenberg E . 1995 . Role of auxilin in uncoating clathrin - coated vesi - cles . Nature 378 : 632 – 635 . Urrutia R , Henley JR , Cook T , McNiven MA . 1997 . The dynamins : Redundant or distinct functions for an ex - panding family of related GTPases ? Proc Natl Acad Sci 94 : 377 – 384 . van Weering JRT , Sessions RB , Traer CJ , Kloer DP , Bhatia VK , Stamou D , Carlsson SR , Hurley JH , Cullen PJ . 2012 . Molecular basis for SNX - BAR - mediated assemblyof dis - tinctendosomalsortingtubules . EMBOJ 31 : 4466 – 4480 . Veiga E , Cossart P . 2005 . Listeria hijacks the clathrin - depen - dent endocytic machinery to invade mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 894 – 900 . Veiga E , Guttman JA , Bonazzi M , Boucrot E , Toledo - Arana A , Lin AE , Enninga J , Pizarro - Cerda´ J , Finlay BB , Kirch - hausen T , et al . 2007 . Invasive and adherent bacterial pathogens co - opt host clathrin for infection . Cell Host Microbe 2 : 340 – 351 . Verstreken P , Koh T - W , Schulze KL , Zhai RG , Hiesinger PR , Zhou Y , Mehta SQ , Cao Y , Roos J , Bellen HJ . 2003 . Syn - aptojanin is recruited byendophilin to promote synaptic vesicle uncoating . Neuron 40 : 733 – 748 . Wang Q , Kaan HYK , Hooda RN , Goh SL , Sondermann H . 2008 . Structure and plasticity of Endophilin and Sorting Nexin 9 . Structure 16 : 1574 – 1587 . Wendland B . 2002 . Epsins : Adaptors in endocytosis ? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 : 971 – 977 . Wilbur JD , Wilbur JD , Chen C - Y , Chen C - Y , Manalo V , ManaloV , HwangPK , HwangPK , FletterickRJ , Fletterick RJ , et al . 2008 . Actin binding by Hip1 ( huntingtin - in - teracting protein 1 ) and Hip1R ( Hip1 - related protein ) is regulated by clathrin light chain . J Biol Chem 283 : 32870 – 32879 . Wu M , Huang B , Graham M , Raimondi A , Heuser JE , Zhuang X , De Camilli P . 2010 . Coupling between clathrin - dependent endocytic budding and F - BAR - de - pendent tubulation in a cell - free system . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 902 – 908 . Xing Y , Bo¨cking T , Wolf M , Grigorieff N , Kirchhausen T , Harrison SC . 2010 . Structure of clathrin coat with bound Hsc70 and auxilin : Mechanism of Hsc70 - facilitated dis - assembly . EMBO J 29 : 655 – 665 . Yu A , Xing Y , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T . 2010 . Structural analysis of the interaction between Dishevelled2 and clathrin AP2 adaptor , a critical step in noncanonical Wnt signaling . Structure 18 : 1311 – 1320 . Zhang P , Hinshaw JE . 2001 . Three - dimensional reconstruc - tion of dynamin in the constricted state . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 922 – 926 . Zoncu R , Perera RM , Sebastian R , Nakatsu F , Chen H , Balla T , Ayala G , Toomre D , De Camilli PV . 2007 . Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc Natl Acad Sci 104 : 3793 – 3798 . T . Kirchhausen et al . 26 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from 2014 ; doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016725 Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol Tom Kirchhausen , David Owen and Stephen C . Harrison Membrane Traffic Molecular Structure , Function , and Dynamics of Clathrin - Mediated Subject Collection Endocytosis Endocytosis : Past , Present , and Future Zerial Sandra L . Schmid , Alexander Sorkin and Marino Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Imaging and Modeling the Dynamics of Marcel Mettlen and Gaudenz Danuser Endosomal System Rab Proteins and the Compartmentalization of the Angela Wandinger - Ness and Marino Zerial Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Endocytic Accessory Factors and Regulation of Christien J . Merrifield and Marko Kaksonen Regulator of Cell Polarity and Tissue Dynamics Cargo Sorting in the Endocytic Pathway : A Key Suzanne Eaton and Fernando Martin - Belmonte SystemThe Complex Ultrastructure of the Endolysosomal Judith Klumperman and Graça Raposo Links to Human Disease Cytoskeleton , Cell Cycle , Nucleus , and Beyond : and Other Endocytic Regulators in the Unconventional Functions for Clathrin , ESCRTs , et al . Frances M . Brodsky , R . Thomas Sosa , Joel A . Ybe , Lysosome - Related Organelles The Biogenesis of Lysosomes and Dieckmann , et al . J . Paul Luzio , Yvonne Hackmann , Nele M . G . Endocytosis of Viruses and Bacteria Pascale Cossart and Ari Helenius Endocytosis , Signaling , and Beyond Pier Paolo Di Fiore and Mark von Zastrow Responds to External Cues Lysosomal Adaptation : How the Lysosome Carmine Settembre and Andrea Ballabio Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis DonaldsonSatyajit Mayor , Robert G . Parton and Julie G . MetabolismReciprocal Regulation of Endocytosis and Amira Klip Costin N . Antonescu , Timothy E . McGraw and SignalingThe Role of Endocytosis during Morphogenetic Marcos Gonzalez - Gaitan and Frank Jülicher Cooperation ? Endocytosis and Autophagy : Exploitation or Sharon A . Tooze , Adi Abada and Zvulun Elazar Disease Role of Endosomes and Lysosomes in Human Frederick R . Maxfield http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / cgi / collection / For additional articles in this collection , see Copyright © 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved Harbor Laboratory Press at HARVARD UNIVERSITY on January 17 , 2015 - Published by Cold Spring http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from