Iterative Fractionation of Recycling Receptors from LysosomaUy Destined Ligands in an Early Sorting Endosome Kenneth W . Dunn , Timothy E . McGraw , and Frederick R . Maxfield Departments of Pathology and Physiology , Columbia Univesity , New York 10032 Abstract . To study the fusion and separation of endo - cytic compartments , we have used digital image analy - sis to quantify the accumulation of fluorescent ligands in endosomes during continuous endocytosis for periods of 1 - 20 min . Fluorescently labeled transferrin ( Tf ) and low density lipoproteins ( LDL ) were used as markers of recycling receptors and lysosomally directed ligands respectively . By measuring the inten - sity of individual endosomes , we found that the amount of LDL per endosome increases 30 - 40 - fold between 1 and 10 min and then plateaus . In contrast , the amount of Tf per endosome reaches a steady state within 2 min at a level that is only three to four times that at 1 min . We used pulse - chase double label methods to dem - onstrate that Tf cycles through the compartment in which the LDL accumulates . When both Tf and LDL are added to cells simultaneously for 2 min , nearly all endosomes contain both labels . With 2 - - 4 min further incubation in the absence of external ligands , LDL - containing compartments become depleted of Tf as Tf is directed to para - Golgi recycling endosomes . How - ever , if Tf is added to the medium 2 - 4 min after a pulse with LDL , most of the LDL - containing endo - somes become labeled with " If . The data indicate that at least 30 - 40 endocytic vesicles containing both Tf and LDL fuse with an endosomal compartment over a period of 5 - 10 min . LDL accumulates within this compartment and Tf is simultaneously removed . Sim - ple mathematical models suggest that this type of iter - ative fractionation can lead to very high efficiency sorting . M AMMALIAN cells internalize a variety of growth factors , nutrients , toxins and viruses through re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis ( for review , see Gold - stein et al . , 1985 ) . After internalization , endocytosed re - ceptors and ligands may be routed in one of several ways . Epidermal growth factor is directed to lysosomes as is its receptor ( Carpenter and Cohen , 1979 ) . Transferrin ( Tf ) ~ unloads its iron and is then recycled back to the cell surface along with its receptor ( Dautry - Varsat et al . , 1983 ; Klausner et al . , 1983 ) . In polarized cells , ligands and receptors may be transported from one domain of the plasma membrane to another ( Mostov et al . , 1984 ; Fuller and Simons , 1986 ) . In - ternalized asialoglycoproteins ( ASGP ) , ot - 2 - macroglobulin ( a2M ) , and low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) are directed to lysosomes and degraded while their receptors are recycled back to the cell surface ( Van Leuven et al . , 1980 ; Brown et al . , 1983 ; Breitfeld et al . , 1985 ) . Some toxins and viruses enter the cytosol directly from endosomes ( Keen et al . , 1982 ; Marsh et al . , 1983 ; Olsnes and Sandvig , 1985 ) . The endo - cytic pathways of Tf and LDL , the two ligands used in this I . Abbreviations used in this paper : ASGP , asialoglycoprotein ; diI - LDL , LDL conjugated to 3 , 3 ' - dioctadecylindocarbocyanine ; diO - LDL , LDL con - jugated to 3 , 3 ' - dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine ; F - ot2M , fluorescein - t ~ 2 - macro - globulin ; LDL , low density lipoproteins ; ct2M , et - 2 - macroglobulin ; MES , 2 - ln - morpholinolethanesulfonic acid ; R - Tf , human transferrin conjugated to rhodamine ; Tf , human transferrin . study , are depicted schematically in Fig . 1 . The nomencla - ture for endocytic compartments is not yet standardized . For consistency with our other papers examining endocytosis in CHO cells , we use here the names shown in Fig . 1 . The rela - tionship to some other nomenclature is given in the figure legend . Despite having different endocytic fates , diferent receptors and ligands are collected into shared coated pits and internal - ized into the same endocytic vesicles ( Maxfield et al . , 1978 ; Pastan and Willingham , 1983 ) . The question then arises of how molecules with different endocytic fates , but residing in the same endosome , are separated from one another and directed onto different intracellular pathways . For ligands that are separated from their receptors and directed to lysosomes , while their receptors are recycled back to the cell surface , sorting depends in part on the acid - dependent dissociation of receptors from ligands . For this class of ligands ( such as ot2M , ASGP , and LDL ) , the acid - ification that occurs in endosomes is sufficient to yield dis - sociation ( Tycko et al . , 1983 ; Brown et al . , 1983 ; Harford et al . , 1983a , 1983b ) and thus reduces the problem ofendo - cytic sorting to one of separating membrane - bound receptors from ligands dispersed into the endosome lumen . It has long been appreciated that endocytosed membrane itself must be recycled at a high rate , particularly in certain cells that pino - © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 89 / 12 / 3303 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 ( No . 6 , Pt . 2 ) , Dec . 1989 3303 - 3314 3303 I ~ i I ~ i ' m I ~ ~ 1 ~ Early endosomes ~ l ~ . ~ ~ i i L ~ S ~ ~ o m e ? Figure L Schematic diagram of the endocytic pathway of internal - ized diferric Tf ( T ) and LDL ( L ) . After binding to specific receptors on the cell surface , ligands are collected into coated pits and inter - nalized together into early endosomes . Later , ligands are found in the larger sorting endosomes , each of which consists of a large vacuole with tubular extensions . From this point receptors and ligands t o b e recycled are separated from those bound for lyso - somes . In this example , the receptor for LDL ( LR ) is shown leaving the sorting endosome for the recycling endosomes , while the LDL itself is next found in the late endosomal / prelysosomal compart - ment , and later still in lysosomes . In contrast , Tf recycles along with its receptor ( TR ) after releasing iron . Both the receptors for LDL and the apo - Tf receptor - ligand complex are returned to the cell surface via the recycling endosomes that are located near the Golgi complex in CHO cells . The lumenal contents of the sorting endosome may be exported from the sorting endosome onto a lysosomal pathway or the sorting endosome itself may mature into a prelysosomal structure . Similar compartments to the " sorting en - dosome " have been described in various models of endocytosis as CURL ( Geuze et al . , 1983 ) , " early endosomes " ( Schmid et ai . , 1988 ) , and " receptosomes " ( Pastan and Willingham , 1983 ) . At present there is no standard nomenclature for the different or - ganelles involved in endocytosis . The terminology used in this pa - per is consistent with previous work from this laboratory ( e . g . , Salzman and Maxfield , 1989 ) . cytose vast amounts of plasma membrane ( Duncan and Prat - ten , 1977 ; Burgert and Thilo , 1983 ; Steinman et al . , 1983 ) . Receptor recycling occurs with high efficiency . From the kinetics of internalization and degradation , it can be esti - mated that each LDL receptor recycles 150 times ( Goldstein et el . , 1985 ) , each Tf receptor up to 300 times ( Omary and Trowbridge , 1981 ) , and each ASGP receptor ' ~ 250 times ( Schwartz and Rup , 1983 ) . These figures suggest that recep - tors are recycled with > 99 % efficiency . Ligands of recycling receptors are sorted to lysosomes with somewhat lower efficiency . Between 25 % and 50 % of internalized ASGP is returned intact to the cell surface of rat hepatocytes ( Weigel and Oka , 1984 ) and between 28 % and 50 % of internalized ASGP is returned intact to the cell sur - face of HepG2 cells ( Simmons and Schwartz , 1984 ) , Yama - shiro et al . ( 1984 ) found only ' ~ 80 % of the et ~ M internal - ized by CHO cells was directed onto a lysosomal pathway after sorting from its receptor . Up to 10 % of endocytosed LDL is returned intact to the cell surface of skin fibroblasts ( Greenspan and St . Clair , 1984 ) . Sorting may be accomplished in one of two ways . In the first , sorting may occur in a single , very efficient step . Lin - derman and Lauffenburger ( 1988 ) developed mathematical descriptions for a model of this type in which recycling com - ponents migrate freely throughout the membrane of the sort - ing endosome , but are trapped in tubules from which recy - cling vesicles form . Sorting efficiency for a given receptor would be a function of how freely and rapidly it enters tu - bules . Lumenal ligands accumulate in the sorting endosome Early Sorting endosome Recycling endosome endosome \ / \ / After I round ~ 40 ~ Tf receptorsrecyc ed I ~ I00 ~ LDL ~ igands retained 100g LDL liqands retained 60g Tf receptors recycled g7 ~ LOL ligands retained ~ After 4 rounds , 68g Tf receptors recycled IJ 95 ~ LDL ligands retained l / 72 ~ Tf receptors recycled g4 ~ LDL ligands retained 77 ~ Tf receptors recycled I ~ 93 ~ LDL ligands retained @ After 20 rounds , 93Z Tf receptors recycled 82g LOL lJqands retained Figure 2 . Schematic diagram of the iterative fractionation model of endocytic sorting . In this example , we assume that the sorting endo - some fuses continuously with early endosomes , each of which car - ries 10 receptor and 10 ligand molecules . After fusion , receptors are free to migrate over the membrane , and ligands are free to dis - perse throughout the lumen of the sorting endosome . Simultane - ously ( although not necessarily in the lockstep depicted here ) 40 % of the receptors and 2 % of the ligand contained in the sorting endo - some are sorted and exported via each recycling vesicle . As shown in the running budget at the right of the figure , receptor recycling efficiency increases and ligand retention efficiency decreases with each round of sorting . One can also see that although the sorting endosome exports only 40 % of its receptors with each sorting step , the sorting endosome is operating at 100 % efficiency after six rounds of sorting since from this point onward the number of recep - tors exported in each round equals the number imported in that round . For simplicity , we have depicted the iterative fractionation sorting model as if the processes of fusion and sorting are linked , but this need not be the case . If recycling vesicles continue to form after fusion has stopped , recycling receptors may continue to be ex - ported from the sorting endosome and the number delivered to lyso - somes further decreased . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 3304 and are eventually degraded along with whatever receptors have been left behind at the time of sorting . Alternatively , sorting may be accomplished in a more con - tinuous fashion by many iterations of a sorting step . The sort - ing step need not be particularly efficient since , like a frac - tional distillation apparatus , high efficiency sorting would result from repetition of the sorting step . These two types of models lead to specific and different predictions about the accumulation of recycling and lyso - somally directed ligands in the sorting compartment . In the first process , both types of ligands would accumulate in en - dosomes simultaneously and with similar kinetics until the separation process began . This could occur after repeated fusions of coated pit - derived vesicles ( early endosomes ) . It could also occur separately for each of these early endo - somes , as would be required in models of endocytosis in which no mixing occurs between sequentially endocytosed molecules ( Ajioka and Kaplan , 1987 ; Ward et al . , 1989 ) . In the second type of process , the sorting compartment would experience repeated fusions with vesicles containing newly endocytosed ligands , while simultaneously exporting recy - cling components and accumulating lysosomally directed ligand . In this type of process , lysosomally directed ligands would accumulate to a greater degree in the sorting compart - ment than the recycling ligands and receptors . Also , a steady - state level of recycling ligands in the sorting compartment would be achieved more rapidly . Finally , the sorting com - partment should be capable of fusion with newly endocy - tosed material for several minutes . This type ofiterative frac - tionation is illustrated schematically in Fig . 2 . Support for the notion that the process of endocytic sorting involves large numbers of early endosome fusions comes from data obtained both in vivo ( Salzman and Maxfield , 1988 , 1989 ) and in vitro ( Gruenberg and Howell , 1986 ; Braell , 1987 ; Diaz et al . , 1988 ) , which show that at early times endosomes are fusogenic but they may lose their ca - pacity for fusion with time . In electron microscopic exami - nations of hepatocytes , Geuze et al . ( 1983 ) observed that endosomes increased in size while accumulating ASGP , sug - gesting repeated fusion of early endosomes . Endosome fusion could be compatibile with either of the two types of sorting models described above . In this paper , we describe experiments using digital image processing to measure the accumulation of Tf and LDL in endosomes . The data obtained are consistent with the iterative fractionation model . Materials and Methods Cell Cultures TRVb - I cells , a CHO cell line lacking endogenous Tf receptor activity and expressing transfected human Tf receptor ( McGraw et al . , 1987 ) were cul - tured on plastic tissue culture dishes in bicarbonate buffered F - 12 sup - plemented with 5 % FCS ( Gibco Laboratories , Grand Island , NY ; 100 U / ml penicillin and 100 # g / ml streptomycin at 370C in a 5 % CO2 humidified air atmosphere . Cells were passaged by trypsinization . 2 d before each experiment cells were plated onto cover slip bottom dishes , 35 - ram plastic tissue culture dishes whose bottoms have been replaced with polylysine coated glass coverslips ( Salzman and Maxfield , 1988 ) . I d before each experiment , the culture medium of each was replaced with a similar medium but made with 5 % delipidated FCS to stimulate in - creased expression of the cells ' LDL receptors ( Goldstein et al . , 1983 ) . Fluorescent Ligand Preparation Human Tf ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) was iron loaded , further purified by Sephacryl S - 300 gel filtration and conjugated to rhodamine as previously described ( Yamashiro et al . , 1984 ) . LDL was prepared from whole human serum as described by Goldstein et al . ( 1983 ) . LDL con - jugated to 3 , 3 ' - dioctadecylindocarbocyanine ( DiI - LDL ) and 3 , 3 ' - dioctade - cyloxacarbocyanine ( diO - LDL ) , ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) were prepared as described by Pitas et al . ( 1981 ) . Fluorescent LDLs were kindly provided by Dr . Ira Tahas ( Columbia University ) . Fluorescent Labeling of Cells 5 rain before labeling , the culture medium of each coverslip bottom dish was replaced with F - 12 without bicarbonate , buffered with 20 mM Hepes ( pH Z4 ) , supplemented with 100 U / ml penicillin , 100 # g / ml streptomycin and 2 mg / ml ovalbumin ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) and incubated in air on a warm tray at 3 " / °C . Cells were rinsed in the same medium and then incubated with either 5 tzg / ml DiI - LDL or 20 ~ g / ml rhodamine - Tf ( R - Tf ) in the Hepes - buffered F - 12 medium described above in air , on a warm tray at 37°C . At the end of the incubation period , cells were rapidly rinsed four times in medium 1 ( 150 mM NaC1 , 20 mM Hepes , pH Z4 , i mM CaCI2 , 5 mM KCI , 1 mM MgCI2 ) , two times in a mild acid solution of 50 mM MES ( 2 - n - morpholino ethanesulfonic acid ) , 280 mM sucrose , pH 5 . 0 , 4 times in medium 1 , fixed for 2 min at room temperature in 2 % formaldehyde freshly diluted in medium 1 , rinsed four times in medium 1 and placed in darkness until used . For double label studies , cells were incubated in medium 1 sup - plemented with 2 mg / ml ovalbumin , 5 / ~ g / ml diO - LDL and / or 20 / ~ g / ml R - Tf for the indicated times . In pulse - chase studies cells were rinsed free of label ( s ) with five changes of medium 1 before the chase in unlabeled medium 1 with 2 mg / ml ovalbumin . In those studies where cells were treated with second label following the chase interval , cells were rinsed four more times at the end of the chase , before administration of the second label . In all dual label studies , cells were immediately chilled at the end of incuba - tions , rinsed four times in ice - cold medium 1 , 2 times in ice - cold mild acid solution and another four times in ice - cold medium 1 . Cells were then fixed on ice as described above . Fluorescence Microscopy R - Tf and dil - LDL were visualized using a fluorescence microscope ( Dia - vert , E . Leitz , Inc . , Rockleigh , N J ) equipped with a 63 x , NA 1 . 4 objective , a 530 - 560 - nm band pass excitation filter , a 580 - nm dichroic mirror and 580 - nm - loag pass emission filter , diO - LDL was visualized with the same equipment but with a 450 - - 490 - nm band pass excitation filter , a 510 - nm dichroic mirror and a 515 - rim - long pass emission filter . Images were re - corded on a video cassette recorder ( CR6650U ; JVC ( Elmwood Park , NJ ) ) with a camera and image intensifier ( model No . VS2000N and KS1380 , respectively ; Videoscope International , Ltd . , Washington D . C . ) . Neutral density excitation filters ( 50 % , 25 % , 10 % , 5 % , 2 . 5 % transmission ) were used to keep fluorescence intensities from exceeding the camera ' s linear range . The image intensifier was kept at one gain setting for all time point recordings for each ligand . Fields were chosen under bright field illumina - tion . For each field , 10 serial focal plane images were recorded , 1 . 2 - # m apart , for , x , 2 sec apiece . Focal plane adjustment was made using a micro - stepping motor z - axis controller ( Kinetek Corp . , Yonkers , NY ) . Image Processing We developed a procedure for automatically measuring the fluorescence in - tensity of individual endosomes throughout a ceil . This required a method for identifying endosomes against background fluorescence , finding the in - focus plane for each endosome , separating the fluorescent image of each en - dosome from those of nearby endosomes and measuring the intensity of each resolved endosome . Images were digitized and background corrected as described previously ( Maxfield , 1989 ; Maxfield and Dunn , 1989 ) with the following changes : digital images were constructed from the average of 16 video frames , only the central 312 x 312 pixel region of the original 512 x 512 pixel image was analyzed and background intensity for each pixel was calculated as the median intensity in a surrounding 32 × 32 pixel region ( 5 . 5 x 5 . 5 tzm ) . This procedure does not lead to any significant subtraction of label fluores - cence from in - focus endosomes since all pixels within an endosome are above the median intensity in the region ( Maxfield and Dunn , 1989 ) . This has been verified for endosomes under all conditions in this paper . To distinguish partially overlapping images of closely adjacent fluores - Dunn et al . lterative Endocytic Sorting 3305 lso , A . - - 5 10 15 20 position 150 m C . ~ . 50 o . iiiii ! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S 10 15 20 position t50 " ~ 100 g - ~ so 0 . 0 5 10 15 20 position lso - F i ~ - B 0 • ' - , . . . . ' . . . . ' . . . . " " 5 10 15 20 position 1so - D " ~ lOO " ~ 50 " ' 5 . 0 51111111I 5 10 15 20 position C - D = E . c _ ~ 5o O , . 150 " 100 . c ' ~ . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . 5 10 15 20 position G 5 lo 15 20 position copy E through D = F copy A through F = G Figure 3 . Schematic diagram of image focus correction procedure . This figure shows fluorescence intensity profiles through the centers of two endosomes in two adjacent focal planes . The procedure illus - trated is used to determine if an endosome is in focus in the image from which the intensity profile ( A ) was obtained by comparing it with the adjacent focal plane ( B ) . Each profile has both a focused ( tall and narrow ) and a blurred , out - of - focus spot ( short and wide ) . A spot is defined as a group of contiguous pixels whose brightness is above a threshold value . The purpose of the method in this exam - ple is to delete the left spot of image A , while retaining the measured pixels of the right spot . Before focal correction , pixels whose inten - sities are < 40 % of that of the brightest pixel in each spot ( i . e . , those shown by the dashed line ) are deleted . The first step of this process requires that the maximum intensity of each spot be determined and assigned to all pixeis in the spot . The results of this operation on images A and B are shown in profiles C and D , respectively . Next the intensities of image D are subtracted , pixel - by - pixel , from those of image C . The profile of the remainder image is shown as profile E . Image E is then copied , using the nonzero plxels of image D as cent endosomes , an automated procedure was employed that removed the relatively dim areas of overlap by blackening pixels whose brightness level is < 40 % of that of the brightest pixel found in the same spot ( a spot being defined as a group of contiguous pixels whose brightness is above a thresh - old value ) . To quantify the fluorescence intensity of each individual endosome we devised a procedure for identifying the in - focus focal plane for each endo - some from a series of optical sections . We determined that fluorescent endo - somes would behave almost like point sources of light in our system since fluorescent beads ranging in diameter from 0 . 1 to 0 . 9 t ~ m ( Polysciences Inc . , Warrington , PA ) and fluorescent endosomes all produce images of nearly the same size and intensity profile shape . In principle , the integrated fluores - cence intensity of a point source ( like an endosome ) is nearly independent of focal plane within the microscope ' s focal range ( Kam , 1987 ) . The prob - lem becomes one of resolution , however , as out of focus images merge into one another and fade into the background fluorescence . Out - of - focus contri - butions to an image may be eliminated either mathematically , using the point spread function of the microscope / detector system , or optically , using a confocal microscope ( Kam , 1987 ) . Our technique makes use of the sim - plest aspect of the point spread function : the image of a point source be - comes both broader and dimmer as the distance from the focal plane in - creases . The process is depicted schematically and described fully in Fig . 3 . Briefly , fluorescent images were recorded for 10 serial focal planes ( 1 . 2 , am apart ) that spanned each field of cells . Images were next processed as described above . Each focal plane image was then compared to the images of the adjacent two focal planes . An endosome was judged to be in focus in a given focal plume if it was present in both adjacent focal planes , and had a lower fluorescence intensity in both adjacent focal planes . If an endo - some was either not present , or was brighter in one of the adjacent focal planes , it was discarded from the focal plane being analyzed . This proce - dure was repeated for the inner eight focal planes of each field and the resul - tant images were combined to yield a composite image of focused endo - somes . At this point , fluorescent spots whose sizes fall outside the range observed for a single endosome ( between 4 and 40 pixels in area ) were deleted from images . Large spots resulted from the inability of the method to distinguish the images of closely adjacent endosomes . The brightness of each endosome was quantified as the sum of the brightness values of all pixels whose brightness was at least 50 % of that of the brightest pixel in the endosome image , a parameter that was found to be relatively insensitive to focus errors . Measurements of serial focal plane images ( taken at 0 . 1 - t ~ m intervals ) of 0 . 13 # m fluorescent microspberes showed that measured inten - sity errors of (cid:127)10 % could be expected for slightly out - of - focus endosomes . Results TRVb - 1 cells incubated with 5 ttg / ml of diO - LDL and 20 # g / ml R - Tf for 2 min and fixed immediately show a vesicular pattern of fluorescence in which nearly all endosomes con - mining LDL also contain Tf ( Fig . 4 , a and b ) . Between 2 and 4 min of further incubation in the absence of fluorescent ligands Tf leaves the LDL - containing compartments and ac - cumulates in the para - Golgi region ( Fig . 4 , c , d , e , and f ) . During this same period of time , however , the LDL - con - mining compartments are capable of receiving newly endo - cytosed Tf ( Fig . 5 , a and b ) , indicating that Tf is continuously cycling through these compartments . LDL - containing endo - somes lose the capacity for fusion with time , so that very few are accessible to Tf endocytosed following an 8 - min chase ( Fig . 5 , c and d ) . When cells are continuously exposed to both R - Tf and diO - LDL for 10 min several different classes of endosomes can be identified ( Fig . 6 ) . Recycling endosomes , characterized a stencil , to make image E Finally image A , the original image to be processed , is copied through the nonzero pixels of image F to yield image G . As can be seen from the profiles , the out - of - focus spot has been removed from the original image , leaving only the focused spot . The procedure is then repeated using the other adja - cent out - of - focus focal plane image . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 3306 Figure 4 . Movement of R - Tf through the sorting endosome . TRVb - 1 cells were incubated in 5 ~ tg / ml diO - LDL and 20 # g / ml R - Tf for 2 min and either fixed immediately ( a and b ) , rinsed and incubated for another 2 min in the absence of labels ( c and d ) , or rinsed and incubated for another 4 min in the absence of labels ( e and f ) . a , c , and e were obtained using fluorescein optics to display diO - LDL , b , d , and fwere obtained using rhodamine optics to display R - Tf . Arrows indicate examples of endosomes containing both ligands . Using the arrows as landmarks , one can see that with time Tf appears to depart from the LDL - containing endosomes as it accumulates in the para - Golgi region . Bar , 10 / ~ m . Dunn et al . lterative Endocytic Sorting 3307 Figure 5 . Time - dependent loss of fusion competence by the sorting endosome . TRVb - I cells were incubated in 5 / ~ g / ml diO - LDL for 2 min , rinsed , and incubated in the absence of label for either 2 min ( a and b ) or 8 min ( c and d ) , rinsed , and incubated in 20 t ~ g / ml R - Tf for 2 min . As in Fig . 4 , diO - LDL fluorescence is displayed in panels a and c , R - Tf fluorescence is displayed in b and d . Arrows indicate examples of endosomes containing both ligands . Using the arrows as landmarks , one can see that while most of the diO - LDL - containing endosomes can be labeled with " If endocytosed 2 min later , very few are accessible to Tf endocytosed 8 min later . Bar , 10 ~ m . by the presence of Tf and absence of LDL , accumulate in the para - Golgi region . Late endosomes , which contain LDL but not Tf , distribute in a punctate pattern . Sorting endosomes , which contain both Tf and LDL , also show a punctate pat - tern . Endosomes containing diO - LDL display a wide range of fluorescence intensities , only an upper fraction of which is shown here because of the limited dynamic range of the video camera . As shown below , this variation in fluorescence intensity results from the accumulation of LDL in individual endosomes with time of incubation . R - Tf can be found in en - dosomes showing every level of diO - LDL accumulation and , in particular , in endosomes with the largest accumulation of diO - LDL , indicating that Tf cycles through the LDL accu - mulating compartment , which can be functionally defined as a sorting endosome . To measure the kinetics of accumulation of receptors and ligands in endosomes , we have developed a method for mea - suring the relative amounts of fluorescently labeled ligands in individual endosomes by quantifying their fluorescence intensity ( see Materials and Methods ) . In this procedure TRVb - 1 cells were incubated for various periods of time with either 5 # g / ml of diI - LDL ( a fluorescent ligand delivered mainly to lysosomes ) or 20 # g / ml of R - Tf ( a fluorescent recy - cling receptor marker ) . Cells were then fixed in 2 % formal - dehyde and their fluorescent images videotaped . The time course of accumulation of diI - LDL or R - Tf in endosomes was quantified as the increase in individual endosome bright - ness with time of incubation . Measuring fluorescence intensity of individual endosomes required developing techniques capable of quantifying fluo - rescence intensity over a 1 , 000 - fold range , capable of mini - mizing the effects of focal plane on endosome image fluores - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 3308 Figure 6 . Access of R - Tf to an LDL - accumulating sorting endosome . TRVb - I cells were incubated in 5 # g / ml diO - LDL and 20 ~ , g / mi R - Tf for 10 rain . DiO - LDL fluorescence is shown in a , and R - Tf fluorescence is shown in b . Arrows indicate examples of endosomes contain - ing both ligands . Note that R - Tf occurs in endosomes containing a range of quantities ofdiO - LDL , including those with the largest accumula - tion of diO - LDL . Bar , 10 # m . cence and capable of making large numbers of measurements . To extend the range of measurement , neutral density filters were placed in the excitation path , effectively extending the video camera ' s linear sensitivity range 40 - fold . Since we were interested in measuring the brightness of the brightest endosomes under each experimental condition , the dimmest endosomes were necessarily attenuated to a brightness level below the camera ' s sensitivity . Since the measured fluores - cence intensity of an endosome is a function of focal plane , a ) . E E O ~ t - O 9 e - E 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 0 5 10 15 20 time of uptake ( min ) Figure 7 . Time course of diI - LDL and R - Tf accumulation in endo - somes . Cells were continuously labeled with either 5 # g / ml DiI - LDL ( squares ) or 20 ~ , g / ml R - Tf ( triangles ) for the indicated peri - ods of time and the brightnesses of the endosomes quantified as de - scribed . Points shown are mean measured endosome brighmesses ( relative to the l - min value ) of four fields of , 03 - 5 cells each . Stan - dard errors of the mean are in each case smaller than the symbol size . I1 ) ( 1 ) t ~ 20 - 15 " 10 5 0 A . . . . . . . . . , , , I 1 1 1 . . . . . . o , ~ c ~ c5 c : ; ~ - - : - - - : - - : - - : cu e , i o , i c , , i c , , i ~ c6 o5 c , - j ¢6 ~ . ~ / ~ : log brightness 2 0 0 B 15 8 , 8 lO e ~ 5 log brightness Figure 8 . The frequency distributions of endosome brightnesses ( arbitrary units ) for TRVb - 1 ceils incubated with diI - LDL ( A ) or R - Tf ( B ) . Cells were incubated for either 1 min ( solid bars ) or 10 min ( lined bars ) . Each distribution represents the combined data of 10 fields of , , 03 - 5 cells each ( totaling between 470 and 980 endo - somes for each distribution ) . The mean brightness ofdiI - LDL con - taining endosomes increases 37 - fold , while the mean brightness of R - Tf containing endosomes increases by 2 . 5 times . Dunn et al . Iterative Endocytic Sorting 3309 a method was developed to eliminate out - of - focus endosomes from an image before measurement . This procedure guaran - teed that measurements were made only on those endosomes whose images were recorded within 0 . 6 / ~ m of the in - focus focal plane . The automated procedure devised to perform this function was capable of rapidly processing large num - bers of fluorescent images and was , in all cases tested , suc - cessful in eliminating endosomes that were judged to be out of focus . Endosome brightness was quantified as the sum of the brightness values of all pixels whose brightness was at least 50 % of that of the brightest pixel in the endosome . This parameter is relatively insensitive to focal plane since the in - tegrated fluorescence intensity of a point source is nearly independent of focal plane ( Kam , 1987 ) . Measurements of serial focal plane images of fluorescent microspheres showed that errors in intensity measurements arising from misfocus were reduced to , o10 % by these procedures ( see Materials and Methods ) . Although recycling ligands ( e . g . , Tf ) and lyso - somally directed ligands ( e . g . , LDL ) may be distributed to different regions of the sorting endosome , this should not affect measurements since the shapes of the intensity profiles of endosomes containing either " If or LDL are indistinguish - able from one another . In CHO and TRVb - 1 cells , " If collects in recycling endo - somes that are concentrated in a para - Golgi location after pas - sage through the sorting endosome ( Yamashiro et al . , 1984 ; McGraw et al . , 1987 ) . Since the para - Golgi concentration of Tf appears as a large mass in fluorescent images of cells , a maximum size criterion applied to eliminate overlapping en - dosomes ( see Materials and Methods ) effectively eliminated the postsorting para - Golgi structure from images before quan - tification . As reported for other lysosomally directed ligands , diI - LDL never shows this pattern , distributing instead in a punctate pattern . Eliminating the para - Golgi Tf accumulation from images will not affect measurements of intensities in the sorting endosome since Tf accumulates in the para - Golgi re - gion only after segregation from lysosomally directed ligands . To measure the accumulation of LDL in endosomes , TRVbl cells were incubated in medium containing 5 # g / ml diI - LDL for varying periods of time . The cells were rinsed , fixed , and the average endosome brightness determined at each time point . As shown in Fig . 7 , measured endosome brightnesses increased almost linearly for 10 min before level - ing off . By 10 min the average measured endosome brightness was 30 times the level at 1 min , indicating that these endo - somes experienced at least 30 fusions during this interval of time . In equivalent experiments in which cells were labeled with 20 # g / ml R - Tf , we found that the pattern and extent of R - Tf accumulation in punctate endosomes contrasted sharply with that of diI - LDL . As in ceils labeled with diI - LDL , the aver - age measured endosome brightness of R - Tf labeled cells in - creased approximately fourfold between 1 and 2 min of up - take , but while endosomes of diI - LDL labeled cells continued to brighten at approximately the same rate , R - Tf - containing endosomes stopped increasing in brightness at this point . From 2 min of incubation onward , the para - Golgi recycling structure became prominently labeled with R - Tf . In a separate experiment , TRVb - 1 cells were incubated with fluorescent ligands for either 1 or 10 min . Fig . 8 shows the distribution of measured brightnesses of diI - LDL - and R - Tf - containing endosomes in these cells . In this experiment diI - LDL - containing endosomes increased in brightness by 37 times between 1 and 10 min of continuous uptake , while the brightness of endosomes containing R - Tf increased by only 2 . 5 times . Fig . 9 shows pseudocolored examples of typi - cal fields of cells from this experiment . Discussion While it is generaUy observed that the amount of internalized ligand increases with time of incubation , the accumulation in individual endosomes has not been investigated quantita - tively . The data shown here demostrate that much of the ini - tial increase in intensity during incubation with fluorescent LDL results from an increase in the brighmess of individual endosomes , rather than from an increase in number of fluo - rescently labeled endosomes . Our observation that individ - ual endosomes increase in brightness by 30 - - 40 times during a continuous uptake of diI - LDL clearly indicates that endo - somes experience a large number of fusions , suggesting that endosome fusion is a significant aspect of the endocytic pro - cess . We have demonstrated that LDL accumulates in a com - partment that is accessible to endocytosed Tf ( Fig . 6 ) . Al - though diI - LDL accumulates in these endosomes for 10 min , R - Tf reaches a steady - state level within 2 min . Since LDL and Tfare delivered to this endosome together , the difference in accumulation kinetics indicates that the endosome con - tinuously releases R - Tf but retains diI - LDL and thus acts as a sorting endosome . The simplest explanation for these ob - servations is provided by an iterative fractionation model of sorting . For illustrative purposes we depicted a simple form of this model in Fig . 2 . To analyze the general properties of iterative sorting we used this same simplified model to calculate the accumulation kinetics and overall sorting efficiencies using a range of step - wise sorting efficiency values . The results are shown in Fig . 10 where F is defined as the step - wise sorting efficiency ( the fraction of receptors or ligands exported from the sorting endosome with each sorting step ) . As shown in this figure , the iterative fractionation model predicts that the accumulation of recycling receptors in the sorting endosome would rapidly reach a relatively low steady - state value , but ligands that were retained would continue to accumulate for a longer time and to a much greater degree . In contrast , if the sorting process is not iterative , but occurs in a single maturation step for each sorting endosome ( as discussed in the Introduction ) , both recycling receptors and lysosomally directed molecules would accumulate equally until they were sorted from each other . As shown in Figs . 7 and 8 , the ac - cumulation kinetics for LDL and Tf are consistent with the iterative fractionation model . In an iterative fractionation process , such as that illus - trated in Fig . 2 , the sorting endosome must continue to fuse with new early endosomes as it exports recycling molecules . These properties were directly demonstrated in the pulse - chase and pulse - chase - pulse experiments in Figs . 4 and 5 . When R - Tf and diO - LDL are cointernalized for 2 min , most of the endosomes show the presence of both ligands . With 2 rain of chase in the absence of external ligand , the LDL - containing endosomes become depleted of R - Tf and by 4 min almost none contain detectable R - Tf . By 4 min nearly all of the R - Tf has moved to recycling endosomes in the para - Golgi region . These data are in excellent agreement with the The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 3310 Figure 9 . Representative fields from the experiment summarized in Fig . 8 . ( A ) 1 min of diI - LDL uptake ; ( B ) 10 min of diI - LDL uptake ; ( C ) 1 min of R - Tf uptake ; ( D ) 10 min of R - Tf uptake . The brightnesses of the images shown have been corrected for the different neutral density filters used in each ( , 4 , 100 % transmission ; B , 5 % ; C , 100 % ; D , 50 % ) . Images shown have been pseudocolored to facilitate bright - ness comparisons . The pseudocolor brightness scale is shown at the bottom of each figure . For each ligand , the same pseudocolor conversion was applied for each pair of images . Brightnesses were scaled such that the brightest pixel in the pair had an arbitrary brightness level of 100 . Colorbar , 87 / Lm . findings of Stoorvogel et al . ( 1987 ) that showed that Tfis rap - idly segregated from ASGP when the two ligands are coin - ternalized . The LDL - containing vesicles retain the ability to fuse with new endosomes for several minutes as shown in Fig . 5 . Thus , LDL accumulates in an endosome that rapidly exports Tfbut continues to fuse with new endosomes . These are the properties required of a sorting endosome in the itera - tive fractionation model . The sorting endosome does not continue to fuse with new endosomes indefinitely . As shown in Fig . 5 , only a small per - centage of endosomes which had been labeled with diO - LDL were still accessible after an 8 - min chase . Also , the amount of LDL per endosome does not increase after ~ , 10 min ( Fig . 7 ) . The time - dependent loss of fusion accessibility of a sort - ing endosome has been established by an independent meth - od ( Salzman and Maxfield , 1989 ) . In those studies , cells were first allowed to endocytose fluorescein - t ~ E - macroglo - bulin ( F - c ~ 2M ) , were then incubated for different periods in unlabeled medium , and then were incubated in medium containing an antifluorescein antibody that quenches fluores - cein fluorescence upon binding . The degree of fluorescence quenching is a measure of endosome fusion since the anti - body quenches fluorescein fluorescence if and only if it reaches compartments containing F - o ~ 2M . It was found that the compartment containing F - ot2M loses its accessibility to subsequently endocytosed antibody with a half time of 8 min . This suggests that the sorting endosome has an average life - span of ~ 8 min . The 10 - min period during which diI - LDL accumulates is in good agreement with the 8 - min period dur - ing which the sorting endosome remains fusion accessible . An iterative fractionation model can reconcile data that seem to be in conflict according to a single step sorting para - digm . Ajioka and Kaplan ( 1987 ) showed that Tf receptors in - ternalized at different times do not intermix . However , Salz - Dunn et al . lterative Endocytic Sorting 3311 , o I , . . . . . . 0 ~ 0 ~ 0 ~ 0 - - 0 - - 0 F - O , 1 o B I O / 0 ~ 6 - ~ 4 t o ~ O _ _ O - - O - - $ - - o - - e - ~ o - - e F - O , 2 0 10 20 30 40 50 Cycles of Fu ~ lion / Segregotion 1 , 000 0800 0 . 600 0 . 400 = o 0 . 200 0 . 00 ~ C F - 03 p . oj ° / / " o w yo / / , ~ 2 ~ go ~ o ~ ' 0 Cycles of Fulion / Segregotlon 40 - 30 - , . = , 20 - = _ o i 10 , 0 B 0 0 / 0 / 0 / 0 / e / I ¢ / I Cycln of Fusion / Segregation 1 . 000 D o . 8oo . . = 0 . 600 0 . 400 ~ A ~ Q ~ Q 0 . 200 ~ ~ Z ~ ID ~ lll ~ " 0 ~ 0 ~ 0 ~ 0 a ~ > o ' ~ o ~ O ~ ° ~ °°°° - ~ ~ ~ o ~ ' o , ' o ~ ' o Cy¢bem of Fusion / Segregotion F - O . 01 F = O . 02 FffiO . 03 F - O . 03 F = O . 02 F ~ O . OI Figure 10 . Accumulation kinetics and sorting efficiencies produced through iterative fractionation en - docytic sorting . In these figures , the simplified model depicted in Fig . 2 has been used to show how overall receptor recycling effi - ciency would increase and how ligands would accumulate in the sorting endosome with the num - ber of cycles of fusion / segrega - tion . In each case , F represents the step - wise sorting efficiency ( the fraction of receptors or li - gands exported from the sorting endosome with each sorting step ) . Across a range of relatively low values of F ( F = 0 . 1 - 0 . 3 ) , the model predicts that , with suffi - cient repetition , membrane - bound receptors would recycle with high efficiency ( C ) , with very little in - tracellular accumulation ( A ) . As - suming small values for the volumes of the recycling vesicles ( F = 0 . 01 - 0 . 03 ) results in large accumulation of lumenal ligand in the sorting endosome ( B ) with minimal delivery to the recycling pathway ( D ) . As in Fig . 2 , we have , for simplicity , depicted the iterative fractionation sorting process as if the processes of fusion and sorting are linked , but this need not be the case . If recycling vesicles continue to form after fusion has stopped , recycling receptors may continue to be exported from the sorting endosome and recycling efficiency further in - creased . man and Maxfield ( 1988 , 1989 ) have shown that there is substantial fusion of sequentially endocytosed molecules . In the iterative fractionation model , Tf is rapidly removed from the sorting endosome , so previously endocytosed Tf recep - tors would not still be present when a second pulse of Tf receptors entered the cell . Although we cannot make an exact determination , we may derive a minimum estimate for the number of fusions experi - enced by the sorting endosome from the accumulation fac - tors found for diI - LDL . The 30 - 40 - fold increase in the amount of diI - LDL in each sorting endosome between 1 and 10 min of internalization means that the sorting endosome must experience no fewer than 30 - 40 fusions with early en - dosomes . To the degree that 1 - min - old endosomes result from fusions themselves , and to the degree that diI - LDL is recycled , the actual number of fusions would be correspond - ingly higher . As shown in Fig . 10 , 30 cycles of fusion and budding of vesicles would provide highly efficient recycling even if each cycle were only 20 - 30 % efficient . A mechanism of sorting is suggested by the tubulovesicu - lar structure of the sorting endosome as shown in electron micrographs ( Geuze et al . , 1983 , 1987 ) . This endosome , called compartment of uncoupling of receptor and ligand ( CURL ) by Geuze et al . , contains both receptors and li - gands , but while receptors are largely found in the tubular domain , ligands are primarily found in the vesicular domain . Rome ( 1985 ) noted that because of the high surface - area - to - volume ratio of the tubular domain , tubules will contain a disproportionately large amount of membrane - bound recep - tors while the vesicular portion of the sorting endosome will contain disproportionately more of the lumenal ligand . He suggested that if ligands freely disperse throughout the lu - men and receptors freely migrate on the membrane of the sorting endosome , sorting of receptors from ligands may be accomplished by the formation of vesicles from tubules . Such vesicles will have a higher surface - area - to - volume ratio than that of the sorting endosome and will thus withdraw a relatively large amount of membrane - bound receptors with relatively little ligand . With a high enough number of itera - tions , even the relatively low efficiency of a sorting process resulting purely from geometry could provide a high overall efficiency of recycling . The efficiency of sorting may be fur - ther enhanced by preferential direction of some membrane proteins to the tubular portion of the sorting endosome as has been reported for the ASGP receptor ( Geuze et al . , 1987 ) . Our data do not exclude the possibility that each sorting step could be highly efficient ( for example , by clustering of recep - tors in tubules ) . However , for step - wise sorting efficiency values < 1 . 0 , the overall sorting efficiency is enhanced by iter - ation of the process . If the mechanism of sorting is provided by the geometry of the sorting endosome , then bulk membrane should be pre - dominantly sorted to the same recycling compartments as re - cycling receptors . Koval and Pagano ( 1989 ) have found that fluorescent lipid analogues introduced into the plasma mem - brane and subsequently endocytosed by Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells recycle efficiently back to the cell surface apparently via the same compartment as endocytosed Tf ( al - though perhaps with slower kinetics ) . Since the majority of cell surface proteins probably recycle after endocytosis ( Bur - gert and Thilo , 1983 ; Raub et al . , 1986 ) , it seems likely that the recycling pathway is the default endocytic pathway for membrane proteins . An iterative fractionation process such as that described here would provide a simple and efficient mechanism for recycling lipid and membrane proteins back to the cell surface . Rather than requiring specific signals to recycle , membrane proteins may require specific signals or characteristics ( such as aggregation upon ligand binding ) to be routed to lysosomes . While the iterative fractionation model provides a satisfac - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 3312 tory mechanism for the sorting of lysosomally directed li - gands such as LDL , a2M and ASGP from their recycling receptors , it is clear that membrane association is not suffi - cient to ensure recycling of receptors . When Tf receptors ( Hopkins and Trowbridge , 1983 ; Weissman et al . , 1986 ) , Fc receptors ( Mellman and Plutner , 1984 ) , LDL receptors ( Anderson et al . , 1982 ) , ASGP receptors ( Schwartz et al . , 1986 ) , and mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors ( Von Figura et al . , 1984 ) are cross - linked with multivalent antibodies , these normally recycling receptors are routed to lysosomes . This abnormal routing may be induced by receptor aggregation since cells treated with non - cross - linking monovalent anti - bodies to the ASGP receptor ( Schwartz et al . , 1986 ) , LDL receptor ( Anderson et al . , 1982 ) , and Fc receptor ( Mellman et al . , 1984 ) , show normal receptor routing . An iterative fractionation process in a sorting endosome provides a simple mechanism for the process of endocytic sorting , one that is consonant with what is known about the kinetics and cellular structures involved in endocytic sorting . The data we present are consistent with those of other studies and support several of the specific predictions of this model . Studies are presently underway to further characterize the process and structures involved in the endosomal accumula - tion of LDL and recycling of Tf . We thank Michael Hillmeyer and Raj Kumar for developing software for the automated digital image processing procedures . We thank Peter Marks for technical assistance and Nita Salzman and Karsten Fliegner for their helpful discussion and suggestions . We also thank Michael Koval and Richard Pagano for providing us with their results before publication . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant DK 27083 ( to F . Maxfield ) and NIH fellowship F32 GM12148 ( to K . Dunn ) . Received for publication 27 April 1989 and in revised form 13 September 1989 . References Ajioka , R . S . , and J . Kaplan . 1987 . Intracellular pools of transferrin receptors result from constitutive internalization of unoccupied receptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 6445 - 6449 . Anderson , R . G . W . , M . S . Brown , U . Beisiegel , and J . L . Goldstein . 1982 . Surface distribution and recycling of the LDL receptor as visualized by anti - receptor antibodies . J . Cell Biol . 93 : 523 - 531 . Braell , W . A . 1981 . Fusion between endocytic vesicles in a cell free system . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 1137 - 1141 . Breitfeld , P . P . , C . F . Simmons , G . J . Strous , H . J . Geaze , and A . L . Schwartz . 1985 . Cell biology of the asialoglycoprotein system : a model of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Int . Rev . Cytol . 97 : 47 - 95 . Brown , M . S . , R . G . W . Anderson , and J . L . Goldstein . 1983 . Recycling recep - tors ; the round trip itinerary of migrant membrane proteins . Cell . 32 : 663 - 667 . Burgert , H . G . , and L . Thilo . 1983 . Internalization and recycling of plasma membrane glycoconjugates during pinocytosis in the macrophage cell line p388Dt . Exp . Cell Res . 144 : 127 - 142 . Carpenter , G . , and S . Cohen . 1979 . Epidermal growth factor . Annu . Rev . Bio - chem . 48 : 193 - 216 . Dautry - Varsat , A . , A . Ciechanover , and H . F . Lodish . 1983 . pH and the recy - cling oftransferrin during receptor - mediated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 80 : 2258 - 2262 . Diaz , R . , L . Mayorga , and P . Stahl . 1988 . In vitro fusion ofendosomes follow - ing receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 6093 - 6100 . Draper , R . K . , and M . I . Simon . 1980 . The entry of diphtheria toxin in to the mammalian cell cytoplasm : evidence for lysosomal involvement . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 849 - 854 . Duncan , R . , and M . K . Pratten . 1977 . Membrane economics in endocytic sys - tems . J . Theor . Biol . 66 : 727 - 735 . Fuller , S . D . , and K . Simons . 1986 . Transferrin receptor polarity and recycling accuracy in ~ tight " and " leaky " strains of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 1767 - 1779 . Geuze , H . J . , J . W . Slot , G . J . A . M . Strous , H . F . l . xxlish , and A . L . Schwartz . 1983 . Intracellular site of asialoglycoprotein receptor - ligand uncoupling : double label immunoelectron microscopy during receptor mediated endocy - tosis , Cell . 32 : 277 - 287 . Geuze , H . L , L W . Slot , and A . L . Schwartz . 1987 . Membranes of sorting or - ganelles display lateral heterogeneity in receptor distribution . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 1715 - 1723 . Goldstein , J . L . , S . K . Basu , and M . S . Brown . 1983 . Receptor mediated en - docytosis of low - density lipoprotein in cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 98 : 241 - 260 . Goldstein , J . L . M . S . Brown , R . G . W . Anderson , D . W . Russell , and W . J . Schneider . 1985 . Receptor mediated endocytosis : concepts emerging from the LDL receptor system . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 - 39 . Greenspan , P . , and R . W . St . Clair . 1984 . Retroendocytosis of low density lipo - protein : effect of lysosomal inhibitors on the release of undegraded ~ 2sI - Iow density lipoprotein of altered composition from skin fibroblasts in culture . J . Biol . Chem . 259 : 1703 - 1713 . Gruenberg , J . E . , and K . E . Howell . 1986 . Reconstitution of vesicle fusions occurring in endocytosis with a cell free system . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Or - gan . ) J . 5 : 3091 - 3101 . Haigler , H . T . , F . R . Maxfield , M . C . Willingham , and I . Pastan . 1980 . Dan - sylcadaverine inhibits internalization of ~ 2Sl - epidermal growth factor in BALB 3T3 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 255 : 1239 - 1241 . Harford , L , K . Bridges , G . Ashwell , and R . D . Klausner . 1983a . Intracellular dissociation of receptor - bound asialoglycoproteins in cultured hepatocytes : a pH - mediated nonlysosomal event . J . Biol . Chem . 258 : 3191 - 3197 . Harford , J . , A . W . Wolkoff , G . Ashwell , and R . D . Klausner . 1983b . Monen - sin inhibits intracellular dissociation of asialoglycoproteins from their recep - tor . J . Cell Biol . 96 : 1824 - 1828 . Hopkins , C . R . , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1983 . Internalization and processing of transferrin and the transferrin receptor in human carcinoma A4331 cells . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 508 - 521 . Kam , Z . 1987 . Microscopic imaging of cells . Q . Rev . Biophys . 20 : 201 - 259 . Keen , J . H . , F . R . Maxfield , M . C . Hardegree , and W . H . Habig . 1982 . Recep - tor mediated endocytosis of diphtheria toxin by cells in culture . Proc . Natl . Acod . Sci . USA . 79 : 2912 - 2916 . Klansner , R . D . , G . Ashwell , J . Van Renswoude , J . B . Harford , and K . R . Bridges . 1983 . Binding of alxJtransferrin to tz ~ 62 cells : explanation of the transferrin cycle . Proc . Natl . Ace , d . Sci . USA . 80 : 2263 - 2266 . Koval , M . , and R . E . Pagano . 1989 . Lipid recycling between the plasma mem - brane and intracellular compartments : transport and metabolism of fluores - cent sphingomyelin analogs in cultured fibroblasts . J . CellBioL 108 : 2169 - 2181 . Linderman , J . L . , and D . A . Lauffenburger . 1988 . Analysis of intracellular receptor / ligand sorting in endosomes . J . Theor , Biol . 132 : 203 - 245 . Marsh , M . , E . Bolzau , and A . Helenius . 1983 . Penetration of Semliki forest virus from acidic prelysosomal vacuoles . Cell . 32 : 931 - 940 . Maxfield , F . R . 1989 . Measurement of vacuolar pH and cytoplasmic calcium in living cells using fluorescence microscopy . Methods Enzymol . 173 : 745 - 771 . Maxfield , F . R . , J . Schlessinger , Y . Shector , I . Pastan , and M . C . Willingham . 1978 . Collection of insulin , EGF , and a - 2 - macroglobulin in the same patches on the surface of cultured fibroblasts and common internalization . Cell . 14 : 805 - 810 . Maxfield , F . R . , and K . W . Dunn . 1989 . Studies of endocytosis using image intensification fluorescence microscopy and digital image analysis . In Digi - tized Video Microscopy . B . Herman and K . Jacobson , editors . Alan R . Liss Inc . , New York . In press . McGraw , T . E . , L . Greenfield , and F . R . Maxfield . 1987 . Functional expres - sion of the human transferrin receptor cDNA in Chinese hamster ovary cells deficient in endogenous transferrin receptor . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 207 - 214 . Mellman , I . S . , and H . Plutner . 1984 . Internalization and fate of macrophage Fc receptors bound to polyvalent immune complexes . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 1170 - 1177 . Mellman , I . , H . Plumer , and P . Ukkonea . 1984 . Internalization and rapid recy - cling of macrophage Fc receptors tagged with monovalant antireceptor ami - body : possible role of a prelysosomal compartment . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 1163 - 1169 . Mostov , K . E . , M . Friedlander , and G . BIobel . 1984 . The receptor for trans - epithelial transport of IgA and IgM contains multiple immunoglobulin - like domains . Nature ( Lond . ) o 308 : 37 - 43 . Olsnes , S . , and K . Sandvig . 1985 . Entry ofpolypeptide toxins into animal cells . In Endocytosis . I . Past , an , and M . C . Willingham , editors . Plenum Publish - ing Corp . , New York . 195 - 234 . Omary , M . B . , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1981 . Biosynthesis of the human transfer - rin receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 256 : 12888 - 12892 . Pastan , I . , and M . C . Willingham . 1983 . Receptor mediated endocytosis : coated pits , receptosomes and the Golgi . Trends Biochem . Sci . 8 : 250 - 254 . Pitas , R . E . , T . L . Innerarity , J . N . Weinstein , and R . W . Mahley . 1981 . Acetoacetylated lipoproteins used to distinguish fibroblasts from macro - phages in vitro by fluorescence microscopy . Arteriosclerosis . 1 : 177 - 185 . Rauh , T . J . , J , B . Denny , and R . M . Roberts . 1986 . Cell surface glycoproteins of CHO cells 1 . Internalization and rapid recycling . F . . rp . Cell Res . 165 : 73 - 91 . Rome , L . H . 1985 . Curling receptors . Trends Biochem . Sci . 10 : 151 . Salzman , N . H . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1988 . Intracellular fusion of sequentially formed endocyfic compartments . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 1083 - I091 . Salzman , N . H . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1989 . Fusion - accessibility of endocytic compartments along the recycling and lysosomal endocytic pathways in in - Dunn et al . Iterative Endocytic Sorting 3313 tact cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2097 - 2104 . Schlessinger , J . 1986 . AIIosteric regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor kinase . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 2067 - 2072 . Schmid , S . L . , R . Fuchs , P . Male , and I . Mellman . 1988 . Two distinct sub - populations of endosomes involved in membrane recycling and transport to lysosomes . Cell . 52 : 73 - 83 . Schwartz , A . L . , and D . Rup . 1983 . Biosynthesis of the human asialoglycopro - tein receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 258 : 11249 - 11255 . Schwartz , A . L . , A . Ciechanover , S . Merritt , and A . Turkewitz . 1986 . Anti - body - induced receptor loss : different fates for asialoglycoproteins and the asialoglycoprotein receptor in HepG2 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 15225 - 15232 . Simmons , C . F . , and A . L . Schwartz . 1984 . Cellular pathways of galactose - terminal ligand movement in a cloned human hepatoma cell line . Mol . Phar - macol . 26 : 509 - 519 . Steinman , R . M . , I . S . Mellman , W . A . Muller , and Z . A . Cohn . 1983 . En - docytosis and recycling of plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 96 : 1 - 27 . Stoorvogel , W . , H . J . Geuze , and G . J . Strous . 1987 . Sorting of endocytosed transferrin and asialoglycoprotein occurs immediately after internalization in HepG2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 1261 - 1268 . Tycko , B . , C . H . Keith , and F . R . Maxfield . 1983 . Rapid acidification of endo - cytic vesicles containing asiaioglycoprotein in cells of a human hepatoma line . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 1762 - 1776 . Van Leuven , F . , J . - J . Cassiman , and H . Van Den Berghe . 1980 . Primary amines inhibit recycling of a2M receptors in fibroblasts . Cell . 20 : 37 - - 43 . Von Figura , K . V . , V . Gieselmann , and A . Hasilik . 1984 . Antibody to mannose 6 phosphate specific receptor induces receptor deficiency in human fibro - blasts . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 3 : 1281 - 1286 . Ward , D . M . , R . Ajioka , and J . Kaplan . 1989 . Cohort movement of different ligands and receptors in the intracellular endocytic pathway of alveolar mac - rophages . J . BioL Chem . 264 : 8164 - 8170 . Weigel , P . H . , and J . A . Oka . 1984 . Recycling of the hepatic asialoglycoprotein receptor in isolated rat hepntocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 259 : 1150 - 1154 . Weissman , A . M . , R . D . Klausner , K . Rao , andJ . B . Harford . 1986 . Exposure of K562 cells to anti - receptor monoclonal antibody OKT9 results in rapid redistribution and enhanced degradation of the transferrin receptor . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 951 - 958 . Yamashiro , D . J . , B . Tycko , S . R . Fluss , and F . R . Maxfield . 1984 . Segrega - tion of transferrin to a mildly acidic ( pH 6 . 5 ) para - Golgi compartment in the recycling pathway . Cell . 37 : 789 - 800 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 3314