195 Vol . 1 , Issue 2 , 2014 Is the Psychology of Creativity in Terminal Crisis ? Comments on Glăveanu’s Article “The Psychology of Creativity : A Critical Reading” * Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi Claremont Graduate University , USA E - mail address : miska @ cgu . edu A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords : Crisis in Psychology of creativity Development of the field The systems model of creativity The comment is organized around two questions , which were raised after reading the article : The Psychology of Cre - ativity : A Critical Reading . Is there indeed a crisis , which may be threatening the psychology of creativity and if there is one , does the solution lie along the lines of developing an " increased awareness and responsibility " in relation to the future of the discipline . The discussion of these two ques - tions is based on the systems conception of creativity . More or less systematic reflections on the condition of the psychology of creativity have been taking place for years ( Chan , 2013 ; Csikszentmihalyi , 1988 ; Hennessey & Amabile , 2010 ; Mayer , 1999 ; Mumford , 2003 ; Sawyer , 2012 ) . Perhaps this " concern " results from the constantly self - critical stance of research in general , or is a typical feature of a " young " sub - discipline requiring support in its development , and intent on construc - tively overcoming emergent problems ( or crises ) . We applaud Professor Glaveanu ' s attempt to overcome what he characterizes as a " pervasive and difficult " crisis in the domain of creativity research . However , we are not at all sure that a ) there is indeed a crisis which may be threatening the domain , b ) if there is one , that the solution lies along the lines of developing an " increased aware - ness and responsibility " in relation to the future of the discipline . Let us discuss these two points . The author presents the following reasons as evidence that a crisis exists : Creativity researchers tend not to reveal their " paradigmatic assumptions " ( Glăveanu , 2014 , p . 13 ) ; their questions are " method - driven " ( ibid . ) ; underpinning assumptions remain unques - Article history : Received 27 September 2014 Received in revised form 28 December 2014 Accepted 29 December 2014 ISSN : 2354 - 0036 DOI : 10 . 15290 / ctra . 2014 . 01 . 02 . 03 Theories – Research – Applications Izabela Lebuda Academy of Special Education , Poland E - mail address : izalebuda @ gmail . com * This article was written thanks to the funding received from the program Mobility Plus ( 1152 / 1 / MOB / 2014 / 0 ) from the Ministry of Science and Higher Education , Poland . 196 tioned ( Glăveanu , 2014 , p . 14 ) ; they tend to fragment the phenomenon studied by being too analytic ( Glăveanu , 2014 , p . 19 ) ; by relying too much on psychometrics , by decontex - tualizing the creative process as if one could actually reproduce it on demand in a labora - tory situation without compromising the essence of what is being studied . All of these are legitimate points . However , they are not specific to creativity studies , but apply to any kind of psychological research , whether neurological , cognitive , social , motivational or clinical – when such research is badly conceived and executed . So we take Glăveanu ' s analysis as relevant to all research , not specifically to that focused on creativity . The fact is , all research is always in a state of " crisis " , by definition . If it were not , it would cease to grow and be creative . A few generations ago many physicists were of the opinion that their discipline had achieved a stage of maturity , where no further ma - jor changes could happen . Then , in the first decades of the last century , quantum me - chanics opened up a whole new range of unknowns for physicists to explore – and tem - porarily the crisis was averted . But let us assume that Glăveanu ' s analyses are accurate and that the psychology of creativity is beset by problems more than other disciplines . How should we go about bringing the process back on track ? The six steps he lists at the end of the article are rea - sonable suggestions for any scientist to follow and to pass on to his / her students . Howev - er , as a generative set of ideas for revitalizing creativity research , we find them rather bland and bureaucratic . They bring to mind a story that is told by the descendants of Niels Bohr about their illustrious relative . According to the story , after Bohr received his Nobel Prize in 1923 for developing the model that started quantum mechanics , he was invited to Moscow to give a talk at the lab of Lev Landau , who was the then star of Rus - sian physics , well supported by the Soviet government . During the visit , a Russian jour - nalist asked Bohr at a press conference : " Professor Bohr , how do you explain the fact that your little lab in the small country of Denmark has achieved such remarkable results in physics , while the Moscow lab , despite huge investments by our government , has failed to achieve them ? " After a minute of hesitation , Bohr answered along the following lines : " I think our success is due to the fact that if I make a mistake , anyone in the lab feels free to call me stupid . " However , either because of a misunderstanding or because it seemed a more logical explanation , Bohr ' s answer was translated into Russian as : " . . . Because if anyone in my lab makes a mistake , I feel free to call him stupid . " After the con - ference , the KGB called Landau in , and asked how come he didn ' t call his students stu - pid . " But I do , I do . . . " answered poor Landau . " Apparently not often enough ! " responded the KGB officer and ordered Landau to call his students stupid more often . Even though Is the Psychology of Creativity in Terminal Crisis ? Comments on Glăveanu’s Article … / CREATIVITY 1 ( 2 ) 2014 197 Landau received the Nobel Prize in physics in 1962 , his lab did not produce much after the cure ordered by the secret police was applied . The reason this historical example came to mind after reading Glăveanu ' s article is that creativity rarely flourishes by decree , or by imposing rules , or following plans – no matter how reasonable they sound . The one constant requirement for getting to anything resembling creativity is unyielding curiosity about a topic that matters to the person more than almost anything else ( Abuhamdeh & Csikszentmihalyi , 2012 ) . And as for the individ - ual ' s contribution – we need freedom , we need stimulation , we need to take risks , we need people telling us we are stupid if we make mistakes – but above all else , we need the experience of joy that comes from lifting the veil of reality and seeing what might be behind it ( Amabile , 1996 ; Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ) . The rest – whatever is required to pur - sue the curiosity and to bring forth new results – is also necessary , but largely outside the control of the person . These are cultural resources and social supports without which , even the potentially most creative idea will languish and leave no trace . We do need to take into account the socio - cultural matrix if we wish to understand how the ideas ger - minating in a person ' s head will turn into components of society and culture ( Brannigan , 1981 ; Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ; 1999 ; Simonton , 1991 ) . This view of scientific work , suggests that the crisis indicated by Professor Glaveanu may be a natural phase in the development of the field . Socialization to the field and achieving a professional level , as well as achieving " peak condition " , particularly in the social sciences , requires time ( Simonton , 1991 ; 2004 ) . The first presentation of a new idea rarely results in success , but assuming things go well , the creator , probably after a series of revisions , will have a chance to present the work to a wider audience . Recognition of the discovery or innovation in science is measured , inter alia , by the num - ber of citations and awards ( Feist , 1993 ; 1997 ) ; it takes longer when the degree of struc - ture in the field is looser ( Simonton , 2009 ) and it is difficult to minimize the variance in the formal assessments of competent judges ( Simonton , 2013 ) . If the theory or method pass - es all the " tests " , it has a chance of entering the domain permanently , be an inspiration to other researchers and to be implemented in practice . Professor Glăveanu indicates theories that are familiar to every psychologist of creativity ( Glăveanu , 2014 , p . 12 ) ; we would like to note , however , that none of them can be seen as new . When we look at the list of today ' s most influential psychologists , including researchers of creativity , we can clearly see that their legacy was built up over decades ( Diener , Oishi & Park , 2014 ) . We are far from arguing that it is enough to ensure freedom to researchers and ask them to be patient , and then expect that brilliant theories of creativity and reliable methods Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi , Izabela Lebuda / CREATIVITY 1 ( 2 ) 2014 198 of measurements will spring up like mushrooms after the rain . Curiosity , interest , hard work – and love of the work itself are also surely needed . Furthermore it is necessary not to cut corners , to take the easy way out , and be satisfied with superficial conclusions . In other words , if we want the psychology of creativity to gain and maintain respect , we have to do good science . REFERENCES Abuhamdeh , S . & Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 2012 ) . Attentional involvement and intrinsic moti - vation . Motivation and Emotion , 3 , 257 - 267 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in Context . Boulder , Co : Westview Press . Brannigan , A . ( 1981 ) . The Social Basis of Scientific Discoveries . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Chan , J . ( 2013 ) . Researching creativity and creativity research . In K . Thomas & J . Chan ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Research on Creativity ( pp . 21 - 32 ) . Cheltenham , Northampton : Edward Elgar . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1988 ) . Society , culture and person : a systems view of creativity . In R . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The Nature of Creativity : Contemporary Psychological Perspectives ( pp . 325 - 329 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1997 ) . Creativity : Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Inno - vation . New York : Harper Collins . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1999 ) . Implication of a system perspective for the study of creativi - ty . In R . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 313 - 335 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Diener , E . , Oishi , S . , & Park , J . ( 2014 ) . An incomplete list of eminent psychologists of the modern era . Archives of Scientific Psychology , 2 , 20 - 32 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / arc0000006 Feist , G . J . ( 1993 ) . A structural model of scientific eminence . Psychological Science , 4 , 366 - 371 . Feist , G . J . ( 1997 ) . Quantity , quality , and depth of research as influences on scientific emi - nence : is quantity most important ? Creativity Research Journal , 10 , 325 - 335 . Glăveanu , V . P . ( 2014 ) . The Psychology of Creativity : A Critical Reading . Creativity : Theories — Research — Applications , 1 , 10 - 32 , DOI : 10 . 15290 / ctra . 2014 . 01 . 01 . 02 . Hennessey , B . A . & Amabile , T . ( 2010 ) . Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology , 62 , 569 - 598 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Fifty years of creativity research . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 449 - 460 ) , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Is the Psychology of Creativity in Terminal Crisis ? Comments on Glăveanu’s Article … / CREATIVITY 1 ( 2 ) 2014 199 Mumford , M . D . ( 2003 ) . Where have we been , where are we going ? Taking stock in crea - tivity research . Creativity Research Journal , 15 , 107 – 120 . Sawyer , R . K . ( 2012 ) . Explaining Creativity : The Science of Human Innovation . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Simonton , D . K . ( 1991 ) . Career landmarks in science : individual differences and interdisci - plinary contrasts . Developmental Psychology , 1 , 119 - 130 . Simonton , D . K . ( 2004 ) . Creativity in Science . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Simonton , D . K . ( 2009 ) . Varieties of ( Scientific ) Creativity : A Hierarchical Model of Domain - Specific Disposition , Development , an Achievement . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 4 , 441 - 452 . Simonton , D . K ( 2013 ) . What is a creative idea ? Little - c versus Big - C creativity . In J . Chan & K . Thomas ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research on creativity ( pp . 69 - 83 ) . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi , Izabela Lebuda / CREATIVITY 1 ( 2 ) 2014 Corresponding author at : Izabela Lebuda , Department of Educational Sciences , Acad - emy of Special Education , 40 Szczesliwicka St . , 02353 Warsaw , Poland . E - mail : izalebuda @ gmail . com