PLASMA MEMBRANE FOLDS ON THE MAST CELL SURFACE AND THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO SECRETORY ACTIVITY SUSAN JO BURWEN and BIRGIT H . SATIR From the Department of Physiology - Anatomy , University of California , Berkeley , California 94720 . Dr . Burwen ' s present address is the Cancer Research Laboratory , University of California , Berkeley , California 94720 . Dr . Satir ' s present address is the Department of Anatomy , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , New York 10461 . ABSTRACT Changes in the surface morphology of secreting mast cells have been followed by scanning electron microscopy . Mast cells isolated from the rat peritoneal cavity have folds of plasma membrane that form snake - like ridges on their surfaces . Fold length varies considerably from cell to cell , whereas fold width and depth appear to remain relatively constant . To assess the possible relationship between secre - tory activity and surface folding , a semiquantitative method was used for measur - ing fold length in control and secreting populations . A positive correlation is found between secretion of histamine and the extent of membrane folds on the mast cell surface . The source of the membrane required for fold formation is probably secretory granule membrane incorporated into the plasma membrane as a result of exocytosis . Furthermore , a distinct cell type devoid of surface folds , designated as a raspberry - type cell , is found to occur as an integral part of a normal population of mast cells . This cell type is resistant to stimulation by polymyxin . KEY WORDS mast cell - histamine secretion membrane folds (cid:12)9 cell surface morphology (cid:12)9 scanning electron microscopy The surface features of a cell are an expression of the cell ' s response to its internal and external environment . Cell surfaces change as a function of altered physiology , for example , during cell cycle ( 18 ) , in transformed cells ( 19 ) , in response to environmental irritants ( 17 ) , etc . The experiments reported here were undertaken to determine a possible relationship between surface features and secretory activity in the rat peritoneal mast cell . The mast cell synthesizes and stores histamine , among other secretory products , and undergoes compound exocytosis when stimulated to secrete ( 6 ) . Mast cells observed in the scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) have , as characteristic surface features , folds of plasma membrane that form curved ridges in anastomosing patterns ( 3 , 9 , 23 ) , corresponding to microvillus - like projections ob - served in thin sections ( 11 , 20 ) . The folds are also visible on freeze - fracture faces of plasma mem - brane as cross - fractured areas forming snake - like patterns ( 4 ) . Previous studies of the mast cell in SEM ( 9 , 23 ) reported the presence of these folds primarily on unstimulated cells . A cell type , de - void of folds , was also described , designated as the raspberry - type cell , which was dismissed as being an artifact of the preparation ( 9 ) . When cells were exhaustively stimulated to secrete , they lost their surface folds , developed deep cavities , and par - tially collapsed , revealing sharp contours of under - lying granules . The dosages of secretagogue and incubation times used in these previous studies were many times in excess of the conditions re - 690 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 74 , 1977 " pages 690 - 697 quired to obtain 100 % histamine release ( 12 ) . In the experiments reported here , intermediate stages of secretion are obtained by using milder conditions of stimulation , i . e . , lower dosage of secretagogue , shorter incubation times , and lower temperature . Histamine release is measured to assess the secretory activity of the cells . In this way , changes in the surface of secreting mast cells can be studied relative to the secretory activity of the population . Since the mast cell is essentially nonmitotic , cell cycle is not a factor in influencing its surface features . Therefore , in this case , changes in surface features probably reflect other physiological responses , the most likely of which is secretory activity . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Collection and Incubation Mast cells are collected from the peritoneal cavities of exsanguinated male rats , 150 - 180 g , of the Long - Evans strain ( U . C . Berkeley colony ) by recovering phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) ( pH 7 . 2 ) pipetted into the cavities ( 20 ) . The cell suspensions , initially containing ~ 5 % mast cells , are enriched to > 70 % mast cells by using discontinuous Ficoll ( Pharmacia Fine Chemicals , Pisca - taway , N . J . ) gradients ( 1 ) . Mast cells derived from three to eight rats are pooled and resuspended in PBS at 180C . A controlled amount of histamine secretion is obtained by adding polymyxin B sulfate ( 4 / . tg / ml of incubation mixture ) . Samples are taken 60 s after stimulation for assay of histamine release and examination in SEM . Histamine Assay Ice - cold PBS is added to each sample at the end of an incubation period to stop secretion . The samples are centrifuged ( 200 g , 4 ~ 5 min ) and histamine determi - nations are made on each supernate and pellet pair by the method of Bergendorff and Uvn ~ is ( 2 ) . Histamine is completely extracted from each pellet by boiling in 0 . 1 N HCI for 5 min . Dilutions are made with H20 . Samples of supernate containing undiluted PBS form precipitates during the assay which do not interfere with determina - tions if removed by centrifugation or filtration before reading . Histamine release is expressed as the percent - age of histamine in the supernate ( supernatant histamine plus pellet histamine equals 100 % ) . Sample Preparation for Scanning Electron Microscopy Mast cells are fixed in suspension with ice - cold 2 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 2 M Millonig ' s buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) and kept at room temperature for 1 h , then washed once ( Millonig ' s buffer plus 6 % sucrose ) and postfixed for 1 h in 1 % OsO4 in Millonig ' s buffer at 4 ~ The cells are kept in suspension throughout alcohol dehydration , transferral to 100 % Freon TC ( E . I . du Pont de Nem - ours & Co . , Wilmington , Del . ) , and placement in B . E . E . M . capsule chambers ( Better Equipment for Electron Microscopy , Inc . , Bronx , N . Y . ) with Flotron - ics silver membrane filters ( Selas Corp . of America , Spring House , Pa . ) ( 0 . 45 / zm pore size ) covering one end . The cells are critical - point dried in Freon 13 ( E . I . du Pont de Nemours & Co . ) . Flotronics filters give high rates of recovery for cell suspensions ( 7 ) . Surface arti - facts caused by Flotronics filters ( 25 ) are avoided by fixation of cells before contact with them ( 7 ) . Polylysine ( 14 ) is not used for attachment of cells to glass cover slips because of the possible introduction of surface artifacts ( 16 ) . Pieces of filter containing the critical - point dried cells are glued onto specimen stubs with silver paste , coated with gold under vacuum on a tilting - rotating stage , and examined in an ETEC or Coates and Welter CWlC scanning electron microscope . Micrographs are taken with Polaroid type 55 P / N film . RESULTS Mast cells observed in SEM have folds of plasma membrane that project from their surfaces . The folds form snake - like ridges in anastomosing pat - terns ( 3 , 9 , 23 ) . In between folds , contours of underlying granules are visible . No microvilli are observed ( Fig . 1 ) . Therefore , the surface projec - tions from mast cells which were previously identi - fied as microviUi in thin sections ( 11 , 20 ) corre - spond to these folds of plasma membrane viewed in cross section . The folds appear to be fairly uniform in width on the same cell and from one cell to another , averaging ~ 0 . 1 / zm . Fold depth , as viewed at the cell edge , varies to some extent , ranging from 0 . 3 to 1 . 0 / zm with 70 - 80 % of the folds - 0 . 8 / ~ m deep . Fold length is the dimension which shows the greatest variability from one cell to another . Differences in fold length are extremely apparent from cell to cell , whereas fold width and depth tend to remain fairly constant . Variability in fold length is the factor which most accounts for the heterogeneous appearance of the mast cell in SEM with respect to surface features . The cells in Fig . 1 are arranged in a sequence of increasingly folded surfaces ( increas - ing fold length ) . Some cells lack folds entirely ( the raspberry - type cell ) ( Fig . 1 A ) and the contours of underlying secretory granules are visible . Cells with extensively folded surfaces ( Fig . 1 C ) often have the extruded contents of several granules adhering to them ( arrow ) , while underlying gran - ule contours are almost totally obscured by folds . S . J . BU ~ WEN AND B . H . SAriS Plasma Membrane Folds on the Mast Cell Surface 691 Furthermore , the complete range of cell surface appearances is present in both control and stimu - lated populations . The secretion of histamine by mast cells , under the conditions of stimulation used ( incubation in PBS at 18 ~ for 60 s in the presence of 4 / ~ g / ml polymyxin B sulfate ) , was 64 . 2 + - - 4 . 0 % ( n = 3 ) , while the corresponding histamine release by con - trol cells , incubated in the absence of polymyxin B sulfate , was 9 . 9 - - - 1 . 0 % ( n = 4 ) . To determine whether the surface features of mast cells change as a result of stimulation and secretion , a qualitative evaluation of the extent of folding was carried out as follows : Each of two preparations of cells was divided into control and stimulated populations . 50 cells from each popula - tion were randomly selected in SEM at low magni - fication ( (cid:141) 100 ) at which any surface detail is indistinguishable . Magnification was then in - creased to (cid:141) 10 , 000 , and if the cells met the criteria of being undamaged , spherical , and unob - structed , they were photographed . In this manner , 200 cells were systematically photographed . For each cell , a number was assigned on a scale of 1 to 3 , depending on the extent of folds on the cell surface . Category 1 represents cells with very few folds ( including raspberry - type cells ) , category 2 , cells with an intermediate range of folds , and category 3 , cells with extensively folded surfaces . The three cells in Fig . 1 are representative of each category . The numbers of cells falling into each category were compared in the paired control and stimulated populations ( Table I ) . The results show that more cells have extensively folded surfaces in the stimulated populations than in the control populations . To confirm the results obtained with the qualita - tive evaluation , a semiquantitative method was developed for measuring fold length per cell . If the simplifying assumption is made that fold width and depth are relatively uniform from cell to cell , then fold length becomes the variable that allows direct comparison of one mast cell to another . 100 randomly selected cells from a third preparation , divided into control and stimulated populations , FIGURE 1 The various appearances of the mast cell surface in SEM . These cells are taken from both control and stimulated populations and are arranged in order of increasingly folded surfaces . 1A : Category 1 : a rasp - berry - type cell ; 1 B : Category 2 : cell with an intermedi - ate range of folds ; 1 C : Category 3 : cell with an exten - sively folded surface . Several extruded granules are seen on the cell surface ( arrow ) . All x 8 , 750 . 692 ThE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 74 , 1977 were photographed as described above , and mi - crographs were printed at a . final magnification of x 20 , 000 . Fold length measurements were car - ded out according to the method described in Fig . 2 . For each cell , a ratio of fold length in microme - ters per square micrometers of surface area was calculated , and the distributions of cells according to these ratios were compared in the paired con - trol and stimulated populations ( Fig . 3 ) . Fold length varies over a range from 0 / zm / / zm 2 surface area ( raspberry - type cells ) to - 2 . 4 / . tm / / zm 2 sur - face area , and the distribution resembles a poisson distribution ( Fig . 3 a ) . However , the proportion of TABLE I Qualitative Evaluation of Surface Folding Relative to Secretory Activity Category 1 : Category 2 : Category 3 : very few intermediate extensive Population folds folds folds no . of cells Control 11 23 16 Stimulated * 13 12 25 Control 11 31 8 Stimulated * 12 23 15 * Stimulated with polymyxin B sulfate , 4 / xg / ml , at 18 ~ for 60 s . raspberry - type cells , which varies from 6 to 12 % , is higher than would be predicted from a typical poisson distribution . There is an overall shift in distribution as a result of stimulation ( Fig . 3b ) , again demonstrating a positive correlation be - tween secretion of histamine and the appearance of membrane folds . The average length of folds per cell for the stimulated population increases - 23 % as a result of secretion of 64 % of the histamine present ( Ta - ble II ) . The relationship between the secretory activity of a population and cell size is shown in Table III . The average cell radius decreases ~ 5 % upon stimulation . However , this shrinkage alone cannot account for the above increase in mem - brane fold length ( Fig . 4 ) . At most , 0 . 07 / zm folds / / xm 2 surface area can be generated from the membrane area made available by cell shrinkage . Since the average increase in fold length from control to stimulated cell is - 0 . 3 / ~ m / / ~ m 2 surface area ( Table II ) , the 0 . 07 / zm folds / ~ m 2 can ac - count for , at most , - 23 % of the 0 . 3 / zm / p . m 2 membrane needed to generate the folds . Prolonged stimulation of cells for 15 min ( still at 18 ~ results in extensive cell damage and lysis . Cell recovery is checked by counting cells in a hemacytometer . After prolonged stimulation , - 27 % of the cells lyse and are not even recovered FmURE 2 Method for measuring fold length on mast cells . 2 A : A clear plexiglass circle with concentric rings etched on it at 1 - cm intervals is superimposed over a scanning micrograph of a mast cell originally printed at (cid:141) 20 , 000 and reproduced here at x 8 , 750 . The center point and radius of the cell are deter - mined . 2 B : A concentric circle whose radius is 80 % of the radius of the cell is drawn on the micrograph . The area falling within this circle corresponds to 20 % of the total surface area of a smooth sphere . The folds of membrane lying within this circle are traced with a map reader to obtain a linear measurement . The data for each cell are expressed as a ratio of fold length ( / zm ) to sphere surface area ( / tin2 ) . (cid:141) 8 , 750 . S . J . BURWEN AND B . H . SAaTa Plasma Membrane Folds on the Mast Cell Surface 693 o " ) J J ILl o ii 0 hi ( . 9 I ' - - Z LIJ , { . . 3 n " U . I O - 50 - o - - o CONTROL x - - x POLYMYXIN - STIMULATED x o 0 . 4 o . 8 Lz ~ . 6 z . o 2 . 4 FOLDS ( A ~ . m ) : SURFACE AREA ( , , tm 2 ) 80 o0 . . . J , , fi 60 ( , . . ) u _ o N 4o b - Z W ~ 2o w 0 - 1 . 5 1 . 4 - 2 . 2 ยง CONTROL I POLYMYXIN - STIMULATED | FOLDS ( Am ) : SURFACE AREA ( # m z ) FIGURE 3 The distribution of cells according to their membrane surface folds in paired control and stimulated populations . 3 a : The cells are arranged in categories of 0 . 4 - / zm increments of their ratios of fold length to sur - face area . The shift in distribution after stimulation is emphasized by the stippled vs . striped areas . 3b : The histogram presents the same data as in Fig . 3a , reduced to two categories : 0 - 1 . 3 and 1 . 4 - 2 . 2 + folds ( / zm ) / / zm 2 surface area . TABLE II Length of Folds per Surface Area population Average length of folds wn / iJ , m2 / Cell Control 1 . 3 ( n = 50 ) Stimulated * 1 . 6 ( n = 50 ) Percent Increase 23 % * Stimulated with polymyxin B sulfate , 4 / xg / ml , at 18 ~ for 60 s . for further study . Of the remaining 73 % , ~ 40 % are damaged as revealed by examination in SEM , showing collapse , partial lysis , and loss of plasma membrane integrity . In summary , upon prolonged stimulation , 27 % of the cells are not even re - covered , and 29 % are damaged , leaving only 44 % of the initial population intact . Of this 44 % , a great majority ( > 80 % ) appear to be raspberry - type cells or cells with relatively few folds ( 0 - 1 . 0 / xm / / zm 2 , Fig . 3a ) . Therefore , these remaining cells must be relatively resistant to polymyxin treatment , and the raspberry - type cell appears to be particularly insensitive to polymyxin relative to other mast cells . TABLE III Mast Cell Size as a Function of Secretory State Population Radius Area of a smooth sphere calcu - lated from ra - dius Control 4 . 34 - + 0 . 05 Stimulated * 4 . 10 - + 0 . 05 Percent Decrease 5 . 5 % Membrane available as a result of radius change p / n 2 237 211 26 n = 50 for both populations . The data are expressed as the means of the n , - + SEM . * Stimulated with polymyxin B sulfate , 4 / xg / ml , at 18 ~ for 60 s . d O . 1A . ~ m FmURE 4 Contribution of cell shrinkage , associated with secretion , to increase in membrane fold length . The average width of folds = 0 . 1 tzm , and the average depth of folds = 0 . 8 ttm ( both dimensions approximated from scanning micrographs ) . The length of fold with these dimensions which can be generated from 26 ~ m 2 mem - brane area ( Table III ) is 15 / zm ; ( ~ ' ) L = 26 / zm 2 0 . 8L + 0 . 8L + 0 . 1 ~ L 15 / J , m . 15 / zm per 211 / xm 2 surface area gives a ratio of 0 . 07 / zm / / zmL 694 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY ' VOLUME 74 , 1977 DISCUSSION The mast cell , observed in SEM , has folds of plasma membrane that form snake - like ridges on its surface . These folds correspond to the microvil - lus - like projections previously observed in thin sections . Other cells , observed in SEM as having similar folds , distinct from microvilli , are disso - ciated epithelial cells ( 24 ) . The mast cell folds appear to vary in length from cell to cell to a far greater extent than they vary in width and depth . Some cells lack folds entirely , whereas other cells are completely cov - ered with them . The complete range of cell surface appearances is found in both control and stimu - lated populations . However , qualitative evalua - tion of 200 cells in two separate preparations suggested that more cells have extensively folded surfaces in the stimulated populations than in the control populations . To test this observation fur - ther , a semiquantitative method was devised to compare the extent of plasma membrane folding on control vs . stimulated cells . The length of folds per cell was chosen as the variable allowing com - parison of one mast cell to another . A positive correlation between histamine secretion and fold length was found . This method tends to minimize the difference between control and stimulated cells , because observations in transmission elec - tron microscopy ( 16 ) have tentatively suggested that fold depth may actually increase with stimula - tion . Expansion of the surface area of the mast cell plasma membrane as a result of exocytosis was first reported by Kinsolving et al . ( 10 ) , using an increase in acridone - binding capacity as an indica - tor of newly available membrane surface area . The increase in plasma membrane area was re - lated to histamine secretion ( 15 ) , with 63 % hista - mine release corresponding to a 350 % plasma membrane expansion . The apparent discrepancy between those results and the results presented here is due to the fact that in the experiments of Kinsolving et al . , the internal cavities formed by compound exocytosis are included in the measure - ment . The current observations on plasma mem - brane expansion are limited to the increase in surface area visible as membrane folds on the cell surface . Cell shrinkage associated with secretion will not provide sufficient membrane for generation of folds in stimulated cells . The rapidity of the change ( within 60 s ) probably precludes de novo membrane synthesis as the source of the needed membrane . Therefore , the membrane for fold for - mation probably comes from granule membrane incorporated into plasma membrane after mem - brane fusion and exocytosis . Incorporation of vesi - cle membrane into plasma membrane after release of secretory product has been shown to occur in several secretory systems : in frog neuromuscular junction after prolonged stimulation ( 8 ) , in Tetra - hymena in which synchronous release has been induced ( 21 , 22 ) , in sperm after acrosome dis - charge ( 5 ) , and in the secretory cells of the duck salt gland ( 13 ) . The raspberry - type cell , the cell that lacks mem - brane folds , does not appear to be a damaged cell or an artifact of preparation , in contrast to views previously stated ( 9 , 23 ) . Rather , it is part of the normal mast cell population , and its proportion is higher than would be expected from a poisson distribution . This cell is resistant to damage by prolonged exposure to polymyxin under condi - tions which damage other mast cells . The rasp - berry - type cell may be harder to induce to secrete , due to its having less surface area , or having im - mature membrane which may lack necessary re - ceptor molecules for stimulation . The results sug - gest that cells with greater surface area ( exten - sively folded surfaces ) are more susceptible to stimulation , having perhaps more receptor mole - cules available . One might speculate that addi - tional receptors may be contributed by the interior surface of the granule membrane which , upon fusion , becomes the exterior surface of the plasma membrane . A positive feedback mechanism may be involved in the explosive nature of mast cell secretion at physiological temperature : stimula - tion ~ increase in folds ( receptors ) ~ further stimulation . A positive feedback effect could ac - count for previously stimulated cells being espe - cially susceptible to damage and lysis by further stimulation . Raspberry - type cells may represent different stages of mast cell maturation , during either ( a ) differentiation , or ( b ) recovery after depletion of secretory products . As for the first possibility , a precursor cell of the fully differentiated mast cell still has not been positively identified . With regard to the second possibility , the mast cell should theoretically be able to synthesize and package new product , to " recycle " , because its plasma membrane remains intact and all necessary cyto - plasmic organelles are present . However , the process of recovery after depletion has not been well studied in mast cells . Finally , the raspberry - S . J . BURWEN AND B . H . SATI ~ Plasma Membrane Folds on the Mast Cell Surface 695 type cell may represent a less mature form of a mast cell that is less susceptible to stimulation . The fact that raspberry - type cells can be se - lected for by their ability to survive prolonged stimulation ( 15 min ) may provide a means for isolating them from other cells present . Thus , problems of differentiation , recycling , membrane sites , etc . could possibly be specifically studied in these cells . The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of Dr . Peter Satir and William Reed in the development of the semiquantitative method for measuring fold length on the mast cell surface , and Dr . J . - P . Revel for the use of the ETEC scanning microscope . This work was supported by U . S . Public Health Service grants GM 02575 , GM 21077 , and GM 24724 . Received for publication 30 August 1976 , and in revised form 26 April 1977 . REFERENCES 1 . BACH , M . K . , K . J . BLOCK , and K . F . AUSTEN . 1971 . IgE and IgGA antibody - mediated release of histamine from rat peritoneal cells . Optimum condi - tions for in vitro preparation of target cells with antibody and challenge with antigen . J . Exp . Med . 133 : 752 - 771 . 2 . BERGENDORFF , A . , and B . UVNT , S . 1972 . Storage of 5 - hydroxytryptamine in rat mast cells . Evidence for an ionic binding to carboxyl groups in a granule heparin - protein complex . Acta Physiol . Scand . 84 : 320 - 331 . 3 . BURWEN , S . J . , and B . SATIR . 1975 . Membrane surface changes during mast cell secretion . J . Cell Biol . 67 ( 2 , Pt . 2 ) : 51 a . ( Abstr . ) . 4 . BURWEN , S . J . , and B . SATIR . 1977 . A freeze - fracture study of early membrane events during mast cell secretion . J . Cell Biol . 73 : 660 - 671 . 5 . COLWIN , A . L . , and L . H . COLWIN . 1963 . Role of the gamete membranes in fertilization in Saccoglos - sus kowalevskii ( Enteropneusts ) . J . Cell Biol . 19 : 477 - 500 . 6 . DOU6LAS , W . W . 1974 . Involvement of calcium in exocytosis and the exocytosis - vesiculation sequence . Biochem . Soc . Syrup . 39 : 1 - 28 . 7 . DE HARVEN ) E . , N . LAMPEN , A . POLLIACK , A . WARFEL , and J . FOGH . 1975 . New observations on methods for preparing cell suspensions for scanning electron microscopy . Scanning Electron Micros # copy / 1975 ( Part I ) . Proceedings of the 8th Annual Scanning Electron Microscope Symposium . IIT Research Institute , Chicago . 361 - 367 . 8 . HEUSER , J . E . , and T . S . REESE . 1973 . Evidence for recycling of synaptic vesicle membrane during transmitter release at the frog neuromuscular junc - tion . J . Cell Biol . 57 : 315 - 344 . 9 . KESSLER , S . , and C . KUHN . 1975 . Scanning elec - tron microscopy of mast cell degranulation . Lab . Invest . 32 : 71 - 77 . 10 . KINSOLVaNG , C . R . , A . R . JOHNSON , and N . C . MORAN . 1975 . The uptake of a substituted acridone by rat mast cells in relationship to histamine release : a possible indicator of exocytosis - induced expansion of the plasma membrane . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 192 : 654 - 669 . 11 . LAGUNOFF , D . 1973 . Membrane fusion during mast cell secretion . J . Cell Biol . 57 : 252 - 259 . 12 . LAOUNOFF , D . , and H . WAN . 1974 . Temperature dependence of mast cell histamine secretion . J . Cell Biol . 61 : 809 - 811 . 13 . LEVEE , A . M . , J . A . HIC , ~ INS , and R . J . BAI ~ NETr . 1972 . Biogenesis of plasma membranes in salt glands of salt - stressed domestic ducklings : localization of acyltransferase activity . J . Cell Sci . 11 : 855 - 873 . 14 . MAZIA , D . , G . SCHATI ' EN , and W . SALE . 1975 . Adhesion of cells to surfaces coated with polylysine . Applications to electron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 66 : 198 - 200 . 15 . MORAN , N . C . , C . R . KINSOLVlNG , and A . R . JOHNSON . 1975 . Expansion of the plasma mem - brane of rat peritoneal mast cells resulting from exocytosis . Fed . Proc . 34 : 718 . 16 . PADAWER , J . 1970 . The reaction of rat mast cells to polylysine . J . Cell Biol . 47 : 352 - 372 . 17 . PLOPPER , C . G . , D . L . DUNGWORTH , and W . S . TYLER . 1973 . Morphometric evaluation of pulmo - nary lesions in rats exposed to ozone . Am . J . Pathol . 71 : 395 - 408 . 18 . PORTER , K . R . , D . PRESCO ~ , and J . FRYE . 1973 . Changes in surface morphology of Chinese hamster ovary cells during the cell cycle . J . Cell Biol . 57 : 815 - 836 . 19 . PORTER , K . R . , G . J . TODARO , and V . FONTE . 1973 . A scanning electron microscope study of surface features of viral and spontaneous transformants of mouse Balb / 3T3 cells . J . Cell Biol . 59 : 633 - 642 . 20 . R ( SHLICH , P . , P . ANDERSON , and B . UVN ~ , S . 1971 . Electron microscope observations on compound 48 / 80 - induced degranulation in rat mast cells . Evi - dence for sequential exocytosis of storage granules . J . Cell Biol . 51 " 465 - 483 . 21 . SATIR , B . 1974 . Ultrastructural aspects of mem - brane fusion . J . Supramol . Struct . 2 : 529 - 537 . 22 . SATIR , B . 1977 . Dibucaine - induced synchronous mucocyst secretion in Tetrahymena . Cell Biol . Inter - nat . Rep . 1 : 69 - 73 . 23 . TIZARD , I . R . , and W . L . HOLMES . 1974 . Degranu - lation of sensitized rat peritoneal mast cells in re - sponse to antigen , compound 48 / 80 and polymyxin B . A scanning electron microscope study . Int . Arch . 696 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 74 , 1977 Allergy Appl . Immunol . 46 : 867 - 879 . 24 . VIAL , J . , and K . R . PORTER . 1975 . Scanning mi - croscopy of dissociated tissue cells . J . Cell Biol . 67 : 345 - 360 . 25 . WV . S ~ BOOK , E . , B . WETZEL , G . B . CANr ~ ON , and D . BERARD . 1975 . The impact of culture conditions on the surface morphology of cells in vitro . Scan - ning Electron Microscopy / 1975 ( Part I ) . Proceed - ings of the 8th Annual Scanning Electron Micro - scope Symposium . IIT Research Institute , Chicago . 351 - 360 . S . J . BURWEN AND B . H . SATIR Plasma Membrane Folds on the Mast Cell Surface 697