Vol . 23 ISMB / ECCB 2007 , pages i377 – i386 BIOINFORMATICS doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btm203 Functional annotation of regulatory pathways Jayesh Pandey 1 , (cid:1) , Mehmet Koyutu¨rk 1 , Yohan Kim 2 , Wojciech Szpankowski 1 , Shankar Subramaniam 2 and Ananth Grama 1 1 Department of Computer Science , Purdue University and 2 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of California , San Diego , USA ABSTRACT Motivation : Standardized annotations of biomolecules in interaction networks ( e . g . Gene Ontology ) provide comprehensive understand - ing of the function of individual molecules . Extending such annotations to pathways is a critical component of functional characterization of cellular signaling at the systems level . Results : We propose a framework for projecting gene regulatory networks onto the space of functional attributes using multigraph models , with the objective of deriving statistically significant pathway annotations . We first demonstrate that annotations of pairwise interactions do not generalize to indirect relationships between processes . Motivated by this result , we formalize the problem of identifying statistically overrepresented pathways of functional attributes . We establish the hardness of this problem by demon - strating the non - monotonicity of common statistical significance measures . We propose a statistical model that emphasizes the modularity of a pathway , evaluating its significance based on the coupling of its building blocks . We complement the statistical model by an efficient algorithm and software , N ARADA , for computing significant pathways in large regulatory networks . Comprehensive results from our methods applied to the Escherichia coli transcription network demonstrate that our approach is effective in identifying known , as well as novel biological pathway annotations . Availability : N ARADA is implemented in Java and is available at http : / / www . cs . purdue . edu / homes / jpandey / narada / Contact : jpandey @ cs . purdue . edu 1 INTRODUCTION Gene regulatory networks represent powerful formalisms for modeling cell signaling . These networks are inferred from gene expression , as well as other sources of data , using various statistical and computational methods ( Friedman et al . , 2000 ; Husmeier , 2003 ) . Recent studies on networks of specific organisms show that interactions between genes that take part in specific pairs of biological processes are significantly overrepresented ( Lee et al . , 2002 ; Tong et al . , 2004 ) . Generalizing such observations to pathways of arbitrary length may allow identification of standardized pathways , enabling creation of reference databases of direct and indirect interactions between various processes . Knowledge of such pathways is useful , not only in general understanding of the relationship between cellular processes at the systems level , but also in projecting existing knowledge of cellular organization of model organisms to other species . Increasing availability of species - specific interaction data , coupled with attempts aimed at creating standardized dictionaries of func - tional annotation for biomolecules provide the knowledge base that can be effectively used for this purpose . What is lacking is a comprehensive set of tools that combine these two sources of data to identify significantly overrepresented patterns of interaction through reliable statistical modeling with a formal computational basis . In this article , we introduce the notion of functional network characterization , derived from a gene regulatory network and associated functional annotations of genes . We use the Gene Ontology ( GO ) ( Ashburner et al . , 2000 ) for annotations , however , our methods themselves generalize to other networks and annotations . Functional network characterization is based on the abstract notion of regulatory interactions between pairs of functional attributes ( as opposed to genes ) . In this context , we demonstrate that methods for identifying significant pairwise annotations do not generalize to pathway annotations . We introduce the problem of identifying statistically overrepresented pathways of functional attributes , targeted at the identification of chains of regulatory interac - tions between functional attributes . We study the hardness of this problem , focusing on the non - monotonicity of commonly used statistical significance measures . We show that the problem is hard along two dimensions : ( i ) the pathway space of the functional attribute network , and ( ii ) the space of functional resolution specified by GO hierarchy . Emphasizing the modularity of a pathway to assess its significance , we propose a statistical model that focuses on the coupling of the building blocks of a pathway . We use this statistical model to derive efficient algorithms for solving the pathway annotation problem . Our methods are implemented in a web - based tool , N ARADA which provides an intuitive user and data interface . Comprehensive evaluation of N ARADA on an Escherichia coli transcription network from RegulonDB ( Salgado et al . , 2006 ) shows that our method identifies several known , as well as novel pathways , at near - interactive query rates . Note that the current knowledge of regulatory networks is incomplete , and limited to a few model organisms . Therefore , the application of our method on currently available data does not provide a comprehensive library of regulatory network annotation . On the other hand , the partial annotation provided by our method forms a useful basis for extending our knowledge of regulatory networks beyond well - studied processes and model organisms . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . (cid:1) 2007 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non - Commercial License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 2 . 0 / uk / ) which permits unrestricted non - commercial use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . 2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 2 . 1 Results from previous studies Lee et al . ( 2002 ) study the Saccharomyces cerevisiae transcrip - tion regulation network with a view to understanding relation - ships between functional categories . They observe that transcriptional regulators within a functional category com - monly bind to genes encoding regulators within the same category ( e . g . cell cycle , metabolism , environmental response ) . They also report that many transcriptional regulators within a functional category bind to transcriptional regulators that play key roles in the control of other cellular processes . For example , cell cycle activators are observed to bind to genes that are responsible for regulation of metabolism , environmental response , development and protein biosynthesis . Tong et al . ( 2004 ) identify putative genetic interactions in yeast via synthetic genetic array ( SGA ) analysis and investigate the functional relevance of their results in the context of GO annotations . They construct a network of GO terms by inserting an edge between any pair of terms that are bridged by a significant number of interacting gene pairs . Here , two GO terms are said to be bridged by an interaction if one of the interacting genes is associated with one of the terms , and the other gene with the second term , but neither is associated with both terms . They show that the resulting network is clustered according to underlying biological processes , while some biological processes buffer one another . For example , microtubule - based functions buffer both actin - based and DNA synthesis or repair functions , suggesting coordination of these functions through interaction of various genes . 2 . 2 Approach Establishing functional relationships from gene interactions is essential to understanding functional organization of a cell . Current investigations are limited to case - specific studies that generally focus on validation or evaluation of results through simple statistical analyses — yet they provide significant insights ( Gamalielsson et al . , 2006 ; Lee et al . , 2002 ; Tong et al . , 2004 ) . Computational tools that are based on sophisti - cated abstractions and customized statistical models are likely to yield novel insights . The basic approach for integrating existing knowledge of gene networks and functional annota - tions is to project the network in the gene space onto the functional attribute space through mapping of genes to attributes as specified by the annotation . A simple method for achieving this annotates each gene with its function and identifies overrepresented interacting annotations . This method yields interesting insights , as illustrated by Tong et al . ( 2004 ) in the context of synthetic genetic arrays . This model , however , does not generalize beyond pairwise interactions since each interaction between a pair of functional attributes is within a specific context ( a different pair of genes ) in the network , as illustrated by the following example . 2 . 3 Motivating example Two regulatory pathways are shown in Figure 1 — each node is identified by its corresponding gene ( g i ) and tagged by the functional attribute ( T j ) associated with the gene . In Figure 1a , genes g 1 , g 2 and g 3 indirectly regulate genes g 5 , g 6 and g 7 through gene g 4 . In Figure 1b , the network is isolated and there is no indirect regulation . Now assume the network of functional attributes derived from the simple method described above , separately for each gene network . For both networks , since all genes associated with functional attribute T 1 regulate a gene with T 2 , one may conclude that T 1 regulating T 2 is significant . A similar conclusion follows for the regulatory effect of T 2 on T 3 . If only pairwise interactions are considered , we derive the same network of functional attributes from both genetic networks ( Figure 1c ) . This network clearly suggests that functional attribute T 1 indirectly regulates T 3 through T 2 . This is indeed a correct observation for the network in Figure 1a . However , this is not true for the network in Figure 1b . To address this problem , we develop a formal framework for projecting a gene network on to a network of functional attributes , using multigraph models that accurately capture the context in which an interaction occurs . Through this frame - work , we generalize pairwise interactions between functional attributes to the identification of regulatory pathways of functional attributes . 3 METHODS We now describe the biological , statistical , and computational formalisms that underlie our methods . 3 . 1 Formal model for functional attribute networks A gene regulatory network is modeled by a labeled directed graph G ð V G ; E G ; M G Þ . In this network , nodes g i 2 V G represent genes . Directed edge g i g j 2 E G , where g i ; g j 2 V G , represents a regulatory interaction between genes g i and g j . M G : E G ! fþ ; (cid:2) ; (cid:3)g specifies a labeling of edges that represents the mode of regulation : activation ( þ ) , repression ( (cid:2) ) or dual regulation ( (cid:3) ) . A sample gene regulatory network is shown in Figure 2 . In our discussion , for the sake of simplicity , we omit the mode of regulation and treat all interactions as activator interactions , whenever appropriate . Fig . 1 . Pairwise assessment of regulatory interactions between func - tional attributes may result in identification of non - existent patterns . Two regulatory networks are shown in ( a ) and ( b ) . The nodes are labeled by corresponding genes and each gene is tagged with a set of functional attributes . The network of functional attributes resulting from both networks , considering only pairwise interactions , is shown in ( c ) . i378 J . Pandey et al . Each gene in the network is associated with a set of functional attributes . These attributes describe a functional annotation of the gene , i . e . they map an individual biological entity to known functional classes . D EFINITION 1 . Functional Annotation . Given a set of genes V G and a set of functional attributes V F , let 2 V G and 2 V F denote the power set of V G and V F , respectively . Then , functional annotation Að V G ; V F Þ ¼ fF ; Gg defines mapping F : V G ! 2 V F and G : V F ! 2 V G , such that T j 2 Fð g i Þ if and only if g i 2 Gð T j Þ , for any g i 2 V G and T j 2 V F . The frequency of T j , (cid:1) ð T j Þ ¼ jGð T j Þj , is equal to the number of genes that are mapped to T j . In Figure 2a , each gene g i is tagged with the functional attributes in Fð g i Þ . For each T j , Gð T j Þ is composed of the genes tagged by T j . We use Gene Ontology ( GO ) ( Ashburner et al . , 2000 ) as a reference library for annotating genes . For each gene , GO specifies the molecular functions associated with it , biological processes it takes part in , and cellular components it may be part of . The functional attributes in GO , known as GO terms , are organized hierarchically through is a and part of relationships . For example , ‘regulation of stereoid biosynthetic process’ is a ‘regulation of stereoid metabolic process’ and is part of ‘stereoid biosynthetic process’ . This hierarchy is abstracted using a directed acyclic graph ( DAG ) . In this representation , if T i is a , or part of T j , then Gð T i Þ (cid:4) Gð T j Þ , i . e . the genes associated with T i form a subset of genes associated with T j . In this case , T j is said to be a parent of T i . A term may have more than one parent , i . e . Gð T i Þ (cid:4) Gð T j Þ and Gð T i Þ (cid:4) Gð T k Þ does not imply Gð T j Þ \ Gð T k Þ ¼ Gð T j Þ [ Gð T k Þ . Furthermore , there is a unique T 0 2 V F with no parent , called root , such that Gð T 0 Þ ¼ V G . In the rest of this section , we use a network of functional attributes with no constraints ( e . g . GO hierarchy ) on function G . We discuss the issue specifically relating to the GO hierarchy when addressing the implementation of N ARADA . We model networks of functional attributes using multigraphs . A multigraph is a generalized graph , where multiple edges are allowed between a single pair of nodes . D EFINITION 2 . Functional Attribute Network . Given gene regulatory network G ð V G ; E G Þ , a set of functional attributes V F , and functional annotation Að V G ; V F Þ ¼ fF ; Gg , the corresponding functional attribute network F ð V F ; E F Þ is a multigraph defined as follows . The set of functional attributes V F is also the set of nodes in F . Each node T i 2 V F contains a set of ports corresponding to the set of genes associated with T i , i . e . Gð T i Þ . Each multiedge T i T j is a set of ordered port pairs ( edges ) g k g ‘ , such that g k 2 Gð T i Þ , g ‘ 2 Gð T j Þ and g k g ‘ 2 E G . The functional attribute network corresponding to the gene regulatory network in Figure 2a is shown in Figure 2b . This multigraph model captures the context of each interaction accurately through the concept of ports . As illustrated in Figure 1 , if a simple graph model is used , paths that do not exist in the gene network emerge in the functional attribute network . This is not possible in the multigraph model , since a path must leave a node from the port at which it enters the node . D EFINITION 3 . Path . In functional attribute network F ð V F ; E F Þ , a path (cid:2) ¼ fð T i 1 ; g j 1 Þ ; ð T i 2 ; g j 2 Þ ; : : : ; ð T i k ; g j k Þg is an ordered set of node - port pairs such that ( i ) T i r 6¼ T i s for 1 (cid:5) r < s (cid:5) k ( nodes are not repeated ) , ( ii ) g j r 2 Gð T i r Þ for 1 (cid:5) r (cid:5) k and ( iii ) g j r g j r þ 1 2 T i r T i r þ 1 2 E F for 1 (cid:5) r < k ( con - secutive edges are connected through the same port ) . The length of (cid:2) is j (cid:2) j (cid:2) 1 ¼ k (cid:2) 1 . In Figure 2b , fð T 1 ; g 1 Þ ; ð T 2 ; g 3 Þ ; ð T 4 ; g 6 Þg is a path but fð T 1 ; g 1 Þ ; ð T 2 ; g 4 Þ ; ð T 4 ; g 6 Þg is not , since multiedge T 1 T 2 does not contain the edge g 1 g 4 . Note that allowing T i 1 ¼ T i k and g j 1 ¼ g j k , we may also include cycles in this definition . According to the above definition , paths are characterized by ports . While analyzing regulatory pathways of functional attributes , however , we are interested in paths that are characterized by nodes in the functional attribute network . Clearly , such pathways may correspond to multiple paths in the functional attribute network . Therefore , we model them using multipaths . D EFINITION 4 . Multipath . In functional attribute network F ð V F ; E F Þ , a multipath (cid:1) ¼ f T i 1 ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k g is an ordered set of nodes such that ( i ) T i r 6¼ T i s for 1 (cid:5) r < s (cid:5) k , and ( ii ) there exist g j r 2 T i r for 1 (cid:5) r (cid:5) k , such that fð T i 1 ; g j 1 Þ ; ð T i 2 ; g j 2 Þ ; : : : ; ð T i k ; g j k Þg is a path . The occurrence set Oð (cid:1) Þ of (cid:1) consists of all distinct paths that satisfy ( ii ) and each such path is called an occurrence of (cid:1) . The frequency of (cid:1) , (cid:1) ð (cid:1) Þ ¼ jOð (cid:1) Þj , is equal to the number of occurrences of (cid:1) . We use the terms pathway and multipath interchangeably , to emphasize the biological meaning of a multipath . Allowing T i 1 ¼ T i k , we also extend this definition to multicycles , occurrences of which correspond to cycles in the gene network . In Figure 2b , f T 1 ; T 2 ; T 3 g ( also denoted T 1 ! T 2 a T 3 throughout this article ) is a multipath with frequency four . On the other hand , multipath T 2 a T 4 ! T 3 does not exist in this network , i . e . it has frequency zero , although multiedges T 2 a T 4 and T 4 ! T 3 both exist . Note that the distinction between activator and inhibitor interactions is emphasized in this example for illustrative purposes , while it is omitted in the definition for simplicity . A multipath with high frequency is likely to be biologically interesting , since it corresponds to a regulatory pathway of functional attributes that recurs in various contexts in the underlying cellular organization . In order to quantify this biological significance , it is useful to evaluate frequency from a statistical perspective . Fig . 2 . ( a ) A sample gene regulatory network and the functional annotation of the genes in this network . Each node represents a unique gene and is tagged by the set of functional attributes attached to that gene . Activator interactions are shown by regular arrows , repressor interactions are shown by dashed arrows . ( b ) Functional attribute network derived from the gene regulatory network in ( a ) . In this multigraph , nodes ( functional attributes ) are represented by squares and ports ( genes ) are represented by dark circles . i379 Functional annotation of regulatory pathways 3 . 2 Hardness of significant pathway identification Raw counts have long been used as a measure of significance— primarily because of the resulting algorithmic simplicity . This is a direct consequence of its monotonicity properties , namely that a subgraph ( or substring / subset ) of a frequent graph ( or string / set ) is itself frequent ( Koyutu¨rk et al . , 2006b ) . In identification of significantly over - represented pathways of functional attributes , frequency alone does not provide a good measure of statistical significance . This is because , the degree distribution of gene regulatory networks and the distribution of the frequency of functional attributes are both highly skewed . Consequently , paths including functional attributes that are associated with high - degree genes ( e . g . molecular functions related to transcrip - tion ) and those associated with many genes ( e . g . GO terms that are at coarser levels of GO hierarchy ) are likely to dominate . For this reason , a statistical measure that takes into account these distributions is needed . Monotonicity of common statistical significance measures . We identify the basic properties of a useful measure of statistical significance . P ROPOSITION 1 . Statistical Interpretability . Consider a set X of binary random variables and the set of corresponding observa - tions x , where X ¼ 1 for X 2 X corresponds to an observation supporting a hypothesis . Let f ð X ¼ x Þ be a real - valued function , used to assess the statistical significance of the collection of observations defined by x . Let X and Y be disjoint binary random variable sets , i . e . X \ Y ¼ ; , and let x and y be the respective observation sets . A function f is statistically interpretable if it satisfies the following conditions : ( i ) If y ¼ 0 8 y 2 y , then f ð X ¼ x Þ < f ð X [ Y ¼ x [ y Þ , ( ii ) If y ¼ 1 8 y 2 y ; then f ð X ¼ x Þ > f ð X [ Y ¼ x [ y Þ . Here , without loss of generality , f ð X ¼ x Þ < f ð Y ¼ y Þ implies that ð X ¼ x Þ is a more interesting observation than ð Y ¼ y Þ . More generally , the binary random variables characterize a pattern , and a larger set of these variables corresponds to a larger ( or more general ) pattern . This property simply states that additional positive ( negative ) observations should increase ( decrease ) our confidence that a pattern is interesting . Most significance measures used in the analysis of discrete biological data are statistically interpretable . Consider , for example , the identifi - cation of significantly enriched GO terms in a set of genes . For a given term , the binary variables ( X ) , one for each gene ( X 2 X ) , indicate whether the gene is associated with the term ( X ¼ 1 ) . Adding a new gene ( Y ¼ f Y g ) to this set will improve the significance of enrichment ( f ð x Þ < f ð x [ y Þ ) if the new gene is associated with the term ( Y ¼ 1 ) . If not ( Y ¼ 0 ) , the enrichment of the term in the new set will be less significant ( f ð x Þ > f ð x [ y Þ ) . Indeed , existing methods and statistical measures for this problem demonstrate this property ( Grossman et al . , 2006 ; Hsiao et al . , 2005 ) . Now we show that , in contrast to approximations that do not take into account the size of the sample space ( e . g . frequency ) , statistically interpretable measures of significance do not possess monotonicity . T HEOREM 1 . Let f be a monotonically non - decreasing ( non - increasing ) function , i . e . for any X (cid:4) Z and x (cid:4) z , f ð X ¼ x Þ (cid:5) f ð Z ¼ z Þ ( f ð X ¼ x Þ (cid:6) f ð Z ¼ z Þ ) . Then f is not statistically interpretable . P ROOF . Without loss of generality , assume f is non - decreasing . Let Y be a set of binary random variables , and y be a set of corresponding observations , such that 8 y 2 y , y ¼ 1 . Since f is monotonically non - decreasing , we have f ð X ¼ x Þ (cid:5) f ð X [ Y ¼ x [ y Þ . This contradicts condition ( ii ) in Proposition 1 . œ 3 . 2 . 1 Monotonicity with respect to GO hierarchy We now show that this result directly applies to the monotonicity of useful significance measures with respect to the GO hierarchy . Consider an ordered set of GO terms f T i 1 ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k g . For any ordered set f g j 1 ; g j 2 ; : : : ; g j k g such that g j r 2 Gð T i r Þ for 1 (cid:5) r (cid:5) k , define a binary random variable indicating the existence of the corresponding path in the underlying regulatory network . Clearly , the frequency of multipath f T i 1 ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k g is equal to the sum of the realizations of these random variables . Let X be the set of these random variables . Now , without loss of generality , consider pathway f T P ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k g , such that T P is a parent of T i 1 , i . e . Gð T i 1 Þ (cid:7) Gð T P Þ . Then , for each gene g P 2 Gð T P Þ n Gð T i 1 Þ , there are multiple additional random variables , each for one of f g P ; g j 2 ; : : : ; g j k g . Let Y be the set of these random variables . In this setting , the definition of statistical interpretability directly applies . If all paths of the sort f g P ; g j 2 ; : : : ; g j k g exist in the underlying regulatory network , then the pathway f T P ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k g is more significant than f T i 1 ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k g . If none of them exist , then the pathway containing the child is more significant . Applying Theorem 1 , we conclude that a statistically interpretable function , that quantifies the significance of the frequency of a multipath in the functional attribute network , cannot be monotonic with respect to GO hierarchy . The example in Figure 3 illustrates this point . Here , both T 11 and T 12 are parents of T 1 . Since all genes that are not in T 1 but in T 11 regulate T 3 , the regulatory effect of T 11 on T 3 is more significant than that of T 1 . Since none of the genes absent in T 1 but present in T 12 regulate T 3 , the regulatory effect of T 12 on T 3 is less significant than that of T 1 . Thus , any statistically interpretable measure f should satisfy f ð T 11 ! T 3 Þ < f ð T 1 ! T 3 Þ < f ð T 12 ! T 3 Þ , which violates monotoni - city . Note also that frequency , which is monotonically non - decreasing with respect to height ( proximity to root ) in GO hierarchy , is not statistically interpretable as (cid:1) ð T 1 ! T 3 Þ ¼ (cid:1) ð T 12 ! T 3 Þ . This result can be interpreted as follows . GO hierarchy defines a combinatorial space of resolution for pathways of functional attributes . In other words , a pathway may be generalized or specialized by replacing a node ( GO term ) in the pathway with one of its ancestors or descendants in the GO DAG . Since this can be done for each node in the pathway , the size of this space is exponential in pathway length . However , as demonstrated above , the significance of a pathway fluctuates in this space . Consequently , all significant pathways cannot be efficiently identified using traditional inductive techniques , by starting from the highest ( lowest ) resolution in GO hierarchy and pruning out coarser ( finer ) terms in chunks . Alternate approaches to this problem are necessary , not only in the context of significant pathway identification , but also other combina - torial problems in systems biology that involve hierarchical annota - tions . One possible approach is to develop a measure of statistical significance that admits a tight bound on the significance of a pathway Fig . 3 . Example illustrating that an interpretable measure of statistical significance is not monotonic with respect to GO hierarchy . GO terms T 11 and T 12 are parents of T 1 . The regulatory effect of T 11 on T 2 is more significant than that of T 1 , but the regulatory effect of T 12 is less significant . i380 J . Pandey et al . in terms of the frequencies of pathways that are at a higher ( lower ) GO resolution . The discussion above clearly demonstrates that it is not straightforward to do so . Indeed , the statistical model we introduce in the next section does not easily lead to such tight bounds , since it emphasizes the modularity of a pathway to assess its significance . Consequently , in our implementation of N ARADA , we use the most specific GO terms as the default resolution . Development of measures and methods that effectively prune out parts of the GO space remains an open problem . 3 . 2 . 2 Monotonicity with respect to pathway length We apply Theorem 1 to the multipath space of a functional attribute network , i . e . to the relationship between a multipath and its subpaths . As before , a multipath is represented by a set of binary random variables , each corresponding to one of its potential occurrences . Without loss of generality , consider multipaths (cid:1) k ¼ f T i 1 ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k g and (cid:1) k (cid:2) 1 ¼ f T i 1 ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k (cid:2) 1 g . The random variables that represent (cid:1) k do not form a superset of those that represent (cid:1) k (cid:2) 1 . Rather , they are extensions of them , as defined below : D EFINITION 5 . Extension . Given a set X , an extension Z of X , denoted Z l X , is defined as follows . Each X 2 X , is attached to a subset Z X (cid:4) Z . Each Z 2 Z is attached to exactly one X 2 X , i . e . for any X 1 ; X 2 2 X , Z X 1 \ Z X 2 ¼ ; . Each potential occurrence of (cid:1) k is a superpath of exactly one potential occurrence of (cid:1) k (cid:2) 1 and there may be multiple such occurrences of (cid:1) k that correspond to a particular occurrence of (cid:1) k (cid:2) 1 . Therefore , the set of random variables that represent (cid:1) k form an extension of the set of random variables that represent (cid:1) k (cid:2) 1 . P ROPOSITION 2 . Statistical Interpretability w . r . t . Extension . Consider X , x , and f ð X ¼ x Þ as defined in Proposition 1 . Let Z l X and let z l x be the respective observation set . A function f is statistically interpretable with respect to extension if it satisfies the following conditions : ( i ) If for all x 2 x such that x ¼ 1 , z ¼ 0 8 z 2 z x , then f ð X ¼ x Þ < f ð Z ¼ z Þ , ( ii ) If for all x 2 x such that x ¼ 1 , z ¼ 1 8 z 2 z x , then f ð X ¼ x Þ > f ð Z ¼ z Þ . Each x ¼ 1 corresponds to an occurrence of the corresponding pathway . Consequently , statistical interpretability with respect to extension of a pathway requires the following . If for all occurrences of (cid:1) k (cid:2) 1 , all corresponding potential occurrences of (cid:1) k exist in the network , then (cid:1) k is statistically more interesting than (cid:1) k (cid:2) 1 . If none of them occurs , then (cid:1) k (cid:2) 1 is more interesting . C OROLLARY 1 . Let f be a monotonically non - decreasing ( non - increasing ) function with respect to extension , i . e . for any Z l X and z l x , f ð X ¼ x Þ (cid:5) f ð Z ¼ z Þ ( f ð X ¼ x Þ (cid:6) f ð Z ¼ z Þ ) . Then f is not statistically interpretable with respect to extension . The example shown in Figure 1 illustrates this result . In both of the scenarios shown in Figure 1a and b , (cid:1) ð T 1 ! T 2 Þ ¼ (cid:1) ð T 2 ! T 3 Þ ¼ 3 . In ( a ) , (cid:1) ð T 1 ! T 2 ! T 3 Þ ¼ 9 , i . e . condition ( i ) in Definition 2 ( all potential occurrences of T 1 ! T 2 ! T 3 , given the occurrences of T 1 ! T 2 , exist in the network ) , hence the pathway T 1 ! T 2 ! T 3 is more interesting than both T 1 ! T 2 and T 2 ! T 3 . In ( b ) , on the other hand , (cid:1) ð T 1 ! T 2 ! T 3 Þ ¼ 0 ( condition ( ii ) holds ) , so both T 1 ! T 2 and T 2 ! T 3 are more interesting than T 1 ! T 2 ! T 3 . This discussion motivates the statistical model we present in the next section . 3 . 3 Statistical model for pathways of functional attributes We present a novel statistical model for assessing the significance of the frequency of a multipath in a functional attribute network . In this approach , the ‘interestingness’ of a pathway is associated with its modularity , i . e . the significance of the coupling of its building blocks . In statistical terms , this is achieved by conditioning the distribution of the frequency ( modeled as a random variable ) of a pathway on the frequency of its subpaths ( modeled as fixed parameters ) . 3 . 3 . 1 Motivating example We illustrate the notion of the significance of coupling between regulatory interactions using the regulatory network and its corresponding functional attribute network shown in Figure 2 . In this example , (cid:1) ð T 1 ! T 2 Þ ¼ (cid:1) ð T 2 a T 3 Þ ¼ (cid:1) ð T 2 ! T 4 Þ ¼ 2 , i . e regulatory interactions T 1 ! T 2 , T 2 a T 3 , and T 2 ! T 4 occur twice . Furthermore , regulatory pathway ( multipath in the functional attribute network ) T 1 ! T 2 a T 3 occurs four times , i . e . (cid:1) ð T 1 ! T 2 a T 3 Þ ¼ 4 . Observe that , given the frequen - cies of T 1 ! T 2 and T 2 a T 3 , this is the maximum value (cid:1) ð T 1 ! T 2 a T 3 Þ can take . In other words , any gene with annotation T 2 , which is up - regulated by a T 1 gene , always down - regulates a T 3 gene . This observation suggests that , T 1 plays an indirect , but important role in the regulation of T 3 . On the contrary , (cid:1) ð T 1 ! T 2 ! T 4 Þ ¼ 2 , since gene g 4 with annotation T 2 up - regulates a T 4 - gene ( g 6 ) , but it is not regulated by a T 1 - gene . These observations suggest that the coupling between regulatory interactions T 1 ! T 2 and T 2 a T 3 is stronger than the coupling between T 1 ! T 2 and T 2 ! T 4 . In other words , the pathway T 1 ! T 2 a T 3 is more likely to be modular , compared to T 1 ! T 2 ! T 4 . We develop a statistical model that evaluates the modularity of regulatory pathways based on the coupling between their building blocks . For each pathway , our model assumes that the frequency of the building blocks of a pathway are known , i . e . constitute the background distribution . We quantify the statistical significance of a pathway with the conditional probability of its frequency based on this background . 3 . 3 . 2 Baseline model To quantify the significance of a pathway of shortest length ( i . e . a single regulatory interaction ) , we rely on a reference model that generates a functional attribute network . This model takes into account ( i ) the degree distribution of the underlying gene network , as well as ( ii ) the distribution of the number of genes associated with each functional attribute , based on the independent edge generation paradigm commonly used in modeling networks with arbitrary degree distribution ( Chung et al . , 2003 ; Itzkovitz et al . , 2003 ) . Note that this model is better suited to multigraphs than simple graphs ( King , 2004 ) . We refer to this model as the baseline model , and denote it B . The baseline model is defined by a set of parameters , and specifies the expected multidegree of each node in the functional attribute network . Here , the multidegree of a node in a multigraph refers to the number of multiedges incident to that node . Given gene regulatory network G ð V G ; V E Þ , functional attribute set V F , and annotation Að V G ; V F Þ , the expected in - degree (cid:3) ð T i Þ and out - degree (cid:4) ð T i Þ of a functional attribute T i 2 V F are estimated as follows : ^ (cid:3) i ¼ d (cid:3) ð T i Þ ¼ X T j 2 V F (cid:1) ð T i T j Þ ; ^ (cid:4) i ¼ d (cid:4) ð T i Þ ¼ X T j 2 V F (cid:1) ð T j T i Þ ; ð 1 Þ where we denote the estimate of a parameter x by ^ x . Note also that , if f is a function of x , we use f i to denote f ( x i ) whenever appropriate . Given these parameters , B generates a functional attribute network as follows : there is a pool of potential edges that contains (cid:3) i (cid:4) j potential edges i381 Functional annotation of regulatory pathways between each pair of functional attributes T i and T j . The size of the pool is given by : m ¼ P T i ; T j 2 V F (cid:3) i (cid:4) j : A total of n edges are drawn from this pool , independently and without replacement , where n is equal to the number of edges in the observed functional attribute network , i . e . n ¼ P i (cid:3) i ¼ P j (cid:4) j : Let B i ¼ B ð T i Þ and D i ¼ D ð T i Þ denote the random variables that correspond to the in and out degrees of T i in the generated network . Then , we have E ½ B i (cid:8) ¼ X j (cid:3) i (cid:4) j n m ¼ (cid:3) i X j (cid:4) j P ‘ (cid:3) ‘ P ‘ ; j (cid:3) ‘ (cid:4) j ¼ (cid:3) i ð 2 Þ and similarly E ½ D i (cid:8) ¼ (cid:4) i . In other words , the expected values of multidegrees in the generated network mirror the specifications . 3 . 3 . 3 Significance of a regulatory interaction Let (cid:2) ð (cid:1) Þ denote the random variable representing the frequency of pathway (cid:1) in the generated functional attribute network . Clearly , (cid:2) ij ¼ (cid:2) ð T i T j Þ is a hypergeometric random variable with parameters m ( number of items ) , (cid:3) i (cid:4) j ( number of good items ) , n ( number of selected items ) and (cid:1) ij ( number of selected good items ) ( Feller 1968 ) . Hence , the P - value of a regulatory interaction T i T j in the observed network , i . e . the probability of observing at least (cid:1) ij interactions between genes associated with T i and genes associated with T j , is given by p ij ¼ P ð (cid:2) ij (cid:6) (cid:1) ij j B Þ ¼ X min f (cid:3) i (cid:4) j ; n g ‘ ¼ (cid:1) ij (cid:3) i (cid:4) j ‘ (cid:1) (cid:2) m (cid:2) (cid:3) i (cid:4) j n (cid:2) ‘ (cid:1) (cid:2) mn (cid:1) (cid:2) : ð 3 Þ 3 . 3 . 4 Significance of a pathway We now present a statistical model to assess the statistical significance of a pathway of functional attributes , which assumes a background distribution based on the occurrence of the building blocks of a pathway . Let (cid:1) i ; k denote the path f T i 1 ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k g . For 1 < j < k , we want to evaluate the significance of the coupling between pathways (cid:1) 1 , j and (cid:1) j , k . In other words , we want to understand how strong a conclusion of the sort ‘If a gene g ‘ 2 Gð T i j Þ is regulated through a chain of regulatory interactions characterized by (cid:1) 1 ; j , then this gene is likely to regulate a T i k gene through pathway (cid:1) j , k ( or vice versa ) can be . To achieve this , we assume a reference model , in which the frequency of pathways (cid:1) 1 ; j and (cid:1) j ; k is established a priori . Let (cid:2) i ; k and (cid:1) i ; k denote (cid:2) ð (cid:1) i ; k Þ and (cid:1) ð (cid:1) i ; k Þ , respectively . Then , the P - value of the coupling between (cid:1) 1 ; j and (cid:1) j ; k is defined as follows : p 1 ; j ; k ¼ P ð (cid:2) 1 , k (cid:6) (cid:1) 1 , k j (cid:2) 1 , j ¼ (cid:1) 1 , j ; (cid:2) j , k ¼ (cid:1) j , k Þ : ð 4 Þ Our model for the distribution of (cid:2) 1 , k , given (cid:1) 1 , j and (cid:1) j , k , is illustrated in Figure 4 . Assume that a pool contains all possible occurrences of multipaths f T i 1 ; T i 2 : : : ; T i j g and f T i j ; T i 2 : : : ; T i k g . Clearly , there are m 1 , j ¼ Q j ‘ ¼ 1 (cid:1) i ‘ and m j , k ¼ Q k ‘ ¼ j (cid:1) i ‘ potential occurrences of each multipath . This is shown in Figure 4a . Now consider a pair of paths , one corresponding to a potential occurrence of (cid:1) 1 ; j , the other to (cid:1) 1 , k . Such a pair corresponds to a path , i . e . an occurrence of (cid:1) 1 , k , only if the second path originates in the port in which the first one terminates . This is illustrated in Figure 4b and c . Since there are (cid:1) 1 , j and (cid:1) j , k occurrences of (cid:1) 1 , j and (cid:1) j , k , respectively , the problem is formulated as follows : we draw (cid:1) 1 , j paths from m 1 , j potential occurrences of (cid:1) 1 , j and (cid:1) j , k paths from m j , k potential occurrences of (cid:1) j , k , forming (cid:1) 1 , j (cid:1) j , k pairs . What is the probability that in at least (cid:1) 1 , k of these pairs , the port on T j will be common ? We approximate this probability using our result on the behavior of dense subgraphs ( Koyutu¨rk et al . , 2006a ) and Chva´tal’s bound on hypergeometric tail ( Chva´tal , 1979 ) . In order to apply these results , we resolve dependencies assuming that the selected path pairs are independent from each other . Then , letting q j ¼ 1 = (cid:1) j be the probability that a given path pair will go through the same gene and t 1 ; j ; k ¼ (cid:1) 1 , k = (cid:1) 1 , j (cid:1) j , k be the fraction of observed paths among all existing pairs , we obtain the following bound : p 1 ; j ; k (cid:5) exp ð (cid:1) 1 , j (cid:1) j , k H q j ð t 1 ; j ; k ÞÞ ; ð 5 Þ where H q ð t Þ ¼ t log qt þ ð 1 (cid:2) t Þ log 1 (cid:2) q 1 (cid:2) t denotes weighted entropy . This estimate is Bonferroni - corrected for multiple testing , i . e . it is adjusted by a factor of Q kj ¼ 1 j S g ‘ 2 T ij Fð g ‘ Þj . 3 . 4 N ARADA : a software for identification of significant regulatory pathways Based on the above statistical model , we develop algorithms and a comprehensive software tool , N ARADA , for projecting gene regulatory networks on the functional attribute domain . The input to N ARADA consists of three files : ( i ) a gene regulatory network , in which the source gene , target gene and the mode of interaction are specified for each regulatory interaction , ( ii ) specifica - tion of the functional attributes and their relations ( e . g . Gene Ontology obo file ) and ( iii ) annotation file that specifies the mapping between genes and functional attributes . N ARADA currently handles three types of queries : (cid:9) Q 1 : Given a functional attribute T , find all significant pathways that are regulated by ( originate from ) genes that are associated with T . (cid:9) Q 2 : Given a functional attribute T , find all significant pathways that regulate ( terminate at ) genes that are associated with T . (cid:9) Q 3 : Given a sequence of functional attributes T i 1 ; T i 2 ; : : : ; T i k , find all occurrences of the corresponding pathway in the gene network and determine its significance . A pathway is identified as being significant if its P - value is less than the critical (cid:5) - level , a user - defined parameter . N ARADA delivers near interactive query response using a novel , biologically motivated pruning technique . We call a pathway strongly significant if all of its subpaths are significant . In biological terms , a strongly significant pathway is likely to correspond to a significantly Fig . 4 . Model testing whether the frequency of path T 1 ! T 2 ! T 3 , given (cid:1) 12 and (cid:1) 23 , is significant . ( a ) Pool of possible T 1 T 2 and T 1 T 3 edges . There are (cid:1) 1 (cid:1) 2 ¼ 6 and (cid:1) 2 (cid:1) 3 ¼ 4 possible T 1 T 2 and T 1 T 3 edges , respectively . ( b ) A possible pair of edges that corresponds to a path . ( c ) A possible pair of edges that does not correspond to a path . ( d ) (cid:1) 12 ¼ 2 T 1 T 2 edges and (cid:1) 23 ¼ 2 T 2 T 3 edges are randomly selected from the pool . ( e ) A possible configuration of selected edges . In this case , (cid:1) 123 ¼ 2 . i382 J . Pandey et al . modular process , in which not only the building blocks of the pathway , but also its constituent building blocks are tightly coupled . In the context of queries implemented in N ARADA , these subpaths are limited to those that originate from ( terminate at ) the query term . The option for searching strongly significant paths is also available in N ARADA . The main motivation in identification of significant regulatory pathways is understanding the crosstalk between different processes , functions and cellular components . Therefore , functions and processes that are known to play a key role in gene regulation ( e . g . transcription regulator activity or DNA binding ) may overload the identified pathways and overwhelm other interesting patterns . However , genes that are responsible for these functions are likely to bridge regulatory interactions between different processes ( Lee et al . , 2002 ) , so they cannot be ignored . For this reason , such GO terms are short - circuited , i . e . if process T i regulates T j , which is a key process in transcription , and T j regulates another process T k , then the pathway T i ! T j ! T k is replaced with regulatory interaction T i ! T k . 4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION We test N ARADA comprehensively on the E . coli transcriptional network obtained from RegulonDB ( Salgado et al . , 2006 ) . The release 5 . 6 . of this dataset contains 1364 genes with 3159 regulatory interactions . A total of 193 of these interactions specify dual regulation . We separate these dual regulatory interactions as up and down regulatory interactions . We use Gene Ontology ( Ashburner et al . , 2000 ) as a library of functional attributes . The annotation of E . coli genes is obtained from UniProt GOA Proteome ( Camon et al . , 2004 ) . Using the mapping provided by GO , the gene network is mapped to functional attribute networks of the three name spaces in GO . Mapping to the biological process space provides maximum coverage in number of genes annotated , 881 genes are mapped to one or more of 318 process terms . We discuss here results obtained by this mapping only . Results relating to molecular functions and cellular components , as well as comprehensive results on pathways of biological processes , are available at the N ARADA website . We use N ARADA to identify all significant forward and reverse pathways of length 2 – 5 . In order to identify these paths , we run queries Q 1 and Q 2 with a critical (cid:5) of 0 . 01 on all 318 biological processes . The number of pathways obtained using combinations of the algorithmic options described in the previous section are shown in Table 1 . On a Pentium M ( 1 . 6 GHz ) laptop with 1 . 21GB RAM the brute - force approach takes on average 0 . 5 s per query for path length 2 , to 12 s per query for paths of length 5 . For strongly significant paths , it takes < 2 s per query for paths of length 5 , while for shortcutting terms it is 8s per query for paths of length 4 . Strongly significant pathways , i . e . those obtained by extending only significant pathways , compose a significant portion of the highly significant pathways . This observations suggests that significantly modular pathways are also likely to be composed of significantly modular building blocks . 4 . 1 Discussion One of the prominent features of the detected significant pathways is that a large number of them begin with terms relating to transcriptional and translational regulation while ending in other cellular processes ( Fig . 5 ) . This can be explained by the fact that the network consists of a set of transcription factor genes and set of genes regulated by them . Therefore , most of the regulatory pathways of length 3 or more have to begin at or flow through this set of genes annotated with processes relating to transcription , translation and regulation thereof . Pathways involving other process terms occur with lower frequency , but most of them are highly significant . Samples of pathways obtained are shown in Table 2 . Some pathways like ( sensory perception (cid:2)j transcription ! trans - port ) occur frequently and may constitute a common mechan - ism for regulation of transport - related activities . Parts of the significant pathways that regulate phosphorylation via genes involved in transcription and DNA recombination are shown in Figure 5a . As genes involved in transcription are abundantly present in the network , part of the pathway ( DNA recombination ! transcription ) occurs rarely ( 12 times ) Table 1 . Total number of significant pathways found by N ARADA on E . coli transcription network for various path lengths Pathway length 2 3 4 5 All significant pathways 427 580 1401 942 Strongly significant pathways 427 208 183 142 Short - circuiting common terms 184 119 3 1 ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 5 . Sample significantly overrepresented pathways in E . coli transcription network . ( a ) DNA recombination ! transcription ! phosphorylation ( b ) transcription (cid:2)j flagellum biogenesis ! cell motility . The pathways in functional attribute space are shown on the upper panel , their occurrences in the gene network are shown on the lower panel . i383 Functional annotation of regulatory pathways and is not significant , but in 6 of the 12 times it occurs , the genes involved in transcription regulate phosphorylation . The fis transcriptional regulator is responsible for regulation of nuoA - N operon ( Wackwitz et al . , 1999 ) , while the fhlA transcriptional activator regulates the hyf locus ( Hopper et al . , 1994 ; Skibinski et al . , 2002 ) . Indeed , it is observed that the integration host factor ( ihfA , ihfB ) affects the regula - tion of these phosphorylation related genes ( nuoA - N , hyf , hyc ) directly and indirectly ( Hopper et al . , 1994 ; Nasser et al . , 2002 ) . In Figure 5b , significant pathways that regulate cell motility are shown . This is part of a response to a query of type Q 2 . The flhD operon that encodes flhC and flhD has been shown to act as positive regulator of flagellar regulons ( fli , flg ) ( Liu and Matsumura , 1994 ) . The flagellar master operon flhDC , in turn , is tightly regulated at the transcriptional level by rscAB , fur , ompR ( Francez - Charlot et al . , 2003 ; Lehnen et al . , 2002 ; Ko and Park , 2000 ) . The output of N ARADA captures this indirect regulation of flagellar expression perfectly . 4 . 2 Case study : Regulatory network of molybdate ion transport Figure 6 shows all significant paths of maximum length 3 regulated by molybdate ion transport . The genes associated with molybdate ion transport are modE and the operon modABCD , but it has been observed that the gene modE down - regulates the operon modABCD ( McNicholas et al . , 1997 ) , and the operon does not regulate any other gene . The three pathways at the bottom of the figure are the only significant paths of length 2 originating at molybdate ion transport . As can be seen on on the upper side of the figure ( paths of length 3 ) , molybdate ion transport promotes and suppresses various processes indirectly , through DNA - dependent regulation of transcription , two - component signal transduction system and nitrate assimilation . It is important to note that direct regulation of these intermediate terms by molybdate ion transport is not significant by itself . By extending the search beyond pairwise interactions , N ARADA is able to capture these significant indirect interactions successfully . The paths of length 2 mirror the direct regulation of moaABCDE operon ( McNicholas et al . , 1997 ) and oppABCDF operon ( Tao et al . , 2005 ) by modE . Furthermore , modE indirectly regulates cytochrome complex assembly ccm operon ( Overton et al . , 2006 ) , electron transport nap operon ( McNicholas and Gunsalus , 2002 ) , nitrate assembly nar operon ( Self et al . , 1999 ) and mitochondrial electron transport nuo operon ( Bongaerts , et al . 1995 ; Overton , et al . , 2006 ) . All these indirect regulations occur through genes involved in respiratory nitrate reductase narXL ( Tao et al . , 2005 ) . In the RegulonDB network , we observe that modE indeed regulates narL , which regulates other genes . N ARADA associates the mediation of Table 2 . Selection of significantly overrepresented pathways identified by N ARADA on E . coli transcription network Frequency P – value Pathway 217 2 . 7E (cid:2) 49 Sensory perception – j transcription ! transport 64 7 . 1E (cid:2) 32 Regulation of translation – j DNA recombination ! transport 50 2 . 0E (cid:2) 24 Regulation of translation – j DNA recombination – j generation of precursor metabolites and energy 45 1 . 1E (cid:2) 23 Molybdate ion transport ! sensory perception – j metabolic process 34 1 . 6E (cid:2) 8 Two – component signal transduction system ( phosphorelay ) – j transcription ! sensory perception 36 9 . 1E (cid:2) 8 Transcription – j flagellum biogenesis ! chemotaxis 37 6 . 7E (cid:2) 5 Two – component signal transduction system ( phosphorelay ) ! transcription ! cell motility 6 6 . 2E (cid:2) 3 Sensory perception – j regulation of transcription , DNA – dependent ! peptidoglycan catabolic process 8 6 . 2E (cid:2) 3 Translation – j regulation of transcription , DNA – dependent – j detection of virus 8 4 . 5E (cid:2) 3 Glcolysis ! transcription ! amino acid biosynthetic process Fig . 6 . Direct and indirect regulation of various processes by molybdate ion transport and the corresponding gene network . i384 J . Pandey et al . modE ’s regulatory effect on several other processes with the functional associations of narL . An interesting observation is that , even though the regulation is mediated by the same gene , different biological processes associated with narL are found to mediate the regulation of different processes . Consider the paths molybdate ion transport ! two component signal transduction (cid:2)j cytochrome complex assembly ( 1 ) and molybdate ion transport ! nitrate assimila - tion (cid:2)j cytochrome complex assembly ( 2 ) . Even though the underlying genes in both pathways are identical , the signifi - cance values assigned by N ARADA to each of them is differ - ent ( one is found to be significant while the other is not ) . Further inspection reveals that the regulatory interaction molybdate ion transport ! two component signal transduction occurs only twice in the entire network , one of which , modE ! narL , occurs in the context of ( 1 ) . Similarly , two component signal transduction (cid:2)j cytochrome complex assembly occurs 9 times , 8 of which , narL (cid:2)j nrfE , ccmABCDEFH , occur in the context of ( 1 ) . On the other hand , molybdate ion transport ! nitrate assimilation occurs 3 times in the complete network and is observed once in the context of ( 2 ) , and only 8 of 15 occurrences of nitrate assimilation (cid:2)j cytochrome complex assembly are associated with ( 2 ) . Furthermore , there are 43 genes in the network that are associated with two component signal transduction , while there are 14 associated with nitrate assimilation . Consequently , statistical analysis suggests that a gene involved in two component signal transduction needs to be regulated by a molybdate ion transport to regulate cytochrome complex assembly . On the other hand , nitrate assimilation may regulate cytochrome complex assembly with and without the presence of molybdate ion transport gene regulating itself . Therefore , the modularity of the indirect suppression of cytochrome complex assembly by molybdate ion transport through two component signal transduction is found to be stronger than that through nitrate assimilation . 5 CONCLUDING REMARKS In this article , we introduce the notion of statistically significant regulatory pathways of functional attributes and provide a formal framework for projecting regulatory networks from gene space to functional attribute space . We demonstrate the hardness of the resulting general problem in terms of non - monotonicity of interpretable statistical measures . We propose a statistical model for functional attribute networks that emphasizes the modularity of pathways by conditioning on its building blocks . We present a comprehensive software tool , N ARADA , based on the proposed models and methods , and validate results obtained from the E . coli transcription network . Conflict of Interest : none declared . REFERENCES Ashburner , M . et al . ( 2000 ) Gene Ontology : Tool for the unification of biology . the Gene Ontology consortium . Nat . Genet . , 25 , 25 – 29 . Bongaerts , J . et al . ( 1995 ) Transcriptional regulation of the proton translocating NADH dehydrogenase genes ( nuoA - N ) of Escherichia coli by electron acceptors , electron donors and gene regulators . Mol . Microbiol . , 16 , 521 – 534 . Comparative Study . Camon , E . et al . ( 2004 ) The Gene Ontology Annotation ( GOA ) Database : sharing knowledge in Uniprot with Gene Ontology . Nucleic . Acids . Res . , 32 , 262 – 266 . Chung , F . et al . ( 2003 ) Spectra of random graphs with given expected degrees . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 100 , 6313 – 6318 . Chva´tal , V . ( 1979 ) The tail of the hypergeometric distribution . Discrete Mathematics , 25 , pp . 285 – 287 . Feller , W . ( 1968 ) The hypergeometric series . In An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications . Vol . 1 , 3rd edn . Wiley , New York , pp . 41 – 45 . Francez - Charlot , A . et al . ( 2003 ) RcsCDB His - Asp phosphorelay system negatively regulates the flhDC operon in Escherichia coli . Mol Microbiol , 49 , 823 – 832 . Friedman , N . et al . ( 2000 ) Using bayesian networks to analyze expression data . J . Comput . Biol . , 7 , 601 – 620 . Gamalielsson , J . et al . ( 2006 ) A GO - based method for assessing the biological plausibility of regulatory hypotheses . In International Conference on Computational Science ( 2 ) , pp . 879 – 886 . Grossmann , S . et al . ( 2006 ) An improved statistic for detecting over - represented gene ontology annotations in gene sets In RECOMB’06 , pp . 85 – 98 . Hopper , S . et al . ( 1994 ) Regulated expression in vitro of genes coding for formate hydrogenlyase components of Escherichia coli . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 , 19597 – 19604 . Hsiao , A . et al . ( 2005 ) VAMPIRE microarray suite : a web - based platform for the interpretation of gene expression data . Nucleic . Acids . Res . , 33 , W627 – W632 . Husmeier , D . ( 2003 ) Sensitivity and specificity of inferring genetic regulatory interactions from microarray experiments with dynamic bayesian networks . Bioinformatics , 19 , 2271 – 2282 . Itzkovitz , S . et al . ( 2003 ) Subgraphs in random networks . Physical Review E , 68 , 026127 . King , O . D . ( 2004 ) Comment on ‘Subgraphs in random networks’ . Physical Review E , 70 , 058101 . Ko , M . and Park , C . ( 2000 ) H - NS - Dependent regulation of flagellar synthesis is mediated by a LysR family protein . J . Bacteriol . , 182 , 4670 – 4672 . Koyutu¨rk , M . et al . ( 2006a ) Assessing significance of connectivity and conserva - tion in protein interaction networks . In RECOMB’06 , pp . 45 – 59 . Koyutu¨rk , M . et al . ( 2006b ) Detecting conserved interaction patterns in biological networks . J . Comput . Biol . , 13 , 1299 – 1322 . Lee , T . I . et al . ( 2002 ) Transcriptional regulatory networks in S . cerevisiae . Science , 298 , 799 – 804 . Lehnen , D . et al . ( 2002 ) LrhA as a new transcriptional key regulator of flagella , motility and chemotaxis genes in E . coli . Mol . Microbiol . , 45 , 521 – 532 . Comparative Study . Liu , X . and Matsumura , P . ( 1994 ) The FlhD / FlhC complex , a trans - criptional activator of the E . coli flagellar class II operons . J . Bacteriol . , 176 , 7345 – 7351 . McNicholas , P . M . and Gunsalus , R . P . ( 2002 ) The molybdate - responsive E . coli ModE transcriptional regulator coordinates periplasmic nitrate reductase ( nap ) operon expression with nitrate and molybdate availability . J . Bacteriol . , 184 , 3253 – 3259 . McNicholas , P . M . et al . ( 1997 ) Characterization of the ModE DNA - binding sites in the control regions of modABCD and moaABCDE of Escherichia coli . Mol . Microbiol . , 23 , 515 – 524 . Nasser , W . et al . ( 2002 ) Transcriptional regulation of fis operon involves a module of multiple coupled promoters . EMBO J . , 21 , 715 – 724 . Overton , T . W . et al . ( 2006 ) Microarray analysis of gene regulation by oxygen , nitrate , nitrite , FNR , NarL and NarP during anaerobic growth of Escherichia coli : new insights into microbial physiology . Biochem . Soc . Trans . , 34 , 104 – 7 . Salgado , H . et al . ( 2006 ) RegulonDB ( version 5 . 0 ) : E . coli K - 12 transcriptional regulatory network , operon organization , and growth conditions . Nucleic . Acids . Res . , 34 , D394 – D397 . Self , W . T . et al . ( 1999 ) Transcriptional regulation of molybdoenzyme synthesis in E . coli in response to molybdenum : ModE - molybdate , a repressor of the modABCD ( molybdate transport ) operon is a secondary transcriptional activator for the hyc and nar operons . Microbiology , 145 , 41 – 55 . i385 Functional annotation of regulatory pathways Skibinski , D . A . G . et al . ( 2002 ) Regulation of the hydrogenase - 4 operon of E . coli by the sigma ( 54 ) - dependent transcriptional activators FhlA and HyfR . J . Bacteriol . , 184 , 6642 – 6653 . Tao , H . et al . ( 2005 ) Global gene expression analysis revealed an unsuspected deo operon under the control of molybdate sensor , ModE protein , in E . coli . Arch . Microbiol . , 184 , 225 – 33 . Tong , A . H . Y . et al . ( 2004 ) Global mapping of the yeast genetic interaction network . Science , 303 , 808 – 813 . Wackwitz , B . et al . ( 1999 ) Growth phase - dependent regulation of nuoA - N expression in E . coli K - 12 by the Fis protein : upstream binding sites and bioenergetic significance . Mol . Gen . Genet . , 262 , 876 – 883 . i386 J . Pandey et al .