Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 Persuasive robotic assistant for health self - management of older adults : Design and evaluation of social behaviors Rosemarijn Looije a , (cid:2) , Mark A . Neerincx a , b , 1 , Fokie Cnossen c , 2 a TNO Defence , Security and Safety , P . O . Box 23 , 3769ZG Soesterberg , Netherlands b Man – Machine Interaction Group , Delft University of Technology , Mekelweg 4 , 2628 CD , Delft , Netherlands c Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence , University of Groningen Postbus 407 , 9700 AK , Groningen , Netherlands Received 14 November 2008 ; received in revised form 20 July 2009 ; accepted 21 August 2009 Available online 28 August 2009 Abstract Daily health self - management , such as the harmonization of food , exercise and medication , is a major problem for a large group of older adults with obesity or diabetics . Computer - based personal assistance can help to behave healthy by persuading and guiding older adults . For effective persuasion , the assistant should express social behaviors ( e . g . , turn taking , emotional expressions ) to be trustworthy and show empathy . From the motivational interviewing method and synthetic assistants’ literature , we derived a set of social behaviors , and implemented a subset in a physical character , a virtual character and a text interface . The ﬁrst behavior type concerns conversing with high - level dialogue ( semantics , intentions ) , which could be implemented in all 3 assistants . The other behavior types could only be implemented in the characters : showing natural cues ( e . g . , gaze , posture ) , expressing emotions ( e . g . , compassionate face ) , and accommodating social conversations ( e . g . , turn taking ) . In an experiment , 24 older adults ( 45 – 65 ) interacted with the text interface and one of the characters , conform a ‘‘one - week diabetics scenario’’ . They experienced the virtual and physical character as more empathic and trustworthy than the text - based assistant , and expressed more conversational behavior with the characters . However , it seems that the preference of interacting with the character or the text interface was inﬂuenced by the conscientiousness of the participant ; more conscientious people liked the text interface better . Older adults responded more negative to the characters that lacked the social behaviors than to the text interface . Some differences between the virtual and physical character probably occurred due to the speciﬁc constraints of the physical character . r 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : Persuasive computing ; Human – robot interaction ; Health - care 1 . Introduction In the year 2000 , one in ten individuals in the world was 60 years or older and one in fourteen was at least 65 . It is expected that these numbers will increase to one in every ﬁve persons being 60 or older and nearly one in six people 65 or older in 2050 ( United Nations , 2002 ) . On top of that , the prevalence of chronic diseases is rising amongst older people because of urbanization and an unhealthy life - style ( Wild et al . , 2004 ) ( e . g . , diabetes , COPD , obesities ) . A major problem is that only 50 % of the chronically ill adheres to their treatment advice ( WHO , 2003 ) . For older adults , this problem is particularly hard because of their health illiteracy and deep - rooted daily routines—or lifestyles . Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) might provide the required support to better cope with the personal health constraints , such as doing exercises ( Kidd and Breazeal , 2006 ; Ruttkay et al . , 2006 ; Bickmore et al . , 2004 ; Goetz et al . , 2003 ; Gockley and Mataric , 2006 ) , giving social support ( Kidd et al . , 2006 ; Kriglstein and Wallner , 2005 ) , and helping with lifestyle change ( Bigelow et al . , 2000 ; Looije et al . , 2006 ) . Research on persuasive technology ( Fogg , 2002 ) and affective computing ( Picard , 1997 ) is providing technological ( partial ) solutions for the development of this type of assistance , e . g . , for the ARTICLE IN PRESS www . elsevier . com / locate / ijhcs 1071 - 5819 / $ - see front matter r 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2009 . 08 . 007 (cid:2) Corresponding author . Tel . : + 31346356370 . E - mail addresses : roosjel @ hotmail . com , rosemarijn . looije @ tno . nl ( R . Looije ) , Mark . Neerincx @ tno . nl ( M . A . Neerincx ) , F . Cnossen @ ai . rug . nl ( F . Cnossen ) . 1 Tel . : + 31346356298 . 2 Tel . : + 31503636336 . realization of social behavior , such as social talk and turn taking ( Bickmore et al . , 2004 ; Kidd et al . , 2006 ; Goetz et al . , 2003 ; Gockley and Mataric , 2006 ) , and of empathic behavior , such as attentiveness and compliments ( Kidd et al . , 2006 ; Bigelow et al . , 2000 ; Looije et al . , 2006 ; Kriglstein and Wallner , 2005 ) . In our view , psychological techniques for behavioral change , such as motivational interviewing , should be accommodated by this type of ICT support ( e . g . , Rogers , 1951 ; Looije et al . , 2006 ; Miller and Rollnick , 1991 ) . However , a concise and coherent set of behaviors – worked - out in speciﬁc user - interface behaviors – for such an accommodation is lacking . Derived from relevant literature of psychology , persuasive technology and affective computing , this paper presents a ﬁrst set of behaviors ( e . g . , compassion ) that map support objectives ( motivating , educating , and supporting ) on speciﬁc – social – user - interface behaviors for the intended ICT support . In an experiment , we tested how far these social behaviors help to make the interface more empathetic and trust - worthy , which are preconditions for long - term use . It should be noted that older adults experience speciﬁc hindrances to actually make use of ICT support , due to relatively limited computer skills ( partly due to limited sensory , physical and cognitive abilities ) , and motivation to use a standard Windows , Icons , Menu and Pointing ( WIMP ) device ( Czaja and Lee , 2007 ) . An important question is how to realize user interfaces with which older adults feel at ease and which are pleasant in use ( Czaja and Lee , 2007 ) . Different user - interface types for older adults’ health assistance have been developed , such as text or WIMP - based questionnaires and feedback providers ( Blanson - Henkemans et al . , 2007 ; Bigelow et al . , 2000 ) , and character educators and buddies ( Looije et al . , 2006 ; Kidd et al . , 2006 ; Goetz et al . , 2003 ; Gockley and Mataric , 2006 ; Kriglstein and Wallner , 2005 ) . A speech interface may be more natural to use than a text interface for people who are not experienced with computer technology ( Neerincx et al . , 2008 ) . A user interface with a character - like appearance ( e . g . , animal ) could further improve the feeling of comfort of older adults with technology ( Kidd et al . , 2006 ; Kriglstein and Wallner , 2005 ) . Social behavior increases when a character - like appearance is used ( Kidd et al . , 2006 ; Kriglstein and Wallner , 2005 ) and as a result the resistance towards the interface might decrease . However , empirical research on possible beneﬁts of these types of user interfaces on older adults’ appreciation and conversational behavior is lacking . This paper presents an experiment , comparing a text - based interface with a – virtual and physical – character providing health assistance for older adults . For this comparison , we used the currently most common dialogue : written input and output ( keyboard and window ) for the text ( WIMP ) interface , and spoken input and output for the character . Overall , the expectation was that social behaviors improve users’ appreciation and enriches their interaction behavior ; i . e . , more talking , looking , laughing will occur . Furthermore , it is expected that such user - interface behaviors can be best incorporated in characters in comparison with virtual characters and text interfaces . However , we assume that characters which do not show the required social behavior evoke relatively large negative responses of the users . Finally , we expect that the personality of the user inﬂuences his / her preference for a speciﬁc interface . 2 . Research approach Within the SuperAssist project , in which this experiment was performed , we apply a user - centered design approach , in which support concepts are being developed , tested and implemented incrementally ( Neerincx and Lindenberg , 2008 ; Blanson - Henkemans et al . , 2007 ) . Within the Super - Assist project diabetes is taken as a case study for the development of personal assistants for older adults . The support content about diabetes is based on a thorough domain and task analysis with involvement of patients ( e . g . , interviews ) , medical experts ( e . g . , with respect to diet and lifestyle advice for people with obesity ) , and computer support experts ( e . g . , current e - health solutions ) ; see Blanson Henkemans et al . ( 2009 ) . Scenarios are derived from this analysis , getting the use context clear , and enabling assessments of the expected support effects and corresponding behaviors ( Blanson - Henkemans et al . , 2008 ; Rosson and Carroll , 2001 ) . In the practice of medical research , the well - being of patients should remain central , and empirical foundation of computer support – such as a persuasive assistant – should burden this user group as little as possible ( Coyle et al . , 2007 ) . To reduce this burden , general support characteristics can ﬁrst be tested with healthy persons . The general characteristics of these persons that may affect support preferences , such as age , should be similar to the target group as far as possible . Scenarios help to address the effects of context - of - use in the evaluation . Furthermore , scenarios can help healthy participants empathize with the use of health assistants in complex and tedious patient situations during the evalua - tion . The evaluation may show positive and negative outcomes on core support characteristics , and recommen - dations for improvement . When the outcomes are mainly positive , the tests with patients should be started . This paper presents an experiment with healthy adults in the age group with a relatively high risk to acquire diabetes type II ( i . e . , age between 45 and 65 ) . The experiment shows whether this user group in general appreciates the social behavior of virtual or physical characters , and responses well to the persuasion skills that are relevant for chronic diseases like diabetics . If the assistance works well on these aspects , we will test the support with older adults with diabetics in a subsequent experiment . 3 . Social computer skills for persuasion We aim at computer - based personal assistance that persuades and guides older adults to behave healthily . ARTICLE IN PRESS R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 387 Research on persuasive technology ( e . g . , Fogg , 2002 ) shows that such technology is perceived as a ‘‘social actor’’ by the user . Consequently , the technology reactions ( feedback ) should be social and therefore follow principles of empathy . In addition , research on automation and personal assistants shows that the technology should be trustworthy to evoke adequate user behavior ( e . g . , Neerincx and Streefkerk , 2003 ; Cassell and Bickmore , 2000 ) . 3 . 1 . Empathy Rogers ( 1951 ) was the ﬁrst to note that to induce behavioral change in a client a therapist has to be empathetic . A technique for behavioral change that is derived from various psychological theories , from which Rogers’ theory is the most prominent , is Motivational Interviewing ( Miller and Rollnick , 1991 ) . The key principle of motivational interviewing is that the patient’s self - knowledge about the effects of his / her behavior , combined with self - efﬁcacy , i . e . , the ability to reach the desired effect by himself / herself , results in more stable and prolonged behavioral change . By implementing characteristics such as empathy , we want to increase the persuasive abilities of the personal assistant to change attitude and behavior of the user . In total ten skills can be identiﬁed for a Motivational Interviewing therapist , which are as follows : 1 ) Be complimentary rather than punitive ( Give compli - ments where applicable , and do not punish after a fault ) . 2 ) Be attentive ( Clearly show to the speaker that you are listening , among other things in your non - verbal behavior ) . 3 ) Express compassion through reﬂective listening ( React appropriately on what is said , if someone says : ‘‘I’m not feeling well’’ show compassion ) . 4 ) Communicate respect for and acceptance of clients and their feelings ( Do not react negatively on feelings and actions of the client ) . 5 ) Establish a non - judgmental , collaborative relationship with the client ( Do not judge , but support ) . 6 ) Be a knowledgeable support person ( Do not lie and know what you are talking about ) . 7 ) Gently persuade , with understanding that change is up to the client ( Explicitly say that change is up to the client ) . 8 ) Develop discrepancy between client’s goals or values and current behavior ( Help clients appreciate the value of change ) . 9 ) Adjust to , rather than oppose , client resistance ( Accept the client’s reluctance as natural ) . 10 ) Support self - efﬁcacy and optimism ( Focus on client’s strengths to support the hope and optimism needed to change ) . The HealthBuddy s is an example of persuasive technology that applies Motivational Interviewing in a very limited way ( Bigelow et al . , 2000 ; van Dijken et al . , 2005 ) . The HealthBuddy s supports people with chronic diseases such as COPD and diabetics with a text - based user interface . 3 . 2 . Trust Because the assistant handles delicate data and acts autonomously ; it is of utmost importance that people trust the personal assistant . The system therefore has to behave in a competent manner . Trust can grow with experience with the system , and is inﬂuenced by errors from the system , and interface and user characteristics ( Muir , 1994 ) . Trust is also a critical factor in interpersonal relationships ( Lee and See , 2004 ) : To achieve trust , the interaction between user and system must follow the same dialogue conventions as are exhibited in human – human interaction ( e . g . , social talk , politeness , consistency , turn taking ) ( Cassell and Bickmore , 2000 ) . Particularly for older adults , positive feedback is important to have conﬁdence in a good ending ( Czaja and Lee , 2007 ; Jussim et al . , 1995 ) . 4 . Implementation of social behavior for a persuasive assistant Research in the area of affective computing ( Picard , 1997 ) aims at technology to ( partially ) automate social behavior ( i . e . , sensing , interpreting and accommodating emotions ) . Liu and Picard ( 2005 ) showed that a personal assistant is appreciated more and therefore used for a longer period of time if its expression ( e . g . , empathy ) is attuned to the user’s state . The statements of Reeves and Nass ( 1996 ) that people will have higher appreciation of technology if it is socially and physically present has been conﬁrmed in research that compared text and characters ( Moreno et al . , 2001 ) and in research that compared physical and virtual characters ( i . e . , favorable results for the physical character , ( Bartneck , 2003 ; Kidd , 2003 ; Wainer et al . , 2006 ; Goetz et al . , 2003 ) ) . Fong et al . ( 2003 ) enumerate several behaviors of such a social ( synthetic ) character , as follows : 1 ) Communicate with high - level dialogue ( address seman - tics and speakers intentions adequately ) . 2 ) Use natural cues ( e . g . , gaze , gestures , posture , etc . ) . 3 ) Express and / or perceive emotions ( e . g . , show a happy face ) . 4 ) Learn / recognize models of other characters ( e . g . , recognize the difference between an introvert and extravert personality ) . 5 ) Exhibit distinctive personality and character ( e . g . , be introvert or extravert ) . 6 ) Learn / develop social competencies ( e . g . , dialogue con - ventions such as turn taking and social talk ) . The social synthetic behaviors listed above should include the social skills enumerated in Section 3 . The ﬁrst ARTICLE IN PRESS R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 388 three ( empathy ) skills of motivational interviewing match the ﬁrst three behaviors listed above . Furthermore , the trust requirement of Section 3 . 2 is matched by the sixth behavior . The fourth and ﬁfth social behaviors are relevant for more long - term relationships and will not be imple - mented in our ﬁrst prototype that focuses – as a start – on short - term effects . Table 1 shows how the empathy and trust objectives ( what ) are related to the social behaviors ( how ) of a computer assistant . To study the effects of these behaviors in a user study , we implemented the behaviors of Table 1 in four different assistants : a virtual and a physical social character and a virtual and a physical non - social character . As a control condition , we added a text interface . All personal assistants exhibited the same level of high - level dialogue ( 1st behavior ) . The non - social character does not apply the other three types of behavior ( i . e . , it does not use natural cues , express emotions and show social competencies ) . Table 2 shows the relative presence of these three behaviors in the different interfaces with the corresponding positive or negative effects on the empathy and trust objectives . 4 . 1 . Text interface The text interface is a chat program where the experimenter asks questions and the participant answers by means of a keyboard ( Fig . 1a ) . It is implemented in C ] and it is the client in a TCP / IP protocol . The questions from the program appear in the upper window of the interface while the answers are typed in the lower window . By clicking the send - button the participant sends the message . Complimentary behavior is implemented using high - level dialogue for complimenting the participants when they adhere well to their therapy or when they answer a question correctly . In line with the motivational interview - ing skills users receive no punitive remarks when they give an incorrect answer , such as ‘‘that was wrong’’ . The interface does not say that the participant is wrong , but simply gives the explanation of the correct answer . 4 . 2 . Characters We use two types of characters : the virtual ( Fig . 1b ) and the physical ( Fig . 1c ) iCat from Philips . We use the iCat because of the ability of the iCat to express emotions ( and thus be a social character ) . It seems that older adults are also supported socially when their caretaking abilities are addressed ( Kidd et al . , 2006 ) and there is no extra burden to communicate with the device ( Kriglstein and Wallner , 2005 ) . The iCat both addresses the caretaking and limits the burden by its ability to listen and talk . ARTICLE IN PRESS Table 1 Relation between empathy and trust objectives with social behaviors of a computer assistant . Empathy Trust Complimentary Attentive Compassionate High level dialogue X Natural cues X X Express / perceive emotions X Social dialogue competencies X Table 2 Relative presence of social behaviors with the corresponding positive or negative effects on the empathy and trust objectives . Empathy Trust Natural cues Express / perceive emotion Social competencies Social character vs . text + Text has no natural cues for attentiveness , the social character has + The social character shows emotions , the text interface does not + The social character is better able in making social competencies explicit ( e . g . , turn taking ) Non - social character vs . text (cid:2) The non - social character has negative cues for empathy ( e . g . , glancing past the participant ) (cid:2) The non - social character shows no emotions , contrary to social conventions (cid:2) The non - social character does not behave according to social conventions Social vs . non - social character + + The social character’s non - verbal dialogue acts agree with social rules , the non - social au contrary + + The social character shows emotions , the non - social one not + + The social character acts according to social conventions , the social character not Physical vs . virtual character + The physical character can use natural cues better , for instance , to look at someone + The physical character is better able to express emotions and to make them more clear ¼ The social competencies for the physical and virtual characters are the same R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 389 The iCat is a plastic yellow cat with a face and a body that move to follow a person for instance . It expresses emotions by moving its lips , eyebrows , eyes , eyelids , head and body . To make its movements credible the iCat uses principles of animation ( van Breemen , 2004 ) , which are focused on making a smooth movement instead of the common machine - like behavior of characters—such as moving at constant velocity and in straight lines . Because credibility is lost when the transition between emotions is abrupt , ﬂuent animations are important . In the iCat , a smooth transition between movements is assured by using a Transition ﬁlter ( van Breemen , 2004 ) . The iCat has a speaker , microphones , a webcam , a proximity sensor and touch sensors . With these , it can speak , hear , see and feel . The iCat uses speech for input and output , as it has no keyboard or display . Our iCat uses the Dutch male voice from ( Loquendo , 2007 ) . 4 . 2 . 1 . Social vs . non - social characters The system is made to appear compassionate by implementing emotional behavior and natural cues such as happy , sad , and understanding . When happy , the character is smiling , while it shakes its head , moves its head downwards and closes its eyes a bit to show it is sad . The understanding emotion was a deep nod with an under - standing ‘‘mmm’’ sound that came from the Loquendo text - to - speech engine library . We implemented three different natural cues ; looking , understanding , and listening , to make the social character appear attentive . We implemented both that the social character is looking at the participants with a listening expression and that it sometimes nods its head with or without an understanding ‘‘mmm’’ sound . The listening movement means open eyes and green ears to indicate its attention to the speaker . The social character performs behaviors for all three empathy skills ( be complimentary , be attentive , show compassion ) . In the non - social character only behavior for the complimentary skill is implemented , because this is implemented in the text it speaks . The non - social character does not express emotions , does not follow the participant with its eyes and head , and does not blink or nod . It even looks past the participant to make the non - social condition more extreme . 4 . 2 . 2 . Physical vs . virtual characters In the experiment the iCat is used as the physical character as well as the virtual character . The implementa - tion of the behaviors is the same for the physical and the virtual character except for gazing towards the participant . In the social condition the physical iCat follows the participant with its head and we hoped this would be interpreted as if it was listening to the participant . In the virtual condition the iCat is positioned on the screen so that it looks to the participant . We expect that the physical character would be experienced as a better social actor than the virtual character because of its physical presence on the table ( Reeves and Nass , 1996 ) . We think , following ( Bartneck , 2003 ; Kidd , 2003 ; Wainer et al . , 2006 ; Goetz et al . , 2003 ) , that a physical character will have a greater social facilitation effect , the tendency for people to perform simple tasks better when in the presence of others ( Triplett , 1898 ) , than a virtual character ( Bartneck , 2003 ) . Thus our hypotheses are H1 . Social characters are perceived to be more empathetic and trustworthy than a text interface . Furthermore , characters evoke more conversational behavior stimulated by the empathic behavior of the characters than the text interface . H2 . Non - social characters are found to be less empathetic and trustworthy than a text interface . Furthermore , non - social characters evoke the same amount of conversational behavior as a text interface . H3 . Social characters are found be more empathetic and trustworthy than non - social characters . Furthermore , social characters evoke more conversational behavior stimulated by the empathic behavior of the social characters . H4 . Physically present characters are found to be more empathetic than and equally trustworthy as virtual characters . Furthermore , physical characters evoke more conversational behavior stimulated by the empathic behavior of the physical characters . 5 . Experiment 5 . 1 . The roles In the experiment every interface fulﬁlled the roles of buddy ( introducing , asking about participant’s well - being and showing compassion ) , educator ( informing and asking about general health and diabetes ) and motivator ( asking lifestyle questions and providing feedback on desired changes ) . The different roles assist , by providing informa - tion and feedback , in increasing the self - help ability and motivation of users , increasing knowledge about their disease and increasing knowledge about the effects of their lifestyle on their disease . ARTICLE IN PRESS Fig . 1 . Text interface ( a ) , virtual iCat ( b ) , and physical iCat ( c ) . R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 390 5 . 2 . Wizard of Oz The experiment was done in a Wizard of Oz setting . A Wizard of Oz experiment means that participants think they are interacting with an autonomous system , while in fact the system is partly or completely operated by the experimenter . In this experiment , participants were told they were communicating with an intelligent interface which automatically responded on their answers . In fact the experimenter followed a script with prepared texts , making sure the reactions of the interface did not differ between participants , from which the experimenter could choose dependent on the reaction of the participant ( e . g . , the interface reacted differently to a correct answer than on an incorrect answer ) . For the text interface this prepared texts appeared in a text box on the screen of the participant , while with the characters the texts were pronounced by the text - to - speech program Loquendo ( Dutch male - voice Willem ) . The scripts also included the emotions and other movements from the iCat , such as following the participant with its head . 5 . 3 . Method Participants : Twenty - four non - diabetic participants took part in the experiment ; twelve females and twelve males , aged 45 – 65 ( M age ¼ 55 . 04 , SD ¼ 5 . 74 ) . The experiment took around 2 h . Setting : The experiment was conducted in a room that resembled a living room . There was a table with an LCD screen , a webcam ( Logitech Sphere ) , and a laptop on it . Only when the physical iCat was used , would it be on the table ( Fig . 2 ) . The LCD screen was used for the text interface and the virtual iCat while the laptop screen was used for the questionnaires ( see below ) . The laptop and LCD screens were linked to each other , so that participants only needed one mouse and keyboard to use both screens . We used two screens , because research suggests that people are more likely to react positively towards a computer program when questions about the computer program are posed by the same computer on which the program runs ( Reeves and Nass , 1996 ) . Experimental design : All participants interacted with the text interface and one other personal assistant . One group ( N ¼ 12 ) interacted with the physical iCat and the other group ( N ¼ 12 ) worked with the virtual iCat ( Table 3 ) . The text interface was used as a baseline condition . Participants interacted with both the social and non - social character . The social / non - social variable was thus a within - subjects factor while physical / virtual was a between - subjects factor . The conditions were counter - balanced ; every order of conditions was done by a female and a male participant . Hypothesis 1 , 2 and 3 were thus tested with 24 participants , within subject and Hypothesis 4 was tested between subject with in each group 12 participants . Scenarios : Three scenarios were written about diabetics with self - care problems . The scenarios describe a situation typical for a diabetic patient , which were derived from a domain analysis ( De Haan et al . , 2005 ; Kuijten , 2006 ) . The scenarios were given in the same order to every participant , but the order of the experimental conditions was varied . The scenarios all started with a short introduction on the situation of the patient . The ﬁrst scenario focused on a 62 - year - old diabetic with problems adhering to the diet , the second scenario was about a 56 - year old patient who is reluctant to perform the feet self - checks regularly , and the third scenario involved a patient of 43 who regularly forgets to take his medication . In each scenario , the ‘‘physician’’ ( the experimenter ) asked the ‘‘patient’’ ( the participant ) to try out a personal assistant for a week . It was explained to the patients that the assistant would ask them questions about their health and diabetes on Monday , Wednesday , Friday , and Sunday . For each day there was short scenario which explained what the participant did the rest of the day and the next day . In reality a session took about half an hour . Questions : A block consisted of eight questions : four open questions informing about the health of the patient and four multiple choice questions on diabetes . Before and after the block the personal assistant greeted the user . To test for an effect of the personal assistants on learning rates , three of the four multiple choice questions concerned the same diabetes facts as in other blocks . The formulation of the questions and of the reactions on the participants’ responses was based on motivational interviewing . Examples of health questions are as follow - ing : ‘‘How are you feeling today ? ’’ and ‘‘What is your blood glucose level ? ’’ The reaction of the personal assistant was attuned to the answer of the participant : if the participant was optimistic about his / her health , the inter - face said it was happy for the participant . To participants in the social condition , the iCat showed a facial expression in line with its verbal reaction . ARTICLE IN PRESS Fig . 2 . Experimental setup . Table 3 The different experimental conditions . Text Social and non - social virtual Social and non - social physical Group 1 X X Group 2 X X R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 391 Examples of multiple choice questions on diabetes were : ‘‘Is a blood glucose level of 8 healthy ? ( A ) yes , ( B ) no , ( C ) I do not know’’ , ‘‘Should diabetics eat a lot of sugar ? ( A ) yes , ( B ) no , ( C ) I do not know . ’’ In line with motivational interviewing , if the answer was wrong the interface did not say that the participant was wrong , but gave the explanation of the correct answer . If the participant gave the correct answer , the interface said the participant was correct and explained why the answer was correct . When the interface was social it showed a happy or neutral expression depending on whether the answer was correct or not . There were thus four blocks of questions ; in between every block there was a short break in which participants read a short story about what the patient did during the day in this break . Measures : To test the hypotheses , we used several subjective and behavioral measures . We measured to what extent participants perceived the personal assistants as empathic and trustworthy actors , and to what extent the participants treated the personal assistant as a social actor . (cid:3) Personality The participants’ personality was measured with a short personality questionnaire ( 15 items ) . The person - ality questionnaire was based on the Big - Five ques - tionnaire ( Goldberg , 1992 ) . The Big - Five assumes ﬁve important personality traits : extroversion , openness to experience , emotional stability , agreeableness and conscientiousness . We used a shorter version of this questionnaire that consisted of ﬁfteen items on a 9 - point Likert scale which were divided in ﬁve groups of three items . This smaller version of the Big - Five was validated at TNO ( Van Vliet , 2001 ) . (cid:3) Conversational behavior We recorded the face of the participant with a webcam ( Logitech Sphere ) during the experiment . The video data were scored ofﬂine on four variables for behavior towards the personal assistant that indicated heightened involvement with the assistant : J Talking : The percentage of the total interaction time that participants were talking or typing with the personal assistant . Also , how many words were used , formal or informal word use and the number of positive and negative utterances were measured . J Looking : The percentage of total interaction time that the participant looked at the assistant . This was only measured when the participant was working with one of the characters . J Laughing : How many times the participant laughed or smiled during the interaction . J Goodbye : How many times the participant said goodbye during the interaction . Saying goodbye is an act of politeness and therefore shows that a participant sees the interface as a social entity . (cid:3) Questionnaires ( Table 4 ) J Empathic abilities : We measured empathic abilities of the interfaces with a 14 - item questionnaire . Partici - pants had to rate the personal assistants on the ability to express empathy on a 5 - point Likert scale . Items included : ‘‘did the assistant look at you ? ’’ , ‘‘how friendly did the personal assistant appear to you ? ’’ The items were based on items of the Social Behavior Questionnaire ( SBQ ) ( de Ruyter et al . , 2005 ) . J Social personality of personal assistants : The same personality questionnaire that was ﬁlled out by the participants about themselves was given to the participants to ﬁll out for the personal assistants . The higher the overall score the more social and empathetic the personal assistant was perceived . J Trust : To assess how trustworthy participants rate the personal assistants , we used four items , on a 5 - point Likert scale , about level of trust , credibility , intelligence and expertise . These items were also based on items of the SBQ ( de Ruyter et al . , 2005 ) . J Acceptance : To measure the acceptance level of the personal assistants a shortened version of the Uniﬁed Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology ( UTAUT ) questionnaire ( Venkatesh et al . , 2003 ) was used . The questionnaire uses a 5 - point Likert scale . We translated this questionnaire into Dutch and made it shorter ( 16 items ) . The UTAUT was originally developed for technology acceptance at work and therefore speciﬁc work - related questions were excluded in this experiment . We did include the questions about performance of the assistant , effort that was needed , attitude towards the assistant , anxiety , and behavioral intention . The UTAUT gives information about the trustworthiness of the assis - tant . J Overall : Participants were asked to rate the personal assistants : would they use a personal assistant if they had diabetes ( yes / no ) , how much did they like each personal assistant ( 5 - point Likert scale ) , which personal assistant did they ﬁnd the most reliable / believable / professional ( choice between the three assistants ) , which personal assistant’s dialogue did they prefer ( choice between the three assistants ) . ARTICLE IN PRESS Table 4 Overview of questionnaires and items used in the experiment . Nr . of questions Answer possibility ( nr . of questions ) Users personality 15 9 - point Likert scale ( 15 ) Empathetic abilities 14 5 - point Likert scale ( 14 ) Social personality 15 9 - point Likert scale ( 15 ) Acceptance 16 5 - point Likert scale ( 16 ) Trust 4 5 - point Likert scale ( 4 ) Overall 9 5 - point Likert scale ( 3 ) Choice ( 4 ) Yes / no ( 1 ) Open ( 1 ) R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 392 We also asked for general remarks about the assistants ( open question ) . In total this questionnaire consisted of nine items . Procedure : Each participant was explained that the goal of the experiment was to determine which personal assistant they would like to use if they had diabetes . It was emphasized that the personal assistants were speciﬁ - cally designed to ask questions on health and diabetes and react to the answers of those questions , but were not able to do more . Participants were told they would work with three different personal assistants and with each ; they would receive four blocks of questions . Prior to interacting with a personal assistant they would receive a scenario about a diabetic with whom they had to identify . The experimental session started with a questionnaire about personal data and the personality questionnaire . To give all participants some knowledge about diabetes , they were shown an animation of about 3 min about diabetes , made by a student , and a short movie of 12 min , which was a shortened version of an educational video about diabetes . They also received information from the experimenter about the ( low level of ) treatment adherence in diabetics . The participants read 3 different scenarios about a diabetic patient . The scenarios were given to every partici - pant in the same order . The scenarios stated that a patient had to test the assistant for a week . The experimental session was started by the personal assistant who started asking some general questions , so participants could get used to the personal assistant . If the iCat was used , participants were explained they could ask the iCat to repeat the last sentence when they had difﬁculty understanding it . At the end of each ‘‘day’’ participants read short stories about what the subject of the scenario did during the day . They ﬁnished the ‘‘week’’ after the fourth block of questions . The participants were then asked to ﬁll out the three questionnaires about the personal assistant . After the three scenarios were completed , participants were asked to ﬁll out a last questionnaire about their overall opinion of the three personal assistants . Data analysis : The means of the items on the Likert scale questionnaires were analyzed with a Mann - Whitney U statistical test . The mean results of the video analysis of the conversational behavior were analyzed with a T - test and the means of the Likert scale items of the overall questionnaire were analyzed with a Friedmann Anova . Furthermore , a Spearman rank order test was performed for correlations between the questionnaires . We decided not to test for learning effect of the diabetes questions , because it was found that most participants answered all the questions correctly from the start . 5 . 4 . Results experiment This section reports ﬁrst the results that were statistically signiﬁcant ( p o 0 , 05 ) for the hypotheses we formulated at the outset . All analyses were done , but to be more concise we will only report the statistical signiﬁcant results . This will be followed by a correlation analysis to explore possible relationships between variables . Hypotheses : (cid:3) Social characters vs . text : The expectation was that the social characters would be rated higher on empathy and trust , and evoke more conversational behavior . Table 5 summarizes the results for this hypothesis . The social character was rated higher on the Social Personality questionnaire for the items Warm , Creative , Talkative , Original , Spontaneous and Artistic . In addi - tion , it induced more social behavior from the partici - pants than the text interface : Looking , Laughing and Goodbye ; they also really felt that the character was looking at them ( 4 . 5 on scale 1 – 5 ) . The percentage time of the dialogue was higher for the text interface , but did not include more content . Participants talked / typed more when they were using the text interface compared with the character . In the overall questionnaire we asked the participants if they would use a personal assistant when they would need one : 87 . 5 % said they would use one . About half of them preferred to use the text interface while the other half preferred a social iCat . (cid:3) Non - social characters vs . text : We expected the text interface to score higher on empathy and trust . Table 6 summarizes the results for this hypothesis . The text interface was indeed rated higher on two acceptance questions : the items Pleasant and Home use . At evoking social behavior the text interface scored signiﬁcantly lower on looking and saying goodbye . The typing time was signiﬁcantly higher for the text inter - face ; this is negative for the text interface because it did not contain more content . The overall questionnaire showed that the text assistant was perceived as a better personal assistant than the non - social character . (cid:3) Social vs . non - social characters : We had expected that the social character would score higher on empathy and trust , and evoke more conversational behavior . Results ( Table 7 ) show that the social character did indeed score higher than the non - social character on items from the Empathy questionnaire ( Looking and Friendly ) , Social Personality ( Creative ) and Acceptance ( Pleasant ) . The social character did also evoke more conversational behavior than the non - social character ( Laughing and Looking ) . Moreover , the social character overall questionnaire showed that the social assistant was perceived as a better personal assistant . In general , there were more signiﬁcant differences between the social and non - social characters than both between the virtual and the physical character and between the text and characters : seven items showed signiﬁcant differ - ences ( Table 7 ) . (cid:3) Physical vs . virtual characters : We expected that the physical characters would be rated higher on empathy and evoke more conversational behavior . ARTICLE IN PRESS R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 393 Table 8 summarizes the results for this hypothesis . In contrast , the items Satisﬁed , Kind and Friendly , showed signiﬁcant higher values for the virtual character ( a between - subjects factor ) . On intelligence , a question of the trust questionnaire , the physical character scored signiﬁcantly higher than the virtual characters . Other results : To see if the behaviors were correlated , we correlated the different questionnaires for empathy , personality , trust , acceptance , and behaviors . All items on the questionnaires were positively correlated ( Table 9 ) . Furthermore , the conversational behaviors were ARTICLE IN PRESS Table 5 The means of text and social characters on items that showed a signiﬁcant difference . Questionnaire ( nr . of questions ) Question ( scale ) Mean social characters Mean text Test signiﬁcance Social personality ( 15 ) Warm ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 4 4 . 9 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 02 Creative ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 2 4 . 2 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 01 Talkative ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 8 5 . 4 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 Original ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 3 4 . 8 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 02 Spontaneous ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 3 5 . 2 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 Artistic ( 1 – 9 ) 5 . 5 3 . 6 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 01 Conversational behavior ( 4 ) Looking ( % ) 53 . 3 0 T - test p o 0 . 001 Talk / typing ( % ) 6 . 8 17 . 2 T - test p o 0 . 001 Laughing ( nr . ) 4 . 0 1 T - test p o 0 . 01 Goodbye ( nr . ) 0 . 9 0 T - test p o 0 . 01 The higher the value the more positive the tested aspect was assessed ( with exception of talk / typing ) . Table 6 The means of text and non - social characters on items that showed a signiﬁcant difference . Questionnaire ( nr . of questions ) Question ( scale ) Mean non - social characters Mean text Test signiﬁcance Acceptance ( 16 ) Pleasant ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 2 3 . 9 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 Home use ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 1 3 . 9 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 Conversational behavior ( 4 ) Looking ( % ) 29 . 8 0 T - test p o 0 . 001 Talk / typing ( % ) 7 . 3 17 . 2 T - test p o 0 . 001 Goodbye ( nr . ) 0 . 7 0 T - test p o 0 . 001 Overall ( 3 ) Good ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 2 3 . 8 Sign test p o 0 . 05 The higher the value the more positive the tested aspect was assessed . Table 7 The means of social and non - social characters on items that showed a signiﬁcant difference . Questionnaire ( nr . of questions ) Question ( scale ) Social Non - social Test signiﬁcance Empathy ( 14 ) Looking ( 1 – 5 ) 4 . 5 2 . 0 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 01 Friendly ( 1 – 5 ) 4 . 7 3 . 9 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 Conversational behavior ( 4 ) Laughing ( Nr . ) 4 . 2 1 . 4 T - test p o 0 . 05 Looking ( % ) 59 . 9 37 . 8 T - test p o 0 . 05 Social personality ( 15 ) Creative ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 13 4 . 2 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 01 Acceptance ( 16 ) Pleasant ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 9 3 . 2 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 Overall ( 3 ) Good ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 9 3 . 2 Sign test p o 0 . 01 The higher the value the more positive the tested aspect was assessed . Table 8 The means of physical and virtual characters on items that showed a signiﬁcant difference . Questionnaire ( nr . of questions ) Question ( scale ) Physical Virtual Test signiﬁcance Social personality ( 15 ) Satisﬁed ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 4 7 . 5 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 Kind ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 5 7 . 8 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 01 Friendly ( 1 – 9 ) 7 . 1 7 . 9 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 Trust ( 4 ) Intelligent ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 7 2 . 9 Mann - Whitney U p o 0 . 05 The higher the value the more positive the tested aspect was assessed . R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 394 positively correlated to the empathy and personality questionnaires . Next to this we found a correlation between the personality of the participant and the personal assistant of their choice . The more conscientious someone rated him / herself in the personality questionnaire the less he / she liked the social iCat . The Spearman rank order correlation , with pair wise deletion , showed that there was a correlation ( (cid:2) 0 . 447 ) between conscientiousness of the participant and how much the social character was liked . 6 . Conclusion and discussion In this study , our aim was to ﬁnd behavior for an electronic personal assistant that improves the self - care capabilities of older adults . The psychological method of ‘‘motivational interviewing’’ provides a sound basis to persuade adults to behave healthy . Based on this method and recent research on affective computing , we derived two objectives of a persuasive assistant , to show empathy and establish trust , and found four social behaviors that could be mapped onto these objectives : high - level dialogue , natural cues , use of emotions , and social dialogue competencies . As far as possible , these behaviors were implemented in three assistants – a ( classical ) text interface , virtual character and a physical character – incorporating , increasingly natural , social behavior . The results of our experiment partially supported three of the four hypotheses on the positive effects of these behaviors . First , the social characters were found to be more empathetic than the text interface , and the characters evoked more conversational behavior , both as expected . It should be noted that typing with the text interface took substantially more time ( more than twice ) than talking with the character without increasing the content . In this experimental setting the participants were inclined to make the effort , but it is unclear whether they will still do so with long - term use . Speech , as implemented in the character interfaces , removes some hindrances that older adults might experience when they use classical input devices such as keyboard and mouse . Regarding the second hypothesis , the non - social characters were perceived as less trustworthy than a text interface , and were appreciated less , exactly as we expected . Regarding the third hypothesis , social characters were perceived as more empathetic and trust - worthy than non - social characters , and evoked more conversational behavior , also as expected . The non - social physical iCat was seen as annoying by the participants , because it ignored them ( e . g . , looked past them ) and in that way ignored conversational conventions . This indicates that it is of utmost importance that behaviors are social behaviors , because otherwise the behaviors are contra - productive . Regarding the fourth hypothesis , the physical characters were indeed found to be more trustworthy but less empathic than the virtual character , which was not expected ( cf . ( Lee et al . , 2006 ) , who found little differences between virtual and embodied characters ) . This negative outcome on empathy might be due to speciﬁc constraints of the iCat : it makes relatively much noise when it moves , and the head and body movements are perhaps not ﬂuent enough . Another technical constraint was the ( occasionally ) appearing of errors in the movements and speech , such as skipping choices of the multiple choice questions . Furthermore , it may be that our three character roles did not capture important advantages of a physical character that can act in the real environment . For instance , more positive outcomes might show up with a character that helps to attend to a medicine box with a speciﬁc location in house , compared to a virtual character that is not a real actor in this house ( c . f . Shinozawa et al . , 2005 ) . It was promising to notice that almost 90 % of our participants asserted that they would use a personal assistant if they needed one , and that the iCat and text interface were equally preferred ( both 50 % ) . It seemed that conscientious persons particularly prefer a text interface . Furthermore , it was promising that most participants had no trouble learning to interact with the iCat assistants , perhaps indicating that there may be little hindrances to make use of the iCat for older adults . The dialogue should be made more varied in the next version , both for the text and character interfaces : participants who disliked the assistant thought it was repeating too many questions and gave too often similar responses . By using a speaking and hearing , emotional , physical character in this experiment , we choose for the most ‘‘natural’’ human - character communication and compared it with a conventional text chat . Subsequent experiments should study more in detail what the costs and beneﬁts are of the different modality choices . ARTICLE IN PRESS Table 9 Correlation matrix of the questionnaires . Questionnaire ( nr . of questions ) Empathy Personality Trust Acceptance Behaviors Empathy ( 14 ) 1 0 . 63 (cid:2) 0 . 60 (cid:2) 0 . 53 (cid:2) 0 . 30 (cid:2) Social personality ( 15 ) 0 . 63 (cid:2) 1 0 . 35 (cid:2) 0 . 36 (cid:2) 0 . 38 (cid:2) Trust ( 4 ) 0 . 60 (cid:2) 0 . 35 (cid:2) 1 0 . 60 (cid:2) 0 . 20 Acceptance ( 16 ) 0 . 53 (cid:2) 0 . 36 (cid:2) 0 . 55 (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) 0 . 02 Behaviors ( 4 ) 0 . 30 (cid:2) 0 . 38 (cid:2) 0 . 20 (cid:2) 0 . 02 1 (cid:2) ¼ p o 0 . 02 . R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 395 Daily health self - management , such as the harmoniza - tion of food , exercise and medication , is a major problem for a large group of older adults with obesity or diabetics . Persuasive assistants that are emphatic and trustworthy may help solve this problem if they apply principles from the psychological method of ‘‘motivational interviewing’’ . Although our experiment was limited in its methodology by the fact that we used healthy people rather than unhealthy people , it provided at least partial evidence that applying these principles might indeed be a fruitful approach . An experiment using the virtual iCat with people with obesity provided further support for this approach ( Blanson - Henkemans et al . , 2009 ) . In this experiment , patients with obesity used either a web interface with the proposed – virtual - iCat mediated – motivational support or without . The support resulted in better adherence to the personal goals for diet , exercises and diary - notations , and a signiﬁcant improvement of the body mass index . Acknowledgment We would like to thank IOP - MMI Senter Novem , a program of the Dutch Ministry of Economics , for partially funding the SuperAssist project . Rosemarijn Looije thanks Dennis Taapken from Philips Research for the fast responses when we had difﬁculties with the iCat . References Bartneck , C . , 2003 . Interacting with an embodied emotional character . In : Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on Designing Pleasurable Products and Interfaces . ACM , New York , pp . 55 – 60 . Bickmore , T . , Gruber , A . , Picard , R . , 2004 . Establishing the computer – patient working alliance in automated health behavior change interventions . Patient Education and Counseling . Bigelow , J . H . , Cretin , S . , Solomon , M . , Wu , S . Y . , Cherry , J . C . , Cobb , H . , et al . , 2000 . Patient Compliance with and Attitudes Towards Health Buddy . RAND Corporation , Santa Monica . Blanson Henkemans , O . A . , van der Boog , P . J . M . , Lindenberg , J . , van der Mast , C . A . P . G . , Neerincx , M . A . , Zwetsloot - Schonk , B . J . H . M . , 2009 . An online lifestyle diary with a persuasive computer assistant providing feedback on self - management . Technology and Health Care 17 ( 3 ) , 253 – 267 . Blanson - Henkemans , O . , Fisk , A . D . , Lindenberg , J . , van der Mast , C . A . P . G . , Neerincx , M . A . , Rogers , W . A . , 2007 . A Computer Assistant for Supervision of Self - care and Improvement of Health Literacy . APA , Washington , DC . Blanson - Henkemans , O . A . , Rogers , W . A . , Fisk , A . D . , Neerincx , M . A . , Lindenberg , J . , van der Mast , C . , 2008 . Usability of an adaptive computer assistant that improves the management of care tasks and health literacy among older adults . Methods of Information in Medicine : Special Topic Issue on Smart Homes and Ambient Assisted Living in an Aging Society . Cassell , J . , Bickmore , T . , 2000 . External manifestations of trustworthiness in the interface . Communications of the ACM 43 , 50 – 56 . Coyle , D . , Doherty , G . , Matthews , M . , Sharry , J . , 2007 . Computers in talk - based mental health interventions . Interacting with Computers 19 , 545 – 562 . Czaja , S . J . , Lee , C . C . , 2007 . The impact of aging on access to technology . Universal Access in the Information Society 5 , 341 – 349 . de Haan , G . , Blanson - Henkemans , O . , Aluwalia , A . , 2005 . Personal assistants for healthcare treatment at home . Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the European Association of Cognitive Ergonomics , 225 – 231 . de Ruyter , B . , Saini , P . , Markopoulos , P . , van Breemen , A . , 2005 . Assessing the effects of building social intelligence in a robotic interface for the home . Interacting with Computers 17 , 522 – 541 . Fogg , B . J . , 2002 . Persuasive Technology : Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco , CA . Fong , T . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Dautenhahn , K . , 2003 . A survey of socially interactive robots . Robotics and Autonomous Systems 42 , 143 – 166 . Gockley , R . , Mataric , M . J . , 2006 . Encouraging physical therapy compliance with a hands - off mobile robot . In : ACM SIGCHI / SIGART Human – Robot Interaction 2006 . ACM , New York , pp . 150 – 155 . Goetz , J . , Kiesler , S . , Powers , A . , 2003 . Matching robot appearance and behavior to tasks to improve human – robot cooperation . In : IEEE Ro - Man 2003 . IEEE , Piscataway , pp . 55 – 60 . Goldberg , L . R . , 1992 . The development of markers for the Big - Five factor structure . Psychological Assessment 4 , 26 – 42 . Jussim , L . , Yen , H . J . , Aiello , J . R . , 1995 . Self - consistency , self - enhance - ment , and accuracy in reactions to feedback . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 31 , 322 – 356 . Kidd , C . D . , 2003 . Sociable robots : the role of presence and task in human – robot interaction . Master Thesis MIT , Boston . Kidd , C . D . , Breazeal , C . , 2006 . Designing a sociable robot system for weight maintenance . In : IEEE Consumer Communication and Networking Conference . IEEE , Piscataway . Kidd , C . D . , Taggart , W . , Turkle , S . , 2006 . A sociable robot to encourage social interaction among the elderly . In : ICRA 2006 . IEEE , Piscataway , pp . 3972 – 3976 . Kriglstein , S . , Wallner , G . , 2005 . HOMIE : an artiﬁcial companion for elderly people . In : Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , pp . 2094 – 2098 . Kuijten , L . L . P . J . M . , 2006 . Patient’s emotional expressiveness towards a human or digital assistant . Master’s Thesis—Cognitive Psychology , University Maastricht . Lee , J . D . , See , K . A . , 2004 . Trust in automation : designing for appropriate reliance . Human Factors 46 , 50 – 81 . Lee , K . M . , Jung , Y . , Kim , J . , Kim , S . R . , 2006 . Are physically embodied social agents better than disembodied social agents ? : the effects of physical embodiment , tactile interaction , and people’s loneliness in human – robot interaction . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies 64 , 962 – 973 . Liu , K . , Picard , R . , 2005 . Embedded empathy in continuous , interactive health assessment . CHI Workshop on HCI Challenges in Health Assessment . Looije , R . , Cnossen , F . , Neerincx , M . A . , 2006 . Incorporating guidelines for health assistance into a socially intelligent robot . In : Ro - man , 2006 . IEEE , Piscataway , pp . 515 – 520 . Loquendo 2007 . / www . loquendo . com S Available : / www . loquendo . com S Miller , W . R . , Rollnick , S . , 1991 . Motivational Interviewing : Preparing People to Change Addictive Behavior . Guilford Press , New York . Moreno , R . , Mayer , R . E . , Spires , H . A . , Lester , J . C . , 2001 . The case for social agency in computer - based teaching : do students learn more deeply when they interact with animated pedagogical agents ? Cogni - tion and Instruction 2 ( 19 ) , 177 – 213 . Muir , B . M . , 1994 . Trust in automation : part I . Theoretical issues in the study of trust and human intervention in automated systems . Ergonomics 37 , 1905 – 1922 . Neerincx , M . A . , Cremers , A . H . M . , Kessens , J . M . , Van Leeuwen , D . A . , Truong , K . P . , 2008 . Attuning speech - enabled interfaces to user and context for inclusive design : technology , methodology and practice . Universal Access in the Information Society 8 . Neerincx , M . A . , Lindenberg , J . , 2008 . Situated cognitive engineering for complex task environments . In : Schraagen , J . M . C . , Militello , L . , ARTICLE IN PRESS R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 396 Ormerod , T . , Lipshitz , R . ( Eds . ) , Naturalistic Decision Making and Macrocognition . Ashgate Publishing Limited , Aldershot , UK , pp . 373 – 390 . Neerincx , M . A . , Streefkerk , J . W . , 2003 . Interacting in desktop and mobile context : emotion , trust and task performance . In : Proceedings of the First European Symposium on Ambient Intelligence ( EUSAI ) . Spring - er - Verlag , Eindhoven , The Netherlands . Picard , R . W . , 1997 . Affective Computing . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Reeves , B . , Nass , C . , 1996 . The Media Equation : How People Treat Computers , Television , and New Media Like Real People and Places . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY . Rogers , C . R . , 1951 . Client - Centered Therapy : its Current Practice , Implications , and Theory . Houghton Mifﬂin , Boston . Rosson , M . B . , Carroll , J . M . , 2001 . Usability Engineering : Scenario - based Development of Human – Computer Interaction . Morgan Kaufmann . Ruttkay , Z . M . , Zwiers , J . , Van Welbergen , H . , Reidsma , D . , 2006 . Towards a Reactive Virtual Trainer . Springer - Verlag , Berlin , pp . 292 – 303 . Shinozawa , K . , Naya , F . , Yamato , J . , Kogure , K . , 2005 . Differences in effect of robot and screen agent recommendations on human decision - making . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies 62 , 267 – 279 . Triplett , N . , 1898 . The dynamogenic factors in pacemaking and competition . The American Journal of Psychology 9 , 507 – 533 . United Nations , 2002 . World population ageing 1950 – 2050 . / http : / / www . un . org / esa / population / publications / worldageing19502050 S Available : / http : / / www . un . org / esa / population / publications / worldageing19502050 S van Breemen , A . J . N . , 2004 . Bringing robots to life : applying principles of animation to robots . In : Proceedings of Shaping Human – Robot Interaction Workshop , CHI 2004 . van Dijken , G . D . , Niesink , I . A . , Schrijvers , A . J . P . , 2005 . Telehealth in de Verenigde Staten . U . M . C , Utrecht . Van Vliet , A . J . , 2001 . Effecten van teamsamenstelling op het moreel van uitgezonden militairen ( Effects of teamcomposition on the morale of dispatched soldiers ) ( Rep . No . TM - 01 - A0404 ) . Soesterberg : TNO technische menskunde . Venkatesh , V . , Morris , M . G . , Davis , G . B . , Davis , F . D . , 2003 . User acceptance of information technology : toward a uniﬁed view . MIS Quarterly 27 , 425 – 478 . Wainer , J . , Feil - Seifer , D . , Shell , D . , Mataric , M . , 2006 . The role of physical embodiment in human – robot interaction . In : Ro - man , 2006 . IEEE , Piscataway , pp . 117 – 122 . WHO , 2003 . Adherence to long - term therapies . / http : / / www . who . int / bookorders / anglais / detart1 . jsp ? sesslan = 1 & codlan = 1 & codcol = 15 & codcch = 526 S Available : / http : / / www . who . int / bookorders / anglais / detart1 . jsp ? sesslan = 1 & codlan = 1 & codcol = 15 & codcch = 526 S . Wild , S . , Roglic , G . , Green , A . , Sicree , R . , King , H . , 2004 . Global prevalence of diabetes . Diabetes Care 27 , 1047 – 1053 . ARTICLE IN PRESS R . Looije et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 68 ( 2010 ) 386 – 397 397