Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling as a Mechanism for the Regulation of Growth Cone Motility and Guidance Daniel M . Suter , Paul Forscher Department of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology , Yale University , New Haven , Connecticut 06520 Received 20 April 2000 ; accepted 25 April 2000 ABSTRACT : Growth cones are highly motile structures at the end of neuronal processes , capable of receiving multiple types of guidance cues and transduc - ing them into directed axonal growth . Thus , to guide the axon toward the appropriate target cell , the growth cone carries out different functions : it acts as a sensor , signal transducer , and motility device . An increasing number of molecular components that mediate axon guidance have been characterized over the past years . The vast majority of these molecules include proteins that act as guidance cues and their respective receptors . In addi - tion , more and more signaling and cytoskeleton - associ - ated proteins have been localized to the growth cone . Furthermore , it has become evident that growth cone motility and guidance depends on a dynamic cytoskele - ton that is regulated by incoming guidance information . Current and future research in the growth cone ﬁeld will be focussed on how different guidance cues transmit their signals to the cytoskeleton and change its dynamic properties to affect the rate and direction of growth cone movement . In this review , we discuss recent evidence that cell adhesion molecules can regulate growth cone motility and guidance by a mechanism of substrate – cytoskeletal coupling . © 2000 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . J Neurobiol 44 : 97 – 113 , 2000 Keywords : growth cone ; motility ; guidance ; cytoskeletal dynamics ; cell adhesion molecules ; substrate – cytoskel - etal coupling Although the detailed studies by Ramon y Cajal ( 1890 ) revealed the neuronal growth cone as an ac - tively motile structure being important for axon out - growth more than 100 years ago , it has been only during the last quarter of the 20th century that the growth cone has regained the attention of an increas - ing number of researchers . Of course , the renaissance of growth cone research was partially due to the development of modern molecular and cell biological techniques , but has also been driven by description of the unique organization of the growth cone cytoskel - eton ( Yamada et al . , 1970 , 1971 ) . After these initial studies , some researchers investigated biophysical growth cone properties such as motility ( Bray and Chapman , 1985 ) and tension ( Bray , 1979 , 1984 ; Joshi et al . , 1985 ; Dennerll et al . , 1988 ; Lamoureux et al . , 1989 ) , whereas others focussed on growth cone mor - phologies and pathﬁnding in situ ( Caudy and Bentley , 1986a , b ; Bovolenta and Mason , 1987 ) . From a num - ber of in vitro and in vivo experiments it became obvious that growth cone motility and guidance de - pends on a dynamic actin and microtubule cytoskel - eton ( Tosney and Wessells , 1983 ; Bentley and Toroian - Raymond , 1986 ; Letourneau et al . , 1987 ; Dennerll et al . , 1988 ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) . An increasing number of reports have conﬁrmed these initial ﬁndings and addressed the role of cytoskeletal dynamics in growth cone motility and guidance in detail . A comprehensive discussion of these studies can be found in several excellent reviews ( Bray and Hollenbeck , 1988 ; Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ; Correspondence to : P . Forscher ( paul . forscher @ yale . edu ) . Contract grant sponsor : National Institutes of Health ; contract grant number : RO1 - NS28695 ( PF ) © 2000 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . 97 Bentley and O’Connor , 1994 ; Lin et al . , 1994 ; Tanaka and Sabry , 1995 ; Heidemann , 1996 ; Letourneau , 1996 ) . Growth cones are capable of responding to a vari - ety of guidance cues resulting in different pathﬁnding behaviors such as outgrowth , retraction , stalling , turn - ing , and fasciculation . Guidance cues include diffus - ible factors that can attract axons over long distances , as it has been shown for the netrins ( Kennedy and Tessier - Lavigne , 1995 ) . Diffusible guidance mole - cules may have repulsive as well as inhibitory effects , which can result in total growth cone collapse , as demonstrated for collapsin - 1 ( Luo et al . , 1993 ) . Growth cones can be also be guided by short - range , contact - mediated mechanisms involving cell adhesion molecules ( Brummendorf and Rathjen , 1996 ; Takei - chi et al . , 1997 ; Walsh and Doherty , 1997 ) and extra - cellular matrix proteins ( Reichardt and Tomaselli , 1991 ; Hynes and Lander , 1992 ) , which in turn can be either attractive or repulsive . In summary , axon guid - ance molecules can be grouped into at least four categories according to their range and type of action ( Goodman , 1996 ; Tessier - Lavigne and Goodman , 1996 ) . Subsequent to identiﬁcation of the major families of guidance molecules , many laboratories are now turning their attention to the investigation of down - stream effector mechanisms . Several signal transduc - tion pathways and effector molecules ( tyrosine ki - nases , serin - threonine kinases , Ca 2 1 ) have been implicated in growth cone guidance and motility in recent years . However , how they affect cytoskeletal dynamics , and thereby motility remains speculative in most cases . This is partially because of the limited size and resolution of many vertebrate and inverte - brate growth cones . In contrast , Aplysia bag cell neu - rons of the abdominal ganglion form large growth cones in culture , which have a well - deﬁned cytoplas - mic organization and provide an ideal system for analyzing cytoskeletal dynamics ( Fig . 1 ) . Using this system , we have recently provided evidence that cell adhesion molecules ( CAMs ) can promote growth and guidance by a mechanism of substrate – cytoskeletal coupling ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . Further evidence for this model arose from work on integrin receptors in me - diating motility of ﬁbroblast - like cells ( Felsenfeld et al . , 1996 ; Huttenlocher et al . , 1996 ; Palecek et al . , 1997 ) . After reviewing our current understanding of cy - toskeletal dynamics in growth cones , we will focus in this review on recent ﬁndings from both the growth cone and ﬁbroblast literature that relate to the sub - strate – cytoskeletal coupling model . Finally , we will discuss different parameters , such as tyrosine phos - phorylation , that appear to regulate the strength of coupling between CAMs and the cytoskeleton . GROWTH CONE CYTOSKELETAL DYNAMICS It is important to consider key attributes of cytoskel - etal protein dynamics ﬁrst before delving into growth cone – substrate interactions that rely on these pro - Figure 1 Organization of cytoplasmic domains and cy - toskeletal structures in Aplysia growth cones . ( A ) Aplysia bag cell growth cone on poly - lysine substrate visualized by high - resolution DIC ( differential interference contrast ) op - tics . Different cytoplasmic domains are indicated : central domain ( C ) , transition zone ( T ) , and peripheral domain ( P ) . Bar 5 10 m m . ( B ) Growth cone in ( A ) was ﬁxed , extracted with 1 % Triton X - 100 , and stained with rhodamine - phalloi - din for F - actin ( red ) and with a tubulin antibody for micro - tubules ( green ) . A dashed line indicates the border between the central domain and the transition zone / peripheral do - main . 98 Suter and Forscher cesses . On the basis of morphology , one can distin - guish three major cytoplasmic domains in neuronal growth cones : the peripheral domain consisting of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , the central domain con - taining organelles , and a transition zone characterized by actin - based rufﬂing activity that is located between the peripheral and central domains [ Fig . 1 ( A ) ] . This organization can be observed very clearly in cultured Aplysia growth cones ( Fig . 1 ; Goldberg and Burmeis - ter , 1986 ; Forscher et al . , 1987 ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) . Although these domains are present in verte - brate growth cones too , the boundaries between them are typically less well deﬁned compared with the Aplysia cones . The distribution of the two main cy - toskeletal structures , ﬁlamentous ( F ) - actin and micro - tubules , parallels this domain organization to a high degree [ Fig . 1 ( B ) ] : actin ﬁlaments are found predom - inantly in the peripheral domain , whereas microtu - bules are localized mainly in the central cytoplasmic domain ( Gordon - Weeks , 1987 ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Bridgman and Dailey , 1989 ) . It is in the tran - sition zone that many of the distal tips of microtubules reside . However , some microtubules can also extend through the transition zone into the F - actin - rich pe - ripheral domain [ Fig . 1 ( B ) ] . Actin Dynamics in Growth Cones Detailed EM studies revealed two major populations of F - actin networks in the peripheral growth cone domain ( Fig . 2 ) : bundles of longer ﬁlaments with their plus ends toward the leading edge and more randomly oriented networks of shorter ﬁlaments between the bundles ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . The ﬁlament bundles span the width of the lamellipodia and extend into ﬁlopodia . Both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia are highly dynamic growth cone structures that continu - ously extend and retract ( Bray and Chapman , 1985 ; Goldberg and Burmeister , 1986 ) . This dynamic be - havior enables the growth cone to explore the extra - cellular environment for potential guidance cues that mediate adhesion and motility . It is currently believed that the dynamic shape of the growth cone lamellipo - dia and ﬁlopodia is mainly determined by the under - lying F - actin dynamics ( Tanaka and Sabry , 1995 ; Letourneau , 1996 ) . The dynamic properties of actin ﬁlaments in growth cones ( and motile cells in general ) can be described by three independent kinetic pro - cesses ( Fig . 2 ) : ( 1 ) assembly of actin ﬁlaments from G - actin monomers at the leading edge and tips of ﬁlopodia [ Fig . 2 ( A ) , right inset ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Okabe and Hirokawa , 1991 ; Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ] ; ( 2 ) constant retrograde ﬂow of F - actin networks powered by myosin motors [ Fig . 2 ( A ) , lower inset , Fig . 2 ( B ) ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Lin et al . , 1996 ] ; and ( 3 ) proximal recycling of F - actin in the transition zone , a necessary process not yet well characterized in growth cones [ Fig . 2 ( A ) , lower inset ] . Regulation of these dynamic properties occurs through an increasing number of actin - binding pro - teins , frequently characterized ﬁrst in nonneuronal cells ( Stossel , 1993 ; Welch et al . , 1997c ) . Although many of these proteins have been localized in the peripheral domain of neuronal growth cones ( Letour - neau , 1996 ) , studies addressing their functions as well as their ultrastructural localization in growth cones are still mostly lacking . F - actin assembly at the leading edge [ Fig . 2 ( A ) ] results from a combination of nucleation , polymeriza - tion , and annealing of short actin ﬁlaments . These processes are likely mediated by nucleation factors such as the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Welch et al . , 1997a , b ) , barbed - end capping proteins such as CapZ ( Caldwell et al . , 1989 ) , actin monomer - binding proteins such as proﬁlin and thymosin b 4 ( Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ) , and proteins of the Ena / Mena / VASP family that enhance the polymerization rate by recruiting proﬁlin to sites of actin assembly ( Chakraborty et al . , 1995 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Kang et al . , 1997 ) . Genetic studies have recently provided evidence that both proﬁlin and Ena control motor axon outgrowth and guidance in the Drosophila embryo ( Wills et al . , 1999a , b ) . With respect to vertebrate neurons , Mena - deﬁcient mice have defects in commissure formation , suggesting an important role for Mena in neuronal growth and pathﬁnding ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ) . Further - more , these authors showed localization of Mena right at the tip of growth cone ﬁlopodia , where actin poly - merization takes place ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ) . Much about the functional properties and binding interac - tions of the actin regulatory proteins mentioned above has been learned by studying the motility of intracel - lular bacterial pathogens such as Listeria and Shi - gella . Analysis of the mechanism by which these bacteria commandeer the host cell’s actin machinery to propel themselves through the cytoplasm is likely to provide us with important insights into how cells regulate F - actin assembly under steady state condition as well as in response to extracellular signals ( for recent excellent reviews see Beckerle , 1998 ; Carlier , 1998 ; Dramsi and Cossart , 1998 ) . After being assembled at the leading edge , F - actin bundles and networks are translocated toward the central domain by retrograde F - actin ﬂow [ Fig . 2 ( B ) ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ] . Evidence for retrograde F - actin ﬂow arose from studies in which blocking of plus - end F - actin assembly with cytochalasin B resulted in a progres - Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling and Growth Cone Motility 99 sive clearance of actin structures in the peripheral domain beginning at the leading edge ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) . F - actin ﬂow rates in Aplysia growth cones plated on poly - lysine substrates are 4 – 6 m m / min ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Lin and Forscher , 1995 ) . Thus , in a growth cone with a 15 - to 20 - m m - wide peripheral domain , the entire F - actin cytoskele - ton turns over every ; 3 min . Studies from our labo - Figure 2 Cytoskeletal organization and actin dynamics in growth cones . ( A ) Distribution of the two major cytoskeletal components in neurites and growth cones . Microtubules are localized in the neurite and the central domain of the growth cone , whereas actin ﬁlaments are distributed in the peripheral domain . Blowup to right shows the organization of actin ﬁlaments in more detail . Filopodia contain bundles of ﬁlaments with their plus ( barbed ) ends oriented toward the leading edge . These bundles can span the whole width of the lamellipodia . A second population of actin ﬁlaments form less polarized networks in lamellipodia . Plus ( barbed ) end assembly occurs at the leading edge and at the tips of ﬁlopodia . ( B ) Cross section of a growth cone demonstrating the dynamic processes involved in actin - based growth cone motility . Retrograde F - actin ﬂow is indicated by a marker ( e . g . , ﬂow - coupled bead ) . Inset : retrograde translocation of actin ﬁlaments is driven by myosin motors that are likely in the transition zone . Possible actomyosin combinations for tension generation are shown in inset ( a – c ) , double headed myosin II and single headed myosin I subtypes are depicted . Retrograde ﬂow rate is high and tension is low if actin networks are not stabilized by substrate interactions ( cf . Fig . 4 ) . Filament recycling occurs by action of putative severing proteins in the transition zone such as gelsolin and / or factors such as ADF / coﬁlin . ( Reprinted from Curr Opin Neurobiol , Suter and Forscher , An emerging link between cytoskeletal dynamics and cell adhesion molecules in growth cone guidance , 8 : 106 – 116 , 1998 , with permission from Elsevier Science ) . 100 Suter and Forscher ratory have provided evidence that retrograde F - actin ﬂow in growth cones is powered by myosin motors ( Lin et al . , 1996 ) . Myosin inhibition either by injec - tion of N - ethyl maleimide ( NEM ) - inactivated myosin S1 fragments or by cell treatment with 2 , 3 - butanedi - one - 2 - monoxime ( BDM ; an inhibitor of myosin AT - Pase ) resulted in slowing of retrograde F - actin ﬂow accompanied by protrusive growth of ﬁlopodia . This ﬁlopodial growth was due to persistent actin assembly during myosin inhibition , as evidenced by its high sensitivity to cytochalasin B ( Lin et al . , 1996 ) . These results also suggest that actin assembly and translo - cation of F - actin structures by myosin are distinct processes that could be subject to independent regu - lation . Of all the myosins identiﬁed in growth cones so far , biochemical , genetic , immunocytological , and physiological evidence indicate myosin II and / or my - osin I as conceivable candidates for the motors that drive retrograde ﬂow ( for review see Hasson and Mooseker , 1997 ) . Recycling of F - actin networks is likely to occur in the transition zone if a steady state ﬂux is to be maintained [ Fig . 2 ( A ) , lower inset ] . It could be me - diated by severing proteins such as gelsolin ( Yin and Stossel , 1979 ) and / or depolymerizing factors of the ADF / coﬁlin family ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ; Lappalainen and Drubin , 1997 ; Rosenblatt et al . , 1997 ) . Growth cones from gelsolin knockout mice have more ﬁlop - odia than control growth cones as a result of a delayed retraction rate ( Lu et al . , 1997 ) . Impaired F - actin severing at the base of ﬁlopodia could account for delayed retraction rates observed . Signals that activate ADF / coﬁlin by dephosphorylation are associated with enhanced neurite growth ( Meberg et al . , 1998 ) . On the other hand , overexpression of LIM - kinase , which in - activates coﬁlin through phosphorylation , leads to ac - cumulation of F - actin in nonneuronal cells as well as in growth cones ( Arber et al . , 1998 ) . Taken together , increased actin turnover could explain increased ax - onal growth rates after ADF / coﬁlin activation ( Me - berg et al . , 1998 ) . Finally , N - WASP , a neural homo - logue of WASP ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ) could also contribute to actin recycling in growth cones . This PIP 2 - binding protein has been shown to have actin - depolymerizing activity and is implicated in signal transduction between the receptor tyrosine kinases and the actin cytoskeleton ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . However , more recent studies have provided evidence that N - WASP is an important regulator of actin as - sembly by linking signals such as Cdc42 and lipids to the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Ma et al . , 1998 ; Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Miki et al . , 1998 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . Microtubule Dynamics in Growth Cones Microtubules are the prominent cytoskeletal compo - nents in neuronal processes as well as in the central domain of the growth cone [ Fig . 1 ( B ) ] . They provide both structural support for axon elongation and act as substrates for fast axonal transport of organelles into the growth cone . After entering the growth cone , microtubules typically splay out [ Fig . 1 ( B ) ] and con - tinuously probe the actin - rich peripheral domain by extension and retraction ( Tanaka and Kirschner , 1991 ) . This highly dynamic microtubule behavior is believed to occur by stochastic bouts of microtubule assembly and disassembly , a process referred to as dynamic instability , and / or by microtubule sliding , potentially mediated by the action of microtubule motors ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ; Heidemann , 1996 ) . Pharmacological studies using low concentra - tions of vinblastine , nocodazole , or taxol , which in - hibit dynamic instability without causing marked mi - crotubule loss , revealed that both axonal advance and growth cone guidance depend on dynamic microtu - bules ( Tanaka et al . , 1995 ; Tanaka and Kirschner , 1995 ; Rochlin et al . , 1996 ; Williamson et al . , 1996 ; Challacombe et al . , 1997 ) . A recent study also sug - gested that there is a signiﬁcant sliding component to microtubule movements in growth cones ( Dent et al . , 1999 ) . However , a detailed analysis of the mechanism of microtubule dynamics ( analysis of treadmilling vs . sliding , for example ) in growth cones has yet to be accomplished . Furthermore , research on proteins in - volved in regulation of microtubule dynamics has proceeded at a slower pace than related work in the actin dynamics ﬁeld . An exception to this trend is the well - established role of microtubule - associated pro - teins ( MAPs ) in regulating microtubule stabilization ( Heidemann , 1996 ) . SUBSTRATE – CYTOSKELETAL COUPLING IN GROWTH CONES It is generally established that the regulation of growth cone and cell motility involves coordinated control of cytoskeletal protein distribution and dy - namics ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ; Stossel , 1993 ; Letourneau , 1996 ; Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ) as well as cell – substrate adhesion ( Hammar - back et al . , 1988 ; Payne et al . , 1992 ; Gomez et al . , 1996 ) . A recently developed paradigm for growth cone and cell motility is the “substrate – cytoskeletal coupling” model ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ; Lin et al . , 1994 ; Suter and Forscher , 1998 ) . According to this model , cells and growth cones can move forward Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling and Growth Cone Motility 101 if they are capable of coupling intracellular actomy - osin - based motility to a ﬁxed ( noncompliant ) extra - cellular translocation substrate via cell surface recep - tors ( see Fig . 4 ) . These receptors must form a strong linkage between the substrate and the actin cytoskel - eton , allowing actomyosin contractions to pull the growth cone forward . If a permissive translocation substrate is not available , myosin motors will drive retrograde ﬂow , but the resulting F - actin ﬂux does not effectively contribute to forward movement [ Fig . 2 ( B ) ] . Two different lines of evidence provide the main support for this model : ( 1 ) Work from our laboratory focusing on the regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics in Aplysia bag cell growth cones by a cell adhesion molecule of the immunoglobulin ( Ig ) super - family ( that we will discuss predominantly in this chapter ) ; and ( 2 ) Studies investigating integrin – cy - toskeleton interactions in ﬁbroblasts and growth cones ( this will mainly be discussed in the section on regu - lation of receptor – cytoskeleton coupling ) . Restrained Bead Interactions—An Assay to Study Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling A number of in vivo and in vitro studies in the last few years have indicated that rapid rearrangement of the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton occurs when growth cones respond to attractive extracellular guid - ance cues ( reviewed in Tanaka and Sabry , 1995 ) . To summarize , during growth cone – target interactions microtubules reorient and extend toward interaction sites , and F - actin tends to accumulate distal to micro - tubule ends . Furthermore , from many studies it has been concluded that F - actin reorganization proceeds and in some manner guides microtubule reorganiza - tion and advance ( Tanaka and Sabry , 1995 ) . For ex - ample , studies from our laboratory demonstrated that microtubules speciﬁcally extend to sites of F - actin accumulation that occur when Aplysia growth cones undergo homophilic interactions in culture ( Lin and Forscher , 1993 ) . Analysis of retrograde F - actin ﬂow during such Aplysia growth cone – target interactions revealed an inverse relationship between rates of cen - tral domain extension and retrograde ﬂow ( Lin and Forscher , 1995 ) . Using Concanavalin A ( Con A ) - coated microbeads as markers for measuring retro - grade F - actin ﬂow rates , Lin and Forscher ( 1995 ) demonstrated that F - actin ﬂow attenuates speciﬁcally along the target interaction axis at the same time the rate of central domain extension increases . These ﬁndings suggested the substrate – cytoskeletal cou - pling model ; however , the putative receptors mediat - ing coupling were unknown . To test this model rigorously with respect to a speciﬁc cell adhesion receptor type , we developed a novel in vitro target interaction system , referred to as restrained bead interaction ( RBI ) assay ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . This assay utilizes relatively large silica beads ( 5 m m diameter ) with amino - functional groups on their surface that permit covalent coupling of proteins of interest as target substrates . Beads coated with ligands to speciﬁc cell adhesion receptors can then be placed onto the peripheral domain of Aplysia bag cell growth cones to assess their effects . We were partic - ularly interested in investigating ligands to apCAM , a member of the Ig superfamily and the Aplysia homo - logue of vertebrate NCAM ( Mayford et al . , 1992 ) , inasmuch as apCAM had previously been shown to accumulate at interaction sites between growth cones in culture and to functionally interact with the F - actin cytoskeleton ( Thompson et al . , 1996 ) . Ligands to ap - CAM in our RBI assay included a monoclonal anti - body to an extracellular epitope of apCAM , as well as biochemically puriﬁed apCAM and Con A—a lectin determined to bind a multitude of neuronal cell sur - face proteins including apCAM ( Thompson et al . , 1996 ) . Beads coated with apCAM ligands rapidly bind to the cell surface , couple to retrograde F - actin ﬂow , and will normally be cleared from the peripheral domain in ; 3 min ( Thompson et al . , 1996 ) . However , in the RBI assay , beads are restrained with a mi - croneedle to prevent retrograde translocation , the logic being that physiological substrates , like cells and extracellular matrices , are generally noncompli - ant . The results of an RBI experiment are shown in Figure 3 ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . During the ﬁrst 10 min of restraining an anti - apCAM – coated bead ( referred to as the latency period ) , no obvious changes in growth cone structure and motility were observed [ Fig . 3 ( A ) ] . However , the latency period abruptly ends when the central domain begins to extend toward the bead interaction site , and the leading edge begins to pro - trude distal to the bead [ Fig . 3 ( B ) , arrow ] . Signiﬁ - cantly , central domain extension is accompanied by a marked increase in tension in the RBI axis as indi - cated by a progressive increase in needle bending during the interaction period [ Fig . 3 ( F ) , red line ] . These observations demonstrate that the growth cone exerts a pulling force on the dorsally placed bead substrate during the interaction . Major cytoskeletal reorganization including microtubule extension di - rectly to the bead binding site and F - actin accumula - tion around the restrained bead underlies these struc - tural changes [ Fig . 3 ( C – E ) ] . Importantly , quan - tiﬁcation of retrograde F - actin ﬂow during the inter - action revealed attenuation of ﬂow along the target 102 Suter and Forscher interaction axis but not in the adjacent lamellipodium ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . The structural and cytoskeletal changes we observe with the RBI assay ( using a chemically deﬁned substrate ) faithfully mimic the changes previously reported for growth cone interac - tions with native cellular targets ( Lin and Forscher , 1993 , 1995 ) . These results provided direct evidence for the substrate – cytoskeletal coupling model and demonstrated for the ﬁrst time that adhesion mole - cules of the Ig CAM superfamily can act as force transducers between motile cytoskeletal networks and extracellular substrates . Attenuation of Retrograde F - Actin Flow by Formation of a Molecular Clutch Complex How could apCAM - clustering result in attenuation of retrograde ﬂow ? One intriguing possibility is that apCAM - clustering results in formation of a complex that acts like a molecular “clutch . ” When engaged , this clutch supports tension between extracellular sub - strates and the contractile actomyosin networks em - bodying retrograde ﬂow . In the context of an RBI experiment , during the latency period , retrograde ﬂow rates along the RBI axis were indistinguishable from off - axis ﬂow rates in the adjacent lamellipodium ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . We speculate that linkages be - tween the bead substrate and the actin cytoskeleton are initially relatively weak and as a result there is “clutch slippage” at the receptor – actin interface dur - ing the latency period [ Fig . 4 ( A ) ] . This conclusion is evidenced by continued retrograde F - actin ﬂow in the target interaction axis , by the fact that target beads do move with the ﬂow when needle restraint is removed , and also by the absence of signiﬁcant tension build - up during the latency period . We hypothesize that over time , the number and / or state of apCAM / actin link - ages changes promoting progressive strengthening of the F - actin – apCAM linkage to the extent that even - tually the full force of the myosin driven retrograde ﬂow can be restrained [ Fig . 4 ( B ) , “linkage strength - ening” ] . Under this condition the actomyosin contrac - tile system would be applying maximal pulling force on the substrate . Figure 3 Crosslinking of apCAM triggers C domain ex - tension , protrusive growth , and cytoskeletal remodeling . All images refer to the same growth cone . ( A ) Beads coated with the anti - apCAM antibody ( 4E8 ) were placed on the peripheral domain of an Aplysia bag cell growth cone near the leading edge and restrained from retrograde movement using a microneedle . This video - enhanced DIC image was recorded after the latency period ( see G ) at the start of central domain extension . The double - headed arrow indi - cates interaction axis between bead and central domain . ( B ) After 4 min , the central domain boundary extended to the bead ( arrowhead marks initial boundary position ) . Arrow indicates new leading edge position . ( C ) Rhodamine - phal - loidin labeling of F - actin and ( D ) b - tubulin immunoﬂuo - rescence after ﬁxation at the 5 - min time point . Note F - actin accumulation around the bead ( arrowhead in C ) and typical control staining for actin bundles in adjacent areas ( arrow in C ) . Microtubule extension ( arrow in D ) was directed toward the bead . ( E ) Pseudocolor overlay of F - actin ( red ) and tubulin ( green ) stainings . ( F ) DIC time course of this inter - action . Line indicates needle position at time 0 ; note rear - ward displacement over time . ( G ) Central domain extension rates plotted as a function of time . Bead placement ( arrow - head ) followed by latency and interaction periods ( double - headed arrows ) are indicated . Bars 5 5 m m . Video sequence to this experiment can be found on the Web site of Journal ofNeurobiology : http : / / www . interscience . wiley . com / jpages / 0022 - 3034 / . ( Reproduced from J Cell Biol , 1998 , 141 : 227 – 240 , by copyright permission of The Rockefeller University Press ) . Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling and Growth Cone Motility 103 Note that if F - actin assembly rates remain un - changed as ﬂow attenuation proceeds , lamellipodium protrusion distal to the point of ﬂow restraint ( the bead ) is predicted , which is exactly what we observe [ Fig . 3 ( B ) ] , although we can not rule out other pos - sible contributing factors such as site - directed actin assembly also triggered by apCAM clustering ( Thompson et al . , 1996 ) . apCAM is the ﬁrst Ig super - family CAM ( IgCAM ) shown to couple to retrograde F - actin ﬂow upon clustering ( Thompson et al . , 1996 ) and to transduce force ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . In addition , very recently it was shown that another IgCAM , Nr - CAM , associates to retrograde ﬂow in growth cones after clustering through its ligand F3 ( Faivre - Sarrailh et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , it appears that regulation of growth cone motility by substrate – cytoskeletal coupling is likely to be a conserved mechanism . Force It is well known that growth cones exert pulling forces and can advance in the direction of applied tension ( Bray , 1984 ; Lamoureux et al . , 1989 ) . We observed an increase in tension between the bead substrate and the central domain during the interaction period of the RBI experiment [ Fig . 3 ( F ) ] that is consistent with these studies . Thus , tension development parallels both retrograde F - actin ﬂow attenuation and central domain advance . It seems reasonable to assume that the same myosin motors that drive retrograde F - actin ﬂow under control conditions ( Lin et al . , 1996 ) are responsible for tension development during RBIs . Studies in migrating ﬁsh keratocytes strongly suggest that myosin II – based contractile networks located in the transition zone are responsible for generating ret - rograde ﬂow and tension during translocation ( Svit - kina et al . , 1997 ) —a similar situation may exist in growth cones because myosin II has been localized to the transition zone here too ( Miller et al . , 1992 ; Roch - lin et al . , 1995 ) . Microtubule Extension When the central domain extends along the target interaction axis toward a bead during an RBI , under - lying microtubules also extend [ Fig . 3 ( D ) ] . The fact that central domain extension was accompanied by both ﬂow attenuation and tension increase strongly suggests that a mechanical continuum develops over time between the apCAM bead substrate , the periph - eral actin domain , and the central domain ; however , a detailed description of the molecules involved in this central – peripheral domain linkage remains an impor - tant area for further studies . A related question that remains to be addressed is the mechanism of micro - tubule extension during directed growth ( see also Suter et al . , 1998 ; Suter and Forscher , 1998 ) . There is evidence that F - actin and retrograde ﬂow impose steric constraints to microtubule advance ( i . e . , periph - eral F - actin acts as a physical barrier ) . In support of this idea , microtubules rapidly extend into peripheral domains depleted of F - actin subsequent to cytochala - sin B treatment ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) , and a recent related study provides evidence that retrograde F - actin ﬂow exerts inhibitory effects on both plus - end assembly and microtubule sliding ( Waterman - Storer and Salmon , 1997 ) . Note that simple steady state kinetics predicts that F - actin ﬂow attenuation during a target interaction would result in a compensatory for - ward shift of the F - actin domain if one assumes un - changed recycling rates [ Fig . 4 ( B ) ] . This could pro - vide an opportunity for microtubules to grow into a region of decreased F - actin density ( i . e . , up the target interaction axis ) . An alternative mechanism for microtubule exten - sion could involve myosin - dependent pulling on mi - crotubule ends . Myosins may be associated with mi - crotubule ends that penetrate the transition zone [ Fig . 4 ( A ) , left inset ] . If the peripheral domain is restrained by interaction with a substrate , microtubule - associ - ated myosins would tend to pull the microtubule do - main forward toward the plus end of the actin ﬁla - ments [ Fig . 4 ( B ) ] . Although this model is intriguing , evidence that myosins provide a dynamic link be - tween microtubules and actin ﬁlaments is largely missing . In summary , whatever mechanism ( s ) actu - ally mediate microtubule extension during directed growth , they are likely to involve dynamic interac - tions with the contractile actin cytoskeleton . CAM LINKAGE TO THE CYTOSKELETON Do CAMs have the requisite properties to act as coupling agents between extracellular substrates and intracellular actomyosin networks during directed neuronal growth ? Neuronal CAMs are important me - diators of neurite growth and guidance involving a mechanism of contact attraction or contact repulsion ( Goodman , 1996 ; Tessier - Lavigne and Goodman , 1996 ) . They can represent both guidance cues and receptor molecules , and frequently , but not exclu - sively , bind to members of the same structural family . The classical neuronal CAMs belong to three distinct structural families : ( 1 ) integrins , ( 2 ) cadherins , and ( 3 ) IgCAMs . All of these cell adhesion molecules have been originally identiﬁed to mediate adhesive func - 104 Suter and Forscher Figure 4 Substrate - cytoskeletal coupling model . Schematic cross sections through a growth cone demonstrate the cytoskeletal organization of the peripheral and central domain , as well as of the transition zone , at different stages of an RBI experiment . Left inset shows potential conventional ( a ) , unconventional ( b ) , and microtubule - associated ( c ) myosin localizations and details of actin recy - cling ; right inset depicts actin ﬁlament organization in ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia as well as actin assembly . Inset in ( B ) shows details of a potential “molecular clutch . ” Cross section and top views of growth cones during RBIs are shown on left and right , respectively . ( A ) Latency period . The molecular “clutch” between receptor and actin cytoskeleton exhibits slippage at low levels of apCAM clustering early in the RBI . ApCAM - actin linkage is not strong enough to support signiﬁcant central – peripheral domain tension or attenuate retrograde ﬂow . Retrograde ﬂow is maximal ( cf . F - actin ﬂow marker 1 displacement ) and growth is slow . ( B ) Interaction period . When enough functional linkages are engaged by restrained beads , retrograde ﬂow is attenuated ( marker bead 2 ) , central - peripheral domain tension increases and the central domain extends toward the restrained bead . Protrusive growth may result directly from continued actin assembly during F - actin ﬂow attenuation . ( Reproduced from J Cell Biology , 141 : 227 – 240 1998 , by copyright permission of The Rockefeller University Press ) . Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling and Growth Cone Motility 105 tions ( e . g . , neurite fasciculation ) , but later have also been shown to have morphogenic effects such as promoting axonal growth and to interact with signal transduction pathways as well . Many excellent re - views have been written on various aspects of these cell adhesion receptors ( Reichardt and Tomaselli , 1991 ; Hynes and Lander , 1992 ; Brummendorf and Rathjen , 1995 ; Brummendorf and Rathjen , 1996 ; Takeichi et al . , 1997 ; Walsh and Doherty , 1997 ) . Therefore , we will introduce the three CAM families only brieﬂy , and focus on the proteins that link these receptors to the actin cytoskeleton . Integrins Integrins are important heterodimeric receptors that interact with extracellular matrix molecules ( ECM ) as well with Ig superfamily molecules to mediate cell – cell adhesion ( Hynes , 1992 ) . Integrins are widely expressed in the nervous system and play a role in various developmental processes such as neuronal migration , axonal growth , and guidance by attaching to ECM proteins such as laminin , ﬁbronectin , and tenascin ( Reichardt and Tomaselli , 1991 ; Hynes and Lander , 1992 ) . Initial studies addressing the role of integrins in neurite outgrowth involved the applica - tion of function - blocking antibodies to neurites grow - ing on either glial cells or puriﬁed ECM proteins in vitro ( e . g . , Bozyczko and Horwitz , 1986 ; Neugebauer et al . , 1988 ; Tomaselli et al . , 1988 ) . A more recent study showed enrichment of integrin receptors at the tip of growth cone ﬁlopodia , suggesting a role in axon guidance ( Wu et al . , 1996 ) . Evidence for such a function arose from both in vitro studies using ECM proteins as molecular guideposts ( Kuhn et al . , 1995 ; Kuhn et al . , 1998 ) and genetic analysis of integrins in Drosophila axon guidance ( Hoang and Chiba , 1998 ) . With respect to cytoskeletal linkages , linkage reg - ulation , and signaling , the integrins are by far the best - studied family of adhesion receptors . Much of our knowledge on the proteins that link integrins to the actin cytoskeleton stems from studies on focal adhesions formed by nonneuronal cells in culture when attaching to ECM substrates ( Burridge and Chr - zanowska - Wodnicka , 1996 ; Schoenwaelder and Bur - ridge , 1999 ) . Besides the immense number of cy - toskeletal - associated ( e . g . , vinculin and talin ) and signaling proteins ( e . g . , FAK , Rho , and Src ) found in focal adhesions , the fact that integrins can engage in bidirectional signaling ( Ginsberg et al . , 1992 ; Schoen - waelder and Burridge , 1999 ) adds an additional level of complexity to integrin function . Many of these focal adhesion proteins have been detected in growth cones ( Cypher and Letourneau , 1991 ; Helmke and Pfenninger , 1995 ) , suggesting a role for integrin - cytoskeletal coupling in growth cone motility and guidance . It is reasonable to assume that the molecular composition and architecture of inte - grin – cytoskeleton linkages of migrating growth cones depends on the substrate . Interference reﬂection mi - croscopy ( IRM ) and immunoﬂuorescence studies of growth cone interactions with ECM and CAM pro - teins support this assumption ( Burden - Gulley and Lemmon , 1996 ; Gomez et al . , 1996 ; Drazba et al . , 1997 ) . Speciﬁcally , it was found that growth cone contacts on ﬁbronectin but not laminin resemble ﬁ - broblastic focal adhesions ( Gomez et al . , 1996 ) . Re - cent functional studies involving protein inactivation methods such as microscale chromophore - assisted la - ser inactivation ( CALI ) or suppression of protein ex - pression by antisense methods conﬁrmed a role in cytoskeletal coupling in the case of talin and vinculin ( Varnum - Finney and Reichardt , 1994 ; Sydor et al . , 1996 ) . Cadherins Cadherins are Ca 2 1 - dependent homophilic CAMs that play important roles in morphogenesis in both neuronal and nonneuronal systems ( Takeichi et al . , 1997 ) . N - cadherin is widely expressed in the devel - oping central nervous system ( Hatta et al . , 1987 ) . Several in vitro studies have demonstrated the func - tion of N - cadherin in promoting neurite outgrowth , either when presented as puriﬁed protein substrate or when expressed on the surface of cells ( Neugebauer et al . , 1988 ; Tomaselli et al . , 1988 ; Bixby and Zhang , 1990 ; Payne et al . , 1992 ) . Expression of a dominant negative N - cadherin mutant lacking a large portion of the extracellular domain in Xenopus revealed that N - cadherin function is necessary for axonal and den - dritic outgrowth from retinal ganglion cells in vivo ( Riehl et al . , 1996 ) . The linkage between cadherins and the actin cy - toskeleton is well described . The general structure of this linkage involves either b - catenin or g - catenin binding to the cytoplasmic domain of cadherin as well as to a - catenin , which in turn is thought to link the cadherin / catenin complex to the actin cytoskeleton ( Aberle et al . , 1996 ) . Although cadherin / catenin in - teractions are required for cell adhesion , they do not appear to be critical for axonogenesis of retinal gan - glion cells . This has been demonstrated in Xenopus by overexpression of the cytoplasmic N - cadherin tail containing mainly the catenin - binding region ( Riehl et al . , 1996 ) . 106 Suter and Forscher IgCAMs The Ig superfamily is the largest family of structurally related proteins , with well over 100 members , all characterized by the presence of at least one Ig do - main ( Williams and Barclay , 1988 ) . The ﬁrst neuronal member of the IgCAMs characterized in mediating cell adhesion of retina cells is NCAM ( Hoffman et al . , 1982 ) . In recent years , the number of neuronal Ig - CAMs expanded signiﬁcantly , and members can be grouped according to their domain organization , amino acid sequence similarity , and type of mem - brane anchorage ( Brummendorf and Rathjen , 1996 ) . Using a variety of different protein - binding ap - proaches , several neuronal IgCAMs have been dem - onstrated to undergo multiple homophilic and hetero - philic interactions , which are Ca 2 1 - independent ( in contrast to cadherins ) and occur both in trans - and cis - conﬁgurations ( for review see Brummendorf and Rathjen , 1996 ) . Such multiple protein interactions give rise to a high level of complexity that is impor - tant for the various pathﬁnding decisions during ner - vous system development . Regulating the expression of different interacting CAMs provides a mechanism for growth cone pathﬁnding involving a limited num - ber of molecules . For example , results from in vivo antibody perturbation studies suggested such a mech - anism for axonin - 1 , NgCAM , and NrCAM during commissural axon guidance to and at the midline ( Stoeckli and Landmesser , 1995 ) . Functional cooper - ation of axonin - 1 and NgCAM during growth cone – substrate interactions and fasciculation has further been demonstrated by a combination of immunolocal - ization , neurite outgrowth , heterologous expression , and biochemical crosslinking studies ( Buchstaller et al . , 1996 ; Kunz et al . , 1996 , 1998 ; Stoeckli et al . , 1996 ) . Despite recent progress on how neuronal IgCAMs may activate signal transduction pathways ( Doherty and Walsh , 1996 ) , molecular details of IgCAM – cy - toskeleton linkages are far less characterized relative to the integrins and cadherins . Most is known about ankyrin and its role in linking L1 family members to the spectrin / actin cytoskeleton ( Davis and Bennett , 1994 ) . Recruitment of ankyrin to cell contact sites induced by homophilic interactions of the Drosophila L1 homologue neuroglian suggests that neuroglian clustering promotes ankyrin / IgCAM association ( Dubreuil et al . , 1996 ) . Evidence for a functional cooperation between ankyrinB and L1 in vivo is given by the observations that ankyrinB ( 2 / 2 ) mice exhibit similar nervous system defects as L1 ( 2 / 2 ) mice , such as dilated optic nerve axons ( Scotland et al . , 1998 ) . Interestingly , when neuroglian was expressed with a glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) anchor , it was unable to recruit ankyrin ( Dubreuil et al . , 1996 ) . Many IgCAMs are inserted into the plasma membrane via a GPI anchor ( Brummendorf and Rathjen , 1996 ) . How do these molecules transmit their signals and associate with the underlying cytoskeleton ? Can they transduce force ? One possibility involves cis - interac - tions with membrane - spanning binding partners . For example , the GPI - linked IgCAM axonin - 1 / TAG - 1 has been demonstrated to interact with its transmembrane binding partner NgCAM / L1 only in cis ( e . g . , in the plane of the same membrane ) , but not in trans ( Buch - staller et al . , 1996 ; Kunz et al . , 1998 ; Malhotra et al . , 1998 ) . In support of the assumption mentioned above , Malhotra et al . ( 1998 ) have shown that during ho - mophilic TAG - 1 – mediated cell adhesion , a cis - inter - action between TAG - 1 and L1 promotes ankyrin re - cruitment to cell contact sites . However , clearly more work is needed to better understand how GPI - linked CAMs transmit guidance information and to ﬁnd out if they can transduce force . REGULATION OF CAM – CYTOSKELETON COUPLING How are linkages between CAMs and the underlying actin cytoskeleton regulated ? This question is partic - ularly important with respect to motile cells and growth cones , which have to rapidly form and disas - semble substrate – cytoskeletal linkages for migration to occur . In addition , the cell has to be able to regulate the speed of migration . Supporting this concept , it has been shown that the speed of integrin - mediated cell migration is highest at intermediate levels of adhe - siveness , which is determined by a combination of different parameters such as ligand concentration , re - ceptor density , and afﬁnity , as well as the presence of a functionally active cytoplasmic receptor domain ( Huttenlocher et al . , 1996 ; Palecek et al . , 1997 ) . In addition , these studies from the Horwitz laboratory have shown that by varying the above parameters the maximum migration speed attainable remains un - changed ( Palecek et al . , 1997 ) . Such ﬁndings are completely in line with our results on the substrate - dependent correlation of retrograde F - actin ﬂow and advance rates of Aplysia growth cones ( Lin and For - scher , 1995 ; Suter et al . , 1998 ) , where maximum growth rate on a permissive substrate was never found to exceed the retrograde ﬂow rate on a nonpermissive substrate . A very recent study on focal adhesion motility in stationary and migrating ﬁbroblasts provides further Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling and Growth Cone Motility 107 evidence that migration speed is regulated by a mo - lecular clutch between extracellular substrates and the actin cytoskeleton ( Smilenov et al . , 1999 ) . Using green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged b 1 - integrin , Smilenov and coworkers showed that focal adhesions move retrogradely in association with actin ﬁbers in stationary ﬁbroblasts , whereas little focal adhesion movement was observed in migrating cells , suggest - ing a clutch - like mechanism between integrins and ECM proteins . Interestingly , again the rate of focal adhesion movement in stationary cells was similar to the rate of ﬁbroblast cell migration . Taken together , all these studies suggest that the migration speed of cells and growth cones is most likely to be regulated at the clutch level ( e . g . , somewhere at the substrate – CAM – cytoskeleton interface ) . Several parameters have been demonstrated to reg - ulate CAM – cytoskeleton linkages involved in cell migration . These include ligand binding , receptor clustering , force , and tyrosine phosphorylation . Most of the corresponding studies have focused on integrin - mediated cell adhesion and migration of ﬁbroblast - like cells . However , there is increasing evidence that the above parameters ( e . g . , clustering and tyrosine phosphorylation ) also modulate cadherin and IgCAM linkages regulating growth cone motility . For exam - ple , apCAM – actin interactions depend on clustering density ( Thompson et al . , 1996 ) . At lower levels of apCAM clustering , this IgCAM associates with retro - grade ﬂow , whereas at higher density it can promote de novo site - directed F - actin assembly . Many studies addressing the functional interaction of integrin receptors with the actin cytoskeleton have used ligand - coated microbeads to study recruitment of focal adhesion proteins ( Miyamoto et al . , 1995 ) or to analyze biophysical parameters such as receptor lo - calization and mobility ( Schmidt et al . , 1995 ) , cy - toskeletal coupling ( Felsenfeld et al . , 1996 ) , and linkage strengthening ( Choquet et al . , 1997 ) . Interest - ingly , there appears to be a hierarchy of events in the assembly of integrin – cytoskeletal complexes . An ex - tensive study in ﬁbroblasts revealed that cytoskeletal and signaling proteins can be grouped depending on their recruitment to ﬁbronectin - coated beads in re - sponse to the following parameters : ligand occu - pancy , integrin clustering , and the presence of ty - rosine phosphorylation activity ( Miyamoto et al . , 1995 ) . Using beads coated with low levels of integrin antibodies , the addition of an RGD - containing peptide induced the coupling of such beads to the retrograde moving F - actin cytoskeleton ( Felsenfeld et al . , 1996 ) . These ﬁndings indicated that ligand binding promotes the association of integrin receptors with the cytoskel - eton . Furthermore , in both ﬁbroblasts and neuronal growth cones , integrin linkages were found to be stronger at the leading edge when compared to posi - tions closer to the cell body ( Schmidt et al . , 1993 , 1995 ) . In addition to ligand occupancy , receptor clus - tering , and localization , the application of external forces increases the strength of integrin – cytoskeleton interactions , suggesting that cells can sense and re - spond to the rigidity of the ECM ( Choquet et al . , 1997 ) . Consistent with a role for force in regulating integrin – cytoskeletal linkages are the ﬁndings that contractility stimulated by the small GTPase Rho promotes focal adhesion assembly and integrin clus - tering ( Burridge and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , 1996 ; Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1996 ) . An important regulator of CAM – cytoskeleton linkages not only for integrins but also cadherins and IgCAMs is tyrosine phosphorylation . Tyrosine phos - phorylation events may occur on the level of the adhesion receptors ( cytoplasmic domain of integrins , cadherins , and L1 ) but also of the cytoskeletal linkage ( e . g . , vinculin , paxillin , and catenin ) and signaling proteins ( e . g . , FAK and p130 cas ) . Furthermore , ty - rosine phosphorylation may either enhance or weaken receptor – cytoskeleton coupling , depending on the molecular interaction . In the case of focal adhesions , integrin clustering and ligand binding promotes an overall increase in tyrosine phosphorylation and in - hibiting tyrosine kinase activity blocks focal adhesion formation ( Miyamoto et al . , 1995 ; Burridge and Chr - zanowska - Wodnicka , 1996 ) . However , details on the series of events involving tyrosine phosphorylation during focal adhesion assembly are not completely understood ( Burridge and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , 1996 ; Schoenwaelder and Burridge , 1999 ) . Recent studies from our laboratory have shown increased phosphotyrosine levels at restrained apCAM – bead in - teraction sites but not around unrestrained beads ( D . M . Suter and P . Forscher , unpublished results ) . Furthermore , the application of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein blocked restrained bead interac - tions without completely inhibiting weaker apCAM – actin interactions required for retrograde bead trans - location . In summary , these observations suggest that total phosphotyrosine levels are generally higher at sites where strong apCAM – actin linkages occur . Speciﬁc tyrosine phosphorylation events have also been found to uncouple receptor - linkage protein in - teractions in the case of all three families of CAMs . Tyrosine phosphorylation of b - catenin was found to result in reduced cadherin - mediated cell adhesion ( Matsuyoshi et al . , 1992 ) . Similarly , it was demon - strated that tyrosine phosphorylation of the cytoplas - mic tail of neurofascin at a site highly conserved among members of the L1 - family abolished the bind - 108 Suter and Forscher ing of neurofascin to ankyrin and resulted in an in - creased lateral mobility of neurofascin ( Garver et al . , 1997 ) . Finally , the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Src has been shown to negatively regulate the strengthen - ing of linkages between the cytoskeleton and the integrin vitronectin , but not ﬁbronectin receptor ( Felsenfeld et al . , 1999 ) . CONCLUDING REMARKS Functional studies with cell adhesion proteins from different structural families suggest substrate – cy - toskeletal coupling as a mechanism for regulating growth cone and cell motility . Furthermore , many reports provide evidence that an important site for the regulation of forward movement is the receptor – actin as opposed to the myosin – actin interface . Besides acting as force transducing agents , cell adhesion re - ceptors may also promote growth by stimulating de novo F - actin assembly , as it has been shown in the case of apCAM ( Thompson et al . , 1996 ) . However , increased F - actin assembly rates can only lead to enhanced long - term growth rates , if the whole periph - eral actin domain shifts forward ( e . g . , by coupling to a permissive substrate ) . With respect to receptors reg - ulating F - actin assembly , an interesting connection from the membrane to the cytoskeleton has been recently established for Drosophila motor axon guid - ance . Genetic and biochemical studies have revealed that the receptor phosphatase Dlar may transmit a guidance signal to the actin cytoskeleton via interac - tion with Ena , which in turn regulates actin assembly via interaction with proﬁlin ( Wills et al . , 1999a , b ) . Furthermore , both Ena and Dlar appear to be nega - tively regulated by the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase abl ( Wills et al . , 1999a ) . Many intriguing questions remain with respect to mechanisms of substrate – cytoskeletal coupling in growth cone motility and guidance ; for example , ( 1 ) What is the detailed series of events during the estab - lishment of a functional receptor – cytoskeleton link - age ? ( 2 ) How are signaling complexes recruited to growth cone target interaction sites ? ( 3 ) Which myo - sins produce force during substrate - mediated growth and where are the myosins localized ? ( 4 ) How does force affect the strength of CAM – cytoskeletal cou - pling linkages ? ( 5 ) What is the mechanism of micro - tubule extension during directed neuronal growth ? The rapidly evolving power of molecular and live cell imaging techniques will be important to approach these interesting questions in the future . We thank members of the Forscher laboratory for com - ments on the manuscript . We apologize for omissions of references due to space limitations , especially since this review is integrating work from different ﬁelds . CW001119 - TI3 . 20 REFERENCES Aberle H , Schwartz H , Kemler R . 1996 . Cadherin - catenin complex : protein interactions and their implications for cadherin function . J Cell Biochem 61 : 514 – 523 . Arber S , Barbayannis FA , Hanser H , Schneider C , Stanyon CA , Bernard O , Caroni P . 1998 . Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 : 805 – 809 . Beckerle MC . 1998 . Spatial control of actin ﬁlament assem - bly : lessons from Listeria . Cell 95 : 741 – 748 . Bentley D , O’Connor TP . 1994 . Cytoskeletal events in growth cone steering . Curr Opin Neurobiol 4 : 43 – 48 . Bentley D , Toroian - Raymond A . 1986 . Disoriented path - ﬁnding by pioneer neuron growth cones deprived of ﬁlopodia by cytochalasin treatment . Nature 323 : 712 – 715 . Bixby JL , Zhang R . 1990 . Puriﬁed N - cadherin is a potent substrate for the rapid induction of neurite outgrowth . J Cell Biol 110 : 1253 – 1260 . Bovolenta P , Mason C . 1987 . Growth cone morphology varies with position in the developing mouse visual path - way from retina to ﬁrst targets . J Neurosci 7 : 1447 – 1460 . Bozyczko D , Horwitz AF . 1986 . The participation of a putative cell surface receptor for laminin and ﬁbronectin in peripheral neurite extension . J Neurosci 6 : 1241 – 1251 . Bray D . 1979 . Mechanical tension produced by nerve cells in tissue culture . J Cell Sci 37 : 391 – 410 . Bray D . 1984 . Axonal growth in response to experimentally applied mechanical tension . Dev Biol 102 : 379 – 389 . Bray D , Chapman K . 1985 . Analysis of microspike move - ments on the neuronal growth cone . J Neurosci 5 : 3204 – 3213 . Bray D , Hollenbeck PJ . 1988 . Growth cone motility and guidance . Annu Rev Cell Biol 4 : 43 – 61 . Bridgman PC , Dailey ME . 1989 . The organization of my - osin and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones . J Cell Biol 108 : 95 – 109 . Brummendorf T , Rathjen FG . 1995 . Cell adhesion mole - cules 1 : immunoglobulin superfamily . Protein Proﬁle 2 : 963 – 108 . Brummendorf T , Rathjen FG . 1996 . Structure / function re - lationships of axon - associated adhesion receptors of the immunoglobulin superfamily . Curr Opin Neurobiol 6 : 584 – 593 . Buchstaller A , Kunz S , Berger P , Kunz B , Ziegler U , Rader C , Sonderegger P . 1996 . Cell adhesion molecules Ng - CAM and axonin - 1 form heterodimers in the neuronal membrane and cooperate in neurite outgrowth promotion . J Cell Biol 135 : 1593 – 1607 . Burden - Gulley SM , Lemmon V . 1996 . L1 , N - cadherin , and laminin induce distinct distribution patterns of cytoskel - Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling and Growth Cone Motility 109 etal elements in growth cones . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 35 : 1 – 23 . Burridge K , Chrzanowska - Wodnicka M . 1996 . Focal adhe - sions , contractility , and signaling . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 12 : 463 – 518 . Caldwell JE , Heiss SG , Mermall V , Cooper JA . 1989 . Effects of CapZ , an actin capping protein of muscle , on the polymerization of actin . Biochemistry 28 : 8506 – 8514 . Carlier MF . 1998 . Control of actin dynamics . Curr Opin Cell Biol 10 : 45 – 51 . Carlier MF , Laurent V , Santolini J , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D . 1997 . Actin depo - lymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁl - ament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 : 1307 – 1322 . Caudy M , Bentley D . 1986a . Pioneer growth cone morphol - ogies reveal proximal increases in substrate afﬁnity within leg segments of grasshopper embryos . J Neurosci 6 : 364 – 379 . Caudy M , Bentley D . 1986b . Pioneer growth cone steering along a series of neuronal and non - neuronal cues of different afﬁnities . J Neurosci 6 : 1781 – 1795 . Chakraborty T , Ebel F , Domann E , Niebuhr K , Gerstel B , Pistor S , Temm - Grove CJ , Jockusch BM , Reinhard M , Walter U . 1995 . A focal adhesion factor directly linking intracellularly motile Listeria monocytogenes and Liste - ria ivanovii to the actin - based cytoskeleton of mamma - lian cells . Embo J 14 : 1314 – 1321 . Challacombe JF , Snow DM , Letourneau PC . 1997 . Dy - namic microtubule ends are required for growth cone turning to avoid an inhibitory guidance cue . J Neurosci 17 : 3085 – 3095 . Choquet D , Felsenfeld DP , Sheetz MP . 1997 . Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin - cytoskel - eton linkages . Cell 88 : 39 – 48 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka M , Burridge K . 1996 . Rho - stimu - lated contractility drives the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . J Cell Biol 133 : 1403 – 1415 . Cypher C , Letourneau PC . 1991 . Identiﬁcation of cytoskel - etal , focal adhesion , and cell adhesion proteins in growth cone particles isolated from developing chick brain . J Neurosci Res 30 : 259 – 265 . Davis JQ , Bennett V . 1994 . Ankyrin binding activity shared by the neurofascin / L1 / NrCAM family of nervous system cell adhesion molecules . J Biol Chem 269 : 27163 – 27166 . Dennerll TJ , Joshi HC , Steel VL , Buxbaum RE , Heidemann SR . 1988 . Tension and compression in the cytoskeleton of PC - 12 neurites . II : quantitative measurements . J Cell Biol 107 : 665 – 674 . Dent EW , Callaway JL , Szebenyi G , Baas PW , Kalil K . 1999 . Reorganization and movement of microtubules in axonal growth cones and developing interstitial branches . J Neurosci 19 : 8894 – 8908 . Doherty P , Walsh FS . 1996 . CAM - FGF receptor interac - tions : a model for axonal growth . Mol Cell Neurosci 8 : 99 – 111 . Dramsi S , Cossart P . 1998 . Intracellular pathogens and the actin cytoskeleton . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 14 : 137 – 166 . Drazba J , Liljelund P , Smith C , Payne R , Lemmon V . 1997 . Growth cone interactions with puriﬁed cell and substrate adhesion molecules visualized by interference reﬂection microscopy . Brain Res Dev Brain Res 100 : 183 – 197 . Dubreuil RR , MacVicar G , Dissanayake S , Liu C , Homer D , Hortsch M . 1996 . Neuroglian - mediated cell adhesion in - duces assembly of the membrane skeleton at cell contact sites . J Cell Biol 133 : 647 – 655 . Faivre - Sarrailh C , Falk J , Pollerberg E , Schachner M , Ro - ugon G . 1999 . NrCAM , cerebellar granule cell receptor for the neuronal adhesion molecule F3 , displays an actin - dependent mobility in growth cones . J Cell Sci 112 : 3015 – 3027 . Felsenfeld DP , Choquet D , Sheetz MP . 1996 . Ligand bind - ing regulates the directed movement of beta1 integrins on ﬁbroblasts . Nature 383 : 438 – 440 . Felsenfeld DP , Schwartzberg PL , Venegas A , Tse R , Sheetz MP . 1999 . Selective regulation of integrin - cytoskeleton interactions by the tyrosine kinase Src . Nature Cell Biol - ogy 1 : 200 – 206 . Forscher P , Kaczmarek LK , Buchanan JA , Smith SJ . 1987 . Cyclic AMP induces changes in distribution and transport of organelles within growth cones of Aplysia bag cell neurons . J Neurosci 7 : 3600 – 3611 . Forscher P , Smith SJ . 1988 . Actions of cytochalasins on the organization of actin ﬁlaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone . J Cell Biol 107 : 1505 – 1516 . Garver TD , Ren Q , Tuvia S , Bennett V . 1997 . Tyrosine phosphorylation at a site highly conserved in the L1 family of cell adhesion molecules abolishes ankyrin bind - ing and increases lateral mobility of neurofascin . J Cell Biol 137 : 703 – 714 . Gertler FB , Niebuhr K , Reinhard M , Wehland J , Soriano P . 1996 . Mena , a relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , is implicated in the control of microﬁlament dynamics . Cell 87 : 227 – 239 . Ginsberg MH , Du X , Plow EF . 1992 . Inside - out integrin signalling . Curr Opin Cell Biol 4 : 766 – 771 . Goldberg DJ , Burmeister DW . 1986 . Stages in axon forma - tion : observations of growth of Aplysia axons in culture using video - enhanced contrast - differential interference contrast microscopy . J Cell Biol 103 : 1921 – 1931 . Gomez TM , Roche FK , Letourneau PC . 1996 . Chick sen - sory neuronal growth cones distinguish ﬁbronectin from laminin by making substratum contacts that resemble focal contacts . J Neurobiol 29 : 18 – 34 . Goodman CS . 1996 . Mechanisms and molecules that con - trol growth cone guidance . Annu Rev Neurosci 19 : 341 – 377 . Gordon - Weeks PR . 1987 . The cytoskeletons of isolated , neuronal growth cones . Neuroscience 21 : 977 – 989 . Hammarback JA , McCarthy JB , Palm SL , Furcht LT , Le - tourneau PC . 1988 . Growth cone guidance by substrate - bound laminin pathways is correlated with neuron - to - pathway adhesivity . Dev Biol 126 : 29 – 39 . Hasson T , Mooseker M . 1997 . The growing family of 110 Suter and Forscher myosin motors and their role in neurons and sensory cells . Curr Opin Neurobiol 7 : 615 – 623 . Hatta K , Takagi S , Fujisawa H , Takeichi M . 1987 . Spatial and temporal expression pattern of N - cadherin cell adhe - sion molecules correlated with morphogenetic processes of chicken embryos . Dev Biol 120 : 215 – 227 . Heidemann SR . 1996 . Cytoplasmic mechanisms of axonal and dendritic growth in neurons . Int Rev Cytol 165 : 235 – 296 . Helmke S , Pfenninger KH . 1995 . Growth cone enrichment and cytoskeletal association of non - receptor tyrosine ki - nases . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 30 : 194 – 207 . Hoang B , Chiba A . 1998 . Genetic analysis on the role of integrin during axon guidance in Drosophila . J Neurosci 18 : 7847 – 7855 . Hoffman S , Sorkin BC , White PC , Brackenbury R , Mail - hammer R , Rutishauser U , Cunningham BA , Edelman GM . 1982 . Chemical characterization of a neural cell adhesion molecule puriﬁed from embryonic brain mem - branes . J Biol Chem 257 : 7720 – 7729 . Huttenlocher A , Ginsberg MH , Horwitz AF . 1996 . Modu - lation of cell migration by integrin - mediated cytoskeletal linkages and ligand - binding afﬁnity . J Cell Biol 134 : 1551 – 1562 . Hynes RO . 1992 . Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhesion . Cell 69 : 11 – 25 . Hynes RO , Lander AD . 1992 . Contact and adhesive speci - ﬁcities in the associations , migrations , and targeting of cells and axons . Cell 68 : 303 – 322 . Joshi HC , Chu D , Buxbaum RE , Heidemann SR . 1985 . Tension and compression in the cytoskeleton of PC 12 neurites . J Cell Biol 101 : 697 – 705 . Kang F , Laine RO , Bubb MR , Southwick FS , Purich DL . 1997 . Proﬁlin interacts with the Gly - Pro - Pro - Pro - Pro - Pro sequences of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) : implications for actin - based Listeria motility . Biochemistry 36 : 8384 – 8392 . Kennedy TE , Tessier - Lavigne M . 1995 . Guidance and in - duction of branch formation in developing axons by target - derived diffusible factors . Curr Opin Neurobiol 5 : 83 – 90 . Kuhn TB , Schmidt MF , Kater SB . 1995 . Laminin and ﬁbronectin guideposts signal sustained but opposite ef - fects to passing growth cones . Neuron 14 : 275 – 285 . Kuhn TB , Williams CV , Dou P , Kater SB . 1998 . Laminin directs growth cone navigation via two temporally and functionally distinct calcium signals . J Neurosci 18 : 184 – 194 . Kunz S , Spirig M , Ginsburg C , Buchstaller A , Berger P , Lanz R , Rader C , Vogt L , Kunz B , Sonderegger P . 1998 . Neurite fasciculation mediated by complexes of axonin - 1 and Ng cell adhesion molecule . J Cell Biol 143 : 1673 – 1690 . Kunz S , Ziegler U , Kunz B , Sonderegger P . 1996 . Intracel - lular signaling is changed after clustering of the neural cell adhesion molecules axonin - 1 and NgCAM during neurite fasciculation . J Cell Biol 135 : 253 – 267 . Lamoureux P , Buxbaum RE , Heidemann SR . 1989 . Direct evidence that growth cones pull . Nature 340 : 159 – 162 . Lanier LM , Gates MA , Witke W , Menzies AS , Wehman AM , Macklis JD , Kwiatkowski D , Soriano P , Gertler FB . 1999 . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neuron 22 : 313 – 325 . Lappalainen P , Drubin DG . 1997 . Coﬁlin promotes rapid actin ﬁlament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 : 78 – 82 . Letourneau PC . 1996 . The cytoskeleton in nerve growth cone motility and axonal pathﬁnding . Perspect Dev Neu - robiol 4 : 111 – 123 . Letourneau PC , Shattuck TA , Ressler AH . 1987 . “Pull” and “push” in neurite elongation : observations on the effects of different concentrations of cytochalasin B and taxol . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 8 : 193 – 209 . Lewis AK , Bridgman PC . 1992 . Nerve growth cone lamel - lipodia contain two populations of actin ﬁlaments that differ in organization and polarity . J Cell Biol 119 : 1219 – 1243 . Lin CH , Espreaﬁco EM , Mooseker MS , Forscher P . 1996 . Myosin drives retrograde F - actin ﬂow in neuronal growth cones . Neuron 16 : 769 – 782 . Lin CH , Forscher P . 1993 . Cytoskeletal remodeling during growth cone - target interactions . J Cell Biol 121 : 1369 – 1383 . Lin C - H , Forscher P . 1995 . Growth cone advance is in - versely proportional to retrograde F - actin ﬂow . Neuron 14 : 763 – 771 . Lin CH , Thompson CA , Forscher P . 1994 . Cytoskeletal reorganization underlying growth cone motility . Curr Opin Neurobiol 4 : 640 – 647 . Lu M , Witke W , Kwiatkowski DJ , Kosik KS . 1997 . De - layed retraction of ﬁlopodia in gelsolin null mice . J Cell Biol 138 : 1279 – 1287 . Luo Y , Raible D , Raper JA . 1993 . Collapsin : a protein in brain that induces the collapse and paralysis of neuronal growth cones . Cell 75 : 217 – 227 . Ma L , Rohatgi R , Kirschner MW . 1998 . The Arp2 / 3 com - plex mediates actin polymerization induced by the small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 : 15362 – 15367 . Machesky LM , Insall RH . 1998 . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 8 : 1347 – 1356 . Malhotra JD , Tsiotra P , Karagogeos D , Hortsch M . 1998 . Cis - activation of L1 - mediated ankyrin recruitment by TAG - 1 homophilic cell adhesion . J Biol Chem 273 : 33354 – 33359 . Mallavarapu A , Mitchison T . 1999 . Regulated actin cy - toskeleton assembly at ﬁlopodium tips controls their ex - tension and retraction . J Cell Biol 146 : 1097 – 1106 . Matsuyoshi N , Hamaguchi M , Taniguchi S , Nagafuchi A , Tsukita S , Takeichi M . 1992 . Cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion is perturbed by v - src tyrosine phosphorylation in metastatic ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 118 : 703 – 714 . Mayford M , Barzilai A , Keller F , Schacher S , Kandel ER . 1992 . Modulation of an NCAM - related adhesion mole - Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling and Growth Cone Motility 111 cule with long - term synaptic plasticity in Aplysia . Sci - ence 256 : 638 – 644 . Meberg PJ , Ono S , Minamide LS , Takahashi M , Bamburg JR . 1998 . Actin depolymerizing factor and coﬁlin phos - phorylation dynamics : response to signals that regulate neurite extension . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 39 : 172 – 190 . Miki H , Miura K , Takenawa T . 1996 . N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the cortical cy - toskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . Embo J 15 : 5326 – 5335 . Miki H , Sasaki T , Takai Y , Takenawa T . 1998 . Induction of ﬁlopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depoly - merizing protein N - WASP . Nature 391 : 93 – 96 . Miller M , Bower E , Levitt P , Li D , Chantler PD . 1992 . Myosin II distribution in neurons is consistent with a role in growth cone motility but not synaptic vesicle mobili - zation . Neuron 8 : 25 – 44 . Mitchison T , Kirschner M . 1988 . Cytoskeletal dynamics and nerve growth . Neuron 1 : 761 – 772 . Mitchison TJ , Cramer LP . 1996 . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 84 : 371 – 379 . Miyamoto S , Teramoto H , Coso OA , Gutkind JS , Burbelo PD , Akiyama SK , Yamada KM . 1995 . Integrin function : molecular hierarchies of cytoskeletal and signaling mol - ecules . J Cell Biol 131 : 791 – 805 . Neugebauer KM , Tomaselli KJ , Lilien J , Reichardt LF . 1988 . N - cadherin , NCAM , and integrins promote retinal neurite outgrowth on astrocytes in vitro . J Cell Biol 107 : 1177 – 1187 . Okabe S , Hirokawa N . 1991 . Actin dynamics in growth cones . J Neurosci 11 : 1918 – 1929 . Palecek SP , Loftus JC , Ginsberg MH , Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . 1997 . Integrin - ligand binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell - substratum ad - hesiveness . Nature 385 : 537 – 540 . Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . 1993 . How proﬁlin promotes actin ﬁlament assembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell 75 : 1007 – 1014 . Payne HR , Burden SM , Lemmon V . 1992 . Modulation of growth cone morphology by substrate - bound adhesion molecules . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 21 : 65 – 73 . Ramon y Cajal S . 1890 . Sobre la aparicion de las expan - sionas cellulares en la medula embrionaria . Gaceta San - itaria de Barcelona 413 – 419 . Reichardt LF , Tomaselli KJ . 1991 . Extracellular matrix molecules and their receptors : functions in neural devel - opment . Annu Rev Neurosci 14 : 531 – 570 . Riehl R , Johnson K , Bradley R , Grunwald GB , Cornel E , Lilienbaum A , Holt CE . 1996 . Cadherin function is re - quired for axon outgrowth in retinal ganglion cells in vivo . Neuron 17 : 837 – 848 . Rochlin MW , Itoh K , Adelstein RS , Bridgman PC . 1995 . Localization of myosin II A and B isoforms in cultured neurons . J Cell Sci 108 : 3661 – 3670 . Rochlin MW , Wickline KM , Bridgman PC . 1996 . Micro - tubule stability decreases axon elongation but not axo - plasm production . J Neurosci 16 : 3236 – 3246 . Rohatgi R , Ma L , Miki H , Lopez M , Kirchhausen T , Tak - enawa T , Kirschner MW . 1999 . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - depen - dent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 : 221 – 231 . Rosenblatt J , Agnew BJ , Abe H , Bamburg JR , Mitchison TJ . 1997 . Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin ( XAC ) is responsible for the turnover of actin ﬁlaments in Listeria monocytogenes tails . J Cell Biol 136 : 1323 – 1332 . Schmidt CE , Dai J , Lauffenburger DA , Sheetz MP , Horwitz AF . 1995 . Integrin - cytoskeletal interactions in neuronal growth cones . J Neurosci 15 : 3400 – 3407 . Schmidt CE , Horwitz AF , Lauffenburger DA , Sheetz MP . 1993 . Integrin - cytoskeletal interactions in migrating ﬁ - broblasts are dynamic , asymmetric , and regulated . J Cell Biol 123 : 977 – 991 . Schoenwaelder SM , Burridge K . 1999 . Bidirectional signal - ing between the cytoskeleton and integrins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 11 : 274 – 286 . Scotland P , Zhou D , Benveniste H , Bennett V . 1998 . Ner - vous system defects of AnkyrinB ( 2 / 2 ) mice suggest functional overlap between the cell adhesion molecule L1 and 440 - kD AnkyrinB in premyelinated axons . J Cell Biol 143 : 1305 – 1315 . Smilenov LB , Mikhailov A , Pelham RJ , Marcantonio EE , Gundersen GG . 1999 . Focal adhesion motility revealed in stationary ﬁbroblasts . Science 286 : 1172 – 1174 . Stoeckli ET , Landmesser LT . 1995 . Axonin - 1 , Nr - CAM , and Ng - CAM play different roles in the in vivo guidance of chick commissural neurons . Neuron 14 : 1165 – 1179 . Stoeckli ET , Ziegler U , Bleiker AJ , Groscurth P , Sondereg - ger P . 1996 . Clustering and functional cooperation of Ng - CAM and axonin - 1 in the substratum - contact area of growth cones . Dev Biol 177 : 15 – 29 . Stossel TP . 1993 . On the crawling of animal cells . Science 260 : 1086 – 1094 . Suter DM , Errante LD , Belotserkovsky V , Forscher P . 1998 . The Ig superfamily cell adhesion molecule , apCAM , me - diates growth cone steering by substrate - cytoskeletal cou - pling . J Cell Biol 141 : 227 – 240 . Suter DM , Forscher P . 1998 . An emerging link between cytoskeletal dynamics and cell adhesion molecules in growth cone guidance . Curr Opin Neurobiol 8 : 106 – 116 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG . 1997 . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes—mechanism of cell body translo - cation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 . Sydor AM , Su AL , Wang FS , Xu A , Jay DG . 1996 . Talin and vinculin play distinct roles in ﬁlopodial motility in the neuronal growth cone . J Cell Biol 134 : 1197 – 1207 . Takeichi M , Uemura T , Iwai Y , Uchida N , Inoue T , Tanaka T , Suzuki SC . 1997 . Cadherins in brain patterning and neural network formation . Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 62 : 505 – 510 . Tanaka E , Ho T , Kirschner MW . 1995 . The role of micro - tubule dynamics in growth cone motility and axonal growth . J Cell Biol 128 : 139 – 155 . Tanaka E , Kirschner MW . 1995 . The role of microtubules in growth cone turning at substrate boundaries . J Cell Biol 128 : 127 – 137 . 112 Suter and Forscher Tanaka E , Sabry J . 1995 . Making the connection : cytoskel - etal rearrangements during growth cone guidance . Cell 83 : 171 – 176 . Tanaka EM , Kirschner MW . 1991 . Microtubule behavior in the growth cones of living neurons during axon elonga - tion . J Cell Biol 115 : 345 – 363 . Tessier - Lavigne M , Goodman CS . 1996 . The molecular biology of axon guidance . Science 274 : 1123 – 1133 . Thompson C , Lin CH , Forscher P . 1996 . An Aplysia cell adhesion molecule associated with site - directed actin ﬁl - ament assembly in neuronal growth cones . J Cell Sci 109 : 2843 – 2854 . Tomaselli KJ , Neugebauer KM , Bixby JL , Lilien J , Reichardt LF . 1988 . N - cadherin and integrins : two recep - tor systems that mediate neuronal process outgrowth on astrocyte surfaces . Neuron 1 : 33 – 43 . Tosney KW , Wessells NK . 1983 . Neuronal motility : the ultrastructure of veils and microspikes correlates with their motile activities . J Cell Sci 61 : 389 – 411 . Varnum - Finney B , Reichardt LF . 1994 . Vinculin - deﬁcient PC12 cell lines extend unstable lamellipodia and ﬁlopo - dia and have a reduced rate of neurite outgrowth . J Cell Biol 127 : 1071 – 1084 . Walsh FS , Doherty P . 1997 . Neural cell adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily : role in axon growth and guidance . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 13 : 425 – 456 . Waterman - Storer CM , Salmon ED . 1997 . Actomyosin - based retrograde ﬂow of microtubules in the lamella of migrating epithelial cells inﬂuences microtubule dy - namic instability and turnover and is associated with microtubule breakage and treadmilling . J Cell Biol 139 : 417 – 434 . Welch MD , DePace AH , Verma S , Iwamatsu A , Mitchison TJ . 1997a . The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved subunits and is localized to cel - lular regions of dynamic actin ﬁlament assembly . J Cell Biol 138 : 375 – 384 . Welch MD , Iwamatsu A , Mitchison TJ . 1997b . Actin po - lymerization is induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes . Nature 385 : 265 – 269 . Welch MD , Mallavarapu A , Rosenblatt J , Mitchison TJ . 1997c . Actin dynamics in vivo . Curr Opin Cell Biol 9 : 54 – 61 . Williams AF , Barclay AN . 1988 . The immunoglobulin su - perfamily—domains for cell surface recognition . Annu Rev Immunol 6 : 381 – 405 . Williamson T , Gordon - Weeks PR , Schachner M , Taylor J . 1996 . Microtubule reorganization is obligatory for growth cone turning . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 15221 – 15226 . Wills Z , Bateman J , Korey CA , Comer A , Van Vactor D . 1999a . The tyrosine kinase Abl and its substrate enabled collaborate with the receptor phosphatase Dlar to control motor axon guidance . Neuron 22 : 301 – 312 . Wills Z , Marr L , Zinn K , Goodman CS , Van Vactor D . 1999b . Proﬁlin and the Abl tyrosine kinase are required for motor axon outgrowth in the Drosophila embryo . Neuron 22 : 291 – 299 . Wu DY , Wang LC , Mason CA , Goldberg DJ . 1996 . Asso - ciation of beta 1 integrin with phosphotyrosine in growth cone ﬁlopodia . J Neurosci 16 : 1470 – 1478 . Yamada KM , Spooner BS , Wessells NK . 1970 . Axon growth : roles of microﬁlaments and microtubules . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 66 : 1206 – 1212 . Yamada KM , Spooner BS , Wessells NK . 1971 . Ultrastruc - ture and function of growth cones and axons of cultured nerve cells . J Cell Biol 49 : 614 – 635 . Yin HL , Stossel TP . 1979 . Control of cytoplasmic actin gel - sol transformation by gelsolin , a calcium - dependent regulatory protein . Nature 281 : 583 – 586 . Substrate – Cytoskeletal Coupling and Growth Cone Motility 113