Fluorescence Fluctuation Spectroscopy Enables Quantitative Imaging of Single mRNAs in Living Cells Bin Wu , Jeffrey A . Chao , and Robert H . Singer * Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , New York ABSTRACT Imaging mRNA with single - molecule sensitivity in live cells has become an indispensable tool for quantitatively studying RNA biology . The MS2 system has been extensively used due to its unique simplicity and sensitivity . However , the levels of the coat protein needed for consistent labeling of mRNAs limits the sensitivity and quantitation of this technology . Here , we applied ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy to quantitatively characterize and enhance the MS2 system . Surpris - ingly , we found that a high ﬂuorescence background resulted from inefﬁcient dimerization of ﬂuorescent protein ( FP ) - labeled MS2 coat protein ( MCP ) . To mitigate this problem , we used a single - chain tandem dimer of MCP ( tdMCP ) that signiﬁcantly increased the uniformity and sensitivity of mRNA labeling . Furthermore , we characterized the PP7 coat protein and the binding to its respective RNA stem loop . We conclude that the PP7 system performs better for RNA labeling . Finally , we used these improvements to study endogenous b - actin mRNA , which has 24xMS2 binding sites inserted into the 3 0 untranslated region . The tdMCP - FP allowed uniform RNA labeling and provided quantitative measurements of endogenous mRNA concentration and diffusion . This work provides a foundation for quantitative spectroscopy and imaging of single mRNAs directly in live cells . INTRODUCTION Imaging mRNAs in single living cells allows the dynamics of mRNA transcription , transport , and localization to be studied with greater spatiotemporal resolution compared with traditional approaches . Several techniques have been developed to visualize mRNA with single transcript sensi - tivity in live cells ( 1 , 2 ) . One can directly inject or transfect ﬂuorescently labeled mRNA into cells that can be imaged with excellent signal / noise ratio ( SNR ) ( 3 , 4 ) . A drawback of this approach is that these RNAs are not synthesized and processed normally by the cell , and consequently may lack certain trans - acting protein factors that inﬂuence RNA metabolism . To image endogenous mRNA , in - vestigators have used different ﬂuorogenic probes , such as molecular beacons . These probes produce ﬂuorescence signal only when they hybridize to their target RNAs ( 5 ) . However , this technology is limited by complicated hybridization kinetics and the reduced stability of hybrid - ized mRNA . Recently , RNA aptamers that bind to small molecules that resemble GFP - like ﬂuorophores have been developed ( 6 ) . The small molecule becomes ﬂuorescent only when the reporter RNA containing the aptamer sequence binds to it . This is a promising technique to image RNA ; however , the sensitivity needs to be improved to detect single transcripts . In the last approach , an RNA - binding protein fused to a ﬂuorescent protein ( FP ) is co - expressed with a reporter mRNA containing the RNA sequence that the RNA - binding protein recognizes . The MS2 system is the ﬁrst and most widely used technique utilizing this strategy ( 7 ) . A drawback of this system , however , is the background ﬂuorescence generated from free coat proteins , which decreases the SNR and labeling efﬁciency . In this work , we developed a technology to address this problem by engineering coat proteins so that very low background levels and high SNR can be obtained . In the MS2 labeling method , a genetically encoded sequence derived from the bacteriophage MS2 is inserted into the gene of interest . The sequence folds into a unique stem - loop structure that forms the MS2 - binding site ( MBS ) for the MS2 coat protein ( MCP ) ( 8 ) . When cells that express the gene carrying MBS also express MCP fused to an FP ( MCP - FP ) , the mRNA of interest is ﬂuorescently labeled by MCP - FP . Because both the MCP - FP and the reporter mRNA are genetically encoded , it is possible to make stable cell lines or even transgenic animals . This tech - nique was ﬁrst employed to image ASH1 mRNA in yeast ( 7 ) . Since then it has been used to image transcription , trans - port , and localization of mRNA in various cell types and organisms ( 9 – 13 ) . Recently , a transgenic mouse model ( the MBS mouse ) was established in which the 24xMBS cassette is inserted into the 3 0 untranslated region ( UTR ) of the b - actin gene ( 15 ) . With the MBS mouse , it is possible to image an endogenous mRNA in isolated cells , tissue , or even a living animal . For example , visualization of the endogenous b - actin mRNA moving through the nuclear pore complex has been achieved in a cell line derived from the MBS mouse ( 11 ) . To image multiple mRNAs in the same cell , other RNA - binding proteins and their cognate RNAs have been engineered in a similar manner as the MS2 system ( 16 – 19 ) . PP7 bacteriophage coat protein binds to its own stem - loop RNA primer - binding site ( PBS ) with high afﬁnity ( K d ¼ 1 . 6 nM ( 18 ) ) but only weakly interacts with the MBS ( K d > 1 m M ) . Because both MCP Submitted January 27 , 2012 , and accepted for publication May 7 , 2012 . * Correspondence : robert . singer @ einstein . yu . edu Editor : Xiaowei Zhuang . (cid:1) 2012 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 12 / 06 / 2936 / 9 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 05 . 017 2936 Biophysical Journal Volume 102 June 2012 2936 – 2944 and PCP recognize unique RNA stem loops , this allows both systems to be used in the same cell to visualize distinct mRNA populations . Recently , the PP7 system was used to image real - time transcription dynamics in live yeast cells ( 20 ) . One of the limitations of MS2 - like systems is the high ﬂuorescent background due to the unbound MCP - FP signal . To detect single mRNA molecules , it is necessary to incorporate multiple binding sites into the mRNA to increase the signal of the mRNA over the background of MCP - FP . It was previously observed that not all MBSs are completely bound by MCP - FP ( 21 ) . In addition , it is often found that the mRNAs are not uniformly labeled in different cells , which complicates quantitative analysis . For example , to quantify the number of nascent transcripts at the transcription site , one must know the number of MCP - GFPs per mRNA to correctly calibrate the measure - ment . It is accepted that both MCP and PCP bind to their target RNA stem loops as dimers . However , the extent of dimerization of the CP - FP fusions in the cell is not known . Therefore , to fully utilize these labeling techniques to obtain quantitative information about mRNA dynamics in living cells , one must ensure that the dimerization of CP - FP is thoroughly calibrated and carefully optimized . In this work , we constructed single - chain tandem dimers of the MS2 and PP7 coat proteins ( termed tdMCP and tdPCP , respectively ) , which eliminated the additional dimerization step and allowed us to achieve uniform labeling and quantitative imaging of RNA with substan - tially increased SNR . We used ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy ( FFS ) to quantify the MS2 and PP7 labeling systems . FFS utilizes the ﬂuctuating ﬂuorescence signal when ﬂuorescently labeled molecules move through a subfemtoliter observa - tion volume , allowing various physical and biological systems to be studied at the single - molecule level . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) ( 22 – 24 ) , a well - known FFS technique , uses the autocorrelation function to measure concentration , diffusion , transport , and interactions both in vitro and in vivo . FCS distinguishes species based on their diffusion coefﬁcients , which ulti - mately depend on molecular weights ( 25 ) . The mRNA diffuses much more slowly than the free CP - FP , which allows the diffusion constant of mRNA to be speciﬁcally measured with FCS . Another important FFS tool is bright - ness analysis . Brightness characterizes the average ﬂuores - cence intensity of a single particle . Because brightness depends on the number of ﬂuorophores in a particle , it reveals the oligomerization state of a molecule ( 26 – 28 ) . For example , if two ﬂuorescently labeled monomers form a dimer , the brightness of the dimer will be twice that of the monomer ( 27 ) . Brightness analysis has been used to measure stoichiometry and binding curves of proteins directly in live cells ( 29 , 30 ) . The mRNA molecule , bound by multiple CP - FPs , has a brightness value much higher than that of free CP - FP . Therefore , both the brightness and the diffusion coefﬁcient can be used to resolve mRNA from the background of free CP - FPs . Time - integrated ﬂuo - rescence cumulant analysis ( TIFCA ) ( 31 ) , which was devel - oped to unify the brightness and diffusion coefﬁcient into a same analytical model , is an ideal tool for extracting quantitative information from the data . In this study , we ﬁrst used an FFS brightness analysis to measure the dimerization of both MCP - FP and PCP - FP . We then generated single - chain tandem dimers of both coat protein ( tdMCP and tdPCP ) that signiﬁcantly improved the labeling efﬁciency and uniformity . Subse - quently , we measured the copy number of the CP - FPs ( or tdCP - FPs ) on an mRNA and compared the MS2 and PP7 systems quantitatively . Finally , we demonstrated the biolog - ical value of this approach by applying FFS to measure the diffusion constants and concentration of endogenous b - actin mRNA . The concentration of b - actin transcripts in the nucleus during serum stimulation was measured quantitatively . MATERIALS AND METHODS FFS and data analysis The FFS experiments were performed on an in - house - built , dual - channel , two - photon ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation microscope . The instrument consists of an Olympus IX - 71 and a mode - locked Ti : Sapphire laser ( Chameleon Ultra ; Coherent , Santa Clara , CA ) . A 60 (cid:2) Plan - Apo oil immersion objective ( NA ¼ 1 . 4 ; Olympus , Center Valley , PA ) is used to focus the laser and collect the ﬂuorescence . The scattered laser light is eliminated by two short - pass ﬁlters ( ET680sp - 2p8 ; Chroma , Rockingham , VT ) . The ﬂuorescence is separated into two different detection channels with a dichroic mirror ( 565DCXR ; Chroma ) . The green channel is equipped with a band - pass emission ﬁlter ( FF01 - 525 / 50 - 01 ; Semrock , Rochester , NY ) to eliminate the reﬂected ﬂuorescence from red channel . Two avalanche photodiodes ( APD ) ( SPCM - AQR - 14 ; PerkinElmer , Waltham , MA ) detect photons in each channel . The output of the APD , which produces TTL pulses , is directly connected to a two - channel data acquisi - tion card ( FLEX02 ; Correlator . com ) . The recorded photon counts were stored and later analyzed with programs written in IDL ( ITT Exelis , McLean , VA ) . The normalized brightness b ( 27 ) is deﬁned as b ¼ l app / l EGFP . The sample apparent brightness l app is measured via generalized Mandel’s Q parameter analysis ( 32 ) . The brightness l EGFP is obtained in a calibration experiment by measuring cells transfected with enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) . For a mixture of different homo - oligomers , the normalized brightness depends on the dissociation constant and the degree of oligomer - ization . For a monomer / dimer equilibrium A 2 4 K d 2 A with dissociation constant K d , the normalized brightness b is b ¼ K d þ 8 A t (cid:3) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ K d ð K d þ 8 A t Þ p 4 A t ; ( 1 ) where A t is the total concentration of A , A t ¼ 2 A 2 þ A . In the FFS experi - ment , A t is readily measured by the total intensity divided by the monomer brightness . Therefore , the dissociation constant K d is determined by ﬁtting b as a function of A t . We performed a single - color TIFCA analysis as described previously ( 31 ) . Basically , we rebinned the raw photon counts to calculate the factorial Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2936 – 2944 FFS of mRNA 2937 cumulants for different sampling times . We then ﬁt the experimental cumu - lants to a theoretical model : k ½ n (cid:4) ð T Þ ¼ X i g n N i l ni B n ð T ; t di ; r Þ ; ( 2 ) where N i , l i , and t di are respectively the number of molecules , brightness , and diffusion time of the i th species . The function B n ( T ; t di , r ) is the n th order binning function as deﬁned previously ( 31 ) . The summation is over the number of species . The parameter g n is the n th order g - factors , and r is the squared beam waist ratio that describes the excitation laser proﬁle ( 31 ) . The autocorrelation curves were ﬁt to a simple diffusion model : G ð t Þ ¼ X i G0 i (cid:3) 1 þ t = t di (cid:4) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ t = r t di q ; ( 3 ) where the parameter G0 i ¼ g 2 f 2 i = N i . Note that G0 i depends not only on the number of molecules but also on the fractional intensities f i ¼ N i l i / S j N j l j . Without knowledge of brightness , the autocorrelation function is not able to recover the number of molecules . Thus , we used it only to obtain the diffusion time of molecules . Fluorescence imaging and analysis Images were taken with a 150 (cid:2) 1 . 45 NA oil immersion objective ( Olympus ) and 488 - nm excitation laser , and recorded with an EMCCD camera ( model DU897 BI ; Andor iXon , South Windsor , CT ) . The micro - scope was controlled with MetaMorph imaging software . A time - lapse movie of a single Z - plane was recorded with a 50 - ms exposure time . To count mRNA in a single plane , we used a spot detection algorithm based on a two - dimensional Gaussian mask as described previously ( 33 ) and implemented in MATLAB ( The MathWorks , Natick , MA ) . Plasmid construction To create single - chain tandem dimeric coat proteins , we used polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) to produce two coat protein gene sequences with appropriate restriction sites . The linker region between the two MCPs is ATCTACGCCATGGCTTCT , and that between the two PCPs is CGTGCGGATCCGCTAGCCTCC . A nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) and hemagglutinin ( HA ) tag were also added to the constructs . We created NLS - PCP - EGFP ( P000234 ) , NLS - tdPCP - EGFP ( P000233 ) , NLS - MCP - EGFP ( P000109 ) , and NLS - tdMCP - EGFP ( P000143 ) genes by PCR ( Fig . 1 A ) . The NLS sequence was added to sequester the coat protein in the nucleus and keep the unbound coat protein in the cytoplasm at a minimum . All coat protein constructs used in this work have an NLS signal , so the NLS is omitted for simplicity when we refer to a coat protein . We cloned these genes into a phage - ubc - RIG lentiviral backbone from which the DsRed - IRES - GFP fragments had been excised using NotI and ClaI . We also further modiﬁed the lentiviral backbone to replace the human ubiquitin C ( UBC ) promoter with the cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) promoter . Using PCR , we generated the sequence coding for cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( CFP ) . After the stop codon , we inserted 24xMBS ( 24xPBS ) sites . Finally , we combined phage - CMV backbone and CFP - 24xMBS ( P000169 ) ( or CFP - 24xPBS ( P000179 ) ) into a complete plasmid , yielding mRNA with a CFP open reading frame and 24xMBS ( or 24xPBS ) in the 3 0 UTR . Cell culture and sample preparation We used a mouse with 24xMBS sites knocked into the 3 0 UTR of the Actb gene ( MBS mouse ) and isolated the E14 mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast ( MEF ) line as described elsewhere ( 15 ) . To stably express MCP - EGFP and tdMCP - EGFP , we created recombinant lentiviral particles using the phage UBC plasmid ( described above ) and used them to infect the MBS - MEF . After several passages , the cells were sorted for positive EGFP ﬂuo - rescence by ﬂow cytometry . U2OS cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection . Both cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modi - ﬁed Eagle’s medium ( 10 - 013 ; Cellgro , Manassa , VA ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS , F4135 ; Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) and 1 % penicillin and streptomycin ( 15140 - 122 ; Invitrogen ) . Transient transfection was performed with Fugene 6 ( 11814443001 ; Roche , Indianap - olis , IN ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Cells were subcul - tured in a Delta - T coverglass - bottomed imaging dish ( Bioptechs , Butler , PA ) . Before measurements , the growth medium was removed and replaced with Leibovitz L15 medium ( 21083 - 027 ; Invitrogen , Grand Island , NY ) with 10 % FBS unless explicitly indicated . For MEFs , the dish was also coated with 10 m g / ml human ﬁbronectin ( F2006 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min before the cells were plated . During the course of the experiment , the Delta - T dish was kept at 37 (cid:5) C . A B CP GFP NLS CP GFP NLS CP C FIGURE 1 Normalized brightness of coat proteins . ( A ) Schematic of the coat protein constructs . ( B ) The brightness of CP - EGFP measured in U2OS cells is plotted as a function of CP concentration . From the data , it is clear that PCP - EGFP ( triangles ) dimerizes at a much lower concentration than MCP - EGFP ( diamonds ) does . The data were ﬁt to Eq . 1 to obtain the disso - ciation constant of the coat protein ( 410 nM for MCP - EGFP and < 20 nM for PCP - EGFP ) . ( C ) The normalized brightness of tdCP - EGFP stays at unity at different concentrations , indicating that the tandem dimers are behaving as monomers . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2936 – 2944 2938 Wu et al . RESULTS Brightness analysis of the CP - FP and tdCP - FP fusion proteins Previous studies showed that MCPs and PCPs bind to their target stem loops as dimers ( 18 , 34 , 35 ) . We used FFS bright - ness analysis to characterize the oligomerization state of MCP - FP and PCP - FP in living cells . We constructed coat proteins fused to EGFP that also contained an N - terminal NLS ( Fig . 1 A ) . The NLS was used to concentrate the free CP - FPs in the nucleus and thus achieve a higher SNR of mRNA in the cytoplasm . We expressed CP - EGFP in U2OS cells and conducted FFS measurements in the nucleus . The brightness of the sample was calculated via a generalized Mandel’s Q parameter analysis ( 32 ) . In Fig . 1 B , the normalized brightness values are plotted as a function of the concentration of CP - EGFP . Each point represents a measurement in a different cell . The normalized brightness b , determined by the ratio between the brightness of CP - EGFP and EGFP monomer ( 27 ) , provides a direct measure of the average oligomeric states of the labeled proteins . For instance , a normalized brightness of b ¼ 2 indicates that the protein is a dimer . When the concentration of the protein is varied , the normalized brightness will increase from 1 to 2 , depending on the proportions of the monomer and dimer . Therefore , a titration curve of bright - ness versus concentration gives rise to the apparent K d of the dimerization interaction . The normalized brightness of PCP in Fig . 1 B ( triangle ) lies between 1 and 2 and saturates at 2 at high concentrations . The titration curve indicates that the K d , app of PCP - EGFP is < 20 nM ( due to the lack of data at very low concentration , we extrapolated the data using Eq . 1 ; dashed line ) . Surprisingly , for the MCP ( Fig . 1 B , dia - mond ) , the situation is very different . MCP - EGFP reaches a dimer fraction at a much higher concentration than PCP - EGFP does , indicating that the former is a much weaker dimer . Fitting the data to Eq . 1 yields K d , app ¼ 410 nM , which is considerably weaker than the dimerization esti - mated by biochemical experiments ( 8 ) . Although biochem - ical experiments show similar K d - values for PCP and MCP in vitro , the live - cell FFS experiment shows that MCP - EGFP is a weaker dimer than PCP - EGFP . Further experi - ments showed that the NLS signal , the linker length between MCP and EGFP , and the identity of the FP do not affect the dimerization afﬁnity of MCP . The reason for the reduced dimerization afﬁnity for MCP - FP is still under investigation . Free CP - FPs that do not bind to mRNA increase the back - ground ﬂuorescence , so the concentration of CP should be maintained as low as possible . However , because only the dimeric CP can bind to the stem loop , it is imperative to have the CP concentration high enough to maintain sufﬁ - cient dimer concentration . This is particularly important for the MS2 system because our data suggest that signiﬁcant amounts of monomeric MCP - EGFP exist under most exper - imental conditions . In the crystal structures of both MCP and PCP dimers , the N - terminus of one protomer is in close vicinity to the C - terminus of the other protomer ( 18 , 35 ) . Due to this structural arrangement , a single - chain tandem dimer of the coat proteins ( tdMCP and tdPCP ) can be con - structed that enables an intramolecular dimer to be formed . The tdMCP has been shown to bind to the MBS with the same afﬁnity as the intermolecular MCP dimer , and has been used to image single molecules of RNA in bacteria ( 36 , 37 ) . Based upon these experiments , we generated tdMCP - EGFP and tdPCP - EGFP and determined that they both had a brightness of one ( Fig . 1 C ) , which was , as ex - pected , independent of concentration . The fact that tdCP - FP has a single brightness value is particularly advantageous for FFS brightness analysis , because the apparent brightness of CP - FP depends on its concentration . tdCP - FP - labeled mRNA has uniform brightness Quantitative ﬂuorescence imaging and spectroscopy require knowledge of the labeling efﬁciency of mRNA . Uniform labeling of the mRNA facilitates a quantitative interpreta - tion of experimental results . FFS offers a simple method to measure the number of CP - FPs bound to an mRNA by the normalized brightness of an mRNA . Usually the mRNA has multiple MBSs ( or PBSs ) and therefore binds to many CP - FPs . The brightness of the mRNA is much higher than that of the free CP - FP . Furthermore , the mRNA is signiﬁcantly larger than the free CP - FP and diffuses much more slowly . Therefore , one can distinguish them by both brightness and diffusion time . TIFCA ( 31 ) is ideal for such an analysis because it incorporates both brightness and diffusion time into the same analysis model . We constructed plasmids coding for CFP with 24xPBS or 24xMBS inserted after the stop codon in the 3 0 UTR ( Fig . 2 A ) . The plasmid was transiently transfected together with the appropriate CP - EGFP in U2OS cells . The experi - ment was done at a two - photon laser wavelength of 1010 nm so that the CFP would not be excited . To aid the focus of the laser in the cell , mCherry was also cotransfected . The ﬂuorescence was split into two channels by a dichroic mirror and detected by two APDs . We focused the two - photon laser spot at the mid - section in the perinuclear region of a cell by monitoring the red channel signal . The ﬂuores - cence intensity trace of the red channel and green channel are plotted in Fig . S1 A of the Supporting Material . From the ﬁgure , it is clear that the green ﬂuorescence intensity has a much higher level of ﬂuctuations than that of the red channel , emphasizing the value of the red channel for deﬁning the focal point of the laser . We analyzed the data in the green channel using TIFCA . A one - species model was not able to ﬁt the data , which was expected because of the presence of two components ( the mRNA and the free CP - FPs ) . We ﬁt the data with a two - species model , which more accurately described the data . An example of the ﬁt is Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2936 – 2944 FFS of mRNA 2939 presented in Fig . S1 B . From this ﬁt , we measured the bright - ness of the mRNA . In Fig . 2 B , we plot the normalized bright - ness of the CFP - 24xPBS mRNA labeled by tdPCP - EGFP as a function of total EGFP concentration . Each symbol repre - sents a measurement of a single cell . Even though there were different concentrations of mRNA and tdPCP among the cells , the brightness and the number of coat proteins that bound to the mRNA were relatively constant . The average number of tdPCP - EGFP was 23 5 5 , that is , within error , equal to the expected maximum occupancy of the 24xPBS . We also measured the CFP - 24xPBS mRNA co - transfected with PCP - EGFP . The normalized molecular brightness of mRNA is shown in Fig . 2 C . At high concentra - tions of PCP - EGFP , the normalized brightness saturated at 49 5 9 . This is also equal to the expected maximum occu - pancy number , 48 ( represented as the dash - dotted line ) , because each stem loop binds to a dimer of PCP - EGFP . In addition , we notice that the mRNA brightness was reduced at low concentrations of PCP - EGFP , where the dimer was not sufﬁcient to saturate all stem loops on the mRNA . We performed the same experiment using the MS2 system . We cotransfected the CFP - 24xMBS mRNA with tdMCP - EGFP and mCherry . The measured mRNA bright - ness is shown in Fig . 2 D . It is apparent that the normalized brightness stays constant , but at a lower value than the ex - pected number of 24 . In fact , the average is only 13 5 2 ( shown as dotted lines ) . Similarly , we cotransfected the CFP - 24xMBS mRNA and MCP - EGFP together to assess the binding of MCP dimer to mRNA . Not surprisingly , the brightness of the MCP - EGFP - labeled mRNA depended on the concentration of MCP - FP , as shown in Fig . 2 E . The brightness increased with the concentration of MCP - GFP . At the saturation level , the average brightness of mRNA is 26 5 3 , twice that of tdMCP - EGFP , as expected . It was previously reported that the average number of MCP - EGFPs on an mRNA that contains 24xMBS is 33 ( 21 ) , also indi - cating an incomplete occupancy . The reason for incomplete binding is further discussed below , but a direct consequence of differences in CP - FP occupancy is that the mRNAs labeled using the PP7 system were brighter , and hence had better SNR than those labeled with the MS2 system in live - cell imaging . Imaging endogenous b - actin mRNA As mentioned above , we constructed an MBS mouse in which the 3 0 UTR of b - actin gene has 24xMBS knocked in ( 15 ) . It is possible to image the endogenous b - actin in any cell type from this mouse . We isolated E14 mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MBS - MEF ) and made a stable MEF cell line with SV40 T antigen ( 15 ) . To compare the performance of tdMCP with that of MCP , we made MBS - MEF cell lines that stably express tdMCP - EGFP and MCP - EGFP , respectively , via lentiviral infection , as described in Materials and Methods . The cells were then imaged on a ﬂuorescence microscope . As shown in B C D E A A . . . A A CFP A 24xPBS , tdPCP 24xPBS , PCP 24xMBS , tdMCP 24xMBS , MCP FIGURE 2 Normalized brightness of mRNA . ( A ) mRNA constructs used in the experiment . The mRNAs have a CFP open reading frame . After the stop codon , 24xPBS or 24xMBS is inserted into the 3 0 UTR . ( B ) CFP - 24xPBS is cotransfected with tdPCP - EGFP and mCherry in U2OS cells and measured for 3 min at a wavelength of 1010 nm . The two - species ﬁt of the data reports the bright - ness of the mRNA . The normalized mRNA bright - ness , which measures the number of EGFPs on the mRNA , is plotted as a function of the total concen - tration of EGFP , determined by dividing the total ﬂuorescence intensity by the EGFP brightness . The data indicate that the average number of EGFP on mRNA is 23 5 5 , implying that 24 PBS are fully occupied . ( C ) The same experiments were performed as in B except that tdPCP - EGFP was substituted by PCP - EGFP . The normalized brightness of mRNA saturates at 48 at high PCP concentration , but at low concentration the PP7 stem loops are not fully occupied . ( D and E ) The same experiments were performed on CFP - 24xMBS cotransfected with tdMCP - EGFP ( D ) or MCP - EGFP ( E ) . The normalized brightness of mRNA does not change with concentration for tdMCP - EGFP ( the average is 13 5 2 ) , but it is approximately half of the expected full occupation number , 24 . For MCP - EGFP , the mRNA brightness increases with the concentration of MCP and satu - rates at 26 5 3 . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2936 – 2944 2940 Wu et al . Fig . 3 A , MCP - EGFP did not label the cells uniformly . The cell in the upper - left corner had higher ﬂuorescence inten - sity in the nucleus and the mRNA was brightly labeled . However , the mRNAs at the lower right of the image were only faintly labeled . The densities of labeled mRNA were also signiﬁcantly different between the two cells . This is clearly demonstrated in Movie S1 . On the other hand , the cell labeled with tdMCP - EGFP had more uniform labeling , as shown in Fig . 3 B and Movie S2 . Although the ﬂuores - cence intensity in the nucleus was similar to that of the dimmer cell in Fig . 3 A , the mRNA was brightly labeled . In fact , in some cells , the tdMCP - EGFP concentration was so low that the nuclei looked dark , but the mRNAs were still brightly labeled . To evaluate the labeling efﬁciency of MCP and tdMCP quantitatively , we counted the number of b - actin mRNAs in the cytoplasm . We used an automated computer program as described in Materials and Methods ( Airlocal - ize ) to localize the diffraction - limited ﬂuorescence spots . The cytoplasm was segmented manually , and spots inside the cytoplasmic area were counted as mRNAs . The average ﬂuorescence intensity inside the nucleus was measured to indicate the expression level of the coat proteins . As shown in Fig . 3 C , the detected mRNA number ( normalized by the cytoplasm size ) stayed constant for various expression levels of tdMCP ( triangle ) , whereas for MCP ( diamond ) it depended on the concentration of the coat protein in the nucleus . Only at high concentration did it saturate at the level detected by tdMCP . FFS of endogenous b - actin mRNA Finally , we applied FFS to study endogenous b - actin mRNA in MBS - MEF . We stably expressed tdMCP - EGFP in the MBS - MEF as described in the Materials and Methods section and in ( 15 ) . The two - photon laser was focused in the cytoplasm near the nucleus and measured for 3 min . An example of a ﬂuorescence intensity trace is plotted in Fig . S2 A . The autocorrelation function was calculated from the data and ﬁt with a two - species diffusion model ( Fig . S2 B ) . From the ﬁt , we obtained two diffusion times . One is close to that of free tdMCP - EGFP and the other is much longer ( 100 5 30 ms ) , which is identiﬁed as the mRNA . From the diffusion time , we can infer the diffusion constant based on the calibration of the laser beam waist . A scatter plot of the diffusion constant of mRNA in the cytoplasm is shown in Fig . 4 A . The diffusion constants of mRNA ranged from 0 . 15 to 0 . 74 m m 2 / s , with an average of 0 . 35 m m 2 / s . The same data were also subjected to TIFCA ﬁtting , which provided the molecular brightness and the concentration of mRNA . The histogram of mRNA concen - tration is plotted in Fig . 4 B . The b - actin mRNA concentra - tion ranged from 1 to 30 nM , with an average of 11 nM . The transcription of b - actin responds to serum starvation and stimulation ( 38 ) , and the transcription dynamics can be followed by ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization to monitor the A B C FIGURE 3 MBS - MEF cells stably expressing ( A ) MCP - EGFP or ( B ) tdMCP - EGFP are imaged on an epiﬂuorescence microscope with an excita - tionwavelengthof 488 nm . To assistthe comparison , both imagesare scaled with the same black / white levels . ( A ) The signal of MCP - EGFP - labeled mRNA depends on the concentration of MCP . The upper - left cell has higher ﬂuorescence intensity in the nucleus and more detectable mRNA than the lower - right cell . These two cells are in the same imaging ﬁeld . ( B ) mRNA is uniformly labeled with tdMCP - EGFP . The cell has similar ﬂuorescence intensity in the nucleus as the dimmer cell in panel A , but mRNA molecules are brightly and uniformly labeled . The scale bar is 5 m m . ( C ) The detected mRNAnumberinthecytoplasm ( normalizedbythesizeofthecytoplasm ) is plotted as a function of ﬂuorescence intensity in the nucleus . Each symbol is a measurement of a single cell . To facilitate comparison , the same criterion for spot detection was used for all images . With tdMCP labeling , the de - tected mRNA number does not depend on the expression level of tdMCP ( triangles ) . However , for MCP - labeled mRNA ( diamonds ) , the detected mRNAs increase with the concentration of MCP and only reach the tdMCP - detected mRNA level at high concentration . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2936 – 2944 FFS of mRNA 2941 transcript level . We studied the serum stimulation kinetics by measuring mRNA concentration in the nucleus with FFS . The MBS - MEF cells were serum - starved overnight before they were subjected to 20 % serum . We then took FFS measurements in the nucleus for 30 min . We divided the data into 3 - min segments and ﬁt all segments globally by linking the brightness parameters together while allow - ing the concentration of species to vary . As a result , the concentration of mRNA during the serum stimulation was obtained . The concentration is plotted in Fig . 4 C . From the plot , there is essentially no mRNA in the nucleus due to the serum starvation . The concentration of mRNA increases after serum stimulation and reaches a maximum after 10 min and then decreases slowly to a steady - state value . There is a large variation among the cells in terms of kinetic response . In Fig . 4 A , we show the scatter plot of the diffusion constant of mRNA in the nucleus compared with that in the cytoplasm . The diffusion constant is larger in the nucleus than in the cytoplasm , possibly due to factors ( e . g . , ribosomes ) binding to the mRNA . The average diffu - sion constant in the nucleus is 0 . 72 m m 2 / s . DISCUSSION When imaging mRNA with single - transcript sensitivity , the SNR is the limiting factor . The MS2 technology ampliﬁes the signal of mRNA by multimerizing the MS2 - binding sites and increasing the number of FPs bound to an individual mRNA . Another way to increase the SNR is to reduce the background . The background , besides the cellular autoﬂuor - escence , results from the free unbound CP - FP . It is known that coat proteins must dimerize before they can bind to their respective RNA stem loops . At a certain concentration of coat protein , the fraction of dimer depends on the disso - ciation constant K d . By creating an intramolecular dimer , we eliminate the intermolecular dimerization process and enable all tdCPs to bind directly to their targets . As a result , we can express the tdCP - FP at low concentrations and still label the mRNA efﬁciently . For example , if the total MCP - FP concentration is 50 nM , the concentration of the dimer would be 4 nM , assuming that the dimerization K d ¼ 410 nM . If we further assume that the dimer binds to the stem loop with K d ¼ 5 nM in cells ( 39 ) , only 40 % of the stem loops will be occupied and the SNR of mRNA will be 1 . 4 . However , if a cell has 50 nM tdMCP - FP , 90 % of the stem loops will be labeled and the SNR of mRNA will be 3 . If we have two EGFPs linked to the tandem dimer ( tdMCP - tdFP ) , the SNR will increase to 4 . 2 , a threefold increase . Experimentally , if the SNR of a particle is too low , it will not be detected . As demonstrated in Fig . 3 C , A C B 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 5 10 15 20 25 30 H i s t og r a m mRNA concentration ( nM ) Compartment D i ff u s i on c on s t a n t µ m 2 / s cytoplasm nucleus 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Cytoplasm m RNA c on ce n t r a t i on 0 10 20 30 40 FIGURE 4 FFS measurements of endogenous b - actin mRNA . ( A ) Diffu - sion constant of b - actin mRNA in the cytoplasm and nucleus . MBS - MEF was infected with lentivirus to stably express tdMCP - EGFP . First , the MBS - MEF cell was measured in cytoplasm for 3 min . The autocorrelation function was ﬁt with a two - species diffusion model ( Eq . 3 ; see Fig . S2 for ﬁt ) and the mRNA diffusion constant was measured . Second , to measure the diffusion property of mRNA in the nucleus , MBS - MEF cells were stimu - lated with 20 % serum after serum starvation overnight . FFS measurements were conducted in the nucleus immediately after serum stimulation . The photon counting traces were split into 5 - min segments . The autocorrelation curves were calculated from the segments and ﬁt to Eq . 3 to obtain the diffu - sion constant of mRNA . The scatter plot of the diffusion constants of b - actin mRNA is shown . In the cytoplasm , the diffusion constant of b - actin mRNA ranges from 0 . 15 to 0 . 74 m m 2 / s , with an average of 0 . 35 m m 2 / s . The diffusion constant of mRNA in the nucleus is larger than in cytoplasm , with an average of 0 . 72 m m 2 / s . ( B ) Concentration of b - actin in cytoplasm . The MBS - MEF cell was measured for 3 min in cytoplasm . The data are ﬁt by a two - species TIFCA model , which provides the concentration of b - actin mRNA . The histogram of mRNA concentration is plotted . In the inset , the scatterplot of the concentration is also shown . The concentration ranges from 1 to 30 nM , with an average of 11 nM . ( C ) The MBS - MEF was serum - stimulated as described for panel A . The data were subjected to a two - species TIFCA ﬁt , and the concentration of b - actin mRNA is plotted as a function of time . Each dotted curve represents a measurement of a single cell . The average response of these cells is plotted as solid lines . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2936 – 2944 2942 Wu et al . with tdMCP - FP labeling , the total number of mRNAs de - tected does not depend on the expression of coat proteins . However , MCP - FP - labeled mRNA depends on the concen - tration of coat proteins . Therefore , tdCP is more suitable for quantitative counting experiments . Furthermore , tdCP readily saturated the binding sites on an mRNA and resulted in a uniform mRNA brightness , as demonstrated in Fig . 2 . This is particularly advantageous for quantifying the number of transcripts at the transcription site . Combining two coat proteins into a single peptide provides additional advantages . For example , in some appli - cations the coat protein is used to tether the target protein onto RNA ( 40 ) . The dimerization of coat protein forces the dimerization of the target protein , which might introduce undesirable side effects . The pseudo tandem dimer is a single peptide and effectively behaves as a monomer , which will not cause an undesired oligomerization of the fusion protein . There is , however , a potential drawback of the tandem dimer . Because each tandem dimer is fused to one FP , the maximum number of FPs labeling one mRNA will be reduced to half that of the true dimer . Nevertheless , there is an easy solution for this problem : one can fuse two FPs to the tandem dimer . Preliminary data show that the construct tdMCP - tdEGFP labels mRNA as efﬁciently as tdMCP - EGFP , but with the additional advantage of being brighter . Quantitative and sensitive ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spec - troscopy combined with speciﬁc labeling of mRNA provides unique information that is unattainable otherwise . By performing an FFS brightness analysis , we determined the number of CP dimers on the mRNA . For mRNA labeled with 24xPBS , we recovered the expected maximum occupancy number for both tdPCP and PCP . Previously , brightness has been used to measure unknown supramolec - ular complexes , such as the copy number of the coat protein in viral - like particles ( 41 ) . Our results provide the ﬁrst measurement , to our knowledge , of experimentally controlled copy number , which further establishes the valid - ity of the brightness analysis for supramolecular complexes . For mRNA labeled with 24xMBS , our data show that the maximum occupancy number is far below 24 . This is consistent with the ﬂuorescence imaging data . The PP7 - labeled mRNA is much brighter and has a better SNR than MS2 mRNA . We constructed different MBS constructs by varying the stem length and the linker between the stem loops . The occupation numbers of these mRNAs did not change substantially within experimental error . We applied FFS to study endogenous b - actin mRNA . As a result , the concentration of b - actin mRNA was measured to be ~ 10 nM and varied between 1 and 30 nM . Another metric that we are able to determine is the diffusion constant in both cytoplasm and nucleoplasm . The average value of the diffusion constant in cytoplasm and nucleoplasm is 0 . 35 m m 2 / s and 0 . 72 m m 2 / s , respectively . Previous studies obtained mRNA diffusion constants between 0 . 04 m m 2 / s ( 42 ) and 1 . 3 m m 2 / s ( 11 ) in nucleoplasm by single - particle tracking , depending on the exposure time and tracking algo - rithm used . FCS effectively measures an average diffusion constant of many mRNAs and is closer to the recent measurements obtained with single - particle tracking ( 11 ) . To further investigate the diffusion property of mRNA in the cytoplasm , we constructed mRNAs with different lengths , as shown in Fig . S3 A . All three mRNAs have the same coding region of CFP . In the 3 0 UTR , 24xPP7 , 24xPP7 - 24xMS2 , or 6xPP7 were inserted . Each of these mRNAs was expressed in U2OS cells together with tdPCP - EGFP . The diffusion constants of the mRNAs were measured by FCS and plotted in Fig . S3 B . Although CFP - 24xPP7 - 24xMS2 has 1000 more nucleotides than CFP - 24xPP7 , their diffusion times are the same within experimental error . The diffusion constant of CFP - 6xPP7 is slightly larger than that of CFP - 24xPP7 . To summarize , we have established methods for obtain - ing absolute measurements of speciﬁcally labeled endoge - nous and exogenous mRNAs using FFS . We created a single - chain tandem coat protein dimer that labels mRNA uniformly with increased SNR . Such a careful anal - ysis of the kinetics of the two aptamers binding to their respective coat proteins is a requisite for developing a two - color intra - or intermolecular labeling scheme for RNA . This will prove to be an important technology for measuring the single - molecule kinetics of mRNA metabo - lism , including synthesis , processing , export , translation , and degradation . Another powerful extension of this study is dual - color FFS . Once we have the ability to label an RNA - binding protein of interest with a different color , dual - color FFS promises to provide information about the interaction between protein and mRNA in precise cellular locations . SUPPORTING MATERIAL Three ﬁgures and two movies are available at http : / / www . biophysj . org / biophysj / supplemental / S0006 - 3495 ( 12 ) 00570 - X . We thank Timothe´e Lionnet for sharing the MATLAB program ( Airlocal - ize ) for image analysis , and Xiuhua Meng for cloning some of the plasmids . This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( GM84364 and GM86217 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Tyagi , S . 2009 . Imaging intracellular RNA distribution and dynamics in living cells . Nat . Methods . 6 : 331 – 338 . 2 . Rodriguez , A . J . , J . Condeelis , . , J . B . Dictenberg . 2007 . Imaging mRNA movement from transcription sites to translation sites . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 : 202 – 208 . 3 . Cha , B . J . , B . S . Koppetsch , and W . E . Theurkauf . 2001 . In vivo analysis of Drosophila bicoid mRNA localization reveals a novel microtubule - dependent axis speciﬁcation pathway . Cell . 106 : 35 – 46 . 4 . Ainger , K . , D . Avossa , . , J . H . Carson . 1993 . Transport and localiza - tion of exogenous myelin basic protein mRNA microinjected into oligodendrocytes . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 431 – 441 . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2936 – 2944 FFS of mRNA 2943 5 . Bratu , D . P . , B . J . Cha , . , S . Tyagi . 2003 . Visualizing the distribution and transport of mRNAs in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 13308 – 13313 . 6 . Paige , J . S . , K . Y . Wu , and S . R . Jaffrey . 2011 . RNA mimics of green ﬂuorescent protein . Science . 333 : 642 – 646 . 7 . Bertrand , E . , P . Chartrand , . , R . M . Long . 1998 . Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol . Cell . 2 : 437 – 445 . 8 . Lim , F . , M . Spingola , and D . S . Peabody . 1994 . Altering the RNA binding speciﬁcity of a translational repressor . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 9006 – 9010 . 9 . Zimyanin , V . L . , K . Belaya , . , D . St Johnston . 2008 . In vivo imaging of oskar mRNA transport reveals the mechanism of posterior localiza - tion . Cell . 134 : 843 – 853 . 10 . Dynes , J . L . , and O . Steward . 2007 . Dynamics of bidirectional transport of Arc mRNA in neuronal dendrites . J . Comp . Neurol . 500 : 433 – 447 . 11 . Gru¨nwald , D . , and R . H . Singer . 2010 . In vivo imaging of labelled endogenous b - actin mRNA during nucleocytoplasmic transport . Nature . 467 : 604 – 607 . 12 . Chubb , J . R . , T . Trcek , . , R . H . Singer . 2006 . Transcriptional pulsing of a developmental gene . Curr . Biol . 16 : 1018 – 1025 . 13 . Golding , I . , J . Paulsson , . , E . C . Cox . 2005 . Real - time kinetics of gene activity in individual bacteria . Cell . 123 : 1025 – 1036 . 14 . Reference deleted in proof . 15 . Lionnet , T . , K . Czaplinski , . , R . H . Singer . 2011 . A transgenic mouse for in vivo detection of endogenous labeled mRNA . Nat . Methods . 8 : 165 – 170 . 16 . Brodsky , A . S . , and P . A . Silver . 2000 . Pre - mRNA processing factors are required for nuclear export . RNA . 6 : 1737 – 1749 . 17 . Lange , S . , Y . Katayama , . , R . P . Jansen . 2008 . Simultaneous transport of different localized mRNA species revealed by live - cell imaging . Trafﬁc . 9 : 1256 – 1267 . 18 . Chao , J . A . , Y . Patskovsky , . , R . H . Singer . 2008 . Structural basis for the coevolution of a viral RNA - protein complex . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 : 103 – 105 . 19 . Daigle , N . , and J . Ellenberg . 2007 . l N - GFP : an RNA reporter system for live - cell imaging . Nat . Methods . 4 : 633 – 636 . 20 . Larson , D . R . , D . Zenklusen , . , R . H . Singer . 2011 . Real - time obser - vation of transcription initiation and elongation on an endogenous yeast gene . Science . 332 : 475 – 478 . 21 . Fusco , D . , N . Accornero , . , E . Bertrand . 2003 . Single mRNA molecules demonstrate probabilistic movement in living mammalian cells . Curr . Biol . 13 : 161 – 167 . 22 . Magde , D . , E . Elson , and W . W . Webb . 1972 . Thermodynamics ﬂuctu - ations in a reacting system : measurement by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . Phys . Rev . Lett . 29 : 705 – 708 . 23 . Berland , K . M . , P . T . So , and E . Gratton . 1995 . Two - photon ﬂuores - cence correlation spectroscopy : method and application to the intracel - lular environment . Biophys . J . 68 : 694 – 701 . 24 . Dittrich , P . , F . Malvezzi - Campeggi , . , P . Schwille . 2001 . Accessing molecular dynamics in cells by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . Biol . Chem . 382 : 491 – 494 . 25 . Meseth , U . , T . Wohland , . , H . Vogel . 1999 . Resolution of ﬂuorescence correlation measurements . Biophys . J . 76 : 1619 – 1631 . 26 . Digman , M . A . , P . W . Wiseman , . , E . Gratton . 2009 . Stoichiometry of molecular complexes at adhesions in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 106 : 2170 – 2175 . 27 . Chen , Y . , L . N . Wei , and J . D . Mu¨ller . 2003 . Probing protein oligomer - ization in living cells with ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 15492 – 15497 . 28 . Saffarian , S . , Y . Li , . , L . J . Pike . 2007 . Oligomerization of the EGF receptor investigated by live cell ﬂuorescence intensity distribution analysis . Biophys . J . 93 : 1021 – 1031 . 29 . Wu , B . , Y . Chen , and J . D . Mu¨ller . 2010 . Heterospecies partition anal - ysis reveals binding curve and stoichiometry of protein interactions in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 107 : 4117 – 4122 . 30 . Chen , Y . , and J . D . Mu¨ller . 2007 . Determining the stoichiometry of protein heterocomplexes in living cells with ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 3147 – 3152 . 31 . Wu , B . , and J . D . Mu¨ller . 2005 . Time - integrated ﬂuorescence cumulant analysis in ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 89 : 2721 – 2735 . 32 . Sanchez - Andres , A . , Y . Chen , and J . D . Mu¨ller . 2005 . Molecular bright - ness determined from a generalized form of Mandel’s Q - parameter . Biophys . J . 89 : 3531 – 3547 . 33 . Thompson , R . E . , D . R . Larson , and W . W . Webb . 2002 . Precise nanometer localization analysis for individual ﬂuorescent probes . Biophys . J . 82 : 2775 – 2783 . 34 . Valega˚rd , K . , L . Liljas , . , T . Unge . 1990 . The three - dimensional struc - ture of the bacterial virus MS2 . Nature . 345 : 36 – 41 . 35 . Ni , C . Z . , R . Syed , . , K . R . Ely . 1995 . Crystal structure of the MS2 coat protein dimer : implications for RNA binding and virus assembly . Structure . 3 : 255 – 263 . 36 . Peabody , D . S . , and F . Lim . 1996 . Complementation of RNA binding site mutations in MS2 coat protein heterodimers . Nucleic Acids Res . 24 : 2352 – 2359 . 37 . Golding , I . , and E . C . Cox . 2004 . RNA dynamics in live Escherichia coli cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 11310 – 11315 . 38 . Levsky , J . M . , S . M . Shenoy , . , R . H . Singer . 2002 . Single - cell gene expression proﬁling . Science . 297 : 836 – 840 . 39 . Schneider , D . , C . Tuerk , and L . Gold . 1992 . Selection of high afﬁnity RNA ligands to the bacteriophage R17 coat protein . J . Mol . Biol . 228 : 862 – 869 . 40 . Rackham , O . , and C . M . Brown . 2004 . Visualization of RNA - protein interactions in living cells : FMRP and IMP1 interact on mRNAs . EMBO J . 23 : 3346 – 3355 . 41 . Chen , Y . , B . Wu , . , J . D . Mueller . 2009 . Fluorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy on viral - like particles reveals variable gag stoichiometry . Biophys . J . 96 : 1961 – 1969 . 42 . Shav - Tal , Y . , X . Darzacq , . , R . H . Singer . 2004 . Dynamics of single mRNPs in nuclei of living cells . Science . 304 : 1797 – 1800 . Biophysical Journal 102 ( 12 ) 2936 – 2944 2944 Wu et al .