Vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes Kristina Popova Rachael Garrett Claudia Núñez - Pacheco kpopova @ kth . se rachaelg @ kth . se claudia2 @ kth . se Media Technology and Interaction Media Technology and Interaction Media Technology and Interaction Design , KTH Royal Institute of Design , KTH Royal Institute of Design , KTH Royal Institute of Technology Technology Technology Stockholm , Sweden Stockholm , Sweden Stockholm , Sweden Airi Lampinen Kristina Höök airi @ dsv . su . se khook @ kth . se Department of Computer and Systems Media Technology and Interaction Sciences , Stockholm University Design , KTH Royal Institute of Stockholm , Sweden Technology Stockholm , Sweden ABSTRACT We articulate vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes and discuss the conditions of its emergence . We argue that purposeful vulnerability – an act of taking risk , exposing oneself , and resigning part of one’s autonomy – is a necessary although often neglected part of design , and specifcally soma design , which builds on felt experience and stimulates designers to engage with the non - habitual by challenging norms , habitual movements , and social interactions . With the help of ethnography , video analysis , and micro - phenomenological interviews , we document an early design exploration around drones , describing how vulnerability is accomplished in collaboration between members of the design team and the design materials . We ( 1 ) defne vulnerability as an active ethical stance ; ( 2 ) make vulnerability visible as a necessary but often neglected part of an exploratory design process ; and ( 3 ) discuss the conditions of its emergence , demonstrating the importance of deliberating ethics within the design process . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Interaction design theory , concepts and paradigms . KEYWORDS vulnerability , soma design , ethics , drones ACM Reference Format : Kristina Popova , Rachael Garrett , Claudia Núñez - Pacheco , Airi Lampinen , and Kristina Höök . 2022 . Vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501994 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9157 - 3 / 22 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501994 1 INTRODUCTION Physical , emotional , or political vulnerability in engagement with technology is rarely regarded as something positive . Weaknesses in cyber - security , exposing research participants to harm , and the misuse or exploitation of technologies [ 29 , 32 ] are all examples of vulnerabilities that need to be mitigated , generally through en - hanced security measures , ethical research guidelines , or legislation governing the proper use of technology . A similar argument can be made about the design process that leads to novel technolo - gies – whether aimed for ‘serious’ realms or mainly focused on enjoyment , designers are rarely encouraged to put themselves in a vulnerable position . Yet , recent work by Balaam and colleagues shows how user experience designers in academia are vulnerable and exposed to emotional pressures that often go unmentioned and unmitigated [ 2 ] . Balaam and colleagues call for researchers to share the emotional work undertaken during research in formalised discussions – a call we are responding to here . We bring the im - portance of purposeful vulnerability into the discussion . We argue that vulnerability – understood as an act of taking risk , exposing oneself and resigning part of one’s autonomy in a design process – is a necessary condition for interaction design . To build and ground our theoretical argument , we address the role of vulnerability and the conditions of its emergence by analysing and refecting upon a design process around human - drone interaction . Our work is situated in soma design [ 24 ] , an approach to design that builds on a deep , authentic engagement with both ourselves and our technologies . A level of vulnerability is fundamental to soma design’s generativity . This is refected in the use of frst - person engagements [ 25 ] , exposing our inner thoughts and feelings to scrutiny from each other and the academic community ; using our bodies to engage with new technologies and design materials [ 12 ] , thereby opening ourselves up to physical vulnerability ; as well as seeking non - habitual experiences [ 64 , 68 ] by putting ourselves in uncomfortable or unknown contexts . As a methodological re - quirement , connecting the felt and the refective , soma design also calls for a systematic and nuanced articulation and documentation of our inner experiences in order to infuence our design outcomes [ 24 ] and to ensure rigour throughout the process [ 57 ] . To undertake a soma design process requires designers to be vulnerable but , in CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Popova , et al . this context , vulnerability is an active ethical position . We engage in the design process , not as passive human bodies endangered by potentially harmful technologies , but as " living , sentient , pur - posive” [ 54 ] subjectivities , actively shaping both vulnerability and risk alongside technology . The primary contribution of this paper is theoretical , but we illustrate our points by presenting an empirical analysis of a soma design process aiming to create novel interaction possibilities be - tween drones and their pilots . ( We do not go into the details of human - drone interaction research , such as [ 36 , 71 ] , or the prob - lematic history of drone technology [ 6 , 59 ] , as our primary goal here is to concentrate on the details of the design process and its relation to purposeful vulnerability ) . Using a combination of ethnog - raphy , video analysis and micro - phenomenological interviews [ 4 ] , we trace the development of our design explorations and discuss the fundamental role vulnerability plays at diferent stages of the process ; from early playful design explorations ; to an accidental , but fruitful , breakdown involving a collision with a drone ; to focused collaborations seeking novel experiences and devising novel inter - action possibilities , such as controlling a drone through singing together . The analytical section of the paper presents the course of the design process through three ethnographic vignettes , illus - trating signifcant moments of our explorations . Each of the three fragments adds to framing how vulnerability is enacted . The frst clarifes our understanding of purposeful vulnerability and demon - strates how it is accomplished in the interaction with technology . The second shows how breakdowns can be fruitful for design and exploration of what we will frame as felt ethics . The third focuses on interactional work 1 we perform to cultivate vulnerability during our design sessions . With our analysis , we advocate to expand the discussion of vulnerability in interaction design and , more broadly , in our re - lationships with technology . Rather than discussing vulnerability from the perspective of exposing others to harm , we address how one’s own vulnerability can be cultivated in the design process . First , we show that purposeful vulnerability , addressing our phys - ical , emotional , refective , social selves as a whole is a necessary pre - condition for design work aimed at exploring non - habitual behaviours and experiences . Even though the state of vulnerability is not specifc to soma design , the non - habitual and body - centered process of soma design foregrounds vulnerability as an active ethi - cal stance , and as the outcome of interactional work that designers purposefully engage in . Second , we demonstrate the quite tangible risks involved in using our bodies to engage with new technologies – our sociodigital materials [ 24 ] – as well as the work and care that are required in a design team after a breakdown or failure takes place . Breakdowns , however , can open up a space for negoti - ating ethics and create a possibility to alternate our habitual ethical responses . Thus , they should not necessarily always be avoided . Third , we illustrate how to cultivate the vulnerability inherent in design methods that purposely seek non - habitual action or novel experiences as resources for design work by staging conditions that are favorable for its emergence . As we will argue , it is not until we break with the habitual and normative using our whole somas , that 1 Interactional work here refers to the work we perform to coordinate even simplest collaborative activities , such as walking together or taking turns while talking . ethical choices deeply ingrained within us reveal themselves – they become felt experiences , as a crucial complement to intellectual discussion of risks . 2 RELATED WORK Let us start by introducing soma design . We will then move on to describe how vulnerability has been discussed in the literature and how it concerns not only our bodily integrity , but how it is also enacted between us – intercorporeally – and between us and the environment . After that , we provide a brief account of the ethical foundations of soma design to highlight the often - neglected role of vulnerability in developing ethical sensibilities . 2 . 1 Soma design Our work is situated within soma design [ 24 ] , rooted in theories of human morphology and movement [ 51 , 52 ] and the philoso - phy of somaesthetics [ 53 , 54 ] . The term ‘soma’ encompasses our non - dualistic self – subjectivity , body , emotion – as one whole . ‘Aesthetics’ refers to how we experience and engage with the world around us . As a pragmatist philosophy , somaesthetics advocates for a practical , analytical , and pragmatic approach toward bodily cultivation to improve our ‘tool of tools’ , as Shusterman frames our bodies , for acting in and experiencing the world [ 54 ] . These concepts have deeply informed soma design as a practice . Starting with movement as the foundation of experience [ 52 ] , soma design encourages designers to pursue a bodily , felt engagement with their design process and materials , to better understand values , ethics , meaning - making processes , and ways of engaging with the world [ 24 ] . It answers to the evolving landscape of ubiquitous and wear - able technologies , biosensors and actuators , and other technologies that increasingly engage our whole bodies in interaction . As such , soma design methods are generally centered around frst - person perspectives [ 25 ] or autobiographical design processes [ 42 ] , involving the training of designers’ aesthetic sensibilities by engaging in bodily practices ( sometimes led by somatic connois - seurs [ 49 ] ) , material and technological explorations of their design materials [ 55 , 69 ] , and their experiences of the artefacts being de - signed [ 62 , 64 ] . Soma design uses the designer’s own lived body [ 38 ] as a resource for design , with the aim of better understanding the technologies that others will ultimately experience . Soma design could also be regarded as advocating for not just aesthetic ideals , but also ethical ones . The somaesthetic project posi - tions the body as the ‘somatic template’ that guides our empathy and understanding with others [ 54 ] . Thus , through refective engage - ment with design materials [ 50 ] , designers can better understand the implications of design decisions , the ‘sedimented movements’ [ 12 ] embedded in technologies that others will experience , and how these movements will shape others who use such technologies . This has also been termed an ‘ethics of self - use’ [ 42 ] . Soma design does not completely adhere to the idea of ’fat ontol - ogy’ [ 8 ] , which removes any distinction between human and non - human entities . Rather , it prioritises individual experience as a start - ing point of design exploration . However , similar to ’more than hu - man design’ [ 21 ] , soma design challenges the user - centered frame - work and goes beyond a functional view on human - technology relations , accepting multiplicity of agency and complex relations Vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA between human and non - human actors [ 35 ] . Soma design explores other forms of connection between humans and non - humans , such as the relations of correspondence [ 28 ] or connecting with the alterity of the non - human [ 31 ] . 2 . 2 Vulnerability and intercorporeality Vulnerability is a complex concept that takes diferent meanings in diferent contexts . For instance , in interaction design , vulner - ability is often seen as a quality associated with sensitive topics [ 67 ] or particular groups , such as children [ 48 ] , elderly [ 58 ] , peo - ple who identify as LGBTQ [ 18 ] , or people with disabilities [ 3 ] . In cyber - security , vulnerability is seen as a weakness that exposes a person or organisation to intrusion , theft or fraud [ 20 ] . Connecting to the purposes of this paper , vulnerability can also be regarded as a foundation for our intercorporeal relations , both with others and in our relationship with technologies [ 22 ] . As highlighted by Grosz , the essential vulnerability of the human body is a condition for intercorporeal relations as “the body provides a point of mediation between what is perceived as purely internal and accessible only to the subject and what is external and publicly observable” [ 22 ] . Further , the vulnerability of bodies exposed to technology has a potential to create connection and social cohesion by creating shared expe - rience and bridging together internal experience and that which is publicly observable [ 22 ] . As such , Meyer et al . argue that our mediated relationships with and through technologies can also be described in terms of intercorporeality [ 39 , p . xxix ] : technology ofers the possibility to mediate relationships and create a space of intercorporeality through articulating this essential vulnerability of human bodies . Intercorporeality , in its essence , refers to the idea that communi - cation , coordination and meaning - making are situated in the shared pre - refexive and pre - conditional space of our lived corporeal hu - man bodies . Fundamentally , it is based on the idea that we are inherently social beings and our sociality resides on the corporeal level rather than on the level of symbolic interaction . Sociality , as an ability to share meaning and coordinate activities with other human beings , exists before we are able to articulate it in the form of rules or guidelines . Meyer et al . draw on Merleau - Ponty’s defni - tion of intercorporeality to refer to all of our interpersonal abilities , or more specifcally “a radical and coherent conception of the human body as being constituted by its corporeal relations and interactions with other human or animate bodies — a conception , that is , in which the body is never alone in the frst place , or only in conditions of deprivation that we recognize as inhumane” [ 39 , p . xviii ] . Similarly , soma design adheres to the idea of human cognition as corporeal [ 24 ] , which presumes that knowledge , perception and cognition are not individual mental states , but intersubjective phe - nomena residing in the pre - refexive interaction between lived human bodies [ 16 , 38 ] . Rather than assuming that we frst develop inner mental models of the world , which are then shared with others through symbolic language , phenomenology – and more recently soma design – consider intercorporeality as a space where knowledge , creativity and ethics are frst created and experienced through pre - refexive bodily sensations , which can then be trans - lated into a symbolic form or an artefact . In another scholarly tradition , ethnomethodology and conversation analysis develop the meaning of intercorporeality further by demonstrating that not only symbolic knowledge but physical sensations , such as taste or smell , are co - created in multimodal human interaction , which goes beyond lexical sounds and includes gestures , gaze , and coordinated movements [ 40 , 41 ] . In the same way as phenomenology considers perception and knowledge as located in the space of interporeality , ethics can be considered as situated in pre - refexive corporeal experiences rather than solely formalised lexical rules . Ethics - in - action , then , can be primarily felt and observed in the space of intercorporeality – in the interaction between human and technology where both engage in habitual ethical behaviour , which can later be translated to the symbolic level and / or changed . In HCI , Eriksson et al . [ 13 ] have explored the relationship between ethics and intercorporeality by designing movement - controlled drones to be used on the opera stage as part of an artistic performance . Their study showed that the choreographer , Åsa , by frst learning to shape her movements to best control the drones , thereby also learnt how to recognize when others were afraid of the drones . By drawing on her skills as a choreographer , Åsa could then work with the dancers to help them overcome those fears . In this way , Eriksson et al . [ 12 ] expand the conversation on ethics as dynamically unfolding in relationships between humans and drones and also include to it aspects , such as movement , empathy , and artistic expression . The work of Eriksson et al . [ 12 , 13 ] indicates that a creative and generative design process requires taking risks and being exposed in various ways to others , but also learning to do so with care and empathy . 2 . 3 Processual ethics in interaction design There have been calls to examine ethics as situated in the inter - action between design practitioners , participants , and technology , including the concepts of in - action ethics [ 15 ] and micro - ethics [ 33 , 56 ] . These draw attention to how ethical decision - making is enacted within the research process , sometimes outside the scope of what is prescribed to be ethical or moral action by overarching ethical approval processes and ‘check - list’ approaches to ethical conduct . These studies view ethical decision - making as located in everyday practices and micro - decisions , which are often not ex - plicitly negotiated . Rather , this negotiation goes unnoticed as it is embedded in the unfolding of the event at hand . It therefore be - comes important to make the conditions necessary for micro - ethics visible for explication and refection . The ultimate goal here is to develop ethical sensibilities and , when needed , change our habitual behaviours that are deeply ingrained and often taken for granted . From the perspective of enaction , Varela [ 65 ] points out that ethics is an afair closer to corporeal wisdom rather than reason . He criticised how Western thought emphasises ethics as a synonym of moral behaviour or what is right , in contrast with what is good . This argument resonates with Shusterman’s project of ethics , understood as grounded in the body towards living a better , more virtuous life [ 54 ] . Under this perspective , a virtuous person – one who has acquired good habits throughout their life – somatically knows what is ethical and engages in such actions . This perceptual sensibility places ethics as part of our everyday processing of the world rather than a predefned set of rules that are external to our subjectivity . For instance , if we have a lively conversation with someone and CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Popova , et al . start noticing that the topic makes that person uncomfortable , an ethical impulse would be to change the subject to make the person feel safe again . In that sense , ethics is something we perform and experience somatically and generatively [ 12 ] . Although most of these micro - ethical decisions are made without much refection , our ethical stance can be trained and refned by accessing the non - habitual as a way to bring to the fore the implications of our actions . As exemplifed by Shusterman , if a woman starts experimenting with sitting like a man , it is quite likely she will start noticing how social norms associated with gendered behaviour are ingrained in her habitual ways of being [ 54 ] . This is why soma design emphasises defamiliarisation techniques to help purposefully examine our somatic experience and ethics [ 24 ] . Through doing the habitual in a non - habitual manner , we may uncover deeply ingrained habits and feelings , making them attainable for change and improvement . Those changes may very well be slow and difcult to make . For example , it may be difcult for a woman to learn being assertive in a way that is not socially considered to be appropriately ’female’ . Processual approaches view ethics as a part of everyday perfor - mance , shaped both by individual , subjective and felt senses and social rules [ 19 ] . In HCI , the subjective nature of ethics is acknowl - edged by Loke and Schiphorst [ 37 ] , who stress that connecting with designers’ somatic sensibilities constitutes the frst step to - wards empathizing with others . As a potential method to engage with this approach to ethics , they suggest training designers in somatic connoisseurship [ 37 ] . Becoming a connoisseur involves training oneself to guide others into unfolding their somatic sensi - bilities and helping them bring out qualities to inform the design process [ 49 ] . It also allows designers to actively discern between diferent somatic markers for design and actively connect with the subjective experiencing of those involved in the process [ 24 ] . This can be done , for instance , by adjusting part of the somatic guidance , such as slowing down some bodily movements , or by modifying the wording of a guided body scanning . This process of somatic discernment involves a generative pondering of ethical micro - decisions along the way . This is particularly evident in the work of Spiel et al . [ 56 ] , who build on the concept of micro - ethics from the medical professions ; the ethics of “what happens in every interaction” between individuals [ 33 ] , to show how small ethical decisions were constantly enacted and refected upon in the context of participatory design with children with autism . Ethical decision - making can similarly be considered as enacted within our interactions with technology [ 12 , 13 ] . Using a postphe - nomenological lens , people and technology are mutually constitut - ing one another – each evolving and shaping the other [ 27 , 47 , 66 ] . Taking this mutuality into account , in - action ethics foregrounds the importance of ethical refexivity through participation , drawing connections with the way design is fostered through refection - in - action [ 15 , 50 ] . Similar to micro - ethics , this encourages a diferent approach to considering how ethical decision - making unfolds in human - technology interactions . Those changes can be uncovered through attending to bodily sensations and experiences altered in the interaction with technology . Our work on vulnerability thereby follows and extends prior studies of processual ethics in HCI . We bring attention to an important yet often neglected aspect of devel - oping ethical sensibilities : purposefully engaging with vulnerability in the interaction both with technology and with other members of a design team . 3 DESIGN PROCESS AND METHODS Let us now turn to our soma design process . Our initial aim was to explore and design relationships with drones as ‘the other’ – a dis - tinctive and separate entity , which is neither completely controlled , nor fully autonomous . We were curious to see if movement , dance , or singing could allow us to direct , infuence or correspond with drones as if they have some form of autonomy or intentionality . The work built on earlier projects by La Delfa and colleagues [ 34 , 35 ] and Eriksson and colleagues [ 12 , 13 ] . More importantly in this con - text , we aimed to explore where and how the felt dimension of ethics arises – if at all . We wanted to document and understand the felt experience of ethics in relation to interaction between humans and technology as well as to explicate where ethics is situated in the bodies of those engaged in the interaction . We did not initially plan to explore group relationships or vul - nerability , but both became central as the design process required us to explicate our feelings and expose ourselves to discomfort , without having any previous experience of working together . The design process was an exercise in collaborating together as a group , getting to know each other , as well as developing trust in both the research group and the process itself . We started our exploration as a group of fve women , although later it was mostly four of us who attended the design sessions . ( One of the authors joined us at the analysis and writing stage ; ad - ditionally , other members of the extended design team occasionally joined us in the design exploration . ) The core design team consists of four members . One of us is a professor already established at the institution , one is a postdoctoral researcher newly arrived at the university , and the remaining two are PhD students in the early stages of their research . The design process was the frst time , when we were actually working together . Previous interaction had been limited to at - distance meetings where we discussed theoretical as - pects of our research . Three of us were relatively experienced in soma design , while one did not have any previous design back - ground . Each was coming from a diferent country ; we collaborated in English , but only one of us has English as her frst language . We difered in age , class ( although the defnition of class becomes problematic when one moves abroad ) , country of origin and so - cial background , even though each had at least a Master’s level degree . We were situated in a research institution in the Global North , which presumes a signifcant degree of privilege . 3 . 1 Design process and vulnerability To provide some context to the situations under analysis , we frst outline our broader design process . Each situation occurred during the frst year of an ongoing soma design process exploring novel interactions between humans and drones , aimed to go beyond the forms of subordination and control . Our design process aimed to explore ways of interacting with drones beyond a simple fight controller . This included augmenting the fight experience with diferent modalities of feedback such as heat , air , and vibrations as well as investigating ways to engage the whole body in interaction with the drone . During the frst year , we had 15 design sessions , Vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA starting from a week of intensive bodily work and followed by reg - ular design explorations which took place once or twice a month . During these sessions , we engaged in material explorations sup - ported by artefacts created as part of the soma design methodology , such as Soma Bits [ 69 ] and infatable pillows [ 31 ] . We followed soma design methods , frst sensitising our bodies and aesthetic sen - sibilities [ 24 ] by working closely with somatic connoisseurs [ 49 ] . We then moved onto technological explorations involving small TELLO drones 2 to familiarise ourselves with the felt experience and material qualities of our design material . We started by introducing the drone into the design process to explore its material qualities , as well as our sensations and feelings of the drone . Following this , we moved onto more in - depth ideation by combining the drone with other technological artefacts . Currently , we are engaged in more structured collaborative workshops with a series of somatic con - noisseurs to explore specifc interactional qualities , such as sound and coordinated movement , in greater depth . 3 . 2 Documentation To document our design process , we used an ethnographic ap - proach supported by several methods . After mutual consent , we video recorded our design sessions , including physical exercises , experiments with drones , props and materials , as well as our refec - tions after each session . We also kept a collaborative diary with feld notes , which included our refections , sketches and body maps [ 26 ] , articulating what was meaningful to each one of us . In some cases , we used soma trajectories [ 60 ] as a method to illustrate and de - scribe the temporal aspects of our experiences unfolding along the dimensions of specifc somatic qualities . After an accidental drone collision , we conducted two micro - phenomenological interviews [ 4 ] . This interview method elicits detailed descriptions of an evoked experience , including both synchronic ( the cognitive , sensory , and emotional ) and diachronic aspects ( referring to the unfolding of experience over time ) [ 45 ] . This method focuses on the how instead of the what of the experience , assisting the participant in eliciting sensations , feelings and fne - grained descriptions of the given phe - nomenon [ 44 ] . One particular aspect of micro - phenomenology is that all the questions are content - empty , deriving exclusively from what the participants decide to share . A micro phenomenological session starts , when the participant is asked to focus on a specifc moment of the experience . This moment is generatively examined with the help of the interviewer , who asks questions to zoom in on the how of the experience . Once the interview fnishes , the in - terviewer recapitulates the content of the dialogue . Revisiting the content has two functions : ( 1 ) to ensure the experience was cap - tured with precision , and ( 2 ) to confrm the participant’s consent . Here , we used video recordings of the drone crash as a prompt to evoke fne - grained descriptions of the procedural aspects of the experience from the standpoint of both the ‘collisioner’ and the ‘collisionee’ . 3 . 3 Analysis The three vignettes presented here are outcomes of slightly dif - ferent analyses . For the frst and third examples , we used video 2 These are small , lightweight quadcopters often used in educational contexts . https : / / m . dji . com / se / product / tello - edu recordings of the sessions to create detailed descriptions of our design activities , and then selected the excerpts that best illustrate the role of vulnerability in our work . The second example presents fndings obtained through a combination of ethnomethodological video - analysis [ 23 ] and micro - phenomenological interviews [ 45 ] . Within two weeks after the crash , we conducted and video recorded micro - phenomenological interviews with the two main participants in the crash . Each interview took approximately 90 minutes and was conducted by a practitioner , who had received a week of train - ing in micro - phenomenology , and was supervised by a certifed practitioner of micro - phenomenology . We also prepared a detailed transcription of the drone crash video excerpt using ELAN soft - ware 3 to analyse the circumstances of the crash and the subsequent repair work done by the design team . We transcribed and analysed the micro - phenomenological interviews with a thematic analysis approach [ 7 ] to generate relevant themes : the alternated experience of time during the crash ; the feelings evoked by the crash ; and the material qualities of the drone revealed by the crash . The interviews were frst coded by one of the authors and the initial set of themes was then presented to the group together with fndings from eth - nomethodological video - analysis . After discussion , the frst analyst continued the analysis of the interviews iteratively , together with the other authors . The results presented in this paper combine the fndings from video analysis and the interviews . The fnal selection of themes presented in this paper was guided by our intention to use the empirical analysis to highlight our theoretical argument . Our theoretical focus was also a key reason for why we approached micro - phenomenological interviews with thematic analysis and substituted a detailed transcript of the video with ethnographic descriptions . While our data contain more possible themes , we pur - posefully selected our empirical examples to highlight the aspects relevant to our discussion of vulnerability . The selection work was done collaboratively by all the authors during three meetings that were specifcally devoted to data analysis and coordinating the writing process . While we consider it necessary to expose our inner thoughts and experiences to scrutiny within the design team and in the context of the design process – allowing ourselves to do our best work through being vulnerable , candid , honest , and awkward in ways we might avoid in other professional settings – in what follows , we use pseudonyms to reference the team members . We have made the choice of using pseudonyms as an act of care , to avoid unnecessary discomfort , and to make it possible to open up our design process without limiting our capacity to express the issues at stake . 4 VULNERABILITY IN A DRONE DESIGN PROCESS We now turn to our analyses of the three examples chosen to repre - sent diferent stages of our design process . Though not indicative of a fnal design outcome , these examples trace the development of our design process during a year of explorations and depict vulner - ability in diferent stages of the design process . The frst example from an early exploration aims to demonstrate that being vulner - able , i . e . engaging oneself with the non - habitual ways of moving 3 https : / / archive . mpi . nl / tla / elan CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Popova , et al . Figure 1 : Olivia sits in a beanbag while Maria and Maxine control actuators or interacting , requires efort and that technology can prompt vul - nerability . The second example is taken from a later stage of the process when an accidental , but ultimately fruitful , collision oc - curred when imagining novel ways of controlling the drone . The example represents a break of normality , which generates insights about the drone’s materiality and opens up a space to deliberate ethics in the group while mitigating the aftermaths of the drone crash . The third example reports on our exploration of controlling the drone through singing with it . Using examples from earlier and later stages of our work , we discuss the diferent shapes that engaging with the non - habitual takes as trust within the design team develops over time . 4 . 1 Early engagements with the drone The example analysed in this part is taken from our frst session devoted to exploring the drone as a design material , its interactional qualities , as well as the sensations and feelings associated with controlling and being around the drone . This exploration took the form of a workshop where fve members of our design team gathered together , planning to take turns in fying the drone , to ideate , and to experiment with other artefacts in the room . It was the frst time when we went from talking about drones to actually experiencing them together . The session was devoted to inventing novel ways of engaging with the drone . To stimulate our exploration , we were using a TELLO drone , but we tried to go beyond its embedded functions and ways of being controlled . Through Wizard of Oz - inspired interactions [ 10 ] , we explored novel ways of engagement with the drone , for example : using vibrations as a way to ’feel’ the drone ( See Figure 1 ) ; gesturing at the drone to make it move ( See Figure 3 ) ; imitating its sounds ; or experimenting with the weight of the drone . Both the use of the drone and other artefacts – such as vibrating actuators , strings and a fan ( See Figure 2 ) used to imitate or infuence the drone’s airfow – were aimed to stimulate non - habitual engagement in order to counteract the obvious , thereby exploring what could be . This process often left us feeling awkward and embarrassed – not only because of the activities themselves but because of the uncertain outcomes . As we will demonstrate in the following ethnographic account , vulnerability here related to experimenting with the unknown Figure 2 : Lena and Maxine explore airfow using a fan with Anna and Maria in the background and defning the borders of what is possible . We prepared the en - gagement to a certain extent by establishing its structure : our ses - sions had specifcally assigned hours , a warm - up activity where we started from sharing our body maps 4 and openly discussing how each of us was feeling that day [ 26 ] , and a concluding discussion where we tried to make sense of our daily explorations . Despite the presence of structure and artefacts stimulating exploration , as well as an overarching commitment by all participants to engage in soma design explorations , a lot of emotional work ( as discussed by Balaam and colleagues [ 2 ] ) was needed to ensure that we would dare to be vulnerable in a social group where we had not yet built sufcient interpersonal trust . Vulnerability at this stage was re - quired to engage in the exploration despite the risk of looking silly , suggest new ideas that could be abandoned , and engage in activities that might not be supported by others . However demanding for the team members from a psychological perspective , the exploration was also both supported and challenged by the fragility of the drone itself , as the following ethnographic description illustrates : We started by engaging with a TELLO drone , a small toy - drone , using it as a frst model for our future customized drones . Getting it up into the air took some time as the drone’s software needed to be updated . When the drone fnally took of , it created an unexpectedly loud sound and simultaneously generated a fairly strong airfow – despite its smallness . This immediately attracted everyone’s startled attention . Olivia , who was driving the drone , made it make a few fips . The group responds strongly – imitating fearful screaming , laughing , and mocking panic . The drone immediately changed the atmosphere in the room . The laughter and screaming were liberating – they broadened the borders of what would be allowed and turned the design exploration into a playful activity – not an intellectual exercise . Our emotions grew stronger when we tried teaching one another to fy the drone : there was an over - demonstration of fear and fake screaming , creating an atmosphere of a children play . We drove the drone for a short while until it crashed into a bookshelf and one of the propellers broke , after which the drone was unable to fy . This failure called for a break in our joint activities and evoked a discussion on the fragility of the drone and the difculties in controlling it . 4 Body maps are the instruments to visualise participants’ bodily sensations . For more details see [ 9 ] Vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 3 : Lena and Anna simulate controlling the drone us - ing gesture while Maxine watches While the drone here indeed became the other , a potentially dangerous and fear - evoking technology , one of the frst things we learned during this design exploration was how the drone itself was more fragile than expected . These small TELLO - drones can be seriously damaged by the tiniest crash ; they have extremely short - lived batteries , requiring constant monitoring and recharging ; and they depend on external software . Vulnerability here does not exclusively belong either to people or to technology – it is a state created in the situated interaction between humans and fragile drones . The presence of the drone , provoking laughter , mock screaming , and – later – care , acted as a catalyst for creating a space for playful – and vulnerable – exploration . In these design explorations , we also ascribed intentionality and agency to the drone , interpreting its fashing LED " eye " and jerky movements as purposive or communicative . We reconstituted the drone from being something simply fragile into something ’vulnerable’ . Here , vulnerability and risk are actively co - produced in the interaction between us as a group of designers , with our designerly aims and feshy bodies , and the drone technology with its technological afordances and fragile plastic body . The space to be vulnerable , to engage with an unfamiliar technology , in non - habitual design activities , and risky exploratory ideas , is a product of interactional work within the assemblage of humans and drones . 4 . 2 Drone crash This session analyses how the risks associated with being vulner - able while engaging in design explorations at times become , not only a felt problem , but a physical , emotional or social risk of harm . While we would not advise designers to deliberately put themselves at risk , we show how such unexpected and potentially harmful breakdowns may be generative to design . We do it by analysing an incident where the drone accidentally collided with a member of our design team . The crash became a break - down of normality , which , instead of violating our mutual trust and derail - ing the design process , was successfully resolved , leading to an active engagement to build trust , practice care while mitigating the crash consequences , and articulate ethical stances important for our team . Beyond this , the breakdown became a focal point of both our analysis and designerly explorations , leading – as failure often Figure 4 : Maria , Lena , and Patrick watch as Olivia fies the drone does [ 14 , 43 ] – to new insights into the drone as a design material , and the role of the drone in our ethical action . The crash occurred during a session where we were exploring in - fatable materials ( shape - changing infatable cushions powered by pneumatic actuators and controlled by a mobile application [ 30 , 64 ] ) as a novel way of controlling the drone . The shape - changing feed - back from the infatables also interested us as a way of conveying the feeling of ’being’ the drone – by imitating the pressure ’felt’ by the drone moving through the air . Midway through this session , we decided to incorporate the drone into our exploration . We began to fy the drone around the room and ideating possible responses to the manipulation of the cushions . At several points during this process , it was noted that the blinking LED on the front of the drone was reminiscent of an ’eye’ . Controlling the drone whilst it ’looked’ at us gave the interaction a particular dynamic . Interested in exploring this further , Olivia brought the drone to eye - level with Maria , who placed her foot on an infatable pillow and acted as if she was controlling the drone ( see Figure 4 ) . What follows is a short description of the incident based on the video recorded that day . Olivia starts fying the drone in the room , while Maria is dealing with an infatable pillow attached to the foor , pretending to operate the drone with a foot . Lena and Patrick are in the corners of the room , observing the scene . After about 30 seconds of fying the drone , Olivia by mistake drives the drone into Maria . The drone crashes into Maria’s face , creating panic in the room – but as it turns out , luckily not causing any serious physical damage to her . After the crash , Maria freezes for a few seconds and the other group members are scared . Their bodies manifest fear : shrugging , jumping back and protecting their heads with their arms , or shouting in fear . After this very brief moment of panic , the group starts repairing the damage . Olivia rushes to Maria and helps to untangle the drone from her hair , checking if there is any physical damage . Olivia explains her mistake and repeatedly apologizes . Maria ensures she is okay , not seriously damaged , and does not think the accident is serious . The frst round of apologies makes the group more relaxed and alleviates the tension . Once this is established , Maria and Lena are attempting to make jokes about the crash , but the laughter of relief does not happen until Maria repeatedly confrms that she is alright both physically and psychologically and Olivia gets the space to explain herself and receive the confrmation that there are no hard feelings in the group . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Popova , et al . 4 . 2 . 1 Breakdown . The crash momentarily pulls us away from play - ful , lighthearted exploration . As Maria described in the micro - phenomenological interview 5 : “it was suddenly serious . So the weather changed . And with that , my engagement with the drone . So from play - ful and fun and ‘oh , look at these wzhoo , wzhoo , wzhoo sound and the correspondence between two things and the mapping between my right foot and the movement of the sound suddenly became this star - ing contest . This moment of . . . this challenging moment between ’the woman’ and ’the machine’ . ” Several factors led to this crash . In part , the collision occurred due to the diferent orientations between the pilot , Olivia , and the drone . Olivia believed that she was going to reverse the drone away from Maria , but accidentally moved it forwards causing it to collide . Maria also made a deliberate decision to not move away from the drone in the moment when it approached her , choosing instead to explore a ’staring contest’ with the drone . When the drone approached Maria , she remained still , almost in a frozen posture , and watched it approaching her without turning away . She describes the eye contact with the drone as a competition between her – " a living , feshy human " – and the drone machine staring back at her with its led - light ’eye’ . She explained her decision to remain static as a deliberate choice making sense in the staring contest between her and the machine . Though the drone’s control system and pilot error played a role in causing the crash , the collision ultimately arose due to our decision to accept the risks involved in bringing the drone into a shared space . The crash also occurred due to the determination to treat the ’staring contest’ between Maria and the drone as a part of the ongoing exploration and make the active decision to engage in the situation rather than retreat . " At some point it [ the drone ] went out of control and I saw it approaching and it was a moment of stillness . I was resistant to move deliberately " . [ . . . ] There was a sense of anticipation that the drone was coming and this stillness . I think I was looking . I was looking to the drone and there was this moment . I wouldn’t say like a staring contest * laughter * but this strange encounter between a woman and a machine face to face . [ . . . ] I had this sort of a staring contest with the drone because I was a body , an organic biological woman in front of this inert cold artifcial thing , and I became a body during that second , and my mind was empty . [ . . . ] And that stillness was physical and perhaps spiritual in a way . It’s like who is gonna win this staring contest is it drone or is it me . ” The collision created a moment of intimate connection between the two people actively participating in the event and the drone , when human - machine interaction becomes distinctly felt , immer - sive , and non - refective . Maria describes it as a moment of a sudden presence one - on - one with the drone , when she immerses in her body to realize herself not as a participant of the social interaction but as an organic human being , a woman , being caught up in a contest with a ‘cold artifcial thing’ . In contrast to the previous moments of sociality with its playfulness and awkwardness , this breakdown constitutes a moment where Maria becomes hyper - aware of herself in relation to the drone . However , instead of iso - lation , her account indicates an experience more akin to solitude , as she describes in the interview : “this stillness was perhaps a brief 5 the fragments marked in bold are our interpretation of what is most relevant in the excerpts moment of contact with my body , where I could feel myself breathing and I could feel my heart beating . ” The moment of the crash , the breakdown between ourselves and between us and the drone , became a focal point of our design exploration . The crash added new dimensions to the materiality of the drone . At the beginning of our design process , we sought to understand the materiality of the drone as a design material and its interactional qualities – both fundamental to future design work . Intermittently throughout the process , we treated the drone as ’the other’ ; a robotic alien - like body moving and behaving in ways unavailable to us ; a potentially dangerous and somewhat un - predictable yet fascinating device that drew our collective attention like a new toy ; a vulnerable design partner in need of repair ; an inscrutable assemblage of inert parts which , for reasons unclear to us , refused to operate during our design sessions . We variously dis - cussed the drone’s presence in terms of noise , airfow , and danger , but the drone’s ’presence’ in the room was seemingly distinct and separate from its easily broken plastic parts . The crash synthesised our corporeal understanding of the drone . In the moment of the crash , our encounter with the drone became felt through the artifcial lightness of its plastic , its small sharp propellers , the contradictory orientation in the air , its high sus - ceptibility to the air fow direction , and our lack of control over it , in sharp contrast to our soft , feshy bodies . This crash repre - sented a breakdown in the assemblage of humans and drones , and it is through experiencing the visceral , bodily roots of our vulner - abilities , that we came to a greater understanding of our design materials and our relationships to one another . This opened up the space for ethical action . 4 . 2 . 2 Felt dimension : vulnerability of human bodies creates empa - thy , repair produces social cohesion . During the crash , the drone hit Maria on the chin and the drone’s propellers continued spinning for a short moment after the crash , threatening to cause even more damage . Even through only Maria is at physical risk , all group mem - bers displayed shared feelings of fear and panic : Lena cringed in her chair , Olivia finched and recoiled slightly . The breakdown made our vulnerabilities available for others . Rather than disrupting the connections between the group , it generated empathy and provided space for concrete ethical action . First and foremost , it opened a space of care . Immediately after the crash Olivia crossed the distance between her and Maria to un - tangle Maria’s hair from the drone . Maria , in turn , froze for another few seconds as if the collision temporarily deprived her of agency and placed the responsibility to care on Olivia . The breakdown altered the conventions of normality : despite COVID restrictions and norms of individual privacy , care and close physical contact became needed . The rest of the group also got involved in mitigating the conse - quences of the crash . This repair work included establishing that Maria was not physically harmed , providing space for explanation , and ensuring that all remaining tension was discharged through a joke about " the new functionality of a drone - hairdresser” . The laugh - ter at the end of the incident was quite diferent from the laughter at the beginning of our design exploration . Now we were laughing together indicating that the situation was not dangerous for the Vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA group and that we were able to collectively recover from a poten - tially problematic breakdown . Overall , the crash opened up the space for deliberating ethics . Even though we did not explicitly discuss how we as a group should mitigate the breakdown , we made ethical choices – habitually – engaging in care work , mak - ing collective eforts to save the group’s integrity , and saving our social faces . Following the crash , we engaged in discussions and conducted micro - phenomenological interviews on our experience of the crash . This allowed us to refect in depth on the ethical ac - tions and micro - decisions we took in the challenging situation and , eventually , make sense of the crash . One of the important outcomes of the crash was discovering our group dynamics as a resource for design , prompting us to explore collective ways to interact with the drone . Since we successfully repaired the situation and were willing to take responsibility for the collision , the breakdown enhanced trust within the group . An event that could have led to resentment and distrust , fear of ex - perimenting , or negative conclusions about our practice , instead became a fruitful feld of exploration . Not only did we ’survive’ the event , but the repair and sense - making after the crash brought to the fore values shared by the group : physical integrity and safety matter , but risk is accepted ; mistakes are forgiven ; carelessness is problematic ; the dignity of all group members is important – in the aftermath of the crash , all of these became topics for discus - sion and material for building stronger agreement . The breakdown also highlighted that the interactional work needed to create a safe space for vulnerability is pervasive in our design sessions – even in everyday situations where breakdowns do not occur , as the fnal example will demonstrate . 4 . 3 Singing with the drone Engaging with the non - habitual requires continuous work , the shape of which changes when we grow to trust one another as a team . The following section analyses two excerpts where we ex - plored a non - habitual action – singing with the drone – to highlight the interactional work performed to achieve the state of vulnerabil - ity we deem necessary for soma design . The frst excerpt is taken from our early design explorations and the second from a more structured workshop that was led by a professional singer . In both , we examine the ordinary ethical work that takes place to enable non - habitual engagement . The frst ethnographic description depicts the early stage of our process , during which we struggled with embarrassment and often created an emotional distance between ourselves and our exploration , for example , by using laughter as a way of resisting engagement . However , the moments of overcoming this resistance often led to powerful discoveries which furthered our design work . One example of this was singing with the drone – an ideation activ - ity during one of our frst sessions where we explored controlling a drone with sound . Here , the singer Natalie , made the decision to engage seriously and authentically in the activity despite the em - barrassment involved . Her decision to be vulnerable and actively engage in the process later helped us to recognize a potentially interesting design space . Next iteration continues the sound exploration with the help of Natalie – a professional singer working on her projects in the extended Figure 5 : Olivia , Maxine , Natalie and Lena sit in a circle with the drone at the centre group . Natalie starts from producing humming sounds . At the very beginning she stumbles because the mask she is wearing gets stuck in her mouth . Everyone including herself is laughing . She then starts singing again , reinforcing her voice and getting into a more profes - sional mode – the sounds are powerful and mesmerising . Anna reacts to her singing manually moving the immobilized drone in the space . There is no simple connection between the pitch of Natalie’s voice and the drone’s movements but the interaction of Natalie and Anna looks like a coordinated performance . We are observing silently , there are no comments , everyone is immersed in the performance . We became an audience . The end of the performance is met by applause . We continued exploring sound as a way of interacting with the drone during later stages of our process . To stimulate the explo - ration , we staged it as a workshop " Singing with the drone " . We ofcially named the workshop , organized a dedicated space for it , and planned a series of exercises with rules , and arranged a leader with professional expertise in singing . We concluded the workshop with a discussion aimed at translating our playful insights into prac - tical design outcomes . Such a framework made exposing ourselves to the unknown easier . At the stage in our design process when the workshop was organized , we had also started trusting each other more , which made engaging with the non - habitual signifcantly easier compared to our earlier work . However , the engagement still required a lot of interactional work to determine the boundaries within our exploration and create a safe space for experimentation . We further consider interactional work performed as a part of the ’Snake’ exercise ( See Figure 5 ) . During the exercise , we gathered in a circle , the frst - person produced a sound – a humming , low note , or a series of beats – and the next person listened and responded with a sound resembling the frst in rhythm or tonality , to which the next participant responded in turn , repeating the cycle by producing a new variation of the sound . We used the sound of our TELLO drone as a starting point . The seemingly silly action of imitating the drone’s sound was intimidating and required work to establish the space where we could be playful without being judged or embarrassed , but also without being pushed beyond our personal limits . The interactional work included encouraging each other to remove unnecessary ex - pectations : ‘we’ll try and we’ll see , yeah , we’ll do our best’ . There was no criticism over other members’ mistakes and embarrassment , CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Popova , et al . and , in contrast with the beginning of our process , there was sig - nifcantly less laughter . Self - laughter , in this case , did not make others laugh but prompted supportive gestures from other members . We encouraged each other to participate in the explorations , but avoided pushing beyond individual limits . We kept available and occasionally drew upon the mechanisms of resisting the engage - ment , such as laughter or taking a break from the activity . These are essential as engagement is not a one - of commitment , but needs to be constantly negotiated throughout the process . 5 DISCUSSION In arguing for vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design , we have highlighted it as a necessary but often neglected part of an exploratory design process and depicted the conditions of its emergence . In what follows , we frst summarise our position on vulnerability in soma design and other frst - person - based design approaches , explaining how this stance may connect with felt ethics . Our aim is to demonstrate that purposeful vulnerability serves as a necessary precondition for developing ethical sensibilities and refecting on otherwise taken - for - granted ethical stances . We then describe how vulnerability can be cultivated in the course of a design process and refect on the staging and ethical deliberation that this entails . 5 . 1 Vulnerability , ethics , and aesthetics in frst - person design processes Our results here pertain to a frst - person design process [ 25 ] where the felt experience is guiding design choices . Through our work , we have come to see vulnerability as an active ethical position [ 65 ] , a deliberate attitude where participants take the risk of exposing their weaknesses , putting themselves in a position where they de - pend on one another . Vulnerability , therefore , is the opposite of a passive non - action – it is an active move towards exploring the unknown . Purposeful vulnerability in design is required to fully engage with non - habitual actions , moving away from established norms and routines . While a frst - person stance requires being vul - nerable , vulnerability is not ’an automatic feature’ . Instead , it is an interactional achievement that has to be orchestrated : Vulnerability – understood as taking a risk , exposing oneself , and resigning part of one’s autonomy – is accomplished through collaborative work . We recognise that vulnerability is not specifc only to soma design , and that all creative processes feature some sort of vulner - ability . Our notion of vulnerability resonates also with the skills required of good ethnographers who have to manage the discom - fort often involved in entering previously unfamiliar social worlds , while striving to remain refexive [ 5 ] . Approaches like sensory ethnography explicitly call for researchers to attune to their so - mas , too , in stressing how smell , taste , touch and vision can be interconnected and interrelated within research [ 46 ] . Despite these similarities , we argue that vulnerability is especially prominent in soma design’s commitment to challenge the habitual and disrupt the normative . The vignettes discussed in this paper are examples of vulnerabil - ity in a very specifc context – a design process where vulnerability appeared through exposure to discomfort , embarrassment , and un - certainty of the process rather than structural reasons related to socioeconomic context . We realise that our examples are far from extreme . Emotional discomfort and physical vulnerability can be much more dangerous and have more serious implications , even in the academic context , when we deal with ’taboo’ emotions : anger , disgust , jealousy , or power struggle . We discussed an example of a breakdown that got resolved quite successfully , but there are break - downs that are outright impossible to repair . Our aim here was not to illustrate the sharpest cases ( nor would we have had the data to do so ) but rather to open up space for recognising and refecting on vulnerability and its place in the very mundane details of design work . In soma design , stepping outside the normative uses of a particu - lar technology – as well as the norms of human behaviour – helps us to articulate and challenge norms and habits . These eforts are similar to the breaching experiments of early ethnomethodologists where the goal was to challenge the norms of ordinary commu - nication in order to make them visible [ 17 ] . Here , however , the aim is not only to understand what the norms are but also to push past them in order to imagine and create new interactions . Soma design cultivates vulnerability actively as a design resource and purposefully provides space for refection . Methodologically , it also demands designers to systematically examine , document and refect on their inner experiences so as to infuence design outcomes [ 26 ] . This makes the interactional work aimed at staging vulnerability more readily observable . Our argument for vulnerability connects to both ethics and aes - thetics . We work from the commitment that design needs to help us lead a better life , both as designers and as end - users of technol - ogy . In line with our soma - design position , we see better life as one that prioritises expressivity [ 13 ] and richer experience , some - times through discomfort and risk [ 24 ] . As our analysis illustrates , breakdowns can be generative in that they open up a space for negotiating ethics . Breakdowns do not by necessity imply situa - tions of physical risk ; moral breakdowns can be ’out of ordinary’ situations where following taken for granted norms is no longer possible [ 72 ] . Our three examples demonstrate that the moments of ethical choices are felt – they are moments of emotional tension and release . This was perhaps most apparent in the drone crash example , but it is also present in the moments of embarrassment and discomfort . As we have shown in our analysis , vulnerability involves risks , and risks should only be taken with care : creating space for being vulnerable goes hand in hand with creating space to deliberate on the ethics of our vulnerable encounters with each other and the technologies we engage with . Just as aesthetic sensibilities are cultivated through engagement with our lived bodies in design practice [ 24 , 53 ] , our felt experience of vulnerability can lead us into refection on our ethical micro - decisions and eventually help us cultivate an ethical understanding towards each other . This suggests to us that ethical sensibilities can be cultivated if we manage to build interactions where participants are open to their emotions and interactions with one another . This by necessity implies being vulnerable to exposure and discomfort . ’Ethical habits’ – taken for granted ways of addressing oneself and each other – can be revealed and challenged if we manage to put ourselves in an authentic , honest , and vulnerable mode of interaction . Hence , we now turn to the issue of how we can cultivate vulnerability in the course of a design process . Vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA 5 . 2 How to cultivate vulnerability in soma design ? Adding to the growing discussion on micro - ethics [ 15 , 56 ] , we claim that ethics is not solely about making technology adhere to certain rules or checklists , but also about the design process itself : how we cultivate conditions that allow us to explore the unfamiliar and even the uncomfortable without harming each other . Expanding on care ethics [ 61 ] , we consider all of us who work as designers within the frst - person perspective as vulnerable and , thus , stress the importance of treating each other with care . But what does it mean to cultivate vulnerability with a caring sensibility ? A key aspect of this is how the interaction is staged : we strive to not harm each other , we work to give each other space to explore , and we make eforts to create safety without avoiding discomfort . Soma design methods are specifcally aimed at establishing open - ness within the group : The sharing that takes place with the help of body maps , which prompt participants to engage with their bodies but also open up and share their experiences with each other ; the exercises that concern deliberate engagement with one’s soma , and setting up playful explorations ( see e . g . [ 63 ] ) are all part of stag - ing a setting that cultivates vulnerability in a generative manner . Similarly , engagement with digital materials and artefacts , such as drones , is important for producing a space of openness and experi - mentation as well as getting deeply acquainted with the materiality of the technology . Vulnerability and the risks associated with it were seen to arise in the assemblage of us and the drone , shaped not only by our connections to each other , but also in the dynamic unfolding of our collective interactions with technology . Much of this interactional efort is situated in small decisions , such as when to push others to engage in the exploration more and when to allow others space to resist exposing themselves . These decisions are highly context - specifc , and cannot be distilled into a set of instructions . In our case , mundane interactional decisions implied , for instance , allowing resistance in the form of laughter or self - distancing during the frst sessions , or taking into account ev - eryone’s opinion on demonstrating the video of the crash , whether to disclose our real names , and trying to mitigate power imbalances in the design process . To give a concrete example , we needed to discuss whether or not we can demonstrate the clip of the drone crash publicly . While watching the video within our group , laughing and discussing our actions created a bonding experience , showing the video to others , outside our group , increased the signifcance of the crash and came to threaten the trust within the group . The video , taken out of context , could easily be misinterpreted , for example , as a joke . As a part of this , we made the choice to apply pseudonyms throughout so that we do not need to reveal who is who , while still allowing us to convey our frst - person perspectives and the work we have done together as a team . One conclusion , here , is that soma design teams need to discuss what kind vulnerability and related risks the team members are willing to accept – and be respectful of every team member’s position on what they are willing to expose . We have learnt that retaining space for resistance is important . Since being vulnerable in the presence of strangers is hard , resis - tance to exposing oneself will inevitably appear and should be accepted . For us , resistance often took the form of laughter . We struggled with laughter during the frst sessions , where it accom - panied all stages of exploration : we were laughing together , indi - vidually at ourselves , each other , and the activity . While resistance can be disruptive , keeping the possibility to step outside the deeply involved exploration is essential for building safety and comfort . The risk involved in being vulnerable should be taken voluntar - ily rather than imposed on anyone as a condition of being a part of a group . Resistance at the earlier stages of the process is to be expected , and suppressing it will only generate confict . While we cannot give more general instructions as vulnerability is not reducible to abstract principles , what we can say , following feminist theories [ 1 ] and critical pedagogies [ 11 , 70 ] , is that being vulnerable and open to change implies discomfort . Discomfort is an inevitable consequence of defamiliarisation , questioning our habitual ways of being and our taken - for - granted assumptions [ 70 ] . Discomfort should be refected upon as it demonstrates where the non - problematic breaks . Additionally , personal discomfort asks for deeper engagements as a potential indicator of structural issues [ 1 ] – one could , for example , probe whether discomfort arises be - cause one’s agency has been hampered , one’s habitual ways of behaving have been challenged , or because one’s privilege has been questioned . In any case , being vulnerable implies questioning one’s assumptions and opening up to the possibility of change . In sum - mary , the task of developing ethical sensibilities requires exploring the underlying reasons for discomfort . Soma design is a valuable approach to exploration as it provides instruments for refecting on what is usually taken for granted . However , engagement with our feelings through soma design does not promise to solve ethical issues on its own . One of the reasons is that the feeling of discomfort is contextual and impartial . The sen - sibility to discomfort is mediated by our personal histories ( which are inevitably intertwined with our social positions ) , expertise , and environments . For example , discomfort around a design decision can be felt by a person with a past experience of oppression while unnoticed by others . Some situations would make a trained physio - therapist uncomfortable , but would not be noticed by a layperson . Actions felt as entirely non - problematic at a university campus , might not be acceptable in another context . That means that if we design technology for others , we need to train our capacity for empathy and compassion as our end - users might have other sensitivities to discomfort . This said , exploring discomfort , its rea - sons , and ways to train a soma - based sensitivity to ethical issues , should be given further attention . What we learnt and reported here showed how the ethical work of changing our habitual ways of being cannot be done without engaging in purposefully vulnerable interaction with each other and the technology at hand . 6 CONCLUSION We positioned vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design and a necessary but often neglected part of an exploratory design process . We argued that purposeful vulnerability in design is an interactional achievement rather that an automatically emerging feature . Subsequently , we analysed the conditions of its emergence and what it renders . We also demonstrated that the state of being vulnerable opens up space for negotiating the processual ethics CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Popova , et al . of interaction design . The decision to engage in design with vul - nerability requires members of design teams to treat each other with care , but being vulnerable allows us as designers to feel ethical decision - making as emotionally loaded moments of tension and release . This stimulates our understanding of ethics as processual , sensorial , and situated in the bodies of both designers and users of technology . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Kelsey Cotton , Özgun Kilic Afsar , Yoav Luft , Nadia Campo Woytuk , and Pavel Karpashevich for their contributions . We would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their suggestions on improving the initial draft . The work was supported by WASP - HS through a Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation project MMW 2019 . 0228 and the Digital Futures centre at KTH , Stockholm University and RISE . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Sara Ahmed . 2017 . Living a Feminist Life . Duke University Press , Durham and London . [ 2 ] Madeline Balaam , Rob Comber , Rachel E Clarke , Charles Windlin , Anna Ståhl , Kristina Höök , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2019 . Emotion work in experience - centered design . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 12 . [ 3 ] Gerd Berget and Andrew MacFarlane . 2021 . Between Rigour and Ethics in Studies Involving Participants with Disabilities : A Tutorial . In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval . 343 – 344 . [ 4 ] Michel Bitbol and Claire Petitmengin . 2017 . Neurophenomenology and the micro - phenomenological interview . The Blackwell companion to consciousness 2 ( 2017 ) , 726 – 739 . [ 5 ] Tom Boellstorf , Bonnie Nardi , Celia Pearce , and Tina L Taylor . 2012 . Ethnography and virtual worlds . Princeton University Press . [ 6 ] Michael J . Boyle . 2020 . The Drone Age . Oxford University Press . [ 7 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clark . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . [ 8 ] Levi R . Bryant . 2011 . The Democracy of Objects . Open Humanities Press . [ 9 ] Karen Anne Cochrane , Kristina Mah , Anna Ståhl , Núñez - Pacheco Claudia , Made - line Balaam , Naseem Admadpour , and Lian Loke . 2022 . Body Maps : A Generative Tool for Soma - based Design [ forthcoming ] . In Proceedings of the Sixteen Interna - tional Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery . [ 10 ] Nils Dahlbäck , Arne Jönsson , and Lars Ahrenberg . 1993 . Wizard of Oz studies — why and how . Knowledge - Based Systems 6 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 258 – 266 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0950 - 7051 ( 93 ) 90017 - N Special Issue : Intelligent User Interfaces . [ 11 ] Danya Davis and Melissa Steyn . 2012 . Teaching social justice : Reframing some common pedagogical assumptions . Perspectives in Education 30 , 4 ( Dec . 2012 ) , 29 – 38 . https : / / journals . ufs . ac . za / index . php / pie / article / view / 1780 [ 12 ] Sara Eriksson , Kristina Höök , Richard Shusterman , Dag Svanes , Carl Unander - Scharin , and Åsa Unander - Scharin . 2020 . Ethics in Movement : Shaping and Being Shaped in Human - Drone Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 14 . [ 13 ] Sara Eriksson , Åsa Unander - Scharin , Vincent Trichon , Carl Unander - Scharin , Hedvig Kjellström , and Kristina Höök . 2019 . Dancing with drones : Crafting novel artistic expressions through intercorporeality . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 12 . [ 14 ] Sarah Fdili Alaoui . 2019 . Making an Interactive Dance Piece : Tensions in Integrat - ing Technology in Art . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( San Diego , CA , USA ) ( DIS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1195 – 1208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322289 [ 15 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Marjo Rauhala , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2017 . In - action ethics . Interacting with Computers 29 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 220 – 236 . [ 16 ] Thomas Fuchs and Hanne De Jaegher . 2009 . Enactive intersubjectivity : Partici - patory sense - making and mutual incorporation . Phenomenology and Cognitive Science 8 ( 2009 ) , 465 – 486 . [ 17 ] Harold Garfnkel . 1967 . Studies in Ethnomethodology . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Clifs , NJ . [ 18 ] Cally Gatehouse , Matthew Wood , Jo Briggs , James Pickles , and Shaun Lawson . 2018 . Troubling Vulnerability : Designing with LGBT Young People’s Ambivalence Towards Hate Crime Reporting . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 13 . [ 19 ] Eugene T Gendlin . 1986 . Process ethics and the political question . In The Moral Sense in the Communal Signifcance of Life . Springer , 265 – 275 . [ 20 ] Seyed Mohammad Ghafarian and Hamid Reza Shahriari . 2017 . Software Vul - nerability Analysis and Discovery Using Machine - Learning and Data - Mining Techniques : A Survey . ACM Comput . Surv . 50 , 4 ( 2017 ) . [ 21 ] Elisa Giaccardi and Johan Redström . 2020 . Technology and More - Than - Human Design . Design Issues 36 , 4 ( 09 2020 ) , 33 – 44 . [ 22 ] Elizabeth Grosz . 1994 . Volatile bodies : toward a corporeal feminism . Allen and Unwin St . Leonards , N . S . W . [ 23 ] Christian Heath , John Hindmarsh , and Paul Luf . 2010 . Video in Qualitative Re - search : Analysing Social Interaction in Everyday Life . SAGE Publications , London . [ 24 ] Kristina Höök . 2018 . Designing with the body : Somaesthetic interaction design . MIT Press . [ 25 ] Kristina Höök , Baptiste Caramiaux , Cumhur Erkut , Jodi Forlizzi , Nassrin Ha - jinejad , Michael Haller , Caroline Hummels , Katherine Isbister , Martin Jonsson , George Khut , et al . 2018 . Embracing frst - person perspectives in soma - based design . In Informatics , Vol . 5 . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute , 8 . [ 26 ] Kristina Höök , Sara Eriksson , Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard , Marianela Ciolf Fe - lice , Nadia Campo Woytuk , Ozgun Kilic Afsar , Vasiliki Tsaknaki , and Anna Ståhl . 2019 . Soma Design and Politics of the Body . In Proceedings of the Halfway to the Future Symposium 2019 . Association for Computing Machinery . [ 27 ] Don Ihde . 1990 . Technology and the lifeworld : From garden to earth . Indiana University Press . [ 28 ] Tim Ingold . 2020 . Correspondences . Polity . [ 29 ] Jim Isaak and Mina J . Hanna . 2018 . User Data Privacy : Facebook , Cambridge Analytica , and Privacy Protection . Computer 51 , 8 ( 2018 ) , 56 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MC . 2018 . 3191268 [ 30 ] Annkatrin Jung , Miquel Alfaras , Pavel Karpashevich , William Primett , and Kristina Höök . 2021 . Exploring Awareness of Breathing through Deep Touch Pres - sure . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 15 . [ 31 ] Pavel Karpashevich , Pedro Sanches , Rachael Garrett , Yoav Luft , Kelsey Cotton , Vasiliki Tsaknaki , and Kristina Höök . 2021 . Touching Our Breathing through Shape - Change : Monster , Organic Other or Twisted Mirror [ Forthcoming ] . Special Issue . Digital Touch . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) ( 2021 ) . [ 32 ] Merel Keijsers and Christoph Bartneck . 2018 . Mindless Robots Get Bullied . In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , 205 – 214 . [ 33 ] Paul A Komesarof . 1995 . From bioethics to microethics : Ethical debate and clinical medicine . In Troubled Bodies . Duke University Press , 62 – 86 . [ 34 ] Joseph La Delfa , Mehmet Aydin Baytaş , Emma Luke , Ben Koder , and Florian’Floyd’ Mueller . 2020 . Designing Drone Chi : Unpacking the Thinking and Making of Somaesthetic Human - Drone Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 575 – 586 . [ 35 ] Joseph La Delfa , Mehmet Aydin Baytas , Rakesh Patibanda , Hazel Ngari , Ro - hit Ashok Khot , and Florian’Floyd’ Mueller . 2020 . Drone chi : Somaesthetic human - drone interaction . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 36 ] Sara Ljungblad , Yemao Man , Mehmet Aydın Baytaş , Mafalda Gamboa , Moham - mad Obaid , and Morten Fjeld . 2021 . What Matters in Professional Drone Pilots’ Practice ? An Interview Study to Understand the Complexity of Their Work and In - form Human - Drone Interaction Research . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . [ 37 ] Lian Loke and Thecla Schiphorst . 2018 . The somatic turn in human - computer interaction . Interactions 25 , 5 ( 2018 ) , 54 – 5863 . [ 38 ] Maurice Merleau - Ponty . 2013 . Phenomenology of perception . Routledge . [ 39 ] Christian Meyer , Jürgen Streeck , and J Scott Jordan . 2017 . Intercorporeality : Emerging socialities in interaction . Oxford University Press . [ 40 ] Lorenza Mondada . 2018 . The multimodal interactional organization of tasting : Practices of tasting cheese in gourmet shops . Discourse Studies 20 , 6 ( 2018 ) , 743 – 769 . [ 41 ] Lorenza Mondada . 2020 . Audible Snifs : Smelling - in - Interaction . Research on Language and Social Interaction 53 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 140 – 163 . [ 42 ] Carman Neustaedter and Phoebe Sengers . 2012 . Autobiographical design in HCI research : designing and learning through use - it - yourself . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 514 – 523 . [ 43 ] Claudia Nunez - Pacheco and Lian Loke . 2014 . Crafting the Body - Tool : A Body - Centred Perspective on Wearable Technology . In Proceedings of the 2014 Confer - ence on Designing Interactive Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( DIS ’14 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 553 – 566 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598546 [ 44 ] Claire Petitmengin . 2006 . Describing one’s subjective experience in the second person : An interview method for the science of consciousness . Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 5 , 3 ( Dec . 2006 ) , 229 – 269 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11097 - 006 - 9022 - 2 [ 45 ] Claire Petitmengin , Anne Remillieux , and Camila Valenzuela - Moguillansky . 2019 . Discovering the structures of lived experience . Phenomenology and the Cognitive Vulnerability as an ethical stance in soma design processes CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Sciences 18 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 691 – 730 . [ 46 ] Sarah Pink . 2015 . Doing sensory ethnography . Sage . [ 47 ] Robert Rosenberger and Peter PCC Verbeek . 2015 . Postphenomenological investi - gations : essays on human - technology relations . Lexington Books . [ 48 ] Selina Schepers , Katrien Dreessen , and Bieke Zaman . 2018 . Exploring User Gains in Participatory Design Processes with Vulnerable Children . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 . 1 – 5 . [ 49 ] Thecla Schiphorst . 2011 . Self - evidence : applying somatic connoisseurship to experience design . In CHI’11 extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems . 145 – 160 . [ 50 ] Donald A Schon . 1979 . The refective practitioner . New York ( 1979 ) . [ 51 ] Maxine Sheets - Johnstone . 2008 . The roots of morality . Penn State Press . [ 52 ] Maxine Sheets - Johnstone . 2011 . The primacy of movement . Vol . 82 . John Ben - jamins Publishing . [ 53 ] Richard Shusterman . 2008 . Body consciousness : A philosophy of mindfulness and somaesthetics . Cambridge University Press . [ 54 ] Richard Shusterman . 2012 . Thinking through the body : Essays in somaesthetics . Cambridge University Press . [ 55 ] Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard , Ozgun Kilic Afsar , Marianela Ciolf Felice , Nadia Campo Woytuk , and Madeline Balaam . 2020 . Designing with Intimate Materi - als and Movements : Making " Menarche Bits " . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 587 – 600 . [ 56 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - ethics for participatory design with marginalised chil - dren . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 . 1 – 12 . [ 57 ] Anna Ståhl , Vasiliki Tsaknaki , and Madeline Balaam . 2021 . Validity and Rigour in Soma Design - Sketching with the Soma [ forthcoming ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3470132 [ 58 ] David Struzek , Katerina Cerna , Richard Paluch , Sven Bittenbinder , Claudia Müller , Arlind Reuter , Lydia Stamato , Özge Subasi , Foad Hamidi , and John Vines . 2021 . Designing for New Forms of Vulnerability : Exploring Transformation and Empow - erment in Times of COVID - 19 . 1 – 5 . [ 59 ] Lucy Alice Suchman . 2017 . Situational awareness and adherence to the principle of distinction as a necessary condition for lawful autonomy . German Federal Foreign Ofce , 273 – 283 . [ 60 ] Paul Tennent , Kristina Höök , Steve Benford , Vasiliki Tsaknaki , Anna Ståhl , Clau - dia Dauden Roquet , Charles Windlin , Pedro Sanches , Joe Marshall , Christine Li , Juan Pablo Martinez Avila , Miquel Alfaras , Muhammad Umair , and Feng Zhou . 2021 . Articulating Soma Experiences Using Trajectories . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445482 [ 61 ] Joan C . Tronto . 1998 . An Ethic of Care . Generations : Journal of the American Society on Aging 22 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 15 – 20 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 44875693 [ 62 ] Vasiliki Tsaknaki . 2021 . The Breathing Wings : An Autobiographical Soma Design Exploration of Touch Qualities through Shape - Change Materials . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 . 1266 – 1279 . [ 63 ] Vasiliki Tsaknaki , Madeline Balaam , Anna Ståhl , Pedro Sanches , Charles Windlin , Pavel Karpashevich , and Kristina Höök . 2019 . Teaching Soma Design . In Proceed - ings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( San Diego , CA , USA ) ( DIS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1237 – 1249 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322327 [ 64 ] Vasiliki Tsaknaki , Kelsey Cotton , Pavel Karpashevich , and Pedro Sanches . 2021 . “Feeling the Sensor Feeling you” : A Soma Design Exploration on Sensing Non - habitual Breathing . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 16 . [ 65 ] Francisco J Varela . 1999 . Ethical know - how : Action , wisdom , and cognition . Stanford University Press . [ 66 ] Peter - Paul Verbeek . 2008 . Morality in design : Design ethics and the morality of technological artifacts . In Philosophy and design . Springer , 91 – 103 . [ 67 ] Jenny Waycott , Hilary Davis , Anja Thieme , Stacy Branham , John Vines , and Cosmin Munteanu . 2015 . Ethical Encounters in HCI : Research in Sensitive Settings . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 2369 – 2372 . [ 68 ] Danielle Wilde , Anna Vallgårda , and Oscar Tomico . 2017 . Embodied design ideation methods : analysing the power of estrangement . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 5158 – 5170 . [ 69 ] Charles Windlin , Anna Ståhl , Pedro Sanches , Vasiliki Tsaknaki , Pavel Karpashe - vich , Madeline Balaam , and Kristina Höök . 2019 . Soma Bits - mediating technology to orchestrate bodily experiences . In RTD 2019 - Research through Design Confer - ence 2019 , the Science Centre , Delft , on 19th to 22nd March 2019 . [ 70 ] Michalinos Zembylas . 2017 . Practicing an ethic of discomfort as an ethic of care in higher education teaching . Critical Studies in Teaching and Learning 5 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 11 – 17 . [ 71 ] Howe Yuan Zhu , Eirene Margaret Magsino , Sanjid Mahmood Hamim , Chin - Teng Lin , and Hsiang - Ting Chen . 2021 . A Drone Nearly Hit Me ! A Refection on the Human Factors of Drone Collisions . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . [ 72 ] Jarrett Zigon . 2007 . Moral breakdown and the ethical demand : A theoretical framework for an anthropology of moralities . Anthropological Theory 7 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 131 – 150 .