© Sean Elliott , Carolyn Fitzgerald , 2023 This document is protected by copyright law . Use of the services of Érudit ( including reproduction ) is subject to its terms and conditions , which can be viewed online . https : / / apropos . erudit . org / en / users / policy - on - use / This article is disseminated and preserved by Érudit . Érudit is a non - profit inter - university consortium of the Université de Montréal , Université Laval , and the Université du Québec à Montréal . Its mission is to promote and disseminate research . https : / / www . erudit . org / en / Document generated on 09 / 09 / 2023 4 : 40 p . m . Canadian Journal of Higher Education Revue canadienne d ' enseignement supérieur Navigating Higher Education : Factors Contributing to Former Foster Care Youth’s Graduation from Post - Secondary Education Sean Elliott and Carolyn Fitzgerald Volume 52 , Number 4 , 2022 Special Issue : The Perspectives of Traditionally Underrepresented Students URI : https : / / id . erudit . org / iderudit / 1102550ar See table of contents Publisher ( s ) Canadian Society for the Study of Higher Education ISSN 2293 - 6602 ( digital ) Explore this journal Cite this article Elliott , S . & Fitzgerald , C . ( 2022 ) . Navigating Higher Education : Factors Contributing to Former Foster Care Youth’s Graduation from Post - Secondary Education . Canadian Journal of Higher Education / Revue canadienne d ' enseignement supérieur , 52 ( 4 ) , 56 – 66 . Article abstract This study identifies factors contributing to the success of foster care alumni ( FCA ) who graduate from post - secondary education ( PSE ) , despite institutions devoting little effort to making PSE accessible to FCA . Nine FCA PSE graduates were interviewed about their success . Responses were analyzed using an exploratory method to identify themes related to factors deemed critical to theirgraduation from PSE . Ferguson’s ( 2019 ) conceptual model of a Student Development Pathway was used to organize findings ; success factors were analyzed accordingly to their role in the Preparation , Awareness , Engagement , Transition , and Persistence phases . Findings suggest the role of coaching and caring adults was most notable in the Preparation , Engagement , and Transitional phases to PSE . Determination factored predominantly during the Persistence phase , and Resistance was most associated with the Preparation and Persistence phases . Findings also indicated numerous untapped opportunities and initiatives that could make PSE more accessible and achievable for FCA . Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) Navigating Higher Education : Factors Contributing to Former Foster Care Youth’s Graduation from Post - Secondary Education Abstract This study identifies factors contributing to the success of foster care alumni ( FCA ) who graduate from post - secondary education ( PSE ) , despite institutions devoting little effort to making PSE accessible to FCA . Nine FCA PSE graduates were interviewed about their success . Responses were analyzed using an exploratory method to identify themes related to factors deemed critical to their graduation from PSE . Ferguson’s ( 2019 ) conceptual model of a Student Development Pathway was used to organize findings ; success factors were analyzed accordingly to their role in the Preparation , Awareness , Engagement , Transition , and Persistence phases . Findings suggest the role of coaching and caring adults was most notable in the Preparation , Engagement , and Transitional phases to PSE . Determination factored predominantly during the Persistence phase , and Resistance was most associated with the Preparation and Persistence phases . Findings also indicated numerous untapped opportunities and initiatives that could make PSE more accessible and achievable for FCA . Keywords : foster youth , foster care alumni , student success , post - secondary education Résumé Cette étude définit les facteurs contribuant à la réussite d’anciens jeunes pris en charge titulaires d’un diplôme d’études postsecon - daires ( DEPS ) , malgré le fait que les établissements ont consacré peu d ' efforts à rendre les études postsecondaires accessibles aux jeunes et anciens pris en charge . Neuf anciens jeunes pris en charge titulaires d’un DEPS ont été interrogés au sujet de leur réussite . Les réponses ont été analysées par une méthode exploratoire pour identifier les thèmes liés aux facteurs jugés critiques pour l ' ob - tention de leur DEPS . Le modèle conceptuel de « Parcours de développement étudiant» ( Student Development Pathway ) Ferguson ( 2019 ) a été utilisé pour organiser les résultats . Les facteurs de réussite ont été analysés en fonction de leur rôle dans les phases de préparation , de sensibilisation , d ' engagement , de transition et de persévérance . Les résultats suggèrent que le rôle de l’encadrement et la présence d’adultes bienveillants sont les plus importants dans les phases de préparation , d’engagement et de transition vers les études supérieures . La détermination a joué un rôle prédominant durant la phase de persévérance , et la résistance a été le plus souvent associée aux phases de préparation et de persévérance . Les résultats indiquent également de nombreuses occasions et initiatives inexploitées qui pourraient rendre les études postsecondaires plus accessibles et réalisables pour les jeunes anciens pris en charge . Mots - clés : jeunes pris en charge , anciens jeunes pris en charge , protection de la jeunesse , réussite scolaire , études postsecondaires Introduction Despite recent efforts to increase the diversity of the stu - dent population in post - secondary education ( PSE ) , for - mer foster care youth remain the least likely candidates to attend PSE , never mind join the ranks of graduates . In fact , although 84 % of foster care alumni ( FCA ) express an interest in PSE ( The Annie E . Casey Foundation , 2014 ) , Carolyn FitzGerald Wilfrid Laurier University Sean Elliott Wilfrid Laurier University Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 57 less than 44 % of Ontario foster youth complete high school compared to 81 % of their peers ( Kovarikova , 2017 ) . Fewer still enroll in PSE ; research from the United States indicates that only 20 % enroll in PSE ( Unrau et al . , 2012 ) , and a Brit - ish Columbia - based study found that youth in care were 31 % less likely to enroll in PSE than non - foster care youth ( British Columbia Ministry of Education , 2018 ) . Success in post - secondary is rarer still ; American research indicates that only 2 – 11 % of FCA actually complete any kind of PSE ( Courtney et al . , 2011 ; Emerson & Bassett , 2010 ; Fergu - son , 2019 ; Salazar , 2012 ) . Despite general agreement that education is a basic human right , foster youth have been called an “invisible population on most college cam - puses” ( Medlin & Jaeger , 2021 , p . 154 ) , a reflection on the unlikelihood of FCA engaging with this right . The purpose of this study is to consider lessons that can be learned from FCA who have succeeded in their goals to complete PSE , thereby identifying means by which higher education can become more accessible to other FCA . Without doubt , many FCA experience significant emo - tional and mental health repercussions from childhood trauma related to abuse , neglect , violence , and family dys - function ( Salazar et al . , 2013 ) . According to some studies , 75 % of FCA exhibit serious behavioural or mental health problems requiring ongoing support ( Pecora et al . , 2009 ; Medlin , 2019 ) . However , ongoing support of any nature is seldom available , given that foster youth “age out” of the governmental child welfare system at age 18 , and thereby lose access to formal supports including housing , health care , counselling , and financial assistance ( Medlin , 2019 ) . At a time when most young adults are considering career pathways through PSE , many foster youths are prematurely trying to address the basic needs of food , shelter , and in - come . If FCA are additionally burdened by lack of access to higher education , they will be at further risk for home - lessness , criminal behaviour , dependence on public assis - tance , and increased psychological distress ( Merdinger et al . , 2005 ) . To reduce this risk , post - secondary institutions ( PSIs ) should consider their role in making higher education ac - cessible to this population . However , historically , educa - tional institutions have devoted little effort to attracting or supporting FCA , likely influenced by their drive to meet and maintain enrolment targets . If PSIs are influenced by the negative , deficit - focused narrative imposed upon FCA , they may see FCA as unlikely candidates for PSE , and therefore unworthy of their recruitment efforts . Trends in research support this deficit narrative , given that “existing research tends to focus on negative outcomes and barriers to access and degree attainment , rarely focusing on those foster care alumni who enroll and persist in higher education” ( Medlin & Jaeger , 2021 , p . 154 ) . In this study , we interviewed FCA graduates of PSE to explore factors influencing their success at Ontario’s PSIs , for the purpose of advancing our understanding of how to make higher education more accessible to FCA . Resilience theory , resistance theory , and Ferguson’s ( 2019 ) Student Development Pathway framework are used to inform and frame how some FCA succeed beyond traditional expecta - tions . Findings serve as signposts to institutions , advocates , and policy makers in reversing the mindset of anticipatory failure and paving the path to success for more FCA to enroll in PSE programs . Literature Review As noted by Moyer & Goldberg ( 2019 ) and Ferguson ( 2019 ) , little research exists that identifies barriers for FCA within PSE , or that explores conditions , strategies , or qual - ities that foster success for FCA in PSE . Research tends to locate the problems within FCA and focuses on their high rates of trauma ( Moyer & Goldberg , 2019 ) , mental illness ( Courtney et al . , 2005 ) , and lack of academic preparation for PSE ( Salazar , 2012 ; Unrau et al . , 2012 ) . Within the last three years , however , there have been at least eight doc - toral dissertations on FCA’s successful pursuit of PSE . For example , Sarubbi ( 2019 ) conducted participant - based re - search related to the role of resilience and external supports in FCAs’ success in PSE . Medlin ( 2019 ) documented key qualities and developmental tasks that supported success in FCA . Similarly , Newell ( 2018 ) conducted a phenomeno - logical study of a community of foster youth to document the key role of relationships , and internal and external motiva - tors in PSE success . This recent shift to a more positive and solution - focused approach demonstrates a growing inter - est in how FCA can overcome barriers experienced within a post - secondary setting . Albeit preliminary , a consistent picture is emerging about both internal and external factors that support FCAs’ success in PSE . Regarding internal factors , in a small - scale study with 11 successful graduates , Neal ( 2017 ) noted that all FCA were educationally gifted students who demonstrat - ed tenacity , fortitude , resilience , and a strong resistance to negative stereotyping and low expectations . In a study with 10 FCA , Newell ( 2018 ) also noted the role of ambition to achieve their goals , to survive and overcome stereotypes . Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 58 Medlin ( 2019 ) framed key characteristics as fortitude , self - reliance , compassion , optimism , and high motivation . Finally , in another small - scale study , Sarubbi ( 2019 ) identi - fied the significance of combatting stereotypes as critical to FCAs’ determination to succeed in PSE . Despite the use of different terms to describe these characteristics , it appears that all FCA in these studies shared the common character - istics of a deep motivation to achieve a new life trajectory through education , and a drive to resist the negative ste - reotypes and low expectations they experienced as foster youth . Regarding external supports , in a study to evaluate a campus - based college support program for foster care students , Unrau et al . ( 2017 ) identified coaching , financial aid , and housing assistance as key factors to support suc - cess in PSE . In their study , housing support intersected with financial assistance ( i . e . , providing room and board ) and coaching from caring adults ( i . e . , as might be offered by a family landlord ) . Notably , some of these FCA had 24 - hour access to a coach with specialized trauma - informed train - ing . Having help from this coach was rated as very important by the participants in this study . These results are consistent with findings from numerous other sources , including Day et al . ( 2012 ) , Newell ( 2018 ) and Medlin ( 2019 ) , all of whom reported emotional support and educational advocacy from supportive people as critical to the success of FCA . Theoretical Considerations Johnson’s ( 2019 ) extensive review of research on FCA con - cludes that most of the literature demonstrates an “absence of theoretical perspectives guiding the research . In fact , 37 out of the 46 studies made no explicit mention of their guid - ing conceptual / theoretical framework or perspective , spe - cifically as it relates to the phenomenon under exploration or factors being tested” ( p . 9 ) . Notably , since Johnson’s ( 2019 ) article , some research does incorporate a thorough consideration of theoretical frameworks ( e . g . , Ferguson , 2019 ; Medlin , 2019 ; Medlin & Jaeger , 2021 ) , all of which consider resilience theory as explanation for the success of some FCA in PSE . There is considerable debate within the literature as to a precise definition of resilience , but most agree that resil - ience involves leveraging protective factors against adverse life events , be they short - term and acute , or chronic ( van Breda , 2018 ) . According to Zimmerman ( 2013 ) , protective factors can be internal assets , such as the deep motiva - tion to achieve a new life trajectory through education , as described above , or external , such as a supportive network of friends and family . As noted above , coaches may provide some of the socio - emotional supports and practical advice that non - FCA students receive from their families . In the absence of family privilege ( defined by Seita as “benefits , mostly invisible , that come from membership in a stable family” [ 2001 , p . 131 ] ) , many FCA students miss out on the support that comes from having consistent adults to care for them into their young adult years . Changes in both liv - ing arrangements and the adults appointed to caregiving disturb the developmental process of iterative learning . However , evidence from studies by Unrau et al . ( 2017 ) , Newell ( 2018 ) , Medlin ( 2019 ) , and Day et al . ( 2012 ) clear - ly suggest FCA who connect with other supportive adults benefit from an educational perspective . Resilience theory therefore offers a particularly useful framework from which to understand the academic success of FCA , given the in - herent presence of adverse life events for foster youth , and the growing body of research that suggests FCA attribute their success to both internal factors , such as drive and de - termination spurred on in response to adverse experiences , and external factors , such as supportive adults . Given the prevalence of a deep need to combat neg - ative stereotyping and low expectations among FCA , we contend it may be useful to also consider resistance theory within this context . Although it is beyond the scope of this article to provide a full analysis of how resistance has been conceptualized over the ages , resistance theory relates to power struggles and one’s opposition to domination ( Kim , 2010 ) . From an educational psychology perspective , resis - tance to perceived oppressive practices within a problem - atic environment allows one to achieve a sense of agency or control over the influence of that environment ( Robinson & Ward , 1991 ) . To date , studies on FCA—except for Neal ( 2017 ) —tend not to consider theories of resistance , despite the growing number of studies that identify resistance to negative stereotypes and low expectations as something critical to FCAs’ academic success . Certainly , the preva - lence of negative stereotyping and low expectations direct - ed toward foster youth is well documented . For example , Dworsky and Pérez ( 2010 ) found that foster youth were rarely encouraged to pursue PSE by people within the child welfare system , perhaps in a misguided effort to minimize expectations for those whose lives are already riddled with barriers . Similarly , a report by Ontario’s Provincial Advocate Office for Children and Youth identifies stigma entrenched within our community systems as one of the most signif - icant ways in which we limit the success of foster youth Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 59 ( Kovarikova , 2017 ) . Ferguson ( 2019 ) noted the same expe - rience in her sample of foster youth , especially from those tasked with overseeing their care , prompting the following comment : If social workers expect little of FY , or do not discuss PSE with FY , what influence does that have on a young per - son’s educational pathway ? How does a young person build educational aspirations and expectations for them - selves if they are not being encouraged by those around them , or worse , told they are not a fit ? ( p . 41 ) Given the emerging trend that suggests resistance to these experiences is a key factor in achieving PSE goals , resis - tance theory may help to explain the power of one’s efforts to resist stigma and stereotyping . However , notably absent in the literature is an in - depth analysis of the more precise role of these factors at differ - ent points throughout one’s academic journey . Based on a 2019 analysis of barriers and success factors identified by child welfare workers , advocates , experts , and FCA PSE students , Ferguson proposed that an FCA’s journey through PSE could be framed within five stages of experiential learning that include ( 1 ) Preparation , ( 2 ) Awareness , ( 3 ) Engagement , ( 4 ) Transition , and ( 5 ) Persistence . Accord - ing to this framework , in the Preparation stage , FCA have early experiences and opportunities that impact the likeli - hood of their success in PSE . During the Awareness stage , youth learn of potential PSE opportunities . During the En - gagement stage , FCA participate in any processes and procedures required for registration and enrolment . During the Transition stage , students officially enter PSE and begin their program of study . Persistence is the final stage and re - fers to the time during which students progress to program completion . Ferguson’s Pathway framework may be a particular - ly useful framework to extend understandings of how and when various factors related to student success impact an FCA’s journey through PSE . As noted in the literature review , recent studies have identified some of the factors related to FCAs’ successful completion of PSE . However , by map - ping these factors onto Ferguson’s Pathway framework , we highlight the role that each of these factors play in an FCA’s journey through PSE . In keeping with phenomenological research design ( Creswell & Poth , 2018 ) , this study aims to describe FCAs’ lived experience of their journey through PSE , specifically focusing on the factors to which FCA at - tribute their success , and to consider these factors as they relate to Ferguson’s Pathway framework . To the best of the authors’ knowledge , this is the first phenomenological study to interview a relatively large number of FCA PSE graduates in Ontario , and to consider how factors related to success fit within a student developmental pathway framework . Method Positionality Although the researchers approach this study from a posi - tion of privilege ( being White , middle - class professionals in higher education ) , one of the authors is a former FCA who successfully completed two post - secondary degrees . This journey was not without challenges and influenced this au - thor’s interest in the topic . More specifically , the absence of research highlighting pathways to success in PSE motivat - ed this specific study . Notably , sharing the author’s identity as an FCA appeared to embolden research participants to disclose more details regarding their educational journey . Participants Nine FCA who had graduated from Ontario colleges , uni - versities , or apprenticeships participated in this research ( three identified as male , six as female , and ranged in age from their early 20s to 40s ) . Because Canada’s education - al systems and child welfare management jurisdiction are handled provincially , only participants who completed PSE education in the province of Ontario were included in order to reduce the complications of comparing varying systems . During the interviews , participants were asked to identify and reflect on success factors that marked their experience in PSE . Seven out of the nine participants completed more than one credential , and seven out of the nine were in the midst of completing additional credentials in higher educa - tion at the time of the study . This included college diplomas , as well as undergraduate - and graduate - level university de - grees . Data Collection Potential participants were identified through promotional presentations and agency meetings at the Child Welfare Po - litical Action Committee , educational programs , higher ed - ucation advisory committees , and Child Welfare agencies . Each participant engaged in an exploratory , semi - struc - Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 60 tured online interview with one of the authors that lasted approximately 45 – 60 minutes . Each participant answered approximately 15 – 20 questions related to their academic journey , thereby allowing the researchers to generate a life story about each participant’s educational pathway . Ques - tions related to challenges and supports experienced by the participants prior to and during PSE . Secondary questions focused on the impact of relationships , motivating factors , advice from others , insights , and tips for future FCA . When permission was granted , interviews were recorded and tran - scribed , providing the researchers with 585 pages of inter - view notes and transcriptions to be codified and analyzed for general themes . Analysis Transcripts were analyzed using a constant comparison method ( Boeije , 2002 ) . During the first cycle , the research - ers attached approximately 60 descriptive phrases to units of text . In the second phase , initial codes were collected under two categories , which included internal and external factors supporting success . During the third cycle , a the - matic analysis of responses was mapped onto the student development pathway themes . Three broad thematic codes were identified : “positive relationships , ” “determination , ” and “resistance” ( defined below ) . Each theme was then mapped upon the five phases of the Student Development Pathway framework to determine if some themes figured more predominately than others within each phase . At every stage , the researchers compared the thematic coding to the original transcript to ensure the codes reflect - ed the information and ideas shared during the interview . To protect the participants’ identity , pseudonyms have been used , and any other identifying information has been omitted here . This research was conducted with permission from the Research Ethics Board ( REB ) of the researchers’ university . Findings Overview In this first - of - its - kind phenomenological analysis and map - ping of factors that support post - secondary success among FCA in the province of Ontario , three major themes emerged regarding factors attributed to the participants’ success in PSE . First , FCA described caring , coaching adults , such as teachers , social workers , school staff , a friend’s parent , foster parents , athletic coaches , or church pastors , who of - fered belief , inspiration , hope , acceptance , and encourage - ment toward and throughout PSE . Second , FCA described determination , an inner drive that propelled them into and through PSE . Even when their confidence waned or when they lacked a vision or clear goals , participants described their resolve to succeed “come hell or high water” ( Lucy ) . Third , participants described their resistance to the expec - tation that they would repeat the lives of their own biologi - cal parents , and their resistance to negative stereotypes or stigmatization ( i . e . , whereby many expect failure from FY ) . Although related to determination , resistance was seen as distinct in that it was specific to a fight against negative ex - pectations , rather than a more general quality related to the resolve to succeed . The comments associated with each theme were then mapped onto Ferguson’s ( 2019 ) Student Development Pathway framework , to highlight the significance of these factors in the Preparation , Awareness , Engagement , Tran - sition , and Persistence phases of PSE . This mapping exer - cise indicated that the FCA in this study experienced coach - ing and caring adults as most dominant in the Preparation , Engagement , and Transitional phases to PSE . In contrast , determination was tied most often to the Persistence phase . Resistance factored most dominantly in the Prepa - ration and Persistence phases . Table 1 Distribution of Comments Related to Success in PSE and Phase of Academic Journey ( n = 9 ) Themes Preparation Awareness Engagement Transition Persistence Caring , coaching adults 9 1 6 7 2 Determination 2 3 3 0 8 Resistance 5 3 2 3 6 Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 61 The Role of Caring , Coaching Adults in Preparation for , Engagement with , and Transitions to PSE Despite the common thread among participants of experi - ences of neglect , abuse , and abandonment by any number of adults , participants described the impact of other caring adults as being one of the strongest success factors in their preparation for , engagement with , and transition to high - er education . In what Ferguson frames as the Preparation phase , many participants commented on the support they received as students in elementary and secondary school that created possibilities for a PSE . For example , Jesse at - tributed much of her success to an elementary teacher who helped initiate the assessment of a visual disability , thereby creating conditions for her to be successful in school : “He accepted my assertion that I could not really see , and he took action to help me to get glasses . He fueled my love of learning and helped me with my capacity . ” Other supportive adults were more directly involved in helping the FCA plan their future . For example , Brittany shared her memory of a junior high teacher who motivated her to complete high school and encouraged her to expand her interests in arts and athletics . Caring , coaching adults also played a significant role in the Engagement phase . However , participants’ description of this help clearly indicates the value of their role beyond concrete assistance with specific tasks . For example , Julia stated that college staff at an academic upgrading program helped her with the application process . However , she went on to state , When I went home , I didn’t have anyone to go to and they [ teachers ] were there for me . I’ve seen them outside the college , and they were happy for me . I buy them roses just because I want to . One of my teachers says that I am like their other daughter they didn’t have . She inspired me . Similarly , Peter talked about the emotional support he re - ceived from staff at an alternative high school program that gave him “a glimmer of hope to reconsider post - secondary education . ” When staff helped him transfer his credits for a college academic upgrading program to accelerate his suc - cess , his hope for a college diploma materialized . Caring and coaching adults were equally important in the actual Transition to PSE phase . Jesse relayed how staff from her former group home stayed in touch with her and told her she would have a place to go on holidays when she started PSE : “That meant a lot to me . One of my close social workers had high expectations for me . She believed in my future and what I could accomplish . She was my cheering squad . ” Peter described the role of his first group of profes - sors at PSE . He stated that some professors had specific insight into social work , counselling , and student advising , and were very understanding of his background and chal - lenges . He came away feeling that if “ [ he ] needed some - thing , they were there to help . ” John described his imme - diate connection to a specific program at post - secondary , and noted that the supportive people within Indigenous studies really helped me to succeed . I learned about the systematic issues faced by Indigenous people especially the res - idential schools and many other pains that were very similar . I saw that my past traumas were very similar , and I was given opportunity to work through trauma and pain . It changed my future . All FCA described the significance of this exposure to sup - port in the initial phases of their post - secondary journey , especially as a boost to their confidence that they could achieve their goals . The Role of Determination in the Persistence Phase of PSE Several participants reflected on an inner drive that helped them persist in PSE . Interestingly , none of the participants could identify the exact source of their tenacity , but all con - nected their refusal to give up as driven by a powerful need to escape the conditions of their childhood and create a new life trajectory for themselves . Sam described this by stating “Completing PSE on my own was incredibly challenging BUT what is the alternative ? Going back ? That was not an option ! ” Similarly , Lucy said , “People could judge , make as - sumptions , hurt my confidence and doubt me , but I would just keep persevering and be confident that I would achieve it—come hell or high water . ” Julia also described her drive as key to succeeding in PSE and securing a career : “I am looking at Julia down the road , and I don’t want to let Julia down . ” Like the other participants , Brittany also noted there was “something inside me that wanted me to keep going . ” Interestingly , none of the participants described this asset as a quality they used to help them succeed in elementary or secondary school , in their efforts to learn about PSE , or in their efforts to apply and begin a new program at PSE . Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 62 The Role of Resistance in the Preparation and Persistence Phases in PSE All participants in this study spoke of experiences of dis - couragement , dissuasion , and low expectations regard - ing PSE . However , many also spoke of their resistance to these negative stereotypes and expectations as key to their success . Prior to even thinking about PSE ( i . e . , during the Preparation phase ) , as a younger child , Brittany came to understand the stigma associated with being a foster child . Brittany described an annual event in her hometown , in which the foster children sang in a program to raise money . She perceived that the event created pity among attendees to encourage them to give more money , but it taught her that these children , including herself , were not considered normal . This fuelled a desire in Brittany to not be “a statis - tic” of another foster kid failure , but to be like the “normal” non - foster youth . Other participants described even more direct efforts to dissuade them from higher education . Sam said : [ Education was ] not supported by my foster home . At one point , I was told to stop studying and go watch TV . We lived in poverty and had food insecurity . When I re - alized I had to go to medical school , I knew I had to go against what was familiar . As a second example , Tom described a conversation about his interest in social work with a high school guidance counsellor , who told him that “people with his background do not normally handle those kind of career aspirations well . ” Tom offered this as both an example of the stereotyp - ing he faced , but also as an example of an experience that fueled his resistance to failure : “I think it [ his success ] came back to my drive [ of ] not wanting to be like my parents . I just didn’t want to go there . ” Many of the participants in this study also described the role of resistance in the Persistence phase of PSE . While in post - secondary , Jesse stated that “many people dissuaded me and asked , ‘are you sure you can do this ? ’” However , Jesse found this “very annoying” and used it as fuel for her efforts to go against expectations people set for her . Simi - larly , Sam stated that throughout his time in post - secondary “there was the fear of failing and not having anything to show for it . If you fail , you would prove everyone right . If you don’t have that fight in yourself , you won’t make it . Either you’re rebellious or really resilient . ” Finally , in describing how she persisted in PSE , Lucy described the expectation that she would lead her mother’s life and stated “I didn’t want to be my mother . She was not educated and didn’t have choices . This was my number one driver . I wanted to be in control and achieve success . ” Discussion The analysis of findings reveals that participants in this study attributed their success in PSE in Ontario to the influence of caring , coaching adults , and their inner qualities of determi - nation and resistance . However , by mapping these themes onto Ferguson’s ( 2019 ) Student Development Pathway framework , we are able to more precisely state that coach - ing , caring adults played a particularly important role in the Preparation , Engagement , and Transition phases of PSE . In contrast , determination was particularly important to the Persistence phase , and resistance factored most dominant - ly in the Preparation and Persistence phases . These findings serve to highlight how and when participants made use of external and internal resources available to them , but may also indicate missed opportunities . For example , few FCA indicated they had access to a caring , coaching adult in the Persistence phase , although most speculated on how such a person might have helped them complete their studies . Many findings from this novel phenomenological re - search are consistent with recent studies working with FCA to determine factors supporting success in PSE , especially regarding the importance of a caring adult ( e . g . , Day et al . , 2012 ; Medlin , 2019 ; Neal , 2017 ; Newell , 2018 ; Unrau et al . , 2017 ) . However , the results of our study extend these find - ings in the sense that although participants also identified caring , coaching adults as extremely important to their suc - cess , these adults were generally only available to them in the Preparation , Engagement , and Transition phases . No - tably , none of the FCA in this study spoke of a caring adult to help them learn about options within higher education ( i . e . , during the Awareness phase ) . Many researchers have com - mented on the pervasive stigma and negative stereotyping attached to foster youth ( e . g . , Dworsky & Pérez , 2010 ; Fer - guson , 2019 ; Kovarikova , 2017 ) ; findings from this study suggest that expectations are set so low for foster youth that adults in their lives do not even consider providing infor - mation about PSE . Neither did any of the FCA in this study speak of a caring adult to help them persist in their program , although most participants speculated about how such a person would have helped them complete their studies . Significantly , none of the FCA in this study spoke of any kind of formal post - secondary program to assist with housing , tuition , finances , or mentorship , which may explain the ab - Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 63 sence of caring adults in the Persistence phase of PSE . De - spite recent announcements regarding tuition waivers for FCA at Ontario universities ( Gahagan , 2021 ) , it may be that Ontario is far behind the United States in terms of programs to help FCA persist in PSE ( see Fostering Success , 2022 ) , thereby denying FCA easy access to mentorship , one of the most significant forms of support noted by FCA . The quality of determination , or inner drive , is less commonly noted in the literature , although Neal ( 2017 ) de - scribed her sample of FCA as marked by tenacity and for - titude , Newell ( 2018 ) noted the role of ambition to achieve their goals and ambition to survive , and Medlin ( 2019 ) framed a key characteristic as fortitude . Similarly , Samuels and Pryce ( 2008 ) refer to survivalist self - reliance as a key quality that helped the foster care youth overcome adversi - ties , and Ferguson ( 2019 ) reported that determination was an integral quality that allowed for the kind of self - advocacy that participants needed to persist in their educational goals . In the current study , FCA spoke of determination specifically within the Persistence phase of PSE . Given the few studies that have considered qualities related to determination , it would be helpful for future researchers to come to a consen - sus regarding how to describe this trait , and to explore this quality as it impacts all stages in the journey through PSE . Similarly , although there is also a paucity of theoretical frameworks that specifically consider the quality of resis - tance to negative expectations and stereotyping , this qual - ity emerged as meaningful in our findings , and consistent with the few studies on this trait ( e . g . , Drapeau et al . , 2007 ; Neal , 2017 ; Newell , 2018 ; Sarubbi , 2019 ) . Participants in the current study indicated that resistance to negative ex - pectations and stereotypes propelled them toward success , especially during the Preparation and Persistence phases . Clearly , negative expectations and stereotyping were per - vasive forces in the FCAs’ early lives , given that almost all participants spoke of experiences of educational discour - agement and dissuasion that began in childhood . Resis - tance to these experiences also emerged as an important factor in completing high school , thereby making PSE a possibility . However , resistance also emerged as important in the Persistence phase , thereby suggesting that the stig - ma encountered prior to PSE pursued FCA throughout their advanced studies . Implications for Practitioners Implications from this study for child welfare agencies , educators , educational institutions , and child welfare ad - vocates are two - fold . First , foster youth may benefit when opportunities are created to nurture the qualities of deter - mination and resistance . Anyone supporting the education of foster youth should engage in a critical self - reflection of intentional and unintentional efforts to dissuade or dis - courage current and future educational prospects , but it is unlikely that this mindset can be eradicated entirely . There - fore , practitioners may best equip youth by nurturing qual - ities like determination and resistance , thereby providing them with the tools they need to counter these experiences . The ongoing roles of caring adults in the lives of foster youth must also be considered , especially if that person can be a champion for the youth’s educational ambitions . Second , Ferguson’s ( 2019 ) Pathway framework is par - ticularly important to practitioners because it highlights that success in PSE involves moving through several different phases , beginning in elementary school and continuing un - til graduation from PSE . Finding ways to promote success at every individual and unique phase will encourage a wholis - tic approach that relies on deliberate , effective , and evi - dence - based strategies . Certainly , this study suggests that these resources are not equally available to FCA through - out all phases of their PSE journey , thereby indicating more precise ways in which we can build success . For example , in considering the absence of caring and knowledgeable adults in his life , John noted that his “foster and adoptive families did not encourage PSE . I was ill - informed . I didn’t know the differences between one degree or another , and I didn’t have someone to tell me . ” Clearly , an advocate during the Awareness phase would have been an asset . Many oth - ers also commented on the role a caring adult might have played during the Persistence phase . As Sam explained , “social support is important . If you don’t have family to go to for Thanksgiving or if you had a problem at school , you cannot go back to family . You don’t have the social support to help . ” Similarly , how the qualities of determination and re - sistance might have aided FCA in the Awareness , Engage - ment , and Transition phases must be considered . The FCA in this study were well aware of the barriers they encoun - tered during these phases , but may not have been as cog - nizant of the extent to which they would need to rely on de - termination and resistance to overcome these barriers . For example , Sam stated “teachers were barriers and [ thought ] because of my situation , I wouldn’t be able to do post - sec - ondary education . My ability to get out of my situation was not shared by my teachers . ” If PSE is to be universally ac - cessible , systemic barriers that fuel such low expectations Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 64 must be removed , and foster youth must be helped to see those negative responses for what they are so they can make use of their own strengths to resist their influence . Limitations and Recommendations for Future Research This study is not without limitations , especially regarding the decision to restrict potential participants to those who com - pleted PSE in Ontario , given the distinct differences in the college and university sectors in each province . Differenc - es exist in funding formulas and respective tuition waiver incentives , such that housing and financial supports might factor differentially in participants’ ideas about reasons for their success . Second , given the paucity of research with FCA who completed PSE , we chose to use a phenomeno - logical approach that would allow us to develop a clear un - derstanding of participants’ educational journey . However , ideally , this study would be replicated with a much larger , pan - Canadian representative sample size to determine if findings are generalizable . Third , time and funding limita - tions necessitated limiting our target population to FCA . By including teachers , social workers , child welfare advocates , and educators from PSE , we could develop a much broad - er understanding of external factors perceived to promote successful completion of PSE . Fourth , although theories of resilience and resistance help explain the process by which some FCA succeed in PSE , additional research is required to clarify the differences between resilience / determination and resistance . Furthermore , neither theory accounts for why only some FCA access and leverage both internal and external factors in response to adversity or hostile environ - ments . Although beyond the scope of this study to compare the experiences of FCA who do and do not pursue PSE , this research might shed light on critical differences . Regardless of the exact nature of future research , fos - ter youth should be engaged as participant researchers to ensure this invisible group has a voice in advocating for their needs , and the needs of future generations . When FCA are enabled to participate as first - voice advocates , positive youth development is promoted through civic engagement and social justice advocacy ( Day et al . , 2012 ) . In this study , many described their participation in research and advoca - cy for change as their duty . Final Conclusions As noted previously , few FCA enter PSE , and fewer still com - plete their program of study . However , a growing body of re - search suggests there are consistent success factors cited by FCA who completed PSE . The participants in this study all experienced significant trauma and loss , all referred to internal struggles , and all talked about people who discour - aged , dissuaded , or otherwise eroded any aspirations they might have to a life beyond what they knew . However , de - spite so many negative relationships , many also spoke of an adult who played a key role in their success in PSE . Despite the trauma and loss , many spoke of an inner drive or a de - termination to forge ahead . Despite the discouragement , many spoke of their resistance as a key factor in their ability to succeed . This group represents a seldom - heard voice of what is possible given the right conditions . None of our find - ings suggest their journey was easy ; in fact , all participants also spoke about missing supports at every step of their journey . However , PSE is clearly not an impossible dream for FCA . These findings serve as a signpost for practitioners and future researchers as to what can become more proba - ble , with the removal of barriers and the presence of effec - tive supports . References The Annie E . Casey Foundation . ( 2014 ) . Sustaining momentum : Improving educational stability for young people in foster care . https : / / www . aecf . org / resources / sustaining - momentum / Boeije , H . ( 2002 ) . A purposeful approach to the constant comparative method in the analysis of qualitative inter - views . Quality and Quantity , 36 ( 4 ) , 391 – 409 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1020909529486 British Columbia Ministry of Education . ( 2018 ) . How are we doing ? Children and youth in government care and youth on youth agreements . Government of British Columbia . https : / / www2 . gov . bc . ca / assets / gov / educa - tion / administration / kindergarten - to - grade - 12 / reports / cyic / cyic - report . pdf Courtney , M . E . , Dworsky , A . , Ruth , G . , Keller , T . , Havlicek , J . , & Bost , N . ( 2005 ) . Midwest evaluation of the adult functioning of former foster youth : Outcomes at age 19 . https : / / thehomestretch . org . au / site / wp - content / up - loads / 2016 / 08 / ChapinHall - Mid - West - full - evaluation . pdf Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 65 Courtney , M . E . , Dworsky , A . , Brown , A . , Cary , C . , Love , K . , & Vorhies , V . ( 2011 ) . Midwest evaluation of the adult functioning of former foster youth : Outcomes at age 26 . https : / / www . chapinhall . org / wp - content / uploads / Midwest - Eval - Outcomes - at - Age - 26 . pdf Creswell , J . , & Poth , C . ( 2018 ) . Qualitative inquiry & research design : Choosing among five approaches ( 4th ed . ) . SAGE . Day , A . , Riebschleger , J . , Dworsky , A . , Damashek , A . , & Fogarty , K . ( 2012 ) . Maximizing educational opportu - nities for youth aging out of foster care by engaging youth voices in a partnership for social change . Chil - dren and Youth Services Review , 34 ( 5 ) , 1007 – 1014 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . childyouth . 2012 . 02 . 001 Drapeau , S . , Saint - Jacques , M . C . , Lépine , R . , Bégin , G . , & Bernard , M . ( 2007 ) . Processes that contribute to resilience among youth in foster care . Journal of Adolescence , 30 ( 6 ) , 977 – 999 . Dworsky , A . , & Pérez , A . ( 2010 ) . Helping former fos - ter youth graduate from college through campus support programs . Children and Youth Services Review , 32 ( 2 ) , 255 – 263 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . childyouth . 2009 . 09 . 004 Emerson , J . , & Bassett , L . ( 2010 ) . Supporting success : Improving higher education outcomes for students from foster care . Casey Family Program . https : / / www . casey . org / supporting - success / Ferguson , R . ( 2019 ) . Hidden among the under - represent - ed : Foster youth access and persistence in Ontario post - secondary education [ Doctoral dissertation , Ontario Institute for Studies in Education , University of Toronto ] . TSpace . http : / / hdl . handle . net / 1807 / 97034 Fostering Success . ( 2022 ) . National postsecondary support map . http : / / fosteringsuccessmichigan . com / campus - support Gahagan , J . ( 2021 ) . Youth who grew up in care have the right to post - secondary education – and tuition waivers open doors . The Conversation . https : / / theconversa - tion . com / youth - who - grew - up - in - care - have - the - right - to - post - secondary - education - and - tuition - waivers - open - doors - 160972 Johnson , R . M . ( 2019 ) . The state of research on under - graduate youth formerly in foster care : A systematic review of the literature . Journal of Diversity in Higher Education , 14 ( 1 ) , 147 – 160 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / dhe0000150 Kim , J - H . ( 2010 ) . Understanding student resistance as a communicative act . Ethnography and Education , 5 ( 3 ) , 261 – 276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17457823 . 2010 . 51 1349 Kovarikova , J . ( 2017 ) . Exploring youth outcomes after aging - out of care . Provincial Advocate for Children and Youth . https : / / www . homelesshub . ca / sites / de - fault / files / attachments / Exploring % 20Youth % 20Out - comes % 20After % 20Aging - Out % 20of % 20Care % 20 . pdf McMillen , J . C . , Zima , B . T . , Scott , L . D . , Jr . , Auslander , W . F . , Munson , M . R . , Ollie , M . T . , & Spitznagel , E . L . ( 2005 ) . Prevalence of psychiatric disorders among older youths in the foster care system . Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psy - chiatry , 44 ( 1 ) , 88 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / 01 . chi . 0000145806 . 24274 . d2 Medlin , A . ( 2019 ) . Fostering the HERO within : A nar - rative study of foster care alumni in higher educa - tion [ Doctoral dissertation , North Carolina State University ] . ProQuest . https : / / libproxy . wlu . ca / log - in ? url = https : / / www - proquest - com . libproxy . wlu . ca / docview / 2381677753 ? accountid = 15090 Medlin , A . , & Jaeger , A . ( 2021 ) . Foster kids’ capital . Jour - nal of College Student Development , 62 ( 2 ) , 154 – 168 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1353 / csd . 2021 . 0014 Merdinger , J . M . , Hines , A . M . , Osterling , K . L . , & Wyatt , P . ( 2005 ) . Pathways to college for former foster youth : Understanding factors that contribute to educational success . Child Welfare , 84 ( 6 ) , 867 – 96 . Moyer , A . M . , & Goldberg , A . E . ( 2019 ) . Foster youth’s educational challenges and supports : Perspectives of teachers , foster parents , and former foster youth . Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal , 37 ( 2 ) , 123 – 136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10560 - 019 - 00640 - 9 Neal , D . ( 2017 ) . Academic resilience and caring adults : The experiences of former foster youth . Children and Youth Services Review , 79 , 242 – 248 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . childyouth . 2017 . 06 . 005 Newell , M . A . ( 2018 ) . Success within an unlikely candi - Foster Youth in Higher Education S . Elliott & C . FitzGerald Canadian Journal of Higher Education | Revue canadienne d’enseignement supérieur 52 : 4 ( 2023 ) 66 date : A phenomenological study of the lived expe - riences of academically successful youth who have aged out of foster care [ Doctoral dissertation , Drexel University ] . ProQuest Dissertations Publishing . Pecora , P . J . , Jensen , P . S . , Romanelli , L . H . , Jackson , L . J . , & Ortiz , A . ( 2009 ) . Mental health services for children placed in foster care : An overview of current challenges . Child Welfare , 88 ( 1 ) , 5 – 26 . Robinson , T . L & Ward , J . V . ( 1991 ) . ‘‘A belief in self far greater than anyone’s disbelief’’ : Cultivating resistance among African American female adoles - cents . Women & Therapy , 11 , 87 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1300 / J015V11N03 _ 06 Salazar , A . M . ( 2012 ) . Supporting college success in foster care alumni : Salient factors related to postsecondary retention . Child Welfare , 91 ( 5 ) , 139 – 142 . Salazar , A . M . , Keller , T . E . , Gowen , L . K . , & Courtney , M . E . ( 2013 ) . Trauma exposure and PTSD among older adolescents in foster care . Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology , 48 ( 4 ) , 545 – 551 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00127 - 012 - 0563 - 0 Samuels , G . M . , & Pryce , J . M . ( 2008 ) . “What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger” : Survivalist self - reliance as resilience and risk among young adults aging out of foster care . Children and Youth Services Re - view , 30 ( 10 ) , 1198 – 1210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . childyouth . 2008 . 03 . 005 Sarubbi , M . ( 2019 ) . Stories of the 3 % : Foster care alumni narratives of resilience and postsecondary attainment [ Doctoral dissertation , University of Denver ] . Digital Commons @ DU . https : / / digitalcommons . du . edu / etd / 1614 Seita , J . R . ( 2001 ) . Growing up without family privilege . Reclaiming Children and Youth , 10 ( 3 ) , 130 – 132 . https : / / reclaimingjournal . com / sites / default / files / jour - nal - article - pdfs / 10 _ 3 _ Seita . pdf Unrau , Y . A . , Font , S . A . , & Rawls , G . ( 2012 ) . Readiness for college engagement among students who have aged out of foster care . Children and Youth Services Review , 34 ( 1 ) , 76 – 83 . Unrau , Y . A . , Dawson , A . , Hamilton , R . D . , & Bennett , J . L . ( 2017 ) . Perceived value of a campus - based college support program by students who aged out of foster care . Children and Youth Services Review , 78 , 64 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . childyouth . 2011 . 09 . 002 van Breda , A . D . ( 2018 ) . A critical review of resilience theory and its relevance for social work . Social Work / Maatskaplike Werk , 54 ( 1 ) , 2 – 5 . http : / / www . scielo . org . za / pdf / sw / v54n1 / 02 . pdf Zimmerman , M . A . ( 2013 ) . Resiliency theory : A strengths - based approach to research and practice for adoles - cent health . Health Education and Behaviour , 40 ( 4 ) , 381 – 383 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1090198113493782 Contact Information Sean Elliott sean @ seanelliott . ca