Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 1997 , Vol . 23 , No . 5 , 1160 - 1175 Copyright 1997 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0278 - 7393 / 97 / $ 3 . 00 Collective Memory : Collaborative and Individual Processes in Remembering Mary Susan Weldon and Krystal D . Bellinger University of California , Santa Cruz Two experiments compared collaborative and individual recall . In Experiment 1 , participants encoded pictures and words with a deep or shallow processing task , then recalled them twice either individually or collaboratively . Collaborative groups recalled more than individuals , but less than nominal groups ( pooled individuals ) , thus exhibiting collaborative inhibition . However , group recall appeared to be more stable over time than individual recall . Groups and individuals both showed a picture - superiority effect , a level - of - processing effect , and hypermnesia . In Experiment 2 , participants recalled the story " War of the Ghosts " ( from F . C . Bartlett , 1932 ) , and again collaborative groups recalled more than individuals , but less than nominal groups . Both the individual and collaborative recalls were highly organized . There was evidence that the collaborative groups tended to rely on the best individual to a greater extent in story than in list recall . Possible social and cognitive mechanisms are considered . Several years ago , at a typical faculty meeting at an unnamed university , a good bit of time was devoted to trying to figure out what had been accomplished at the previous meeting . There often seemed to be considerable disagree - ment about what had been accomplished , and various individuals collaborated to try to reconstruct an account . From the point of view of a memory researcher , the situation presented interesting questions about the nature of collective memory as compared with individual memory . There were obvious similarities between the group processes and well - known properties of individual recall ( e . g . , reconstruction ) , but a variety of other issues came to mind . Are there important differences between group and individual memory ? What impact does the individual have on the group , and the group on the individual ? Does the social setting affect what is remembered and how it is remembered ? Traditionally , mainstream experimental psychology has characterized cognitive mechanisms as processes taking place within the individual mind . A person is isolated in a laboratory relatively free from distractions and is asked to perform various tasks that tap into the individual ' s cognitive processes . An issue that seems to have been largely ignored , however , is the social nature of cognitive activity , which is the topic of interest here . Rather than viewing the social milieu as contamination , it could be fruitful to view it as a fundamental constituent of cognition . We refer to this Mary Susan Weldon and Krystal D . Bellinger , Department of Psychology , University of California , Santa Cruz . This research was supported by grants from the Division of Social Sciences and a Faculty Research Grant from the University of California , Santa Cruz . We thank Barbara Basden and David Basden for their interest and insights into this work . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Mary Susan Weldon , Department of Psychology , University of California , Santa Cruz , Santa Cruz , California 95064 . Electronic mail may be sent via Internet to weldon @ cats . ucsc . edu . general endeavor in memory research as the study of collective memory . Dimensions of Collective Memory Memory is social in multiple ways , and so collective memory can be conceptualized in a variety of ways . First , and most obviously , remembering may take place as a social activity . People can collaborate to recall events , such that group memory is an emergent property of different individu - als ' recollections expressed witjiin a social context . In this situation , the social context exerts its influence at several levels . For example , the social setting suggests a particular group identity and connotes particular goals and norms that guide the process and content of retrieval . As an example , a teenager might provide one account of last night ' s party to his or her parents , but the process of recollection and the account that is produced will likely be quite different when this same teen is reminiscing about the party with his or her friends . Across different situations , the social setting ( a ) prescribes the style and contents of recall that are appropri - ate in the setting , ( b ) is characterized by social dynamics that govern who speaks when and whose recollections receive the most weight , and ( c ) varies in the purpose of the recollective activity ( e . g . , assuring mom and dad they have nothing to worry about vs . cultivating peer relationships ) . Thus , the properties of the social setting will influence how past events are reconstructed . Although performance on traditional memory tests is typically interpreted on the assumption that the goal of remembering is to retrieve items as accurately and quickly as possible , remembering more typically takes place in the service of other tasks . For example , people often reminisce to establish social relations or common ground . In these situations , the speed and accuracy of retrieval might be less important than developing positive social relationships , and thus accuracy may be sacrificed for camaraderie ; or to 1160 COLLECTIVE MEMORY 1161 maintain status in a group , accuracy may be sacrificed for persuasiveness . In storytelling , accuracy may be sacrificed for dramatic effect , and in work groups that are assembled to accomplish tasks such as decision making , product design , problem solving , and so forth , memory may operate to support the tasks and guide decisions , but may not serve as the goal of the group activity per se . Therefore , as a social process , remembering may exhibit many interesting proper - ties that are overlooked when it is studied as an individual cognitive activity . A second way in which remembering is social is in the sense that it is situated within a larger culture or group which , in the practice of its activities , teaches its members to use memory in a particular way . Bartlett ( 1932 ) addressed this aspect of the social nature of memory in his book Remembering : A Study in Experimental and Social Psychol - ogy . He argued that social groups are organized units with tendencies and characteristics that exist only as the group exists and disappear if the group dissolves . Thus , group characteristics are something different from a simple sum of the individual characteristics , and social groups have emer - gent properties that may affect remembering in the group . The interests and characteristics of the group may exist as schemata that bias members ' attention to and reconstruction of events . Bartlett asserted that " both the manner and the matter of recall are often predominantly determined by social influences " ( p . 244 ) . Consistent with this idea , cross - cultural studies demonstrate that the content and process of recall differ across cultures ( see review by Rogoff & Mistry , 1985 ) . A third way in which memory may be considered to be social concerns the manner in which information is repre - sented in a group . Information may be shared collectively among all of the individuals in a group such that each person possesses knowledge in common , or alternatively , informa - tion may be distributed or divided among individuals . Wegner , Giuliano , and Hertel ( 1985 ) have discussed the possibility that group processes may result in shared memo - ries that are different from individual memories ( cf . Meud - ell , Hitch , & . Kirby , 1992 ) . Thus , collective memory may have emergent properties that are not predictable from individuals alone . Furthermore , the distinction between shared and distributed memory is meaningful because the dynamics of retrieval may be very different for these two types of collective representation . Finally , collective memory has important social , cultural , and political implications because it affects people ' s percep - tions of individuals , groups , and events , and has conse - quences for actions and reactions toward them . Shared memories have a significant impact on the construction and communication of events , interpersonal relations , group histories , and government and social policy , as well as the characterization of groups and institutions . An interesting example of this dynamic occurred in recent history . When former President Bush and the Congress declared war in the Persian Gulf , it was commonly agreed that we did not want " another Vietnam . " The collective memory of the Vietnam War was invoked in a specific way to win support for military strategy in the Persian Gulf . A variety of other perspectives on the social nature of memory and the conceptualization of collective memory are possible ( e . g . , see Bartlett , 1932 ; Clark & Stephenson , 1989 ; Durkheim , 1915 ; Halbwachs , 1950 / 1980 ; Jung , 1953 ; Rogoff & Mistry , 1985 ; Vygotsky , 1962 , 1978 ; Wundt , 1910 / 1916 ) , but for the moment the main point is that the study of collective memory may yield insights into individual and group cognitive processes about which little is known at present . Many interesting questions need to be addressed . What impact does individual remembering have on group remembering , and vice versa ? What are the emergent properties of group remembering ? How are shared memo - ries established ? When multiple accounts of a situation are possible , who or what determines the emergence of the majority memory ? How is historical memory different from memory for experienced events ? How can social and cultural factors be accounted for in the description of group memory ? What are the appropriate units of analysis , the individuals within the sociocultural context , or the activity itself defined by the tasks , goals , and sociocultural setting ? In the work reported here , we begin to investigate this domain in a modest fashion and address only a small number of the issues that arise when considering memory as a social phenomenon . Collaborative and Individual Recall The goal of these experiments was to explore three main questions . First , are groups or individuals more productive in terms of how much they remember ? Second , does group remembering obey principles similar to individual remember - ing ? Third , what is the influence of group recall on individual recall , and vice versa ? To address these issues , two experiments were conducted . In Experiment 1 , groups of 3 individuals studied mixed lists of pictures and words with either a shallow or a deep processing task . Participants then recalled the items twice , either individually - individu - ally ( II ) , collaboratively - collaboratively ( CC ) , individually - collaboratively ( IC ) , or coUaboratively - individually ( CO - In Experiment 2 , groups of 3 people heard two readings of the story " War of the Ghosts " ( from Bartlett , 1932 ; see Appen - dix ) and then recalled the story in one of the four conditions ( n , CC , IC , orCI ) . With respect to the question of group productivity , some studies of group versus individual recall have been reported in the literature . For example , it is commonly believed that " two heads are better than one , " and research indicates that when people collaborate to recall an event the group does remember more than individuals working alone ( e . g . , Clark , Stephenson , & Kniveton , 1990 ; Dashiell , 1935 ; Hoppe , 1962 ; Lorge & Solomon , 1961 ; Stephenson , Brandstatter , & Wagner , 1983 ; Yuker , 1955 ) . However , the question arises as to whether group recall is better than , equal to , or worse than the sum of the individual recalls . On the one hand , it is possible that information recalled by others in the group may provide cues to help individuals remember items that they would not recall if working alone , a process called cross - cuing ( Meudell et al , 1992 ; Meudell , Hitch , & Boyle , 1995 ) . On the other hand , collaborative recall may result in process 1162 WELDON AND BELLINGER loss such that the interacting group suffers a decrement . For example , the group activity may interfere with individual performance , or some individuals may slack off in the group . To assess productivity , one can compare the performance of a collaborating group with performance in a nominal group , the latter created by pooling the nonredundant responses of individuals working alone ( e . g . , if Person 1 recalls items a , b , c , a \ Person 2 recalls b , c , d , ef , and Person 3 recalls cj , g , the nominal group recall is aj > , c , d , ej , % ) . Many studies of brainstorming report that interacting groups actually produce fewer ideas than nominal groups , indicating that collaboration inhibits productivity ( e . g . , Bouchard & Hare , 1970 ; Taylor , Berry , & Block , 1958 ) . Therefore , it is possible that in recall , group collaboration likewise has an inhibitory effect such that interacting groups recall less than nominal groups . Some evidence that this might be the case was obtained by Lorge and Solomon ( 1961 ) , who observed that group learning over multiple trials was overestimated by a model predicting additivity of individual learning rates . One of the goals of the present work was to determine whether collaborative recall facili - tates , inhibits , or simply pools individuals 1 knowledge , and to see whether the effects are consistent across a variety of materials and encoding conditions . We tested people in groups of 3 because there is some evidence that with dyads , nominal and collaborative groups perform equally well ( e . g . , Meudell et al . , 1992 , 1995 ; but also see Andersson & Ronnberg , 1996 ) , and we wanted a stronger test of the effect of group processes . A second issue of interest is whether principles of memory derived from research on individuals generalize to collaborative recall . In Experiment 1 , we manipulated two variables known to have robust effects in individual remem - bering : level of processing ( Craik & Lockhart , 1972 ) and picture versus word encoding . On free recall , deep or meaningful processing produces better recall than shallow or superficial processing ( Craik & Tulving , 1975 ) . Also , pic - tures are typically recalled better than words , an outcome known as the picture - superiority effect ( e . g . , Nelson , 1979 ; Paivio , 1971 ) . We expected to observe these same outcomes with groups . Of course , if these variables had different effects in group and individual recall , it would suggest that collaborative recall is radically different from individual recall , but there is no a priori reason to believe this would happen in the present experiments . Nevertheless , it was deemed important to establish empirically the continuity between individual and collaborative recall for these stan - dard , robust variables . Unique properties of collaborative recall are likely to be of a more subtle nature , so we included analyses of the organization of the material , intertest reminis - cence and forgetting , and intrusion rates to see if the groups and individuals exhibited differences on these measures . A third goal of this work was to investigate how indi - vidual recall affects group recall , and vice versa . There is evidence that individual recall benefits from prior collabora - tive recall ( e . g . , Stephenson & Wagner , 1989 ; Yuker , 1955 ) , but that work compares a single individual - recall trial with individual recall preceded by group discussion or group recall . Therefore , it does not enable one to distinguish between the effects of prior group recall and possible effects of hypermnesia , the increased recall that occurs when multiple recall trials follow in immediate succession ( Erde - lyi & Kleinbard , 1978 ; Payne , 1987 ) . Our design disen - tangles these factors and also assesses the effect of prior individual recall on subsequent group recall . In summary , the goal of this research was to investigate and compare memory as both an individual and a social process , specifically to study productivity , reciprocal influ - ence , and the generalizability of certain principles of memory . Experiment 1 Method Participants and design . One hundred ninety - two undergradu - ates from the University of California , Santa Cruz , participated for credit in lower division psychology courses . Participants were tested in groups of 3 . Two encoding variables were manipulated within subjects : stimulus form ( pictures vs . words ) and level of processing ( deep vs . shallow ) . During the test , participants recalled the items twice , creating an additional within - subjects variable ( first recall vs . second recall ) . Each recall was either individual or collaborative , and participants served in one of four different test conditions representing the four possible combinations ( II , CC , IC , and CI ) . There were 16 three - person groups in each test condition . Materials . Target items were 40 common items ( e . g . , grapes , snowman , hammer , sailboat ) selected from Snodgr & ss and Vander - wart ' s ( 1980 ) picture norms . Two slides were obtained for each item , one containing the black - and - white line drawing from Snodgrass and Vanderwart ' s norms and the other containing the word typed in lowercase Anal font . The items were randomly divided into four sets that were counterbalanced so that each appeared an equal number of times in each study condition ( picture - shallow , word - shallow , picture - deep , word - deep ) across participants and test conditions . Eight additional pictures and eight words were selected to serve as buffer items in the study lists . For the study phase , two blocks of targets were created by assigning two sets of items to one block and two to the other block . In each block , one item set was designated as pictures and one as words , with this designation counterbalanced across subjects . Pictures and words were randomly mixed in the block with the restriction that no more than three pictures or words appeared in succession . Half the participants studied one item block with the deep - encoding task and the other item block with the shallow task , with the assignment of encoding task to item block counterbal - anced across subjects . The order of the encoding task was also counterbalanced such that half the participants performed the deep task and half the shallow task first . Buffer items were divided so that there were 2 pictures and 2 words at the beginning and end of both blocks . Thus , each block contained 28 items ( 10 pictures , 10 words , and 8 buffers ) . Procedure . Participants were tested in groups of 3 . They were told that they would perform tasks related to research on problem solving , but they were not told that they would receive a memory test or work in groups . ( Incidental learning was used to avoid the risk that intentional learning would elevate performance in the shallow - processing condition . ) They were given a rating sheet for the study phase and received appropriate instructions before each block of slides . For the shallow - encoding task , they rated the graphic quality of each picture and word ( whether it was crisp , clear , easy to view ) on a scale of 1 to 5 ( poor to high quality ) . Slides COLLECTIVE MEMORY 1163 Table 1 Experiment 1 : Proportion of Correct Free Recall as a Function of Stimulus Type , Level of Processing , Group Size , and Recall Order Recall condition ( test condition ) Individual recall First recall ( 11 ) Second recall Preceded by individual recall ( II ) Preceded by collaborative recall ( CI ) Nominal - group recall First recall ( E ) Second recall Preceded by individual recall ( II ) Preceded by collaborative recall ( CI ) Collaborative group recall First recall ( CC ) Second recall Preceded by individual recall ( IC ) Preceded by collaborative recall ( CC ) Graphicquality . 11 . 10 . 14 . 27 . 26 . 23 . 21 . 20 . 22 Encoding condition and rating task Words Pleasantness . 31 . 36 . 46 . 64 . 71 . 66 . 53 . 61 . 59 Pictures Graphicquality . 26 . 30 . 45 . 53 . 56 . 64 . 53 . 67 . 54 Pleasantness M . 41 . 43 . 53 . 78 . 81 . 75 . 61 . 70 . 63 . 27 . 30 . 40 . 56 . 59 . 57 . 47 . 54 . 49 Note . Test conditions ( in parentheses ) indicate the source of the data , with the bold letter indicating the recall trial . II = individual - individual ; CI = collaborative - individual ; CC = collaborative - collaborative ; IC = individual - collaborative . were not designed to vary on this dimension ; people responded to natural variations in quality . For die deep - encoding task , partici - pants rated how pleasant they thought the real - world item desig - nated by each picture and word was , with a scale of I to 5 ( very unpleasant to very pleasant ) . Participants circled a number on their rating sheet for each item . Slides were presented for 6 s each . As a distractor task after the encoding phase , each person worked alone for 5 min to solve a set of mazes . Next , the participants received two recall trials , the task and order depending on the test condition ( II , CC , IC , or CI ) . In the individual recall task , each person received a blank sheet of paper and was instructed to write down as many of the pictures and words as he or she could remember from both study tasks ( deep and shallow ) . In the collaborative recall task , participants were told they would work together as a group to recall as many items as possible . One person was asked to serve as the recorder for the group and to write down everything the members recalled , as well as to participate in the collaborative recall . Participants were given no instructions about how to resolve disagreements and were allowed to resolve them as they saw fit . In each condition , partici - pants were given 7 min to recall as many items as possible . After the first recall , the answer sheets were removed and the participants were immediately given instructions for the second recall , which was either collaborative or individual . At the end of the experiment , they completed a brief questionnaire and were debriefed . Results The proportions of items correctly recalled in each condition are presented in Table 1 . The individual recall data were scored in two ways . First , the total number of items each individual recalled was computed for each participant , and the means are labeled as " Individual Recall / ' Second , the recalls of the 3 individuals were pooled , with redundant items counted only once , and these means are designated as " Nominal Group Recall . " The data for the collaborative groups were scored by counting the total number of nonre - dundant items recalled by the group and are labeled as " Collaborative Group Recall . " Some aspects of the data are summarized in Figures 1 and 2 . The individual , nominal , and collaborative conditions could not all be compared in the same analysis because the individual and nominal conditions contained the same participants , whereas the nominal and collaborative condi - tions contained different participants . Different comparisons were conducted to answer each of the research questions , and the conditions that contributed the data used in each analysis are noted in turn . Significant results are reported at p < . 05 . Differences in productivity . To determine whether the level of recall differed across conditions , two different analyses were conducted . One compared collaborative with individual recall by using the individual data ( CC vs . Il - ind , where Il - ind refers to participants tested individually and scored individually ) , and the other compared collaborative with nominal recall by using the individuals ' pooled data ( CC vs . II - nom , where II - nom refers to participants who were tested individually but had their responses pooled ) . Figure 1 summarizes the differences in productivity , col - lapsed across level of processing and stimulus form . The question of whether groups recalled more than individuals was addressed by comparing condition CC with H - ind in a 2 X 2 X 2 X 2 mixed analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) , with recall condition ( individual vs . collabora - tive ) as the between - subjects variable and with recall trial ( first vs . second ) , level of processing ( deep vs . shallow ) , and stimulus form ( picture vs . word ) as within - subjects vari - ables . Proportion of correct recall was significantly higher in collaborative groups { M — . 48 ) than in individuals ( Af = . 28 ) , F ( l , 62 ) = 85 . 66 , MSE = 0 . 044 . This finding replicates 1164 WELDON AND BELLINGER Experiment 1 Recall Individuals Nominal Groups Collaborative Groups Figure 1 . Recall on the first and second recall trials in Experiment 1 . Data for the individuals and the nominal groups are from recall condition II . Data for the collaborative groups are from recall condition CC . II = individual - individual ; CC = collaborative - collaborative . others in the literature and was as expected . ( Other aspects of this analysis are discussed later . ) In the analysis comparing all of the individuals with the collaborative groups , the numbers of observations in the two conditions were very uneven : There were 48 individuals and 16 groups . Therefore , a second analysis was conducted by taking the best individual from each of the 16 sets of 3 individuals and comparing their average performance with Experiment 1 Recall . 8 Pictures Words Individuals Pictures Words Nominal Groups Pictures Words Collaborative Groups Figure 2 . Free recall in Experiment 1 . Data are averaged across first and second recalls . Data for the individuals and the nominal groups are taken from recall condition II . Data for the collaborative groups are taken from recall condition CC . II = individual - individual ; CC = collaborative - collabora - tive . COLLECTIVE MEMORY 1165 that of the collaborative groups . The collaborative groups ( M ~ . 48 ) still recalled significantly more than the best individuals ( M = . 36 ) , F ( l , 30 ) = 31 . 56 , MSE = 0 . 004 . These results show that the collaborative group was not simply relying on the best individual in the group , that is , the best individual did not represent the upper bound of group performance . Of most interest was the comparison between the nominal and collaborative groups . A 2 X 2 X 2 X2 mixed ANOVA ( variables : recall condition , recall trial , level of processing , stimulus form ) was conducted comparing the II - nom condi - tion with the CC condition . For II - nom , the individuals ' pooled data were used . The ANOVA revealed that nominal groups ( M = . 57 ) recalled more than collaborative groups ( M = . 48 ) , F ( l , 30 ) = 10 . 64 , MSE = 0 . 045 ( see Figure 1 ) . The data reveal that although collaborative groups re - called more than individuals , collaboration did not optimize individual recall . In other words , when working together in a group to recall information , individuals recalled less than when they worked alone . We refer to this effect as collabora - tive inhibition . Level - of - prvcessing and picture - superiority effects . One of the objectives of this study was to see whether two robust principles of individual remembering generalize to collabo - rative remembering . Figure 2 displays the effects of level of processing and stimulus type for individual and collabora - tive recall . ( The data for the nominal group are included in the figure for completeness , but were not included in this analysis because the goal was to evaluate the effects of collaboration . ) The 2 X 2 X 2 X2 ANOVA comparing individual with collaborative recall ( H - ind vs . CC ) revealed a significant level - of - processing effect , F ( l , 62 ) = 40 . 19 , MSE — 0 . 097 , with deep processing ( M = . 43 ) producing better recall than shallow processing ( Af = . 22 ) . There was also a significant picture - superiority effect , F ( l , 62 ) = 69 . 15 , MSE = 0 . 035 , with pictures ( M = . 41 ) recalled better than words ( Af = . 26 ) . There was a significant interaction between stimulus form and level of processing , F ( l t 62 ) = 20 . 30 , MSE = i ) . 038 , such that the advantage of pictures over words was diminished with the deep level of processing ( see similar findings in D ' Agostino , O ' Neill , & Paivio , 1977 ; Durso & Johnson , 1980 ; Weldon & Coyote , 1996 ) . Neither level of processing nor stimulus form entered into a significant two - way interaction with recall condition ( individual vs . collaborative ) , which suggests that these variables operated in a similar fashion in both individual and collaborative recall . However , there was a significant three - way interaction among level of processing , stimulus form , and group type ( individual vs . collaborative ) , F ( l , 62 ) = 4 . 56 , MSE = 0 . 038 , due to the fact that the picture - superiority effect under graphic - encoding conditions was somewhat larger in collaborative recall than in individual recall . Thus , the picture - superiority effect was somewhat exaggerated in collaborative groups under conditions of shallow coding . With respect to the encoding variables tested here , individual and collaborative recall revealed similar prin - ciples of memory . Specifically , deep processing produced better recall than shallow processing ; pictures were recalled better than words ; and the picture - superiority effect dimin - ished under deep - encoding conditions . These findings sug - gest that even though collaborative recall is not the sum of the individual recalls , it is still largely a product of individual recall . This outcome is not surprising , but it is not demanded . For example , it is conceivable that collective processes would engender unique strategies that would enable the group to overcome the limitations of relatively poor encod - ing conditions like the shallow encoding of words . For instance , people may be able to cross - cue each other and improve access to the material ( Meudell et al . , 1995 ) , which could benefit poorly remembered classes of items to a greater degree than well - remembered classes . However , there is no evidence for such an effect in our data . The collaborative inhibition is consistent with Meudell et al . ' s ( 1995 ) failure to observe cross - cuing and with Andersson and Ronnberg ' s ( 1996 ) evidence of impaired performance in dyad recall . Furthermore , the exaggerated advantage of pictures over words in the shallow - encoding condition suggests that the groups were unable to develop a strategy to overcome the mnemonic deficit commonly observed for shallowly processed words . Item intrusions . One question that arises is whether groups are more or less susceptible to the intrusion of false memories . The average number of item intrusions for individual and collaborative recall , on both the first and second recalls , is presented in Table 2 . Overall , the intrusion rates were very low , as is typical in free recall ( e . g . , Payne , 1986 , Experiment 4 ) . A 2 X 2 ANOVA evaluating recall condition ( II vs . CC ) and recall trial ( first vs . second ) revealed that there were significantly more intrusions on the second recall { M — 1 . 94 ) than on the first recall ( M = 1 . 36 ) , F ( l , 62 ) = 10 . 53 , AfS£ = 13 . 13 . Although there was attend toward higher intrusion rates in the collaborative groups , the effect was not significant , F ( l , 62 ) = 1 . 63 , MSE = 11 . 00 , p - . 21 . Finally , the trend toward a larger intertrial increase in intrusion rates in the collaborative groups than in the individual recall condition was not significant , F ( l , 62 ) - 2 . 01 , MSE = 2 . 50 , / ? = . 16 . Vollrath , Sheppard , Hinsz , and Davis ( 1989 ) have sug - gested that groups have better error - checking strategies than individuals and so are likely to produce fewer incorrect responses . They required their groups to reach unanimous consensus and observed that trends for intrusions , false alarms , and misses were slightly lower in collaborating groups . However , Basden , Basden , Bryner , and Thomas ( 1997 ) did not require groups to reach consensus and found intrusions to be higher in collaborative groups . They sug - gested that when groups are not required to reach consensus , Table 2 Experiment 1 : Intrusion Rates , Expressed as the Number ofNontarget Items Produced Type of recall First recall Second recall Individual ( II ) 1 . 27 Collaborative ( CC ) 1 . 63 1 . 69 2 . 69 Note . II = individual - individual recall ; CC — collaborative - collaborative recall . 1166 WELDON AND BELLINGER intrusions are less likely to be edited out . Consistent with this , we did not require our groups to reach consensus , and our results are similar to Basden et al . ' s ( but see Ravicchio et al . , 1996 ) . Hypermnesia , reminiscence , and forgetting . One inter - esting pattern in the data that was not predicted a priori is hypermnesia , or increased recall from the first to second recall trials ( see Figure 1 ) . An ANOVA comparing collabora - tive with individual recall revealed a significant main effect of recall trial , F ( l f 62 ) = 11 . 44 , MSE = 0 . 005 , and no interaction with recall condition ( F < 1 ) , indicating that recall improved to about the same degree in collaborative ( proportion correct for the first recall trial , M = . 47 ; for the second , M = . 49 ) and individual ( for the first recall trial , M = . 27 ; for the second , M - . 30 ) recall . The hypermnesia effect is small but reliable . In experiments designed to study hypermnesia , participants are typically instructed to rerecall items from the first test and to try particularly to recall items they had not recalled on the first test , which produces larger hypermnesia effects ( e . g . , Payne , 1986 ) . We did not include such instructions because we were not looking for hypermne - sia , but we still obtained a significant , albeit small , effect . Our results are consistent with those of Meudell et al . ( 1995 ) , who found that dyads and individuals both exhibited hypermnesia . They also suggested that if collaboration facilitates recall , then the dyads should exhibit more hyperm - nesia than individuals , which they did not . This is consistent with the idea that collaboration introduces inhibitory pro - cesses that impair recall We examined whether patterns of interest reminiscence and forgetting differed for individuals , nominal groups , and collaborative groups . Reminiscence was defined as an item not retrieved on Recall 1 but retrieved on Recall 2 , and forgetting was defined as an item retrieved on Recall 1 but not retrieved on Recall 2 . Table 3 presents average reminis - cence and forgetting , expressed as number of items , in the four encoding conditions for participants in the II and CC recall conditions . The last column presents the total number of items summed across the four encoding conditions . Overall , reminiscence and forgetting were quite low , but an ANOVA comparing reminiscence and forgetting in individuals and collaborative groups revealed that reminis - cence was significantly higher than forgetting , F ( l , 62 ) = 13 . 32 , MSE = 5 . 39 , which accounts for the hypermnesia effect . There was a tendency for collaborative groups to both reminisce and to forget slightly less than the individuals , suggesting that group performance was more stable or consistent over time . However , the difference between collaborative groups and individuals was not significant for either reminiscence ( r = 1 . 00 ) or forgetting ( / < 1 . 00 ) . We also examined reminiscence and forgetting in the collaborative groups versus the nominal groups and found that the group differences were marginally significant ; for intertest reminiscence , * ( 30 ) = 1 - 75 , p = . 09 , and for intertest forgetting , f ( 30 ) = 1 . 79 , p - . 10 . Therefore , pooling the individuals ' performance exaggerated the appar - ent instability of the individuals , suggesting that each person tended to remember and forget somewhat different items from one another . However , the trends toward group differ - ences were small and should be viewed as only preliminary and suggestive . The possibility that group performance may have been more stable over time was examined further by looking at subjective organization . Subjective organization . We attempted to assess whether subjective organization differed in individual and collabora - tive recall . Two issues can be evaluated by looking at subjective organization . First , collaborative inhibition might have been due to disruption of the individuals ' organization of the material ; if so , one might expect that collaborative recall would be less organized than individual recall . This interpretation of the collaborative - inhibition effect was sug - gested by Basden et al . ( 1997 ) , who obtained collaborative inhibition with large categorized lists and also found less category clustering in collaborative than individual recall . However , we could not address this issue because our lists were composed of unrelated items , and therefore techniques for assessing organization relative to an existing standard were not applicable . Second , individual performance might have been more stable over time than group performance ; if so , then individuals should have maintained a more stable organiza - tion of the material from the first to the second recall . To address this , we compared the organization of Recall 2 with that of Recall 1 . We used a bidirectional measure of intertrial Table 3 Experiment 1 : Intertest Reminiscence and Forgetting , Expressed in Number of Items Intertest performance ReminiscenceIndividual recall ( II ) Nominal groups ( II ) Collaborative groups ( CC ) ForgettingIndividual recall ( II ) Nominal groups ( II ) Collaborative groups ( CC ) Graphicquality 0 . 06 0 . 25 0 . 38 0 . 19 0 . 44 0 . 69 Encoding condition and rating task Words Pleasantness 0 . 921 . 13 0 . 69 0 . 35 0 . 38 0 . 25 Graphicquality 0 . 63 0 . 88 0 . 50 0 . 31 0 . 38 0 . 31 Pictures Pleasantness 0 . 75 0 . 63 0 . 38 0 . 48 0 . 50 0 . 25 Totalitems 2 . 35 2 . 88 1 . 94 1 . 331 . 691 . 06 Note . II = individual - individual recall ; CC = collaborative - collaborative recall . COLLECTIVE MEMORY 1167 repetitions examining pair frequency ( PF ) , which is the frequency with which the same two items are recalled adjacently on Recall 1 and Recall 2 , regardless of order ( e . g . , camel , balloon and balloon , camel count as an adjacent repetition ; Anderson & Watts , 1969 ; Sternberg & Thriving , 1977 ) . PF is computed as PF = 0 ( 77X2 ) - E ( fTR2 ) = 0 { ITR2 ) - 2c ( c - 1 ) hk where O ( FTR2 ) represents the number of pairs of items recalled on Trials t and t + 1 in adjacent positions ; E ( FTR2 ) represents the expected number of pairs of items ; c is the number of items recalled on both trials ; h is the total number of items recalled on Recall 1 ; and k is the total items recalled on Recall 2 . Intertrial item pairings appeared with greater consistency in collaborative recall ( mean PF = 0 . 69 ) than in individual recall ( mean PF — 0 . 08 ) . This difference was marginally significant , t ( 62 ) - 1 . 84 , p = . 07 , and suggests that the group maintained its organization better than in - dividuals . At first these results may seem inconsistent with the idea that collaborative inhibition is due to retrieval disruption ( Basden et al . , 1997 ) . However , our organizational measure is based on a comparison across two recall trials , which uses the participants ' first recalls as the standard of comparison , whereas Basden et al . ( 1997 ) examined organization within a single recall trial , with preexisting categories as the standard of comparison . Our data indicate that the organiza - tion of group recall is more consistent across trials , whereas Basden et al . ' s data indicate that the groups are less organized within a single recall trial . Although counterintui - tive , perhaps , these are not mutually exclusive outcomes . Groups may be disorganized when they first recall the material , but may better retain the organization that they establish . Group recall does not completely capture the individuals ' representations of the material , but instead a new representation emerges through the group collabora - tion , which then is relatively stable over time . Thus , one important difference between collective and individual memories might be the relative stability of collective versus individual memories . Clearly , more research is needed to better understand how groups organize material and how they maintain that organization during group recall , but this finding suggests an interesting direction for future work . Reciprocal effects of individual and group recall . A further question of interest concerned the effects of collabo - rative recall on individual recall , and vice versa . To assess this , performance on the second recall trial when preceded by individual recall was compared with performance on the second trial when preceded by group recall ( see Table 1 ) . For individuals , the second recall from H was compared with that from CI , and for collaborative groups , the second recall from IC was compared with that from CC . ( The bold letter indicates the recall trial that was compared . ) In individual recall , people recalled more if they had previously recalled with a group than if they had recalled alone , F ( l , 94 ) = 31 . 94 , MSE = 0 . 030 . This is not surprising because , overall , the collaborative groups did recall more than single individu - als , so during collaborative recall each participant had a chance to hear items that he or she might have forgotten . Thus , people got a second study opportunity for more items when recalling collaboratively than when recalling alone , which boosted later individual performance . The collaborative group showed a pattern different from that of individuals . Specifically , collaborative groups re - called somewhat more when recall was preceded by indi - vidual rather than by collaborative recall , but this trend was only marginally significant , F ( l , 30 ) = 3 . 26 , MSE = 0 . 025 , p = . 08 . Thus , for collaborative groups , prior collaborative recall did not appreciably improve memory relative to prior individual recall . Presumably this is because on the first recall trial , each person produced nearly all he or she could remember , and so members of the collaborative group heard only items that the group already remembered ; there was no opportunity to releam items the group did not remember . Discussion In summary , Experiment 1 revealed several interesting findings . First , although groups did recall more than individu - als , there was an inhibitory effect of working in groups such that collaborative groups actually recalled less than nominal groups ( pooled individuals ) . Paradoxically , whereas work - ing in a group tended to help later recall by a single individual , it actually hurt the performance of the group as a whole . Not only did collaboration fail to optimize individual performance , it actually impaired individual performance ( cf . Andersson & Ronnberg , 1995 , 1996 ; Meudell et al . , 1992 , 1995 ) . Although three heads may be better than one , three separate heads are better than three working together , at least with respect to the paradigm used here . Second , collaborative recall exhibited some of the same phenomena as individual recall . Both groups and individuals exhibited a significant level - of - processing effect , a picture - superiority effect , hypermnesia , and more reminiscence than forgetting . Thus , at least with respect to these variables , collaborative recall behaved like individual recall . Third , there was evidence that collaborative recall may differ from individual recall in the stability of the representa - tion over time . Groups exhibited somewhat less reminis - cence and forgetting than individuals , and the groups ' organization of the material was more consistent across recall trials . Thus , although the group output was not the sum of the individual recollections , it appears that a unique organization emerged during collaboration and that this organization was relatively stable over time . Finally , individual recall benefited from prior collabora - tive recall . Presumably , group recall provided a second study opportunity for some items that the individual would not have recalled alone . However , collaborative recall did not reliably differ as a function of prior collaborative versus individual recall , so prior collaboration did not confer the same benefits to groups that it did to individuals . Experiment 2 Experiment 2 was designed to see if the results of Experiment 1 generalized to recall of prose . Specifically , 1168 WELDON AND BELLINGER groups of 3 participants listened to the story " War of the Ghosts " ( Bartlett , 1932 ) twice , and then tried to recall it either alone or collaboratively . The main goal was to see if the inhibitory effect of collaborative recall was also obtained with story recall . It was possible that story recall would not exhibit the collaborative - inhibition effect observed with the free recall of unrelated word lists . First , recall of word lists might represent a relatively more artificial task for groups than for individuals . Individuals may be accustomed to recalling listlike information for tests in school , for example , but this rarely occurs as a group activity . In social interactions , it may be more common for groups to collaborate to remember stories and events , so groups may be relatively more skilled at this type of task . Second , some investigators have hypothesized that people share common story grammars or normative story structures and schemata , which can be used to comprehend and recall stories ( e . g . , Bower , 1976 ; Kintsch & van Dijk , 1978 ; Mandler & Johnson , 1977 ; Thorndyke , 1977 ) . Groups might be able to exploit these structures more effectively than individuals to facilitate story recall . For example , groups might be better able to collaboratively invoke a story structure , and this may help to cue recall of the elements of the story , or people working in a group might recall more total macropropositions ( high - order conceptual units ) , which may also lead to recall of more micropropositions ( low - order units ; cf . Clark , Stephenson , & Rutter , 1986 ) . This is similar to Basden et al . ' s ( 1997 ) suggestion that categorized lists should be less subject to collaborative inhibition because the structure imposed by the categories should help protect retrieval from the disruptive effects of group partici - pation . Thus , the collaborative - group deficit might be elimi - nated when the material has a structure that the group members are likely to share and that they may be able to exploit more efficiently than individuals . Method Participants and design . One - hundred twenty undergraduates participated for credit in lower division psychology courses . None had participated in Experiment 1 . Participants recalled the material twice , either individually ( I ) or collaboratively ( C ) . There were two II conditions—one requiring oral recall ( II - oral ) and one requiring written recall ( II - written ) —to assess whether people who write the story produce less output than those who speak it . There were 24 people in each test condition ; II - oral , II - written , IC , CI , and CC . Participants were randomly assigned to one of the five test con - ditions . The comparison between oral and written recall was needed because people in the collaborative conditions recalled the story orally , but those in the individual conditions had to write their recalls because they were tested in groups of 3 and so could not say their individual recalls aloud . Because story recall requires consid - erable effort , it was possible that people who had to write their recalls ( individual recall ) would write less than those recalling orally ( collaborative recall ) . Therefore , to try to assess the con - found between recall modality ( written vs . oral ) and recall condi - tion ( individual vs . collaborative ) , both II - oral and II - written conditions were tested to see if people would produce less in the written condition . All participants in the II - oral condition were tested individually rather than in groups of 3 . Materials . The story " War of the Ghosts " was recorded by a man who worked at the campus radio station and had a clear voice . This reading was copied twice onto a cassette tape so that participants heard two identical readings in immediate succession . Procedure . Participants were tested in groups of 3 , except in the II - oral condition in which people were tested individually . In all conditions , people were told that they were participating in an experiment on problem solving . They were instructed to listen to the story carefully as it was read twice . Next , they worked on mazes individually for 5 min as a distractor task . They then received the recall instructions . In collaborative recall , participants were in - structed to work together to recall the story as accurately as possible from beginning to end , telling the story aloud . They were given no instructions about how to resolve discrepancies . The recall was videotaped . In the II - oral condition , participants re - ceived the same instructions except that they twice recalled the story aloud by themselves and they were videotaped . In all other individual recall conditions , participants received similar instruc - tions except that they were told to write their recalls on a piece of blank paper . After the first recall , participants recalled the story again in die condition designated for their group ( II - oral , II - written , CC , IC , or CI ) . In all conditions , participants were allowed up to 10 min for each recall , which was always more than adequate , and the recall trial was terminated when they reached the end of the story and indicated they were finished . Results The story was divided into the 42 propositional units suggested by Mandler and Johnson ( 1977 ; see Appendix ) . For the recalls , each unit was scored as wrong ( 0 ) ; partially correct ( . 5 ) , meaning that part of the gist was correct ; or correct ( 1 ) , meaning that the whole gist was correct . Two judges scored each recall independently and then conferred to resolve any discrepancies . Initial interrater consistency was 90 % . Judges could not be kept unaware of the recall condition , because the videotapes revealed whether recall was collaborative or individual . As in Experiment 1 , recalls were scored for the collaborative groups and for individuals , and the nominal - group data were derived from the indi - vidual data . Results are presented in Table 4 and Figure 3 . In Experiment 2 , we did not try to analyze intrusion rates because it would have been quite difficult to decide what Table 4 Experiment 2 : Proportion of Propositions Recalled From " War of the Ghosts " Recall condition First recall Second recall Preceded by indi - vidual recall Preceded by col - laborative recall Individualrecall . 47 ( II - oral ) . 48 ( II - oral ) . 57 ( CI ) Nominalgroup . 74 ( II - oral ) . 73 ( II - oral ) . 74 ( CI ) Collaborativegroup . 59 ( CC ) . 52 ( IC ) . 62 ( CC ) Note . The test conditions ( in parentheses ) indicate the source of the data , with the bold letter indicating the recall trial . II - oral = in - dividual - individual , oral recall ; CC = collaborative - collaborative ; IC = individual - collaborative ; CI = collaborative - individual . COLLECTIVE MEMORY Experiment 2 Recall 1169 Is I ooo . 2 . 5 . 4 Individuals Nominal Groups Collaborative Groups Figure 3 . Recall on the first and second recall trials in Experiment 2 . Data for the individuals and the nominal groups are from recall condition II . Data for the collaborative groups are from recall condition CC . II = individual - individual ; CC = collaborative - collaborative . would count as an intrusion idea unit in story recall and to get high interrater reliability . An ANOVA revealed that the proportions of correct recall did not differ in the II - oral ( M = . 47 ) and II - written ( M = . 51 ) conditions , F ( l , 46 ) = 1 . 24 , MSE = 0 . 022 , p = . 27 , and there was no interaction between recall modality and recall trial ( F < 1 ) . To prevent the number of observations in the individual versus group comparisons from becoming too unbalanced , the analyses were performed with the II - oral data , because this was most similar to the modality of recall in the groups . Differences in productivity . Figure 3 compares propor - tion of correct recall on the first and second recall trials for individuals , nominal groups , and collaborative groups . Of most interest was the comparison between the nominal and collaborative groups . A 2 ( group type : II - oral - nom vs . CC ) X 2 ( recall trial : first vs . second ) mixed ANOVA comparing the nominal and collaborative groups revealed a significant effect of recall condition , F ( l , 14 ) = 9 . 40 , MSE = 0 . 137 . Collaborative inhibition was obtained such that recall was worse in collaborative groups ( Af = . 60 ) than in nominal groups { M — . 73 ) , replicating Experiment 1 . In this analysis , recall was not significantly better on the second recall trial than on the first ( F < 1 ) , and there was no significant interaction between group type and recall trial , F ( l , 14 ) = 1 . 30 , MSE = 0 . 003 , / ? = . 27 . A 2 ( group type : II - oral - ind vs . CC ) X 2 ( recall trial : first vs . second ) mixed ANOVA comparing individuals with collaborative groups revealed the expected finding that collaborative groups ( M = . 60 ) recalled more than individu - als ( M = . 47 ) , F ( l , 30 ) = 9 . 81 , MSE = 0 . 020 . The trend toward better recall on the second trial was not significant , F ( l , 30 ) = 2 . 40 , MSE = 0 . 001 , p = . 13 , nor was the interaction between group type and recall trial , F ( l , 30 ) = 2 . 84 , MSE = 0 . 001 , / > = . 21 . As in Experiment 1 , to equate the number of observations in the II versus CC comparison , the average performance of the best individuals from each II - oral group was compared with the average performance of the collaborative groups . In contrast to Experiment 1 , however , there was no difference between the best individuals ( Af = . 56 ) and the collaborative groups ( M = . 60 ) , t ( 14 ) < 1 . We also compared the mean of the best individuals in written recall ( M = . 60 ) , and this also was not different from the collaborative group , f ( 14 ) < 1 . Thus , these data suggest that with story recall , the perfor - mance of the best individual may be close to the upper bound of performance in the collaborative group . These data contrast with Experiment 1 , in which the collaborating groups ' performance was significantly better than that of the best individuals . There may have been a difference in how groups collaborated when recalling lists of unrelated words versus stories . Perhaps with stories , the groups tended to rely on the person who appeared to recall the most . To examine the hypothesis that collaborative groups relied on the best individual in Experiment 2 but not in Experiment 1 , several analyses were conducted . We exam - 1170 WELDON AND BELLINGER ined the data in the IC conditions to see whether the best individual ' s performance on Recall 1 appeared to predict the collaborating group ' s performance on Recall 2 . First , we correlated the number of items recalled by the best indi - vidual with the number recalled by the collaborating group . In Experiment 1 , r = . 31 , p = . 31 , whereas in Experiment 2 , r - . 71 , p - . 05 , indicating that the level of recall in the groups was more highly correlated with the best individual during story recall than list recall . In another approach , we looked at item additions , defined as the number of items the group recalled during Recall 2 that were not recalled by the best individual on Recall 1 . In this analysis , if the group was simply following the best individual , they should not have added many additional items . Before conducting this analysis , we had to correct for differences in the levels of the best individuals ' perfor - mances on Recall 1 . For example , if the best individual recalled 30 of the 40 items , then only 10 items remained to be added , whereas if the best individual recalled 20 of the 40 items , then 20 items remained . Therefore , we computed item additions as the number of items the group added to the best individual , divided by the number of items unrecalled by the best individual . For example , in Experiment 1 , which had 40 targets , if the best individual recalled 22 items and the group added 4 items , then additions = 4 / ( 40 - 22 ) = 0 . 22 . In Experiment 2 , the computation allowed for a maximum of 42 items . Consistent with expectations , the proportion of items added by the collaborative group in Experiment 2 for story recall ( M - . 26 ) was slightly less than in Experiment 1 for list recall ( Af = . 31 ) , but the difference was not signifi - cant , f ( 22 ) = 1 . 16 , p = . 26 . Of course , the power of this cross - experiment comparison is low because there were only 16 groups in Experiment 1 and 8 in Experiment 2 . Finally , we viewed the tapes of the group recalls and selected the person who appeared to be the group leader or who appeared to dominate recall , then compared this with the person who had the best recall in the individual recall session . In six out of eight cases they were the same person . In the videotapes of story recall in Experiment 2 , there was a tendency in many groups for the participants to let one person take charge , while the others monitored his or her performance , occasionally adding an addition or correction . Because we do not have videotapes of the list recalls from Experiment 1 , however , we could not do a cross - experiment comparison of the role of the individual with the best recall . In summary , then , there is some evidence that the collaborative groups tended to rely on the best individual to a greater extent during story recall than during list recall , but this evidence requires further verification . Implications are addressed in the General Discussion . Hypermnesia , reminiscence , and forgetting . As men - tioned earlier , in the analysis comparing individuals with collaborative groups , the trend toward hypermnesia was not significant . Nevertheless , we examined interest reminis - cence and forgetting for the story propositions , and the mean numbers of items recovered and forgotten across the two recall trials are presented in Table 5 . A 2 X 2 mixed ANOVA was conducted on recall condition ( individual - oral vs . collaborative ) and item status ( reminiscence vs . forgetting ) . Table 5 Experiment 2 : Intertest Reminiscence and Forgetting , Expressed as Number of Items Intertest Individual recall Nominal Collaborative performance ( II - oral ) ( II - oral ) group ( CC ) ReminiscenceForgetting 3 . 23 2 . 75 2 . 06 2 . 31 4 . 50 3 . 06 Note . II - oral = individual - individual recall condition , oral recall ; CC = collaborative - collaborative recall condition . As in Experiment 1 , there was somewhat more reminiscence than forgetting , although here the effect was only marginally significant , F ( l , 30 ) = 11 . 02 , MSE = 2 . 99 , p = . 06 , which accounts for the lack of significant hypermnesia . Neither the effect of recall condition , F < 2 . 31 , MSE = 3 . 25 , p = . 14 , nor the interaction between recall condition and item status ( F < 1 ) was significant . These data differed from those in Experiment 1 in that the hypermnesia was not significant here . Wheeler and Roediger ( 1992 ) did obtain hypermnesia when individuals recalled " War of the Ghosts " twice , although the effect was quite small , with just one additional idea unit recalled on the second trial . However , we were not specifically looking for hypermnesia and did not give the typical instructions to obtain hypermnesia , so we are unconcerned about this aspect of the data for now . Subjective organization . With these materials , we were able to evaluate two aspects of the organization of the material . First , to examine whether collaboration disrupted individual organization , we compared the organization of the first and second story recalls with the original story by computing Spearman rank - order correlations between the order of the propositions in recall and in the original story . These correlations were computed for each individual ( II ) and for each collaborative group ( CC ) . The average correla - tion was . 99 in all four conditions ( both the individuals and the groups on both the first and the second recalls ) . Although the correlations were too high to enable a meaningful statistical analysis , they do suggest that even though groups recalled fewer actual propositions than the pooled individu - als , what they did recall was highly organized relative to the original story . Second , we examined whether groups maintained the organization of the material over time better than individu - als , as was suggested in Experiment 1 . We computed the rank - order correlations between the first and second recalls of the individuals and groups , and the average correlations for the groups and the individuals were both . 98 . Thus , both groups and individuals exhibited very high stability , but again the ceiling effect makes the numbers difficult to interpret because it obscures any potential difference . The highly organized recall seen in the rank - order correla - tions may be attributable to the nature of the material . Story recall is very constrained because story grammar demands coherence and restricts the order in which the propositions can be recalled , particularly in a brief story . There was little room for much variance in this measure . Therefore , these data were not helpful in determining whether , in general , COLLECTIVE MEMORY 1171 groups experience more initial retrieval disruption or main - tain a more stable organization than individuals . Reciprocal effects of individual and group recall To assess the effects of prior recall on later recall , data for the second recall trials were analyzed for individuals ( CI , Il - written , II - oral ) and collaborative groups ( IC , CC ) . ( The H - written data were evaluated here because they were more similar to the CI condition , in which all the group members wrote their individual recalls . ) The individual recall data replicated Experiment 1 in that individual recall was better when preceded by collaborative than individual recall . The difference between the second recalls of the CI ( Af = . 57 ) and II - written ( Af = . 51 ) conditions was just significant , F ( l , 46 ) = 3 . 85 , MSE = 0 . 012 , p = . 056 , and the difference between the second recalls of the CI and II - oral ( Af - . 48 ) conditions was significant , F ( l , 46 ) = 7 . 84 , MSE = 0 . 013 . Again , it appears that group recall provided a second study opportunity for some items the individuals had forgotten . The results for the collaborative groups contrasted with those from Experiment 1 . Here , collaborative recall was significantly better following collaborative recall ( for CC , M = . 62 ) than following individual recall ( for IC , M — . 52 ) , F ( l , 14 ) = 4 . 90 , MSE = 0 . 008 . This finding was not predicted . However , it is consistent with the possibility that groups may have tended to conform to the best individual in story recall . That is , because the best individual had an opportunity to relearn more of the story during collaborative than individual recall , the upper bound on performance in the second recall , which tended to be set by the best individual , would have tended to be higher after a collabora - tive first recall . However , one problematic aspect of these data is that the second recall in the IC condition ( Af = . 52 ) was actually worse than the first recall in the CC condition ( M = . 59 ) , so second recall in the IC condition might have been artificially low , rather than second recall in the CC ( M - . 62 ) condition being relatively improved . Therefore , additional work is needed to determine whether the benefit of collaborative recall for stories is a replicable result . Discussion In summary , the data of most interest replicate the findings of Experiment 1 . Although collaborative groups did recall more than individuals working alone , they actually recalled less than pooled individuals . Using a story rather than an unrelated list of items did not eliminate this collaborative inhibition . In fact , if anything , the collaborative - group deficit appeared even larger with the story . Simply sharing knowledge of story structure did not enhance the collaborative groups ' performance . Although this shared story grammar may have contributed to the very high correlation between the organization of the groups ' recalls and the original story , it did not enable the group to recall enough propositions to overcome collaborative inhibition . Again , collaboration did not optimize individual perfor - mance . Somewhat paradoxically , however , individual recall ultimately benefited from collaborative recall in both experi - ments , a result consistent with other findings in the literature ( e . g . , Stephenson & Wagner , 1989 ) . The effect presumably reflects the opportunity for individuals to be reexposed to items they did not recall on the first recall trial , thereby making them more accessible for later retrieval . Story recall also exhibited some differences from list recall . First , with the story there was some evidence that the groups tended to rely on the best individual , which set a relatively low upper bound on the amount of material the group recalled , relative to what each individual actually knew . This was not the case with list recall , in which the group recalled significantly more than the best individual . We can only speculate on what might have underlain this difference , but two factors might have been at work . First , different social norms might govern story versus list recall , such that people may have felt reluctant to interrupt some - one telling a story . Second , stories are relatively coherent , whereas random lists are relatively disjointed . Thus , it might have been easier for individuals to add additional items during list recall because recall order was unconstrained , and it would have been less disruptive to interject any items that came to mind . A second difference between list and story recall was that with list recall the groups ' performance tended to be more stable than the individuals ' , but with story recall both the groups and individuals exhibited very high stability and conformed closely to the original story order . Finally , the effects of prior recall on collaborative recall were somewhat different in the two experiments , Experi - ment 1 indicated that collaborative recall was about the same when preceded by individual and collaborative recall , but Experiment 2 suggested that collaborative recall was better following collaborative recall . It is possible that for collabo - rative groups the effect of prior recall depended on the type of material to be remembered ( e . g . , unrelated item lists vs . stories ) . If groups relied on the best individual more in story recall than in random - list recall , the effects of prior collabo - rative recall may have been different in each case , as suggested earlier . General Discussion Two experiments were conducted to compare individual and collaborative recall . In Experiment 1 , participants studied random lists of pictures and words with either a deep or a shallow encoding task . In Experiment 2 , participants heard the story " War of the Ghosts . " In each experiment people recalled the material twice in one of four conditions representing combinations of individual and collaborative recall ( II , CC , IC , or CI ) . Performance was compared for individuals , collaborative groups , and nominal groups con - structed by pooling the nonredundant answers of individuals . As expected , collaborative groups recalled more than individuals . However , the most interesting outcome in both experiments was that collaborative groups recalled less than nominal groups . Thus , although collaboration was better than individual recall , collaboration did not optimize indi - vidual performance . An inhibitory process appears to oper - ate in collaborative recall , producing collaborative inhibi - tion . These data are consistent with Lorge and Solomon ' s ( 1961 ) finding that a model predicting additivity of indi - 1172 WELDON AND BELLINGER vidual performance overpredicted group performance on a multitrial learning task ( cf . Andersson & R & nnberg , 1995 , 1996 ; Hoppe , 1962 ) . Similar effects have been reported in other domains . In brainstorming , nominal groups produce a greater number of unique ideas than do collaborative groups ( e . g . , Bouchard & Hare , 1970 ; Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Dunnette , Campbell , & Jaastad , 1963 ; Taylor et al . , 1958 ) . Also , in emergency situations , a person alone is more inclined to help than is a person in a group , and the probability of lending assistance decreases as group size increases ( Darley & Latane \ 1968 ) . In many other tasks , from rope pulling to vigilance tasks , people contribute less when working in groups than when working alone ( see review by Karau & Williams , 1993 ) . A variety of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the loss of individual productivity in group work . Many of these mechanisms focus on motivational factors , and these conceivably could be at play in collaborative recall . One proposed explanation is free riding or social loafing , the idea that people do not work as hard in groups as they do when working alone . Social loafing may occur because in group work ( a ) personal accountability is diminished , making it easier to exert less effort without being noticed ; ( b ) there is perceived dispensibility of effort , or the perception that one ' s contribution will not make much of a difference ; ( c ) individuals attempt to achieve an equity of effort , but performance will be low because each person ' s output is initially limited by having to allow others to take their turns ; and ( d ) there is a diffusion of responsibility , or a belief that one is less accountable for the group ' s behavior than for one ' s individual behavior ( Latan6 & Nida , 1981 ) . There is some evidence that free riding plays a small role in productivity loss in brainstorming groups ( e . g . , Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Harkins & Petty , 1982 ) , but it does not appear to account for the whole effect . Finally , evaluation apprehen - sion might inhibit individual contributions if one is con - cerned about being evaluated negatively by the group ( e . g . , Collaros & Anderson , 1969 ; Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ) . A second major hypothesized source of collaborative inhibition in cognitive tasks is production blocking ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ) , or the idea that because only one group member can speak at a time , individuals cannot produce all the ideas that they would otherwise . The exact mechanism through which this might inhibit individual performance is unclear , but possibilities include that ( a ) one needs to remember one ' s own ideas while waiting for others , and this interferes with one ' s ability to generate new ideas ; ( b ) one might forget one ' s own ideas while waiting for others ; ( c ) as others present their ideas , one might see one ' s own as less valuable or original and so suppress them ; ( d ) one might be distracted by listening to others , which might disrupt one ' s own thought processes . Diehl and Stroebe ( 1987 ) have argued that production blocking accounts for most of the group - productivity loss in brainstorming . Any of these processes could theoretically operate in collaborative recall . In line with this idea , production blocking during collabo - rative recall could occur through a process similar to that which underlies part - list cuing and retrieval - inhibition ef - fects ( e . g . , Basden & Basden , 1995 ; Roediger & Neely , 1982 ; Slamecka , 1969 ) . In the part - list cuing effect , during retrieval some people are shown a subset of the target words and are asked to recall the remaining words . Recall for the remaining words is actually worse than when people are given no subset of target words during recall . This inhibitory effect has been attributed to various mechanisms ( see reviews by Nickerson , 1984 ; Roediger , 1973 ; Rundus , 1973 ) . For example , the retrievability of the presented targets might be strengthened , to the detriment of the remaining subset . Alternatively , Basden and Basden ( 1995 ) have proposed that the intralist cues disrupt the individual ' s organization of the material , thereby impairing recall . Our experiments do not provide much direct evidence to distinguish between motivational and cognitive causes of the collaborative - inhibition effect . However , some aspects of the data suggest that both motivational factors and cognitive factors are at work . For example , collaborative inhibition appeared to be somewhat larger in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1 , indicating that people did not contrib - ute as much of their individual knowledge to the group with story recall as they did with list recall . Also , there was evidence that groups tended to follow the best individual to a greater extent in story recall than in random - list recall . These findings suggest a possible role of motivational factors , in that story recall might be perceived as more difficult , and so individuals might be more willing to defer to others in the group . In addition , social norms may make people more reluctant to interrupt someone telling a story . These findings also suggest a role for cognitive factors . Because the organizational structure of a story is relatively complex and rigid , it may take considerable cognitive effort to retrieve and maintain one ' s own representation while monitoring the story development in the group . Furthermore , an individual may not want to slow down the pace of the group story reconstruction , so rather than asking the group to pause while one tries to retrieve more details , a person might contribute only items that he or she can retrieve easily and quickly . In contrast , in list recall there is no obvious order in which the material must be retrieved , and pauses in the recall become frequent and long , so the individual members can spend more time and effort retrieving items without appear - ing to disrupt the group activity . Thus , both social and cognitive factors may interact to inhibit individual perfor - mance m collaborative recall , but the severity of this inhibition may be modulated by the type of material . More direct evidence for the role of cognitive factors in collaborative inhibition was provided by Basden et al . ( 1997 ) , who examined group recall for categorized lists . Such lists seem to provide a middle ground between the random word list and the organized story , and provide a better opportunity for assessing the organization of recall relative to the original material . Basden et al . demonstrated that group recall conforms less well to the organizational structure of the categorized lists than does individual recall , thus supporting the idea that retrieval disruption may play a role in collaborative inhibition . The idea that cognitive inhibition arises from retrieval interference suggests some additional avenues for future COLLECTIVE MEMORY 1173 research . If one can find situations in which collaboration does not interfere with individual organization , collabora - tion should not inhibit recall . Thus , one strategy would be to examine collaborative recall for material that is likely to be organized very similarly by the members of the group , such as highly structured material ( although our Experiment 2 suggests this material should also be relatively easy to recall ) . Another factor that may reduce retrieval interference is familiarity among group members . For example , individu - als in long - term intimate or working relationships may be able to coordinate their recall better than do groups of strangers , and may thereby reduce interference . Finally , it is possible that domains in which the information is richly interconnected may be more resistant to collaborative inhibi - tion . For example , in a variety of semantic - memory tasks , such as answering trivia questions or reconstructing a map of the United States ( both of which we are currently testing ) , there may be a sufficient variety of retrieval routes so that the potential of cross - cuing overrides the decrement produced by interference . Evidence that collaborative inhibition may be reduced in semantic memory tests and when collaborat - ing with friends has recently been obtained by Andersson and Rbnnberg ( 1995 , 1996 ) in studies of dyad recall . Experiment 1 did provide interesting information about possible differences in the representation of information in groups versus individuals . The intertrial organization of the material was somewhat higher for groups than for individu - als , suggesting that although groups do not manage to incorporate all of the individuals ' knowledge , they do create a new organization of the material that is relatively more stable over time . In future work , it will be useful to see if this finding holds for other types of materials and to develop paradigms to determine whether the groups ' representations have emergent properties that cannot be predicted from the individuals ' representations . Our findings are consistent with those of Meudell and colleagues ( Meudell et al . , 1992 , 1995 ) , in the sense that their findings also failed to show any advantage of collabora - tion relative to pooled individual performance . However , they tested dyads and found no difference between nominal and collaborative groups , whereas we tested triads and found inhibition in the collaborative groups . Thus , dyads appear to exhibit additivity , but larger groups actually inhibit recall ( but see Andersson & R6nnberg , 1995 , 1996 , who obtained evidence for collaborative inhibition in dyads ) . This finding suggests that relative inhibition may increase as group size increases , a hypothesis that should be examined in future work . The difference between dyads and triads is also consistent with the possibility that collaborative inhibi - tion results from retrieval disruption , because more disrup - tion would occur with larger groups . On the other hand , it is possible that dyads represent a social group with unique properties , as suggested by the fact that the dyads can exhibit no collaborative inhibition , even though a partner ' s recall should produce interference . However , Meudell et al . ' s ( 1992 , 1995 ) participants recalled the material as individuals before recalling it as pairs , which may have served to consolidate the information and make it resistant to interfer - ence by the other person . Clearly , the difference between dyads and larger groups represents an interesting area for further work , and may be helpful in assessing the cognitive and social contributions to collaborative inhibition . In conclusion , the present work demonstrated the impor - tance of social factors in cognitive performance , factors which historically have been ignored in experimental cogni - tive psychology . Here it was shown that groups exhibit some of the same phenomena as individuals ( i . e . , the level - of - processing effect , picture - superiority effect , and hypermne - sia ) , but collaboration did not optimize the performance of individuals . Whereas one might predict that collaborative recall should enhance individual recall by providing addi - tional retrieval cues , in fact collaboration actually inhibited individual performance . Future work should be directed toward understanding the possible roles of cognitive and motivational factors in producing this effect , and toward developing theoretical frameworks that account for the interplay between individual and collaborative memory processes . More broadly , as discussed in the introduction , memory can be considered to be social in many different ways , and investigations of these dimensions promise to enrich our understanding of mnemonic processes . References Anderson , R . C , & Watts , G . H . ( 1969 ) . Bidirectional associations in multi - trial free recall . Psychonomic Science , 15 , 288 - 289 . Andersson , J . , & Ronnberg , J . ( 1995 ) . Recall suffers from collabo - ration : Joint recall effects of friendship and task complexity . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 9 , 199 - 211 . Andersson , J . , & Ronnberg , J . ( 1996 ) . Collaboration and memory : Effects of dyadic retrieval on different memory tasks . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 10 , 171 - 181 . Bartlett , F . C . ( 1932 ) . Remembering : A study in experimental and social psychology . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Basden , B . H . , Basden , D . R . , Bryner , S . , & Thomas , R . L . , HL ( 1997 ) . A comparison of group and individual remembering : Does group participation disrupt retrieval ? Journal of Experimen - tal Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 23 , 1176— 1189 . Basden , D . R . , & Basden , B . H . ( 1995 ) . Some tests of the strategy disruption interpretation of part - list cuing inhibition . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 21 , 1656 - 1669 . Bouchard , T . J . , Jr . , & Hare , M . ( 1970 ) . Size , performance , and potential in brainstorming groups . Journal of Applied Psychol - ogy , 54 , 51 - 55 . Bower , G . H . ( 1976 ) . Experiments on story understanding and recall . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 28 , 511 - 534 . Clark , N . K . , & Stephenson , G . M . ( 1989 ) . Group remembering . In P . B . Paulus ( Ed . ) , Psychology of group influence ( 2nd ed . , pp . 357 - 391 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Eribaum . Clark , N . K . , Stephenson , G . M , & Kniveton , B . ( 1990 ) . Social remembering : Quantitative aspects of individual and collabora - tive remembering by police officers and students . British Journal of Psychology , 81 , 73 - 94 . Clark , N . K . , Stephenson , G . M . , & Rutter , D . R . ( 1986 ) . Memory for a complex social discourse : The analysis and prediction of individual and group recall . Journal of Memory and Language , 25 , 295 - 313 . Collaros , P . A . , & Anderson , L . R . ( 1969 ) . Effect of perceived expertness upon creativity of members of brainstorming groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 53 , 159 - 163 . 1174 WELDON AND BELLINGER Craik , F . I . M . , & Lockhart , R . S . ( 1972 ) . Levels of processing : A framework for memory research . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 11 , 671 - 684 . Craik , R I . M , & Tulving , E . ( 1975 ) . Depth of processing and the retention of words in episodic memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 104 , 268 - 294 . D ' Agostino , P . R . , O ' Neill , B . J . , & Paivio , A . ( 1977 ) . Memory for pictures and words as a function of level of processing : Depth or dual coding ? Memory & Cognition , 5 , 252 - 256 . Darley , J . M . , & Latan6 , B . ( 1968 ) . Bystander intervention in emergencies : Diffusion of responsibility . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 8 , 377 - 388 . Dashiell , J . F . ( 1935 ) . Experimental studies of the influence of social situations on the behavior of individual human adults . In C . Murchison ( Ed . ) , A handbook of social psychology ( Vol . 2 , pp . 1097 - 1158 ) . New York : Russell & Russell . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1987 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 497 - 509 . Dunnette , M . D . , Campbell , J . , & Jaastad , K . ( 1963 ) . The effects of group participation on brainstorming effectiveness for two industrial samples . Journal of Applied Psychology , 47 , 30 - 37 . Durkheim , E . ( 1915 ) . Elementary forms of the religious life . New York : Macmillan . Durso , F . T . , & Johnson , M . K . ( 1980 ) . The effects of orienting tasks on recognition , recall , and modality confusion of pictures and words . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 19 , 416 - 429 . Erdelyi , M . H . , & Kleinbard , J . ( 1978 ) . Has Ebbinghaus decayed with time ? The growth of recall ( hypermnesia ) over days . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 4 , 275 - 289 . Halbwachs , M . ( 1980 ) . The collective memory , ( F . J . Ditter , Jr . & V . Y . Ditter , Trans . ) . New York : Harper & Row . ( Original work published 1950 ) Harkins , S . G . , & Petty , R . E . ( 1982 ) . Effects of task difficulty and task uniqueness on social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 43 , 1214 - 1229 . Hoppe , R . A . ( 1962 ) . Memorizing by individuals and groups : Atest of the pooling - of - ability model . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 65 , 64 - 67 . Jung , C . G . ( 1953 ) . The collected works ofC . G . Jung ( H . Read , M . Fordham , & G . Adler , Eds . ) . New York : Pantheon Books . Karau , S . J . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1993 ) . Social loafing : A meta - analytic review and theoretical integration . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 , 681 - 706 . Kintsch , W . , & van Dijk , T . A . ( 1978 ) . Towards a model of text comprehension and production . Psychological Review , 85 > 363 - 394 . Lamm , H . , & Trommsdorff , G . ( 1973 ) . Group versus individual performance on tasks requiring ideational proficiency ( brain - storming ) . European Journal of Social Psychology , 3 , 361 - 387 . Latane " , B . , & Nida , S . A . ( 1981 ) . Ten years of research on group size and helping . Psychological Bulletin , 89 , 308 - 324 . Lorge , I . , & Solomon , H . ( 1961 ) . Group and individual behavior in free recall . In J . H . Criswell , H . Solomon , & P . Suppes ( Eds . ) , Mathematical methods in small group processes ( pp . 221 - 231 ) . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Mandler , J . M . , & Johnson , N . S . ( 1977 ) . Remembrance of things parsed : Story structure and recall . Cognitive Psychology , 9 , 111 - 151 . Meudell , P . R . , Hitch , G . J . , & Boyle , M . M . ( 1995 ) . Collaboration in recall : Do pairs of people cross - cue each other to produce new memories ? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Experimental Psychology , 48 ( A ) , 141 - 152 . Meudell , P . R . , Hitch , G . J . , & Kirby , P . ( 1992 ) . Are two heads better than one ? Experimental investigations of the social facili - tation of memory . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 525 - 543 . Nelson , D . L . ( 1979 ) . Remembering pictures and words : Appear - ance , significance , and name . In L . S . Cermak & E I . M . Craik ( Eds . ) , Levels of processing in human memory ( pp . 45 - 76 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Nickerson , R . S . ( 1984 ) . Retrieval inhibition from part - set cuing : A persisting enigma in memory research . Memory & Cognition , 72 , 531 - 552 . Paivio , A . ( 1971 ) . Imagery and verbal processes . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . Payne , D . G . ( 1986 ) . Hypermnesia for pictures and words : Testing the recall level hypothesis . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 12 , 16 - 29 . Payne , D . G . ( 1987 ) . Hypermnesia and reminiscence in recall : A historical and empirical review . Psychological Bulletin , 101 , 5 - 27 . Ravicchio , D . , Thomas , R . L . , Ill , Randall , W . , Souphasith , S . , Speer , M . , Basden , B . H . , & Basden , D . R . ( 1996 , May ) . False remembering in group recall and recognition . Poster session presented at the Eighth Annual Convention of the American Psychological Society , San Francisco , CA . Roediger , H . L . , in . ( 1973 ) . Inhibition in recall from cueing with recall targets . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 12 , 644 - 657 . Roediger , H . L . , Ill , & Neely , J . H . ( 1982 ) . Retrieval blocks in episodic and semantic memory . Canadian Journal of Psychol - ogy , 36 , 213 - 242 . Rogoif , B . , AMistry , J . J . ( 1985 ) . Memory development in cultural context . In M . Pressley & C . Brainerd ( Eds . ) , Cognitive learning and memory in children ( pp . 117 - 142 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Rundus , D . ( 1973 ) . Negative effects of using list items as recall cues . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 12 , 43 - 50 . Slamecka , N . J . ( 1969 ) . Testing for associative storage in multitrial free recall . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 81 , 557 - 560 . S nod grass , J . G . , & Vanderwart , M . ( 1980 ) . A standardized set of 260 pictures : Norms for name agreement , image agreement , familiarity , and visual complexity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 6 , 174 - 215 . Stephenson , G . M . , BrandstStter , H . , & Wagner , W . ( 1983 ) . An experimental study of social performance and delay on the testimonial validity of story recall . European Journal of Social Psychology , 13 , 175 - 191 . Stephenson , G . M . , & Wagner , W . ( 1989 ) . Origins of the misplaced confidence effect in collaborative recall . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 227 - 236 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Tulving , E . ( 1977 ) . The measurement of subjective organization in free recall . Psychological Bulletin , 84 , 539 - 556 . Taylor , D . W . , Berry , P . C , & Block , C . H . ( 1958 ) . Does group participation when using brainstorming facilitate or inhibit creative thinking ? Administrative Science Quarterly , 3 , 23 - 47 . Thorndyke , P . ( 1977 ) . Cognitive psychology . Cognitive Structures in Comprehension and Memory of Narrative Discourse , 9 , 77 - 110 . Vollrath , D . A . , Sheppard , B . H . , Hinsz , V . B . , & Davis , J . H . ( 1989 ) . Memory performance by decision - making groups and individuals . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 43 , 289 - 300 . Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1962 ) . Thought and language . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1978 ) . Mind in society . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Wegner , D . M . , Giuliano , T . , & Hertel , P . T . ( 1985 ) . Cognitive COLLECTIVE MEMORY 1175 interdependence in close relationships . In W . Ickes ( Ed . ) , Compatible and incompatible relationships ( pp . 253 - 276 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Weldon , M . S . , & Coyote , K . C . ( 1996 ) . Failure to find the picture superiority effect in implicit conceptual memory tests . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 670 - 686 . Wheeler , M . A . , & Roediger , H . L . , m . ( 1992 ) . Disparate effects of repeated testing : Reconciling Bollard ' s ( 1913 ) and Bartlett ' s ( 1932 ) results . Psychological Science , 3 , 240 - 245 . Wundt , W . ( 1916 ) . Elements of folk psychology ( E . L . Schaub , Trans . ) . New York : Macmillan . ( Original work published 1910 ) Yuker , H . E . ( 1955 ) . Group atmosphere and memory . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 51 , 117 - 123 . Appendix Idea Units for Scoring " War of the Ghosts , " Taken From Mandler and Johnson ( 1977 ) 1 1 . One night two young men from Egulac went down to the river to hunt seals , 2 . and while they were there it became foggy and calm . 3 . Then they heard war cries , 4 . and they thought , " Maybe this is a war party . " 5 . They escaped to the shore 6 . and hid behind a log . 7 . Now canoea came up , 8 . and they heard the noise of paddles 9 . and saw one canoe coming up to mem . 10 . There were five men in the canoe , 11 . and they said , " What do you think ? We wish to take you along . 12 . We are going up the river to make war on the people . " 13 . One of the young men said , " I have no arrows . " 14 . " Arrows are in the canoe , " they said . 15 . " I will not go along . 16 . 1 might be killed . 17 . My relatives do not know where I have gone . IS . But you , " he said , turning to the other , " may go with them . " 19 . So one of the young men went , 20 . but the other returned home . 21 . And the warriors went up the river to a town on the other side of Kalama . 22 . The people came down to the water , 23 . and they began to fight , 24 . and many were killed . 25 . But presently the young man heard one of the warriors say , " Quick , tet us go home ; that Indian has been hit . " 26 . Now he thought , " Oh , they are ghosts . " 27 . He did not feel sick , 28 . but they said he had been shot . 29 . So the canoes went back to Egulac , 30 . and the young man went ashore to his house and made a fire . 31 . And he told everybody and said , " Behold , I accompanied the ghosts , and we went to a fight . 32 . Many of our fellows were killed , 33 . and many of those who attacked us were killed . 34 . And they said I was nit 35 . and I did not feel sick . " 36 . He told it all , 37 . and then he became quiet . 38 . When the sun rose he fell down . 39 . Something black came out of his mouth . 40 . His face became contorted . 41 . The people jumped up and cried . 42 . He was dead . 1 From " Remembrance of Things Parsed : Story Structure and Recall , " by J . M . Mandler and N . S . Johnson , 1977 , Cognitive Psychology , 9 , p . 136 . Copyright 1977 by Academic Press . Re - printed with permission . Received July 10 , 1995 Revision received February 27 , 1997 Accepted February 28 , 1997 •