STATE - OF - THE - ART REVIEW Invadosomes are coming : new insights into function and disease relevance Elyse K . Paterson 1 and Sara A . Courtneidge 1 , 2 , 3 1 Department of Cell , Developmental and Cancer Biology , Oregon Health & Science University , Portland , OR , USA 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Oregon Health & Science University , Portland , OR , USA 3 Knight Cancer Institute , Oregon Health & Science University , Portland , OR , USA Keywords 3D growth ; degradation ; F - actin ; invadopodia ; invadosome ; invasion ; metastasis ; MT1 - MMP ; podosomes ; Tks5 Correspondence S . A . Courtneidge , Oregon Health and Science University , CLSB 6N086 ; Mail Code CL6 , 2730 SW Moody Avenue , Portland , OR 97201 , USA Fax : + 1 503 494 4253 Tel : + 1 503 496 4750 E - mail : courtneidge @ ohsu . edu ( Received 13 March 2017 , revised 9 May 2017 , accepted 24 May 2017 ) doi : 10 . 1111 / febs . 14123 Invadopodia and podosomes are discrete , actin - based molecular protru - sions that form in cancer cells and normal cells , respectively , in response to diverse signaling pathways and extracellular matrix cues . Although they participate in a host of different cellular processes , they share a common functional theme of controlling pericellular proteolytic activity , which sets them apart from other structures that function in migration and adhesion , including focal adhesions , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . In this review , we highlight research that explores the function of these complex structures , including roles for podosomes in embryonic and postnatal development , in angiogenesis and remodeling of the vasculature , in maturation of the post - synaptic membrane , in antigen sampling and recognition , and in cell – cell fusion mechanisms , as well as the involvement of invadopodia at multiple steps of the metastatic cascade , and how all of this may apply in the treat - ment of human disease states . Finally , we explore recent research that implicates a novel role for exosomes and microvesicles in invadopodia - dependent and invadopodia - independent mechanisms of invasion , respec - tively . Introduction Cellular invasion plays vital roles in homeostasis and is employed by many different cell types throughout the lifetime of the organism , including during embry - onic development , immune surveillance and response , and wound healing [ 1 , 2 ] . In cancer , tumor cells hijack the molecular components of normal cellular invasion to achieve degradation of the basement membrane and subsequent invasion into the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and the underlying vasculature , which begins the metastatic cascade of aggressive tumors [ 3 ] . The ECM , which refers to both the basement membrane and the interstitial matrix , is a complex , yet dynamic Abbreviations 3D , three - dimensional ; ACh , acetylcholine ; Ag , antigen ; APCs , antigen - presenting cells ; Arp2 / 3 , actin - related protein 2 and 3 ; BDCS , Borrone dermato - cardio - skeletal syndrome ; Cdk5 , cyclin - dependent kinase 5 ; CNF1 , cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; F - actin , ﬁlamentous - actin ; FAs , focal adhesions ; FGF , ﬁbroblast growth factor ; FITC , ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ; FTHS , Frank - ter Haar syndrome ; GFP , green ﬂuorescent protein ; HNSCC , head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ; ILPs , invadosome - like protrusions ; KD , knockdown ; MMP , matrix metalloprotease ; MSCs , mesenchymal stromal cells ; MT1 - MMP or MMP14 , membrane type I matrix metalloprotease ; MVEs , multivesicular endosomes ; NCCs , neural crest cells ; NMJ , neuromuscular junction ; N - WASP , neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ; PAMPs , pathogen - associated molecular patterns ; PDGF , platelet - derived growth factor ; PMA , phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ; PRRs , pattern recognition receptors ; PX , Phox homology ; RNAi , RNA interference ; ROS , reactive oxygen species ; SH3 , Src homology 3 domain ; TGF - b , transforming growth factor b ; TIMP - 2 , tissue inhibitor of metalloproteases 2 ; Tks4 , tyrosine kinase substrate with 4 SH3 domains ; Tks5 , tyrosine kinase substrate with 5 SH3 domains ; uPA , urokinase - type plasminogen activator ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor ; WASP , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ; WAS , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome . 8 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies structural component found in and between all tissues [ 4 , 5 ] . Comprised of many different macromolecules , including ﬁbrillar collagens , proteoglycans , glycopro - teins and polysaccharides , the ECM is a molecular scaffold that provides underlying support to promote tissue boundaries , architecture and integrity [ 6 ] . Dur - ing cellular invasion processes , cells must be able to degrade and remodel the ECM . One way in which cells accomplish this task is through podosomes and invadopodia ( sometimes collectively referred to as ‘in - vadosomes’ ) [ 7 ] , which are dynamic protrusions of the plasma membrane found in both normal ( referred to as podosomes ) and in cancer cells ( referred to as invadopodia ) [ 8 – 12 ] . Podosomes and invadopodia are complex molecular structures comprised of a dense ﬁlamentous ( F ) - actin core containing actin - regulating proteins , including polymerization activators , ﬁlament crosslinkers , nucle - ators , and binders , surrounded by proteins involved in regulation , adhesion , and scaffolding , including inte - grins , kinases , GTPases , and adaptor proteins [ 7 , 12 , 13 ] . Key components of invadosomes include the scaffold protein Tks5 , the actin regulators cortactin , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein family members [ WASP or neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) ] and coﬁlin , and membrane type I matrix metalloprotease ( MT1 - MMP or MMP14 ) . Tks5 , a Src substrate , is a scaffold protein that localizes to , and is required for invadosome formation [ 14 – 16 ] . It contains an amino - terminal Phox homology ( PX ) domain , which binds to phosphorylated phos - phatidylinositol lipids [ 17 ] , as well as ﬁve Src homol - ogy 3 ( SH3 ) domains , small noncatalytic domains that facilitate protein – protein interactions through the recognition of proline - rich residues [ 18 ] . In vitro stud - ies have demonstrated that Tks5 is necessary for the ability of both normal cells and tumor cells to degrade and invade [ 15 , 16 , 19 ] , and it has been shown to inter - act with numerous actin - remodeling proteins , including N - WASP , Grb2 , and Nck2 [ 20 , 21 ] , as well as pro - teases , including the ADAM - family proteases [ 17 ] . Unlike many other invadosome proteins , Tks5 is not found in other protrusions and adhesions ( such as lamellipodia , ﬁlopodia , and focal adhesions ) [ 15 , 17 , 19 ] . Furthermore , expression of Tks5 in noninvasive cancer cells drives the formation of invadopodia [ 15 ] . There are at least three isoforms of Tks5 : Tks5 a ( Tks5 long ) , Tks5 b , and Tks5 short [ 22 , 23 ] . Tks5 b and Tks5 short are initiated at distinct internal promoters , and lack the PX domain . Only Tks5 a contributes to invadosome formation [ 15 ] ; furthermore , cancer cell lines in culture predominantly express Tks5 a [ 15 ] . In lung adenocarci - noma , the ratio of Tks5 a to Tks5 short expression increases with tumor progression , and is a predictor of worse outcome [ 23 ] . High Tks5 a expression is also a predictor of poor survival in breast cancer , particularly for those with stage I and II tumors [ 24 ] . Other studies have also noted a correlation between Tks5 expression and decreased survival , although these studies did not differentiate the Tks5 isoforms [ 25 , 26 ] . Mature podosomes and invadopodia are sites of pericellular proteolytic activity , resulting in ECM degradation . Most investigators consider that this focal proteolysis is diagnostic of the presence of invado - somes , although one recent paper has described MT1 - MMP and Src - dependent proteolysis at focal adhe - sions ( FAs ) [ 27 ] . Three classes of proteases have been reported at invadosomes ; zinc - regulated matrix metal - loproteases ( e . g . , MMP2 , MMP9 , MT1 - MMP , and the ADAMs family of sheddases ) , cathepsin cysteine pro - teases ( e . g . , cathepsin B ) ; and serine proteases ( e . g . , seprase and urokinase - type plasminogen activator , or uPA ) [ 7 , 28 ] . Of these , MT1 - MMP , a transmembrane MMP [ 29 ] , has often been described as a master regu - lator of invadosome function [ 30 – 36 ] . As well as ECM degradation and remodeling , pericellular proteases can function in the control of cell growth , apoptosis , and in cell – cell communications [ 37 ] , through the release of growth factors that have a high afﬁnity for matrix pro - teins ( e . g . , ﬁbroblast growth factor , or FGF and trans - forming growth factor - b , or TGF - b ) [ 37 ] , direct cleavage and activation of growth factors ( e . g . , TGF - b and interleukin - 1 b ) [ 38 ] , and cleavage of cell surface receptors ( e . g . , FGF receptor 1 ) [ 37 , 38 ] . Whether the localization of proteases to invadosomes is required for these diverse functions is an important but unan - swered question . The invadosome is considered a distinct cellular structure from other actin - based structures such as ﬁlopodia , lamellipodia , and FAs [ 7 ] . FAs are the sites of attachment to , and signaling by , the ECM [ 39 , 40 ] . Lamellipodia are thin , sheet - like cellular protrusions that are found at the leading edge of a migratory cell and which contain a branched network of actin ﬁla - ments [ 41 , 42 ] . Filopodia , which are often found extending from the lamellipodial actin network , are thin protrusions that contain tightly packed , parallel bundles of F - actin , and have been implicated in prob - ing the cell environment , in cell – cell adhesion , and in guidance toward chemoattractant gradients in neu - ronal growth cones [ 43 ] . All of these structures are involved in cell – ECM interaction , but , with the caveat mentioned above , proteolytic activity is usually con - ﬁned to invadosomes . Indeed , the colocalization of F - actin , Tks5 , and ECM degradation is often regarded as diagnostic for invadosomes ( Fig . 1 ) . Colocalization 9 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease of actin and other proteins such as talin or Arp2 / 3 is also often used , but we caution that these proteins are also found together in FAs [ 44 ] and lamellipodia [ 45 , 46 ] , respectively . Not surprisingly , many of the studies on podosome biology have been conducted in cells of the immune system , which rely on invasion not only to navigate through the ECM , but also to degrade and remodel blood vessels for entry into circulation . Leukocytes [ 47 ] , macrophages [ 47 ] , megakaryocytes [ 48 ] , eosino - phils [ 49 ] , and dendritic cells [ 50 , 51 ] , have all been documented to form podosomes , either constitutively or under speciﬁc stimulation . However , podosomes have also been observed in a number of other normal cell types , including osteoclasts [ 52 , 53 ] , aortic endothe - lial cells [ 31 , 54 ] , myoblasts [ 55 ] , bronchial epithelial cells [ 56 ] , neural crest cells [ 22 ] , and in neuronal growth cones [ 57 ] . Similarly , many cancer cell types form invadopodia , including pancreatic [ 58 ] , ovarian [ 59 ] , prostate [ 16 , 60 ] , brain [ 61 ] , skin [ 62 ] , bladder [ 63 – 65 ] , head and neck [ 66 ] , breast [ 24 ] , and melanoma [ 34 ] . F - actin FITC - gelatin Merge B C P odo s o m e s I n v adopod i a F - actin / gelatin / nuclei Invadosome ECM F - actin FITC - gelatin A Fig . 1 . Normal cells and cancer cells form podosomes and invadopodia , respectively , and degrade a gelatin matrix . ( A ) A simpliﬁed schematic of a cell with invadosomes on top of a ﬂuorescently labeled gelatin matrix . Using the proteolytic activity of its invadosomes , the cell is able to degrade the gelatin matrix ( represented as cleaved , red ECM proteins ) . In order to visualize the degradation activity , the cells are ﬁxed and stained with phalloidin , a ﬂuorescently conjugated F - actin probe . The use of an appropriate ﬂuorescent wavelength allows for the observation of the ﬂuorescently labeled , degraded gelatin . Both of these events are illustrated in the zoomed - in image directly underneath the invadosome . The colocalization of F - actin punctae and areas of degraded matrix ( see zoomed - in illustration ) are indicative of invadosome activity . ( B ) THP - 1 cells differentiated into macrophages by PMA and ( C ) BxPC - 3 pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells were seeded onto FITC - labeled gelatin and allowed to degrade . In the left - most images of ( B ) and ( C ) , cells were stained with phalloidin . The middle images of ( B ) and ( C ) show areas of degraded FITC - gelatin . Podosomes are observed in ( B ) and invadopodia are observed in ( C ) by the colocalization of F - actin punctae with degraded areas of gelatin , as seen in the merged image ( actin / gelatin / nuclei ) . In ( C ) , the cell nuclei were stained for using DAPI . In ( B ) , no DAPI stain is provided because it obstructed the F - actin staining . Images were taken at 20 9 [ macrophages , in ( B ) ] and at 63 9 [ BxPC - 3 cells , in ( C ) ] magniﬁcation . Scale bars = 20 l m . Images courtesy of Dr . A . Kuipers and Dr . P . Saini of Oregon Health and Science University , Portland , Oregon , USA . 10 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Are invadopodia and podosomes distinct structures ? There are several reports of differences . For example , invadopodia have been observed to last hours in cul - ture , whereas podosomes typically have a lifespan of minutes [ 7 , 67 ] . Moreover , it has been documented that podosomes do not protrude as far into the substrata as invadopodia , with protrusive lengths of 0 . 5 – 2 l m and greater than 2 l m , respectively [ 7 ] . Lastly , the cell mem - brane at invadopodia has been observed to undergo rapid morphological changes in the form of ﬁlament - like processes that extend into the underlying matrix ; such a phenomenon was not observed at the cell mem - brane of podosomes [ 68 ] . We believe it is possible that differences in experimental conditions underlie many of the observed disparities between podosomes and invadopodia . A thorough examination on how culture conditions and matrix composition and rigidity impacts invadosome half - life and protrusion is lacking . How - ever , one informative study suggests that invadopodia are able to sense and respond to a wide range of matri - ces , and that the initiation of invadopodia and the sub - sequent emergence of proteolytic activity are regulated by differences in substrate rigidity [ 69 ] . Furthermore , in one interesting study that used polycarbonate ﬁlters with pores that could be ﬁlled with ECM , it was shown that dendritic cell podosomes increased in length and width in response to ECM , suggesting that podosome formation is responsive to speciﬁc environments [ 50 ] . While minor differences in the composition of invadopodia compared to podosomes ( e . g . , N - WASP rather than WASP ) may be due to cell background dif - ferences , it seems most likely that invadopodia are the results of mimicry , or ‘hijacking’ of the invasive behav - iors of normal cell types . This concept was supported by a gene expression proﬁling study on cancer cells describing a host of differentially expressed genes involved in cell proliferation , apoptosis , survival , chemotaxis , and motility [ 70 ] . What triggers the formation of invadosomes ? They can form in response to a variety of molecules , signal - ing pathways , and microenvironmental cues . For example , growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) [ 71 , 72 ] , platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) [ 73 ] , TGF - b [ 31 , 74 ] , and epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) [ 75 – 77 ] , have all been shown to induce invadosomes . Other mechanisms that inﬂuence podosome and invadopodia formation include acidic pH [ 78 – 81 ] , increased substrate rigidity and density [ 82 – 87 ] , hypoxia [ 73 , 76 , 88 – 90 ] , and reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) [ 91 ] , each of which is considered a hall - mark of aggressive tumors [ 6 , 92 – 96 ] . In this review , we highlight the functions of both podosomes and invadopodia in diverse cellular processes . We also discuss invadopodia as critical play - ers in multiple steps of metastasis , highlighting the recently found , novel role for invadopodia in 3D tumor growth . Throughout this review , we pay special attention to how the function of podosomes and invadopodia may be targeted in numerous disease states , including cancer initiation and the progression to metastasis , and developmental disorders , including Frank - ter Haar syndrome ( FTHS ) and Borrone der - mato - cardio - skeletal syndrome ( BDCS ) . Lastly , we end with a brief discussion on recent ﬁndings that impli - cate exosomes and microvesicles in invadopodia func - tion . Podosomes and invadopodia are present in diverse cell types , but have common functional themes Podosomes in cells of the hematopoietic lineage Osteoclasts , derived from monocytes , are large , multin - ucleated cells [ 97 ] that function to resorb bone matrix [ 98 ] . Using vesicles , endocytosis , and exocytosis mech - anisms , osteoclasts deliver proteases and hydrochloric acid to digest and degrade bone matrix and subse - quently , rid themselves of the degradation products [ 98 ] . Osteoclasts were the ﬁrst normal cell type described to make podosomes . In two independent studies , the addition of vitamin A to osteoclasts was shown to increase the adhesion capability both to glass substratum [ 99 ] as well as to bone laminae matrix [ 100 ] , speciﬁcally by modulating the frequency of podosomes . This was the ﬁrst evidence to suggest that podosomes may play signiﬁcant roles in allowing the osteoclast to form a tight attachment to the bone matrix to be degraded and resorbed . It was subsequently found that pH and calcium levels regulated podosome formation and bone resorp - tive activity in osteoclasts . In one study , increased extracellular pH surrounding osteoclasts resulted in decreased intracellular pH and calcium , and enhanced the formation of podosomes and thus adhesion to the matrix substrate [ 101 ] . On the other hand , exposure of osteoclasts to high extracellular calcium concentrations inhibited the formation of podosomes [ 102 ] . One piv - otal study used bright - ﬁeld and ﬂuorescence micro - scopy to provide clear evidence for the function of podosomes in osteoclasts [ 53 ] . Rabbit osteoclasts were cultured on thin bone slices , and the resorption lacuna was visualized with bright - ﬁeld microscopy . Subse - quently , the osteoclasts were ﬁxed and stained with rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin to identify areas of F - actin . By superimposing the bright - ﬁeld images of 11 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease the resorption lacuna with the ﬂuorescent images of F - actin , it was clear that areas of F - actin correlated perfectly with the degraded bone , thus revealing podosomes as integral functional components in this pathway [ 53 ] . Since this early research , many studies have ana - lyzed the contribution of podosomes to ECM degrada - tion , as well as migration in three - dimensional environments , in a large variety of hematopoietic cell types , including those of both the myeloid and lym - phoid lineage [ 47 – 51 ] . All of these cells are derived from hematopoietic stem cells , and terminally differen - tiate in the bone marrow . Once differentiated , these cells must make their way to the bloodstream and gain access to the vasculature to carry out their respective functions . It makes sense that many of these cell types would rely on podosomes for such migratory behavior , as they are primed to facilitate such activity . The loss of podosomes in cells of the hematopoietic lineage has also been implicated in human disease . Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) arises from muta - tions within the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) gene [ 103 , 104 ] , a hematopoietic - speciﬁc pro - tein localized to the actin core of podosomes [ 105 ] . WAS patients present with severe immunodeﬁciency , eczema , and thrombocytopenia [ 106 ] . In one early deﬁning study , it was observed that WASp deﬁciency lead to defects in podosome formation in patient - derived macrophages from WAS patients [ 105 ] , strongly suggesting that impaired podosome formation is a contributing factor to the WAS immunodeﬁciency phenotype . Later , in studies with WASp knockout mice , it was shown that the reintroduction of WASp was sufﬁcient to reinstate podosome formation in bone marrow - derived cells and to correct the immune deﬁ - ciencies that both occurred in the knockout mice [ 107 ] . These key studies were instrumental in linking podo - somes to the function of diverse cell types of the hematopoietic lineage , the lack of which can lead to various disease states [ 105 , 108 ] . Podosomes in embryonic and postnatal development During mammalian embryogenesis and postnatal development , cell migration is required to achieve the appropriate positioning of cells of differing lineages throughout the body [ 109 ] . Recent research has impli - cated podosomes in both processes , the disruption of which leads to numerous human disease states involv - ing skeletal , ocular , and cardiac tissues . The ﬁrst description and analysis of podosomes dur - ing embryogenesis came from studies using zebraﬁsh embryos . Morpholino targeting of the invadosome scaffold protein Tks5 resulted in numerous develop - mental defects , including decreased head and eye size , cardiac malformation , as well as irregularities in the lateral line and pigmentation [ 110 ] . Interestingly , the majority of the abnormalities in the Tks5 morphants were attributable to defects in tissues derived from neural crest cells ( NCCs ) [ 110 ] . These cells are derived from the ectoderm as a result of epidermal to mes - enchymal transition , and give rise to pigment - produ - cing melanocytes , skeletal and connective tissues found in the head and neck , medulla cells of the adrenal gland , and neurons and glial cells apart of the sensory , sympathetic , and parasympathetic nervous systems [ 111 , 112 ] . A combination of whole - mount in situ stain - ing and confocal time - lapse microscopy experiments revealed that Tks5 morphants possessed signiﬁcantly fewer migrating NCCs that were unable to migrate to the correct location within the developing embryo [ 110 ] . Additionally , the Tks5 morphant NCCs had a reduced number of protrusions compared to normal control cells . A murine NCC line was used to reveal podosome formation as marked by the colocalization of F - actin with cortactin , Tks5 , and Arp2 / 3 , in response to TGF - b or PMA , two molecules known to stimulate cell migration [ 110 ] . Inhibition of Src family kinases and depletion of Tks5 with RNAi both inhib - ited the formation of TGF - b and PMA - induced podo - somes , indicating that the Src - Tks5 signaling pathway is likely needed for proper podosome function in NCCs . Taken together , this suggests that podosomes play important roles in embryonic development , specif - ically in NCCs and their ability to migrate correctly in three - dimensional space , to pattern the embryo and to generate tissues in the appropriate position . In keeping with this , the majority ( 90 % ) of homozygous Tks5 gene - trap mice ( Tks5 trap / trap ) died as neonates associ - ated with complete cleft of the secondary palate , a neural crest - derived tissue [ 22 ] . Several studies have noted developmental defects caused by the loss of Tks4 , the most highly related gene to Tks5 . In one such study , homozygosity - mapping studies were used to map the genetic defect in 7 of 16 individuals with FTHS to a mutation of Tks4 [ 113 ] . FTHS is an autosomal recessive disease marked by skeletal , cardiac , and ocular abnormalities [ 114 ] . Tks4 gene - trap mice , in which a gene - trap vector was placed between exons 3 and 4 in the Tks4 gene [ 113 ] , showed striking phenotypic similarities to FTHS patients , including small body size , craniofacial defects , cardiac problems , loss of adipose tissue , and increased intraocu - lar pressure accompanied by glaucoma and other ocular abnormalities , conﬁrming that loss of Tks4 can cause 12 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge FTHS . In a related study , linkage and sequence analysis identiﬁed a homozygous mutation in Tks4 as the under - lying genetic cause for BDCS [ 115 ] , a progressive disor - der that affects the skin , joints , bone , and heart tissues , but unlike FTHS , no ocular abnormalities are observed [ 116 , 117 ] . The nee mouse , ﬁrst observed and identiﬁed by the Jackson Laboratory as a spontaneous mutant mouse , was initially characterized in an effort to ﬁnd novel mouse models of human disease [ 118 ] . These mice exhibit numerous defects , including small body and skeleton size , infertility , abnormalities of the skull , hearing impairment , ocular abnormalities , and reduced bone mineral density . Linkage and sequence analysis on the nee mutant mice identiﬁed a single base pair deletion in the last exon of Tks4 as the cause [ 118 ] . In an effort to better understand the implications of the deletion , GFP fusion constructs for wild - type Tks4 and the nee mutant Tks4 were transfected into HEK239T cells , and the localization of each were assessed [ 118 ] . It was found that wild - type Tks4 - GFP localized to the cytoplasm , while the nee mutant per - vaded the entire cell , including the nucleus , suggesting that the localization of Tks4 is vital to its function and therefore successful mammalian development . Further studies on the nee mice showed that they develop early - onset glaucoma accompanied by high intraocular pressure and corneal opacity [ 119 ] , consistent with the human syndromes described earlier . By 3 months of age , nee mice also demonstrated severe loss of retinal ganglion cells , a type of neuron located in the retina of the eye , along with the complete degeneration of optic nerve axons and a signiﬁcant reduction in the cross - sectional area of the optic nerve [ 119 ] . Despite the similarities between Tks4 and Tks5 , and the fact that Tks4 is also an important component of invadosome formation and function [ 30 , 34 , 120 ] , care must be taken in ascribing all these developmental phe - notypes to loss of podosomes . For example , recent research using a Tks4 knockout mouse revealed a differ - entiation defect in mesenchymal stromal cells ( MSCs ) , caused by the reduced expression of RunX2 and Osterix , two osteogenic transcription factors that are normally up - regulated during differentiation [ 121 ] . In an adi - pogenic assay , Tks4 knockout MSCs were unable to form lipid droplets in the cytoplasm [ 121 ] . While these studies could be interpreted to mean that podosomes somehow inﬂuence the expression of key genes involved in the differentiation of MSCs to osteoblasts and adipo - cytes , it is also possible that Tks4 has noninvadosome functions . This will require further investigation . In ocular developmental processes , NCCs from the developing forebrain and midbrain migrate and differentiate into the corneal endothelium and stroma , trabecular meshwork , the iris stroma , and the ciliary body and stroma [ 111 ] . Severe congenital eye diseases affecting the anterior segment of the eye result when NCCs are unable to migrate properly within the ocular structure , including Axenfeld – Rieger syndrome , pri - mary congenital glaucoma and congenital ocular colo - boma [ 111 ] . Moreover , recent studies have shown that NCCs can also differentiate into pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells , two cell types that play signiﬁcant roles in maintaining proper vasculature [ 111 ] . Within the eye , both pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells surround endothelial cells within the hyaloid artery and the surrounding blood vessels of the optic nerve [ 111 , 122 – 124 ] . Disruption of proper blood vessel formation within ocular tissues results in congenital eye diseases , including colobomas and microphthalmia , while depletion of pericytes within retinal vasculature is a prominent cause of diabetic retinopathy [ 111 ] . As will be discussed later , endothelial cell podosomes function during angiogenic sprouting [ 31 , 54 , 71 , 72 , 74 ] . Notably , the Tks5 morphants had small eyes , with threefold less volume when compared to control embryos [ 110 ] . Likewise , the nee mutant mice [ 118 , 119 ] and the Tks4 gene - trap mice [ 113 ] demonstrated multi - ple ocular abnormalities , suggesting that podosome function is vital to eye development , the disruption of which is responsible for ocular disease . It will be inter - esting to determine whether the NCC - derived pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells form podosomes that perhaps function in blood vessel maintenance and remodeling within the eye , especially considering the fact that endothelial cells [ 31 , 54 ] , vascular smooth muscle cells [ 125 – 127 ] , and NCCs [ 110 ] have been shown to form podosomes . It is also possible that con - genital eye defects are partly caused by an underlying lack of NCC podosome function , which may inhibit the proper cellular migration and subsequent differen - tiation of these stem cells into their proper derivatives . Further research is needed to determine whether the Tks proteins and podosomes can be targeted therapeu - tically in congenital eye diseases , including glaucoma , coloboma , microphthalmia , and Axenfeld – Rieger syn - drome . Podosomes in angiogenesis and vasculature remodeling Endothelial cells , derived from mesoderm , are a type of epithelial cell that form the interior surface of all blood and lymphatic vessels [ 128 ] . These cells function in barrier maintenance , blood clotting , angiogenesis , vasoconstriction , and vasodilation [ 128 ] . Recent 13 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease research has implicated podosomes in endothelial cell biology , where they function in degradation of base - ment membrane , and facilitate the formation of new blood vessels in sprouting angiogenesis mechanisms . The ﬁrst evidence that podosomes play roles in endothelial cell biology came from experiments on aortic endothelial cells under exposure to cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 ( CNF1 ) , a Rho GTPase activator [ 54 ] . Rho GTPase has previously been implicated in mechanisms of cytoskeleton rearrangements , and this study aimed to understand what role it played in endothelial cells . Punc - tate podosome - like structures were observed on the ven - tral side of the endothelial cells , marked by the characteristic F - actin surrounded by vinculin [ 54 ] . This study also unveiled the presence of Arp2 / 3 , WIP , and N - Wasp in the podosome architecture of endothelial cells . Podosomes in cells of the vasculature , like those in cells of hematopoietic origin , are capable of degrada - tion . Multiple studies have described the presence of podosomes in vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro [ 125 , 129 – 133 ] . We showed that A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells formed functional podosomes when exposed to PDGF , in a process involving microRNA ( miR ) regulation of p53 and Src [ 127 ] . In vivo immu - noelectron microscopy analysis of aortas from miR - 143 KO mice showed the formation of podosomes , as marked by the presence of cortactin and Tks5 [ 127 ] , providing the ﬁrst evidence that podosomes may play roles in various vascular pathologies , including atherosclerosis , aneurysm , and restenosis . Aortic endothelial cells exposed to TGF - b form podosomes containing MT1 - MMP and MMP9 , with MT1 - MMP being necessary for local degradation and invasion through a collagen matrix [ 31 ] . These ﬁndings were expanded in an ex vivo endothelium observation model [ 74 ] . These data suggest that podosomes are key com - ponents in vasculature remodeling and healing mecha - nisms . In fact , podosomes have recently been implicated in sprouting angiogenesis , whereby endothe - lial cells , responding to speciﬁc environmental cues , break down the vascular basement membrane and sprout to form new blood vessels [ 71 ] . Treatment of endothelial cells with vascular endothelial growth fac - tor A ( VEGF - A ) induced the formation of podosome rosettes , speciﬁcally through the up - regulation of inte - grin a 6 b 1 [ 71 ] . Moreover , using a mouse aortic ring assay , it was shown that the formation of podosome - like rosettes , as measured by the colocalization of F - actin , cortactin , and MT1 - MMP , directly preceded the creation of new blood vessel branch points [ 71 ] . How do podosomes accomplish this task ? It is possi - ble that after facilitating the breakdown of the blood vessel basement membrane and ECM through the coordinated actions of proteases , podosomes may somehow serve as a recognition site for the synthesis of new blood vessels . Or , it may be that podosomes are only needed to create an open space for the cre - ation of new blood vessels , and depletion of ECM stimulates sprouting . In a very recent in vivo approach using a mouse retinal neovascularization model , the endothelial tip cells , which conduct the formation of growing capillaries in angiogenesis , were shown to form podosomes in response to VEGF - A / Notch sig - naling [ 72 ] . Collagen - IV was degraded under areas of podosome presence , indicating that tip cell podosomes break down the underlying basement membrane in the endothelium , thus allowing for the expansion and growth of new vessels [ 72 ] . Taken together , such research implies that podosomes could be potential therapeutic targets to block inappropriate angiogene - sis , including tumor angiogenesis . Podosomes in the maturation of the postsynaptic membrane Synaptogenesis , or the creation of new synapses , is a highly complex process that has been studied exten - sively in the neuromuscular junction ( NMJ ) [ 134 ] . The NMJ is comprised of three cell types : the motor neu - ron , the myoﬁber , and the Schwann cell [ 134 ] . When a motor neuron receives extracellular cues , it depolarizes and releases acetylcholine ( Ach ) , a neurotransmitter . ACh migrates across the synaptic cleft to bind to acetylcholine receptors ( AChRs ) on the membrane of the myoﬁber , causing membrane depolarization and subsequent muscle contraction [ 134 ] . During the for - mation and maturation of the synapse , AChRs are made and assembled into small plaques in the mem - brane of the myotube , a multinucleated muscle ﬁber comprised of fused myoblasts [ 134 ] . In a surprising ﬁnding , it was recently discovered that cultured myo - tubes form podosomes at sites of AChR clusters [ 135 ] . Such podosomes are thought to remodel the clusters into pretzel - shaped patterns , an integral step in synapse maturation . Intriguingly , the synapse podo - somes contained many canonical podosome proteins , including F - actin , Arp2 / 3 , cortactin , Tks5 , vinculin , and Src [ 135 ] . Moreover , synapse podosomes acted as sites of attachment to the underlying substratum , and were capable of remodeling ECM [ 135 ] . What role do podosomes play in the remodeling of the postsynaptic membrane ? It is possible that podosome degradation of matrix components stimulates the appropriate dis - tribution of the AChRs laterally across the membrane to form the appropriate pretzel shape of a mature synapse [ 135 ] . 14 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge There is additional evidence to suggest that podo - somes are involved in the NMJ , and likely in neuron development . Interestingly , neuronal growth cones have been observed to form podosome - like protrusions that are capable of degradation and that contain F - actin colocalized with Tks5 , cortactin , Arp2 / 3 , N - WASP , Mena , and a - actinin [ 57 ] . Such growth cone invadosomes are necessary for the proper extension of the motor neuron axons into the peripheral myotome tissue during development in vivo [ 57 ] . Moreover , the dystroglycan receptor , a transmembrane adhesion receptor found in skeletal muscle cells that links the actin cytoskeleton of the cell to extracellular laminins , was shown to interact with Tks5 via its SH3 domain to regulate podosome formation in myoblasts [ 55 ] . Dystroglycan also interacts with Grb2 [ 136 ] , a protein localized to the invadosome [ 137 ] . In a dystroglycan - null chimeric mouse model , the dystroglycan complex was shown to play a major role in the formation of the synaptic basement membrane , as well as in the organization and stabilization of AChR clusters at NMJs [ 138 ] . Taken together , these data suggest that podosomes may play a signiﬁcant role in pathways that form and stabilize the postsynaptic membrane , possibly through interactions between Tks5 and the dystroglycan complex . Podosomes in antigen sampling and recognition The function of the adaptive immune system is two - fold : to eliminate foreign pathogens from the host , and to create a molecular memory of the pathogen in order to provide an enhanced response to it , should reinfec - tion ever occur [ 139 ] . In the adaptive immune system , dendritic cells function to engulf foreign pathogens , ( including bacteria , toxins , and parasites ) and subse - quently present pathogen antigens ( Ags ) to T cells . Dendritic cells form podosomes [ 51 , 140 – 143 ] , which play a role in Ag processing [ 50 , 144 ] . Dendritic cells express pattern recognition receptors ( PRRs ) , which efﬁciently scan and recognize pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) on foreign invaders . The molecular interaction between a PRR and an Ag trig - gers endocytosis and / or phagocytosis to engulf the pathogen . In transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) studies , dendritic cells grown on a gelatin - gold matrix produced sites of degradation coupled with the collec - tion of gold particles in membrane - bound organelles within the podosome [ 50 ] . In cells lacking podosomes , there was less uptake of gold particles . Furthermore , MMP14 - null dendritic cells were incapable of degrad - inggelatin - gold matrix and showed no internalized gold particles [ 50 ] . In similar studies , dendritic cells grown on ﬁlters with 1 l m pores were immunostained for various PRRs known to play roles in Ag uptake [ 144 ] . Interestingly , all PRRs in question localized to the podosomes , as well as CD71 , a receptor involved in endocytosis [ 144 ] . Live cell imaging combined with ﬂu - orescence microscopy showed that the presence of podosomes corresponded to the uptake of ovalbumin , a well - characterized Ag , through the ﬁlter pores ; such ovalbumin uptake was abolished when endocytosis was inhibited [ 144 ] . Taken together , these studies sug - gest that podosomes may be involved in the endocyto - sis required for Ag uptake . In addition to dendritic cells , cells of the vascular endothelium also act as antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) [ 145 ] . In one recent study , an endothelial cell APC model was used to better understand how T cells create close connections with other cells in order to facilitate Ag sampling [ 146 ] . Live cell imaging analysis demonstrated that endothelium exposed to Ag was suf - ﬁcient to activate CD4 T cells , a type of memory T cell of the adaptive immune system [ 146 ] . Next , using ﬂuo - rescent membrane markers in the endothelium , it was shown that Ag - activated T cells produce cylindrical invaginations in the cell surface as they migrate , ter - med ‘podo - prints’ [ 146 ] . Intriguingly , the ‘invadosome - like protrusions’ ( ILPs ) formed by the T cells that produce the podo - prints arranged themselves into rosettes [ 146 ] , which are often observed in podosome formation [ 7 ] . Confocal microscopy showed that the ILPs formed by the T cells were rich in F - actin and talin [ 146 ] , two proteins implicated in , but not limited to , the invadosome . Regardless , ILPs likely serve a role in the initial Ag recognition and subsequent T - cell receptor activation . Furthermore , when activated CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes were exposed to murine heart microvascular cells exposed to Ag , lysis in the endothe - lium was observed after 4 h , suggestive of podosome - like proteolytic activity [ 146 ] . Invadosome - like protrusions might be considered ‘lymphocyte equivalents’ to podosomes and invadopo - dia , although ILPs were observed on cellular sub - strates ( endothelium ) , whereas podosomes and invadopodia form on ECM . It is tempting to speculate that ILPs are podosomes that form on activated T cells in response to Ag stimulation , allowing for efﬁ - cient Ag scanning by rearranging the cytoskeletal com - ponents of both cells coming into close contact with one another . The thick proteoglycan coat found on all cell types represents an important energy barrier in the process of Ag recognition [ 147 ] . It is plausible that the lytic capabilities of ILPs may in essence rearrange the architecture of both cell surfaces as they approach each other . 15 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease Podosomes in cell – cell fusion mechanisms Cell fusion is an energy - requiring process by which two or more cells fuse , leading to the formation of multinucleated cells [ 148 ] . Fusion must occur during fertilization [ 149 ] , osteoclastogenesis [ 150 ] , and myo - tube formation [ 151 ] . It is hypothesized that in the case of osteoclastogenesis , the fusion of two or more osteoclasts results in much higher efﬁciency during bone resorption processes , although this is still not fully understood [ 152 ] . In a microarray analysis , non - treated and RANKL - treated macrophages ( osteoclasts differentiate from macrophages under the inﬂuence of RANKL ) were analyzed with respect to gene expres - sion changes , with an effort to identify genes contain - ing either a PH or PX domain [ 153 ] . This analysis identiﬁed Tks5 , which was found to be present in the plasma membrane of osteoclasts undergoing fusion events [ 153 ] . Knockdown of Tks5 resulted in a signiﬁ - cant decrease in podosome formation , and prevented osteoclast fusion [ 153 ] . In a coculture assay with RANKL - treated macrophages and GFP - nuclear B16F9 melanoma cells , multinucleated osteoclasts with nuclear GFP were often observed [ 153 ] . Such heterocellular fusion was eradicated upon Tks5 deple - tion , demonstrating that Tks5 - mediated invadosomes likely play vital roles in the fusion machinery respon - sible for cell – cell fusion . Although the mechanism for how this is accomplished remains unknown , it opens an avenue for further investigation into invadosomes in cell – cell fusion in cancer as a potential therapeutic target [ 154 – 158 ] . As myoblasts must fuse to form the myotube , and podosomes have recently been impli - cated in the appropriate positioning of AChRs on the myotube membrane , it will be interesting to deter - mine whether podosomes also play a role in myoblast fusion . Invadopodia function throughout metastasis Metastasis is the process by which tumor cells dis - seminate from the primary tumor site to distant organs and tissues [ 159 , 160 ] ( Fig . 2 ) . It is comprised of ﬁve main steps : local invasion , intravasation into a blood vessel , survival in the blood vessel , extravasa - tion out of the blood vessel , and colonization of a new site ( Fig . 2 ) . In the metastatic cascade , tumor cells must ﬁrst degrade the underlying basement membrane and invade the ECM in order to reach the circulatory system ( Fig . 2 ) . During intravasation , tumor cells use MMPs and uPA to proteolytically break down the basal membrane of a blood vessel and enter into it [ 161 – 163 ] . Here , we focus on the involvement of invadopodia in numerous steps throughout metastasis . Neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein functions to integrate output from diverse signaling pathways to control actin polymerization in the cell , by binding to and activating the actin - related protein 2 and 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex [ 164 ] . N - WASP is an obligate component of invadopodia [ 165 ] ; thus , modulating its activity is one method by which invadopodia function can be studied , although it should be noted that N - WASP also has other functions , for example , in lamellipodium spreading [ 166 ] . In one elegant study , the role of N - WASP in the metastatic MTLn3 rat mammary adeno - carcinoma cell line was evaluated [ 167 ] . Knockdown of N - WASP with shRNA or expression of a dominant negative form of N - WASP resulted in fewer tumor cells circulating in the blood , and fewer sites of metas - tases in the lung [ 167 ] . This provided the ﬁrst evidence that invadopodia are likely important in the intravasa - tion process . Further studies using intravital imaging and multiparametric analysis demonstrated the forma - tion of Tks5 - dependent invadopodia in slow moving cells migrating away from the primary tumor and toward blood vessels in MDA - MB - 231 cells implanted orthotopically [ 168 ] . Although the exact process remains unknown , it is hypothesized that extravasation occurs when endothe - lial cells cluster around an arrested tumor cell in a small capillary and induce vasculature remodeling , thus allowing the tumor cell to escape from the blood vessel into the underlying stroma [ 169 ] , although other mechanisms have also been described [ 170 ] . Two stud - ies have shown that invadopodia function in extrava - sation . In the ﬁrst study , an in vivo chicken embryo model was used to demonstrate the pivotal importance of invadopodia in the extravasation of tumor cells from blood vessels into the extravascular stroma , as deﬁned by the requirement for Tks adaptor proteins [ 171 ] . This study showed that invadopodia form early in extravasation , and then protrude into the layers of the endothelial vessel at endothelial junctions . In keep - ing with this , the genetic or pharmacological inhibition of invadopodia components ( cortactin , Tks4 , or Tks5 ) signiﬁcantly impacted the number of micrometastases formed in the lung of an experimental mouse meta - static lung model [ 171 ] . In another related study , cor - tactin was knocked down in a bladder cancer cell model [ 63 ] . Invadopodia formation was signiﬁcantly decreased in the cortactin knockdown cell lines , and upon tail vein injection into nude mice for an in vivo lung metastasis assay , signiﬁcantly fewer metastases were detected in the lungs , providing more support for the importance of invadopodia in the extravasation 16 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Figure Key Epithelial cell Non - invasive transformed cell Epithelial - like tumor cell Mesenchymal - like tumor cell Endothelial cell Pericyte Basement membrane Invadopodia - mediated collagen cleaved collagen blood vessel ( 1 ) Primary tumor formation ? ( 2 ) Basement membrane degradation ( 3 ) ECM remodeling and invasion ( 4 ) Intravasa - tion into blood vessel ( 5 ) Survival in circulation ? ( 6 ) Extravasation out of blood vessel ( 7 ) Growth at metastatic site ( 8 ) Angiogenesis at metastatic site ? Fig . 2 . Invadopodia function throughout metastasis . A simpliﬁed illustration of the metastatic cascade is shown , with numbered steps . Cancer begins when a normal cell , like an epithelial cell , undergoes a transformative event , and becomes a noninvasive tumor cell . Upon acquiring additional mutations , the primary tumor grows in size ( 1 ) , and some cells become invasive . Invasive tumor cells use the proteolytic activity of invadopodia to degrade the underlying basement membrane ( 2 ) and invade through the ECM ( represented in the illustration by the presence of fragmented ECM proteins ) ( 3 ) . It is well established that some tumor cells can undergo EMT and are mesenchymal - like during migration and invasion , as represented in the illustration . By using protease activity to break down the basement membrane of the blood vessel , invadopodia function in intravasation of the tumor cell into the blood stream ( 4 ) . The tumor cell survives and travels in circulation ( 5 ) , until , through unknown mechanisms , it arrests and uses invadopodia to extravasate from the blood vessel ( 6 ) . Tumor cells use invadopodia to invade at distant tissue locations . Upon colonization , tumor cells can undergo MET and become more epithelial like as they form a metastatic growth , which relies upon invadopodia ( 7 ) , although the mechanisms remain unknown . Angiogenesis occurs at the metastatic site to allow tumor cells access to circulation ( 8 ) . Speciﬁc steps in metastasis , including ( 1 ) primary tumor growth , ( 5 ) survival in circulation , and ( 8 ) angiogenesis at metastatic sites , require further research to understand whether invadopodia are involved or not , and are marked by a question mark . The other steps , including ( 2 ) basement membrane degradation , ( 3 ) ECM remodeling and invasion , ( 4 ) intravasation into vasculature , ( 6 ) extravasation out of vasculature , and ( 7 ) growth of tumor cells at metastatic sites , have all been shown to involve invadopodia , and are marked with blue lightning bolts . 17 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease process [ 63 ] ; although it should be noted that cortactin is not exclusively localized to invadopodia . Do invadopodia have functions beyond intravasa - tion and extravasation ( Fig . 2 ) ? We have shown in three different model systems ( mouse ﬁbrosarcoma , human breast cancer , and mouse and human mela - noma ) that knockdown of Tks5 reduces the in vivo growth of tumors , in subcutaneous , orthotopic , and metastatic sites [ 24 , 34 , 172 ] . Intriguingly , the Tks5 - KD tumors formed by both subcutaneous and tail vein injection displayed lower blood vessel density and blood vessel diameter when compared to controls , rais - ing the possibility that tumor cell invadopodia may also play roles in tumor angiogenesis [ 24 ] . In our breast cancer and melanoma studies , we also observed that cells with reduced Tks5 expression grew less well in matrices of type I collagen in vitro [ 24 , 34 ] . It is of course possible that the reduced tumor growth observed in vitro and in vivo could be due to loss of invadopodia - independent functions of Tks5 . But , a survey of the literature reveals that loss of other invadopodia regulators also results in similar pheno - types . The earliest in vitro studies in support of invadopodia playing roles in regulating 3D growth also used a matrix of type - I collagen as a 3D environ - ment [ 173 ] . Here , squamous carcinoma cells , pancre - atic carcinoma cells and ﬁbrosarcoma cells all exhibited a 50 – 80 % reduction in 3D proliferative capacity when exposed to the MMP inhibitors , TIMP - 2 and BB - 94 [ 173 ] . The next study involved cortactin , which is a Src substrate that plays integral roles in cell migration and invasion by controlling branched actin assembly through multiple diverse mechanisms , as well as protease trafﬁcking [ 174 ] . Cortactin is an important component of invadopodia [ 174 ] , although it is also found in lamellipodia [ 175 , 176 ] and ﬁlopodia [ 176 ] . In studies using a semiorthotopic rat trachea model , three different head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines with cortactin knockdown developed signiﬁcantly smaller tumors in vivo when compared to control tumors [ 177 ] . Finally , cyclin - dependent kinase 5 ( Cdk5 ) is a serine / threonine protein kinase that has diverse roles in neuronal growth cone support , cell motility , cell cycle progression , insulin secretion , immune system function , angiogenesis , lymph valve formation , and cancer progression [ 178 ] . Cdk5 is required for invadopodia formation and function , and for invasion in several cancer cell lines , by phosphory - lating and inactivating caldesmon , an inhibitor of inva - dosome function [ 179 ] . One recent study implicated Cdk5 in the 3D growth of prostate cancer cells [ 180 ] , and another in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo [ 181 ] . Although each of these proteins have other functions , these studies strongly suggest that invadopodia function in the regulation of tumor growth in 3D . We are actively pursuing the mechanism of this growth regulation . Exosomes and microvesicles : an independent mode of invasion , or necessary for invadopodia - mediated invasion ? Exosomes and microvesicles are membrane - bound vesicles derived from multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) of endosomes and the plasma membrane , respectively [ 182 ] . As carriers of proteins , lipids and RNA , these vesicles are involved in cell – cell communication [ 182 – 184 ] . In studies aimed at identifying necessary compo - nents for invadosome biogenesis and function , it was observed that the exocyst ( comprised of eight subunits , and involved in tethering of post - Golgi and recycling endosomes at the plasma membrane ) [ 185 ] is necessary for invadopodia formation , and for the secretion of MMPs into the extracellular environment [ 186 , 187 ] . Around the same time , it was also shown that late lyosomal / endosomal v - SNARE TI - VAMP / VAMP7 , a mediator of vesicle fusion with the plasma membrane , was necessary for the transport of MT1 - MMP to the sites of invadopodia [ 188 ] . More recent studies show that the v - SNARE , VAMP3 , is important in the deliv - ery of MT1 - MMP to shedding microvesicles [ 189 ] . And lastly , MT1 - MMP has previously been observed within both exosomes and microvesicles [ 190 , 191 ] . These studies provided the initial evidence suggesting that membrane - bound vesicles may have signiﬁcant roles in invadosome function . However , two recent deﬁning studies , both of which describe the importance of membrane - bound vesicles in the delivery of cargo necessary for invasion , raise important questions regarding whether there are one or two separate mech - anisms at play during cellular invasion . In the ﬁrst of these studies , which used the invasive HNSCC line SCC61 cultured on ﬂuorescent gelatin , it was apparent that invadopodia appeared localized at , or directly adjacent to , multivesicular endosomes ( MVEs ) , as distinguished by the exosome marker , CD63 [ 192 ] . Exosomes isolated from conditioned media contained both MT1 - MMP and MMP2 , while knock - down of Rab27a , a critical docking factor for MVEs , decreased exosome secretion , matrix degradation , and the number of invadopodia per cell , suggesting that exosomes are critical for invadopodia biogenesis and activity . Inhibition of N - WASP with the drug Wiko - statin or knockdown of Tks5 with shRNA produced a signiﬁcant decrease in the number of exosomes released 18 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge per cell , providing evidence that invadopodia may also be critical sites of release for exosomes [ 192 ] . The sec - ond study , which made use of the invasive LOX mela - noma cell line , showed that tumor cells switch from an amoeboid - phenotype , invadopodia - independent mech - anism to a mesenchymal - phenotype , invadopodia - dependent means of invasion , as matrix stiffness increases [ 193 ] , consistent with other studies [ 82 , 194 ] . It was further shown that melanoma cells on more ﬂexible gelatin sub - strates , in addition to adopting an amoeboid shape with blebbing membrane protrusions , released microvesicles [ 193 ] . These amoeboid - like cells tunneled through the gelatin , leaving trails in their wake . Conversely , mela - noma cells seeded onto ﬁrmer gelatin matrices formed invadopodia , released signiﬁcantly fewer microvesicles and did not form membrane blebs [ 193 ] . Degradation in these cells was typical for invadopodia - dot - like punctae in the gelatin . This study suggests that tumor cells may employ two distinct mechanisms of invasion in response to the degree of matrix rigidity , which changes in the microenvironment as metastasis progresses . It will be interesting to determine whether the tumor - released microvesicles contain proteases , and whether the cargo within the microvesicles is necessary for degradation . Can tumor cells use exosomes and microvesicles in sepa - rate ways , and in different modes of invasion ? It will also be of interest to determine whether exosomes and / or microvesicles are important for podosome function . Conclusions and future perspectives How might invadopodia regulate tumor growth ? It is possible that they function , through proteolysis , to cre - ate more space in the ECM for tumors to grow . Alter - natively , the pericellular proteolytic activity at invadopodia could activate various growth factors to drive tumor growth . Both ideas require further investi - gation . Regardless , if invadopodia do function in con - trolling tumor growth , this opens up the intriguing possibility of using invadopodia inhibitors to treat sites of metastatic growth . Do invadopodia function at all stages of tumor pro - gression ( Fig . 2 ) ? Available evidence suggests that they are involved in local degradation and ECM invasion , as well as in intravasation , extravasation , and in growth of metastatic tumor cells . However , it will be important to determine whether invadopodia are criti - cal for primary tumor growth , as well as for the sur - vival of tumor cells in the bloodstream . Although invadopodia and podosomes share many common functions , no studies to date have investigated whether loss of podosomes affects 3D growth in normal cells . Is it possible that 3D growth is a distinct function of only invadopodia , and observable only in cancer cells ? Or , does cell division accompany podo - some function ? Cell types derived from myeloid pro - genitors , including osteoclasts and macrophages , are terminally differentiated and thus cannot be used to assess this question . However , endothelial cells and vas - cular smooth muscle cells , which do divide , represent an ideal cell model for this analysis . It will be interest - ing to determine whether invadopodia and podosomes do have differences in function , or whether invadopo - dia are true mimics of podosomes in all respects . Acknowledgements EKP is supported by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health under award number T32CA106195 . Work in the Courtneidge lab in recent years has been supported by R01 CA129686 , R01 CA154002 and R21 CA177382 from the NCI , and by funds from the Knight Cancer Institute . We thank Dr Arthur Kuipers and Dr Priyanka Saini of the Courtneidge lab for the micro - scopy images used in Fig . 1 . Author contributions Both authors discussed the concepts for the review and composed the manuscript . EKP made the ﬁgures with guidance from SAC . References 1 Ridley AJ , Schwartz MA , Burridge K , Firtel RA , Ginsberg MH , Borisy G , Parsons JT & Horwitz AR ( 2003 ) Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 . 2 Gardel ML , Schneider IC , Aratyn - Schaus Y & Waterman CM ( 2010 ) Mechanical integration of actin and adhesion dynamics in cell migration . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 26 , 315 – 333 . 3 Chambers AF , Groom AC & MacDonald IC ( 2002 ) Dissemination and growth of cancer cells in metastatic sites . Nat Rev Cancer 2 , 563 – 572 . 4 Bosman FT & Stamenkovic I ( 2003 ) Functional structure and composition of the extracellular matrix . J Pathol 200 , 423 – 428 . 5 Mouw JK , Ou G & Weaver VM ( 2014 ) Extracellular matrix assembly : a multiscale deconstruction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 771 – 785 . 6 Lu P , Weaver VM & Werb Z ( 2012 ) The extracellular matrix : a dynamic niche in cancer progression . J Cell Biol 196 , 395 – 406 . 19 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease 7 Murphy DA & Courtneidge SA ( 2011 ) The ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ of podosomes and invadopodia : characteristics , formation and function . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 , 413 – 426 . 8 Hoshino D , Branch KM & Weaver AM ( 2013 ) Signaling inputs to invadopodia and podosomes . J Cell Sci 126 , 2979 – 2989 . 9 Linder S & Wiesner C ( 2016 ) Feel the force : podosomes in mechanosensing . Exp Cell Res 343 , 67 – 72 . 10 Linder S & Wiesner C ( 2015 ) Tools of the trade : podosomes as multipurpose organelles of monocytic cells . Cell Mol Life Sci 72 , 121 – 135 . 11 Veillat V , Spuul P , Daubon T , Egana I , Kramer I & Genot E ( 2015 ) Podosomes : multipurpose organelles ? Int J Biochem Cell Biol 65 , 52 – 60 . 12 Foxall E , Pipili A , Jones GE & Wells CM ( 2016 ) Signiﬁcance of kinase activity in the dynamic invadosome . Eur J Cell Biol 95 , 483 – 492 . 13 Di MartinoJ , HenrietE , EzzoukhryZ , Goetz JG , Moreau V & Saltel F ( 2016 ) Themicroenvironment controls invadosome plasticity . JCellSci 129 , 1759 – 1768 . 14 Lock P , Abram CL , Gibson T & Courtneidge SA ( 1998 ) A new method for isolating tyrosine kinase substrates used to identify ﬁsh , an SH3 and PX domain - containing protein , and Src substrate . EMBO J 17 , 4346 – 4357 . 15 Seals DF , Azucena EF Jr , Pass I , Tesfay L , Gordon R , Woodrow M , Resau JH & Courtneidge SA ( 2005 ) The adaptor protein Tks5 / Fish is required for podosome formation and function , and for the protease - driven invasion of cancer cells . Cancer Cell 7 , 155 – 165 . 16 Burger KL , Learman BS , Boucherle AK , Sirintrapun SJ , Isom S , Diaz B , Courtneidge SA & Seals DF ( 2014 ) Src - dependent Tks5 phosphorylation regulates invadopodia - associated invasion in prostate cancer cells . Prostate 74 , 134 – 148 . 17 Abram CL , Seals DF , Pass I , Salinsky D , Maurer L , Roth TM & Courtneidge SA ( 2003 ) The adaptor protein ﬁsh associates with members of the ADAMs family and localizes to podosomes of Src - transformed cells . J Biol Chem 278 , 16844 – 16851 . 18 Pawson T & Gish GD ( 1992 ) SH2 and SH3 domains : from structure to function . Cell 71 , 359 – 362 . 19 Di Martino J , Paysan L , Gest C , Lagree V , Juin A , Saltel F & Moreau V ( 2014 ) Cdc42 and Tks5 : a minimal and universal molecular signature for functional invadosomes . Cell Adh Migr 8 , 280 – 292 . 20 Oikawa T , Itoh T & Takenawa T ( 2008 ) Sequential signals toward podosome formation in NIH - src cells . J Cell Biol 182 , 157 – 169 . 21 Stylli SS , Stacey TT , Verhagen AM , Xu SS , Pass I , Courtneidge SA & Lock P ( 2009 ) Nck adaptor proteins link Tks5 to invadopodia actin regulation and ECM degradation . J Cell Sci 122 , 2727 – 2740 . 22 Cejudo - Martin P , Yuen A , Vlahovich N , Lock P , Courtneidge SA & Diaz B ( 2014 ) Genetic disruption of the sh3pxd2a gene reveals an essential role in mouse development and the existence of a novel isoform of tks5 . PLoS One 9 , e107674 . 23 Li CM , Chen G , Dayton TL , Kim - Kiselak C , Hoersch S , Whittaker CA , Bronson RT , Beer DG , Winslow MM & Jacks T ( 2013 ) Differential Tks5 isoform expression contributes to metastatic invasion of lung adenocarcinoma . Genes Dev 27 , 1557 – 1567 . 24 Blouw B , Patel M , Iizuka S , Abdullah C , You WK , Huang X , Li J - L , Diaz B , Stallcup WB & Courtneidge SA ( 2015 ) The invadopodia scaffold protein Tks5 is required for the growth of human breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo . PLoS One 10 , e0121003 . 25 Stylli SS , I ST , Kaye AH & Lock P ( 2012 ) Prognostic signiﬁcance of Tks5 expression in gliomas . J Clin Neurosci 19 , 436 – 442 . 26 Stylli SS , Luwor RB , Kaye AH , I ST , Hovens CM & Lock P ( 2014 ) Expression of the adaptor protein Tks5 in human cancer : prognostic potential . Oncol Rep 32 , 989 – 1002 . 27 Wang Y & McNiven MA ( 2012 ) Invasive matrix degradation at focal adhesions occurs via protease recruitment by a FAK - p130Cas complex . J Cell Biol 196 , 375 – 385 . 28 Linder S ( 2007 ) The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in extracellular matrix degradation . Trends Cell Biol 17 , 107 – 117 . 29 Itoh Y ( 2015 ) Membrane - type matrix metalloproteinases : their functions and regulations . Matrix Biol 44 – 46 , 207 – 223 . 30 Buschman MD , Bromann PA , Cejudo - Martin P , Wen F , Pass I & Courtneidge SA ( 2009 ) The novel adaptor protein Tks4 ( SH3PXD2B ) is required for functional podosome formation . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 1302 – 1311 . 31 Varon C , Tatin F , Moreau V , Van Obberghen - Schilling E , Fernandez - Sauze S , Reuzeau E , Kramer I & Genot E ( 2006 ) Transforming growth factor beta induces rosettes of podosomes in primary aortic endothelial cells . Mol Cell Biol 26 , 3582 – 3594 . 32 Watanabe A , Hoshino D , Koshikawa N , Seiki M , Suzuki T & Ichikawa K ( 2013 ) Critical role of transient activity of MT1 - MMP for ECM degradation in invadopodia . PLoS Comput Biol 9 , e1003086 . 33 Williams KC , McNeilly RE & Coppolino MG ( 2014 ) SNAP23 , Syntaxin4 , and vesicle - associated membrane protein 7 ( VAMP7 ) mediate trafﬁcking of membrane type 1 - matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) during invadopodium formation and tumor cell invasion . Mol Biol Cell 25 , 2061 – 2070 . 34 Iizuka S , Abdullah C , Buschman MD , Diaz B & Courtneidge SA ( 2016 ) The role of Tks adaptor proteins in invadopodia formation , growth and metastasis of melanoma . Oncotarget 7 , 78473 – 78486 . 20 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge 35 Lagoutte E , Villeneuve C , Lafanechere L , Wells CM , Jones GE , Chavrier P & Rosse C ( 2016 ) LIMK regulates tumor - cell invasion and matrix degradation through tyrosine phosphorylation of MT1 - MMP . Sci Rep 6 , 24925 . 36 Castro - Castro A , Marchesin V , Monteiro P , Lodillinsky C , Rosse C & Chavrier P ( 2016 ) Cellular and molecular mechanisms of MT1 - MMP - dependent cancer cell invasion . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 32 , 555 – 576 . 37 McCawley LJ & Matrisian LM ( 2001 ) Matrix metalloproteinases : they’re not just for matrix anymore ! . Curr Opin Cell Biol 13 , 534 – 540 . 38 Sternlicht MD & Werb Z ( 2001 ) How matrix metalloproteinases regulate cell behavior . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 17 , 463 – 516 . 39 Wozniak MA , Modzelewska K , Kwong L & Keely PJ ( 2004 ) Focal adhesion regulation of cell behavior . Biochim Biophys Acta 1692 , 103 – 119 . 40 Wehrle - Haller B & Imhof B ( 2002 ) The inner lives of focal adhesions . Trends Cell Biol 12 , 382 – 389 . 41 Small JV , Stradal T , Vignal E & Rottner K ( 2002 ) The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol 12 , 112 – 120 . 42 Cramer LP ( 1997 ) Molecular mechanism of actin - dependent retrograde ﬂow in lamellipodia of motile cells . Front Biosci 2 , d260 – d270 . 43 Mattila PK & Lappalainen P ( 2008 ) Filopodia : molecular architecture and cellular functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 , 446 – 454 . 44 Humphries JD , Wang P , Streuli C , Geiger B , Humphries MJ & Ballestrem C ( 2007 ) Vinculin controls focal adhesion formation by direct interactions with talin and actin . J Cell Biol 179 , 1043 – 1057 . 45 Svitkina TM & Borisy GG ( 1999 ) Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 145 , 1009 – 1026 . 46 Machesky LM ( 2008 ) Lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in metastasis and invasion . FEBS Lett 582 , 2102 – 2111 . 47 Cougoule C , Van Goethem E , Le Cabec V , Lafouresse F , Dupre L , Mehraj V , Mege JL , Lastrucci C & Maridonneau - Parini I ( 2012 ) Blood leukocytes and macrophages of various phenotypes have distinct abilities to form podosomes and to migrate in 3D environments . Eur J Cell Biol 91 , 938 – 949 . 48 Schachtner H , Calaminus SD , Sinclair A , Monypenny J , Blundell MP , Leon C , Holyoake TL , Thrasher AJ , Michie AM , Vukovic M et al . ( 2013 ) Megakaryocytes assemble podosomes that degrade matrix and protrude through basement membrane . Blood 121 , 2542 – 2552 . 49 Johansson MW , Lye MH , Barthel SR , Duffy AK , Annis DS & Mosher DF ( 2004 ) Eosinophils adhere to vascular cell adhesion molecule - 1 via podosomes . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 31 , 413 – 422 . 50 Gawden - Bone C , Zhou Z , King E , Prescott A , Watts C & Lucocq J ( 2010 ) Dendritic cell podosomes are protrusive and invade the extracellular matrix using metalloproteinase MMP - 14 . J Cell Sci 123 , 1427 – 1437 . 51 Banon - Rodriguez I , Monypenny J , Ragazzini C , Franco A , Calle Y , Jones GE & Anton IM ( 2011 ) The cortactin - binding domain of WIP is essential for podosome formation and extracellular matrix degradation by murine dendritic cells . Eur J Cell Biol 90 , 213 – 223 . 52 Miyauchi A , Hruska KA , Greenﬁeld EM , Duncan R , Alvarez J , Barattolo R , Colucci S , Zambonin - Zallone A , Teitelbaum SL & Teti A ( 1990 ) Osteoclast cytosolic calcium , regulated by voltage - gated calcium channels and extracellular calcium , controls podosome assembly and bone resorption . J Cell Biol 111 , 2543 – 2552 . 53 Kanehisa J , Yamanaka T , Doi S , Turksen K , Heersche JN , Aubin JE & Takeuchi H ( 1990 ) A band of F - actin containing podosomes is involved in bone resorption by osteoclasts . Bone 11 , 287 – 293 . 54 Moreau V , Tatin F , Varon C & Genot E ( 2003 ) Actin can reorganize into podosomes in aortic endothelial cells , a process controlled by Cdc42 and RhoA . Mol Cell Biol 23 , 6809 – 6822 . 55 Thompson O , Kleino I , Crimaldi L , Gimona M , Saksela K & Winder SJ ( 2008 ) Dystroglycan , Tks5 and Src mediated assembly of podosomes in myoblasts . PLoS One 3 , e3638 . 56 Xiao H , Eves R , Yeh C , Kan W , Xu F , Mak AS & Liu M ( 2009 ) Phorbol ester - induced podosomes in normal human bronchial epithelial cells . J Cell Physiol 218 , 366 – 375 . 57 Santiago - Medina M , Gregus KA , Nichol RH , O’Toole SM & Gomez TM ( 2015 ) Regulation of ECM degradation and axon guidance by growth cone invadosomes . Development 142 , 486 – 496 . 58 Botta GP , Reginato MJ , Reichert M , Rustgi AK & Lelkes PI ( 2012 ) Constitutive K - RasG12D activation of ERK2 speciﬁcally regulates 3D invasion of human pancreatic cancer cells via MMP - 1 . Mol Cancer Res 10 , 183 – 196 . 59 Semprucci E , Tocci P , Cianfrocca R , Sestito R , Caprara V , Veglione M , Castro VD , Spadaro F , Ferrandina G , Bagnato A et al . ( 2016 ) Endothelin A receptor drives invadopodia function and cell motility through the beta - arrestin / PDZ - RhoGEF pathway in ovarian carcinoma . Oncogene 35 , 3432 – 3442 . 60 Desai B , Ma T & Chellaiah MA ( 2008 ) Invadopodia and matrix degradation , a new property of prostate cancer cells during migration and invasion . J Biol Chem 283 , 13856 – 13866 . 61 Mallawaaratchy DM , Buckland ME , McDonald KL , Li CC , Ly L , Sykes EK , Christopherson RI & 21 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease Kaufman KL ( 2015 ) Membrane proteome analysis of glioblastoma cell invasion . J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 74 , 425 – 441 . 62 Martin - Villar E , Borda - d’Agua B , Carrasco - Ramirez P , Renart J , Parsons M , Quintanilla M & Jones GE ( 2015 ) Podoplanin mediates ECM degradation by squamous carcinoma cells through control of invadopodia stability . Oncogene 34 , 4531 – 4544 . 63 Tokui N , Yoneyama MS , Hatakeyama S , Yamamoto H , Koie T , Saitoh H , Yamaya K , Funyu T , Nakamura T , Ohyama C et al . ( 2014 ) Extravasation during bladder cancer metastasis requires cortactinmediated invadopodia formation . Mol Med Rep 9 , 1142 – 1146 . 64 Yamamoto H , Sutoh M , Hatakeyama S , Hashimoto Y , Yoneyama T , Koie T , Saitoh H , Yamaya K , Funyu T , Nakamura T et al . ( 2011 ) Requirement for FBP17 in invadopodia formation by invasive bladder tumor cells . J Urol 185 , 1930 – 1938 . 65 Sutoh M , Hashimoto Y , Yoneyama T , Yamamoto H , Hatakeyama S , Koie T , Okamoto A , Yamaya K , Saitoh H , Funyu T et al . ( 2010 ) Invadopodia formation by bladder tumor cells . Oncol Res 19 , 85 – 92 . 66 Ammer AG , Kelley LC , Hayes KE , Evans JV , Lopez - Skinner LA , Martin KH , Frederick B , Rothschild BL , Raben D , Elvin P et al . ( 2009 ) Saracatinib impairs head and neck squamous cell carcinoma invasion by disrupting invadopodia function . J Cancer Sci Ther 1 , 52 – 61 . 67 Destaing O , Saltel F , Geminard JC , Jurdic P & Bard F ( 2003 ) Podosomes display actin turnover and dynamic self - organization in osteoclasts expressing actin - green ﬂuorescent protein . Mol Biol Cell 14 , 407 – 416 . 68 Artym VV , Matsumoto K , Mueller SC & Yamada KM ( 2011 ) Dynamic membrane remodeling at invadopodia differentiates invadopodia from podosomes . Eur J Cell Biol 90 , 172 – 180 . 69 Parekh A , Ruppender NS , Branch KM , Sewell - Loftin MK , Lin J , Boyer PD , Candiello JE , Merryman WD , Guelcher SA & Weaver AM ( 2011 ) Sensing and modulation of invadopodia across a wide range of rigidities . Biophys J 100 , 573 – 582 . 70 Condeelis J , Singer RH & Segall JE ( 2005 ) The great escape : when cancer cells hijack the genes for chemotaxis and motility . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 21 , 695 – 718 . 71 Seano G , Chiaverina G , Gagliardi PA , di Blasio L , Puliaﬁto A , Bouvard C , Sessa R , Tarone G , Sorokin L , Helley D et al . ( 2014 ) Endothelial podosome rosettes regulate vascular branching in tumour angiogenesis . Nat Cell Biol 16 ( 931 – 41 ) , 1 – 8 . 72 Spuul P , Daubon T , Pitter B , Alonso F , Fremaux I , Kramer I , Montanez E & Genot E ( 2016 ) VEGF - A / Notch - induced podosomes proteolyse basement membrane collagen - IV during retinal sprouting angiogenesis . Cell Rep 17 , 484 – 500 . 73 Hanna SC , Krishnan B , Bailey ST , Moschos SJ , Kuan PF , Shimamura T , Osborne LD , Siegel MB , Duncan LM , O’Brien ET 3rd et al . ( 2013 ) HIF1alpha and HIF2alpha independently activate SRC to promote melanoma metastases . J Clin Invest 123 , 2078 – 2093 . 74 Rottiers P , Saltel F , Daubon T , Chaigne - Delalande B , Tridon V , Billottet C , Reuzeau E & Genot E ( 2009 ) TGFbeta - induced endothelial podosomes mediate basement membrane collagen degradation in arterial vessels . J Cell Sci 122 , 4311 – 4318 . 75 Hwang YS , Park KK & Chung WY ( 2012 ) Invadopodia formation in oral squamous cell carcinoma : the role of epidermal growth factor receptor signalling . Arch Oral Biol 57 , 335 – 343 . 76 Diaz B , Yuen A , Iizuka S , Higashiyama S & Courtneidge SA ( 2013 ) Notch increases the shedding of HB - EGF by ADAM12 to potentiate invadopodia formation in hypoxia . J Cell Biol 201 , 279 – 292 . 77 Zhou ZN , Sharma VP , Beaty BT , Roh - Johnson M , Peterson EA , Van Rooijen N , Kenny PA , Wiley HS , Condeelis JS & Segall JE ( 2014 ) Autocrine HBEGF expression promotes breast cancer intravasation , metastasis and macrophage - independent invasion in vivo . Oncogene 33 , 3784 – 3793 . 78 Busco G , Cardone RA , Greco MR , Bellizzi A , Colella M , Antelmi E , Mancini MT , Dell’Aquila ME , Casavola V , Paradiso A et al . ( 2010 ) NHE1 promotes invadopodial ECM proteolysis through acidiﬁcation of the peri - invadopodial space . FASEB J 24 , 3903 – 3915 . 79 Magalhaes MA , Larson DR , Mader CC , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Gil - Henn H , Oser M , Chen X , Koleske AJ & Condeelis J ( 2011 ) Cortactin phosphorylation regulates cell invasion through a pH - dependent pathway . J Cell Biol 195 , 903 – 920 . 80 Brisson L , Driffort V , Benoist L , Poet M , Counillon L , Antelmi E , Rubino R , Besson P , Labbal F , Chevalier S et al . ( 2013 ) NaV1 . 5 Na ( + ) channels allosterically regulate the NHE - 1 exchanger and promote the activity of breast cancer cell invadopodia . J Cell Sci 126 , 4835 – 4842 . 81 Greco MR , Antelmi E , Busco G , Guerra L , Rubino R , Casavola V , Reshkin SJ & Cardone RA ( 2014 ) Protease activity at invadopodial focal digestive areas is dependent on NHE1 - driven acidic pHe . Oncol Rep 31 , 940 – 946 . 82 Alexander NR , Branch KM , Parekh A , Clark ES , Iwueke IC , Guelcher SA & Weaver AM ( 2008 ) Extracellular matrix rigidity promotes invadopodia activity . Curr Biol 18 , 1295 – 1299 . 83 Juin A , Planus E , Guillemot F , Horakova P , Albiges - Rizo C , Genot E , Rosenbaum J , Moreau V & Saltel F 22 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge ( 2013 ) Extracellular matrix rigidity controls podosome induction in microvascular endothelial cells . Biol Cell 105 , 46 – 57 . 84 Artym VV , Swatkoski S , Matsumoto K , Campbell CB , Petrie RJ , Dimitriadis EK , Li X , Mueller SC , Bugge TH , Gucek M et al . ( 2015 ) Dense ﬁbrillar collagen is a potent inducer of invadopodia via a speciﬁc signaling network . J Cell Biol 208 , 331 – 350 . 85 Jerrell RJ & Parekh A ( 2016 ) Matrix rigidity differentially regulates invadopodia activity through ROCK1 and ROCK2 . Biomaterials 84 , 119 – 129 . 86 Collin O , Tracqui P , Stephanou A , Usson Y , Clement - Lacroix J & Planus E ( 2006 ) Spatiotemporal dynamics of actin - rich adhesion microdomains : inﬂuence of substrate ﬂexibility . J Cell Sci 119 , 1914 – 1925 . 87 Labernadie A , Bouissou A , Delobelle P , Balor S , Voituriez R , Proag A , Fourquaux I , Thibault C , Vieu C , Poincloux R et al . ( 2014 ) Protrusion force microscopy reveals oscillatory force generation and mechanosensing activity of human macrophage podosomes . Nat Commun 5 , 5343 . 88 Lucien F , Brochu - Gaudreau K , Arsenault D , Harper K & Dubois CM ( 2011 ) Hypoxia - induced invadopodia formation involves activation of NHE - 1 by the p90 ribosomal S6 kinase ( p90RSK ) . PLoS One 6 , e28851 . 89 Arsenault D , Brochu - Gaudreau K , Charbonneau M & Dubois CM ( 2013 ) HDAC6 deacetylase activity is required for hypoxia - induced invadopodia formation and cell invasion . PLoS One 8 , e55529 . 90 Md Hashim NF , Nicholas NS , Dart AE , Kiriakidis S , Paleolog E & Wells CM ( 2013 ) Hypoxia - induced invadopodia formation : a role for beta - PIX . Open Biol 3 , 120159 . 91 Diaz B , Shani G , Pass I , Anderson D , Quintavalle M & Courtneidge SA ( 2009 ) Tks5 - dependent , nox - mediated generation of reactive oxygen species is necessary for invadopodia formation . Sci Signal 2 , ra53 . 92 Krouskop TA , Wheeler TM , Kallel F , Garra BS & Hall T ( 1998 ) Elastic moduli of breast and prostate tissues under compression . Ultrason Imaging 20 , 260 – 274 . 93 Brown JM & Wilson WR ( 2004 ) Exploiting tumour hypoxia in cancer treatment . Nat Rev Cancer 4 , 437 – 447 . 94 Paszek MJ , Zahir N , Johnson KR , Lakins JN , Rozenberg GI , Gefen A , Reinhart - King CA , Margulies SS , Dembo M , Boettiger D et al . ( 2005 ) Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 . 95 Liou GY & Storz P ( 2010 ) Reactive oxygen species in cancer . Free Radic Res 44 , 479 – 496 . 96 Estrella V , Chen T , Lloyd M , Wojtkowiak J , Cornnell HH , Ibrahim - Hashim A , Bailey K , Balagurunathan Y , Rothberg JM , Sloane BF et al . ( 2013 ) Acidity generated by the tumor microenvironment drives local invasion . Cancer Res 73 , 1524 – 1535 . 97 Udagawa N , Takahashi N , Akatsu T , Tanaka H , Sasaki T , Nishihara T , Koga T , Martin TJ & Suda T ( 1990 ) Origin of osteoclasts : mature monocytes and macrophages are capable of differentiating into osteoclasts under a suitable microenvironment prepared by bone marrow - derived stromal cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87 , 7260 – 7264 . 98 Vaananen HK , Zhao H , Mulari M & Halleen JM ( 2000 ) The cell biology of osteoclast function . J Cell Sci 113 ( Pt 3 ) , 377 – 381 . 99 Oreffo RO , Teti A , Trifﬁtt JT , Francis MJ , Carano A & Zallone AZ ( 1988 ) Effect of vitamin A on bone resorption : evidence for direct stimulation of isolated chicken osteoclasts by retinol and retinoic acid . J Bone Miner Res 3 , 203 – 210 . 100 Zambonin - Zallone A , Teti A , Carano A & Marchisio PC ( 1988 ) The distribution of podosomes in osteoclasts cultured on bone laminae : effect of retinol . J Bone Miner Res 3 , 517 – 523 . 101 Teti A , Blair HC , Schlesinger P , Grano M , Zambonin - Zallone A , Kahn AJ , Teitelbaum SL & Hruska KA ( 1989 ) Extracellular protons acidify osteoclasts , reduce cytosolic calcium , and promote expression of cell - matrix attachment structures . J Clin Invest 84 , 773 – 780 . 102 Teti A , Barattolo R , Grano M , Colucci S , Argentino L , Teitelbaum SL , Hruska KA , Santacroce G & Zambonin Zallone A ( 1989 ) Podosome expression in osteoclasts : inﬂuence of high extracellular calcium concentration . Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper 65 , 1039 – 1043 . 103 Villa A , Notarangelo L , Macchi P , Mantuano E , Cavagni G , Brugnoni D , Strina D , Patrosso MC , Ramenghi U , Sacco MG et al . ( 1995 ) X - linked thrombocytopenia and Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome are allelic diseases with mutations in the WASP gene . Nat Genet 9 , 414 – 417 . 104 Massaad MJ , Ramesh N & Geha RS ( 2013 ) Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome : a comprehensive review . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1285 , 26 – 43 . 105 Linder S , Nelson D , Weiss M & Aepfelbacher M ( 1999 ) Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podosomes in primary human macrophages . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 , 9648 – 9653 . 106 Ochs HD & Thrasher AJ ( 2006 ) The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . J Allergy Clin Immunol 117 , 725 – 738 ; quiz 739 . 107 Charrier S , Stockholm D , Seye K , Opolon P , Taveau M , Gross DA , Bucher - Laurent S , Delenda C , Vainchenker W , Danos O et al . ( 2005 ) A lentiviral vector encoding the human Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein corrects immune and cytoskeletal defects in WASP knockout mice . Gene Ther 12 , 597 – 606 . 23 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease 108 Linder S , Wintergerst U , Bender - Gotze C , Schwarz K , Pannicke U & Aepfelbacher M ( 2003 ) Macrophages of patients with X - linked thrombocytopenia display an attenuated Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome phenotype . Immunol Cell Biol 81 , 130 – 136 . 109 Kurosaka S & Kashina A ( 2008 ) Cell biology of embryonic migration . Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 84 , 102 – 122 . 110 Murphy DA , Diaz B , Bromann PA , Tsai JH , Kawakami Y , Maurer J , Stewart RA , Izpisua - Belmonte JC & Courtneidge SA ( 2011 ) A Src - Tks5 pathway is required for neural crest cell migration during embryonic development . PLoS One 6 , e22499 . 111 Williams AL & Bohnsack BL ( 2015 ) Neural crest derivatives in ocular development : discerning the eye of the storm . Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 105 , 87 – 95 . 112 Sauka - Spengler T & Bronner - Fraser M ( 2006 ) Development and evolution of the migratory neural crest : a gene regulatory perspective . Curr Opin Genet Dev 16 , 360 – 366 . 113 Iqbal Z , Cejudo - Martin P , de Brouwer A , van der Zwaag B , Ruiz - Lozano P , Scimia MC , Lindsey JD , Weinreb R , Albrecht B , Megarbane A et al . ( 2010 ) Disruption of the podosome adaptor protein TKS4 ( SH3PXD2B ) causes the skeletal dysplasia , eye , and cardiac abnormalities of Frank - Ter Haar Syndrome . Am J Hum Genet 86 , 254 – 261 . 114 Maas SM , Kayserili H , Lam J , Apak MY & Hennekam RC ( 2004 ) Further delineation of Frank - ter Haar syndrome . Am J Med Genet A 131 , 127 – 133 . 115 Wilson GR , Sunley J , Smith KR , Pope K , Bromhead CJ , Fitzpatrick E , Di Rocco M , van Steensel M , Coman DJ , Leventer RJ et al . ( 2014 ) Mutations in SH3PXD2B cause Borrone dermato - cardio - skeletal syndrome . Eur J Hum Genet 22 , 741 – 747 . 116 Borrone C , Di Rocco M , Crovato F , Camera G & Gambini C ( 1993 ) New multisystemic disorder involving heart valves , skin , bones , and joints in two brothers . Am J Med Genet 46 , 228 – 234 . 117 van Steensel MA , Ceulen RP , Delhaas T & de Die - Smulders C ( 2007 ) Two Dutch brothers with Borrone dermato - cardio - skeletal syndrome . Am J Med Genet A 143A , 1223 – 1226 . 118 Mao M , Thedens DR , Chang B , Harris BS , Zheng QY , Johnson KR , Donahue LR & Anderson MG ( 2009 ) The podosomal - adaptor protein SH3PXD2B is essential for normal postnatal development . Mamm Genome 20 , 462 – 475 . 119 Mao M , Hedberg - Buenz A , Koehn D , John SW & Anderson MG ( 2011 ) Anterior segment dysgenesis and early - onset glaucoma in nee mice with mutation of Sh3pxd2b . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 52 , 2679 – 2688 . 120 Gianni D , Taulet N , DerMardirossian C & Bokoch GM ( 2010 ) c - Src - mediated phosphorylation of NoxA1 and Tks4 induces the reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) - dependent formation of functional invadopodia in human colon cancer cells . Mol Biol Cell 21 , 4287 – 4298 . 121 Dulk M , Kudlik G , Fekete A , Ernszt D , Kvell K , Pongracz JE , Mero BL , Szeder B , Radnai L , Geiszt M et al . ( 2016 ) The scaffold protein Tks4 is required for the differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells ( MSCs ) into adipogenic and osteogenic lineages . Sci Rep 6 , 34280 . 122 Etchevers HC , Vincent C , Le Douarin NM & Couly GF ( 2001 ) The cephalic neural crest provides pericytes and smooth muscle cells to all blood vessels of the face and forebrain . Development 128 , 1059 – 1068 . 123 Gage PJ , Rhoades W , Prucka SK & Hjalt T ( 2005 ) Fate maps of neural crest and mesoderm in the mammalian eye . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 46 , 4200 – 4208 . 124 Trost A , Schroedl F , Lange S , Rivera FJ , Tempfer H , Korntner S , Stolt CC , Wegner M , Bogner B , Kaser - Eichberger A et al . ( 2013 ) Neural crest origin of retinal and choroidal pericytes . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 54 , 7910 – 7921 . 125 Zhou S , Webb BA , Eves R & Mak AS ( 2006 ) Effects of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin on podosome formation in A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 290 , C463 – C471 . 126 Furmaniak - Kazmierczak E , Crawley SW , Carter RL , Maurice DH & Cote GP ( 2007 ) Formation of extracellular matrix - digesting invadopodia by primary aortic smooth muscle cells . Circ Res 100 , 1328 – 1336 . 127 Quintavalle M , Elia L , Condorelli G & Courtneidge SA ( 2010 ) MicroRNA control of podosome formation in vascular smooth muscle cells in vivo and in vitro . J Cell Biol 189 , 13 – 22 . 128 Cines DB , Pollak ES , Buck CA , Loscalzo J , Zimmerman GA , McEver RP , Pober JS , Wick TM , Konkle BA , Schwartz BS et al . ( 1998 ) Endothelial cells in physiology and in the pathophysiology of vascular disorders . Blood 91 , 3527 – 3561 . 129 Webb BA , Eves R , Crawley SW , Zhou S , Cote GP & Mak AS ( 2005 ) PAK1 induces podosome formation in A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells in a PAK - interacting exchange factor - dependent manner . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 289 , C898 – C907 . 130 Kaverina I , Stradal TE & Gimona M ( 2003 ) Podosome formation in cultured A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells requires Arp2 / 3 - dependent de - novo actin polymerization at discrete microdomains . J Cell Sci 116 , 4915 – 4924 . 131 Eves R , Webb BA , Zhou S & Mak AS ( 2006 ) Caldesmon is an integral component of podosomes in smooth muscle cells . J Cell Sci 119 , 1691 – 1702 . 24 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge 132 Gu Z , Kordowska J , Williams GL , Wang CL & Hai CM ( 2007 ) Erk1 / 2 MAPK and caldesmon differentially regulate podosome dynamics in A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells . Exp Cell Res 313 , 849 – 866 . 133 Dorﬂeutner A , Cho Y , Vincent D , Cunnick J , Lin H , Weed SA , Stehlik C & Flynn DC ( 2008 ) Phosphorylation of AFAP - 110 affects podosome lifespan in A7r5 cells . J Cell Sci 121 , 2394 – 2405 . 134 Sanes JR & Lichtman JW ( 1999 ) Development of the vertebrate neuromuscular junction . Annu Rev Neurosci 22 , 389 – 442 . 135 Proszynski TJ , Gingras J , Valdez G , Krzewski K & Sanes JR ( 2009 ) Podosomes are present in a postsynaptic apparatus and participate in its maturation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 , 18373 – 18378 . 136 Yang B , Jung D , Motto D , Meyer J , Koretzky G & Campbell KP ( 1995 ) SH3 domain - mediated interaction of dystroglycan and Grb2 . J Biol Chem 270 , 11711 – 11714 . 137 Oser M , Dovas A , Cox D & Condeelis J ( 2011 ) Nck1 and Grb2 localization patterns can distinguish invadopodia from podosomes . Eur J Cell Biol 90 , 181 – 188 . 138 Jacobson C , Cote PD , Rossi SG , Rotundo RL & Carbonetto S ( 2001 ) The dystroglycan complex is necessary for stabilization of acetylcholine receptor clusters at neuromuscular junctions and formation of the synaptic basement membrane . J Cell Biol 152 , 435 – 450 . 139 Dempsey PW , Vaidya SA & Cheng G ( 2003 ) The art of war : innate and adaptive immune responses . Cell Mol Life Sci 60 , 2604 – 2621 . 140 Burns S , Hardy SJ , Buddle J , Yong KL , Jones GE & Thrasher AJ ( 2004 ) Maturation of DC is associated with changes in motile characteristics and adherence . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 57 , 118 – 132 . 141 Dehring DA , Clarke F , Ricart BG , Huang Y , Gomez TS , Williamson EK , Hammer DA , Billadeau DD , Argon Y & Burkhardt JK ( 2011 ) Hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 functions in concert with the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein to promote podosome array organization and chemotaxis in dendritic cells . J Immunol 186 , 4805 – 4818 . 142 van Helden SF , Krooshoop DJ , Broers KC , Raymakers RA , Figdor CG & van Leeuwen FN ( 2006 ) A critical role for prostaglandin E2 in podosome dissolution and induction of high - speed migration during dendritic cell maturation . J Immunol 177 , 1567 – 1574 . 143 Olivier A , Jeanson - Leh L , Bouma G , Compagno D , Blondeau J , Seye K , Charrier S , Burns S , Thrasher AJ , Danos O et al . ( 2006 ) A partial down - regulation of WASP is sufﬁcient to inhibit podosome formation in dendritic cells . Mol Ther 13 , 729 – 737 . 144 Baranov MV , Ter Beest M , Reinieren - Beeren I , Cambi A , Figdor CG & van den Bogaart G ( 2014 ) Podosomes of dendritic cells facilitate antigen sampling . J Cell Sci 127 , 1052 – 1064 . 145 Savage CO , Brooks CJ , Harcourt GC , Picard JK , King W , Sansom DM & Willcox N ( 1995 ) Human vascular endothelial cells process and present autoantigen to human T cell lines . Int Immunol 7 , 471 – 479 . 146 Sage PT , Varghese LM , Martinelli R , Sciuto TE , Kamei M , Dvorak AM , Springer TA , Sharpe AH & Carman CV ( 2012 ) Antigen recognition is facilitated by invadosome - like protrusions formed by memory / effector T cells . J Immunol 188 , 3686 – 3699 . 147 Bell GI , Dembo M & Bongrand P ( 1984 ) Cell adhesion . Competition between nonspeciﬁc repulsion and speciﬁc bonding . Biophys J 45 , 1051 – 1064 . 148 Chen EH & Olson EN ( 2005 ) Unveiling the mechanisms of cell - cell fusion . Science 308 , 369 – 373 . 149 Primakoff P & Myles DG ( 2007 ) Cell - cell membrane fusion during mammalian fertilization . FEBS Lett 581 , 2174 – 2180 . 150 Ishii M & Saeki Y ( 2008 ) Osteoclast cell fusion : mechanisms and molecules . Mod Rheumatol 18 , 220 – 227 . 151 Abmayr SM & Pavlath GK ( 2012 ) Myoblast fusion : lessons from ﬂies and mice . Development 139 , 641 – 656 . 152 Bar - Shavit Z ( 2007 ) The osteoclast : a multinucleated , hematopoietic - origin , bone - resorbing osteoimmune cell . J Cell Biochem 102 , 1130 – 1139 . 153 Oikawa T , Oyama M , Kozuka - Hata H , Uehara S , Udagawa N , Saya H & Matsuo K ( 2012 ) Tks5 - dependent formation of circumferential podosomes / invadopodia mediates cell - cell fusion . J Cell Biol 197 , 553 – 568 . 154 Bastida - Ruiz D , Van Hoesen K & Cohen M ( 2016 ) The dark side of cell fusion . Int J Mol Sci . 17 , 1 – 120 . 155 Dittmar T , Nagler C , Niggemann B & Zanker KS ( 2013 ) The dark side of stem cells : triggering cancer progression by cell fusion . Curr Mol Med 13 , 735 – 750 . 156 Lu X & Kang Y ( 2009 ) Cell fusion as a hidden force in tumor progression . Cancer Res 69 , 8536 – 8539 . 157 Goldenberg DM ( 2012 ) Horizontal transmission of malignancy by cell - cell fusion . Expert Opin Biol Ther 12 ( Suppl 1 ) , S133 – S139 . 158 Powell AE , Anderson EC , Davies PS , Silk AD , Pelz C , Impey S & Wong MH ( 2011 ) Fusion between Intestinal epithelial cells and macrophages in a cancer context results in nuclear reprogramming . Cancer Res 71 , 1497 – 1505 . 159 Steeg PS ( 2016 ) Targeting metastasis . Nat Rev Cancer 16 , 201 – 218 . 160 Steeg PS & Theodorescu D ( 2008 ) Metastasis : a therapeutic target for cancer . Nat Clin Pract Onco 5 , 206 – 219 . 25 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease 161 Chiang SP , Cabrera RM & Segall JE ( 2016 ) Tumor cell intravasation . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 311 , C1 – C14 . 162 Kim J , Yu W , Kovalski K & Ossowski L ( 1998 ) Requirement for speciﬁc proteases in cancer cell intravasation as revealed by a novel semiquantitative PCR - based assay . Cell 94 , 353 – 362 . 163 Juncker - Jensen A , Deryugina EI , Rimann I , Zajac E , Kupriyanova TA , Engelholm LH & Quigley JP ( 2013 ) Tumor MMP - 1 activates endothelial PAR1 to facilitate vascular intravasation and metastatic dissemination . Cancer Res 73 , 4196 – 4211 . 164 Padrick SB & Rosen MK ( 2010 ) Physical mechanisms of signal integration by WASP family proteins . Annu Rev Biochem 79 , 707 – 735 . 165 Lorenz M , Yamaguchi H , Wang Y , Singer RH & Condeelis J ( 2004 ) Imaging sites of N - wasp activity in lamellipodia and invadopodia of carcinoma cells . Curr Biol 14 , 697 – 703 . 166 Zhang X , Moore SW , Iskratsch T & Sheetz MP ( 2014 ) N - WASP - directed actin polymerization activates Cas phosphorylation and lamellipodium spreading . J Cell Sci 127 , 1394 – 1405 . 167 Gligorijevic B , Wyckoff J , Yamaguchi H , Wang Y , Roussos ET & Condeelis J ( 2012 ) N - WASP - mediated invadopodium formation is involved in intravasation and lung metastasis of mammary tumors . J Cell Sci 125 , 724 – 734 . 168 Gligorijevic B , Bergman A & Condeelis J ( 2014 ) Multiparametric classiﬁcation links tumor microenvironments with tumor cell phenotype . PLoS Biol 12 , e1001995 . 169 Stoletov K , Kato H , Zardouzian E , Kelber J , Yang J , Shattil S & Klemke R ( 2010 ) Visualizing extravasation dynamics of metastatic tumor cells . J Cell Sci 123 , 2332 – 2341 . 170 Azevedo AS , Follain G , Patthabhiraman S , Harlepp S & Goetz JG ( 2015 ) Metastasis of circulating tumor cells : favorable soil or suitable biomechanics , or both ? Cell Adh Migr 9 , 345 – 356 . 171 Leong HS , Robertson AE , Stoletov K , Leith SJ , Chin CA , Chien AE , Hague MN , Ablack A , Carmine - Simmen K , McPherson VA et al . ( 2014 ) Invadopodia are required for cancer cell extravasation and are a therapeutic target for metastasis . Cell Rep 8 , 1558 – 1570 . 172 Blouw B , Seals DF , Pass I , Diaz B & Courtneidge SA ( 2008 ) A role for the podosome / invadopodia scaffold protein Tks5 in tumor growth in vivo . Eur J Cell Biol 87 , 555 – 567 . 173 Hotary KB , Allen ED , Brooks PC , Datta NS , Long MW & Weiss SJ ( 2003 ) Membrane type I matrix metalloproteinase usurps tumor growth control imposed by the three - dimensional extracellular matrix . Cell 114 , 33 – 45 . 174 Kirkbride KC , Sung BH , Sinha S & Weaver AM ( 2011 ) Cortactin : a multifunctional regulator of cellular invasiveness . Cell Adh Migr 5 , 187 – 198 . 175 Weed SA , Karginov AV , Schafer DA , Weaver AM , Kinley AW , Cooper JA & Parsons JT ( 2000 ) Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 151 , 29 – 40 . 176 He Y , Ren Y , Wu B , Decourt B , Lee AC , Taylor A & Suter DM ( 2015 ) Src and cortactin promote lamellipodia protrusion and ﬁlopodia formation and stability in growth cones . Mol Biol Cell 26 , 3229 – 3244 . 177 Clark ES , Brown B , Whigham AS , Kochaishvili A , Yarbrough WG & Weaver AM ( 2009 ) Aggressiveness of HNSCC tumors depends on expression levels of cortactin , a gene in the 11q13 amplicon . Oncogene 28 , 431 – 444 . 178 Shupp A , Casimiro MC & Pestell RG ( 2017 ) Biological functions of CDK5 and potential CDK5 targeted clinical treatments . Oncotarget 8 , 17373 – 17382 . 179 Quintavalle M , Elia L , Price JH , Heynen - Genel S & Courtneidge SA ( 2011 ) A cell - based high - content screening assay reveals activators and inhibitors of cancer cell invasion . Sci Signal 4 , ra49 . 180 Hsu FN , Chen MC , Chiang MC , Lin E , Lee YT , Huang PH , Lee GS & Lin H ( 2011 ) Regulation of androgen receptor and prostate cancer growth by cyclin - dependent kinase 5 . J Biol Chem 286 , 33141 – 33149 . 181 Feldmann G , Mishra A , Hong SM , Bisht S , Strock CJ , Ball DW , Goggins M , Maitra A & Nelkin BD ( 2010 ) Inhibiting the cyclin - dependent kinase CDK5 blocks pancreatic cancer formation and progression through the suppression of Ras - Ral signaling . Cancer Res 70 , 4460 – 4469 . 182 Raposo G & Stoorvogel W ( 2013 ) Extracellular vesicles : exosomes , microvesicles , and friends . J Cell Biol 200 , 373 – 383 . 183 Lee Y , El Andaloussi S & Wood MJ ( 2012 ) Exosomes and microvesicles : extracellular vesicles for genetic information transfer and gene therapy . Hum Mol Genet 21 , R125 – R134 . 184 Lawson C , Vicencio JM , Yellon DM & Davidson SM ( 2016 ) Microvesicles and exosomes : new players in metabolic and cardiovascular disease . J Endocrinol 228 , R57 – R71 . 185 Hsu SC , TerBush D , Abraham M & Guo W ( 2004 ) The exocyst complex in polarized exocytosis . Int Rev Cytol 233 , 243 – 265 . 186 Sakurai - Yageta M , Recchi C , Le Dez G , Sibarita JB , Daviet L , Camonis J , D’Souza - Schorey C & Chavrier P ( 2008 ) The interaction of IQGAP1 with the exocyst complex is required for tumor cell invasion downstream of Cdc42 and RhoA . J Cell Biol 181 , 985 – 998 . 26 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies Invadosome function and disease E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge 187 Liu J , Yue P , Artym VV , Mueller SC & Guo W ( 2009 ) The role of the exocyst in matrix metalloproteinase secretion and actin dynamics during tumor cell invadopodia formation . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 3763 – 3771 . 188 Steffen A , Le Dez G , Poincloux R , Recchi C , Nassoy P , Rottner K , Galli T & Chavrier P ( 2008 ) MT1 - MMP - dependent invasion is regulated by TI - VAMP / VAMP7 . Curr Biol 18 , 926 – 931 . 189 Clancy JW , Sedgwick A , Rosse C , Muralidharan - Chari V , Raposo G , Method M , Chavrier P & D’Souza - Schorey C ( 2015 ) Regulated delivery of molecular cargo to invasive tumour - derived microvesicles . Nat Commun 6 , 6919 . 190 Hakulinen J , Sankkila L , Sugiyama N , Lehti K & Keski - Oja J ( 2008 ) Secretion of active membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP - 14 ) into extracellular space in microvesicular exosomes . J Cell Biochem 105 , 1211 – 1218 . 191 Muralidharan - Chari V , Clancy J , Plou C , Romao M , Chavrier P , Raposo G & D’Souza - Schorey C ( 2009 ) ARF6 - regulated shedding of tumor cell - derived plasma membrane microvesicles . Curr Biol 19 , 1875 – 1885 . 192 Hoshino D , Kirkbride KC , Costello K , Clark ES , Sinha S , Grega - Larson N , Tyska MJ & Weaver AM ( 2013 ) Exosome secretion is enhanced by invadopodia and drives invasive behavior . Cell Rep 5 , 1159 – 1168 . 193 Sedgwick AE , Clancy JW , Olivia Balmert M & D’Souza - Schorey C ( 2015 ) Extracellular microvesicles and invadopodia mediate non - overlapping modes of tumor cell invasion . Sci Rep 5 , 14748 . 194 Aung A , Seo YN , Lu S , Wang Y , Jamora C , del Alamo JC & Varghese S ( 2014 ) 3D traction stresses activate protease - dependent invasion of cancer cells . Biophys J 107 , 2528 – 2537 . 27 The FEBS Journal 285 ( 2018 ) 8 – 27 ª 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies E . K . Paterson and S . A . Courtneidge Invadosome function and disease