Active emulsions in living cell membranes driven by contractile stresses and transbilayer coupling Suvrajit Saha 1 , 2 , * , Amit Das 1 , 3 , * , Chandrima Patra 1 , Anupama Ambika Anilkumar 1 , 4 , Parijat Sil 1 , 5 , Satyajit Mayor 1 , † , and Madan Rao 1 , † 1 National Centre for Biological Sciences ( TIFR ) , Bellary Road , Bangalore 560065 , India 2 Cardiovascular Research Institute , University of California San Francisco ( UCSF ) , San Francisco , California , USA 3 Northeastern University , Boston , Massachusetts , USA 4 Present address : Deputy Scientiﬁc Attaché , Embassy of France in India 5 Present address : Department of Molecular Biology , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ , USA * S . S . & A . D . contributed equally to this work . †Corresponding authors : mayor @ ncbs . res . in & madan @ ncbs . res . in Abstract The spatiotemporal organisation of proteins and lipids on the cell surface has direct functional consequences for signal - ing , sorting and endocytosis . Earlier studies have shown that multiple types of membrane proteins including transmem - brane proteins that have cytoplasmic actin binding capac - ity and lipid - tethered GPI - anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) form nanoscale clusters driven by active contractile ﬂows gener - ated by the actin cortex . To gain insight into the role of lipids in organizing membrane domains in living cells , we study the molecular interactions that promote the actively generated nanoclusters of GPI - APs and transmembrane proteins . This motivates a theoretical description , wherein a combination of active contractile stresses and transbilayer coupling drive the creation of active emulsions , mesoscale liquid ordered ( lo ) domains of the GPI - APs and lipids , at temperatures greater than equilibrium lipid - phase segregation . To test these ideas we use spatial imaging of homo - FRET combined with local membrane order and demonstrate that mesoscopic domains enriched in nanoclusters of GPI - APs are maintained by cor - tical actin activity and transbilayer interactions , and exhibit signiﬁcant lipid order , consistent with predictions of the ac - tive composite model . Introduction An outstanding issue in modern cell biology is the spatio - temporal organisation of composition . The plasma mem - brane of a living cell with its diversity of proteins and lipids is an archetypal example ( 1 ) . Numerous studies have revealed that molecular organisation at the cell surface , ranging from 10 − 10 3 nm in space and 10 − 3 − 10 s in time , have direct functional consequences for signaling reactions , molecular sorting and endocytosis ( 2 , 3 ) . Following the ﬂuid - mosaic model ( 4 ) , several equilibrium models , such as the lipid - shell model ( 5 ) and the lipid - raft model ( 6 ) , have been proposed to describe the lateral organisation of the cell membrane . More recently , it has been shown that many cell surface proteins and lipids form dynamic nanoclusters driven by the activity of actomyosin at the cell cortex ( 7 – 12 ) . This not only iden - tiﬁes a novel molecular organiser of local plasma membrane composition , namely cortical actomyosin ( 13 – 15 ) , but also a new mechanism , highlighting the role of non - equilibrium , energy - consuming ‘active’ processes ( 16 ) in driving local compositional heterogeneities ( 17 ) . This is the motivation for the active composite cell surface model ( 8 , 17 – 19 ) , a juxtaposition of the membrane bilayer and the actomyosin cortex , where membrane components that couple to the cortical elements are subject to ﬂuctuat - ing actomyosin contractile stresses that drive ﬂows in local - ized regions ( 20 – 22 ) , leading to the formation of dynamic ( nano ) clusters on the cell surface ( 7 , 8 , 22 ) . Predictions from this model have been veriﬁed in high resolution ﬂuorescence experiments in living cells ( 7 , 8 , 15 , 23 ) , and in in vitro re - constitutions of the active composite , viz . actomyosin layered atop a planar bilayer membrane ( 19 , 24 ) . The active nanoclustering appears to be a general phenom - ena ( 13 ) ; it is exhibited by transmembrane proteins that di - rectly bind to actin , such as model proteins that consist of actin binding motifs at their cytoplasmic tails ( TMABD ; ( 8 ) ) and by naturally occurring proteins such as E - Cadherin and CD44 , that recruit actin - binding modules to bind to corti - cal actin ( 10 , 11 ) . Further , lipid - tethered membrane pro - teins , such as outer leaﬂet GPI - anchored proteins ( GPI - AP ) ( 8 , 25 , 26 ) , glycolipids ( 12 ) and inner leaﬂet Ras - GTPases ( 27 ) also exhibit actin - dependent nanoclustering . While direct association with actin provides a mechanism for membrane molecules to couple to the actomyosin cor - tex , coupling between outer - leaﬂet GPI - APs or glycolipids and dynamic cortical actin ﬁlaments at the inner - leaﬂet is mediated by transbilayer acyl - chain interactions involving long acyl chain - containing GPI - anchors , inner - leaﬂet Phos - phatidylserine ( PS ) , and cholesterol ( 28 ) . Sphingolipids ( SM ) have also been implicated in the maintainence of these nanoclusters ( 25 ) . A necessary condition for the local sta - bility of the transbilayer interaction at physiological tem - peratures was found to be the immobilization of PS at the inner leaﬂet , together with the inter - digitation of long acyl chain lipids across the bilayer and the presence of adequate levels of cholesterol and sphingolipids , predicting a nano - environment with local liquid order ( lo ) ( 28 ) . 1 In this paper , we use high resolution ﬂuorescence - based as - says to study more closely the role of lipidic interactions , both transbilayer and lateral , in the active organisation of the lipid - tethered GPI - AP and the transmembrane protein , TMABD ( Figure 1A schematic ) . These observations provide the motivation for an active segregation model of a multi - component ﬂuid bilayer membrane comprising outer - leaﬂet GPI - AP , inner - leaﬂet PS and lo and ld preferring lipids in both leaﬂets . We show that the combination of ( i ) active stress ﬂuctuations arising from a coupling to cortical acto - myosin , ( ii ) strong transbilayer interaction between PS and GPI / lo lipids , and iii ) lateral lipidic interactions , drive the mesoscale organisation of GPI - APs at temperatures above the lo - ld phase segregation temperature . Such actively seg - regated mesoscale domains or active emulsions , are expected to exhibit anomalous growth dynamics and ﬂuctuations that are unique to the nonequilibrium steady state ( 29 , 30 ) . To test these theoretical ideas , we use a combination of high - resolution maps of homo - FRET ( 31 ) and local membrane order ( 32 ) , to quantify the mesoscale organisation of GPI - AP and TMABD nanoclusters , and their correlation with the lipid environment . We ﬁnd mesoscale domains of size ≈ 0 . 1 µ m 2 enriched in GPI - AP nanoclusters , which in turn co - register with inner - leaﬂet PS and are associated with higher lipid - order ; while mesoscale domains of TMABD nanoclus - ters are uncorrelated with lipid order . Importantly , disruption of key drivers of activity , viz . the dynamic actin - ﬁlament nu - cleator formin , and mediators of GPI - AP binding to actin , viz . transbilayer coupling of GPI - AP to PS , lead to a loss of lo - mesoscale domains . These results show how the inter - play between active stresses ( due to actomyosin contractility ) and short - range passive forces ( here represented by transbi - layer coupling and weak lateral lipid - lipid interactions ) , pro - vide the driving force for the formation of active emulsions at physiological temperatures , qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with predictions from our theoretical model . Results GPI - anchored proteins and transmembrane proteins form active nanoclusters albeit with different inter - molecular interactions . In earlier studies we and oth - ers had shown that GPI - AP and TMABD form nanoclus - ters ( 8 , 33 ) . Here , using homo - FRET imaging at high reso - lution to identify nanoclustering of ﬂuorescently labeled pro - teins ( ( 31 , 34 ) , we conﬁrm that GPI - AP and TMABD ex - hibit actin - dependent nanoscale clusters contingent on the same actin nucleator , formin , rather than Arp2 / 3 ( 35 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Treatment of CHO cells expressing GPI - anchored Folate Re - ceptor ( FR - GPI ) or FR - tagged - TMABD ( FR - TMABD ) la - beled with N α - pteroyl - N (cid:15) - BodipyTMR - L - lysine [ PLB ; ( 8 ) ] with inhibitors of formins [ SMIFH2 ( 36 ) ] but not Arp2 / 3 [ CK666 ( 37 ) ] , disrupted the nanoscale clustering of both FR - GPI ( Fig . 1 B , C ) and FR - TMABD ( Fig . 1 D , E ) . The cy - toplasmic actin - ﬁlament binding domain ( ABD ) allows FR - TMABD to bind directly to actin ( 8 ) . A single point muta - tion in the cytosolic ABD ( R579A ; ABD * ) abrogates actin binding and resulted in a complete loss of the formation of actin - driven nanoclusters ( 8 ) . The binding of GPI - AP is however indirect , via a transbi - layer coupling to phosphatidylserine ( PS ) at the inner - leaﬂet and cytoplasmic actin ( 28 ) . Consequently , perturbations of PS abrogate nanoclustering of GPI - APs ( 28 ) but not of FR - TMABD ( 38 ) . Furthermore , depletion of cholesterol and sphingomyelin ( SM ) levels alter the nanoscale organisation of GPI - AP ( Fig . 1F and Fig . S1A ) ( 23 , 25 , 39 ) , but have no effect on the nanoclustering of TMABD ( Fig . 1G and Fig . S1B ) , consistent with the idea that both GPI - AP and TMABD engage with the active contractile machinery via distinct molecular interactions . Theoretical description of active segregation involving active contractile stresses and transbilayer coupling . These observations motivate a theoretical description of ac - tive segregation of the components of an asymmetric bilayer membrane , that involves combining the nonequilibrium ef - fects of actomyosin contractility with passive lipidic forces , namely the lateral interactions with lo - lipid components and transbilayer interactions with lower leaﬂet PS ( Fig . 2A ) . Taking a coarse - grained view , we represent the asymmetric bilayer membrane by different components that include the primary players under discussion ( Fig . S2A ) - ( i ) GPI - AP in the upper - leaﬂet , ( ii ) lo - component in the upper - leaﬂet com - prising SM and cholesterol , ( iii ) lower - leaﬂet PS together with other long - chain saturated lipids and cholesterol , ld - component in the ( iv ) upper leaﬂet , and the ( v ) lower leaﬂet , comprising short chain or unsaturated lipids and whenever applicable , a sixth component , ( vi ) transmembrane protein TMABD . The membrane bilayer adjoins a layer of cortical actomyosin , which represents the source of the ﬂuctuating active contractile stresses Σ localized over a spatial scale ξ and a lifetime τ ( 8 , 16 , 18 ) , and directly affects the the lower leaﬂet PS and the transmembrane TMABD , proportional to their binding afﬁnity with cortical actin . A formal description of the theory of active segregation in the asymmetric bilayer membrane with these components is presented in the SI text and Fig . S2A . Here we ﬁnd it convenient to realise this active dynamics using a Kinetic Monte Carlo simulation , whose details are in the SI . The transition rates associated with passive dy - namics are determined from an energy function that depends on the short - range interaction potentials between the coarse - grained membrane components , and obey detailed balance ( Fig . S2A ) . The transition rates associated with active dynam - ics correspond to two features , ﬁrst , the ﬂuctuations of the active contractile stress , represented by birth - death stochas - tic processes of contractile regions , and second , centripetal contractile ﬂows of PS and TMABD determined by local gradients of the active stress , and violate detailed balance ( Fig . S2B ) . These active transition rates depend on the fol - lowing tunable parameters : ( i ) relative binding afﬁnities of PS and TMABD to actin , ( ii ) ﬂuctuation statistics of the ac - tive contractile stress , viz . , the correlation length ξ and cor - relation time τ , ( iii ) magnitude of contractile stress char - acterized by a Péclet number Pe , or relative magnitude of active advective transport to diffusion outside , and ( iv ) the 2 Fig . 1 . GPI - AP and TMABD nanoclusters arise from different intermolecular interactions . A ) Schematic shows actomyosin activity drives cell surface molecules like GPI - AP and TMABD into respective nanoscale clusters ( on the right side ) . Note , while TMABD can directly couple to juxtamembrane f - actin , outer - leaﬂet GPI - APs can only do so via transbilayer coupling with inner leaﬂet PS . ( B - E ) Representative confocal spinning disk images ( B , D ) showing ﬂuorescence intensity and anisotropy image of CHO cells expressing FR - GPI ( B ) or FR - TMABD ( D ) and labeled with PLB , either untreated ( Control ) or treated with pharmacological inhibitors of Formin ( SMI ) or Arp2 / 3 ( CK666 ) . Cumulative frequency plots ( C , E ) of anisotropy values from the indicated treatments show that formin perturbation ( red line ) leads to signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 01 , KS - test ) increase in anisotropy of both FR - GPI and FR - TMABD suggesting a reduction in nanoscale clustering whereas Arp2 / 3 perturbation ( blue line ) has no signiﬁcant ( KS - test ) effects on anisotropy . ( F , G ) Cumulative frequency plots of anisotropy values of CHO cells expressing EGFP - GPI ( F ) or FR - TMABD ( G ; labeled with PLB ) from either untreated cells ( Control ) or cells that were depleted of cholesterol ( MBCD ) or sphingomyelin ( FB1 ) . Note , only GPI - AP anisotropy ( but not TMABD ) increases upon these perturbations . Data were pooled from at least 15 - 20 cells across independent replicates ( 2 - 3 ) in each condition ; statistical signiﬁcance was tested with two sample KS - test . Scale bar for images in ( B , D ) : 10 µm . 3 B A Actomyosin contractility drives PS clustering GPI - AP , , CHOL - PS transbilayer coupling lo Growth of domain via lateral interaction of lo PS component lo component ld GPI - anchor protein ( GPI - AP ) Cholesterol ( CHOL ) E F With active contractile stress x ( μ m ) Without active contractile stress y ( μ m ) x ( μ m ) Segregation parameter proﬁle Colocalization of GPI - AP with lo 1 2 3 Size distribution of domains depends on K PS and coverage of active stress , lo A segregation controlled by PS a ﬃ nity for actin lo − ld segregation driven by active contractile stress at lo − ld T > T c ϕ D 1 2 3 Segregated phase Mixed phase T r a n s b il a y e r c o u p li n g Actin binding a ﬃ nity of PS , K PS Segregation emerges from interplay of transbilayer coupling and activity ⟨ ϕ ⟩ G C Coregistry of PS with GPI - AP and lo Fig . 2 . Kinetic Monte Carlo simulation of a multicomponent model of an active composite cell surface predicts nano to mesoscale lipid ordering and segregation of proteins driven by active contractile stresses generated by the actomyosin cortex . ( A ) Schematic of the three principal ingredients of the multicomponent model of cell surface . For simplicity , we leave out showing the transmembrane protein TMABD , whose presence in the membrane does not make a qualitative difference to the GPI - AP associated lo - domains ( see Fig . S2 for details ) . ( B ) Spatial proﬁles of the lo − ld segregation parameter φ , ( right ) in the presence of active contractile stresses , and ( left ) in their absence ( all other parameters being ﬁxed ) , at temperatures ( T ) higher than the critical temperature T c of equilibrium lo − ld phase separation . φ is deﬁned as : φ = ( ρ lo − ρ ld ) / ( ρ lo + ρ ld ) , where ρ lo and ρ ld are , respectively , the local number densities of the lo and ld components . All simulation data correspond to T = 1 . 05 T c , close to physiological temperature of the cell . ( C ) Dependence of the probability density functions ( PDFs ) of the segregation parameter φ on actin binding afﬁnity of PS , K PS ( see supplementary text for details ) . ( D ) Heat map of the order parameter , h φ i , as a function of the transbilayer coupling and K PS . The angular brackets represent an average over multiple spatial locations and time frames . The transbilayer coupling is deﬁned as the energy scale of PS ( outer leaﬂet ) - SM ( inner leaﬂet ) interaction U SM − PS , expressed in units of k B T , Boltzmann constant k B times the absolute temperature T . ( E ) Time averaged spatial proﬁles of φ ( top row ) , number densities of GPI - AP ( middle row ) and PS ( bottom row ) at increasing K PS ( marked by numbers on the ﬁrst row in E , and in panel D ) . In each case , the contours of φ are also shown as a guide . All the number densities are normalized by the maximum density possible on a grid - point . ( F ) Distribution of the sizes of lo domains ( s ) with increasing K PS . ( G ) Distribution of the sizes of l o domains ( s ) with increasing value of A , the area fraction of active contractile stress . In F and G , the solid lines are the ﬁts to a model distribution , As − θ exp [ − s / s 0 ] . The values of ﬁtting parameter A , exponent θ and the cutoff s 0 are provided in Supplementary Table 1 . Here the unit of s is set by the unit grid area which 0 . 03 µm × 0 . 03 µm . Scale bars in panel B and E are 0 . 1 µ m . extent of activity or the fraction of the region inﬂuenced by active stresses . This generalizes a recent theoretical study ( 29 , 30 ) of the coarse - grained dynamics of segregation of a two - component ﬂuid driven by ﬂuctuating active con - tractile stresses . Our results ( Fig . 2B - E ) show that a combination of active stress ﬂuctuations and strong transbilayer coupling can in - duce mesoscale co - segregation of lo - components including GPI - APs relative to ld - components at physiological temper - atures 310 K , which is above the equilibrium lo - ld phase seg - regation temperature of 293 K determined empirically from Giant Plasma Membrane Vesicles ( 40 ) . Figure 2B shows a comparison between a typical snapshot of a steady state con - ﬁguration of the components in the absence of and with active contractile stresses , at temperatures above the phase segre - gation temperature . The extent of segregation measured by the probability distribution of the segregation order parame - ter P ( φ ) ( Fig . 2C , D ) , and their spatial proﬁles ( Fig . 2E ) , de - pends on the binding afﬁnity of PS with actin ( Fig . 2C ) and the strength of the transbilayer coupling ( Fig . 2D , E ) . The panels in Fig . 2E show the active co - segregation of the lo - domains with GPI - AP in the upper leaﬂet of the mem - brane and their co - registry with PS in the lower leaﬂet . We see that the GPI - AP enriched regions are predominantly sur - 4 rounded by the lo - component in the upper leaﬂet . The ex - tent of segregation and co - registry increases with the afﬁnity of PS to actin . The results on the active co - segregation of lo - components and GPI - AP relative to ld - components con - tinue to hold when an additional component , viz . TMABD , is introduced , which only engages sterically with the other components but is driven by similar contractile stresses ( Fig . S2C , D ) . The TMABD enriched domains are segregated from lo - domains , and PS ( Fig . S2E ) . The extent of mesoscale segregation and the mesoscale do - mains , depend on the ﬂuctuating active contractile stresses , and appear at temperatures above equilibrium phase separa - tion . This paints a picture of an active emulsion driven by active stirring from the cortical medium , and requiring in - ner leaﬂet PS and outer - leaﬂet SM with cholesterol as a glue . While , this is completely consistent with all our observations so far at the nano - scale , this description makes both qualita - tive and quantitative predictions about mesoscopic domains enriched in these nanoclusters , which we verify in experi - ments described below . Evidence for mesoscale organisation of GPI - AP nan - oclusters . A very clear prediction from the theoretical model is that GPI - APs nanoclusters will form mesoscale domains enriched in these entities . To explore the larger scale organisation of these nanoclusters , we re - purposed our custom - built TIRF and confocal spinning disk micro - scopes ( 31 , 34 ) to obtain high resolution spatial anisotropy maps of the labelled proteins over a scale of 300 – 1000 nm . We identify optically resolvable domains enriched ( or depleted ) in these nanoclusters from spatial maps of ﬂuo - rescence emission anisotropy ( Fig . 3A ) , by thresholding the anisotropy at one standard deviation from the mean ( Meth - ods , SI ; schematic in Fig . S3A ) . The thresholded anisotropy map of EGFP tagged - GPI ( EGFP - GPI ; Fig . 3A ) or FR - GPI bound to ﬂuorescent ligands ( Fig . S3B ) , shows a nanoclus - ter fraction in excess of ≈ 10 − 15 % of the mapped area and mean domain area ≈ 0 . 1 µ m 2 ( Control in Fig . 3B , C ) , consistent with previous work ( 7 ) . The dependence of GPI - AP nanoclustering on adequate levels of cholesterol and SM is consistent with their depletion severely perturbing the mesoscale domains ( Fig . 3A - C ) . The mesoscale domains of GPI - APs are also lost when the levels of the trans - bilayer coupling lipid , PS , was perturbed in CHO cells deﬁcient in PSS1 activity and were grown in absence of ethanolamine to reduce membrane PS levels ( 28 ) ( Figs . 3D , E ) . As pre - dicted , the thresholded anisotropy map of TMABD also shows mesoscale domains where the nanocluster fraction is in excess of ≈ 10 % of the mapped area and a mean do - main area ≈ 0 . 1 µ m 2 ( Figs . S3E , F , H , I ) . In contrast to the GPI - APs , the mesoscale organisation of TMABD is unaf - fected by the lipid perturbations ( Figs . S3E , F ) . However , it is much reduced upon abrogation of the actin - binding capac - ity ( Figs . S3H , I ) . Since formin - nucleated dynamic cortical actin is necessary for building the nanoscale clusters of GPI - AP and TMABD ( 35 ) , formin inhibition also leads to a signiﬁcant reduc - tion in their mean domain area ( Figs . 3G , H , S3K , L ; SMI ) , whereas Arp2 / 3 perturbation doesn’t alter these parameters ( Fig . 3G , H , S3K , L ; CK666 ) . These results conﬁrm the qual - itative predictions of the creation of mesoscale domains of nanoclusters , driven by contractile stresses in two distinct classes of molecules , GPI - APs linked via the virtue of the lo - cal lipid environment , and the TMABD to dynamic cortical actin . Mesoscale domain size distributions are sensitive to actin binding afﬁnity and cortical actin dynamics . A quantitative prediction of the theory , as elaborated pre - viously ( 29 ) , is that as a consequence of active driving , the steady state domain size distribution , P ( s ) scales as s − θ exp ( − s / s 0 ) , a power - law with an exponential cutoff at s = s 0 ( Figs . 2F , G ) . The exponent θ and the cutoff scale s 0 depend on the actin binding afﬁnity , the extent of activ - ity and correlation time τ of the active stress ﬂuctuations ( Figs . 2F , G ) . Using the spatial maps of the steady state ﬂu - orescence anisotropy of GPI - AP and TMABD , this domain size distribution is easily measured . We ﬁnd a good ﬁt of the mesoscale domain size distribution data to the predicted form of P ( s ) , with θ ≈ 2 and s 0 ≈ 0 . 4 − 0 . 7 µ m 2 , for both GPI - AP ( Fig . 3 C , F , I ) and TMABD ( Fig . S3 G , J , M ; Supplementary Table ST1 ) . The steady state distribution of cluster sizes still retains the above form upon perturbations of the actomyosin dynamics and the actin - binding afﬁnity , albeit with different values of θ and s 0 . Based on our earlier study of active segregation ( 29 ) and the predictions from the current model , s 0 should always decrease with any of the above perturbations . This is con - sistent with what we observe in our perturbation experiments ( Fig . 3 , S3 and Supplementary Table 1 ) . Together these data show that the two types of membrane components , GPI - AP and TMABD , both actively driven by cortical actin - based machinery ( formin - nucleated ﬁlaments ) , inhabit mesoscopic membrane domains with distinct charac - teristics , consistent with our predictions . Mesoscale domains of GPI - AP are correlated across the bilayer with PS and with lo regions . The active emulsion picture suggests that the mesoscale organisation of nanoclusters of outer - leaﬂet GPI - AP is contingent on co - registry with nanoclusters of PS at the inner - leaﬂet and lo regions ( schematic in Fig . 4A , D ) . To study the corre - lation of mesoscale domains with other membrane com - ponents , we developed a two colour emission anisotropy ( homo - FRET ) methodology wherein we image two differ - ent components in the same cell membrane in a sequential fashion ( Fig . S4A - E ; detailed in SI ) . To examine co - registry with inner - leaﬂet nanoclusters of PS , we built a fusion pro - tein of PS - binding discoidin - like C2 domain of lactadherin ( LactC2 ) in tandem with actin - ﬁlament binding domain of Ezrin and YFP ( YFP - LactC2 - ABD ) . This fusion protein was designed to be recruited to the inner leaﬂet PS ( 41 ) and con - nect to the dynamic cortical actin machinery via its Ezrin - actin binding domain ( 28 ) . LactC2 - ABD - YFP forms nan - oclusters at the inner - leaﬂet as indicated by its depolarized emission anisotropy and subsequent increase upon photo - 5 Fig . 3 . Mesoscale organisation of GPI - AP nanoclusters . ( A ) Boxes represent 6 µm × 6 µm patches of anisotropy map ( top ) and corresponding thresholded binary maps ( below , showing mesoscale domains enriched in nanoclusters ) taken from CHO cells expressing EGFP - GPI which were untreated ( Control ) or depleted of cholesterol ( MBCD ) or sphingomyelin ( FB1 ) . Notched box - plots ( B ) of Domain Area fraction obtained from several images like ( A ) show mesoscale GPI - AP domains are signiﬁcantly reduced upon these lipid perturbations ( p < 0 . 001 One - way ANOVA with Tukey mean - comparison ) . ( C ) Distribution of domain area in the indicated conditions ; solid lines represent the corresponding ﬁts to a model distribution , As − θ exp [ − s / s 0 ] . The characteristic area of GPI - AP domains in Control scenario is estimated to be 0 . 1 µ m 2 ( dashed vertical line ) which translates to a domain diameter of ≈ 360 nm , while both the lipid perturbations mark a shift towards smaller domain area as indicated decrease in the frequency P ( s ) of larger domains ( s ≥ 0 . 1 µ m 2 ) . ( D - F ) Phosphatidylserine ( PS ) deﬁcient PSA3 cells transiently expressing EGFP - GPI were grown in PS + or PS - conditions . Anisotropy and binary domain maps ( D ; 6 µm × 6 µm boxes ) show that PS depletion led to a reduction in domain area fraction ( E , p < 0 . 001 , Mann - Whitney test ) , and Domain area distributions ( F ) show a shift toward smaller domain areas for PS depleted cells ( red circles and dotted ﬁt line ) . ( G - I ) Boxes ( G ) show 6 µm × 6 µm anisotropy and binarized domain maps of PLB - labeled FR - GPI obtained from untreated cells ( Control ) , or cells treated with inhibitors of formin ( SMI ) or Arp2 / 3 ( CK66 ) . Notched box - plot ( H ) of domain area fraction shows that only formin perturbation leads to loss of these domains and led to a marked shift to smaller s in domain area distributions ( I ) . Statistical signiﬁcance was determined at p < 0 . 001 using one - way ANOVA with Tukey mean - comparison . At least 30 - 60 thresholded binary maps were pooled from 10 - 15 cells across 2 independent replicates for the analyses of each condition . bleaching ( Fig . S4F ) ( 25 ) . To visualize the nanocluster - rich regions of GPI - AP and PS in the same cells we transfected YFP - LactC2 - ABD encoding plasmids in GPI - anchored fo - late receptor ( FR - GPI ) expressing cells , and labeled FR - GPI with a ﬂuorescent folate analog ( pteroyl - lysyl - folate - BodipyTMR , PLB ) . We conﬁrmed by sequential imaging of anisotropy of individual components , LactC2 - ABD - YFP , and PLB - labelled FR - GPI co - existed in highly correlated regions ( Fig . S4D , E , G ) . Analysis of the correlation of the spatial anisotropy maps of the outer and inner - leaﬂet localized pro - teins ( Fig . 4B ) showed that the cluster - rich ( low emission anisotropy ) regions of the LactC2Ez are strongly correlated with the cluster rich regions of GPI - AP ( Pearson coeff . = 0 . 6 , p < 0 . 01 ; Fig . 4C ) , but only moderately with TMABD ( Pear - son coeff . = 0 . 28 , p < 0 . 01 ; Fig . S4H , I ) . Together with our previous ﬁndings ( 28 ) , this shows that the actively gener - ated mesoscale organisation of GPI - AP nanoclusters occurs at sites of enrichment of PS clusters in the inner - leaﬂet , me - diated by transbilayer coupling , as predicted by the theory . Next , we sought to understand the local lipid order of these cluster rich ( or sparse ) mesoscopic domains of FR - GPI . To do so we map local membrane order using the polarity sens - ing lipid probe Laurdan , and quantify it by measuring Gen - eralized Polarization ( GP ) ( 42 – 44 ) . GP values are low ( er ) in ld - regions and high ( er ) in lo - regions of the membrane . While the dynamic range of the Laurdan GP values in CHO cells is not very large , as has been noticed in earlier cellular stud - ies ( 45 ) and in cell derived Giant Plasma Membrane Vesi - cles ( 46 ) , it is sufﬁcient to identify regions enriched in lo or ld components . We obtained sequential spatial maps of Laurdan GP and emission anisotropy ( homo - FRET ) of GPI - AP using a spin - ning disk confocal microscope on a uniformly labelled basal membrane ( Fig . 4E , S5A - D ) . We measured the anisotropy 6 Fig . 4 . Mesoscale domains of GPI anchored protein clusters are correlated with inner - leaﬂet PS cluster - rich and lo domains . ( A ) Schematic shows transbilayer coupling between the GPI - AP and inner - leaﬂet PS . LactC2 - ABD which acts as a synthetic linker between the inner - leaﬂet PS and juxtamembrane actin ﬂows ( black arrows ) . Representative TIRF images of ﬂuorescence intensity and anisotropy of PLB - labeled FR - GPI ( B , top panels ) , transfected with YFP - LactC2 - ABD ( B ; lower panels ) . Matched ROIs of 7 × 7 µm sized patches ( black boxes in B ii ) were chosen from the anisotropy images of PLB - labeled FR - GPI and LactC2 - ABD ( iii , iii’ ) . Mesoscale domain sized ROIs ( ≈ 400 × 400 nm ) are drawn around cluster - rich and cluster - poor hotspots of FR - GPI ( B iii , iii’ ) . The anisotropy values of FR - GPI and LactC2 - ABD graphed as scatter plots ( C ) exhibit signiﬁcant positive correlation ( Pearson’s R = 0 . 6 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Individual scatter plots report 630 ROIs collected from cells ( n = 29 cells ) pooled from two independent replicates . ( D - G ) Schematic ( D ) shows how individual nanoscale GPI - AP cluster co - habit a larger mesoscopic patch of lo - like membrane driven by actin ﬂows to form ‘active emulsions’ . Representative high - resolution confocal ﬂuorescence and anisotropy images of CHO cells expressing FR - GPI labeled with PLB ( E , top panel ) and co - labelled with membrane order probe , Laurdan ( E , bottom panel ) . Identical 7 µm × 7 µm sized boxes ( in black ) were chosen from the anisotropy and Laurdan GP map and shown in Analysis ROI ( E ; iii , iii’ , respectively ) . Scatter plot ( F ) of local Laurdan GP and anisotropy computed from corresponding small regions ( 400 x 400 nm ; dashed boxes ) obtained from Analysis ROI for corresponding FR - GPI anisotropy ( iii ) and Laurdan GP ( iii’ ) maps . Note Laurdan GP and anisotropy of PLB - labeled FR - GPI shows negative correlation ( R = - 0 . 4 , p < 0 . 01 ) . ( G ) Box plots show cluster - rich domains of GPI - AP have signiﬁcantly higher local Laurdan GP ( p < 0 . 001 , two sample t - test ) . Dataset ( F , G ) report on at least 500 ROIs collected from cells ( n = 15 cells ) pooled from two independent replicates . Scale bar 10 µm . coarse - grained over 4 × 4 pixels ( pixel : 102 nm ) and de - termined the cluster - rich ( cluster - sparse ) regions together with the corresponding Laurdan GP from membrane patches across multiple cells ( Fig . 4E ) . We found that GPI - AP nanocluster - rich domains have a higher Laurdan GP com - pared to GPI - AP nanocluster - poor domains ( Fig . 4F , G ) . On the other hand , the TMABD cluster - rich ( or sparse ) regions have very little difference in their local membrane order ( Fig . S5E - G ) . These results suggest that mesoscale domains enriched in GPI - AP nanoclusters have a speciﬁc lo - lipid en - vironment , while the TMABD nanoclusters are agnostic to its lipid environment , exactly as predicted by our theory . Lateral membrane ordering is contingent on dynamic cortical actin and transbilayer coupling . An important claim of the active emulsion description is that the mesoscale lo - region observed at physiological temperatures is not a con - sequence of a thermodynamic phase transition , but rather driven by active contractile stresses arising from cortical ac - tomyosin that act via the inner - leaﬂet PS to maintain a strong transbilayer coupling to GPI - AP . To test this crucial pre - diction , we study how local membrane ordering , character - 7 Fig . 5 . Molecular components driving the formation of ordered domains . ( A , B ) Representative confocal images ( A ) show Laurdan total intensity ( Intensity ) and GP map of untreated CHO cells ( Control ) or cells treated with different perturbation of actin cytoskeleton . ( B ) Box - plot shows the effects of different actin perturbations on Laurdan GP . Perturbation of actin polymerization ( Lat A ; pink ) or formin ( SMI ; red ) but not Arp2 / 3 ( CK666 ; blue ) lead to signiﬁcant reduction of Laurdan GP compared to control ( black ) . ( C , D ) Laurdan Intensity and GP images ( C ) of the PS biosynthetic mutant CHO cells ( PSA3 ) grown in presence ( PS + ) or absence ( PS - ) of ethanolamine . Box - plot ( D ) shows that Laurdan GP of PS - ( red ) cell membrane is reduced signiﬁcantly compared to PS + ( black ) , suggesting a reduction of steady state membrane ordering . Cholesterol depletion of PS + cells by MBCD ( C ; D , blue ) leads to similar loss of membrane ordering . ( E , F ) Representative confocal images ( E ) of CHO cells show Laurdan intensity and GP maps of untreated ( E , Control ) , or cells depleted of cholesterol ( MBCD ) or sphingomyelin ( FB1 ) . ( F ) Box - plot of Laurdan GP shows the reduction of membrane ordering in cholesterol ( red ) and sphingomyelin ( blue ) depleted cells compared to control ( black ) . Dataset for each condition was collected from at least 300 - 500 regions ( individual dots in box plots ) from 15 - 20 cells ; Scale bar for images in A , C , E 10 µm . Statistical signﬁcance was deﬁned at p < 0 . 001 using One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s mean comparison test . ized by Laurdan GP , gets affected upon perturbing the actin - nucleator formin , actin ( de ) polymerization , and inner - leaﬂet PS . Perturbations of formin ( SMIFH2 , 25 µ M , 2 hr ) but not Arp2 / 3 ( CK666 , 50 µ M , 2 hr ) led to a reduction in GP val - ues on CHO cells as measured using two different probes for membrane ordering , viz . Laurdan ( Fig . 5 ) and the outer - leaﬂet speciﬁc Nile Red analogue NR12S ( 47 , 48 ) ( Fig . S6 ) . Cells treated with formin inhibitor , SMIFH2 ( Fig . 5A ; SMI ) , and a signiﬁcant reduction in steady state Laurdan GP and NR12S ratios ( Fig . 5 A , B and Fig S6 A , B ; SMI ) while treatment with Arp2 / 3 inhibitor does not affect the GP or NR12S ratios compared to control ( Fig . 5 A , B and Fig . S6 A , B ; CK666 ) . Finally , latrunculin A mediated inhibition of actin polymerization in general ( Fig . 5A , B Lat A ) also low - ers GP value . Note that for the NR12S probe , the shift in GP values is small , but statistically signiﬁcant ( Fig . S6 A , B ; Lat A ) . Laurdan GP measured from PS - deﬁcient cells ( PS - ) shows a clear drop in steady - state membrane order in com - parison to cells grown in presence of ethanolamine ( PS + in Fig . 5C , D ) . The extent of decrease in Laurdan GP in PS - cells are comparable to those obtained from PS + cells depleted of cholesterol ( PS + MBCD , Fig . 5 C , D ) , buttressing the criti - cal role of innerleaﬂet PS in maintaining local membrane or - der . Not surprisingly , the depletion of membrane cholesterol ( MBCD ) and outer - leaﬂet sphingomyelin ( FB1 ) in wild type cells also show marked reduction in the membrane ordering ( Fig . 5E , F ) . These observations verify a critical prediction of the theory , namely that the concerted involvement of dy - namic cortical actin and transbilayer interaction via inner - leaﬂet PS drives the local lo - membrane order that accompa - nies the mesoscale organisation of GPI - AP nanoclusters . 8 Discussion Several studies lend support to the picture of the cell sur - face as a multi - component composite - an asymmetric bilayer membrane sandwiched between a thin cortical layer of ac - tomyosin and an extracellular matrix ( 49 ) . The membrane itself has rich compositional diversity , consisting of a variety of lipids and proteins . In this context many transmembrane protein receptors have evolved intracellular domains allow - ing them to interact with the cortical cytoskeleton either di - rectly or via recruiting actin - binding domains such as Ezrin , ankyrin or alpha catenin ( 50 , 51 ) . On the other hand , proteins and lipids localized to the outer - leaﬂet of the plasma mem - brane , such as the lipid - tethered GPI - APs and glycolipids , also interact with cortical actin , albeit in an indirect manner . Their interaction is mediated via the creation of a speciﬁc lo - lipid environment at nanoscales , involving acyl - chain trans - bilayer coupling with inner - leaﬂet phosphatidylserine ( PS ) and the stabilizing inﬂuence of local cholesterol and sphin - gomyelin ( 12 , 28 ) . The active composite membrane model elaborated here , de - scribes the dynamical response of GPI - APs ( and possibly glycolipids ) at the outer leaﬂet as a consequence of being internally driven by active actomyosin - dependent stresses . As we show here , it predicts that these nanoclusters are or - ganised in mesoscale domains that exhibit lo characteristics . Validating these predictions we ﬁnd mesoscopic domains en - riched in clusters whose size is ≈ 350 − 500 nm , consistent with earlier high resolution studies ( 7 , 33 , 52 ) . This lat - eral mesoscale organisation of nanoclusters is contingent on ( i ) transbilayer coupling to inner - leaﬂet PS , ( ii ) the binding of PS to the active machinery and consequently subject to active contractile stresses , and ( iii ) the presence of lo - lipid components such as SM and Cholesterol , and as a conse - quence manifests at physiological temperatures , which is sig - niﬁcantly higher than the thermodynamic lo - ld phase transi - tion . As conﬁrmed in experiments the lo - domains are depen - dent on a dynamic actin cortex comprising formin - nucleated actin ﬁlaments . Figure 6 shows a schematic of the emergence of this mesoscale organization driven by contractile active stresses , transbilayer coupling via PS and lateral lipidic interactions . This pre - existing lateral segregation on the ﬂat asymmetric bilayer cell membrane is aptly described as an active emul - sion formed by local non - equilibrium stirring of the compos - ite . We expect such active emulsions to display anomalous ﬂuctuations in their non - equilibrium steady state ( 24 , 30 ) . This description differs from passive ( micro ) emulsion mod - els , such as those that invoke preferential wetting as in the lipid - shell model ( 5 ) , or that impute line - actants ( 53 , 54 ) , or depend on the coupling of membrane shape ﬂuctuations to local lipid composition ( 55 , 56 ) , in two fundamental aspects . First , there is a new molecular organiser of local plasma membrane composition , namely cortical actomyosin and its linkage to the lower leaﬂet lipid PS , along with attendant lat - eral interactions . Second , it is dependent on novel forces for driving local organisation , namely non - equilibrium active contractile stresses and passive transbilayer interactions . It is the combination of active internal forces driven by a molec - ular mechanism involving actomyosin , and speciﬁc passive interactions , including transbilayer interaction with PS and lateral interaction with lo - components , that outcompetes the entropy of mixing and drives lateral organisation of lipids at the nano and mesoscales in the plasma membrane at physio - logical temperatures . Concurrently , the lateral active organisation of transmem - brane proteins such as TMABD that bind directly to actin , appears to be agnostic of the underlying membrane composi - tion . Their mesoscale organisation arises from a combination of active internal forces driven by actomyosin and passive protein - protein interactions . This may provide an explana - tion for the mesoscale domains of several actin - interacting endogenous proteins which also exhibit cis - interactions in their ecto - domains such as CD44 and E - Cadherin ( 10 , 11 , 57 ) . In the event that there are covalent or non - covalent inter - actions of these proteins with speciﬁc lipids that prefer lo or ld - phases , we propose that such actively driven protein clus - ters will also be correlated with speciﬁc lipid environments , dictated by these interactions . The active emulsion picture elucidated here has parallels in the creation and maintenance of liquid - liquid phase separated assemblies ( 58 , 59 ) , otherwise known as biomolecular con - densates ( 60 ) . Apart from purely thermodynamic agencies driving such biomolecular aggregation ( 58 – 60 ) , it is likely that activity , arising from either nonequilibrium chemical reactions ( 61 ) or active cytoskeletal elements ( as discussed here ) , could provide the driving force for the formation and maintenance of such mesoscale emulsions . The pre - existing dynamic organisation of the plasma mem - brane described here is maintained out - of - equilibrium by constitutive active processes . This active non - equilibrium steady state sets up the plasma membrane to respond sen - sitively to stimuli , such as in outside - in and inside - out cell surface signalling ( 18 ) . It is therefore no surprise that many membrane signalling receptors have evolved intricate direct or indirect molecular mechanisms linking them to the cy - toskeleton ( 10 , 11 , 57 , 62 ) . For instance , the hierarchical architecture of having mesoscale domains of membrane proteins , built from dy - namic nanoscale motifs , allows for a rapid remodelling of an activated zone ( 13 , 18 , 22 ) . The strength and nature of the coupling between the actomyosin machinery and mem - brane components could be locally regulated , to build larger platforms or disassemble existing ones . A striking example of this , is the rapid expansion of an activated zone of GPI - AP nanoclusters induced during local integrin activation and cell substrate adhesion , with consequences for cell physiol - ogy and receptor function ( 35 ) . Finally , there are two immediate and important consequences of the induced and pre - existing active organisation of mem - brane components . One is the central involvement of acto - myosin in nano and meso scale organisation . This allows the cell to explore mechano - chemical mechanisms for the local control of cell membrane organisation , and thereby mechano - chemical signal processing and feedback ( 63 , 64 ) . The sec - 9 Fig . 6 . Active emulsions : Emergent mesoscale domains at the cell surface . ( A ) Image ( left ) shows a spatially averaged map of upper and lower - leaﬂet components obtained from a snapshot of simulations described in Figure 2 . An axial - slice ( top right ) of the cell membrane schematises the organisation of the resultant patches of GPI - AP clusters enriched in lo - membrane components and juxtamembrane actin interactions at the inner - leaﬂet . ( B ) Model for the emergence of ‘active emulsions’ . Transbilayer coupling and contractile stresses organise GPI - APs and lo - lipids present in a uniformly mixed bilayer ( left ) to form individual nanoscale cluster ( middle ) , which in turn sets up the platforms to facilitate local lipid - lipid lateral interactions leading to the emergence of ordered mesocopic domains or ‘Active Emulsion’ ond is the key ﬁnding of differential segregation of membrane components driven by active contractile stresses . This must direct the focus to uncovering the molecular basis of active contractile force generation at the cortex - their chemistry and interaction partners , force characteristics , spatial organisation and turnover . Materials and Methods Cell lines , labeling and perturbation . Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cell lines were maintained in Ham’s F12 me - dia ( Hi Media , India ) supplemented with ( 10 % ) fetal bovine serum ( FBS , Gibco , USA ) . Plasmids were either expressed stably ( FR - GPI , FR - TMABD , EGFP - GPI ) or transiently transfected ( LactC2 - ABD - YFP ) prior to imaging . PSA3 cell line for phosphatidylserine ( PS ) perturbation experi - ments were maintained in Ham’s F12 medium in the pres - ence of 10 mM ethanolamine and 10 % FBS . N α - pteroyl - N ε - BodipyTMR - L - lysine ( PLB ) was used to label folate - receptor ( FR - GPI and FR - TMABD ) expressing cells at satu - rating concentration ( ∼ 400 nM ) for 5 mins at 37 ◦ C . Imaging were carried out in a HEPES ( 20 mM ) based buffer supple - mented with 2 mg / ml glucose ( details in SI methods ) . Perturbations were carried out as following : ( 1 ) Cholesterol : Methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( MBCD ) ; 10 mM at 37 ◦ C for 30 min - utes . ( 2 ) Sphingomyelin : Fumonisin B1 ( FB1 ) ; 40 µ g / ml for 72 hours in growth culture media . ( 3 ) PS depletion : PSA3 cells were grown in media devoid of ethanolamine and 10 % dialyzed FBS for 36 - 48 hours . ( 4 ) F - actin : Latrunculin A ( LatA ) ; 2 µ M for 10 - 15 min at 37 ◦ C . ( 5 ) Formin : SMIFH2 ; 25 µ M for 2 hr at 37 ◦ C . ( 6 ) Arp2 / 3 : CK - 666 ; 50 µ M for 2 hr at 37 ◦ C . Unless noted otherwise , the drugs against F - actin , formin and Arp2 / 3 were maintained in the imaging buffer during microscopy . Steady - state anisotropy measurements . Steady state anisotropy experiments were carried out as described ear - lier ( 31 , 34 ) using the following high resolution ( 100x Ob - jective , 1 . 45 NA ) imaging platforms : ( 1 ) Yokogawa CSU - 22 spinning disk ( SD ) confocal microscope ( Andor Technolo - gies , Northern Ireland ) ; ( with a sampling pixel size of 100 nm ) or 2 ) Nikon TIRF microscope ( with a pixel size of 75 nm ) . Image processing , analysis , and quantiﬁcation were performed using Metamorph 7 . 0 ( Molecular Devices Corpo - ration , CA , USA ) , MATLAB ( Mathworks , MA , USA ) and ImageJ ( NIH , USA ) as described earlier and detailed in SI . Membrane ordering measurements . Membrane order - ing measurements were primarily carried out by measur - ing the general polarization ( GP ) of Laurdan ( 6 - lauryl - 2 - dimethylamino - napthalene ) at the cell surface . Cells were co - labeled with Laurdan ( at 10 µ M ) and folate - analog PLB ( at 400 nM ) at 37 ◦ C for 5 minutes . Laurdan labeled cells were imaged at 100x ( 1 . 45 NA ) on a confocal spinning disk mi - croscope using 405 nm laser line and emission ﬂuorescence was recorded at the two spectral channels 410 - 460 nm ( Ch1 ) and 470 - 530 nm ( Ch2 ) . Laurdan GP calculation and stan - dards were implemented as described earlier and detailed in SI ( 32 , 43 ) . In some experiments , Nile Red based membrane dye 10 ( NR12S ) blue - red ratiometric imaging provide an alternate measure of lipid order ( 48 ) as detailed in the SI . Data Analysis . Quantiﬁcation of domain abundance and size distributions . Pixel anisotropy distribution obtained from several ( 20 ) 6 - 10 µ m square patches of spatial anisotropy maps of a probe ( say FR - GPI in control conditions ) were used determine the mean and standard deviation ( SD ) and set the threshold ( Mean – SD ) . Mesoscopic domains were de - marcated by thresholding and binarizing spatial anisotropy maps . For comparisons between control and perturbations , same threshold determined from ‘control’ was used uni - formly across all conditions . These binarized maps were quantiﬁed using ‘Analyze particles’ routine of ImageJ with a size criterion of at least 5 pixels ( pixel size is 0 . 1 µ m or 0 . 01 µm 2 ) to obtain domain area fraction ( for each patch ) and individual domain area . Quantitative relation between clustering ( of two probes ) and with lipid order . A systematic correlation - based approach was implemented to compute the relation between the clus - tering ( from anisotropy values ) for two probes or that be - tween clustering and lipid order ( Laurdan GP ) . Brieﬂy ( see details in SI ) , anisotropy rich and poor regions were manually identiﬁed ( say for FR - GPI ; probe 1 ) and demarcated with a region - of - interest ( ROI ) box surrounding the domains . The size of the box ( 0 . 4x0 . 4 µ m ; 0 . 16 µm 2 ) was guided by the mesoscopic domain sizes we determined earlier and several ROIs ( at least 300 - 500 ) were marked across the entire dataset ( at least 15 cells across 2 - 3 independent replicates ) . These ROIs were then used to calculate anisotropy values of either both the probes ( say FR - GPI and LactC2 - ABD ) or anisotropy of a given probe ( FR - GPI ) and it’s corresponding GP values from Laurdan maps . The data was displayed as scatter plots to show the qualitative trend of correlation and compute the Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient . Further details of the imag - ing data analysis can be found in SI . Theory and Simulation . We provide a formal description of the theory of active phase segregation in a multicomponent asymmetric bilayer membrane in the supplementary text and Fig . S2 , which includes the details of the components , the ingredients of the theory ( active contractile stresses , transbi - layer coupling and lateral interactions ) and a detailed account of the methodology used for Kinetic Monte - Carlo Simula - tion . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank members of MR and SM laboratories for stimulating discussions and crit - ical reading of the text . We thank Andrey Klymchenko ( University of Strasbourg ) for the kind gift of Nile Red Dye ( NR12S ) . SS acknowledges fellowship supports from NCBS ( TIFR ) and American Heart Association ( 18POST33990156 ) . AD acknowl - edges support from the Centre for Theoretical Biological Physics and the Discov - ery Cluster at Northeastern University ; AAA was supported by N - PDF fellowship ( SERB - DST ) ; CP and PS acknowledge graduate fellowship from NCBS ( TIFR ) ; MR and AD acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation ( Grant No . 287975 ) . MR and SM are J . C . Bose Fellows ( Department of Science and Technology , Govern - ment of India ) and SM acknowledges support from Human Frontier Science Pro - gram Grant ( RGP0027 / 2012 ) and DBT - Wellcome Trust India Alliance Margadarshi fellowship ( IA / M / 15 / 1 / 502018 ) . Authors acknowledge support from NCBS Cen - tral Imaging and Flow Facility ( CIFF ) and the computing facilities . The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests . Author Contributions : Conceptualisation : SS , AD , SM , MR ; Investigation : SS , CP , AAA , PS ; Formal Analysis : SS , AD , CP ; Theory and Simulations : AD , MR ; Visualisation and Figures : SS , AD ; Writing and revising : SS , AD , MR and SM with inputs from all authors . References 1 . Michael Edidin . Lipids on the frontier : a century of cell - membrane bilayers . Nature reviews . Molecular cell biology , 4 ( May ) : 414 – 418 , 2003 . ISSN 14710072 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1102 . 2 . Daniel Lingwood and Kai Simons . Lipid rafts as a membrane - organizing principle . Science ( NewYork , N . Y . ) , 327 ( 2009 ) : 46 – 50 , 12010 . ISSN0036 - 8075 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1174621 . 3 . Erdinc Sezgin , Ilya Levental , Satyajit Mayor , and Christian Eggeling . The mystery of mem - brane organization : composition , regulation and roles of lipid rafts . Nature Reviews Molec - ular Cell Biology , 18 ( 6 ) : 361 – 374 , 3 2017 . ISSN 1471 - 0072 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 16 . 4 . S Jonathan Singer and Garth L Nicolson . The ﬂuid mosaic model of the structure of cell membranes . Science , 175 ( 4023 ) : 720 – 731 , 1972 . 5 . K Jacobson , E D Sheets , and R Simson . Revisiting the ﬂuid mosaic model of membranes . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) , 268 ( 5216 ) : 1441 – 1442 , 1995 . ISSN 0036 - 8075 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 7770769 . 6 . Kai Simons and Elina Ikonen . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature , 387 ( 6633 ) : 569 – 572 , 6 1997 . ISSN 0028 - 0836 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 42408 . 7 . DebanjanGoswami , KripaGowrishankar , SameeraBilgrami , SubhasriGhosh , RiyaRaghu - pathy , RahulChadda , RamVishwakarma , MadanRao , andSatyajitMayor . Nanoclustersof gpi - anchored proteins are formed by cortical actin - driven activity . Cell , 135 ( 6 ) : 1085 – 1097 , 12 2008 . ISSN 00928674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 11 . 032 . 8 . Kripa Gowrishankar , Subhasri Ghosh , Suvrajit Saha , C . Rumamol , Satyajit Mayor , Madan Rao , Rumamol C . , Satyajit Mayor , and Madan Rao . Active remodeling of cortical actin regulates spatiotemporal organization of cell surface molecules . Cell , 149 ( 6 ) : 1353 – 1367 , 6 2012 . ISSN 00928674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 008 . 9 . Spencer A . Freeman , Anthony Vega , Magdalena Riedl , Richard F . Collins , Phillip P . Os - trowski , Elliot C . Woods , Carolyn R . Bertozzi , Markku I . Tammi , Diane S . Lidke , Pauline Johnson , Satyajit Mayor , Khuloud Jaqaman , and Sergio Grinstein . Transmembrane pickets connectcyto - andpericellularskeletonsformingbarrierstoreceptorengagement . Cell , 172 ( 1 - 2 ) : 305 – 317 . e10 , 1 2018 . ISSN 00928674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 12 . 023 . 10 . Parijat Sil , Nicolas Mateos , Sangeeta Nath , Sonja Buschow , Carlo Manzo , Kenichi GN Suzuki , Takahiro Fujiwara , Akihiro Kusumi , Maria F Garcia - Parajo , and Satyajit Mayor . Dy - namic actin - mediated nano - scale clustering of cd44 regulates its meso - scale organization at the plasma membrane . Molecular biology of the cell , 31 ( 7 ) : 561 – 579 , 2020 . 11 . Rumamol Chandran , Girish Kale , Jean - Marc Philippe , Thomas Lecuit , and Satyajit Mayor . Distinctactin - dependentnanoscaleassembliesunderliethedynamicandhierarchicalorga - nization of e - cadherin . Current Biology , 31 ( 8 ) : 1726 – 1736 , 2021 . 12 . Senthil Arumugam , Stefanie Schmieder , Weria Pezeshkian , Ulrike Becken , Christian Wun - der , Dan Chinnapen , John Hjort Ipsen , Anne K Kenworthy , Wayne Lencer , Satyajit Mayor , et al . Ceramide structure dictates glycosphingolipid nanodomain assembly and function . Nature communications , 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 12 , 2021 . 13 . Maria F Garcia - parajo , Alessandra Cambi , and Ken Jacobson . Nanoclustering as a domi - nant motif in plasma membrane organization . Journal of Cell Science , 127 ( 23 ) : 4995 – 5005 , 12 2014 . ISSN 14779137 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 146340 . 14 . KenJacobson , PingLiu , andB . ChristofferLagerholm . Thelateralorganizationandmobility of plasma membrane components . Cell , 177 ( 4 ) : 806 – 819 , 5 2019 . ISSN 10974172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2019 . 04 . 018 . 15 . SuvrajitSaha , AnupamaAmbikaAnilkumar , andSatyajitMayor . Gpi - anchoredproteinorga - nization and dynamics at the cell surface . Journal of lipid research , 57 ( 2 ) : 159 – 75 , 2 2016 . ISSN 1539 - 7262 . doi : 10 . 1194 / jlr . R062885 . 16 . M Cristina Marchetti , Jean - François Joanny , Sriram Ramaswamy , Tanniemola B Liverpool , Jacques Prost , Madan Rao , and R Aditi Simha . Hydrodynamics of soft active matter . Re - views of Modern Physics , 85 ( 3 ) : 1143 , 2013 . 17 . MadanRaoandSatyajitMayor . Activeorganizationofmembraneconstituentsinlivingcells . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 29 ( 1 ) : 126 – 132 , 2014 . ISSN 18790410 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2014 . 05 . 007 . 18 . Abhishek Chaudhuri , Bhaswati Bhattacharya , Kripa Gowrishankar , Satyajit Mayor , and Madan Rao . Spatiotemporal regulation of chemical reactions by active cytoskeletal remod - eling . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 108 ( 20 ) : 14825 – 14830 , 2011 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1100007108 . 19 . Darius Vasco Köster , Kabir Husain , Elda Iljazi , Abrar Bhat , Peter Bieling , R . Dyche Mullins , Madan Rao , and Satyajit Mayor . Actomyosin dynamics drive local membrane component organization in an in vitro active composite layer . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113 ( 12 ) : E1645 – E1654 , 2016 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1514030113 . 20 . Kripa Gowrishankar and Madan Rao . Nonequilibrium phase transitions , ﬂuctuations and correlations in an active contractile polar ﬂuid . Soft matter , 12 ( 7 ) : 2040 – 6 , 2 2016 . ISSN 1744 - 6848 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c5sm02527c . 21 . Kabir Husain and Madan Rao . Emergent structures in an active polar ﬂuid : Dynamics of shape , scattering , and merger . Physical review letters , 118 ( 7 ) : 078104 , 2017 . 22 . Sk Raj Hossein , Rituparno Mandal , and Madan Rao . Stratiﬁcation , multivalency and turnover of the active cortical machinery are required for steady active contractile ﬂows at the cell surface . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2105 . 11358 , 2021 . 23 . Suvrajit Saha , Il - Hyung Lee , Anirban Polley , Jay T . Groves , Madan Rao , and Satyajit Mayor . Diffusion of gpi - anchored proteins is inﬂuenced by the activity of dynamic cortical actin . Molecular biology of the cell , 26 ( 22 ) : 4033 – 45 , 11 2015 . ISSN 1939 - 4586 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 06 - 0397 . 24 . Amit Das , Abrar Bhat , Rastko Sknepnek , Darius Köster , Satyajit Mayor , and Madan Rao . Stratiﬁcation relieves constraints from steric hindrance in the generation of compact acto - myosin asters at the membrane cortex . Science advances , 6 ( 11 ) : eaay6093 , 2020 . 25 . Pranav Sharma , Rajat Varma , R C Sarasij , Ira , Karine Gousset , G Krishnamoorthy , Madan Rao , and Satyajit Mayor . Nanoscale organization of multiple gpi - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell , 116 ( 4 ) : 577 – 89 , 2 2004 . ISSN 0092 - 8674 . 26 . Rajat Varma and Satyajit Mayor . Gpi - anchored proteins are organized in submicron do - 11 mains at the cell surface . Nature , 394 ( 6695 ) : 798 – 801 , 8 1998 . ISSN 0028 - 0836 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 29563 . 27 . Sarah J Plowman , Cornelia Muncke , Robert G Parton , and John F Hancock . H - ras , k - ras , and inner plasma membrane raft proteins operate in nanoclusters with differential depen - dence on the actin cytoskeleton . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 102 ( 43 ) : 15500 – 15505 , 2005 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0504114102 . 28 . Riya Raghupathy , Anupama Ambika Anilkumar , Anirban Polley , Parvinder Pal Singh , Mahipal Yadav , Charles Johnson , Sharad Suryawanshi , Varma Saikam , Sanghapal D . Sawant , Aniruddha Panda , Zhongwu Guo , Ram A . Vishwakarma , Madan Rao , and Satya - jit Mayor . Transbilayer lipid interactions mediate nanoclustering of lipid - anchored proteins . Cell , 161 ( 3 ) : 581 – 94 , 4 2015 . ISSN 1097 - 4172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 03 . 048 . 29 . AmitDas , AnirbanPolley , andMadanRao . Phasesegregationofpassiveadvectiveparticles in an active medium . Physical Review Letters , 116 ( 6 ) : 068306 , 2 2016 . ISSN 0031 - 9007 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 116 . 068306 . 30 . Ajay Bansal , Amit Das , and Madan Rao . Active segregation dynamics in the living cell . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2111 . 11539 , 2021 . 31 . SubhasriGhosh , SuvrajitSaha , DebanjanGoswami , SameeraBilgrami , andSatyajitMayor . Dynamicimagingofhomo - fretinlivecellsbyﬂuorescenceanisotropymicroscopy . Methods inenzymology , 505 : 291 – 327 , 12012 . ISSN1557 - 7988 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 388448 - 0 . 00024 - 3 . 32 . DylanMOwen , CarlesRentero , AstridMagenau , AhmedAbu - Siniyeh , andKatharinaGaus . Quantitative imaging of membrane lipid order in cells and organisms . Nature Protocols , 7 ( 1 ) : 24 – 35 , 1 2012 . ISSN 1754 - 2189 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2011 . 419 . 33 . Prabuddha Sengupta , Tijana Jovanovic - Talisman , Dunja Skoko , Malte Renz , Sarah L Veatch , and Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz . Probing protein heterogeneity in the plasma membraneusingpalmandpaircorrelationanalysis . NatureMethods , 8 ( 11 ) : 969 – 975 , 2011 . ISSN 1548 - 7091 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1704 . 34 . Suvrajit Saha , Riya Raghupathy , and Satyajit Mayor . Homo - fret imaging highlights the nanoscale organization of cell surface molecules . Methods in molecular biology ( Clifton , N . J . ) , 1251 : 151 – 73 , 2015 . ISSN 1940 - 6029 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 2080 - 8 _ 9 . 35 . Joseph Mathew Kalappurakkal , Anupama Ambika Anilkumar , Chandrima Patra , Thomas S . van Zanten , Michael P Sheetz , and Satyajit Mayor . Integrin mechano - chemical signaling generatesplasmamembranenanodomainsthatpromotecellspreading . Cell , 177 ( 7 ) : 1738 – 1756 . e23 , 6 2019 . ISSN 00928674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2019 . 04 . 037 . 36 . Syed a Rizvi , Erin M Neidt , Jiayue Cui , Zach Feiger , Colleen T Skau , Margaret L Gardel , SergeyaKozmin , andDavidRKovar . Identiﬁcationandcharacterizationofasmallmolecule inhibitorofformin - mediatedactinassembly . Chemistry & biology , 16 ( 11 ) : 1158 – 1168 , 2009 . ISSN 10745521 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chembiol . 2009 . 10 . 006 . 37 . B J Nolen , N Tomasevic , A Russell , D W Pierce , Z Jia , C D McCormick , J Hartman , RSakowicz , andTDPollard . Characterizationoftwoclassesofsmallmoleculeinhibitorsof arp2 / 3complex . Nature , 460 : 1031 – 1034 , 2009 . ISSN0028 - 0836 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature08231 . 38 . Anupama Ambika Anilkumar . Understanding the mechanism of coupling between the outer leaﬂet proteins and the actin cytoskeleton . PhD thesis , SASTRA Deemed University , 2016 . 39 . V . Mueller , C . Ringemann , a . Honigmann , G . Schwarzmann , R . Medda , M . Leutenegger , S . Polyakova , V . N . Belov , S . W . Hell , and C . Eggeling . Sted nanoscopy reveals molecular details of cholesterol - and cytoskeleton - modulated lipid interactions in living cells . Biophys - ical journal , 101 ( 7 ) : 1651 – 60 , 10 2011 . ISSN 1542 - 0086 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 09 . 006 . 40 . Tobias Baumgart , Adam T . Hammond , Prabuddha Sengupta , Samuel T . Hess , David A . Holowka , Barbara A . Baird , and Watt W . Webb . Large - scale ﬂuid / ﬂuid phase separation of proteins and lipids in giant plasma membrane vesicles . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 104 ( 9 ) : 3165 – 3170 , 2 2007 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0611357104 . 41 . Tony Yeung , Gary E . Gilbert , Jialan Shi , John Silvius , Andras Kapus , and Sergio Grinstein . Membrane phosphatidylserine regulates surface charge and protein localization . Science , 319 ( 5860 ) : 210 – 213 , 2008 . ISSN 0036 - 8075 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1152066 . 42 . Katharina Gaus , Soazig Le Lay , Nagaraj Balasubramanian , and Martin a . Schwartz . Integrin - mediated adhesion regulates membrane order . Journal of Cell Biology , 174 ( 5 ) : 725 – 734 , 2006 . ISSN 00219525 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200603034 . 43 . Katharina Gaus , Tobias Zech , and Thomas Harder . Visualizing membrane microdomains by laurdan 2 - photon microscopy . Molecular membrane biology , 23 ( February ) : 41 – 48 , 2006 . ISSN 0968 - 7688 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 09687860500466857 . 44 . Dylan M Owen , David J Williamson , Astrid Magenau , and Katharina Gaus . Sub - resolution lipid domains exist in the plasma membrane and regulate protein diffusion and distribution . Nature communications , 3 : 1256 , 2012 . ISSN 2041 - 1723 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms2273 . 45 . María S . Jaureguiberry , M . Alejandra Tricerri , Susana a . Sanchez , Horacio a . Garda , Gabriela S . Finarelli , Marina C . Gonzalez , and Omar J . Rimoldi . Membrane organization andregulationofcellularcholesterolhomeostasis . JournalofMembraneBiology , 234 : 183 – 194 , 2010 . ISSN 00222631 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00232 - 010 - 9245 - 6 . 46 . Hermann - Josef Kaiser , Daniel Lingwood , Ilya Levental , Julio L Sampaio , Lucie Kalvodova , Lawrence Rajendran , and Kai Simons . Order of lipid phases in model and plasma mem - branes . ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciencesoftheUnitedStatesofAmerica , 106 ( 39 ) : 16645 – 16650 , 2009 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0908987106 . 47 . David B . Iaea and Frederick R . Maxﬁeld . Membrane order in the plasma membrane and endocytic recycling compartment . PLOS ONE , 12 ( 11 ) : e0188041 , 11 2017 . ISSN 1932 - 6203 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0188041 . 48 . Oleksandr A . Kucherak , Sule Oncul , Zeinab Darwich , Dmytro A . Yushchenko , Youri Arntz , Pascal Didier , Yves Mély , and Andrey S . Klymchenko . Switchable nile red - based probe for cholesterol and lipid order at the outer leaﬂet of biomembranes . Journal of the American Chemical Society , 132 ( 13 ) : 4907 – 16 , 4 2010 . ISSN 1520 - 5126 . doi : 10 . 1021 / ja100351w . 49 . Joseph Mathew Kalappurakkal , Parijat Sil , and Satyajit Mayor . Toward a new picture of the living plasma membrane . Protein Science , 29 ( 6 ) : 1355 – 1365 , 2020 . 50 . Gary J Doherty and Harvey T McMahon . Mediation , modulation , and consequences of membrane - cytoskeleton interactions . Annual review of biophysics , 37 ( November ) : 65 – 95 , 2008 . ISSN 1936 - 122X . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 37 . 032807 . 125912 . 51 . Thomas Lecuit and Alpha S . Yap . E - cadherin junctions as active mechanical integrators in tissue dynamics . Nature Cell Biology , 17 ( 5 ) : 533 – 539 , may 2015 . ISSN 1465 - 7392 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3136 . 52 . ThomasSvanZanten , AlessandraCambi , MarjoleinKoopman , BenJoosten , CarlGFigdor , and Maria F Garcia - Parajo . Hotspots of gpi - anchored proteins and integrin nanoclusters function as nucleation sites for cell adhesion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 106 ( 44 ) : 18557 – 18562 , 2009 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0905217106 . 53 . C . Bernardini , S . D . Stoyanov , L . N . Arnaudov , and M . A . Cohen Stuart . Colloids in ﬂatland : a perspective on 2d phase - separated systems , characterisation methods , and lineactant design . Chem . Soc . Rev . , 42 : 2100 – 2129 , 2013 . doi : 10 . 1039 / C2CS35269A . 54 . Robert Brewster and Samuel A Safran . Line active hybrid lipids determine domain size in phase separation of saturated and unsaturated lipids . Biophysical journal , 98 ( 6 ) : L21 – L23 , 2010 . 55 . M . Schick . Membrane heterogeneity : Manifestation of a curvature - induced microemulsion . Phys . Rev . E , 85 : 031902 , Mar 2012 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 85 . 031902 . 56 . M . Schick . Strongly correlated rafts in both leaves of an asymmetric bilayer . The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 122 ( 13 ) : 3251 – 3258 , 2018 . doi : 10 . 1021 / acs . jpcb . 7b08890 . PMID : 29024593 . 57 . Binh - An Truong Quang , Madhav Mani , Olga Markova , Thomas Lecuit , and Pierre - François Lenne . Principles of e - cadherin supramolecular organization in vivo . Current Biology , 23 ( 22 ) : 2197 – 2207 , 11 2013 . ISSN 09609822 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 09 . 015 . 58 . YongdaeShinandCliffordPBrangwynne . Liquidphasecondensationincellphysiologyand disease . Science , 357 ( 6357 ) , 2017 . 59 . Dan Bracha , Mackenzie T Walls , and Clifford P Brangwynne . Probing and engineering liquid - phase organelles . Nature biotechnology , 37 ( 12 ) : 1435 – 1445 , 2019 . 60 . Salman F Banani , Hyun O Lee , Anthony A Hyman , and Michael K Rosen . Biomolecular condensates : organizers of cellular biochemistry . Nature reviews Molecular cell biology , 18 ( 5 ) : 285 – 298 , 2017 . 61 . Christoph A Weber , David Zwicker , Frank Jülicher , and Chiu Fan Lee . Physics of active emulsions . Reports on Progress in Physics , 82 ( 6 ) : 064601 , 2019 . 62 . Natacha Zanin , Christine Viaris de Lesegno , Christophe Lamaze , and Cedric M Blouin . Interferon receptor trafﬁcking and signaling : Journey to the cross roads . Frontiers in Im - munology , 11 : 3512 , 2021 . 63 . Suvrajit Saha , Tamas L . Nagy , and Orion D Weiner . Joining forces : crosstalk between bio - chemical signalling and physical forces orchestrates cellular polarity and dynamics . Philo - sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 373 ( 1747 ) : 20170145 , 5 2018 . ISSN 0962 - 8436 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2017 . 0145 . 64 . Min Wu and Jian Liu . Mechanobiology in cortical waves and oscillations . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 68 : 45 – 54 , feb 2021 . ISSN 09550674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2020 . 08 . 017 . 12 Supplementary Information for Active emulsions in living cell membranes driven by contractile stresses and transbilayer coupling Suvrajit Saha , Amit Das , Chandrima Patra , Anupama Ambika Anilkumar , Parijat Sil , Satyajit Mayor and Madan Rao Supplementary Note 1 : Coarse grained de - scription of a multicomponent asymmetric bilayer driven by PS - actomyosin interaction , active contractile stresses and transbilayer coupling A . Multi - component asymmetric bilayer membrane . A minimal description of the nano - to - meso scale organization of lipids and GPI - AP in the multicomponent asymmetric bilayer , driven by active contractile stresses and transbi - layer coupling requires at least 5 - components , α = 1 , . . . , 5 ( Fig . S2a ) 1 . GPI - AP in the upper - leaflet , 2 . lo - component in the upper - leaflet , collectively com - prising SM , cholesterol , . . . , 3 . PS in the lower - leaflet , together with cholesterol and other long - chain saturated lipids such as PIP2 ( other lo component in Fig . S2a ) , 4 . ld - component in the upper leaflet , collectively com - prising short chain , unsaturated lipids . 5 . ld - component in the lower leaflet , collectively com - prising short chain , unsaturated lipids . In the cases where we compare the organization of GPI - AP with a generic transmembrane protein that can bind to corti - cal actin , we include one more component , α = 6 , 6 . transmembrane protein TMABD straddling both leaflets , In our coarse grained description we represent all molecules as spheres , that reside either on the upper or lower leaflet of the bilayer membrane , or straddling the two leaflets ( parti - tioned according to Rules 1 - 6 above ) . The two leaflets of the bilayer are treated as two parallel 2 - dimensional planes , sep - arated by a distance σ , and lateral dimension L × L . The total number of molecules in the two planes N , is high enough so that there are no large empty spaces in either plane . Components that reside on the same leaflet of the bilayer membrane interact via a Lenard - Jones potential of the form , V ( X αi , X βj ) = ∞ , if r αβij ≤ σ αβ = − J αβ (cid:16) σ αβ / r αβij (cid:17) 6 , if r αβij > σ αβ ( 1 ) where i - th molecule of components α interacts with the j - th molecule of component β , with an attractive interaction strength J αβ , expressed in units of thermal energy k B T ( k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature ) . Here , σ αβ represents the hard - core length scale and r αβij = | X αi − X βj | is the distance between the two molecules . For simplicity , we take σ αβ = σ , for all α , β . Note that with the above ranking of the components , the only cross - term that is nonzero is J 12 > 0 , the rest are 0 . Components that reside on separate leaflets of the bilayer membrane do not have any steric interaction , and only in - teract via an attractive Lenard - Jones potential , V ± ( X αi , X βj ) = − J ± αβ ( σ αβ / r αβij ) 6 ( 2 ) For simplicity , we take σ αβ = σ , for all α , β . With the above ranking of the components , only J ± 13 = J ± 23 > 0 , the rest are 0 . The TMABD being transmembrane has just steric interac - tions with components on either leaflet . B . Active contractile stresses from actomyosin cor - tex . The cortical actomyosin adjoining the lower leaflet of the bilayer applies stochastic contractile stresses on the mem - brane components that bind to it - these are the lower leaflet PS ( α = 3 ) and the transbilayer protein TMABD ( α = 6 ) , with binding affinities given by , K PS and K TM , respec - tively . Following ( 1 – 3 ) we take the statistics of the contractile stresses to be telegraphic - a birth - death process - that is ex - ponentially correlated in time , with a mean lifetime τ . These contractile stresses are strongly correlated over a spatial scale ξ and uncorrelated otherwise . Let us denote as { Ω x a } , the re - gion of radius ξ centred around x a , a = 1 , . . . n , within which the active stresses are nonzero and contractile , Σ ( x , t ) = − Σ 0 ˆ r a , if x ∈ Ω x a = 0 , if x / ∈ Ω x a ( 3 ) where ˆ r a is the unit radial vector from the centre of the do - main Ω x a . We work in an ensemble where the number of such active stress events n are held fixed ( alternatively , we can specify the birth - death rates which fixes the mean ⟨ n ⟩ ) . The coverage of nonzero active stress is A = nπξ 2 / L 2 . 1 Supplementary Note 2 : Dynamics of segre - gation : Kinetic Monte - Carlo Simulation The dynamics of the membrane components , subject to both equilibrium and active forces , are described in terms of a Master equation for the time evolution of the probability dis - tribution , P ( { X αi } , { Ω x a } , t ) . We solve the Master equation using a kinetic Monte Carlo approach , where we specify the updates for the positions { X αi } of the membrane components and placement { Ω x a } of the active stress events . For numerical convenience , the membrane components on the two planes are restricted to lie on a square lattice with lat - tice spacing σ ( the square lattice in the two planes are in com - plete registry ) . The configuration in each plane is updated by attempting an exchange of the positions of any chosen pair of neighbouring particles , { X αi } , { X βj } . These position ex - changes are determined both by equilibrium pair - potentials ( Eqs . 1 , 2 ) and by forces arising from the local contractile stress if the particles ( PS and TMABD ) are in the region { Ω x a } ( Eq . 3 ) . The details of the transition rates associated with the ex - change moves are described below and in Fig . 1b . Note that one time step of this kinetic Monte - Carlo scheme , ∆ t is given by N attempts at position exchanges ( N is the total number of particles in the two planes ) . We choose ∆ t , so that σ 2 / ( 4∆ t ) is the typical diffusion coefficient of a protein on the mem - brane . Every lattice site on the upper plane is occupied by one of the components α = 1 , 2 , 4 , similarly every lattice site on the lower plane is occupied by one of α = 3 , 5 . The transmem - brane protein α = 6 , when included , will straddle both the planes . A . Equilibrium exchange moves . Choosing a neighbour - ing particle pair in the same plane - i ( of component α ) and j ( of component β ) - with uniform probability , we attempt an exchange with a probability , ω = 1 , if ∆ E ≤ 0 = e − ∆ E / k B T , if ∆ E > 0 ( 4 ) where ∆ E is the difference in energy before and after the exchange , and is obtained from the inter - particle potentials Eqs . 1 , 2 . This is the usual Metropolis transition probability and obeys detailed balance ( 4 ) . B . Active advection moves . This applies only to PS ( α = 3 ) and TMABD ( α = 6 ) when included . When these par - ticles are within the contractile regions Ω x a and bound to it with affinities , K PS and K TM , respectively , they move pref - erentially towards the centre x a with a radial velocity pro - portional to Σ 0 ( Eq . 3 ) , by attempting a series of exchange moves . This detailed balance violating move is shown in Fig . S2b - for details of the implementation see ( 3 ) . C . Choice of Parameters and simulation units . In the simulations we vary the parameters : ( i ) total coverage of the contractile regions where active stress is nonzero , A ; ( ii ) life time of the active stress events τ ; ( iii ) binding affinities , K PS and K TM ; and ( iv ) transbilayer coupling tuned via J 23 . The rest of the parameters of the model , such as overall compo - sition of the components and temperature T , are held fixed . The qualitative results we obtain are independent of these pa - rameters across a large range . In our simulations , the upper - leaflet is populated with 11 . 1 % concentration of GPI - AP and rest by equal amounts of lo and ld components . In the lower leaflet , we have 22 . 2 % occupied by PS and other lo compo - nents and the rest by the ld component . The TMABD con - centration , when present , is kept fixed at 11 . 1 % . This com - position approximates the observed composition in a typical patch of membrane in wild - type CHO cells ( 5 ) . In our simulations , the interaction energy scale between lo components sets the scale of energy . In these units , the sim - ulations are done at T = 1 . 05 T c ( i . e . T > T c ) where T c is the critical phase segregation temperature of the lo − ld mix - ture ( 3 ) . We set J 33 = 0 . 5 k B T so that PS does not phase segregate in the lower leaflet . In addition , we keep the mutual attraction of GPI - AP and TMABD’s small with J 11 = J 66 = 0 . 15 k B T to avoid any spontaneous clustering . We empha - size that our choice of relative concentration and temperature is not unique and the results hold for a wide range of relative concentrations and temperatures above T c ( 6 ) . To express the results of our simulation in physical units , we denote every length scale in our simulation in units of σ = 10 nm , a typical molecular scale . This gives us the spa - tial scale of contractile stress ξ = 40 nm and the lateral size of each bilayer patch L = 600 nm . We fix the unit of time in our simulations , using a molecular diffusion coefficient of D ≈ 1 µ m 2 s − 1 ( 7 ) , This corresponds to a Monte - Carlo timestep ∆ t = 0 . 025 ms which is also the time taken by any molecule to travel a distance σ at the cell surface . In these units , a typical simulation run of 10 6 MC steps corresponds to 25 s . The local order parameter ϕ is calculated on a two - dimensional grid with spacing 0 . 03 µ m overlaid on the bi - layer patch . The simulations are performed with a fixed value of the active radial velocity , implemented as an attempt prob - ability , Σ 0 = 0 . 8 ( illustrated in Fig . S2b ) . Majority of our simulations with activity are performed with A = 30 % and τ = 1600 MC steps = 0 . 04 s , unless mentioned otherwise . Supplementary Note 3 : Details of Experimen - tal Methods A . Plasmids , cell culture and labeling . The following constructs were used ( with references ) : 1 ) Human GPI - anchored Folate Receptor ( FR - GPI ) described in detail ear - lier ( 8 ) . 2 ) EGFP - GPI , a chimeric model GPI - AP , where the EGFP was fused to the GPI signal from FR - GPI ( 9 ) . 3 ) TMABD / ABD ∗ , a chimeric model transmembrane actin ( / ABD ∗ non ) binding probe , where the transmembrane form of the folate receptor is fused to a cytosolic actin - binding do - main from Ezrin ( c - terminal Ezrin ABD ) or its mutant non - binding counterpart ( 2 ) . 4 ) LactC2 - Ez - YFP , a fusion con - struct of LactC2 domain with the actin - filament binding do - main of Ezrin and YFP ( 10 ) . 2 B Treatments and Perturbation Chinese hamster Ovary ( CHO ) cell lines stably expressing either GPI - anchored GFP ( EGFP - GPI , GPI signal from FR - GPI ) , Folate receptor ( FR - GPI ) and transmembrane ( FR - TMABD / ∗ ) constructs were maintained in Ham’s F12 media ( Hi Media , India ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS , Gibco , USA ) . PSA3 cell line for phosphatidylserine ( PS ) perturbation experiments were maintained in Ham’s F12 medium in the presence of 10mM ethanolamine and 10 % FBS . Cells expressing GFP - tagged membrane proteins were treated with 75 µ g / ml of cycloheximide for 3 hrs at 37 ◦ C to clear Golgi associated fluorescence before imag - ing ( 11 ) . FR - GPI and FR - TMABD expressing cells were cultured in folic - acid free Ham’s F - 12 and supplemented with 10 % dialyzed FBS to allow efficient labeling with fluorescent analogs of folic acid . N α - pteroyl - N ε - BodipyTMR - L - lysine ( PLB - TMR ) was used to label the cell surface at saturating concentration ( ∼ 400 nM ) on ice for 1 hr or for 5 mins at 37 ◦ C . Transient transfections reported here were carried out ∼ 12 − 16 hours before preparing them for the experiments . The cells were transferred to pre - warmed buffers ( 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM HEPES , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 2 - 7 . 4 also referred to as Buffer M1 ; supple - ment with 2mg / ml glucose , M1 - Glc ) before placing on a temperature - controlled microscope stage and imaged within 30 min ( 7 , 12 ) . B . Treatments and Perturbation . Cholesterol depletions were carried out by treating the cells with 10 mM M β CD at 37 ◦ C for 30 mins , followed by exogenous labeling of fluores - cent probes . Cells were depleted of sphingomyelin by grow - ing cells in culture media containing 40 µ g / ml of Fumonisin B1 ( FB1 ) for 72 hrs at usual culture conditions leading to 40 - 50 % reduction in sphingolipids levels ( 13 ) . PS depletion ( PS - condition ) was carried out by growing PSA3 cells in media devoid of ethanolamine ( using 10 % dialysed FBS ) for 36 - 48 hrs ( 10 ) . PS levels were restored by growing them in cell cul - ture media with normal serum ( PS + condition ) . Perturbation of formin activity was carried out by pre - treatment of cells with the formin inhibitor SMIFH2 at 25 µ M for 2hr at 37 ◦ C . Arp2 / 3 activity was perturbed by treating cells with CK - 666 at 50 µ M for 2 hr at 37 o C . Unless otherwise mentioned , in - hibitors with reversible effects were maintained in the buffer during the imaging session . C . Steady - state anisotropy measurements . Cells singly labeled with PLB - TMR or expressing EGFP - GPI or dually labeled with PLB - TMR and EGFP were imaged using a spinning disk confocal system ( Andor Technologies , Belfast , Northern Ireland ) custom adapted for fluorescence emission anisotropy ( 14 ) . The labeled cells were excited with 488 / 561 nm laser illumination after which parallel and perpendicu - lar polarized fluorescence emission was resolved by pass - ing the emission tight band - pass emission filters , 500 - 550 nm ( for imaging GFP ) and 570 - 610 nm ( for imaging PLB ) followed by a nanowire polarizing beam splitter and col - lected using two EMCCD detectors . Dual color anisotropy imaging was carried out on the same setup by sequential imaging of cells to avoid spectral crosstalk and signal bleed - through . Image processing , analysis , and quantification were performed using Metamorph 7 . 0 ( Molecular Devices Corpo - ration , CA , USA ) , MATLAB ( Mathworks , USA ) and Image J ( NIH , USA ) as described earlier ( 14 , 15 ) . D . Membrane ordering measurements . D . 1 . Laurdan General Polarisation ( GP ) . Laurdan ( 6 - lauryl - 2 - dimethylamino - napthalene ) is a polarity sensitive probe to estimate membrane ordering ( or fluidity ) . Laurdan general - ized polarization ( GP ) , a ratiometric measurement based on the fluorescence intensity collected at the two spectral chan - nels allows a quantitative estimation of the membrane order . Laurdan imaging and GP measurements was implemented on the confocal spinning disk anisotropy platform to monitor the protein clustering and membrane order at high spatial resolu - tion . Imaging Laurdan on a confocal spinning disk also of - fer other unique advantages like comparatively lesser photo - bleaching and ability to measure GP close to the basal mem - brane plane and avoid contamination from internal pools of Laurdan . Co - imaging of Laurdan GP and anisotropy necessi - tated some modifications to existing protocols of Laurdan la - beling and imaging ( 16 ) . Laurdan dye stocks ( 10 mM ) were prepared in DMSO and stored in an airtight and lightproof clean glass vial . CHO cells expressing FR - GPI and TMABD were plated on clean glass coverslip dishes , grown in pres - ence of dialyzed serum ( for folate analog binding ) , and grown for 2 days before imaging was done . The dishes were washed twice gently with M1 - glucose buffer before the central well with cells was incubated with labeling mix containing both Laurdan ( at 10 µ M ) and folate analog PLB ( 400 nM ) at 37 ◦ C for 5 mins . This allows quick labeling of cell - surface and prevents the buildup of internal pools of Laurdan associated with labeling Laurdan at 37 ◦ C for 30 mins ( the usual stain - ing protocol for cells ) . Post - labeling , the dishes were washed thoroughly to reduce overall background fluorescence in im - ages . Laurdan labeled samples were excited using 405 nm laser line and fluorescence was recorded at the two spectral channels 410 - 460 nm ( Ch1 ) and 470 - 530 nm ( Ch2 ) . How - ever , co - imaging of Laurdan along with anisotropy imaging requires placing the polarizing beam splitter at the secondary dichroic position . This splits up the emission into two orthog - onal polarization components for both the channels . The total intensities for both Ch1 and Ch2 was obtained using similar image analysis procedure used for processing anisotropy im - ages . The background intensities were estimated from M1 - Glucose buffer imaged under similar imaging condition as the cells . Additionally , a dilute sample of Laurdan in DMSO ( ∼ 1 µ M ) was also imaged at similar conditions to determine the Laurdan g - factor as described earlier ( 16 , 17 ) . The Lau - rdan GP and g - factor was computed using the following for - mula GP = I Ch 1 − G . I Ch 2 I Ch 1 + G . I Ch 2 where G is the g - factor calculated using , G = GP ref + GP ref . GP mes − GP mes − 1 GP mes + GP ref . GP mes − GP ref − 1 3 Here GP mes is the estimated GP value of the Laurdan in DMSO ( the g - factor sample ) . GP ref is a reference value for Laurdan GP which is conventionally fixed at 0 . 207 ( 16 ) . The empirically estimated g - factor of 0 . 5 was uniformly applied across all experiments to calculate Laurdan GP and obtain spatial Laurdan GP maps of membrane order . Laurdan imag - ing was carried out at room temperature as at 37 ◦ C we saw a rapid equilibration of Laurdan to internal membrane pools and its loss from cell surface ( Fig . S5 A , B ) . The internaliza - tion of Laurdan ( Fig . S5 A , C and higher temperature ( 37 ◦ C compared to 22 ◦ C ; Fig . S5 B , D ) both led to lowering of the Laurdan GP values ( and decrease in dynamic range ) as reported earlier ( 18 , 19 ) and verified independently by us ( Fig . S5 A - D ) . D . 2 . NR12S Blue / Red Ratiometric Imaging . The cells ( un - treated or post - perturbation ) were labelled with 1 µ M NR12S ( 20 , 21 ) in M1 - Glc for 5 mins at 37 ◦ C , washed gen - tly and imaged in M1 - Glc . Cells were imaged on a spin - ning disk confocal microscope with 100X objective ( repre - sentative images in Fig . S6 A ) , illuminated with 561 nm ex - citation laser and emission output was collected using band - pass filters collecting light in the two spectral windows - 565 - 585 nm emission filter ( blue emission ) and 593 - 643 nm ( red emission ) . The background intensities were estimated from M1 - Glc buffer imaged under similar imaging condition as the cells and images were background corrected before comput - ing and quantification of Blue / Red ratiometric images . E . Imaging and data analysis . E . 1 . Quantification of domain abundance and size . We have established a systematic and consistent approach in quanti - fying the features of mesoscale domains and extended the same to study mesoscale organisation of the different cell surface probes ( in control and upon perturbations ) reported here . Multiple ( ≥ 20 ) 6 - 10 µ m 2 patches were selected from the anisotropy maps of probes ( representative image in Fig . S3A ) from multiple cells ( ∼ 10 − 15 ) pooled across in - dependent replicates were pooled to generate a typical pixel anisotropy distribution for each probe ( or any given condi - tion ) . Anisotropy thresholds ( typically 1 standard deviation less than peak of the distribution ; black line in Fig . S3A for FR - GPI ) was set to binarize the maps to show only those pix - els with anisotropies below this threshold ( Fig . S3A ) . These pixels are highly enriched in nanoclusters and a criterion of contiguous set of pixels ( ≥ 5 pixels , 1 pixel : 100 nm or 0 . 01 µm 2 ) was used to define individual mesoscopic domains . The same cut - off that was set for control condition was used for perturbation to compare both . The domains maps were quantified using ‘Analyze particles’ routines of ImageJ to ex - tract the relative abundance ( or domain area fraction ) and av - erage domain area ( in pixel , area : 0 . 01 µ m 2 ) for each anal - ysed patch of the membrane . The data was plotted as notched box - plot and statistically compared using appropriate para - metric or non - parametric statistical tests . E . 2 . Analysis of domain size distribution . We binarize the thresholded segregation order parameter matrix ( simulation ) and density profile matrix ( experiment ) . The thresholds se - lected are shown in Supplemental Table 1 . We use MATLAB function bwlabel to detect all connected objects ( domain ) and count the number of pixels in a given object which is denoted as the domain area s . For the experimental data we have con - sidered all objects with s ≥ 3 . This procedure is repeated for many simulated realizations of the segregation order parame - ter matrix or density profile matrix to generate the probability density function of domain area P ( s ) . Following analysis described in ( 3 ) , we fit the domain area distribution to P ( s ) ∼ s − θ exp [ − s / s 0 ] , with power law exponent θ that is exponentially cutoff at a scale s 0 . Similar domain distributions have been used in other contexts of activity ( 22 , 23 ) . We fit the simula - tion / experimental P ( s ) to the above form using a custom MATLAB program to implement a Monte - Carlo method to minimize the residual sum of squares ( 24 ) . E . 3 . Quantitative relation between clustering ( of two probes ) and with lipid order . We used the following approach to an - alyze the mesoscale sorting behavior of probes . The two color spatial anisotropy maps of several ( ≥ 20 ) 6 - 10 µ m square membrane patches allowed us to manually identify and compute the anisotropy values of a very small patch of membrane ( typically of similar size as the domains of the GPI - AP or TMABD probes ) . For most cases , we have in - tegrated pixel anisotropies of 4 × 4 pixel ROI boxes ( pixel size : 100 nm ) to calculate the overall average anisotropy of the cluster - enriched and cluster - deficient hotspots on the cells . Anisotropy was computed from ROIs marking the cluster - enriched ( hence low anisotropy ) and cluster - sparse ( high anisotropy ) regions from the anisotropy maps obtained for one protein ( say FR - GPI in the case of Fig . S4 A - C ) . The same sets of regions were then transferred to the complemen - tary EGFP - GPI spatial anisotropy map from the same cell , and the anisotropy values of the domains were calculated . Several such ROIs ( at least 500 ) were quantified for both pro - teins from multiple cells ( n = 15 - 20 cells across independent replicates ) and the data was pooled to build a scatter plot to show the trend in the data and compute the Pearson’s corre - lation coefficient ( R = 0 . 55 , p < 0 . 01 between FR - and EGFP - GPI ; Fig . S3C ) for entire dataset . Next we check the cor - relation coefficient obtained for each individual probe across two sequential frames of acquisition . A high correlation co - efficient ( see GFP - GPI T1 : T2 and FR - GPI T1 : T2 in Fig . S4 D , E ) indicates there is significant preservation of domains be - tween two frames and a low correlation values observed be - tween two proteins is not due to the dissolution of the meso - scopic domains over the timescale of imaging ( ∼ 2 sec ) . We translated the same approach to analyse the correlation be - tween the values of anisotropy and laurdan GP of domains . First , cluster rich ( and poor ) domains were identified from the anisotropy maps of the membrane probe ( say FR - GPI or TMABD ) and the same pool of ROI were transferred to the corresponding Laurdan GP map of the same membrane patch 4 E Imaging and data analysis and GP values were extracted ( Fig . 4C , S5F ) . The data is dis - played as a scatter plot of GP v / s anisotropy to qualitatively observe the trend and quantify the Pearson’s Correlation co - efficient ( with statistical significance ) . References 1 . Abhishek Chaudhuri , Bhaswati Bhattacharya , Kripa Gowrishankar , Satyajit Mayor , and Madan Rao . Spatiotemporal regulation of chemical reactions by active cytoskeletal remod - eling . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 108 ( 20 ) : 14825 – 14830 , 2011 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1100007108 . 2 . Kripa Gowrishankar , Subhasri Ghosh , Suvrajit Saha , C . Rumamol , Satyajit Mayor , Madan Rao , Rumamol C . , Satyajit Mayor , and Madan Rao . Active remodeling of cortical actin regulates spatiotemporal organization of cell surface molecules . Cell , 149 ( 6 ) : 1353 – 1367 , 6 2012 . ISSN 00928674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 008 . 3 . AmitDas , AnirbanPolley , andMadanRao . Phasesegregationofpassiveadvectiveparticles in an active medium . Physical Review Letters , 116 ( 6 ) : 068306 , 2 2016 . ISSN 0031 - 9007 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 116 . 068306 . 4 . DavidP . LandauandKurtBinder . AGuidetoMonteCarloSimulationsinStatisticalPhysics . 2005 . doi : 10 . 1017 / cbo9780511614460 . 5 . JH Lorent , KR Levental , L Ganesan , G Rivera - Longsworth , E Sezgin , M Doktorova , E Ly - man , and I Levental . Plasma membranes are asymmetric in lipid unsaturation , packing and protein shape . Nature chemical biology , 16 ( 6 ) : 644 – 652 , 2020 . 6 . Ajay Bansal , Amit Das , and Madan Rao . Active segregation dynamics in the living cell . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2111 . 11539 , 2021 . 7 . Suvrajit Saha , Il - Hyung Lee , Anirban Polley , Jay T . Groves , Madan Rao , and Satyajit Mayor . Diffusion of gpi - anchored proteins is influenced by the activity of dynamic cortical actin . Molecular biology of the cell , 26 ( 22 ) : 4033 – 45 , 11 2015 . ISSN 1939 - 4586 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 06 - 0397 . 8 . Rajat Varma and Satyajit Mayor . Gpi - anchored proteins are organized in submicron do - mains at the cell surface . Nature , 394 ( 6695 ) : 798 – 801 , 8 1998 . ISSN 0028 - 0836 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 29563 . 9 . Pranav Sharma , Rajat Varma , R C Sarasij , Ira , Karine Gousset , G Krishnamoorthy , Madan Rao , and Satyajit Mayor . Nanoscale organization of multiple gpi - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell , 116 ( 4 ) : 577 – 89 , 2 2004 . ISSN 0092 - 8674 . 10 . Riya Raghupathy , Anupama Ambika Anilkumar , Anirban Polley , Parvinder Pal Singh , Mahipal Yadav , Charles Johnson , Sharad Suryawanshi , Varma Saikam , Sanghapal D . Sawant , Aniruddha Panda , Zhongwu Guo , Ram A . Vishwakarma , Madan Rao , and Satya - jit Mayor . Transbilayer lipid interactions mediate nanoclustering of lipid - anchored proteins . Cell , 161 ( 3 ) : 581 – 94 , 4 2015 . ISSN 1097 - 4172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 03 . 048 . 11 . Shefali Sabharanjak , Pranav Sharma , Robert G . Parton , and Satyajit Mayor . Gpi - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Developmental Cell , 2 ( 4 ) : 411 – 423 , 2002 . ISSN 15345807 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 02 ) 00145 - 4 . 12 . Il - HyungLee , SuvrajitSaha , AnirbanPolley , HectorHuang , SatyajitMayor , MadanRao , and JayT . Groves . Livecellplasmamembranesdonotexhibitamiscibilityphasetransitionover a wide range of temperatures . The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 119 ( 12 ) : 4450 – 4459 , 3 2015 . ISSN 1520 - 6106 . doi : 10 . 1021 / jp512839q . 13 . Samit Chatterjee , Elizabeth R . Smith , Kentaro Hanada , Victoria L . Stevens , and Satyajit Mayor . Gpi anchoring leads to sphingolipid - dependent retention of endocytosed proteins in therecyclingendosomalcompartment . EMBOJ , 20 ( 7 ) : 1583 – 1592 , 2001 . ISSN02614189 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / 20 . 7 . 1583 . 14 . SubhasriGhosh , SuvrajitSaha , DebanjanGoswami , SameeraBilgrami , andSatyajitMayor . Dynamicimagingofhomo - fretinlivecellsbyfluorescenceanisotropymicroscopy . Methods inenzymology , 505 : 291 – 327 , 12012 . ISSN1557 - 7988 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 388448 - 0 . 00024 - 3 . 15 . Suvrajit Saha , Riya Raghupathy , and Satyajit Mayor . Homo - fret imaging highlights the nanoscale organization of cell surface molecules . Methods in molecular biology ( Clifton , N . J . ) , 1251 : 151 – 73 , 2015 . ISSN 1940 - 6029 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 2080 - 8 _ 9 . 16 . DylanMOwen , CarlesRentero , AstridMagenau , AhmedAbu - Siniyeh , andKatharinaGaus . Quantitative imaging of membrane lipid order in cells and organisms . Nature Protocols , 7 ( 1 ) : 24 – 35 , 1 2012 . ISSN 1754 - 2189 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2011 . 419 . 17 . Katharina Gaus , Tobias Zech , and Thomas Harder . Visualizing membrane microdomains by laurdan 2 - photon microscopy . Molecular membrane biology , 23 ( February ) : 41 – 48 , 2006 . ISSN 0968 - 7688 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 09687860500466857 . 18 . Katharina Gaus , Enrico Gratton , Eleanor P W Kable , Allan S Jones , Ingrid Gelissen , Leonard Kritharides , and Wendy Jessup . Visualizing lipid structure and raft domains in living cells with two - photon microscopy . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences of the United States of America , 100 ( 26 ) : 15554 – 9 , 12 2003 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2534386100 . 19 . María S . Jaureguiberry , M . Alejandra Tricerri , Susana a . Sanchez , Horacio a . Garda , Gabriela S . Finarelli , Marina C . Gonzalez , and Omar J . Rimoldi . Membrane organization andregulationofcellularcholesterolhomeostasis . JournalofMembraneBiology , 234 : 183 – 194 , 2010 . ISSN 00222631 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00232 - 010 - 9245 - 6 . 20 . David B . Iaea and Frederick R . Maxfield . Membrane order in the plasma membrane and endocytic recycling compartment . PLOS ONE , 12 ( 11 ) : e0188041 , 11 2017 . ISSN 1932 - 6203 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0188041 . 21 . Oleksandr A . Kucherak , Sule Oncul , Zeinab Darwich , Dmytro A . Yushchenko , Youri Arntz , Pascal Didier , Yves Mély , and Andrey S . Klymchenko . Switchable nile red - based probe for cholesterol and lipid order at the outer leaflet of biomembranes . Journal of the American Chemical Society , 132 ( 13 ) : 4907 – 16 , 4 2010 . ISSN 1520 - 5126 . doi : 10 . 1021 / ja100351w . 22 . Binh - An Truong Quang , Madhav Mani , Olga Markova , Thomas Lecuit , and Pierre - François Lenne . Principles of e - cadherin supramolecular organization in vivo . Current Biology , 23 ( 22 ) : 2197 – 2207 , 11 2013 . ISSN 09609822 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 09 . 015 . 23 . H P Zhang , Avraham Be’er , E - L Florin , and Harry L Swinney . Collective motion and density fluctuations in bacterial colonies . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 107 ( 31 ) : 13626 – 30 , 8 2010 . ISSN 1091 - 6490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1001651107 . 24 . Norman R Draper and Harry Smith . Applied regression analysis , volume 326 . John Wiley & Sons , 1998 . 5 Fig . S1 . Lipid perturbations abrogate clustering of GPI - AP but not TMABD ( Related to Figure 1 ) . ( A , B ) Representative confocal spinning disk images shows the intensity and anisotropy maps of CHO cells expressing GFP - GPI ( A ) or FR - TMABD labelled with PLB ( B ) in untreated ( Control ) , depleted of cholesterol ( MBCD ) or sphingolipids ( Fumonisin B1 ; FB1 ) . Quantifications of these experiments are presented in Figure 1 F , G . LUT bar indicates the anisotropy scale . Scale bar : 10 µ m . 6 E Imaging and data analysis Fig . S2 . Kinetic Monte Carlo simulation model showing active segregation in a multicomponent , asymmetric bilayer . ( a ) Schematic of the multicomponent asymmetric bilayer showing various components . ( b ) Kinetic Monte - Carlo simulation moves : Left – equilibrium moves governed by Kawasaki exchange dynamics ( Eq . 4 ) . Right – Active moves on PS and TMABD components when they are within the contractile regions Ω x a and bound to it with a rate K PS and K TM , respectively . The active moves result in preferentially advecting the particles towards the centre x a with a radial velocity proportional to the contractile stress Σ 0 ( Eq . 3 ) . These moves violate detailed balance . Details of implementation in ( 3 ) . ( c ) Probability density functions of lo - ld segregation parameter ϕ with increasing K PS when TMABD is included in the simulation . We take K TM = 0 . 6 . ( d ) Spatial profile of number density of TMABD calculated following the same protocol as in Fig . 2b or 2e , when PS - actin interaction is switched off ( K PS = 0 ) . Scale bar 0 . 1 µ m . ( e ) Time averaged profiles in the presence of TMABD , of ϕ ( top row ) , number densities of GPI - AP ( second row ) , PS ( third row ) and TMABD ( bottom row ) , at three different values of actin binding affinity of PS . 7 Fig . S3 . Measuring spatial features of mesoscale domains from high - resolution anisotropy maps and the effect of perturbations ( related to Figure 3 ) . A ) Analysis approach to measure area fraction and size distribution from anisotropy maps . To generate spatial maps of cluster rich regions ROIs sized 6 µm × 6 µm ( left panel ) taken from high resolution PLB - labeled FR - GPI anisotropy image , the pixel anisotropy distribution for the entire dataset ( middle panel ; from at least 30 - 40 patches derived from 10 - 20 cells ) was used to set an anisotropy cut - off ( mean - standard deviation ; dashed line in plot ) . Anisotropy maps were thresholded to obtain binary domain maps ( right panel ) consisted only of pixels enriched in clusters . We next quantify the abundance ( area fraction ) and size distribution of individual domains at least 5 pixels in size ( red circles on binary maps ; > 5 pixel area ; pixel : 0 . 01 um2 ) . ( B - D ) Representative anisotropy and domain maps of GPI - AP proteins ( GFP - GPI or PLB - labelled FR - GPI ) from 6 µ m x 6 µ m boxes ( B ) show very similar characteristics of mesoscopic domain abundance ( notched box plots in C ; note GFP - GPI data used for comparison is the same as depicted in Figure 3A ) and distribution of domain area ( D ) ; solid lines represent the corresponding fits to a model distribution , As − θ exp [ − s / s 0 ] . ( E - G ) Representative anisotropy and domains maps ( E ; 6 µm × 6 µm boxes ) of PLB - labelked FR - TMABD in untreated ( Control ) or depleted of cholesterol ( MBCD ) or sphingomyelin ( FB1 ) show that both domain abundance ( notched box plots in F ) and distribution of domain area ( G ) are insensitive to these perturbations . Fits to domain distribution yield a characteristic domain area of 0 . 1 µm 2 which translates to a domain diameter of 360 nm for TMABD ( Control , dashed line on plot G ) . ( H - J ) Representative anisotropy and domain maps ( H ; 10 µm × 10 µm boxes ) of PLB - labeled FR - TMABD and actin binding mutant version , PLB - TMABD * show that loss of actin interaction capacity results in a significant decrease in domain area fraction ( notched box plots in I , two - sample t - test p < 0 . 001 ) and a marked shift towards smaller domain sizes ( J ; dashed line on J shows characteristic domain diameter of ∼ 365 nm ) . ( K - M ) Representative anisotropy and domain maps ( K ; 6 µm × 6 µm boxes ) for PLB - labeled FR - TMABD in untreated ( Control ) or cells treated with inhibitors of formins ( SMI ; red ) and Arp2 / 3 ( CK666 ; blue ) show that formin inhibition but not Arp2 / 3 led to significant drop in TMABD domain abundance ( notched box plots in L ; p < 0 . 001 by one - way ANOVA with Tukey means comparison ) and a shift towards smaller domain sizes ( M ; dashed line on M indicates domain diameter of ∼ 375 nm ) . The dataset presented here is pooled from multiple independent replicates ( 2 - 3 ) comprising of at - least n = 20 - 50 anisotropy patches collected from 10 – 20 cells for each condition in each replicate 8 E Imaging and data analysis Fig . S4 . Correlation of properties of mesoscopic regions ( Related to Figure 4 ) . A - E ) CHO cells stably expressing FR - GPI ( and labeled with PLB ; A , i ) and transiently expressing GFP - GPI ( A , ii ) were imaged using a spinning disk confocal microscope to generate representative intensity and anisotropy maps of PLB - labeled FR - GPI ( A i’ ) and GFP - GPI ( A ii’ ) . The expression of two GPI - APs in the same membrane at comparable levels dilutes the nanoclusters of the individual proteins . To select the region of relative expression levels where the contribution of Homo - FRET dilution is minimal , the anisotropy of PLB - labeled FR - GPI is plotted against GFP / PLB ratio ( B ) . The blue - band ( B ) outlines the regime where the two probes form co - clusters , and was used to cells co - expressing appropriate levels of FR - GPI and GFP - GPI to probe the colocalisation of cluster rich domains of GFP - GPI and FR - GPI . A 6 µm × 6 µm patch ( right panel ) from the anisotropy maps of FR - GPI ( top ) and EGFP - GPI ( bottom ) was outlined from the same cell ( dashed box in A i’and ii’ ; right panel ) . Mean anisotropy values quantified from corresponding ROIs ( 4x4 pixels , dashed boxes ) on both images were used to generate scatter plots of anisotropy values of PLB - labeled FR - GPI and GFP - GPI ( C ) . Colocalisation of the anisotropy values of these two probes is indicated by a significant positive correlation correlation ( Pearson’s Correlation coefficient of 0 . 55 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Scatter plot of anisotropy from a similar analysis of two sequential frames of the same GPI - AP probe ; PLB - labeled FR - GPI ( D ) and GFP - GPI ( E ) shows a high degree of correlation , indicating a preservation of domain maps over the timescale of the sequential multi - colour imaging routine ( 2 - 3 sec ) . F ) YFP - LactC2 - ABD , a synthetic linker construct that links PS ( via the LacC2 domain ) to cortical actin ( via the ABD from Ezrin ) was expressed in CHO cells and subject to photobleaching while collecting images for anisotropy imaging . Photobleaching led to a gradual increase in anisotropy ( + / - sd ) ( data from n = 11 cells ) , consistent with YFP - LactC2 - ABD exhibiting significant homo - FRET as a consequence of its nanoscale clustering . G ) Table shows Pearson’s correlation coefficient values taken from scatter plot of anisotropy data from a anisotropy correlation analysis ( analyzed as in D , E ) of two sequential frames of YFP - LactC2 - ABD or PLB - labeled FR - TMABD . Note these are also well correlated across two consecutive frames of imaging the same fluorescent molecule . ( H , I ) Representative TIRF images of fluorescence intensity and anisotropy ( H ) of cells expressing FR - TMABD ( labeled with PLB ; upper panel in H ) and transiently transfected with YFP LactC2 - ABD ( lower panel in H ) . Identical 7 µm × 7 µm sized patches ( black boxes in H , middle panel ) chosen from the anisotropy images of FR - TM - ABD and LactC2 - Ez and shown as Analysis ROI ( iii , iii’ ) . Scatter plots ( I ) exhibit significant positive correlation ( R = 0 . 28 , p < 0 . 01 ) between the anisotropy of small mesoscale domain sized ROIs ( 400 × 400 nm ) drawn around cluster - rich and cluster - poor hotspots of FR - TMABD and LactC2 - ABD ( H ; iii , iii’ , dashed boxes ) . Scatter plot ( I ) report on 600 ROIs collected from cells ( n = 21 ) pooled from two independent replicates . Scale bar for images ( A , H ) : 10 µm . 9 Fig . S5 . Membrane order measurements in living cells using Laurdan ( Related to Figure 4 ) . ( A , B ) Laurdan intensity and GP image ( A ) of same cell ( also represented in Fig . 5B ) at the basal surface ( cell surface ) and an internal plane ( intracellular ) . Internal membrane pools show distinct Laurdan staining , but register significantly lower GP values , as shown in graph ( B ) of the data derived from the dashed line in the laurdan GP image . The dynamic ranges of Laurdan GP reported in Figures 5 clearly indicate that the measurements are specific to the cell - surface pool and hence faithfully report on cell membrane lipid ordering . ( C , D ) Laurdan GP distribution is extremely sensitive to temperature of labelling and measurement . At 22 ◦ C , Laurdan intensity images shows more prominent cell membrane specific labeling ( C i ) but 37 ◦ C , it is internalized rapidly and enters the cell , as evident here ( C ii ) . Moreover , the Laurdan GP values reduce drastically at higher temperatures ( C ii’ ) as quantified in box - plot ( D ) . Therefore the Laurdan GP measurements were conducted at room temperature ( 22 ◦ C ) . E - G ) High - resolution confocal fluorescence and anisotropy images of CHO cells expressing FR - TMABD ( labeled with PLB , E , top panel ) and co - labelled with Laurdan ( E , bottom panel , Intensity ) to obtain Laurdan GP maps . Identical 6 µmx 6 µm sized boxes ( black squares ) were chosen across the anisotropy and Laurdan GP map and shown on the right ( Analysis ROI ; E iii , iii’ , respectively ) . Scatter plot ( F ) of local Laurdan GP and anisotropy computed for small mesoscale domain ( 400 × 400 nm ) from identical ROIs depicted in the Analysis ROI for PLB - labeled FR - TMABD ( E iii , dashed boxes ) and Laurdan GP ( E iii’ , dashed boxes ) . Laurdan GP and anisotropy of PLB FR - TMABD show a small but significant positive correlation ( Pearson’s R = 0 . 2 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Table ( in G ) shows Pearson’s correlation coefficients ( R ) obtained from scatter plots of anisotropy values of PLB - labeled FR - GPI - AP or PLB - labeled TMABD against their local Laurdan GP ( rows , 1 , 2 ) . Note high degree of correlation of clustering of GPI ( row 3 ) , TMABD ( row 4 ) and local lipid order ( Laurdan GP ; row 5 ) across two sequential frames . Individual scatter plot ( F ) report on at least 500 ROIs collected from cells ( n = 20 cells ) pooled from two independent replicates . Scale bar for images ( A , C & E ) : 10 µm . 10 E Imaging and data analysis Fig . S6 . Steady - state lipid order of the outer - leaflet of cell surface probed by solvatochromic probe , NR12S ( Related to Figure 5 ) A ) Confocal images showing the intensity and Blue / Red Ratio images of CHO cells labelled with 1 µ M NR12S in untreated ( CON / control ) condition or upon perturbations of formins ( SMI ) , Arp2 / 3 ( CK ) , actin polymerization ( LAT ) and cholesterol ( MBCD ) . Steady - state outer - leaflet membrane order are reflected in the ratio changes observed in these images ( quantified in B ; scale bar : 10 µ m ) . B ) Box - plots of NR12S Blue / Red ratio for the different perturbation conditions . Perturbation of Formin ( SMI ) and Latrunculin ( LatA ) but not Arp2 / 3 ( CK666 ) lead to loss of outer - leaflet membrane order . The difference between untreated ( Control ) and cholesterol depleted ( MBCD ) cells establish the dynamic range captured by NR12S in this assay . At - least 200 ROIs were considered for the analysis from 40 - 50 cells each condition across 2 independent experiments . Statistical significance of difference between control and each perturbation was determined by one - way ANOVA with Tukey mean comparison . 11 Supplemental Table 1 : Fit Parameters for Domain Size Distribution Experiment Membrane Probe Fitted Values ± errors A θ s0 ( x 0 . 01  m 2 ) Tuning f - actin affinity F - actin binding TM - ABD 3 . 634 ± 0 . 020 2 . 105 ± 0 . 002 38 . 394 ± 0 . 931 No F - actin binding TM - ABD * 5 . 181 ± 0 . 067 1 . 917 ± 0 . 008 7 . 305 ± 0 . 057 Lipid Perturbations GPI - AP control GPI 4 . 264 ± 0 . 097 2 . 205 ± 0 . 003 40 . 412 ± 1 . 758 GPI - AP Sphingomyelin Depletion GPI ( FB1 ) 10 . 881 ± 0 . 426 2 . 380 ± 0 . 041 7 . 260 ± 0 . 654 GPI - AP Cholesterol Depletion GPI ( MBCD ) 18 . 615 ± 1 . 357 2 . 430 ± 0 . 115 4 . 059 ± 0 . 552 TM - ABD control TM - ABD 4 . 855 ± 0 . 024 2 . 287 ± 0 . 003 73 . 689 ± 3 . 130 TM - ABD Sphingomyelin Depletion TM - ABD ( FB1 ) 3 . 922 ± 0 . 020 2 . 106 ± 0 . 002 46 . 650 ± 2 . 298 TM - ABD Cholesterol Depletion TM - ABD ( MBCD ) 4 . 142 ± 0 . 015 2 . 203 ± 0 . 001 93 . 551 ± 2 . 701 Formin Perturbations GPI Control GPI 3 . 263 ± 0 . 021 2 . 004 ± 0 . 003 46 . 127 ± 2 . 950 GPI Formin Inhibition GPI ( SMIFH2 ) 8 . 657 ± 0 . 574 2 . 236 ± 0 . 073 7 . 175 ± 0 . 384 TM - ABD control TM - ABD 3 . 395 ± 0 . 021 2 . 005 ± 0 . 002 37 . 611 ± 1 . 801 TM - ABD Formin Inhibition TM - ABD ( SMIFH2 ) 4 . 557 ± 0 . 282 2 . 017 ± 0 . 012 10 . 752 ± 0 . 106 Two GPI Comparison GFP - GPI 3 . 263 ± 0 . 021 2 . 205 ± 0 . 003 46 . 127 ± 2 . 950 FR - GPI 4 . 264 ± 0 . 097 2 . 004 ± 0 . 003 40 . 412 ± 1 . 758 Simulation Tunable Parameter A θ s0 Tuning Binding Affinity of PS K _ PS 0 . 9 0 . 561 ± 0 . 001 1 . 602 ± 0 . 003 17 . 919 ± 0 . 049 0 . 3 0 . 700 ± 0 . 001 1 . 795 ± 0 . 003 11 . 876 ± 0 . 075 0 . 1 0 . 849 ± 0 . 001 1 . 995 ± 0 . 003 6 . 939 ± 0 . 033 0 . 001 1 . 126 ± 0 . 007 1 . 939 ± 0 . 010 2 . 905 ± 0 . 050 Tuning Area Fraction of Aster A * 0 . 07 0 . 799 ± 0 . 001 1 . 994 ± 0 . 003 9 . 896 ± 0 . 057 0 . 154 0 . 650 ± 0 . 001 1 . 599 ± 0 . 001 13 . 521 ± 0 . 437 0 . 238 0 . 568 ± 0 . 001 1 . 600 ± 0 . 001 18 . 289 ± 0 . 558 0 . 349 0 . 550 ± 0 . 001 1 . 593 ± 0 . 007 19 . 864 ± 0 . 042 Note : All distributions are generated by thresholding binary images for a domain size > = 3 pixels . 12