Information Retrieval in Psychology : Implications of a Case Study Birger Hjdrland ABSTRACI . lnformation retrieval is an important but generally neglected part of the research method in psychology . On the basis of a case sludy , which consists of an examination of the search strategy in a Swedish dissertation , the problems of searching are overviewed , with regard to both the selection of sources , and the construction of the scarch profile . Attention is given to subject faceting in psychol - ogy . A model used by Psychological Abstracts in building on the concepts of experimental variablcs is replaced by a facet model de - veloped on the basis of the Bliss Classification System . This model is illustrated using the above - mentioned dissertation as an example , and it is shown that the model can help in formulating search ques - tions in psycholory . Also discussed are problems that concern the use of abstracts or full texts in the selection of documents . In addi - tion , atteniion is given to the question of types of research in psy - chology that can benefit from computer - based retrieval methods . This article is an attempt to advance information retrieval in psy - cholory by highlighting some important illustrated by an analysis of the literature search in a recent Swedish dissertation ( Welwert , 1984 ) . The dissertation contains a detailed account of the literature search that forms the basis of the studv ' s conclusions . This case Birger Hjdrland is affiliated with Thc Royal Library , 8 Christians Brygge , DK - l2l9 Copenhagen K , Denmark . Behavioral & Social Sciences Librarian , Vol . 6 ( 3 / 4 ) 1988 @ 1988 by The Haworth Press , lnc . All rights rescrvcd . 39 40 BETUWOML & SOCUL SC / ENCE ' S LIBMRIAN study will be drawn upon heavily in order to avoid purely theoreti - cal or speculative statements . THE WSIBILITY OF THE LITERATURE SEARCH One must first ask why a scientific work so seldom includes a dctailed account of the method used for the literature search . The impression is that this has become more common with the increased popu . lariry of computer - based searches , because it is fairly easy to specify the databases and search profiles that have bcen used ; ihat is , an important reason for the absence of such accounts is that it is difficult for a rescarcher to give a methodicar description of the search that has bcen undertaken . This corresponds to thi findings of many user investigations ( among others the American psychologi - cal Association ' s " Py9j9ct on Scientific Information Exihange - in Psychology , " 1963 - 1969 ) , which show that informal and unsys - tcmatic search behavior plays a dominant role . As an information scientist , one must maintain the view that a litcrature search is a component of the research method - and a rather significant one at that . Even though the procedure of the method used in the literature search can - only bi : described with difficulry , ard even though it lacks the presiige associated with other scientific methods ( e . g . , sratistical - analyJis ) , it is so wide - spread and so fundamentally decisive in the research results ob - tryr . d that progress in this area can potentially make research more efficient . Exploration of the problems connected with literature searches or information retrieval should therefore be given high pri - oriry . That it is not can be attributed to , among other thinfs , ' the difficulty experienced in articulating that which ii close - at - ha - nd and obvious and examining it in a meaningful way . It is . hoped . that this article can contribute topromoting the neces - sary change in the perception of information retrieval and titerature work in psychology . At the same time , it should be added thar cer - tain signs indicate a breakthrough is on its way . It is becoming more and more common for researchers to interest ihemselves in th - e pos - sibilities of meta - analysis , research surveys , citation analysis , ' and ! 9 ^ o . n ( sce , for example , Glass et al . , 1981 ; Light and Pillemar , 1984 ; and Rosenthal , 1984 ) . Biryer Hjdrland 41 SOURCES FOR THE RELEVANT LITERATURE Thc abovc - mentioned dissertation is a Swedish psychological treatise , which takes upon itself the task of referring to comparative research in learning , in which material is presented visually versus auditively , and it attempts to draw conclusions based on this mate - rial . Or stated more colloquially , it is an attempt to chart when a verbal presentation of the material works well and when a visual prcsentation ( most often reading ) proves to be the most efficient means of learning . In his dissertation , Welwert mentions fourtecn different sources that were searchcd : from Swedish report serics to retrospective bib - liographies to modern bibliographical databases . These sources will bc bricfly prcsented and commcntcd on below . Nordic Sources Welwcrt begins with thc Swedish sources . He describes how he searched five differcnt sources , with very meagre results ( four re - ports in all ) . These five sources are : ( 1 ) Skoloverstyrelsens ( The School Board ' s ) ye arly surveys , ( 2 ) Surveys of work in the behav - ioral sciences , issued by the State Council of Social Science Re - search , ( 3 ) Bjersted ' s annual bibliographical surveys , ( 4 ) " various universities ' own collocations , " and ( 5 ) the Swedish report series found in the library at the teachers college in Malmo . One can make several comments on the selection of these sources . First , it is puzzling that , relatively speaking , Welwert makes so much out of the Swedish sources and has not , on the other hand , used the corresponding Danish and Norwegian ones . The statement of the problcm is not of a nature that can explain his favoring the Swcdish specch area , and , as we shall see below , he makes a great deal out of more distant speech areas . Second , he kecps exclusivcly within the types of bibliographies known as subjcct bibliographies and does not include , example , the Swcdish national bibliography of books or the bibliography of jour - nal articlcs . As thc subject bibliographies in Swedish psychology are of a very limited range , one would find it natural to complement thcm with other rypes of sources . Third , within the area of Swedish psychological bibliography , 42 BEHAVIOML & SOCUL SC / f , ' NCES LIBRARIAN welwert should have known that the Nonregian pedagogicarstudy collection in oslo has issued an index of siandinaviin ( incrudin ! swedish ) psychological and pedagogical articles with bribf subjec ' i entries ( a project that has now been transferred to the so cailed PEPSY - database ) . There is also a " hidden " annual bibliography of Swedish research in psychology in the journal Nordisk psytcoiog fqrdjc lvcholoXil , thar goes back to ig + 8 - admittedly iisted in alphabetic order according to author with no subject entries , but usable nonetheless . Finally , given the level of work under discussion here , there is somelhing unfortunate in the author ' s contenting himself with drawing on local libraries ( a common phenomenonland not exam - ining thc p . ossibilities the Swedish main library in psychology and pcdagogy ( located in Stockholm ) has ro offcr . we must thcrefore conclude that the bibliographicar apparatus in the Nordic countrics is inadequate and that everi the elements that are available are not used sufficiently because they are too compti - catcd and glty . to ovcrlook . There is a clear need for solid guidance to subject bibliographies when it comes ro Nordic riteraturJon psy - chology . Other Manual Sources with regard to material outside the Nordic countries , welwert relies primarily on bibliographic databases , but he arso lists the fol - lowing sources : r _ ( 6 ) Listening Bibliography , ( 7 ) Eniehungswis - se nsc haft liche H ochs c hulschifte n , ( 8 ) pd dagogisch er J a h - resbe - reicht , ( i2 ) Psychological Abstracts for the - period up until the database was introduced , - and ( 14 ) written inquiries to iix spanish univcrsitics . Dcspitc the fact that thcse manuar sources inciude a few of the most central ones , lhey are , speaking from the point of view of search strategy , rather arbitrary . - A few of the works that have been overlooked are : Bitish Eduiational Index and wilson ' s Education Index , the Bulletin signalctique ( nvo sections , one for education and onc for psychology ) for the period up untit the data - l . These numbers correspond ro the order in which welwert lists his rcfer - enccs . As thcy are ordered a bit differently hcrc , certain gaps appear . Biryer Hjdrland base was introduced and bibliographies of Russian research in Voprosy Psichologii ( Welwert includes Russian and Chinese refer - cnccs in his treatise and keeps statistics on the incidence of literature in different languages ) . . Indeed , many other relevant sources are also available , for exam - ple , Dambauer ' s yearly bibliography of German psychology , which from a professional bibliographic point of view is a model , and various psychological bibliographies , such as the Indian Psy - chological Abstracts . The sourccs that have been mcntioned so far have all been bibli - ographies . It is apparent , however , that important handbooks and cnryclopcdias oftcn contribute valuable information that cannot be found in bibliographics . For example , Welwert would probably havc bcncfited from bccoming familiar with works like the Hand - book of Rcscarch On Teaching , Handbuch dcr Psychologie and the various cditions of Woodworth ' s Expeimental Psychologt , As noted earlicr , Wclwcrt ' s procedure documents the need for a clcar ovcryicw of available scarch possibilitics . A number of works cxist that attempt to provide such overviews , but they are either outdated or seriously limited in various ways . One of the better ones is Mclnnis ' s Research Guide for Psychologt ( 1982 ) , but it only covers English language material . It is also rather difficult for a researcher to utilizc a work of this nature without the assistance of a specialist trained in information work in psychology . Databases ' Welwert emphasized primarily the usefulness of scanning biblio - graphical databases . He went through : ( 9 ) Disserlation Abstracts l86l - 1980 , ( 10 ) ERIC ( Educational Resources Information Center ) 1966 - 1980 , ( ll ) Psychological Abstacts 1967 - i , 980 , and ( 13 ) Pas - cal ( corrcsponds to Bulletin Signalitique , 1972 - 1980 ) . This information rctricval proccss cncompasses far more than what is normally undcrtakcn by rcscarchcrs , and in vicw of the amount of work cntailcd in examining the transcripts from thesc four databascs ( ERIC alonc yields 1200 rcferences ) , it of course may sccm harsh to suggcst that cvcn morc databascs should havc bcen scanned . Ncvcrthelcss , that is the author ' s opinion . At the 44 BELUVIOML A , SOCUL SC / T ' NCES LIBRANAN \ same time , the search profile should have been narrower in order to have produced fewer riferences , in particular from gruC . ' It is feft rhar a scanning of rhe LLBA ^ ( Linguistics and Language Behavior Abstracts ) and of the sSCI lsictaT s ; iieiii - biitio , tn _ der ) would have generated additionar ' referenc . r , rnJ thaiuarious other rndexes could have been included , for example , the Bitbh Educarional Index , which can be found on nrais ! ; inr - b . rrrn ! y : ! y system ; possibly monographic oatauiies , ' ruri as LC - MARC , and so on . . one - cannot - heip thinking au ; uiit . tina or advice welwert received concerning ' the seleciion of databases . It can be seen from the search profili annexed in his bool that the search was p _ e _ rform : d pl { rr ! ] iga . Tekniska Hrigslita ; iii ; Royal Polytechn ic Un ive rsity ) - in Stolkli ' ol m . perhaps itlr ri , pil a ' case of their ^ searching the difabases at rheir dispoJar on ; h ; i ; ' . ; n com - pu . ter ? The selection of databases also seems to indicate that the principle at play is : what is closest at hand imoit urli ' and no attempr is made to exhaust all possibilitics . Even though it is rikery that use of particurarry LLBA and SSCI would have produccd some rerevant references , it i , ntl ' iurr u . - cause of this omission that welwert ' s selection or , ou * iis chal - lengeable . It is more a question of a prevalent tendenry - toi * o , tr , e use of electronic bibliographies over ' that of printedonir . Tt i , i , , n understandable reaction in view of the labbrious p . p . * ort , on - nected with using printed sources of informarion , in [ li iltur , rut . , rne lmportance libraries place on getting as many of their works as possible registered in a database . - In respect to welwert , the computer - based search yielded 79 rel - : , yiil irj . T : h . reports , white the manuat search yi ; tdea ; n addi - lloli , , l - r : Finaily , combing th _ e references in these reports resulted In rrndrng E2 more . Ail tord , werwert succeeded in identifying 20g relevant researc - h reports . The question is wneltrei ' ir , . ' r . rition u . - rween tnc rg retercnces from the computer - based search and thc 47 from thc manual search reflects the true relation urt * . . n * , . possi - bilitics of thcse rwo rypcs of search proccss . This is oouuirrr . tt is clear that the diffcreni6 betwccn rhesc rwo figures . un u . , itriuut . o to the fact that thc manuar . search is not , teritiuety sprrr . irg , " . ry well considered . welwert , howevcr , does not share tliis latte " r ' opiri - ion . He thinks rhat a manuarsearch provides r * h g ; 6 ; ; riilili , i . , Birger Hjdrland 45 for double - checking ( in that relevant references are cited in the re - ports that have already been obtained ) that older works are not likely to be overlookcd . But given what is known about the way in which researchers cite - for example also about language barriers - it is a bit too much to assume that all the relevant research has been cited in the mass of research that has been picked up in Welwert ' s search . On the other hand , the chain search resulted in finding 82 reports and proved to surpass both the manual and the databased bibliographical scarchcs . Again , a rypical example of why so many researchers exploit this mcthod , at the cost of a more systematic litcraturc scarch . In most cascs , it is simply thc most cost - effective method . If only one commcnt wcre to be madc concerning the selection of databascs , it is that thc most important databases are commercial oncs ( as arc cvcn thc so callcd " nonprofit " databases such as Psyc - INFO ) , each intcrcsted in appcaring as the principal source of infor - mation in a given ficld . Instead of clearly delimiting coverage and dividing the indexing between them , there occurs a massive over - lapping and a rather arbitrary division of , for example , more periph - eral subject and spcech areas . The searcher is therefore left without sufficient opportunify for a truly methodical strategy for choosing databases . The only way to alleviate this situation is to let the search be undertaken by the people most experienced with the given data - bases and to produce as many reviews and analyses of existing data - bases as possible and then convey the findings in these to the users . Welwert ' s selcction of sources for his literature search points to a nccd for a far more active effort on thc part of information and library specialists . It is not sufficient for libraries to purchase the appropriate mcans of information retrieval and to enumerate these in long lists . Thcir strcngths and wcaknesscs must also be adc - quatcly clucidatcd . It is ncccssary morcovcr , to dcscribe precisely thc function of thc individual sourccs of intbrmation and to show to what dcgrcc onc sourcc of information makcs anothcr one superflu - ous or rcduccs thc nccd for it within onc or more wcll - defined areas ( such as language , manner of publication , etc . ) . Finally , the litera - ture search must prcferably be dcscribed as a chain of decision - making elemcnts , and this chain must not be utopically long in rela - tion to the time limitations of the typical research project . This B EHAWORAL & SOC UL SC / ENCES LIBMRIAN author has made a suggestion for such a model ( Hjdrland , 1980 ) , until now available only in Danish . THE SEA , RCH PROFILE : TERMINOLOGV AND SUBJECT FACETING As an annex , Welwert includes on page 233 of . his dissertation the search profile that was used in the databased literature search ( see Annex 2 ) . The search profile is also discussed in the text itself , where Welwert maintains that the profile is so broad that no rele - vant reports could have been omitted . The profilc consists of three logical groups of terms : ( a ) terms concerning listening or reading comprehension ( all the documents with these terms are printed out ) ; ( b ) terms for auditory perception and for reading ( documents with these terms are only printed out if they also contain the terms from group [ c ] ) , and ( c ) which com - prises one word , the truncated form of comprehension , compre - hen * . To reiterate , many objections can be made concerning the search profile . First , it appears as though this one search profile has been used for all four databases . It would be unfortunate of course if this were actually the case . That the search profile only contains English terms and that one of the databases is predominantly French , speaks for itself . But even within the same language ( English ) , it would gnly p - e expedient in a few cases to formulate the profile identicalty for different banks . It is precisely this kind of solution that leads either to the printing out of too much from some databases that is irrelevant or too little that is relevant from others . What is clear is that the individual database ' s uniqueness and particular demands have not bccn takcn into consideration . Theoretically , the search strategy one sclccts can be so broad that it will yield anything , re - gardless of the individual database ; such strategies are often - used with qucstions on which there is vcry little available literature - but here the case is the exact opposite . Another complaint about this search profile is that it pins every - thing - on one term , comprchen ' . One can see that this is dangerous just from the fact that if Welwert ' s own dissertation were coded , one would not be able to find it again through a title search under Biryer Hjdrland 47 this term . Wclwert uses the Swedish wo : ' d jrimforande , that is , " comparative " research . It is of course quite likely that one could have identified many pertinent documents by combining the term comparative with auditive and visual . If in addition thcse two interrclatcd aspccts of rhe subject , the auditive and the visual , are considered , a marked imbalance emcrgcs . With rcgard to thc auditive , both thc tcrm auditive and Iistening are uscd . On thc other hand , thc term visual itself is not uscd ; only tcrms for the type of visual pcrccption called reading . The author has fallcn bctwcen two stools . He must either write a dissertation solely about reading comparcd to listening , or he must include othcr forms of visual pcrccption , such as iconic comprchen - sion . Judging from thc disscrtation ' s subtitle , he did thc laticr , but the scarch profilc only cncompasses the tcrms for rcading . Apart from this inconsistency , one could also mention other search terms that might have improved the search result . For example , it might have becn worthwhile to scarch undcr the term modaliry @ r scnse modality ) combined with such other terms as lcarning , text process - ing or word processing ( as used by Rickheit ct al . , 1987 ) . More - ovet , non literate , combincd with , for example , comprei : hension , would have increased the probabiliry of finding all relevant studies . Welwert ' s search strategy indicates that he has used the thesauri that are available for PsyclNFO and ERIC - his use of compound terms , such as listening comprehen * suggest this . However , the author is far too tied to these thesauri . At any rate , experience re - veals that one can often achieve better results by combining a de - scriptor scarch wirh a free tcxt search than by basing it on controlled terms alone . This vicw is common among expcricnccd information workcrs . As sccn , the task of cstablishing a search profilc comprises not only the " sclcction " of scarch tcrms , as it is not just a quistion of a " sclcc _ tion ' . ' proccss , but to a largc dcgrec a tcim - producing pro - cess . within this process , terminological consideiations and ' the logic of thc . scarch profile itsclf affcct each othcr in such a way that thc onc problcm cannot bc solvcd indepcndently of the other . The question is whcther a heuristic method can be indicated to produce and order terms for a search profile ? The method encoun - tercd in psychology that comes closest to that stems from psycho - 48 BEHAWOML & SOCUL SC ' ENCE ' S LIBMRIAN logical Abstracts , which requests its users to fill in a form ( see Annex 4 ) and answer , among others , the following questions : Which descriptors are relevant for the dependent variable ( s ) ? Which dcscriptors are relevant for the independent variable ( s ) and which descriptors are relevant for the population variable ( s ) ? It is felt , however , that this model is not very useful . Inspired by the second edition of Bliss ' s Bibliographical Classification , the autfror has created an alternative model consisting of eight facets . Ii is considered that this is a rather strong model , and even though it is outside the scope of this article to provide a complete introduction to this model , in the next chapter it will bc examincd in its applica - tion to Wclwert ' s subject . SABJECT FACETING AN D EX P E RI M ENTAL VARIAB LE S If we look at the dissertation , we can say that it deals with how learning or comprehension is influenced respectively by an auditive and a visual presentation of the learning material . In other words , it demonstrates how learning is dependent on the means of presenta - tion . In traditional experimental research , learning and perception are described as dependent variables , whereas the means of presen - tation are described as independent variables . The age , sex , educa - tion , etc . , of the subjects of the study are described as the popula - tion variable . As mentioned above , it is the view of Prychological Abstracts that such variable thinking can be used as a means of constructing search profiles . The search profile for Welwert ' s dis - sertation does not quite fit this pattern . This is connected to the fact that one scarch tcrm can cover dependent , as well as independent , variables . In tcrms of scarch technique , listening comprehension and reading comprehcnsion are perceived as one term and thus cover both variables . ( One can say that Psychological Abstracts is in conflict with itsclf in that it could havc avoidcd thcsc composite terms , but that is anothcr problcm and cannot be dcalt with here . ) Second , Welwcrt does not find cause for restricting his investiga - tion to any particular population . For these two reasons , Welwerl ' s search profile deviates from the three types of variable . However , it can be said that the search profile is not too different from this Biryer Hidrlond 49 variable model , as there is some conformity between the research tradition to which Welwert belongs and the one that was the proto - type for the way in which Psychological Abstracrs constructed its forms . The point is that what , for cxample , Klaus Holzkamp ( 1983 , p . 522 ff . ) has critizcd as " variable psychology " is pass6 ( or at any iate less dominant ) as a paradigm in psychological rcsearch . The qucstion of whether to use the variable paradigm as a modcl for drawing up the search profile is twofold : ( l ) Is this an appropriate modcl for research that belongs to the " variable paradigm " itself ? If yes ( 2 ) is it also an appropriate modcl for research that falls out - sidc this paradigm ? It appears that the variable model is in any case a less efficient bnc ; but rather than de monstrating that , this article will concentrate on the altcrnative facet model . The Facet Model Exemplified This alternative facet model will be illustrated by applying it to Welwert ' s dissertation . The model implies that every psychological subject should be analyzed from eight mandatory viewpoints or facets : the research method applied ; the theoretical frame of refer - ence ; common facets such as time , form and place ; the psychologi - cal processes involved ; psychobiological aspects ; individual charac - teriitics such as sex , age and personaliry traits ; social and cultural conditions ; and , finally , the aim of application . Facet I : Research methods . One can say that Welwert ' s research method is first and foremost a secondary analysis of existing studies in the field . Relevant subject headings could be " secondary analy - sis , " " literature survey , " " meta review , " and so on . Facet 2 : Theorctical oientation . One could say that Welwert ' s dis - sertation is in a certain scnse atheoretical or " theory agnostic . " lt is closest to the bchavioral school of thought that compares dependent and indcpcndent variablcs without having any conccption of the , for example , biological or social contexl . One relcvant subject heading might thcrefore be " behaviorism . " Facct 3 : Time , place and form . One can say that Welwcrt ' s study covers the period 1890 - 1980 internationally and that the form is a BEHAVIOML & SOCUL SC / TNCES LIBMRIAN printed dissertation . These three aspects should be covered by de - scriptors . Facet 4 : Prychological processes . As already mentioned , Wel - wert ' s work concerns auditive and visual perceptual processes and should bc indexed under both categories . F9c9t 5 . : Psychobiologt . Welwert does not touch on the neuropsy - chological mechanisms of the processes under study , just as he dbbs not deal with the development of auditive and visual signal systems in the animal kingdom . He could have done so , and whcn conduct - ing a litcrature search it is relcvant to be able to specify both the positive and the ncgative possibiliry . As psychobiology is a manda - tory facet , a stand must be taken , and one can envision two solu - tions - with regard to subject headings : either ( l ) that the missing psychobiological descriptors are evidence of the fact that the docu - ment does not deal with this area , or ( 2 ) the descriptors being used are defined in such a way that they exclude this area ( for example , one could decide that all documents that do not deal with animal psycholog ' y or phylogenesis must be described by the term human ) . Facet 6 : Individuals and personality . Since Welwert does not nar - row his interest to a definite age group , for example 7 - 12 - year otds , it is not necessary to indicate age - specific subject headings . But as he is explicitly interested in how the use of reading versui listening varies with age , a descriptor indicating this must be given . The fact of the matter is that in Prychological Abstractr one finds descriptors tha - t - delimitlge , as well as ones for age - comparative studies ( ' iAge Differences " ) . The latter should be mentioned in this case . Similar examples could bc given with rcgard to psychological terms con - cerning personality . Facet 7 : Social and cultural conditions . Again , what is most char - acteristic is what Welwert does not do . He docs not inctude the question of thc rolc and function of listening and rcading in diffcr - ent cultural or social milieus , and the influence this can have on the way in which an individual acquires reading versus listening skills for various tasks . Carrying out an efficient literature search is con - tingent on whether the indcxing explicitly indicates that these con - ditions have not been elucidated . Biryer Hjdrland 5l Facet 8 : Sphere of application . Welwert ' s work can be relevant in many contexts , for example , in pedagogy , communication and in - flucnce . Dcscriptors cxplicitly accounting for this arc morc signifi - cant than would sccm at first glance . Often those . conducting the litcrature search find thcmsclvcs in a situation where they cannot prccisely definc all the rclevant delimilation variables . Under these circumstanccs , onc can often idcntify thc sphcrc of application to which the studics may appcrtain , and if thc litcrature can be re - trievcd using this facct thc probability of achicving a good research rcsult will thercforc bc increascd . In psychology it is often the case that other faccts are too abstract and dclimit the litcrature in a less expcdicnt way than docs the sphcrc of application facct . This prcsentation of Wclwcrt ' s subjcct using the facct model shows that this modcl is valuable as an aid in producing and sorting relevant tcrms for the scarch profile . It is thus a good tool for library work . Perhaps one can go a stcp farther and claim that it is also a good hcuristic mcthod to clarify thc way in which the problem of the rescarch itsclf is formulated , and that efficient mastery of this model might have allowed Welwcrt to include more facets in his problem formulation than was the case . THE SELECTION PROCESS Annex I shows the data from Welwcrt ' s literature search . It can be seen there that as a rcsult of his computer scarch in the ERIC systcm , 1200 rcfcrcnccs cmcrged . Hc sclccted thcm based on titles , abstracts , etc . and ordered on that basis , 155 reports from the li - brary , of which only 20 provcd in thc end to be rclcvant . The preci - sion is quite low for a literature search ( 1 . 77o ) . This coincides with the general rcputation of the ERlC - system , as well as this author ' s personal expericnce with it . Before drawing conclusions that are too far - reaching , however , one must take various circumstances into account ; for example , whcther the search profile was especially ill suited to this systcm , whether the ERlC - systcm is geared to the qucstions posed ( or whethcr its forte lies in other areas ) , etc . The fact that the other systcms generally pcrform much better can , how - ever , bc intcrprctcd as an indication of poor subjcct indexing and 52 BEHAVIOML & SOCUL SC ' TNC6S LIERARIAN information selection in the ERlC - system . In Table I the cones - ponding figures for the other systemi are presenteo u , u * rp . ri - son . It is evident from welwert ' s account that he experienced signifi - cant difficulties in determining , based on the tianscripti , which studies were relevant . This coniurs with the observation ' that scien - tific abstracts usually are constructed in too general a manner . The user ' s return can be just as nominal as the in - formation u . onrur . i receives from reading a list of ingredicnts on a package of processed food ( sce Herrcll , 1979 ) , welwert states further that even rhough thcre wcre considerable difficultics in sclccting riterature using tf , ese references , he oid not encounter problems in choosing among the documents in full text . This apparently has to do with the ch6sen subject . probrems of a fundamental nature tend to expand , so that in the end * trut one rinos relevant is something compleiely different from what one Jeemeo relevant at the start . Thus , in reiearch that undergoes a conceptual Table 1 : Retrleval and preclslon rates 1n tour databaaGs . : Nam€ of database : : Docurnents : R€levant : pr€clElon rat6 : : retrl6ved : docurnents : : ERIC : 12002 20 : l . ? I : : PEychologlcaI Abgtracts : 383 : 44 | 1 1 . 5 t : : Dlssertatlon Abstracts : 8 1 4 : 2 2 . . 3 . 3 t : : pascal : 7 . 5 t Birger Hiilrland 53 development , the researcher experienccs difficulties in selecting the literature using full tcxts as the - basis upon which choices are made . CONN ECTION BETWEEN TII E FORMiJ I . ATION OF THE PROBLEM AND TIIE POSSIBILITY OF A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE SEARCH That the disscrtation undcr discussion here has dealt with the lit - craturc scarch in a morc thorough way than usual is naturally con - nccted to thc fact that one of its primary aims is to summarize ear . licr rcscarch in thc samc ficld . As mcntioncd abovc , this rype of rcscarch is bccoming morc and more common - which is not sur - prising , givcn thc iapid prolifcration of thc litcrature . Strictly ipcaking , of coursc , ail rcscarchers ought to cvaluate carcfully ex - iiting knowledge about a subject , and thc rcader ought . to b . e able to assume that a ihorough and cxplicit literature scarch has been un - dcrtakcn . One can go a stcp furthcr and ask whcther a correspondingly systematic liieraturc scarch would have been possible if . the formu - lition of the problem had to a lesser degree been phrased in relation to " variable psychology . " To be cvcn morc difficult , onc could ask whether only thc nrosi superficial and unreflective problem formu - lations can 6c translated into a search profile . The answer is both yes and no . In principlc , thcrc is no limit to how advanced the indcxing can be , and at the same timc a dcscription of a subject is not final but a sctting of prioritics of important aspccts of docu - mcnts , bascd on supp - ositions about thc nccds of the rcscarch and thc uscrs . Thc simpicr thc lcvcl on which this indcxing is madc , thc fcwcr - and thc morc simplistic - thc problcm formulations that can , with somc luck , bc translated into a search profile . That is why it is not quite coincidcntal that Wclwert ' s formulation of thc . prob - lem lcd to a profitablc computer - based litcraturc search , whereas othcr disscrtaiions do not havc a corrcsponding nccd . Howcvcr , it is typically the casc that information pcrtaining to ccrtain aspects of a scicntific work must bc retrieved from other sourccs , whereas cer - tain subqucstions can usually be isolatcd and transformed to a com - putcr search . Furthcrmorc , most scicntific works build on just a few 54 BEHAWOML & SOCUL SCIE / VCES LIBMRTAN central sources , and one can advantageously trace the further devel - opment of these through the use of citation indexes . It is thus concluded that alr scientific research could greatly bene - fit from a so - called systematic riterature search , uut gi " " en ihe state of search systems as these exisl today , their roie in ihe conceptuat and theoretical sides of research is minimal . If the meani - or ii , ror - mation retrieval are to function better , the quality of indexing musr be co . nsiderably improved . And it ii treto thai this oiurioprenr must be based on a facet model similar to the one presented here . Until now psychologists have been very little oicupied with re - search efforts directed toward format clissification iystems and taxonomies with rhe aim ^ 9f improving information retri6var in psy - c . hology . McGrath and Attman ( 196d ) gn . d Rjge ( tgtg ) ui , , * . . p - tions . , but they h _ ave onty been ' occupied with i suuiiiciptine in psychology ( small group research ) , and their works haveiao no graglical , consequences on indexin ! or retrieval . nn impoitanr dis - trnctron between their approach and the facet model presented in this . paper is thar they ari onry occupying themsitr . i rJiir , - itre clas - sifying . of . empirical data , whireas tiri faiet model ctassifies lirera - ture . The . hypothesis , that it is sufficient to classiff data , is related tothe positivist tradition in psychotogy . If . it is accepteo itraiempiri - caldata are subject to interpreiation , Tlren ir is not r . irri . i . ntio inor * data ; one must also index iheories . This article wilt be concruded with a problem formulation that is of great importance both to psychology ind to ottrer sociai - i . irn . . r . It has ro do with the . possibiliry oflranscending ttre , eieaictrer ' s theoretical point of departure . - By way of intro " cluction , aiiention will be drawn to another exampre . In 1 - 994 , Karen vibe [ e Morr . n - s . en ( KVII4 ) defcndcd her dissdrtation on ciritdren ' s orawines . rhe dissertation was praised as a sotid piece of work , uut sorcn " qorup ( 1985 ) wrote in his review rhat althbugh the disseitation represented a reasonable contribution to the psychological tradirion to which it belonged , this tradition is quite protrtema - tic ; he thin [ s ii ii - ratner shocking that one can be . a psycriologist of pictoriar repiesentation without having any knowledgti of moiern piirorial trreoil anJ wittr - out taking a position with regard to Gombrich . J - - - , - ll i : . p , , , lr py ? oj . here to determine whether Kjdrup ' s criricism rs Justrtled ( which KVM refuted , during a conveisati6n wirh this Biryer Hjdrlond 55 author , as she does not considcr Combrich rclcvant ) . It is part of scientific research that different points of view exisl concerning the valuc of diffcrcnt thcorctical lines of thought . This is particularly the case in psychology with its many schools of thought . Thcrefore , this criticism points to a vcry regrettable situatiori : if a researcher conducts a computcr - based literature scarch about children ' s draw - ings in , for example , Psychological Abstracls , hc / she is not rcferred to litcraturc that will cnablc him / hcr to trace Gombrich or the " modcrn thcory of pictorial representation . " Thcre are rwo good reasons for this , the most important one be - ing that that kind of litcrature has only a modcst chancc of bcing includcd in Prychological Abstracts . As far as is known , Psycho ' Iogical Abstracts has misunderstood scientific norms as it accepts a grcat amount of litcrature falling within the traditional paradigms and has bccn hcsitant with rcgard to ncw or altcrnative paradigms - especially from the human scicnces as comparcd to those from the natural scicnces . Sccond , even though onc might find relevant ref - erenccs in Psychological Abstracts about this particular theory of pictorial representation , it is improbable that they would emerge in a search for childrcn ' s drawings or that they would be particularly visible . This is connccted to the indexing practice , criticized above , where " variable psychology " is the ideal . If indexing documents according to thcory wcrc strcssed - as in thc facet model - it would be possible to a far greater cxtent than at present to uncover the existing theoretical approaches to a givcn problem formulation . Wclwcrt ' s dissertation is anothcr example of this . He conducted a rather cxtcnsive litcraturc search but did not retricve the esscntial litcraturc that could havc dissipatcd somc of thc stagnation prcva - lent in this ficld . It sccms as though it is difficult to draw conclu - sions that arc sufficicntly gcncral , dcspitc countlcss studies . One result is found for onc population , and anothcr for another popula - tion : the same applics whcn thc tcxt contcnt , etc . , is varied . It is not that lhc rcscarch is not valuablc . It is , to the contrary , highly valu - ablc . The qucstion is simply whether the rcsearch strategy is suffi - cicntly cconomical ; that is , whethcr useful conclusions can be reachcd , quickly and chcaply , within this rclativcly thcory - agnostic tradition . From complctcly diffcrcnl sourccs , attcntion has bccn 56 BEHAVIOML & SOCUL SC / E ' NCES LIBMRIAN drawn to the fact that psycholinguistics works with theories about how acoustic and visual input of words is processed and represented in the psychic system . In Annex 3 , a figure is presented ihat illus - trates this . It is believed that this kind of theoretical research has a better chance of delineating the underlying mechanisms that deter - mine whether reading or listening represents the most efficient form of learning and communicating . - Only fwo examples have been given here , but these , it is con - tended , represent an incre dibly widespread problem , one that it is of the greatest scientific interest to soive ori a high revel . Various things must be done to achieve such a solution . - rn this articte , an attempt has been made to outline what library and information sci - entists ought to contribute in this connection : It is evident that this implies a much closer cooperation between psychorogists and infor - mation scientists , and that persons responsitite for thJpsychological info . rmation . s . ys - tem must have a combined knowredgi of both psy - chology and information science on a very high levIl . REFERENCES American Psychological Associati - on : Repons ol rhe American prychological As - s9c - ialiqn ' s Proiect on scientilic Information Exchange in psycholfut , vol . l - 3 . Washingron , DC : American psychological Assiiarion , ilO : - rii . lOis - triburcd by clearinghousc for Federar Scieniific and rcchnicil Informaridn as PB 164 496 , PB 169 005 and PB t9z96Z . t Glass , Gene V . , . Bu - try McGaw & Mary Lee smith : Meta - onalysis in social re - search . Beverly Hills , CA , 1981 , 2c ) 7 p . Handbuch der Luikologre . Hrsg . von chr . schwarze & Dierer wunderlich . Kcinigstein , Atheniium , I 985 . Herrell , James M . : Abslract Thinking in ApA Journals . Ameican psychologisr , 1979 , 34 , 178 - t90 . Hjdrland , Birger : Psykololii . Kbh . : Dcr kgl . Bibliorck , r990 . 73 sidcr . ( Fagbiblio . graficr , T . ) Holzkamp , Klaus : Grundlegung der psychologie . Frankfurt , t 9g3 . 600 s . Kj { rupl Sdren : Nar born legner mennesker . Disputats om bdrnelegninger - udcn kendskab ril moderne billedleori . Inlomatioi g . februar 19g5 , ; idei . Light , Richard J & David . 9 . l , - ll . rqr , Summing up : The science of reviewing reseorch , Cambridge , MA , 1984 , l9l s . McGrath , J . E . & Altmanl . : small Group Researclr . New york : Holr , Rinehart , & Winston , 1966 . Biryer Hjdrland 57 M . lllr : , Raymond G . : Research Guide for psychologt . London : Grccnwood , 1982 . 6M p . Mifls , Jack & vanda Brorghron : Bliss Bibriographicar crassification . 2 . ed . - . C / r : r I : Pry - c . hologt o1d _ Psychiatry . I _ nndonigurrerworrh , GlA . - - " Rice , Robeil w . : Formar craisification of Research Informuion . An Empirical Te st of thc McGrarh - Arrmll lpproactr an < r an Iilusrra twe caie . - eiriron rry - chologist , 1978 , 33 , 249 - 264 . ' ' Rickhcit , Gcrr , Hans Strohncr & Jochen Mi , issrer : Modaritdts - spczifiche Text - vcrarbcilung bci personcn mir unrerschiedtichem K ; il ; ; ikr , ioirr . rr * r " p ! nk ! . ^ ^ z1its _ 9 ! . qlt fiir Entwicktunss - p . ryctrcrogie , ^ a iaaigijilri , ' J ' Fsycnoro - gie , 1987 , XIX , 65 - 27 . Roscnthal , Robcrt : Meta - anaryric procedures for sociar research . London , 19g4 . 149 p . wefwcrt , cfaes : / . asa elre _ r lyssna ? Redovisning av jtimft ) rande undersokningor sjorda iren I8e0 - te \ o irinii i ; i ; ; ; ; ' ; ; i " uditiv och visueil presenntion s ! ! t lu fdniik titt uua . rdgil9 av resuiiaren . Matmci , Cwf ClJ . rp , f s8q . 233 sider . ( Srudia psychorogiia er paedagogica . serics nr , . i , Iiij ' ' J8 BEHAWOML & SOCUL SC / ENCES LIBMRIAN a€srchsd : Numb€r of : No . of : Number of : ordgrsd ! rolevant : docum€nta : documentg 3 ANNEX l . Specification of data from retricval and collcction of rescarch rcports . ( Translated from Swedish by the present author . ) : Datsbaso : Dlssertatlon : : AbstractE : : ( 1861 - 1980 ) : : retrl , eved : : refsrences . : 8 1 4 : 8 5 2 2 7 : Pascal ( 1972 - 80 ) : 93 : 20 : TOTAI 2 { 90 : 3 6 0 : 98 - r9 : : DupllcatEs : Number of unlque 6nd rolevent docunrenta found : by conputer based lnfornatlon rgtrleval : Numbor of , documente found : by nanual llt€ratur€ agarch 7 9 : : 1 2 6 : 4 7 : Counttr ol publlcatlon : UsA 179 rePorta croat Brlttaln 6 ropo - ta canada 2 reports cermany 13 repolts SHEdon { reportg Chlna 2 reporte Rua61a I report B€Iglur ! 1 roport : - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - : : Number of docunenta found 1n the : refErence llsts 1n obtalned r€ports : 118 z 82 : : - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - : : Total nunber of reports : 60 { : 2OS : rr ' - lr - ' l Lenquaoc ol regearch reportg : Engll8h 187 rsport8 GErmanSnsdlBhChtngseRusslanFrench 13 reports 4 reporte 2 rsportg 1 r€port 1 report Total 208 reporta 208 raporte Irt ' rI - " Biryer Hjdrland 59 ANNEX 2 . The search profile uscd by compuler based information retrieval . NameData Baa6 * Rank Max . r€fa r R6ad r lf rlte r Comm€ntE r Logtc : KTHMLOl : Baa€ Verslon 01 Pag6 01 | ? O itodlflcatlon dateiT9 - 11 - 01 : 0000 Cr€atlon data : 79 - 11 - 01 : IDC : READING AND LISTENING COMPREHENSION : 1 0 r A + B r C TYPNO WGT CUM TERM 0 , 5 + O2 * LISTENIN6 COMPREHENT O , 5 + O2 T READING COMPREHEN * 0 . 5 + O2 * AUDITORY PERCEPTT 0 . 5 + O2 T AUDITORY DISCRIMT 0 . 5 + O2 * READIN6 r O . 5 + O2 T READING ABILIT * O . 5 + O2 * READING SKILLT 0 . 5 + O2 T SILENT READING * O . 5 + O2 * READING PROCES * 0 . 5 + 02 r ORAL READ * 0 . 5 + O2 * COMPREHEN * OF TERMS : OO11 GRP t A t A NO TYP 01 TIK 02 TIK 01 TIK 02 TIK 03 TIK 04 TIK 05 TIK 06 TIK 07 TIK 08 TIK 01 TIK TOTAL NO . r B r B r ' B i B * B * B r B t B & BEHAVIOML & SOCUL SC / ENCES LIBRARIAN ANNEX 3 . Graphic rcprcsentation of the psychological processcs by which visual and accoustical analysis of a word are carried out ( from Handuch der Lexikologie , 1985 , p . 291 ) . tDttdi up AkltvlcMg & r & dcuhlng t . p & . n Al ( Clvlcrung dcr tortrE4 ! Arc - tr lsnMttsctEn XontExt btcrde Hcrm $ g rtdcrtr Alltvlanng & r zugchdrlgcnhtrrt Erb Ptpnot { r ! ptEr Llns . t3uq latcralc lbnnng nlchc rcrhsrrhncr ttr ) sBlq tbstm . rkar lf { 5rtlrl Aktlvlcrug & r zugo - ti5rlgcn l . utbll & 3 lXrlvlcnng & r zu dan ltrt Fhl5rcndat ' t PtffiE I Lter . Ic - l lenntlg N ( Llvlcn $ g & r pa3tafl & n Itrtoirlc N ( t , tvlenng & r Schrlft bll & r , ln & ren & r bchstab€cnfsPrc - ci ' En - 7 - acr { ste l - ' - le vor - ktrmt Aktfvtcnirqdar pr3sci - dan b . Eh - Stabcn I I p | rrllela ltrk - | hrl - xcnj ( tldl lr $ unllch gruf tt * , 1I t l I vfsrller lnFrt I Abb . 2r Graphtschc Vorlnschrullchung der ProzctaG , dlc bcl der vltucllcn bze . . kusclschcn Anrlyra clnca lJort . r rblaufcn . In dar llnkcn Blldhllltc slnd aIlc rutstclgcndcn , ln der rcchton rllc rbstol - gcndcn Aktlvlcrung . n banlnnt . Ftndon 3ovohl hcmcndc l - - - rl ell ruch . kelvlcrcndc l + l Pror . 33c tlrCt , to 3lnd ltrt3 nur dlc aktlvlcrcndon bcn . nnt . F0r dlo hatucndcn Prolcrsc ttl ln dl . 3cn EaIl . analog tu lcron : ' llcmung dGr nlcht tugohorIgcn ( parlcndan . cl , c . l Elnhclt€nr . 4 - - l - - - fr . latarala tlcrmg | 1 , / ) et felrctcn NtrrruElwni - Biryer Hjdrland ANNEX 3 ( continucd ) 6I Engllsh translatlon o ! c€rrnan text Ln Annex 3 : ( A PsvcbollnquLstl . c nodel of thc processLno o ! fonrs of words . ) D1e Ropreaentatlon und V€rarbeltung von wortforrn€n . Tho representatlon lnd processlng of forrne of words . Bedeutung - 6oan1ng botton up Aktlvlerung d6r Bedeutung . bottor ! up actlvatlng of the rnoanl ' ng top dosn AktlvLerung d6r Wortmarks durch semantlschen Xontext . top down actlvrtlng of nark6 of rrorde through sanantlc context . Wortmarke . & ark of a word / ( characterlstlc features of a word ) laterale Hemrnung anderer Wortnarken ( W6rter ) - lateral inhlbltlon of other narks of words ( vrords ) . * : iy : : T : : oder zuseh6rlsen w6rtmarke . actlvatlng th€ ber . onslns i Aktlvlerung des zugeh6rlgen Lautbildes . actlvatlng the belonglng acoustlc lnage schrlftbllduvlsual pl . cturg of the text / word . Lateral , e Hernmung der falschen Altornatlven . Lateral lnhlbltlon of the fala€ alternstlv€ . Lautblld . acoustlc lnage AktLvlenng der Schrlftblld€r , in denen der Buchatsbe aD entsprechen d6r Stello vorkont - rctlvatlng o ! tho vleual picture of the uord , 1n whlch the lettera are at - orrespondlng plales . Aktl . vlerung der zu den t { ort geh6renden phoneme . actlvatlng the phonemes belonglng to thE word . Grapheo - Phonen - Umeetzung . grapheme - phoneme - conversl , on Buchstaben - Ebene - Ievel of I€ttef Phonero - Eben€ . 16v€1 o ! phoneme latorale Harumung . Iateral lnhibLtl , on PhoneD - Graphen - Unsetzung - phoneoe - grapherne - conversl , on Aktlvienung dEr pass€nden Buchstaben . ectlvatlng th€ adoguato l6tter 62 BEHAVIOML & SOCUL SCIE / VCES LIBMRIAN ANNEX 3 ( continued ) Aktlvlonng der gaa : end . n l , leaknalo . actlvatlng the tdequat . Dark vlsu€11€ M6rktnale . vlsual Dark Iat€rllo H€ | ntrung nlcht vorhrndancr M€rknal . . Iltoral lnhlbitlon ot aarks not ! t hsnd akustlech - audlt1v6 Msrkmal€ . lcoustlc - aud1tlvo marks parall6le Merkm ! I8axtrrktlon ( rlurnllch grupplert ) . 9arail , el ortrlctlon of narka ( spEtlal grouped ) . M€rkmala - extraktlon ln Keskad€n . extractlon of narkg ln cascados vLsu€l1er Input . vl . suaI lnput akustlscher Input . acouatlc lnput text und€r llgur€ : ' Flqure 2 : craghlcal 11 : . uatratlon ot thE proc6saea by rhich the vleutl raspectively acouEtlcrl analyals o ! a sord takea plscc . In th . I€ft half of th€ plctur€ ar€ aII th€ upgolng proc6Bs€a naned , { n th€ rlght hal . f of the gicture ar6 all tha dorngol . ng grocasseE naned . If both lnhibltlon ( - - - - - ) and actl . vrtlng ( _ ) processeE tak€ plac€ , th€n only the sctlvatlng processoa arC namad . As to the lnhlbttlng proc€saos th€Ee should be read a ! follorrs : ' Inhtbltlon ol unlts whlch do not bslong ( e . 9 . are not adequate ) . " o z E g c . l o o 8 t t G ! o t EFG g 3 i c I cE E zou , @ ) u , 9 B o CC o r P o F z o Uo . F w = < t u J t r ! z l ; > N E E F ? g U F ( , zF . U I J I G t > t o l o l u l c c l o I E l u l d l 1 9 n l s z l v = lY r ! t * o tul f l d o IE fi l H u IU fi I t d l c t < U o N w F F o > F o FuUFo c i u 8 . s 8 p i o u i r , E t g . z 6 ; i ! E p 6 r i : ! i 3 6 o . ! i i ! 2 tr N 2 G o UEz P a q E E a a a9a , o ! : i I ) 5 ; ! U 9oo E o E 3 : F z go . ! 5 E & ; C 3 i o , , 1 > - / co E : E r ! ! ; F ^ E g g : ! E i ; a p g a ? { y = j ' E " E g i E I F E C 9 < go t ao ! t oo tl 6 P . * E P S E E = o - r 6 € ! . 1 c : J t H o c i IT iE p o b l B : ; E , t o - Q o E F H = - o = c ) - . { ; E ' E ! ; p i = P ' E . = g ! ' f $ sE : ? ! s x E F g F E i . e s \ 9 6 € E e E € R 0 9 € e E 3 . s . E B 3 t : q ; t e E3E * € H . il * F 3 € ; r Y - a c t + S E ! i l E : E z l - , : l . 3 < 5 t ! E S o . lt tno , JefoCE tr o c 63 ' ! o I F r 6 T 8 ! s I i D € . C E E ! ; I E ; B : { ! r $ t l . I i t l E B : ! J i s E i ! I I { a 0 x E u E t oc i 5 E Cog tr oo t o E o i q a It g t l I 8 t I t ll . tt 9 a I E ! E t r r i E EE ! r t ! t l - t l : l l I Cct . _ : ! e 5 ! i € : o ! ! o D a a a E t t t c l l l ; | | l o t t t 5t I t fiE - r d I ! E : l r t i t t t r t t l r i l l rl t I t q o l F I l s i i S i l l s t i t ! i 1 l E q $ l f t E l i t i l e S i l iil Jl iiiil J El t l a l ; l I ! l t l < l : l EI . : t ? l s l o l ! l tl It g c9 t o t 8 E Ea , E I t r E I $ 6 E l l i F l 5 ; i l $ F l f b l i E l E E I I ! ! l . i : I ! I I I i ! E I d . d I a l . oo = . E tro ( J I x rll zz 64