Unraveling the Nanoscale Surface Properties of Chitin Synthase Mutants of Aspergillus fumigatus and Their Biological Implications David Alsteens , † Vishukumar Aimanianda , ‡ Pushpa Hegde , § Ste´phane Pire , † Re´mi Beau , ‡ Jagadeesh Bayry , § Jean - Paul Latge´ , ‡ * and Yves F . Dufreˆne † * † Universite´ catholique de Louvain , Institute of Life Sciences , Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium ; ‡ Unite´ des Aspergillus , Institut Pasteur Paris France , Paris , France ; and § Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale , Unite´ 872 , Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers , Equipe 16 - Immunopathology and therapeutic immunointervention , Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie – Paris 6 , Universite´ Paris Descartes , UMR S 872 , Paris , France ABSTRACT Understanding the surface properties of the human opportunistic pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus conidia is essential given the important role they play during the fungal interactions with the human host . Although chitin synthases with myosin motor - like domain ( CSM ) play a major role in cell wall biosynthesis , the extent to which deletion of the CSM genes alter the surface structural and biophysical - biological properties of conidia is not fully characterized . We used three complemen - tary atomic force microscopy techniques—i . e . , structural imaging , chemical force microscopy with hydrophobic tips , and single - molecule force spectroscopy with lectin tips—to gain detailed insights into the nanoscale surface properties ( ultrastructure , hydrophobicity ) and polysaccharide composition of the wild - type and the chitin synthase mutant ( D csmA , D csmB , and D csmA / csmB ) conidia of A . fumigatus . Wild - type conidia were covered with a highly hydrophobic layer of rodlet nanostructures . By contrast , the surface of the D csmA mutant was almost completely devoid of rodlets , leading to loss of hydrophobicity and exposure of mannan and chitin polysaccharides . The D csmB and D csmA / csmB mutants showed a different behavior , i . e . , the surfaces featured poorly organized rodlet layers , yet with a low hydrophobicity and substantial amounts of exposed mannan and chitin at the surface . As the rodlet layer is important for masking recognition of immunogenic fungal cell wall components by innate immune cells , disappearance of rodlet layers in all three chitin synthase mutant conidia was associated with an activation of human dendritic cells . These nanoscale analyses emphasize the important and distinct roles that the CSMA and CSMB genes play in modulating the surface properties and immune interactions of A . fumigatus and demonstrate the power of atomic force microscopy in fungal genetic studies for assessing the phenotypic characteristics of mutants altered in cell surface organization . INTRODUCTION The human opportunistic pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus causes several important respiratory diseases such as allergic bronchopulmonary and invasive aspergillosis ( 1 , 2 ) . Understanding the molecular bases of A . fumigatus diseases requires a detailed knowledge of the fungal cell wall composition and the cell surface structure as these play key roles in pathogen - host interactions ( 3 ) . Particularly important are the cell wall properties of aerial asexual spores ( i . e . , conidia ) because these are the forms of the fungus invading immunocompromised patients and devel - oping within the lungs . The outermost cell wall layer of A . fumigatus conidia is characterized by the presence of clustered nanoﬁbrils , called rodlets , composed of hydro - phobins , a family of small , hydrophobic proteins character - ized by the conserved eight cysteine residues ( 4 , 5 ) . The hydrophobic character of this outer layer allows the conidia to be easily dispersed into the air and to favor adhesion of the fungus to surfaces . Inner cell wall layers are essentially composed of polysaccharides , such as a - glucans , galacto - mannan , b - glucans , and chitin ( 6 , 7 ) . Chitin , which accounts for 4 – 15 % of the A . fumigatus cell wall depending on the morphotypes ( 8 ) , is one of the two structural polysaccha - rides that provide cell shape and cell wall stiffness ( 7 ) . In A . fumigatus , chitin synthesis , which occurs at the plasma membrane , involves eight chitin synthase ( CHS ) enzymes . Two of those with a myosin motor - like domain ( AfCSMA and AfCSMB ) have been recently shown to play a role not only in chitin synthesis but also on the entire conidial cell wall architecture ( 8 ) . Conidia from D csmA mutant showed strongly reduced amounts of chitin , whereas D csmB and D csmA / D csmB mutants did not show any modiﬁcation of the chitin content in their cell wall but all showed a modiﬁ - cation of the overall cell wall integrity and permeability . Yet , the impact of these genetic modiﬁcations on the organi - zation , properties , and biological interactions of the cell wall remains poorly understood . In this study , we used atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) in three different modes—imaging , chemical force micro - scopy ( CFM ) , and single - molecule force spectroscopy ( SMFS ) —to probe the ultrastructure , hydrophobicity , and polysaccharide properties ( nature and distribution ) of D csmA , D csmB , and D csmA / csmB mutant conidia from A . fumigatus , and we compared these properties with those of the wild - type ( WT ) conidia . The results show that deletion of the CSMA and CSMB leads to major changes in the conidial nanoscale surface properties , and illustrate the power of AFM techniques in the high - resolution phenotypic Submitted March 4 , 2013 , and accepted for publication May 23 , 2013 . * Correspondence : Yves . Dufrene @ uclouvain . be or Jean - paul . latge @ pasteur . fr Editor : Simon Scheuring . (cid:1) 2013 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 13 / 07 / 0320 / 8 $ 2 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 05 . 040 320 Biophysical Journal Volume 105 July 2013 320 – 327 characterization of fungal mutants with altered cell surface organization . These changes were associated with modiﬁca - tions in the immunogenic properties of the conidia . MATERIALS AND METHODS Microorganisms and cultures We used CEA17 D akuB KU80 ( wild - type ) , D csmA , D csmB , and D csmA / csmB strains of A . fumigatus generated as described ( 8 ) . Brieﬂy , conidia were harvested from 10 - day - old culture grown at 25 (cid:1) C on 2 % malt extract agar containing 6 % KCl . They were rinsed 3 times in Tween water ( 0 . 05 % ) , 5 times in deionized water , and then 3 times with sodium acetate buffer ( pH 4 . 75 ) , and resuspended in 10 mL buffer to a concentration of ~ 10 6 conidia per mL . AFM AFM measurements were performed in aqueous solution ( acetate buffer for imaging , deionized water for CFM , and acetate buffer supplemented with 1 mM Ca 2 þ and 1 mM Mn 2 þ for SMFS ) using a Multimode V AFM ( Bruker AXS , Santa Barbara , CA ) , and , unless stated otherwise , using oxide - sharpened microfabricated Si 3 N 4 cantilevers with a nominal spring constant of ~ 0 . 01 N / m ( Microlevers , Bruker AXS ) . Cells were immobi - lized , by mechanical trapping , into porous polycarbonate membranes ( Millipore ) . After ﬁltering a concentrated cell suspension , the ﬁlter was gently rinsed with buffer , carefully cut , attached to a steel sample puck using a small piece of double faced adhesive tape , and the mounted sample was transferred into the AFM liquid cell while avoiding dewetting . The sensitivity of the cantilevers was calibrated on glass substrates , and their spring constants measured using the thermal noise method ( Picoforce , Bruker AXS ) . Data processing was performed using the commercial Nanoscope Analysis software ( Bruker AXS ) and the MATLAB software ( The MathWorks , Natick , MA ) . For each strain , the structural images shown were obtained for multiple conidia from independent cultures and analyzed with different tips , and were representative of the entire conidial population . Forquantifying cell surface hydrophobicity by means of CFM ( 9 ) , hydro - phobic tips were prepared by immersing gold - coated cantilevers ( OMCL - TR4 , Olympus , Tokyo , Japan ; nominal spring constant ~ 0 . 02 N / m ) for 12 h in 1 mM solutions of HS ( CH 2 ) 11 CH 3 in ethanol and then rinsed with ethanol . Single cells were ﬁrst localized and imaged with a silicon nitride tip . The tip was then changed with a hydrophobic tip to record adhe - sion force maps . FIGURE 1 AFM imaging reveals that deletion of the CSMA and CSMB genes leads to major remodeling of the cell wall architecture . AFM deﬂection images of the surface of WT ( a – c ) , D csmA ( d – f ) , D csmB ( g – i ) , and D csmA / csmB ( j – l ) conidia recorded in acetate buffer at low ( a , d , g , j ) , medium ( b , e , h , k ) , and high ( c , f , i , l ) resolution . Labels R and A ’’ indicate regions made of rodlets and amorphous material . The arrow indicates artifacts resulting from the interac - tion between the tip and loosely bond material . For each strain , images are representative of those obtained for at least 15 cells from three indepen - dent cultures , and analyzed with three different tips ( see also Fig . S1 for additional examples ) . Biophysical Journal 105 ( 2 ) 320 – 327 Chitin Synthase Mutants of Aspergillus fumigatus 321 For single - molecule imaging , AFM tips were functionalized with Concavalin A ( ConA ) or wheat germ agglutinin ( WGA ) lectins ( Sigma ) using polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) - benzaldehyde linkers as described by Wildling et al . ( 10 ) . Cantilevers were washed with chloroform and ethanol , placed in an ultraviolet - ozone - cleaner for 30 min , immersed overnight into an ethanolamine solution ( 3 . 3 g ethanolamine into 6 mL of dimenthyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) ) , and then washed 3 times with DMSO and 2 times with ethanol , and dried with N 2 . The ethanol - amine - coated cantilevers were immersed for 2 h in a solution prepared by mixing 1 mg Acetal - PEG - NHS dissolved in 0 . 5 mL chloroform with 10 m L triethylamine , and then washed with chloroform and dried with N 2 . Cantilevers were further immersed for 5 min in a 1 % citric acid solution , washed in MilliQ water , and then covered with a 200 m L droplet of a phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) solution containing lectins ( 0 . 2 mg / mL ) to which 2 m L of a 1 M NaCNBH 3 solution were added . After 50 min , cantilevers were incubated with 5 m L of a 1 M ethanol - amine solution to passivate unreacted aldehyde groups , and then washed with and stored in buffer . Single cells were ﬁrst localized and imaged with a silicon nitride tip . The tip was then changed with a lectin - tip to record adhesion force maps . Force curves were analyzed one by one to determine whether they featured speciﬁc adhesion events . These events were plotted as bright pixels , brighter colors meaning larger adhesion values . Extraction and characterization of the conidial surface proteins Conidia were washed twice with Tween ( 0 . 05 % ) - water and incubated in 0 . 5 M NaCl at room temperature for 90 min . The supernatant obtained was dialyzed against water , concentrated , and subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS - PAGE ) on 12 . 5 % gel . One set of the gel was subjected to silver staining and proteins on another set of the gel was subjected to Western blotting using peroxidase - conjugated ConA and revealed using the ECL kit as per manufacturer’s instructions ( Invitrogen ) . WGA - ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) labeling Conidia were washed extensively with PBS and incubated for 30 min in darkness in a solution containing 5 m g / ml WGA - FITC in 50 mM NaHCO 3 . After washing in the same buffer , conidia were observed under ﬂuorescent microscopy . At least 300 conidia were checked at different ﬁelds under bright ﬁeld microscopy and the same ﬁelds were counted for ﬂuorescent FITC - labeled conidia ; the ratio of FITC - labeled conidia (cid:3) 100 / conidia counted under bright ﬁeld microscopy was expressed as the percentage of WGA - FITC - labeled conidia . Stimulation of human dendritic cells Isolations of the peripheral blood monocytes from the health donors’ blood , their differentiation into dendritic cells ( DC ) , and the stimulation experiments with A . fumigatus conidia were performed as described earlier ( 11 , 12 ) . The phenotype of DC was determined by ﬂow cytometry analysis of surface markers by using ﬂuorochrome - conjugated mono - clonal antibodies to CD83 , CD80 , CD86 , HLA - DR , and CD40 . The values are presented as either percentage DC positive for indicated markers or intensity of expression of the molecules depicted as mean ﬂuorescence intensity . The signiﬁcance of differences between series of results was assessed using the one - way ANOVA and comparison between sets of results was assessed using Tukey’s posttest . Values of p < 0 . 05 were con - sidered as statistically correlated ( * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . All statistical analyses were performed using Prism 5 software ( GraphPad softwares ) . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION CSMA and CSMB genes modulate cell surface architecture We ﬁrst investigated the surface structure of WT and mutant conidia using high - resolution AFM imaging . Cells were immobilized on polymer membranes , a method which allows live cells to be imaged by AFM without using any drying or ﬁxation procedure ( 13 ) . Fig . 1 , a – c , and Fig . S1 , a and c in the Supporting Material , show typical deﬂection images recorded at low , medium , and high resolution for the surface of A . fumigatus WT conidia . Because height images could not reveal the ﬁne ultrastructure of the specimens , deﬂection images were preferred . Deﬂection images revealed the presence of typical hydrophobin fasciculated rodlets , several hundred nm in length and 10 nm in width , consistent with earlier electron microscopy ( 14 ) and AFM ( 15 ) observations . By contrast , D csmA conidia ( Fig . 1 , d – f , and Fig . S1 , e and g ) , were devoid of homogeneous rodlet layers but presented an amorphous , granular surface ( Fig . 1 f , label A ) . On close examination , however , some residual parts of the rodlet layer could be seen ( Fig . 1 f , label R ) . Furthermore , tip - induced alterations were seen on the cell edge , close to the polymer membrane where sample curvature is the highest . As these features were not seen on WT cells , this further conﬁrms that the cell wall architecture of the mutant is altered and more fragile . Analysis of D csmB conidia ( Fig . 1 , g – i , and Fig . S1 , i and k ) , showed the presence of rodlets ( Fig . 1 i , label R ) but the layer seemed to be less compact and less organized FIGURE 2 CFM demonstrates that rodlet layers on WT conidia are uniformly hydrophobic . ( a ) Deﬂection image of a WT conidial surface recorded in water with a silicon nitride tip . ( b – d ) . Representative force - distance curves ( b ) , adhesion force map ( z - range : 4 nN ) ( c ) , and adhesion force histogram ( n ¼ 512 ) . ( d ) Recorded on the same cell with a hydro - phobic tip ( see also Fig . S1 for additional examples ) . Biophysical Journal 105 ( 2 ) 320 – 327 322 Alsteens et al . than the WT . In addition , amorphous material was frequently spotted over the surface ( Fig . 1 i , label A ) . Finally , D csmA / csmB double mutant conidia ( Fig . 1 , j – l , and Fig . S1 , m and o ) featured a heterogenic population with the majority being globally similar to the D csmB mutant . In addition , many conidia of the double mutant showed rodlet regions that were easily damaged by the scanning tip ( Fig . 1 l , arrow ) , suggesting that the hydro - phobin layer was synthesized but somewhat disorganized , thus mechanically fragile . Structural changes in the mutants correlate with differences in cell surface hydrophobicity Because hydrophobins are known to convey strong hydro - phobic properties to the conidia ( 16 ) , we then asked whether the observed structural changes correlate with differences in hydrophobicity . To this end , we used CFM with hydropho - bic ( CH 3 ) tips ( 9 , 15 , 17 ) to map and quantify the nanoscale hydrophobic character of WT and mutant A . fumigatus conidia . Fig . 2 shows a set of CFM data collected on a single WT cell in pure water ( no buffer was used because it is known to interfere with the measurements ) . Force - distance curves recorded across the cell surface revealed large adhesion forces ( Fig . 2 b ) , with a magnitude of 2196 5 148 pN ( mean 5 standard deviation s , n ¼ 1024 ) ( Fig . 2 d ) . Adhesion maps recorded over 0 . 5 m m 2 ( Fig . 2 c ) displayed a homogeneous distribution of hydro - phobic forces , in agreement with previous work ( 15 ) and with the presence of the outermost surface layer of hydro - phobins . Comparison with the data obtained on reference surfaces indicated that the conidial surface has a marked hydrophobic character ( 9 ) , thus indeed consistent with hydrophobins ( Fig . 3 , a – c , and Fig . S1 , a – d ) . Notably , we found that structural changes in D csmA conidia ( Fig . 1 , d – f ) , were correlated with profound modiﬁ - cations of the cell surface hydrophobicity ( Fig . 3 , d – f , and Fig . S1 , e – h ) . Force - distance curves and force maps recorded with the hydrophobic tip showed adhesion forces of only 362 5 59 pN ( mean 5 s , n ¼ 1024 ) , uniformly distributed across the surface , indicating that the conidial surface of the D csmA mutant is hydrophilic ( 9 ) . From these FIGURE 3 Structural changes in the mutants correlate with differences in cell surface hydropho - bicity . Deﬂection images ( a , d , g , j ) recorded in water with silicon nitride tips , adhesion force maps ( z - range : 4 nN ) ( b , e , h , k ) , and adhesion force histograms ( n ¼ 512 ) ( c , f , i , l ) recorded with hydrophobic tips on the surface of WT ( a – c ) , D csmA ( d – f ) , D csmB ( g – i ) , and D csmA / csmB ( j – l ) conidia ( see Fig . S1 ) . Biophysical Journal 105 ( 2 ) 320 – 327 Chitin Synthase Mutants of Aspergillus fumigatus 323 data , we conclude that the D csmA mutation leads to the exposure of a hydrophilic amorphous layer on the cell surface . Because hydrophobins could still be extracted by hydrogen ﬂuoride treatment from D csmA mutant conidia ( 8 ) , we suggest that rodlets are still present but hidden by this amorphous material . For the D csmB ( Fig . 3 , g – i , and Fig . S1 , i – l ) and the D csmA / csmB double ( Fig . 3 , j – l , and Fig . S1 , m – p ) mutants , we observed that the nanoscale struc - tural heterogeneities were to some extent correlated with differences in hydrophobicity , the surface displaying con - trasted hydrophobic and hydrophilic characters . Note that in the present work structural and adhesion maps could not be truly correlated ( overlapped ) as they were obtained with two different tips ( silicon nitride and hydrophobic tips ) . Chitin synthase mutations lead to the exposure of glycans To elucidate the nature of the outer layer covering the rodlet structure , we next analyzed the occurrence and distribution of two of the cell wall polysaccharides , i . e . , mannans and chitin , using SFMS with tips functionalized with the ConA and WGA lectins , respectively ( 18 , 19 ) . Fig . 4 and Fig S2 show the adhesion force maps , the adhesion force histograms , and representative force curves obtained for WT conidia with either ConA - or WGA - tips . Adhesive events were rarely detected ( 2 – 8 % ) and randomly distrib - uted over the surface . The mean adhesion forces , in the 50 – 250 pN range , are consistent with values expected for the rupture of single ( ~ 50 pN ) or multiple lectin - sugar com - plexes ( 18 , 19 ) . Supporting this view , force - distance curves ( Fig . 4 c ) showed well - deﬁned single force peaks with short rupture distances ( 10 – 150 nm ) that are typical of speciﬁc molecular recognition events . The mean rupture distances were quite short indicating that the detected residues are associated with macromolecules that are either short or not ﬂexible like bacterial exopolysaccharides ( 19 ) or yeast mannoproteins ( 18 ) . Both ConA - and WGA - positive molecules were clearly more abundant ( 12 – 25 % depending on the cell investigated ) on the surface of the D csmA mutant ( Fig . 5 , a and b , and Fig . S3 ) , consistent with the absence of rodlets . Adhesion forces were well deﬁned and in the 50 pN range ( see Fig . 5 , g and h ) , thus typical of lectin - carbohydrate bonds ( 18 , 19 ) . Interestingly , ConA - and WGA - positive molecules were essentially detected on smooth , featureless areas lack - ing the rodlets . Proteins were also present on the surface of the conidia of all csm mutants and could be extracted using FIGURE 4 Mapping single polysaccharide residues on WT conidia using SMFS . Adhesion force maps ( z - range : 300 pN ; values in the top right corners correspond to the percentage of adhesive events ) ( a and d ) , adhesion force histograms ( n ¼ 512 ) ( b and e ) and representative force - distance curves ( c and f ) recorded on WT conidia in acetate buffer supplemented with Ca 2 þ and Mn 2 þ , using AFM tips bearing ConA ( a – c ) and WGA ( d – f ) lectins . The insets in panels a and d show deﬂection images of the areas corresponding to the adhesion maps . See Fig . S2 for an independent set of data . Biophysical Journal 105 ( 2 ) 320 – 327 324 Alsteens et al . 0 . 5 M NaCl . These surface proteins , which were present in low amount ( 20 fg / mutant conidium ) , were negative upon Western blotting using peroxidase conjugated lectins ( data not shown ) . Accordingly , these results suggested that ConA - and WGA - positive molecules corresponded most probably to mannan and chitin and not to surface glycopro - teins . These polysaccharides were hardly exposed on the surface of WT conidia , which is fully consistent with our structural ( rodlet - coated cell surface ) and chemical ( very hydrophobic cell surface ) data . The D csmB and D csmA / csmB mutants yielded results that were somewhat similar to the D csmA mutant , i . e . , 11 – 27 % of mannose and N - acetylglucosamine - rich residues cell wall components ( mannan and chitin , respectively ) randomly distributed over the surface ( Fig . 5 , c – h , Fig . S4 , and Fig . S5 ) . This may seem surprising because in contrast to D csmA , the surface of the conidia of D csmB and D csmA / csmB conidia was less homogenously covered with amorphous material . However , rodlet patterns were often fuzzy and hardly visualized , suggesting they were loosely struc - tured and possibly mixed with underlying / extruding carbohydrates . These AFM data were conﬁrmed by an analysis of the labeling of the conidia by FITC conjugated WGA . Labeling showed heterogeneous but increased labeling of the csm mutant conidia compared to WT ( the percent of conidia labeled with WGA - FITC were 51 5 3 , 44 5 2 , and 45 5 9 for D csmA , D csmB , and D csmA / csmB , respectively , compared to 11 5 2 for the WT ) . Moreover , these ﬂuores - cence observations were in agreement with the AFM data that showed heterogeneous conidial populations in the csm mutants . Chitin synthase mutant conidia are immunostimulatory DC play an important role in orchestrating the immune response to invading pathogens ( 20 , 21 ) . In steady state DC rest in immature phenotype and express low level of class II antigen presenting molecule HLA - DR and costimu - latory molecules CD80 , CD86 , and CD40 . When DC encounter pathogens , the interaction of pattern recognition receptors on DC with pathogen - associated molecular patterns leads to maturation and activation of DC . The maturation of DC is associated with a high level of surface expression of CD83 and antigen peptide - loaded HLA - DR that interacts with T cell receptor - CD3 complex on T cells . In addition , mature DC show an increased expres - sion of costimulatory molecules . CD80 and CD86 interact with CD28 and CD40 with CD154 on T cells to provide stimuli for T cell activation and proliferation . The surface rodlet layer on dormant conidia of A . fumigatus masks the immunogenic components of the conidia and hence imparts immunological inertness to air - borne conidia ( 12 ) . In contrast to DC stimulated with WT conidia DC stimulated with csm mutant conidia expressed signiﬁcantly high levels of costimulatory molecules CD80 , CD86 , CD40 , antigen presenting molecule HLA - DR and terminal maturation marker CD83 ( Fig . 6 ) . These results correlate with our pre - vious results that show that chemical or genetic removal of the rodlet layer exposes the immunogenic motifs that stim - ulate innate cells such as DC ( 12 ) . In line with these previ - ous observations , and the present data showing poorly organized rodlet layer on the surfaces of the D csmA , D csmB , and D csmA / csmB mutants , our results indicate that chitin synthase plays an important role in preventing immune FIGURE 5 Chitin synthase mutations lead to the exposure of glycans . Adhesion force maps ( z - range : 300 pN ; the values correspond to the per - centage of adhesive events ) recorded on the surface of D csmA ( a and b ) , D csmB ( c and d ) , and D csmA / csmB ( e and f ) conidia , using AFM tips bearing ConA ( a , c , e ) and WGA ( b , d , f ) lectins . The insets show deﬂection images of the areas corresponding to the adhesion maps . ( g and h ) . Histo - rgams of the mean ( 5 SD ) adhesion force measured on each mutant with ConA ( g ) and WGA ( h ) tips . See Figs . S3 – S5 for independent sets of data . Biophysical Journal 105 ( 2 ) 320 – 327 Chitin Synthase Mutants of Aspergillus fumigatus 325 recognition of airborne conidia by organizing the outer sur - face layer of the conidia . The lack of the signiﬁcant differences among three mutants ( D csmA , D csmB , and D csmA / csmB ) in their ability to stimulate DC was in agree - ment with the data obtained with AFM using tips function - alized with the ConA and WGA lectins . CONCLUSION Knowledge of the surface properties of A . fumigatus chitin synthase mutants appears critical to our understanding of the cell wall synthesis and organization of this pathogen and has some direct impact on the immunological proper - ties of this microorganism ( 21 ) . We have shown that AFM - based imaging , CFM , and SMFS are valuable tools to study the nanoscale surface properties ( ultrastructure , hydrophobicity ) and polysaccharide composition of A . fumigatus chitin synthase mutants . Our results emphasize the important and distinct roles that the CSMA and CSMB genes play in modulating the cell wall architecture and properties of A . fumigatus . Compared to WT conidia , D csmA conidia were profoundly altered : the surface was entirely devoid of rodlets , leading to a loss of hydrophobic - ity and to the exposure of mannan / chitin polysaccharides . FIGURE 6 Chitin synthase mutant conidia stimulate human dendritic cells . The expression of CD83 , CD86 ( both expressed as % positive cells ) ( a and b ) ; CD80 , CD86 , HLA - DR , and CD40 ( all expressed as mean ﬂuorescence inten - sities ) ( c – f , respectively ) on DC that were cultured with cytokines alone or cytokines plus WT conidia , D csmA , D csmB , or D csmA / csmB conidia for 48 h . Data ( mean 5 SE ) from six independent donors . Statistical signiﬁcance as determined by ANOVA test is indicated ( * P < 0 . 05 ; * * P < 0 . 01 ; * * * P < 0 . 001 ) . Biophysical Journal 105 ( 2 ) 320 – 327 326 Alsteens et al . Whereas , D csmB and D csmA / csmB showed somewhat different behaviors : loosely structured rodlet layers were present on the conidial surfaces , yet with a low hydropho - bicity , smooth and rough patches of amorphous component , and exposure of polysaccharides . In agreement with the AFM observations , all three mutant conidia ( D csmA , D csmB , and D csmA / csmB ) showed an increase in the sur - face exposure of immunostimulatory cell wall polysaccha - rides otherwise hidden by the surface rodlet layer in the WT conidia . Taken together , our AFM experiments show that disruption of all CSM genes leads to a very dramatic change in the conidial cell surface organization resulting from unexpected compensatory reactions that were not obvious based only on biochemical data ( 8 ) The AFM results indicated that the three - dimensional organization of the cell wall polymers has been extensively and unpre - dictedly changed by the CSM deletion resulting in the appearance of new molecules on the surface structure of the conidial cell wall . AFM analyses suggested that the loosely structured rodlets allow passage of the molecules that are exposed on the conidial surface . These observa - tions emphasize that AFM is of great help to complement biochemical analysis of the fungal cell wall because the later deals with the overall conidial cell wall composition , whereas AFM analyze the outermost cell surface . Spatial resolution ( lateral and vertical ) is a unique advantage of AFM over biochemical analysis of the cell wall . In addition , AFM is advantageous over ﬂuorescent labeling as AFM tips functionalized with speciﬁc markers enables the precise localization and the quantiﬁcation of surface exposed cell wall components ( 6 , 12 , 22 ) . Under - standing of the fungal surface - speciﬁc properties is critical during host - microbial interaction as the fungal surface is the ﬁrst component confronting with the host immune system . SUPPORTING MATERIAL Five ﬁgures and legends are available at http : / / www . biophysj . org / biophysj / supplemental / S0006 - 3495 ( 13 ) 00627 - 9 . Work at the Universite´ catholique de Louvain was supported by the National Foundation for Scientiﬁc Research ( FNRS ) , the Universite´ catho - lique de Louvain ( Fonds Spe´ciaux de Recherche ) , the Re´gion Wallonne , the Federal Ofﬁce for Scientiﬁc , Technical and Cultural Affairs ( Interuniversity Poles of Attraction Programme ) , and the Research Department of the Communaute´ franc¸aise de Belgique ( Concerted Research Action ) . Work at the Institut Pasteur and Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale , Paris were supported by the ANR grant ANR - 10 - BLAN - 1309 HYDROPHOBIN , European Community’s Seventh Framework Pro - gramme [ FP7 / 2007 - 2013 ] under Grant Agreement No : 260338 ALLFUN and European Science Foundation grant Fuminomics RNP06 - 132 . Y . F . D . and D . A . are Senior Research Associate and Postdoctoral Researcher of the FRS - FNRS . REFERENCES 1 . Chai , L . Y . A . , and L . Y . Hsu . 2011 . Recent advances in invasive pulmonary aspergillosis . Curr . Opin . Pulm . Med . 17 : 160 – 166 . 2 . Mahdavinia , M . , and L . C . Grammer . 2012 . Management of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis : a review and update . Ther . Adv . Respir . Dis . 6 : 173 – 187 . 3 . Annaix , V . , J . P . Bouchara , . , G . Tronchin . 1992 . Speciﬁc binding of human ﬁbrinogen fragment D to Aspergillus fumigatus conidia . Infect . Immun . 60 : 1747 – 1755 . 4 . Beever , R . E . , and G . P . Dempsey . 1978 . Function of rodlets on the surface of fungal spores . Nature . 272 : 608 – 610 . 5 . Cole , G . T . , T . Sekiya , and R . Kasai . 1979 . Surface ultrastructure and chemical composition of the cell walls of conidial fungi . Exp . Mycol . 3 : 132 – 156 . 6 . Latge´ , J . P . 2010 . Tasting the fungal cell wall . Cell . Microbiol . 12 : 863 – 872 . 7 . Latge´ , J . P . , I . Mouyna , . , W . Nierman . 2005 . Speciﬁc molecular fea - tures in the organization and biosynthesis of the cell wall of Aspergillus fumigatus . Med . Mycol . 43 ( Suppl 1 ) : S15 – S22 . 8 . Jime´nez - Ortigosa , C . , V . Aimanianda , . , J . P . Latge´ . 2012 . Chitin synthases with a myosin motor - like domain control the resistance of Aspergillus fumigatus to echinocandins . Antimicrob . Agents Chemo - ther . 56 : 6121 – 6131 . 9 . Alsteens , D . , E . Dague , . , Y . F . Dufreˆne . 2007 . Direct measurement of hydrophobic forces on cell surfaces using AFM . Langmuir . 23 : 11977 – 11979 . 10 . Wildling , L . , B . Unterauer , . , H . J . Gruber . 2011 . Linking of sensor molecules with amino groups to amino - functionalized AFM tips . Bioconjug . Chem . 22 : 1239 – 1248 . 11 . Bansal , K . , A . Y . Sinha , . , J . Bayry . 2010 . Src homology 3 - interacting domain of Rv1917c of Mycobacterium tuberculosis induces selective maturation of human dendritic cells by regulating PI3K - MAPK - NF - kappaB signaling and drives Th2 immune responses . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 36511 – 36522 . 12 . Aimanianda , V . , J . Bayry , . , J . P . Latge´ . 2009 . Surface hydrophobin prevents immune recognition of airborne fungal spores . Nature . 460 : 1117 – 1121 . 13 . Dufreˆne , Y . F . 2008 . Atomic force microscopy and chemical force microscopy of microbial cells . Nat . Protoc . 3 : 1132 – 1138 . 14 . Paris , S . , J . P . Debeaupuis , . , J . P . Latge´ . 2003 . Conidial hydrophobins of Aspergillus fumigatus . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 69 : 1581 – 1588 . 15 . Dague , E . , D . Alsteens , . , Y . F . Dufreˆne . 2007 . Chemical force micro - scopy of single live cells . Nano Lett . 7 : 3026 – 3030 . 16 . Bayry , J . , V . Aimanianda , . , J . P . Latge´ . 2012 . Hydrophobins—unique fungal proteins . PLoS Pathog . 8 : e1002700 . 17 . Dague , E . , D . Alsteens , . , Y . F . Dufreˆne . 2008 . High - resolution cell surface dynamics of germinating Aspergillus fumigatus conidia . Biophys . J . 94 : 656 – 660 . 18 . Alsteens , D . , V . Dupres , . , Y . F . Dufreˆne . 2008 . Structure , cell wall elasticity and polysaccharide properties of living yeast cells , as probed by AFM . Nanotechnology . 19 : 384005 . 19 . Francius , G . , S . Lebeer , . , Y . F . Dufreˆne . 2008 . Detection , localiza - tion , and conformational analysis of single polysaccharide molecules on live bacteria . ACS Nano . 2 : 1921 – 1929 . 20 . Cheng , S . C . , L . A . B . Joosten , . , M . G . Netea . 2012 . Interplay be - tween Candida albicans and the mammalian innate host defense . Infect . Immun . 80 : 1304 – 1313 . 21 . Romani , L . 2011 . Immunity to fungal infections . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 : 275 – 288 . 22 . Roy , R . M . , H . C . Paes , . , B . S . Klein . 2013 . Complement component 3C3 and C3a receptor are required in chitin - dependent allergic sensiti - zation to Aspergillus fumigatus but dispensable in chitin - induced innate allergic inﬂammation . mBio . 4 : e00162 - 13 . Biophysical Journal 105 ( 2 ) 320 – 327 Chitin Synthase Mutants of Aspergillus fumigatus 327