Neuron Article Regulation of Dendritogenesis via a Lipid - Raft - Associated Ca 2 + / Calmodulin - Dependent Protein Kinase CLICK - III / CaMKI g Sayaka Takemoto - Kimura , 1 , 7 Natsumi Ageta - Ishihara , 1 , 2 , 7 Mio Nonaka , 1 Aki Adachi - Morishima , 1 Tatsuo Mano , 1 Michiko Okamura , 1 Hajime Fujii , 1 Toshimitsu Fuse , 1 , 2 Mikio Hoshino , 3 Shingo Suzuki , 4 , 6 Masami Kojima , 4 , 6 Masayoshi Mishina , 5 , 6 Hiroyuki Okuno , 1 and Haruhiko Bito 1 , 2 , 6 , * 1 Department of Neurochemistry 2 The Center for Integrated Brain Medical Science Graduate School of Medicine , The University of Tokyo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 0033 , Japan 3 Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology , Graduate School of Medicine , Kyoto University , Sakyo - ku , Kyoto 606 - 8501 , Japan 4 Research Institute for Cell Engineering , National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology ( AIST ) , Ikeda , Osaka , 563 - 8577 , Japan 5 Department of Molecular Neurobiology and Pharmacology , Graduate School of Medicine , the University of Tokyo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 0033 , Japan 6 SORST - JST , Kawaguchi 332 - 0012 , Japan 7 These authors contributed equally to this work . * Correspondence : hbito @ m . u - tokyo . ac . jp DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2007 . 05 . 021 SUMMARY Ca 2 + signaling plays a central role in activity - dependent regulation of dendritic arborization , but key molecular mechanisms downstream of calcium elevation remain poorly understood . Here we show that the C - terminal region of the Ca 2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase CLICK - III ( CL3 ) / CaMKI g , a membrane - anchored CaMK , was uniquely modiﬁed by two sequential lipidiﬁcation steps : prenylation followed by a kinase - activity - regulated palmitoylation . These modiﬁcations were essential for CL3 membrane anchoring and targeting into detergent - resistant lipid microdomains ( or rafts ) in the dendrites . We found that CL3 critically contrib - uted to BDNF - stimulated dendritic growth . Raft insertion of CL3 speciﬁcally promoted dendritogenesis of cortical neurons by acting upstream of RacGEF STEF and Rac , both pres - ent in lipid rafts . Thus , CL3 may represent a key element in the Ca 2 + - dependent and lipid - raft - delineated switch that turns on extrinsic activity - regulated dendrite formation in devel - oping cortical neurons . INTRODUCTION Neurons grow two characteristic processes : axons and dendrites . The speciﬁcation of these processes , their outgrowth , and their precise arborization are prerequisites for the formation of appropriate connections between neurons . These steps , which constitute the basis for the establishment of neuronal circuits , represent central questions in neuroscience for which the molecular mech - anisms still remain largely unsolved . The dendrite formation , which is critical for proper integration of synaptic inputs , is believed to be determined by genetically encoded cell - intrinsic signals as well as environmental - extrinsic signals from neighboring cells . Recent works have shed light on the critical roles of sem - aphorin 3A , neurotrophins , Notch1 , Slit - 1 , cadherin , BMP , and Wnt / b - catenin in mediating signaling events regulat - ing various stages of dendritogenesis in the developing cerebral cortex ( reviewed in Ciani and Salinas , 2005 ; Higgins et al . , 1997 ; Jan and Jan , 2003 ; Whitford et al . , 2002 ) . In addition , a wealth of work has shown that the for - mation of dendritic trees is shaped by neuronal activity ( Cline , 2001 ; Konur and Ghosh , 2005 ) . For example , surgi - cal and pharmacological attenuation of sensory inputs impaired dendritic development in the visual cortex as well as in the barrel cortex ( Fox and Wong , 2005 ) , while in contrast , enriched environments promoted dendritic growth ( Kozorovitskiy et al . , 2005 ) . However , how neural activity regulates dendrite arborization at the molecular and cellular level is not well understood . Activity - dependent regulation of dendritic arbors is believed to be mediated , in large part , via increases in intracellular calcium concentration , which in turn activate several signaling cascades . How can neuronal activity inﬂuence dendrite formation downstream of calcium entry and mobilization ? Several works have so far indicated a possible involvement of one or multiple members of the multifunctional Ca 2 + / calmodulin ( CaM ) - dependent protein kinases ( CaMKs ) family in dendritic development . CaMKs represent major targets for an activated Ca 2 + / CaM complex generated by intracellular calcium rise , and two subclasses ( the CaMKI / IV subfamily [ consisting Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 755 of ﬁve genes ] and a CaMKII subfamily [ consisting of four genes ] ) have been shown to be highly expressed in the central nervous system ( CNS ) ( Soderling and Stull , 2001 ; Hook and Means , 2001 ; Hudmon and Schulman , 2002 ) . The general CaMK inhibitor KN - 62 , which inhibited activation of members of both kinase subclasses , was shown to block neurite outgrowth in various cell lines ( Zheng et al . , 1994 ; Kuhn et al . , 1998 ; Vaillant et al . , 2002 ) . The role of CaMKII in neurite outgrowth has been controversial , however , in part because of the contrasting effect observed between the a and b isoforms of CaMKII ( Konur and Ghosh , 2005 ) . CaMKIV , enriched in the nucleus , was shown to mediate dendrite formation via CREB phosphorylation and CREB - mediated transcription ( Redmond et al . , 2002 ) . Additionally , CaMKI activity may participate in the regulation of growth cone motility and neurite extension ( Wayman et al . , 2004 ; Schmitt et al . , 2004 ) , but the underlying isoforms and critical mecha - nisms involved remained obscure . Recently , a variety of Rho small GTPase family proteins were shown to contribute to dendritic morphogenesis through regulation of actin cytoskeletal remodeling ( Luo , 2002 ; Van Aelst and Cline , 2004 ) . How the small GTPase activity was turned on and off as a function of neuronal activity and multiple coexisting extracellular cues remained largely unknown . In some instances , the GDP - GTP exchange factor ( GEF ) for a Rho small GTPase family protein was shown to be activated downstream of Ca 2 + . Thus , a synaptically localized Rac - GEF Tiam1 was involved in the regulation of dendritic spines by linking NMDA - receptor activity to Rac1 - dependent actin remod - eling ( Tolias et al . , 2005 ) . However , it was not known whether nor which speciﬁc CaMK activity may contribute to small GTPase - dependent dendritic actin remodeling during dendritogenesis . Here , we show a unique function of a lipid - raft - associated Ca 2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase , CLICK - III ( CL3 ) / CaMKI g , in dendritogenesis of developing cortical neurons . The C - terminal end of CL3 was the substrate for sequential lipidiﬁcations , i . e . , prenylation and palmitoylation . Prenyl - palmitoyl - CL3 , generated in a kinase - activity - dependent manner , efﬁciently accumu - lated into dendrite - enriched raft - like lipid microdomains . Intriguingly , knockdown or knockout of CL3 reduced the number and the total length of dendrites , but not those of axons . Furthermore , blockade of CL3 occluded BDNF - stimulated dendritic growth , and CL3 membrane anchoring appeared to play an important role in mediating this morphological effect . In keeping with the critical sig - niﬁcance of raft insertion of CL3 , Rac and its upstream regulator STEF , a Rac - speciﬁc GEF , acted downstream of CL3 in the molecular cascade linking Ca 2 + to actin remodeling , and both were present in the lipid rafts . Con - sistent with these results , Rac activity was sufﬁcient to rescue the dendritic phenotype associated with CL3 knockdown , while raft disruption abolished the dendrito - genic effect of CL3 overexpression . Taken together , we thus uncovered a novel CaMK - Rac signaling pathway by which lipid raft insertion and activation of a speciﬁc CaMKI isoform may couple extrinsic neuronal activity with dendrite - restricted cytoskeletal remodeling in developing cortical neurons . RESULTS Prenylated CL3 Is Palmitoylated in a Kinase - Activity - Dependent Manner and This Dual Lipidiﬁcation Determines Golgi Membrane Anchoring and Dendrite - Enriched Lipid Raft Targeting Prenylation was often reported to be accompanied by palmitoylation in many neuronal proteins ( El - Husseini and Bredt , 2002 ) . We directly tested the presence of multiple palmitoylation sites in the vicinity of the CAAX motif of CL3 / CaMKI g , a membrane - anchored CaMK ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2003 ) ( Figure 1A ) . Tritiated precursors for either prenyl or palmitoyl moieties , [ 3 H ] - mevalonate or [ 3 H ] - palmitate , were added in the culture medium of COS - 7 cells expressing either wild - type ( WT ) CL3 or various C - to - S substitution mutants of CL3 , and lipidiﬁcation of CL3 was tested using SDS - PAGE and digital autoradiography . Either [ 3 H ] - mevalonate conjuga - tion or [ 3 H ] - palmitate incorporation was signiﬁcantly detected in WT - expressing cells ( Figures 1B and 1C , WT ) . The former was absent in a C474S mutant ( Figure 1B , C474S ) , consistent with a CAAX prenylation . In contrast , the latter was reduced to background levels in a quadruple mutation ( 4CS ) of four cysteines ( C417S , C419S , C420S , and C423S ) ( Figure 1C , 4CS ) , identifying these residues as potential palmitoylation sites . We next tested whether there was a possible interaction between prenylation , palmitoylation , and kinase activity . Interestingly , the 4CS mutant was prenylated to a similar extent as the WT CL3 ( Figure 1D ) , while palmitoylation was hardly detected in a prenylation - deﬁcient C474S mutant ( Figure 1E ) . Thus , prenylation and palmitoylation might take place in a series , with prenylation perhaps occurring prior to and as a prerequisite for palmitoylation . Furthermore , a K52A kinase - inactive mutant of CL3 , in which the consensus ATP - binding lysine residue was replaced with an alanine , was prenylated as much as the WT ( Figure 1D ) , but its palmitoylation was signiﬁcantly impaired ( Figure 1E ) . These lines of evidence suggested that kinase activation on a prenylated ( and thus presum - ably membrane inserted ) CL3 may perhaps trigger a robust conformational change near the membranes that is necessary for full palmitoylation . Recently , 23 palmitoyl acyl transferases ( PATs ) have been identiﬁed ( Fukata et al . , 2004 ; Linder and Deschenes , 2004 ) . The brain - speciﬁc localization and the Golgi enrichment of a PAT , originally identiﬁed as a Golgi - apparatus - speciﬁc protein with the DHHC zinc ﬁnger domain ( GODZ ) ( Uemura et al . , 2002 ) , were reminis - cent of the distribution of CL3 . We therefore tested whether GODZ might palmitoylate CL3 . GODZ coexpres - sion with CL3 in heterologous cells yielded a 4 . 3 - fold 756 Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g increase ( 4 . 3 ± 0 . 55 , n = 5 ) in the amount of palmitate incorporation ( Figure 1F ) . We previously found that prenylation per se may be necessary for membrane anchoring and for trafﬁcking to diverse membrane compartments , such as the Golgi apparatus or the plasma membranes ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2003 ) . To test whether an additional palmitoylation may help to redistribute CL3 into speciﬁc membrane signalosomes such as those enriched at lipid rafts ( Ander - son and Jacobson , 2002 ) , we expressed GFP - tagged CL3 ( GFP - CL3 ) in cultured cortical neurons using a lentiviral vector driven by a synapsin I promoter . Consistent with our hypothesis , CL3 cofractionated with the lipid raft markers , caveolin - 2 and ﬂotillin - 1 , in the Triton X - 100 - insoluble low - density membrane fractions ( Figure 2A ) . We next directly visualized raft - inserted CL3 localization in cultured neurons treated with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , as any residual GFP signal should then be indicative of the presence of CL3 in detergent - resistant membrane micro - domains . In keeping with this , a sizable detergent nonex - tractable pool of GFP - CL3 was present in the perinuclear Golgi and proximal dendrites in developing hippocampal neurons ( see Figure S1A in the Supplemental Data avail - able with this article online , - GODZ arrow and arrowhead ; and Figure S1B ) , and this pool was further increased by coexpression of GODZ ( Figure S1A , + GODZ arrow and arrowheads ) . In immature cortical neurons , a large major - ity of the CL3 signal that was resistant to detergent treat - ment was present both in the intracellular perinuclear Golgi - like membranes and in the minor processes ( i . e . , dendrites ) ( Figure 2B , upper panel , see line scan in the inset for CL3 signal in the dendrites ) . Importantly , this detergent - resistant pool of CL3 was almost completely lost when neurons were treated with zaragozic acid , an Figure 1 . The C - Terminal Region of CL3 Is Covalently Modiﬁed by a Dual Lipidiﬁ - cation Mechanism that Involves Prenyla - tion of the CAAX Motif and a Subsequent Activity - Regulated Palmitoylation ( A ) Domain structure of CL3 ( upper panel ) and amino acid sequence of its C - terminal end ( lower panel ) . The numbers show the position of amino acid residues . In addition to a classi - cal prenylation site at the Cys - 474 residue ( in blue ) of the C - terminal CAAX motif ( double underline ) , the unique C - terminal region of CL3 contained multiple Cys residues ( in red and green ) , which constituted potential palmitoylation sites . Among them , four neigh - boring Cys ( in red and underlined ) were experimentally validated as critical residues for palmitoylation , as shown also in ( C ) . AID , autoinhibitory domain ; CBD , Ca 2 + / calmodulin - binding domain . ( B ) Prenylation of the CAAX motif of CL3 . Immunoprecipitates for each sample were obtained using an anti - GFP antibody and ex - amined by SDS - PAGE followed by autoradio - graphic exposure . [ 3 H ] - mevalonate ( [ 3 H ] - MVA ) incorporation ( left ) was detected in a wild - type GFP - CL3 ( WT ) , but not in a CAAX motif mutant ( C474S ) or GFP alone . The amount of loaded proteins in each lane was compara - ble , as shown by CBB staining ( right ) . The mobility of GFP - CL3 and GFP are indicated by arrows , and the heavy chain of the IgG used for immunoprecipitation is shown by an asterisk . ( C ) Determination of critical palmitoylated Cys residues on CL3 . Incorporation of [ 3 H ] - palmitate ( [ 3 H ] - Pal ) was observed in wild - type GFP - CL3 ( WT ) . Incorporation of [ 3 H ] - palmitate wassigniﬁcantlydiminishedintwomutants ( inred ) , C417 / 419 / 420S ( tripleCys - to - Sersubstitutionatresidues417 , 419 , and420 ) andC423S , indicating the existence of multiple Cys residues critical for palmitoylation . Unaffected mutants are shown in green . A quadruple mutant ( 4CS ) with a quadruple substitution had the least amount of [ 3 H ] - palmitate incorporation and was considered to be a palmitoylation - deﬁcient mutant ( 4CS ) . ( D ) Unchangedlevelofprenylationonbothapalmitoylation - deﬁcient ( 4CS ) andakinase - dead ( K52A , aLysresidueintheATP - bindingpocketreplaced with an Ala ) mutant of CL3 . ( E ) A decrease in palmitoylation was observed in a prenylation - deﬁcient mutant ( C474S ) , as well as a kinase - inactive mutant ( K52A ) . ( F ) CoexpressionofHA - GODZ , aneuronalpalmitoylacyltransferase , ledtoasigniﬁcantincreaseinCL3palmitoylationby4 . 32±0 . 55fold ( n = 5 ) . * * p < 0 . 01 by paired t test . Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 757 Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g inhibitor of squalene synthase that efﬁciently depletes membrane cholesterol ( Figure 2B , lower panel ) . These results indicated that CL3 was a genuine component of dendritic lipid rafts and that raft insertion was likely regulated by CL3 prenylation and palmitoylation . Does CL3 actually share some of the properties known for dendritic raft signaling molecules ? A number of raft proteins were previously reported to homo - oligomerize into a multimeric protein complex via lipidiﬁcation ( Zacha - rias et al . , 2002 ; Huang and El - Husseini , 2005 ) . Indeed , HA - tagged WT CL3 coimmunoprecipitated with GFP - CL3 ( Figure 2C ) in cortical neurons . Furthermore , a signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence energy transfer ( FRET ) was detected between coexpressed CFP - CL3 and YFP - CL3 in live hippocampal neurons , indicative of their genuine molecu - lar proximity in a complex ( Figure S2A ) . Interestingly , Lyn , a well known raft - enriched molecule , colocalized with CL3 in live - untreated , but not in detergent - treated , neurons ( Figure S2B ) . In contrast , the distribution of GluR1 , a dendritic protein that is targeted to lipid rafts by palmitoy - lation ( Suzuki et al . , 2001 ; Hering et al . 2003 ; Hayashi et al . 2005 ) , partially overlapped with CL3 even in detergent - treated neurons ( Figure S2C ) . CL3 Promotes Dendritogenesis in Cortical Neurons From previous studies ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2003 ; Wayman et al . , 2004 ) , it has been speculated that the CaMKK - CaMKI pathway might play a role in the control of neuronal morphology during development . In situ hybridization of embryonic day 17 . 5 ( E17 . 5 ) tissues revealed a strong expression of CL3 transcript in the fore - brain ( Figures 3A and 3B ) and in particular in the cortical plate of the cerebral cortex ( Figures 3C and 3D ) . To test whether CL3 was involved in neuronal morphogenesis during this period , either GFP or GFP - CL3 cDNAs were Figure 2 . Dendritic Raft Targeting and Multimeric Complex Formation of CL3 in Cortical Neurons ( A ) Wild - type GFP - CL3 ( WT ) expressed in cortical neurons using a synapsin I promoter - driven lentivirus was recovered in the lipid raft fraction ( lanes 4 – 5 ) , as conﬁrmed by the enrichment of raft marker proteins ﬂotillin - 1 and caveolin - 2 ( Cav - 2 ) . Fractions 1 – 4 , 5 % sucrose ; 5 – 12 , 35 % sucrose ; 13 , 50 % sucrose . ( B ) A sizable portion of total GFP - CL3 ﬂuores - cence was recovered after detergent treat - ment as detergent - resistant GFP - CL3 , which was localized in a punctate manner in 2 DIV cortical neurons along the dendrites as well as at the perinuclear region . Dendrites were unambiguously identiﬁed as processes of limited length ( much shorter than the axon exceeding100 m m ) . Linescansofpixelﬂuores - cence , carried out within a chosen ﬁeld of a 15 m m dendritic segment ( in insets 1 and 2 ) by horizontally tracking the clusters of GFP - CL3 , illustrate the spotty presence of raft - inserted CL3 along the dendrites ( right panels ) . Treatment with 100 m M zaragozic acid abolished the dendritic detergent - resistant patches and ﬂattened the line scan proﬁle . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( C ) CL3 forms a multimeric complex in cortical neurons . Wild - type CL3 tagged with either HA - tag ( HA - CL3 ) or GFP ( GFP - CL3 ) were coex - pressed in cortical neurons by nucleofection and coimmunoprecipitated using an anti - GFP antibody . In , input ; IP , immunoprecipitates . 758 Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g electroporated into cortical neurons immediately upon dissociation , and the morphology of the neurons was examined 48 hr later , a time point when the majority of neurons under our culture conditions developed well - discernable dendrites and one axon . In control GFP - expressing neurons , little GFP ﬂuorescence overlapped with a Golgi membrane marker , GM130 ( Figures 3E and 3F , arrow ) . In GFP - CL3 - overexpressing cortical neurons , however , GFP ﬂuorescence colocalized with GM130 ( Fig - ures 3G and 3H , arrow ) and also showed discrete enrich - ment within several dendritic processes ( Figures 3G and 3H , arrowhead ) . Compared to GFP - expressing control neurons ( Figure 3I ) , GFP - CL3 - overexpressing neurons appeared to exhibit unaltered axonal extension and branching , while in contrast , increased dendritic growth was found at and in the very vicinity of the soma ( Figure 3L ) . In keeping with this ﬁnding , coexpression of mCherry - actin with GFP - CL3 ( Figures 3M and 3N ) , but not with GFP ( Figures 3J and 3K ) , revealed an augmenta - tion of actin - enriched tips at the growing ends ( Figures 3M and 3N , arrows ) of the nascent processes extending out from the soma , consistent with activation of an actin cytoskeletal remodeling process . To quantify the morpho - logical changes associated with CL3 overexpression , morphometric analyses were performed on the dendrites of GFP - CL3 - expressing cortical neurons in a blind fash - ion . We found that total dendritic length , and in particular the length of the longest dendrite , was most strikingly increased by CL3 overexpression , while the change in branch - tip number remained small and not signiﬁcant ( Figure 3O ) . CL3 - dependent promotion of dendritic growth was detected equally over the whole range of length of primary dendrites ( Figure 3P ) , suggesting that the CL3 effect was unlikely to be restricted to just a subgroup of dendrites , but rather promoted a key com - mon step in early dendritic formation . This CL3 - induced effect was not seen with a kinase - inactive K52A mutant ( data not shown ) . Together , these sets of evidence suggested the possibility that CL3 may be involved in early stages of dendritogenesis in developing cortical neurons . A Required Role of CL3 in Dendritogenesis but Not in Axonogenesis To critically test this possibility , we next examined the neuronal morphology in neurons where CL3 expression wasstronglyattenuatedbyRNAinterference , usingashort hairpin - type pSUPER vector that also coexpressed a PGK promoter - driven EGFP or mRFP1 gene cassette for morphological tracing . The knockdown efﬁciency and speciﬁcity of the shCL3 vector was prominent enough such that even an overexpressed GFP - CL3 became barely detectable 48 hr after transfection , while the control mRFP1 expression level remained unchanged ( Figure 4A ) . This shCL3 vector was introduced into embryonic cortical neurons by electroporation , and formation of dendrites and axons was studied 48 hr later . While the cortical neurons showed 5 – 6 dendritic processes in control experiments , shCL3 - treated neurons revealed a notable impairment in the number and total length of MAP2 - positive dendrites ( Figure 4B , arrows ) . In striking contrast , formation of Tau - 1 - positive axons was largely spared ( Figure 4B , arrowheads ) . Quantitative morphometric analyses on dendritic or axonal arborizations conﬁrmed that the impairment in shCL3 - transfected neurons was actually conﬁned to a selective decline in total dendritic length and in total tip number and did not affect either axonal outgrowth or branching ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . The reduction in dendritic growth was observed throughout the whole range of dendrite length ( Figure S3 ) . The striking speciﬁcity in dendritic phenotype was also sustained even in shCL3 - transfected neurons that were plated following an extensive period ( 48 hr ) of suspension culture that allowed them to maximize the effect of knockdown prior to plating ( Figure S4 ) . Knockdown of either CaMKII a or CaMKIV revealed no phenotype , at least during the very early dendritogenic period that we examined ( Figure S5 ) . Taken together , knockdown of CL3 did not interfere with the process of axon speciﬁcation or axonogenesis , but rather suppressed a subsequent process that was required for dendritogenesis . We next asked whether CL3’s kinase activation was a genuine requirement . The abnormality in dendritogenesis could be rescued by addi - tional expression of an shCL3 - resistant WT ( kinase - active ) CL3 , but not by that of an shCL3 - resistant K52A ( kinase - inactive ) CL3 , demonstrating the absolute necessity of CL3 kinase activity during dendritogenesis ( Figure 4E ) . Consistently , early dendritogenesis , but not axonogene - sis , was also impaired in cultured cortical neurons obtained from CL3 null mice ( Figure 4F ) . In 9 DIV hippocampal neurons , CL3 knockdown dimin - ished total dendritic length and primary dendrite number ( Figure S6 ) and induced an altered Golgi morphology ( Figure S7 ) , which was somewhat reminiscent of Golgi vesiculation associated with impaired dendritic polarity ( Horton et al . , 2005 ) . A Required Role for CL3 in BDNF - Stimulated Dendritic Growth We then asked what calcium mobilization might contrib - ute to CL3 - dependent stimulation of dendrite develop - ment . Brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) was previously shown to strongly promote dendrite growth and trigger an intracellular calcium rise ( e . g . , Huang and Reichardt , 2003 , for a review ) . Consistent with published literature , bath application of BDNF induced a slow but clear increase in intracellular Ca 2 + concentration in the cultured cortical neurons used in our study ( Figures 5A – 5C ) . Latencies of onset and oscillatory amplitudes / frequencies varied from neuron to neuron ( Figures 5B and 5C ) . Continuous treatment of cortical neurons with BDNF signiﬁcantly promoted dendritic growth ( Figure 5D , p < 0 . 05 , ANOVA with post hoc Tukey - Kramer test ) . In the presence of a global blocker of CaM kinase activation , KN - 93 , both constitutive and BDNF - stimulated components of dendritic growth were strongly inhibited Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 759 Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g Figure 3 . Expression of CL3 in the Developing Cortex and Regulation of Dendritic Morphogenesis in Cultured Cortical Neurons ( A – D ) In situ hybridization of mouse embryonic ( E17 . 5 ) tissue using an antisense ( AS ) riboprobe revealed an intense signal of CL3 transcript in the developing forebrain . The boxed area of a macroscopic image in ( A ) is shown at higher magniﬁcation ( C ) : ( left ) hybridized DIG signal only ; ( right ) full - colorimage ( DIGsignalinblue - violet + nuclearcounterstaininginred ) . Thecontrolsenseprobedetectedlittlesignal ( BandD ) . Asterisk , piamater ; MZ , marginal zone ; CP , cortical plate . ( E – H ) Membrane localization of CL3 in embryonic cortical cultures . GFP - CL3 distribution detected by anti - GFP immunostaining ( G and H ) showed colocalization with a Golgi marker , GM130 ( [ G and H ] , arrows ) . GFP - CL3 signals were also enriched within tips of ﬁne dendritic processes ( [ G and H ] , arrowheads ) . Note that the GFP signals in control neurons were separated from the red GM130 immunoﬂuorescence ( E and F ) . Single representative confocal sections are shown . ( I – N ) OverexpressionofGFP - CL3facilitated formationofactin - richthinprocesses fromdendritesand soma . Low - magniﬁcationimageshowedGFP - CL3 signals were distributedboth inthenascent dendrites and intheaxon ( [ L ] , arrow and arrowhead , respectively ) . InGFP - CL3 - expressing neurons , alargernumberofthinprocessesreminiscentofﬁnedendritesand / orﬁlopodiawere presentatdendritesandsoma ( [ LandM ] , arrows ) , ascompared with GFP - expressing neurons ( I and J ) , but not at the axon ( [ L ] , arrowheads ) . These numerous processes contained abundant amounts of b - actin , as shown by enrichment of mCherry - actin ( arrows in [ N ] ) . 760 Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g ( Figure 5D ) . Because KN - 93 suppressed dendritic growth to a similar extent under either constitutive or BDNF - stimulated conditions , this raised the possibility of a common involvement of a KN - 93 - sensitive kinase ( Fig - ure 5D ) . To speciﬁcally test this idea , we employed RNAi and measured the degree of suppression of dendritic growth in the absence or presence of BDNF application and found that indeed CL3 knockdown completely phenocopied the effect of KN - 93 on dendrites and oc - cluded BDNF - stimulated dendritic growth ( Figure 5E ) . ( O ) Facilitation of dendritic outgrowth by CL3 overexpression . Total length , branch tip number , and longest dendrite length are shown . Number of neurons : GFP , n = 30 ; GFP - CL3 , n = 30 . * * * p < 0 . 001 ; n . s . , not signiﬁcant ( p > 0 . 05 ) ( t test ) . ( P ) Cumulative probability analysis shows a signiﬁcant extension of primary dendrites in GFP - CL3 - expressing neurons ( * * p < 0 . 01 , Kolmogorov - Smirnov test ) . Numbers of examined dendrites : GFP , n = 258 ( from 50 neurons ) ; GFP - CL3 , n = 321 ( from 50 neurons ) . Scale bars , 300 m m ( A and B ) ; 50 m m ( C and D ) ; 10 m m ( E – H ) ; 20 m m ( I – N ) . Figure 4 . CL3 Loss - of - Function in Embryonic Cortical Neurons Elicits a Speciﬁc Impairment in Dendrite Morphogenesis ( A ) Efﬁcient downregulation of exogenous GFP - CL3 was achieved by a CL3 - targeted shRNA vector ( pSUPER - shCL3 ) , but not by a control vector ( pSUPER - shNega ) , in embry - onic cortical neurons . The mRFP1 expression , which was driven by a dual promoter in apSUPER + mRFP1vectorcassette , remained unchanged . ( B ) ArepresentativeconfocalimageofanshCL3 / GFP - expressing neuron ( pSUPER - shCL3 ) showing impaired dendritogenesis . In this ex - ample , an shCL3 - expressiong neuron had only a single remaining dendrite ( an arrow in the inset ) , while an shNega - transfected neuron carried 5 – 6 dendrites ( arrows in the inset ) . On the other hand , no change in axonal morphol - ogy was detected ( arrowheads ) . Tau - 1 and MAP2 were used to identify axons and den - drites , respectively . ( C ) Monochrome diagrams of representative shNega - or shCL3 - expressing neurons . The longest process ( axon ) was unchanged , while the morphology of shorter dendrites near the cell soma was much simpliﬁed in shCL3 - transfected neurons . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of morphometric parameters in CL3 - knockdown neurons . To quantify , the totallengthandthedendriticbranchtipnumber werecalculatedoverthedendriticortheaxonal arborizationsforallbranchesexceeding7 m min length . In shCL3 - expressing neurons , both parameters were signiﬁcantly reduced in the dendrites . On the other hand , neither axonal length nor axonal branch tip number were sig - niﬁcantly altered . Number of neurons : shNega , n = 78 ; shCL3 , n = 53 . * * * p < 0 . 001 ; n . s . , notsig - niﬁcant ( p > 0 . 05 ) ( t test ) . ( E ) Requirement for CL3 kinase activity to rescue shCL3 - mediated impairment in dendri - togenesis . Introduction of an shCL3 - resistant silent mutant of wild - type GFP - CL3 ( WT res ) successfully rescued the dendritic phenotype elicited by shCL3 on both morphometric parameters . The shCL3 - resistant kinase - inactive GFP - CL3 ( K52A res ) was unable to rescue the shCL3 phenotype . Number of neurons : shNega , n = 37 ; shCL3 + mock , n = 35 ; shCL3 + WT res , n = 41 ; shCL3 + K52A res , n = 33 . * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ; n . s . , not signiﬁcant ( p > 0 . 05 ) ( ANOVA with post hoc Tukey - Kramer test ) . ( F ) Dendritogenesis , but not axonogenesis , is speciﬁcally impaired in cultured cortical neurons from CL3 - KO mice . WT , n = 20 ; CL3 - KO , n = 20 . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; n . s . , not signiﬁcant ( p > 0 . 05 ) ( t test ) . Scale bars , 50 m m ( A – C ) and 20 m m ( [ B ] , inset ) . Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 761 Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g Furthermore , dendritic growth was rescued by coexpress - ing an shCL3 - resistant wild - type , but not a membrane anchoring - defective CL3 mutant ( Figure 5F ) . Thus , signal - ing via membrane - anchored CL3 may play a critical role in BDNF - mediated cortical dendritogenesis during early development . A Lipid - Raft - Delineated CL3 - STEF - Rac Pathway Contributes to the Development of Cortical Dendrites What are the signaling components that underlie lipidiﬁed CL3 - mediated dendritic growth ? Taking advantage of our ﬁnding that CL3 overexpression was accompanied by a sizable increase in the length of primary dendrites ( Fig - ures 3O , 3P , and 6A ) , and in particular its longest dendrite ( Figure 3O , right panel ; Figure 6B ) , we next tested the pos - sible contribution of small GTPases downstream of CL3 . Coexpression of a dominant - negative Rac abolished the effect of CL3 overexpression ( Figures 6A and 6B ) , and this effect was seen throughout the observed range of primary dendrite length ( Figure 6C ) , supporting the idea that Rac mediated CL3 - stimulated dendritic growth . Con - sistently , we found that CL3 knockdown downregulated Rac activity ( Figure 6D ) . Furthermore , overexpression of a dominant interfering fragment ( PHnTSS ) of STEF , a spe - ciﬁc RacGEF previously implicated in cortical migration and neurite outgrowth ( Kawauchi et al . , 2003 ; Matsuo et al . , 2002 ) , also potently repressed the CL3 effect ( Fig - ures 6A and 6B ) ; however , this effect was less pronounced in dendriteswith shorter lengths ( < 20 m m ) ( Figure 6C ) . Both STEF and Rac were detected in the Triton X - 100 - insoluble low - density membrane fractions enriched for ﬂotillin - 1 but devoid of transferrin receptors ( Figure 6E ) , consistent with the presence of a raft - delineated CL3 - STEF - Rac pathway . In keeping with this , sustained Rac activity signiﬁcantly at - tenuated the impairment in dendrite development ob - served in CL3 - diminished neurons ( Figures 6F and 6G ) . If raft localization of CL3 was critical for CL3 - dependent dendritogenesis , a raft depletion by pharmacological manipulation or a removal of CL3 from rafts by mutation of its palmitoylation sites should signiﬁcantly perturb dendrite formation and growth . To test this , we pretreated cortical neurons with either mevastatin , an HMG - CoA reductase inhibitor , to deplete membrane cholesterol , and / or with fumonisin B 1 , an inhibitor of sphingolipid synthesis . Treatment with either mevastatin or , to a lesser extent , with fumonisin B 1 reduced dendritogenesis ( Fig - ures 7A and 7B ) . A combination of both had no further additive effect ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . As mevastatin was expected to interfere not only with cholesterol synthesis alone but also with protein prenylation , we also examined the effect of zaragozic acid , an inhibitor of squalene syn - thase , which would disrupt cholesterol synthesis while sparing mevalonate production . Zaragozic acid treatment diminished dendrite formation to a degree similar to the effect seen with mevastatin ; a combination of both did not produce a further incremental effect ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . Interestingly , raft depletion by treatment with zara - gozic acid abolished the dendritogenic action of overex - pressed CL3 ( Figure 7C ) . Together , these results further supported the idea that the presence of intact lipid rafts was critical for CL3 to exhibit its dendritic effect . In keeping with this , a palmitoylation - site - deﬁcient 4CS mutant of CL3 , which was made resistant to shCL3 RNAi vector , was unable to rescue the dendritic effect of CL3 knockdown in cortical neurons ( Figure S4C ) . Intriguingly , in hippocampal neurons , the inaccessibility of 4CS mutant protein toward detergent - resistant raft membranes in CL3 - knockdown cells ( Figure S8A ) was accompanied with the appearance of exuberant thin ﬁlopodial pro - cesses from the soma ( Figure S8B , arrows ) . These results are consistent with a role of palmitoylation in targeting , and perhaps restricting , CL3 expression to its appropriate sites of cellular actions . Taken together , CL3 palmitoyla - tion may be a useful means to restrict STEF - Rac activation to microdomains in the vicinity of dendritic rafts during early dendritogenesis . DISCUSSION Identiﬁcation of CL3 / CaMKI g as a Privileged Kinase Involved in the Regulation of Dendritic Cytoarchitecture during Early CNS Development Previous analyses have established the necessity of CaMKII , a predominant form of CaM kinase , as molecular switch required for neuroplasticity in the hippo - campus , the barrel cortex , and the visual cortex ( Lisman et al . , 2002 ; Fox and Wong , 2005 ) . Furthermore , the role of CaMKII isoforms in several forms of dendritic develop - ment was extensively studied , though the exact effect on dendrite morphogenesis has remained rather controver - sial . CaMKII a was shown to contribute to dendritic out - growth in cerebellar granule neurons ( Gaudilliere et al . , 2004 ) , and CaMKII b but not CaMKII a regulated the move - ment and branching of ﬁlopodia and ﬁne dendrites in rat hippocampal neurons ( Fink et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast , in Xenopus retinotectal neurons , CaMKII was reported to limit dendritic outgrowth and to stabilize dendritic arbori - zation in vivo ( Wu and Cline , 1998 ) . In contrast to CaMKII , which is one of most abundant proteins expressed in the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) ( Kennedy , 2000 ) , CaMKIV in the nucleus plays a critical role in mediating Ca 2 + - regulated transcription via a CREB / CBP pathway , which is necessary for the formation of long - term synaptic plasticity and long - term memory ( Silva et al . , 1998 ; Bito and Takemoto - Kimura , 2003 ) , as well as activity - dependent dendritic elongation ( Redmond et al . , 2002 ) . In turn , a cytosolic CaMKI activity has been shown to participate in the gating of an ERK / MAP - kinase - dependent form of LTP ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . Neurite out - growth was also reported to be regulated by a presumably cytosolic CaMKK - CaMKI / IV pathway : indeed , a constitu - tively active CaMKIV was suggested to enhance dendritic growth via stabilization of b - catenin ( Yu and Malenka , 2003 ) , while a CaMKK inhibitory drug , STO - 609 , or puta - tive dominant - negative constructs speciﬁcally blocking 762 Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g either CaMKK or cytosolic CaMKI / CaMKIV ( but not nu - clear CaMKIV ) activities prevented axonal extension and growth cone dynamics as well as neurite extension ( Schmitt et al . , 2004 ; Wayman et al . , 2004 ) . Taken together , multiple CaM kinase pathways that are segregated in distinct subcellular compartments may regulate several critical steps converging onto dendrite elongation and maturation . This prompted us to investi - gate the particular role of CL3 / CaMKI g ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2003 ; Nishimura et al . , 2003 ) , a membrane - anchored form of CaMKI , which was highly expressed in the cortical plate neurons of the mouse embryo ( this study ) . Intriguingly , we found a speciﬁc impairment in the number and total lengths of dendrites in CL3 knock - down and CL3 null neurons ( Figure 4 and Figure S3 ) , while axonal morphology was not signiﬁcantly distinct from controls . Knockdown of CL3 prior to plating of neurons strengthened this suppressive effect on the dendrites while still sparing the axons ( Figure S4 ) . Taken together , our data suggested a prominent role of CL3 during the early stages of dendritogenesis that pre - sumably followed completion of the axon / dendrite speciﬁcation . While this paper was under review , an independent study reported that CL3 / CaMKI g may regulate activity - dependent dendritic growth at an even later stage of development in hippocampal neurons ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ; see also Figures S6 and S7 of this study ) . Figure 5 . Requirement of CL3 for BDNF - Stimulated Dendrititogenesis ( A ) BDNF - induced calcium transients in developing cultured neurons . A representative image of cortical neurons during a typical calcium rise after BDNF bath application is shown in ( A ) . Embryonic cortical neurons ( 1 DIV ) were loaded with a calcium indicator , Fluo - 4AM , and calcium responses were measured by time - lapse imaging . A green ﬂuorescence image was overlaid on a DIC image . Colored boxes indicate the location of cells shown in ( B ) . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( B ) Representative calcium responses in individual cells after BDNF administration . Three different types of calcium responses were revealed . The majority of cells showed a large transient response followed by smaller repetitive responses ( blue ) , whereas some showed oscillation ( yellow ) or chronic increases from the baseline ( red ) . ( C ) Averaged calcium responses after BDNF administration . An averaged response from 70 cells in a microscopic ﬁeld is shown . ( D ) Corticalneuronsweretransfectedwithamorphological tracer , mCherry , andstimulatedwithBDNFfrom6hrto48hrafterplating , inthepresence or absence of KN - 93 , a general CaM kinase inhibitor . BDNF treatment maximized dendritogenesis , and this BDNF - stimulated increment was occluded in neurons treated with KN - 93 . Numbers of neurons : vehicle + DMSO , n = 25 ; vehicle + KN - 93 , n = 44 ; BDNF + DMSO , n = 38 ; BDNF + KN - 93 , n = 32 . ( E ) Quantiﬁcation of dendritogenesis in BDNF - stimulated CL3 - knockdown neurons . CL3 knockdown severely inhibited dendritogenesis induced by BDNFadministration , toanextentsimilartothatobtainedwithKN - 93 . Numbersofneurons : vehicle + shNega , n = 40 ; vehicle + shCL3 , n = 41 ; BDNF + shNega , n = 40 ; BDNF + shCL3 , n = 40 . ( F ) Suppression by CL3 knockdown of BDNF - stimulated dendritogenesis can be rescued by coexpression of an shRNA - resistant wild - type CL3 ( WTres ) , but not by a nonlipidiﬁed mutant CL3 ( C474Sres ) . Numbers of neurons : shNega + mock , n = 52 ; shCL3 + mock , n = 57 ; shCL3 + WTres , n = 57 ; shCL3 + C474Sres , n = 55 . * * * p < 0 . 001 ; n . s . , not signiﬁcant ( ANOVA with post hoc Tukey - Kramer test ) . Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 763 Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g Figure 6 . A Critical Role for RacGEF STEF and Rac in Mediating CL3 - Induced Dendritic Outgrowth ( A ) Cortical neurons were cotransfected with GFP - CL3 and either dominant - negative Rac1 ( RacDN ) or dominant - interfering fragment of STEF ( STEFDN ) together with a morphometric tracer , mRFP1 . Examples for dendrites ( arrows ) and axons ( arrowheads ) are shown . Scale bar , 20 m m . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of longest dendrite . Number of neurons : GFP + mock , n = 51 ; GFP - CL3 + mock , n = 50 ; GFP - CL3 + RacDN , n = 57 ; GFP - CL3 + STEFDN , n = 60 . * * * p < 0 . 001 ( ANOVA with post hoc Tukey - Kramer test ) . ( C ) Cumulative probability analysis of the length of primary dendrites showed that inhibition of STEF and Rac activity suppressed the extension of primary dendrites induced in GFP - CL3 - expressing neurons . Number of examined dendrites ( neurons ) : GFP , n = 324 ( from 51 neurons ) ; GFP - CL3 , n = 332 ( from 50 neurons ) ; GFP - CL3 + RacDN , n = 328 ( from 57 neurons ) ; GFP - CL3 + STEFDN , n = 378 ( from 60 neurons ) . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ( Kolmogorov - Smirnov test ) . 764 Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g Control of CL3 Targeting to Lipid Microdomains by a Kinase - Activity - Regulated Dual Lipidiﬁcation Mechanism In polarized neural cells , covalently attached lipid modiﬁ - cation of proteins is important for membrane targeting and expression of proper function in the vicinity of special - ized membrane compartments . Largely based on quanti - tative work on Ras and PSD - 95 , a palmitoylation / depalmi - toylation cycle has been previously suggested to play a crucial regulatory role in determining the proper ( D ) The amount of GTP - bound active Rac1 was measured by a Pak1 - PBD pulldown assay using cortical neurons transfected with shNega or shCL3 vector . The amount of active Rac1 was reduced by CL3 knockdown . ( E ) Presence of Rac1 and STEF immunoreactivities in lipid raft fractions of cortical neurons . For STEF detection , a pooled and concentrated raft fraction was used . Transferrin receptor was used as a non - raft membrane marker . ( F ) Representative images ofshCL3 / mRFP1 - expressingneuronscoexpressing constitutively active GFP - Rac1 ( + V12Rac1 ) or GFP ( + mock ) . Expres - sion of constitutively - active GFP - Rac1 ( + V12Rac1 ) restored appearance of multiple dendrites ( arrows ) in shCL3 - expressing neurons , while expres - sion of GFP alone did not . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( G ) Quantiﬁcation of dendritic morphogenesis conﬁrmed that constitutively active GFP - Rac1 attenuated the speciﬁc impairment of dendritic morphology induced by shCL3 transfection . Number of neurons : shNega + mock , n = 22 ; shCL3 + mock , n = 47 ; shCL3 + V12Rac1 , n = 49 . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ( ANOVA with post hoc Tukey - Kramer test ) . Figure 7 . Raft Depletion Abolishes CL3 - Mediated Dendrite Outgrowth ( A ) Cortical neurons were transfected with a morphological tracer , mCherry , and cultured in the presence of various combinations of raft - depleting agents from 6 hr to 48 hr after plating . Disruption of cholesterol / sphingolipid synthesis strongly inhibited formation and outgrowth of the dendritic processes around the soma . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( B ) Ensemble average of experiments shown in ( A ) . DMSO , n = 10 ; 10 m M mevastatin , n = 15 ; 10 m M fumonisin B 1 , n = 15 ; 10 m M fumonisin B 1 and 10 m M mevastatin , n = 15 ; 100 m M zaragozic acid , n = 15 ; 100 m M zaragozic acid and 10 m M mevastatin , n = 15 . * * * p < 0 . 001 ( ANOVA with post hoc Tukey - Kramer test ) . ( C ) Raft depletion using zaragozic acid abolished the increase of dendritogenesis induced by CL3 overexpression . A signiﬁcant CL3 - mediated increaseindendriticgrowthwasshownintheDMSOcontrol , butthissigniﬁcantincreasewasabolishedbyraftdepletioninthepresenceofzaragozic acid ( two - way ANOVA , CL3 effect , F 1 , 65 = 8 . 65 , p = 0 . 0045 ; drug effect , F 1 , 65 = 51 . 95 , p < 0 . 0001 ; CL3 3 drug , F 1 , 65 = 8 . 38 , p = 0 . 0052 ) . * * * p < 0 . 001 ( post hoc Bonferroni test ) . DMSO , n = 15 ( (cid:2) CL3 ) , n = 24 ( + CL3 ) , 100 m M zaragozic acid , n = 15 ( (cid:2) CL3 ) , n = 15 ( + CL3 ) . Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 765 Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g trafﬁcking and function of palmitoylated signaling proteins ( Huang and El - Husseini , 2005 ) . Dynamic regulation of pal - mitoylation was already shown for a large number of syn - aptic constituents such as AMPA - receptor subunits ( Hay - ashi et al . , 2005 ) , GABAR g - subunits ( Keller et al . , 2004 ) , and GRIP / ABP ( DeSouza et al . , 2002 ) , indicating a critical role for neuronal PAT in synaptic maturation and mainte - nance . However , a direct involvement of protein palmitoy - lation in early stages of neuronal morphogenesis has not been examined . In this work , we demonstrated that the C - terminal end of CL3 was covalently modiﬁed in a sequential manner by prenylation and by palmitoylation . A dually lipidiﬁed CL3 was generated in a kinase - activity - dependent man - ner , in part via the PAT GODZ ( Uemura et al . , 2002 ) , resulting in an efﬁcient enrichment into dendritic - raft - like lipid microdomains . We then found that dually lipidiﬁed CL3 was likely to be partitioned and targeted to close proximity of dendritic lipid microdomains . Consistently , CL3 showed self - association ( Figure 2C and Figure S2A ) , a property that is not unusual for palmitoylated or dually lipidiﬁed proteins ( Zacharias et al . , 2002 ) . However , we failed to detect any Ca 2 + / CaM - independent kinase activity of CL3 , even under conditions where CL3 multimerization was present . This is distinct from the property of CaMKII , in which dodecame - rization was shown to promote a Ca 2 + / CaM - independent kinase activity that outlasted the duration of the incoming Ca 2 + mobilization through an autophosphorylation mech - anism . We thus speculate that oligomerization , if any , of prenyl - / palmitoyl - CL3 may have roles other than the generation of an autonomous kinase activity , such as sustaining a high degree of molecular proximity and con - centration that favors signal ampliﬁcation and increases the speciﬁcity and efﬁciency of coupling to downstream signaling events . A BDNF - CL3 - Rac Pathway May Underlie Excitation - Morphogenesis Coupling during Early Cortical Dendritogenesis Previously , neuronal activity has been shown to promote initiation of dendrite formation via small GTPases such as Rac and Cdc42 ( Luo , 2002 ; Van Aelst and Cline , 2004 ) . To date , however , knowledge about how neuronal activity regulates these small GTPases is still limited . The strongest evidence in favor of activity - induced den - dritic arborization so far involved several Ca 2 + - regulated transcriptional factor such as CREB , NeuroD , and CREST ( Gaudilliere et al . , 2004 ; Konur and Ghosh , 2005 ) , though the cellular mechanisms linking nuclear events and neuro - nal morphogenesis remained as yet largely undetermined . Here we found that a membrane - bound CaM kinase , CL3 / CaMKI g , may possibly act downstream of BDNF and Ca 2 + signals to promote dendritic cytoskeletal remodeling via the small GTPase Rac , especially during early stages of dendritic development . Furthermore , we provided several lines of evidence that collectively indicated that CL3 - STEF - Rac signaling triggered at or in the vicinity of lipid rafts may play a critical role . Could lipid rafts , also known as sphingolipid - and cholesterol - rich membrane microdomains , be distributed in an asymmetric fashion such that some of these may inﬂuence dendrite targeting of signaling proteins such as CL3 ? In support for such an idea , depletion of cellular cholesterol / sphingolipid content in cultured neurons revealed an important role for cholesterol ( Fan et al . , 2002 ) or sphingolipids ( Schwarz and Futerman , 1998 ; Pelled et al . , 2003 ) in dendritic growth and spine mainte - nance ( Hering et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , no responsiveness to glutamate application was reported in neonatal cortical neurons of a mutant mouse deﬁcient in cholesterol biosynthesis , despite a normal amount of GluR and NMDAR subunit expression , indicating a possible defect in membrane insertion of dendritic glutamate receptors ( Wassif et al . , 2001 ) . A distinct kind of raft - mediated asymmetry may play a role in axonal fate speciﬁcation ( Da Silva et al . , 2005 ) . If raft formation was coupled with the creation of a polarized asymmetry of signaling molecule distribution , how could this possibly underlie a morphogenetic response , especially downstream of BDNF ? Recruit - ment of activated TrkB to lipid rafts ( Suzuki et al . , 2004 ) could evidently contribute to efﬁcient coupling to raft - targeted CL3 downstream of BDNF . In neurons , fractionation experiments during development have also previously revealed a privileged association of Rac with rafts , but not of RhoA or Cdc42 ( Kumanogoh et al . , 2001 ; see also Figure 6E ) . We additionally found that a portion of STEF was clearly present in the raft fractions as well ( Figure 6E ) . As the fragment encom - passing the PHnTSS domain of STEF ( PHnTSS ) has been shown to act as a speciﬁc dominant - negative form for both STEF and Tiam1 ( Matsuo et al . , 2002 ) , it remains possible that there may also be an additional contribution of Tiam1 , a known substrate for CaMK activity ( Tolias et al . , 2005 ) . Taken together , dual lipidiﬁcation of CL3 may be an efﬁcient mechanism not only to target it into rafts and to limit its protein diffusion parallel to the lipid bilayer , but also to generate a membrane - delimited area of Rac acti - vation within segregated dendritic lipid microdomains at the vicinity of Ca 2 + - mobilization events . Further studies are needed to substantiate such a hypothesis . In conclusion , we here uncovered a novel role for CL3 / CaMKI g in the regulation of Rac - dependent dendritic cytoskeletal reorganization , and we found evidence for CL3 in mediating BDNF - stimulated dendritic growth . Through a dual and sequential lipidiﬁcation mechanism , the unique C - terminal region of CL3 was covalently lipid - modiﬁed in a kinase - activity - dependent manner , leading to a privileged partition of membrane - anchored CL3 into dendritic - raft - like lipid microdomains . This membrane - sorting mechanism , unprecedented for a neuronal Ser / Thr kinase , in turn may efﬁciently localize Rac activity and thereby regulate dendritogenesis . Thus , CL3 turned 766 Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g out to represent a key element in the Ca 2 + - dependent and lipid - raft - delineated switch that turned on activity - regu - lated dendrite formation in developing cortical neurons . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cloning and Plasmid Constructions AdetaileddescriptionofallplasmidscanbefoundintheSupplemental Data . Immunocytochemistry Cells were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde / 4 % sucrose / phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) ( (cid:2) ) at room temperature for 20 min , and immu - nostaining was carried out as described ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2003 ) . Additional methods can be found in the Supplemental Data . Western Blot Analysis For western blot analysis , primary antibodies were as follows : rat anti - GFP ( Nacalai Tesque , Japan ) , rat anti - HA ( Roche Diagnostics ) , mouse anti - Flotillin - 1 , mouse anti - Caveolin - 2 , and anti - Rac1 ( BD Transduc - tionLaboratories ) . Arabbitanti - STEFantibodywasasdescribed ( Mat - suo et al . , 2002 ) . Chemiluminescence detection was performed using HRP - conjugated anti - rat and anti - mouse IgG and ECL - Plus reagent ( Amersham Biosciences ) . Metabolic Labeling and Coimmunoprecipitation For metabolic labeling , COS - 7 cells plated onto 6 - well plates were transfected with wild - type and mutant GFP - CL3 vectors using Fugene6 reagent ( Roche Diagnostics ) . For mevalonate labeling , a pMev vector ( ATCC ) , which encoded a transporter that augmented mevalonic acid uptake , was cotransfected with GFP - CL3 for 24 hr . Cells were pretreated with 40 m M Compactin ( Wako , Japan ) for 2 hr , then incubated for 20 hr in growth medium supplemented with 40 m M Compactin and 0 . 1 mCi / ml of [ 3 H ] - mevalonolactone ( Perki - nElmerorARC ) . Palmitatelabelingwasinitiated48hraftertransfection by pretreating cells with serum - free medium ( DMEM with 1 % fatty - acid - free bovine serum albumin [ Sigma ] ) for 1 hr , and then incubating for an additional 3 hr in the serum - free medium supplemented with 0 . 4 mCi / ml of [ 3 H ] - palmitic acid ( PerkinElmer ) . After metabolic labeling , cells were washed twice in ice - cold phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) ( (cid:2) ) and lysed in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 100 mM NaCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 10 % glycerol , 1 % Triton X - 100 , and a Complete protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche Diagnostics ) . Lysates were immunoprecipitated using a rabbit anti - GFP polyclonal antibody ( Molecular Probes ) and Protein - A - Sepharose ( Amersham Biosci - ences ) . Immunoprecipitates were washed three times in lysis buffer and boiled in 4 3 Laemmli buffer containing 5 mM DTT for 3 min and were subjected to SDS - PAGE . Incorporated mevalonolactone and palmitic acid were digitally detected using a BAS - 5000 bioimage analyzer and quantiﬁed using Multi Gauge software ( Fujiﬁlm , Japan ) . Incoimmunoprecipitationassays , cortical neuronswere transfected with GFP - CL3 and HA - CL3 vectors by electroporation using Nucleo - fector ( Amaxa Biosystems ) and plated onto poly - D - Lysine - coated 6 cm dishes at the density of 4 3 10 5 / cm 2 and then harvested at 2 DIV . Immunoprecipitation was performed as described above . Lentivirus Production , Infection , and Lipid Raft Fractionation A 536 bp synapsin I promoter was isolated by PCR from rat genomic DNA and inserted into CS - CA - MCS ( Miyoshi et al . , 1998 ) to replace the original chicken actin promoter . EGFP - CL3 fragment was further inserted and cotransfected with pCAG - HIVgp and pCMV - VSV - G - RSV - Rev into HEK293T cells using Fugene6 reagent to generate a self - inactivating lentivirus vector . All original lentivirus vectors were provided by Dr . Hiroyuki Miyoshi ( RIKEN - BRC , Japan ) . Concentrated virus solutions were obtained by ultracentrifugation at 80 , 000 3 g , and virus titer was determined using HeLa cells . Cortical neurons ( 1 DIV ) were infected with lentivirus for 5 hr at a nominal MOI of about 0 . 2 , and after washout , maintained in Neurobasal containing 0 . 5 mM Glutamax , 1 3 B27 , and 25 m g / ml insulin . Under these conditions , GFP - positive glial cells ( as determined by GFAP expression ) were lessthan6 % . ThoughthenominalMOIwasabout0 . 2 , thisisverylikely to be an underestimate , as it was calculated based on the induction of trace EGFP ﬂuorescence in heterologous cells . Lipid raft preparations were performed 2 days after infection ( 3 DIV ) . Lentivirus - infected corticalneurons in10 cmdishes ( 3 . 5 3 10 5 cells / cm 2 ) were harvested at 3 DIV for preparation of detergent - insoluble membrane fractions according to Suzuki et al . ( 2004 ) with minor modiﬁcations . Thirteen fractions ( 1 ml each ) were collected and 15 m l of each fraction were subjected to SDS - PAGE followed by western blot analysis . To obtain a concentrate of the raft fractions in Figure 5E , raft fractions ( fractions4 and 5 ) were pooled , and aportionof it ( 1 . 4 ml ) wasultracentrifugedat20 , 000 3 gfor1hrat4 (cid:3) C . Thepelletwasresus - pended in 140 m l of Buffer A ( 50 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 7 . 5 ] , 50 mM NaCl ) , and 15 m loftheﬁnalsample was subjected toSDS - PAGE and western blot analysis . Cell Culture Preparation and Visualization of Raft - Targeted Proteins COS - 7 cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium ( DMEM ) containing 10 % heat - inactivated fetal calf serum ( FCS ) . Dissociated cortical cultures from embryonic day 19 Sprague - Dawley rats were prepared as described previously for rat hippocampal cultures ( Bito et al . , 1996 ) with minor modiﬁcations . Cortical neurons were plated onto 12 mm poly - L - Lysine - coated coverslips at the density of 5 3 10 5 cells per coverslip in a 24 - well plate . Gene targeting of CL3 / CaMKI g was carried out in a C57BL / 6 - derivedEScelllineRENKA ( MishinaandSakimura , 2007 ) byinsertional mutagenesis . The exons 2 and 3 of mouse the Camk1g gene , which contained the kinase ATP - binding site , were deleted and replaced byatargetingconstrustsuchthattheﬁrstmethionineofCL3wasfused in - frametoanhCrePR - IRES - EGFPcassettethatwasjuxtaposedtoan inverted neomycin resistance gene ﬂanked by FRT sites . A detailed analysis of the CL3 / CaMKI g null mouse mutant will be described elsewhere ( S . T . - K . , M . O . , T . Takeuchi , K . Sakimura , M . M . , H . O . , and H . B , unpublished data ) . Cortical mouse cultures were prepared from embryonic day 17 C57BL / 6J wild - type or CL3 null mice . For visualization of in situ raft - targeted GFP - fusion proteins , rat cortical or mouse hippocampal neurons were washed with KRH buffer ( Suzuki et al . , 2004 ) containing 2 mM Ca 2 + on ice , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 / KRH ( + ) for 2 min on ice , washed gently , and then ﬁxed . Raftdepletion incortical neurons was carried out by including one of the following drugs ( 10 m M mevastatin , 10 m M fumonisin B 1 , 10 m M fumonisin B 1 and 10 m M mevastatin , 100 m M zaragozic acid , 100 m M zaragozic acid , and 10 m M mevastatin ) in the culture medium from 6 hr after plating onward for an additional 42 hr . mRFP1 was nucleofected for accurate visualization of the contours of individual neurons . In one instance , rat hippocampal neurons obtained from P0 – 1 Sprague - Dawley rats ( Bito et al . , 1996 ) were used to quantify FRET between CL3 molecules ( Figure S2A ) . Morphometric Analysis of the CL3 - Associated Phenotype in Cultured Neurons Dissociated cortical cultures from embryonic day 19 Sprague - Dawley rats were prepared as described previously for rat or mouse hippo - campal cultures ( Bito et al . , 1996 ; Furuyashiki et al . 2002 ) with minor modiﬁcations . Cortical neurons were transfected immediately after dissociation by electroporation using Nucleofector and plated onto 12 mm poly - L - Lysine - coated coverslips at the density of 5 3 10 5 cells per coverslip ( rats ) or 7 . 5 3 10 5 cells per coverslip ( mice ) in 24 - well plates , and then ﬁxed at 2 DIV . Presumably because of a relatively low amount of plasmid transfer across neuronal membranes during electroporation procedure , use of a strong CAG promoter - driven expression cassette was needed to reliably express foreign genes . Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 767 Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g Further , to unequivocally ascertain the phenotypes of neurons expressing various shRNA vectors and rescue constructs , we carried out all quantitative analyses based upon immunostaining of the mor - phometric markers , either GFP or mRFP1 ( a kind gift from Dr . Roger Y . Tsien , HHMI , UCSD ) . This allowed us to obtain clearer images of neuronal contours , thus facilitating morphometric analyses . The transfection efﬁciency was relatively high ( about 50 % in our hands using this protocol ) when examined within a day after electroporation . Thus , we were able to improve the accuracy of visualization in all morphometric experiments by simply mixing the transfected cells with nontransfected cells prepared in parallel , at a ratio of 1 : 20 ( rats ) or 1 : 10 ( mice ) , before plating . Dendritic and axonal arborizations of most transfected neurons could then be traced in total isolation while they still formed a dense network with neighboring untransfected neurons . Neurons expressing pSUPER - type vectors revealed negligi - ble amounts of either cell death ( 0 % – 0 . 5 % ) as measured by TUNEL staining ( Roche Diagnostics ) or dsRNA - induced interferon - like response monitored using a muMx2 promoter - luc vector ( a kind gift from Dr . Atsushi Asano , Hokkaido University ) ( Alvarez et al . , 2006 ) . IntheRac1 - rescue experiments , even an intermediate - levelexpres - sionofaconstitutively active Racmutant , GFP - V12Rac1 , using aCAG promoterusuallyresultedinanaberrantneuronalmorphology , suchas exuberant lamellipodia formation at the cell soma and premature detachment from the glass coverslip . To circumvent this problem , GFP - V12Rac1 was introduced using a CMV promoter - based plasmid vector , as the observed expression level was lower than that obtained using a CAG promoter vector . A few neurons still showed an aberrant somata size and shape and thus were excluded from analyses . Imagesofneuronalmorphologieswerecapturedbasedonimmuno - reactivities against GFP or mRFP1 , using the Olympus BX51 micros - copy system with the 20 3 objective or 40 3 objective in the cases of CL3 - overexpression experiments to visualize ﬁne protrusions for cumulative probability analysis . Dendrites and axons were identiﬁed by standard morphological criteria . As the majority of neurons , in our cortical culture preparation , possessed only one clearly classiﬁable axon and one or more dendrites , neurons with nonpyramidal morpho - logical features ( such as multiple axons or no classiﬁable processes ) wereexcludedfromanalyses . Thetotallengthandthedendriticbranch tip number were determined manually using NeuronJ 1 . 1 . 0 ( Meijering et al . , 2004 ) , plug - in software for ImageJ ( NIH ) . Representative images were acquired using the LSM 510META confocal microscope with the 40 3 objective . All analyses were performed by an observer blinded to the identity of the transfected constructs . InexperimentsdescribedinFigureS4 , electroporatedneuronswere initially cultured as a suspension in a growth medium , without plating , in plastic centrifuge tubes at the density of 2 3 10 6 cells / ml , while neurons were allowed to form aggregation . Forty - eight hours later , aggregated neurons were then dissociated mechanically by gentle pipetting and plated onto 12 mm poly - L - Lysine - coated coverslips at the density of 1 3 10 6 cells per coverslip . Fixation and analysis were carried out 24 hr later . Mouse hippocampal neurons were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) at 7 DIV and analyzed at 9 DIV . Morphometric analy - ses of hippocampal neurons were performed as essentially described above for cortical neurons . Only primary dendrites were traced using ImageJ / NeuronJ software . In Situ Hybridization In situ hybridization using DIG technology ( Roche Diagnostics ) was performed essentially as described ( Ohmae et al . , 2006 ) . For the generation of antisense and sense cRNA probes , a 374 bp fragment corresponding to the nucleotide position 964 – 1337 of CL3 was subcl - oned into pBluescriptII KS + vector ( Stratagene ) . BDNF Application and Calcium Imaging in Cortical Neurons BDNF ( generously provided by Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma , Osaka , Japan , by courtesy of Dr . Chikao Nakayama ) and / or KN - 93 ( Calbio - chem ) wereaddedtocellsat6hrafterplatingattheﬁnalconcentration of 50 ng / ml and 10 m M , respectively . Bath application was performed by dissolving the reagents in one - half volume of the conditioned culture medium and by mixing this gently with the remaining half of the original medium in the dish . No medium change was done there - after till ﬁxation . Fluorescent calcium imaging was performed essentially as de - scribed previously ( Furuyashiki et al . , 2002 ) . A detailed description of further experimental conditions can be found in the Supplemental Data . Rac1 Pull - Down Assays , Measurement of Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer , and Quantiﬁcation of Golgi Deformation A detailed description of experimental procedures can be found in the Supplemental Data . Statistical Analysis Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 4 . 0 ( GraphPad Soft - ware ) and JMP5 . 1 . 2 ( SASInstitute ) . Student’s t testwas usedfor com - parisonsoftwogroups . One - ortwo - wayanalysisofvariance ( ANOVA ) with post hoc Tukey - Kramer or Bonferroni test was used for factorial analysis between more than three groups . The Kolmogorov - Smirnov test was applied to verify whether the bidirectional effect of CL3 manipulation occurred throughout all dendrites or was restricted to a subpopulation . All data are shown as mean ± standard error of means ( SEM ) , unless otherwise mentioned . Supplemental Data The Supplemental Data for this article can be found online at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / 54 / 5 / 755 / DC1 / . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank A . Asano , Z . Honda , Y . Ihara , A . Miyawaki , H . Miyoshi , S . Narumiya , F . Oyama , B . Sabatini , and R . Y . Tsien for providing plas - mids ; S . Wada , M . Morishima - Kawashima , and Y . Ihara for a raft frac - tionation protocol ; T . Furuyashiki for generating EGFP - GluR1 ; K . Oh - kubo for assistance with in situ hybridization ; and all members of the Bitolaboratoryfordiscussion . Weacknowledgetheinvaluablesupport ofH . MoriindesigningasuccessfultargetingvectorandofT . Takeuchi and K . Sakimura for an ongoing collaboration to generate and charac - terize CL3 null mice . We are also indebted to assistance from K . Saiki , Y . Kondo , and T . Kinbara . This work was supported in part by Grants - in - Aid from the MEXT and MHLW of Japan , by a JST - SORST investi - gatorship , and by awards from the Astellas Foundation for Research on Metabolic Disorders , the Brain Science Foundation , the Cell Sci - ence Research Foundation , the Japan Foundation for Applied Enzy - mology , the Kowa Life Science Foundation , the Novartis Foundation ( Japan ) for the Promotion of Science , the Shimadzu Science Founda - tion , the Takeda Foundation , the Toray Science Foundation , and the Human Frontier Science Program . N . A . - I . and H . F . are predoctoral fel - lows , and M . N . is a postdoctoral fellow from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science . Received : May 23 , 2006 Revised : December 30 , 2006 Accepted : May 16 , 2007 Published : June 6 , 2007 REFERENCES Alvarez , V . A . , Ridenour , D . A . , and Sabatini , B . L . ( 2006 ) . Retraction of synapses and dendritic spines induced by off - target effects of RNA interference . J . Neurosci . 26 , 7820 – 7825 . 768 Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g Anderson , R . G . W . , and Jacobson , K . ( 2002 ) . A role for lipid shells in targeting proteins to caveolae , rafts , and other lipid domains . Science 296 , 1821 – 1825 . Bito , H . , and Takemoto - Kimura , S . ( 2003 ) . Ca 2 + / CREB / CBP - dependent gene regulation : a shared mechanism critical in long - term synaptic plasticity and neuronal survival . Cell Calcium 34 , 425 – 430 . Bito , H . , Deisseroth , K . , andTsien , R . W . ( 1996 ) . CREBphosphorylation and dephosphorylation : a Ca 2 + - and stimulus duration - dependent switch for hippocampal gene expression . Cell 87 , 1203 – 1214 . Ciani , L . , and Salinas , P . C . ( 2005 ) . WNTs in the vertebrate nervous system : from patterning to neuronal connectivity . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 6 , 351 – 362 . Cline , H . T . ( 2001 ) . Dendritic arbor development and synaptogenesis . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 11 , 118 – 126 . Da Silva , J . S . , Hasegawa , T . , Miyagi , T . , Dotti , C . G . , and Abad - Rodriguez , J . ( 2005 ) . Asymmetric membrane ganglioside sialidase activity speciﬁes axonal fate . Nat . Neurosci . 8 , 606 – 615 . DeSouza , S . , Fu , J . , States , B . A . , and Ziff , E . B . ( 2002 ) . Differential palmitoylation directs the AMPA receptor - binding protein ABP to spines or to intracellular clusters . J . Neurosci . 22 , 3493 – 3503 . El - Husseini , A . E . - D . , and Bredt , D . S . ( 2002 ) . Protein palmitoylation : a regulator of neuronal development and function . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 3 , 791 – 802 . Fan , Q . W . , Yu , W . , Gong , J . S . , Zou , K . , Sawamura , N . , Senda , T . , Yanagisawa , K . , and Michikawa , M . ( 2002 ) . Cholesterol - dependent modulation of dendrite outgrowth and microtubule stability in cultured neurons . J . Neurochem . 80 , 178 – 190 . Fink , C . C . , Bayer , K . - U . , Myers , J . W . , Ferrell , J . J . E . , Schulman , H . , and Meyer , T . ( 2003 ) . Selectiveregulationofneuriteextensionandsynapse formation by the b - but not the a - isoform of CaMKII . Neuron 39 , 283 – 297 . Fox , K . , and Wong , R . O . ( 2005 ) . A comparison of experience - depen - dent plasticity in the visual and somatosensory systems . Neuron 48 , 465 – 477 . Fukata , M . , Fukata , Y . , Adesnik , H . , Nicoll , R . A . , andBredt , D . S . ( 2004 ) . Identiﬁcation of PSD - 95 palmitoylatingenzymes . Neuron 44 , 987 – 996 . Furuyashiki , T . , Arakawa , Y . , Takemoto - Kimura , S . , Bito , H . , and Narumiya , S . ( 2002 ) . Multiple spatiotemporal modes of actin reorgani - zation by NMDA receptors and voltage - gated Ca 2 + channels . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 14458 – 14463 . Gaudilliere , B . , Konishi , Y . , de la Iglesia , N . , Yao , G . , and Bonni , A . ( 2004 ) . A CaMKII - NeuroD signaling pathway speciﬁes dendritic morphogenesis . Neuron 41 , 229 – 241 . Hayashi , T . , Rumbaugh , G . , and Huganir , R . L . ( 2005 ) . Differential regulation of AMPA receptor subunit trafﬁcking by palmitoylation of two distinct sites . Neuron 47 , 709 – 723 . Hering , H . , Lin , C . C . , and Sheng , M . ( 2003 ) . Lipid rafts in the mainte - nance of synapses , dendritic spines , and surface AMPA receptor stability . J . Neurosci . 23 , 3262 – 3271 . Higgins , D . , Burack , M . , Lein , P . , and Banker , G . ( 1997 ) . Mechanisms of neuronal polarity . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 7 , 599 – 604 . Hook , S . S . , and Means , A . R . ( 2001 ) . Ca 2 + / CaM - dependent kinases : from activation to function . Annu . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . 41 , 471 – 505 . Horton , A . C . , Racz , B . , Monson , E . E . , Lin , A . L . , Weinberg , R . J . , and Ehlers , M . D . ( 2005 ) . Polarized secretory trafﬁcking directs cargo for asymmetricdendritegrowthandmorphogenesis . Neuron 48 , 757 – 771 . Huang , E . J . , andReichardt , L . F . ( 2003 ) . Trkreceptors : rolesinneuronal signal transduction . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 609 – 642 . Huang , K . , and El - Husseini , A . ( 2005 ) . Modulation of neuronal protein trafﬁcking and function by palmitoylation . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 15 , 527 – 535 . Hudmon , A . , and Schulman , H . ( 2002 ) . Neuronal Ca 2 + / Calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II : the role of structure and autoregulation in cellular function . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 71 , 473 – 510 . Jan , Y . - N . , and Jan , L . Y . ( 2003 ) . The control of dendrite development . Neuron 40 , 229 – 242 . Kawauchi , T . , Chihama , K . , Nabeshima , Y . , and Hoshino , M . ( 2003 ) . The in vivo roles of STEF / Tiam1 , Rac1 and JNK in cortical neuronal migration . EMBO J . 22 , 4190 – 4201 . Keller , C . A . , Yuan , X . , Panzanelli , P . , Martin , M . L . , Alldred , M . , Sassoe - Pognetto , M . , and Luscher , B . ( 2004 ) . The gamma2 subunit of GABA A receptors is a substrate for palmitoylation by GODZ . J . Neurosci . 24 , 5881 – 5891 . Kennedy , M . B . ( 2000 ) . Signal - processing machines at the postsynap - tic density . Science 290 , 750 – 754 . Konur , S . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2005 ) . Calcium signaling and the control of dendritic development . Neuron 46 , 401 – 405 . Kozorovitskiy , Y . , Gross , C . G . , Kopil , C . , Battaglia , L . , McBreen , M . , Stranahan , A . M . , and Gould , E . ( 2005 ) . Experience induces structural and biochemical changes in the adult primate brain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 17478 – 17482 . Kuhn , T . B . , Williams , C . V . , Dou , P . , and Kater , S . B . ( 1998 ) . Laminin directs growth cone navigation via two temporally and functionally distinct calcium signals . J . Neurosci . 18 , 184 – 194 . Kumanogoh , H . , Miyata , S . , Sokawa , Y . , and Maekawa , S . ( 2001 ) . Biochemical and morphological analysis on the localization of Rac1 in neurons . Neurosci . Res . 39 , 189 – 196 . Linder , M . E . , and Deschenes , R . J . ( 2004 ) . Model organisms lead the way to protein palmitoyltransferases . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 521 – 526 . Lisman , J . , Schulman , H . , and Cline , H . ( 2002 ) . The molecular basis of CaMKII function in synaptic and behavioural memory . Nat . Rev . Neu - rosci . 3 , 175 – 190 . Luo , L . ( 2002 ) . Actin cytoskeleton regulation in neuronal morphogene - sis and structural plasticity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 601 – 635 . Matsuo , N . , Hoshino , M . , Yoshizawa , M . , and Nabeshima , Y . ( 2002 ) . Characterization of STEF , a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rac1 , required for neurite growth . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 2860 – 2868 . Meijering , E . , Jacob , M . , Sarria , J . C . , Steiner , P . , Hirling , H . , andUnser , M . ( 2004 ) . Design and validation of a tool for neurite tracing and anal - ysis in ﬂuorescence microscopy images . Cytometry A 58 , 167 – 176 . Mishina , M . , and Sakimura , K . ( 2007 ) . Conditional gene targeting on the pure C57BL / 6 genetic background . Neurosci . Res . , in press . Pub - lished online January 18 , 2007 . 10 . 1016 / j . neures . 2007 . 01 . 004 . Miyoshi , H . , Blomer , U . , Takahashi , M . , Gage , F . H . , and Verma , I . M . ( 1998 ) . Development of a self - inactivating lentivirus vector . J . Virol . 72 , 8150 – 8157 . Nishimura , H . , Sakagami , H . , Uezu , A . , Fukunaga , K . , Watanabe , M . , and Kondo , H . ( 2003 ) . Cloning , characterization and expression of two alternatively splicing isoforms of Ca 2 + / calmodulin - dependent pro - tein kinase I gamma in the rat brain . J . Neurochem . 85 , 1216 – 1227 . Ohmae , S . , Takemoto - Kimura , S . , Okamura , M . , Adachi - Morishima , A . , Nonaka , M . , Fuse , T . , Kida , S . , Tanji , M . , Furuyashiki , T . , Arakawa , Y . , etal . ( 2006 ) . Molecularidentiﬁcationandcharacterizationofafamily of kinases with homology to Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinases I / IV . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 20427 – 20439 . Pelled , D . , Riebeling , C . , van Echten - Deckert , G . , Sandhoff , K . , and Futerman , A . H . ( 2003 ) . Reduced rates of axonal and dendritic growth in embryonic hippocampal neurones cultured from a mouse model of Sandhoff disease . Neuropathol . Appl . Neurobiol . 29 , 341 – 349 . Redmond , L . , Kashani , A . H . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2002 ) . Calcium regulation of dendritic growth via CaM Kinase IV and CREB - mediated transcrip - tion . Neuron 34 , 999 – 1010 . Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . 769 Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g Schmitt , J . M . , Wayman , G . A . , Nozaki , N . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2004 ) . Calcium activation of ERK mediated by calmodulin kinase I . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 24064 – 24072 . Schmitt , J . M . , Guire , E . S . , Saneyoshi , T . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2005 ) . Calmodulin - dependent kinase kinase / calmodulin kinase I activity gates extracellular - regulated kinase - dependent long - term potentia - tion . J . Neurosci . 25 , 1281 – 1290 . Schwarz , A . , and Futerman , A . H . ( 1998 ) . Inhibition of sphingolipid synthesis , butnotdegradation , alterstherateofdendritegrowthincul - tured hippocampal neurons . Brain Res . Dev . Brain Res . 108 , 125 – 130 . Silva , A . J . , Kogan , J . H . , Frankland , P . W . , and Kida , S . ( 1998 ) . CREB and memory . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 21 , 127 – 148 . Soderling , T . R . , and Stull , J . T . ( 2001 ) . Structure and regulation of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinases . Chem . Rev . 101 , 2341 – 2352 . Suzuki , T . , Ito , J . , Takagi , H . , Saitoh , F . , Nawa , H . , and Shimizu , H . ( 2001 ) . Biochemical evidence for localization of AMPA - type glutamate receptor subunits in the dendritic raft . Brain Res . Mol . Brain Res . 89 , 20 – 28 . Suzuki , S . , Numakawa , T . , Shimazu , K . , Koshimizu , H . , Hara , T . , Hata - naka , H . , Mei , L . , Lu , B . , and Kojima , M . ( 2004 ) . BDNF - induced recruit - ment of TrkB receptor into neuronal lipid rafts : roles in synaptic mod - ulation . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 1205 – 1215 . Takemoto - Kimura , S . , Terai , H . , Takamoto , M . , Ohmae , S . , Kikumura , S . , Segi , E . , Arakawa , Y . , Furuyashiki , T . , Narumiya , S . , and Bito , H . ( 2003 ) . Molecular cloning and characterization of CLICK - III / CaMKIgamma , a novel membrane - anchored neuronal Ca 2 + / calmodu - lin - dependent protein kinase ( CaMK ) . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 18597 – 18605 . Tolias , K . F . , Bikoff , J . B . , Burette , A . , Paradis , S . , Harrar , D . , Tavazoie , S . , Weinberg , R . J . , and Greenberg , M . E . ( 2005 ) . The Rac1 - GEF Tiam1 couples the NMDA receptor to the activity - dependent development of dendritic arbors and spines . Neuron 45 , 525 – 538 . Uemura , T . , Mori , H . , and Mishina , M . ( 2002 ) . Isolation and character - ization of Golgi apparatus - speciﬁc GODZ with the DHHC zinc ﬁnger domain . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 296 , 492 – 496 . Vaillant , A . R . , Zanassi , P . , Walsh , G . S . , Aumont , A . , Alonso , A . , and Miller , F . D . ( 2002 ) . Signaling mechanisms underlying reversible , activity - dependent dendrite formation . Neuron 34 , 985 – 998 . Van Aelst , L . , and Cline , H . T . ( 2004 ) . Rho GTPases and activity - dependentdendritedevelopment . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 14 , 297 – 304 . Wassif , C . A . , Zhu , P . , Kratz , L . , Krakowiak , P . A . , Battaile , K . P . , Weight , F . F . , Grinberg , A . , Steiner , R . D . , Nwokoro , N . A . , Kelley , R . I . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Biochemical , phenotypic and neurophysiological characteriza - tion of a genetic mouse model of RSH / Smith - Lemli - Opitz syndrome . Hum . Mol . Genet . 10 , 555 – 564 . Wayman , G . A . , Kaech , S . , Grant , W . F . , Davare , M . , Impey , S . , Tokumitsu , H . , Nozaki , N . , Banker , G . , andSoderling , T . R . ( 2004 ) . Reg - ulation of axonal extension and growth cone motility by calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I . J . Neurosci . 24 , 3786 – 3794 . Wayman , G . A . , Impey , S . , Marks , D . , Saneyoshi , T . , Grant , W . F . , Derkach , V . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2006 ) . Activity - dependent dendritic arborization mediated by CaM - kinase I activation and enhanced CREB - dependent transcription of Wnt - 2 . Neuron 50 , 897 – 909 . Whitford , K . L . , Dijkhuizen , P . , Polleux , F . , andGhosh , A . ( 2002 ) . Molec - ular control of cortical dendrite developement . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 25 , 127 – 149 . Wu , G . - Y . , and Cline , H . T . ( 1998 ) . Stabilization of dendritic arbor struc - ture in vivo by CaMKII . Science 279 , 222 – 226 . Yu , X . , and Malenka , R . C . ( 2003 ) . Beta - catenin is critical for dendritic morphogenesis . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 1169 – 1177 . Zacharias , D . A . , Violin , J . D . , Newton , A . C . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2002 ) . Partitioning of lipid - modiﬁed monomeric GFPs into membrane micro - domains of live cells . Science 296 , 913 – 916 . Zheng , J . Q . , Felder , M . , Connor , J . A . , andPoo , M . M . ( 1994 ) . Turningof nerve growth cones induced by neurotransmitters . Nature 368 , 140 – 144 . 770 Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 , June 7 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Regulation of Dendritogenesis via CLICK - III / CaMKI g