WWW . JDSR . IO ISSN : 2003 - 1998 This article is published under a CC BY - SA license JOURNAL DIGITAL SOCIAL RESEARCH OF V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 , 118 – 155 WOMEN ON THE BLOCK : A TECHNOFEMINIST DISCOURSE ANALYSIS OF BLOCKCHAIN MEETUPS , CONFERENCES , AND HACKATHONS Julie Frizzo - Barker a A BSTRACT In response to the stark gender disparity that plagued blockchain in its early days , a range of ' women in blockchain ' initiatives emerged , some more effective than others . Blockchain scenes including ' meetups , ' conferences , and hackathons , present ideal sites to observe these tensions . This study is a technofeminist discourse analysis based on participant observations at blockchain events and interviews with women who work in the industry . It demonstrates how women’s participation in various blockchain scenes can be enabling or constraining depending on the gender power relations of the event . I propose three discursive frames for analyzing these scenes : ( 1 ) gender - blind meritocracy , ( 2 ) lean into blockchain , and ( 3 ) intersectional inclusion . Keywords : blockchain ; gender ; technology ; communication . a Simon Fraser University , Canada J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 119 1 INTRODUCTION Blockchain , the decentralized technology best known for powering cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin , invokes hopeful narratives of revolutionary socio - economic change , democratic values , and meritocracy ( Swan , 2015 ; Tapscott & Tapscott , 2016 ; Mougayar & Buterin , 2016 ; Vigna & Casey , 2018 ) . Its anti - establishment roots infused the technology with a ' power to the people ' sense of possibility ( Nakamoto , 2009 ) . Yet in practice , those possibilities have not yet been equally accessible to people of all genders . Although women have innovated some of blockchain ' s most important advances ( Cuen , 2018 ) , the male - dominated sphere has generated stereotypes of wealthy ‘blockchain bros ' in its short history ( Bowles , 2018 ) . In response to the stark gender inequities in the space , women have grown their ranks through local meetups , mentorship programs , hackathons , and global conferences ( Griffith , 2018 ; Moy , 2018 ; Miller , 2019 ) , and become more visible at the helm of some of blockchain ' s most innovative and successful organizations ( Peck , 2019 ) . Most recently , celebrities like Gwyneth Paltrow , Reese Witherspoon , and Mila Kunis have used their influence to promote investment in cryptocurrencies and non - fungible tokens ( NFTs ) to women ( Gamerman , 2022 ) . This empirical study is a contribution to the long trajectory of work that seeks to understand the relationship between gender , technology , and communication . It investigates the gender power relations that enable and constrain women ' s participation in the blockchain space , through interviews with women who work in the industry , and participant observations at an array of ' meetups , ' conferences , and hackathons . These blockchain scenes present fruitful sites to explore the new opportunities for progress in gender equity , as well as the wicked problems tied up in this complex relationship . According to a study of 100 blockchain startups , only 14 % of employees were women , seven per cent of whom were in leadership roles ( Custer , 2018 ) . Over the past six years , women ' s representation as Bitcoin investors has increased from just 1 . 76 % to 14 . 23 % on the same real - time data chart ( Ogundei , 2016 ; Coin Dance , 2022 ) . And despite rapid hiring growth in the cryptocurrency space , the gender gap in recruitment is only getting worse ( Banerjee , 2022 ) . Gender disparities in the development , investment , and use of emerging technologies like blockchain negatively affect how the world is made . If contemporary life is made possible through socio - technical networks ( Castells , 2000 ) and very few women are in the control rooms of those networks ( Wajcman , 2004 ) , then it follows that useful innovations will be missed . When technology development is heavily male - dominated , the inherent biases make the world less convenient at best , and dangerous at worst , for women ( Perez , 2019 ) . Stanford sociologist Shelley Correll ( 2017 ) notes that while the academy has amassed a large body of theoretical and empirical literature on how gender inequality is reproduced in professional spheres , there is a need for more research on how to bring about effective , positive change . F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 120 This study serves to contribute to this body of knowledge by exploring both enabling and constraining factors for women in blockchain . Investigating blockchain scenes during the technology ' s earliest stages offers the unique vantage point of tracing a sociotechnical phenomenon as it unfolds in real time . Emerging technologies facilitate opportunity for new forms of identity , community , and power . And technofeminist scholars such as Judy Wajcman ( 2007 ) remind us that gender relations are materialized in technology . For instance , in one example of crypto culture at its worst , at a 2018 Bitcoin conference in Miami only three of the 88 speakers were women and the event concluded with a party at a strip club ( Primack , 2018 ) . Since then , advocacy groups and social networks such as Crypto Chicks , She256 , Black Women Blockchain Council , and Diversity in Blockchain have emerged as supportive communities rooted in professionalism and entrepreneurialism . In this study , I focus on how gender relations are materialized , maintained , and sometimes challenged in various blockchain scenes . This study pays attention to questions including : whose voice is heard in these blockchain scenes ? Whose knowledge counts ? Which initiatives , material or discursive , work to improve or hinder gender equity at blockchain events ? Blockchain ' s form and function begins to solidify through the discourses and practices that flow through social networks , both online and place - based . Meetups and other events play a pivotal role in blockchain education , networking , and professional development . They are a key entry point to the technology and the communities within it . To analyze the gender power relations at an array of events attended and described in this study , I propose three discursive frames that emerged from my interviews and observations in the field . Those frames are : ( 1 ) " gender - blind meritocracy , " a dominant discourse associated with meritocracy and postfeminism , ( 2 ) " lean into blockchain , " a negotiated discourse associated with liberal , popular and cyberfeminisms ; ( 3 ) and " intersectional inclusion " an oppositional discourse associated with technofeminism . As a communication scholar , I was particularly interested in how discursive frames about gender and technology are deployed in blockchain . This focus is motivated by the compelling notion that words do more than reflect reality . Words make worlds . Each of these discursive frames highlights how various ' scenes ' function in blockchain , as collectivities , spaces of assembly , workplaces , ethical worlds , and key spaces of mediation ( Straw , 2015 ) . 2 ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK Blockchain is one of the latest developments in the family of information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) . Swan ( 2015 ) places blockchain within the lineage of previous major , global computing paradigms and ‘disruptive technologies’ ( Christensen et . al . 2015 ) , following the mainframe , personal computing , the Internet , social networking , and mobile phones . Through the lenses of communication and science and technology studies ( STS ) , ICTs are understood as J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 121 both material systems and the social contexts of their emergence , which includes the artifacts used to communicate information , the practices people engage in to communicate information , and the social arrangements that develop around them ( Lievrouw & Livingstone , 2006 ) . Similarly the notion of ' scene ' invites us to consider the cultural and material shaping of blockchain networks . This study examines blockchain scenes as " collectivities marked by some form of proximity ; as spaces of assembly engaged in pulling together the varieties of cultural phenomena… as spaces of traversal and preservation through which cultural energies and practices pass at particular speeds " ( Straw , 2015 , p . 477 ) . I argue that some blockchain scenes accelerate women ' s participation in the space at large , while others slow this movement . A common thread that runs through each of the blockchain scenes analyzed in this paper is mediation , which relies on communication . Our everyday lives rely on mediation as a “transformative process in which the meaningfulness and value of things are constructed” ( Silverstone 2002 , p . 761 ) . Mediation is dialectical , in that it involves the structuring element of ICTs and the engagement of users , whose power to work with or against the dominant meanings embedded within certain technologies ( Hall , 1980 ) is unevenly distributed across and within societies . I analyze the gendered discourses and practices around blockchain to expose the interplay between the technology’s structuring influences and interviewees’ agency . Certain blockchain scenes act as " a space of transit between visibility and invisibility " for women in the space ( Straw , 2015 , p . 483 ) . They are characterized by observability , visual interaction , and urban sociality ( Blum , 2001 ; Casemajor & Straw , 2017 ) . While gender power relations shape all types of spaces , the process is even more observable in these particular scenes . A meaningful investigation of this dynamic requires an anti - essentialist understanding of both gender and technology - one that can assess the roles of digital networks , structures of power , and lived experience . I draw upon several theoretical lenses , in varying degrees , in order to analyze the meaningfulness of gender power relations in blockchain scenes . Key theoretical concepts from the network society ( Castells , 2000 ) , the social shaping of technology ( Pinch & Bijker , 1987 ; Mackenzie & Wajcman , 1999 ) , and technofeminism ( Wajcman , 2004 ) each offer useful analytical tools for chiseling a clear picture of gendered discourses and practices in blockchain scenes . The network society thesis serves mainly as a backdrop for understanding the role of global , digital information flows . The social shaping of technology highlights the social , political , and cultural contexts these networks emerge from . And technofeminism underscores the diversity of ways gender and technology shape one another . What these theories bring into focus is that discursive contentions around a technology are constitutive of the technology itself . Communication research on ICTs has often been characterized by praise ( Jenkins , 2006 ) or critique ( Fuchs , 2013 ) of technologies and their associated discourses and practices , at two ends of the spectrum . This paper follows the path F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 122 of constructivist , interpretive scholarship , which opens a path between these , to explore the cultural mediation of technology ( Dunbar - Hester , 2014 ) . The constructivist perspective is not interested in engaging in normative debates about technologies , but rather in examining those debates as research objects – namely , to understand how they co - construct technologies and the meanings we afford to them . Such research comes alongside individuals to understand their everyday practices , and analyze how socio - cultural values are inscribed into technologies , avoiding excessive idealism or pessimism . Science and technology studies ( STS ) , and the concept of the social shaping of technology ( SCOT ) that emerged from it , have supported communication scholars in this pursuit ( Pinch & Bijker , 1987 ; MacKenzie & Wajcman , 1999 ; Boczkowski & Lievrouw , 2008 ) . This school of thought highlights the fact that technologies , such as the electric light or digital networks , are never merely technical - their everyday functions are deeply intertwined with economic , organizational , political , and socio - cultural factors ( Hughes , 1993 ) . And , perhaps most important to this study , the theoretical lens of technofeminism draws our attention to the ways that gender and technology shape one another ( Wajcman , 2004 ) . It is particularly advantageous to analyze the gendered negotiations at work in blockchain scenes , because although technologies remain somewhat ‘plastic’ throughout cycles of production and use , the fluidity of the social co - construction process is heightened in the early stages of its emergence ( Wajcman , 2004 ) . Feminist research has been instrumental in deconstructing the binary opposition between designer and user , production and consumption , and technology and culture , to show that the co - construction of gender and technology is pervasively interconnected ( Cockburn & Ormrod , 1993 ; Wajcman , 1991 , 2004 ) . As a gender - conscious form of science and technology studies ( STS ) , Judy Wajcman’s ( 2004 ) technofeminism took insights from cyberfeminism and the social shaping theory of technology , to conceptualize “a mutually shaping relationship between gender and technology , in which technology is both a source and a consequence of gender relations” ( 2004 , p . 7 ) . Wajcman sought to create a path between technophobia and technophilia , to “explore the complex ways in which women’s everyday lives and technological change interrelate in the age of digitalization” ( 2004 , p . 6 ) . Blockchain events offer a prime site of inquiry to observe the ongoing co - construction of gender and technology in action . They are instantiations of interpretive flexibility ( Pinch & Bijker , 1987 ) where meaning - making occurs , as the identities of both blockchain and its key stakeholders take shape . Over the past decade , communication and STS scholars have conducted exemplary social shaping research focused on gendered social relations and ICTs . For example , Ensmenger ( 2012 ) traces the rise of ‘the computer boys’ of the mid - twentieth century computer revolution as an intentional , contentious , human process of building up power , identity , and expertise in American society . In another historical account , Hicks ( 2017 ) documents a similar process to show how J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 123 Britain discarded women technologists and lost its edge in computing in Programmed Inequality . This paper does not compare gendered practices at blockchain events . Rather , it explores the ways blockchain is used discursively and materially to construct gendered individuals through the social scenes that build , communicate , and diffuse the technology . Both experimental and discursive research have found that challenging sexism is risky for most women ( Ahmed , 2015 ; Worth , Augoustinos , & Hastie , 2015 ) . As Gill puts it , “the potency of sexism lies in its very unspeakability” ( 2011 , p . 63 ) . Paradoxically , within this postfeminist context , there is a rising public awareness of the need for diversity and inclusion initiatives , among corporate and open technology cultures as well as conferences ( Bourke & Espedido , 2019 ; Eswaran , 2019 ; Tulshyan , 2016 ) . In tandem , scholars have brought fresh insight to technofeminist and intersectional practices across computing and hackerspaces ( De Hertogh , Lane & Oullette , 2019 ; Savi ć & Wuschitz , 2018 ) . In Hacking Diversity , Christina Dunbar - Hester ( 2020 ) investigates local initiatives to include more women and people of color in hacker communities . She concludes that their laudable efforts have nevertheless fallen short of securing substantive equity . The tensions between these discourses , as observed through gender - equity initiatives in various blockchain scenes , are explored in this study . Scholars have begun to research meetups as valuable sites to study social networking and information - sharing in ways that differ from other spaces like workplaces or online communities . Gina Neff ( 2012 ) documents how networking is pivotal to maintaining sociotechnical identities , and that Western tech industry workers are expected to put large amounts of time and effort into this practice . Sessions ( 2010 ) and Shen and Cage ( 2013 ) show how offline meetups influence the social dynamics of the online communities they are tied to . A ‘meetup’ is a face - to - face gathering of people with similar interests , often intertwined with and facilitated by digital social networks . These events are typically publicized via email or word of mouth , or publicly searchable on a website like Meetup . com , which enables users to search by interest topic locally and organize regular offline gatherings . Meetups may take the form of regular , informal gatherings in a local coffee shop , or more structured learning events in formal settings . A semi - professional peer group may emerge and meet periodically , as was the case with an invite - only women in blockchain ( WiB ) monthly drinks events I was invited to attend after meeting the organizer at a conference . Participants weave place - based gatherings and digital networks in order to expand their personal and professional circles , support one another , and share information about events and job opportunities ( Wellman et . al . , 2003 ; Benkler 2006 ; Rainie & Wellman , 2012 ) . ‘Women in blockchain’ meetups represent strategies outside of the formal workplace that women use to address gender inequities in male - dominated industries . On a tangible level , these events offer professional networking , job opportunities , and skills development in a safe environment . On an intangible level , they also function as feminist F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 124 infrastructures of support ( Ahmed , 2017 ) for dealing with challenges and discrimination at work . 3 METHODOLOGY This empirical study is based on participant observations at 17 blockchain meetups and conferences in Vancouver , BC , as well as 30 semi - structured interviews with women who work in blockchain , located in Vancouver , Seattle , Toronto , Ottawa , New York , Washington DC , Berlin , and Dubai . This multi - method approach allowed me to observe connections between practices and discourses , through my own participation at events , and the interviewees’ ' situated knowledges ' ( Haraway , 1988 ) in the industry . Through this concept , Haraway argues that people make truth through concrete practices , from particular vantage points . Methodologically , I followed an approach inspired by multi - sited ethnography ( Marcus , 1995 , 2011 ) . This technique was designed to trace the social shaping of technologies , through pre - planned or opportunistic movement within different settings around a complex cultural phenomenon , such as blockchain scenes in this case . Participation observations at blockchain events were important to this study , because gender is defined through relationships between people of various genders in particular social scenarios . Gender is not a rigid “analytic category imposed on human experience , but a fluid one whose meaning emerges in specific social contexts as it is created and recreated through human actions” ( Gerson & Peiss , 1985 , p . 317 ) . The first eight of my 17 participant observations were conducted as part of a collaborative project undertaken by me , two of my lab colleagues , and my PhD supervisor . Our insights from these early observations were published in a book chapter called ‘Meetups : Making Space for Women on the Blockchain , ’ in the edited volume Blockchain and Web 3 . 0 : Social , Economic , and Technological Challenges ( Adams et . al . , 2019 ) . We identified how ‘women in blockchain’ meetups functioned to resist the hyper - masculine blockchain space , and to foster supportive networks for women in the space . These initial participant observations grounded my sense of their role in the space , informed my interview protocol , and provided fruitful avenues for interviewee recruitment in an emerging , non - institutionalized space . I conducted 16 interviews in person in Vancouver , Canada , and 14 via Zoom video calls . Participants ranged in age from their 20s to their 50s . Their educational backgrounds spanned a diversity of fields , and ranged from no post - secondary training to doctorate degrees . Some spoke of the accessibility of entering the space precisely because there are no formal educational requirements . In terms of their professional roles related to blockchain , the majority of interviewees worked in business , operations , or communications roles . Other types of work represented by fewer participants each , included technical roles , advocacy work , research , law , governance and security roles . I sought out women’s situated knowledges , as minoritized stakeholders in blockchain , to understand how discourses in the space J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 125 shape their experience and the technology . Their identities and experiences were diverse , yet their positionality as members of a highly underrepresented group offered them a common vantage point from which to comment on an emerging space as it takes shape . I coded the data sets in order to identify the most salient themes using NVivo qualitative data analysis software ( Saldana , 2015 ) . I then conducted a discourse analysis through a technofeminist lens to make sense of the data . These approaches capture both the theoretical and methodological stance of this study . Technofeminism calls attention to situated practices and lived experience , as opposed to focusing on gendered identity or social structures in isolation ( Wajcman , 2004 ) . Discourse analysis takes seriously the role of language as a worthy focus of study in and of itself , to explore how different social positions are made available and negotiated ( Gill , 2009 , 2018 ) . I then developed a discursive analytical framework , based on three discourses about gender and technology I observed emerging from the events and the interviews , detailed below . 4 THREE DISCURSIVE FRAMES FOR ANALYZING GENDER POWER RELATIONS IN BLOCKCHAIN SCENES Each of the discursive frames outlined here describes a set of cultural viewpoints that shape a particular blockchain scene . When we study discourse , we acknowledge the central role of language as a social practice that not only reflects but constructs social reality ( Schultze & Orlikowski , 2001 ) . This makes for a challenging yet fascinating object of inquiry , as I found in this study . From a critical , feminist orientation , Rosalind Gill ( 2009 ) elaborates a discursive analytic model based on four tenets : ( 1 ) discourse as significant in itself and not as a means to unveiling the truth , ( 2 ) language as constructive in terms of how we move through the world , ( 3 ) discourse as an action - oriented social practice , and ( 4 ) discourse as rhetorically organized to make itself persuasive . These principles informed the frames I identified . The discursive frames are : ( 1 ) ' gender - blind meritocracy , ' a dominant discourse associated with meritocracy and postfeminism , ( 2 ) ' lean into blockchain , ' a negotiated discourse associated with liberal , popular and cyberfeminisms ; ( 3 ) and ' intersectional inclusion ' an oppositional discourse associated with technofeminism . Following a technofeminist line of thought , I argue that these discourses not only reflect different understandings of gender and technology , but they also fuel practices that shape the very definitions of gender and technology , and the co - constructive process between them . As opposed to studies that focus on how women use certain technologies , this framework focuses on how participants encode and decode discourses in a more dynamic way . They are producers , not just consumers , of the technology . Any analytical framework that treats gender , race , or sexuality as isolated or universal factors is flawed , and masks white heteronormative privilege ( Crenshaw , 1990 ; Landström , 2007 ; Cottom , 2017 ) . In contrast , feminist F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 126 scholars like Wajcman and Haraway conceive of subjectivities like gender as fluid , dynamic , and relational . Through this lens , intersectional feminist sensibilities are political and social mindsets available to people of any gender . Social identities are created in relation with technologies , as “racial formation , gender - in - the - making , the forging of class , and the discursive production of sexuality through the constitutive practices of technoscience production themselves” ( Haraway , 1997 , p . 35 ) . Further , over the past decade , both information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) and popular discourse on gender have rapidly evolved - often in deeply intertwined , mutually constitutive ways . For instance , the inclusion of gender pronouns in one ' s professional or social media profile is one recent way that people of all genders have begun to dismantle the taken - for - grantedness of gender presentation . ICTs have played a crucial role in introducing new understandings of gender diversity that eschew rigid binaries , through the proliferation of newer gender labels such as transgender , nonbinary , agender , or genderfluid ( Szulc , 2020 ) . Digitally networked ICTs provide a sandbox in which to experiment , learn about , and express gender . The first discursive frame is the ‘gender - blind meritocracy . ’ This dominant discourse springs from blockchain’s libertarian roots , and continues to flourish in the postfeminist , neoliberal context of tech culture and society at large . It is almost difficult to describe this paradigm since ‘technosolutionism , ’ or the idea that new technologies can and should solve social problems as opposed to political change ( Morozov , 2013 ) , permeates contemporary western society . In the gender - blind meritocracy , it is assumed that anyone has an equal chance to participate based on individual effort , regardless of gender , race , class , or other non - merit factor . Therefore , if certain people choose not to participate , it is entirely based on their own choice . According to American survey research over the past several decades , " most believe that meritocracy is not only the way the system should work , but also the way the system does work " ( Castilla & Benard , 2010 ) . The authors of the aforementioned study expose the ‘paradox of meritocracy , ’ since they found self - proclaimed meritocratic organizations in particular tend to reward male employees over female employees . Postfeminism goes hand - in - hand with meritocracy , based on the notion that second wave feminism was successful , and is therefore less relevant to a younger generation of women whose sensibilities are shaped by neoliberal ideologies of individualism , empowerment , and choice ( Fraser , 2013 ; Gill , 2011 ; McRobbie , 2008 ) . In the context of postfeminism , pre - feminist , feminist , and anti - feminist ideas are entangled in such a way that renders any talk of gendered experience pernicious and detrimental to contest ( Gill , 2009 ) . Within the ‘gender blind meritocracy’ discourse , raising issues of gender inequities is viewed as discriminatory . Any suggestion of gender - based discrimination is associated with victimhood , a social position to be avoided at all costs . The second discursive frame is called ‘lean into blockchain . ' It takes a ‘negotiated’ stance in that it aligns with the dominant discourse in terms of its stance on blockchain ' s role as a revolutionary technology with the potential to transform J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 127 society . Yet it does not discount gender as irrelevant . Rather , from this view , women ought to benefit from participation in blockchain , and blockchain ought to benefit from the additional talent and perspectives of women ' s contributions to the space . It does so without critiquing the technology or the culture of the space . The negotiated frame echoes cyberfeminism ' s enthusiastic embrace of technology itself as a vehicle for women ' s agency ( Turkle , 1995 ; Plant , 1997 ) , as well as liberal feminism ' s belief that the solution lies in helping women to enter the space through increased access , education , and employment . It also carries the message of popular feminism ' s ( Banet - Weiser , 2018 ) neoliberal vision that women simply need to embrace empowerment and confidence to succeed in the space . This message was perhaps most famously popularized through Facebook executive Sheryl Sandberg ' s ( 2013 ) book Lean In : Women , Work , and the Will to Lead . The book only minimally addresses the well - worn dilemma of work / life balance for working women , focusing primarily on how women can take charge of their own careers and be successful . She argues the feminist revolution has stalled , both in terms of external measures of women in leadership , and internal measures such as lack of self - confidence . This negotiated frame views technology itself as liberating for women . The third discursive frame is called ‘intersectional inclusion . ’ It takes an oppositional , intersectional ( Crenshaw , 1990 ) , technofeminist ( Wacjman , 2004 ) stance to critique the structural power dynamics that shape the complexities of embodied social identities and technologies . The term intersectionality , originally coined by Crenshaw to analyze racism and sexism in the legal context , has become the central analytic framework for feminist scholars across various fields to examine the structural identities of race , class , gender , and sexuality ( McCall , 2005 ) . This discourse takes a proactive stance toward creating genuine inclusion over performative diversity in the blockchain space . In her book On Being Included : Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life , feminist scholar Sara Ahmed writes that the “mobility of the word ‘diversity’ means that it is unclear what ‘diversity’ is doing , even when it is understood as a figure of speech” ( 2012 , p . 58 ) . This discourse aims to clarify and promote the value of diversity and inclusion , and ultimately transform the dominant blockchain space . Where a postfeminist perspective would critique the very idea of studying gender in tech work , Wajcman notes that “indeed , the enormous variability in gendering by place , nationality , class , race , ethnicity , sexuality , and generation makes a nuanced exploration of the similarities and differences between and across women’s and men’s experience of technoscience all the more necessary” ( 2004 , p . 8 ) . Tressie McMillan Cottom calls for ‘black cyberfeminism’ as a way forward for technology , to focus on the “dimension of power as the mobilization of capital and politics to the benefit of some at the expense of others” ( 2017 , p . 211 ) . Intersectional approaches foreground the connections between social axes to theorize identity and oppression ( Nash , 2008 ; Cho , Crenshaw & McCall , 2013 ) . For example , scholars have shown how search engine algorithms reinforce racism ( Noble , 2018 ) , high - tech tools profile , police F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 128 and punish the poor ( Eubanks , 2018 ) , and computer code encodes inequity by ignoring and thereby replicating racial bias ( Benjamin , 2019 ) . As each of these discourses emerged more clearly from my observations and the interviews , I then used the framework recursively to analyze how the participants used these discourses to navigate blockchain scenes and afford them with meaning . Beyond identifying these distinct frames , I observed how different types of blockchain events correlated with each discursive frame . As I analyzed how discourses were encoded and decoded in different social contexts across the space , I realized the significance of who the event was designed by , and who the event was designed for . The first type of events I examine are the most plentiful and common in the space . They are ' by men , for everyone ' meetups and conferences , which are typically male - dominated and sometimes include diversity gestures such as ' women in blockchain ' panels . The second type are ' by women , for women ' groups and events , such as women - only blockchain conferences or hackathon competitions . The third type are ' by women , for everyone ' events , which aim to highlight women ' s expertise and improve social equity in the dominant space . My findings show how women’s identities and experiences are both enabled and constrained , sometimes simultaneously , through participation in blockchain events . 4 . 1 Frame 1 : Gender - blind meritocracy ‘By men , for everyone’ events The majority of blockchain meetups and conferences are disproportionately male - dominated , which reflects the gender ratio in the blockchain space at large . Similar to the tech space at large , the sentiment that ‘anyone is welcome’ at these events rings hollow when surveying the demographics in attendance . They align with the dominant discursive frame of the ' gender - blind meritocracy . ' Regardless , they represent an imperative , valuable site for networking and education for anyone’s success in blockchain . Each of the interviewees had attended these types of blockchain events for mixed - gender audiences , and identified various benefits and challenges . Interviewee Carrie , CEO of a cybersecurity company in Berlin , captured the interrelation and interdependence of digital and place - based networks in blockchain’s global context : I watch video talks from conferences , I read blogs or Medium for the latest analysis on certain topics , and I listen to podcasts to get a little bit more in depth . I do a lot of video calls with people around the world . And then another helpful forum would be meeting people in conferences in person – everything from sitting in talks to the one - on - one conversations . I mean , the magic happens between all those things . You get in the one - on - one conversations to really figure out , “How can we do the next thing ? ” J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 129 Carrie’s quote illustrates the fluid dynamic between digital and place - based networks . She underscores the impact of the ways in which these online and offline interactions add up to more than the sum of their parts in the phrase , “the magic happens between all those things . ” Many interviewees toggled back and forth , referencing interactions that weaved through both types of social networks , as they explained how a singular story unfolded . Castells ( 2001 ) calls society a ‘network of networks . ’ Meetups and conferences are just one type of network layered over other networks in blockchain . These multiple , shifting configurations have important implications for trust , participation , and power . Social media and texting platforms such as YouTube , Medium , Twitter , WhatsApp and Telegram play a key role in how participants engage daily with the blockchain space . Yet participants also emphasized how the face - to - face nature of meetups and conferences has the potential to deepen , crystallize , and humanize those connections . Blockchain is a ' convening technology ' that opens new spaces and initiates conversations which " can address issues far beyond what it may ultimately be able to address itself " ( Baym et . al . , 2019 , p . 403 ) . Convening technologies attract resources and networks representing various forms of power . Ariana , a blockchain - focused lawyer who spoke at 50 conferences in 2018 , valued this aspect of gatherings around emerging technologies : Generally the conferences themselves are not useful to me . It’s the people who come around the conference . So when I attend a conference , I will do my panel , but then I’m in meetings the rest of the time . Even if the conference content is not that good , I can identify a new idea , or company I can collaborate with . This point illustrates the importance of participating in embodied , place - based elements of blockchain scenes in terms of collectivities characterized by proximity , and spaces of assembly ( Straw , 2015 ) . The traditional ‘space of places’ exemplified by conferences and meetups may have become less important in blockchain’s typical , digital ‘space of flows’ ( Castells , 2000 ) yet they still play a pivotal role . They are the interfaces between digital and place - based spaces . For ‘convening technologies’ in particular , these spaces attract people with common interests and facilitate collective decision making in an ongoing , iterative fashion . Yet some of the blockchain scenes in the gender - blind meritocracy exemplify ' spaces of traversal ' that ‘may accelerate or decelerate’ movements ( Straw , 2015 ) , in this case , women ' s participation . My interviews and observations reflected a narrative that women are often presumed incompetent until proven capable . In addition , women constantly toggle between personal and professional dynamics at male - dominated blockchain events , in ways that men generally do not need to . When men make up the vast majority of attendees , women are seen as ' other ' at best , or made to feel unsafe at worst . In the case of one blockchain meetup at a local pub , UX designer Aisha felt so uncomfortable , she ended up leaving before the talk began : F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 130 I went in and there were three people talking amongst themselves . No one paid attention to me , and then one person asked , " Are you here for the event ? ” And I said , “yes . ” And they’re like , “OK , are you a student ? ” I was like “No…” [ laughing ] . The assumptions begin from there , you know . And they’re like “OK , do you work in blockchain ? Are you looking ? ” Once I said I worked at MetaMask , then all their attention was there . Then they take me to some other room inside , which was really dingy and disgusting to be honest . And I felt so uncomfortable . No one else was there yet , for the event , and I was somewhere inside in a room , and they were talking to me about a game that they started . It just felt very much like a boys’ club . I felt weird , so I was like , “I’m going to go . ” In this scenario , Aisha was made to feel out of place from the outset , and then progressively uncomfortable enough to the point of leaving before the meetup talk officially began . Besides the talk , she had also hoped to connect with some blockchain developers from CryptoKitties , whom she had seen on the attendee list , about a technical aspect of their analytics . Instead , she introduced herself to them briefly on her way out . They exchanged cards and made a plan to meet at another time . Various interviewees echoed the themes expressed in this scenario . Its hallmarks include an assumption of their ignorance about blockchain , followed by a quizzing about credentials when they reply about their work , and moments of feeling uncomfortable , unsafe , or embarrassed . They may need to make alternative arrangements to achieve their goals in attending the event , as Aisha did , expending additional time and energy . In many of these conference environments , deep - seated patriarchal gender norms persist . For instance , on a recent trip to Australia , interviewee Elise , a ' women in blockchain ' meetup organizer with a master’s degree in computer science gave an opening speech at a large meetup attended mostly by men : It was over 100 men , and they invited women to this meetup as speakers and participants . And following my speech , there was a panel of six very , very brilliant ladies in the space there . But before the event started , I noticed men were talking and discussing , and one of them said to me , “This meetup is kind of like a strip club , where women are on the stage and men are in the audience . ” So , you know , that was certainly something that I didn ' t appreciate . This panel of women in blockchain was a well - intentioned bid toward highlighting the speakers’ expertise . Yet the culture of this male - dominated event reflected open misogyny from some men in the audience . It illustrates the fact that ‘add women and stir’ initiatives , to put it colloquially , do not work . Women speakers were objectified , and their professional skills easily overlooked . This sexist response to women presenting their expertise on stage was echoed by interviewee Gabrielle , who shared , “If you look at the comments on my TED talk , some of them are horrible . They are very much about the way I look , the way I dress , the way I am , the size of my boobs . ” In response to the growing critique of gender inequity in blockchain ( Bowles , 2018 ; Green , 2018 ; Elizabeth , 2018 ) , organizers of male - dominated J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 131 blockchain events have made various strides toward diversity and inclusion . These include a movement against all - male panels , as well as the rise of ' women in blockchain ' panels . In addition , networking receptions for women , tagged onto larger conferences , have become more popular . But these typically involve an additional cost , or what some participants referred to as a ' pink tax . ’ These are strategies for addressing gender inequities in the dominant space , some more effective and well - received than others . Each of these gender - conscious initiatives involves a double - bind for women participants . They openly acknowledge the gender gap , which is important , yet they can also work to ' keep women in their own lane . ' One enabling act that emerged from my observations and interviews for promoting diversity in male - dominated spaces is simply boycotting attendance at - or moderation of - all - male panels . The growing movement against all - male conference panels , sometimes nicknamed ‘manels , ’ has received support by many men and women across business , tech , and academia . April , the CEO of a compliance consultancy shared : I have publicly stated that I ' m not going to events that do not have any female or non - white speakers , because you can ' t tell me that you can ' t find experts . Like , if you ' re trying , you will find them . We’re fucking legion at this point . So when I get the invites to them , I ' ll actually respond and say , “Hey , this is all male and pale , and you probably need to address that . ” And the weirdest , most common response is , “you should come and join said panel . ” And it’s a panel on healthcare [ laughing ] . You should probably look at my bio , and then find a woman who ' s an expert on healthcare . April expressed bewilderment and frustration at this stubborn ‘blind spot’ in the ‘gender - blind meritocracy’ discourse . Such reactionary invitations from conference organizers only reinforce the stereotype of the ‘token women or person of color’ on a panel , who is invited mainly to fill a representation gap that was pointed out . Where ‘diversity’ initiatives are often associated with attempts to improve the optics of an event , ‘inclusion’ efforts are less performative and more qualitative in nature . The difference has to do with whether there is a genuine invitation for the panelist’s expertise to be heard and respected , versus simply improving the representation optics of the event . Within the gender - blind meritocracy , inclusivity efforts are often derided or viewed as unnecessary pressures to be politically correct . On the opposite side of the spectrum from the all - male panel is the ‘women in blockchain’ panel . In comparison to other panels , which tend to focus on a particular blockchain - related topic , this type of panel is curated based on the participants ' gender . While the discussion may involve their various types of professional expertise , the discursive framing of the panel highlights this one aspect of their identity . The conversation often involves the question ‘what is it like to be a woman in blockchain ? ’ Well - intentioned , WiB panels are problematic on both symbolic and material levels , which reinforce one another . F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 132 Symbolically , ' women in tech ' ( WiT ) labels frame men as the default experts in the field , and women as a separate category of professional in the field . The problematic discourse here has both symbolic and material implications . Mariann Hardey critiques “the straitjacket of the WiT label as a status characteristic” in the social construction of gender difference in professional workspaces ( 2019 , p . 44 ) . She argues that the label’s origins , from mainstream media discourses intended to disparage women’s individual and collective worth , limit women’s opportunities to get outside the stereotype determined by its use . This reflects Wendy Faulkner ' s ( 2009 ) concept of the ' in / visibility paradox ' in which women in engineering workplace cultures are highly visible as women yet invisible as engineers . Interviewee Jessie , a financial advisor and meetup organizer in New York , recounted a story about WiB panels , in which she flipped the narrative on its head to show how tone - deaf the concept can sound to the women featured : I was in LA at a conference , and they had a women in blockchain panel with six or seven women on stage . Someone I knew was moderating it , and she said “It was so hard to moderate it , ‘cuz it wasn ' t even curated . It’s just ‘cuz they were ‘women in blockchain . ’” And the organizer at one point asked me , “What did you think about the ' women in blockchain ' panel ? ” And I said , “how would you feel if you walked into a panel and it was ' short , bald white dudes in blockchain ' ? On a material level , ' women in blockchain ' panels are problematic because they are curated based on gender , and not on the speakers ' expertise . Therefore , as Jessie notes above , they tend to be less cohesive or informative . They offer women a small space to be visible , without sacrificing a spot on a panel about a more serious , important , or technical topic . Instead of the well - intentioned initiative of highlighting women ' s expertise it purports to be , these panels can be experienced as a mechanism to keep women ' in their own lane . ' 4 . 2 Frame 2 : Lean into blockchain ‘By women , for women’ events Beyond the blockchain boys club , gatherings designed ' by women , for women ' represent a significant , emerging movement shaping the space ( Griffith , 2018 ) . Larissa Petrucci categorizes gender - inclusive meetups as “out - company strategies that women and non - binary people take to address gender equality in male - dominated and professional industry” ( 2020 , p . 546 ) . These stand in contrast to the many in - company diversity initiatives that have become a popular presence in organizations , yielding limited results . ‘By women , for women’ events in blockchain serve to help women develop their own social infrastructures , and to progress in the industry at large . This exemplifies yet another feature of blockchain scenes : “they provide systems of identification and connection , while simultaneously inviting acts of novelty , invention , and innovation” ( Woo , Rennie & Poyntz , 2018 , p . 288 ) . That is , they provide both an anchor of familiarity and belonging , as well as an alternate vision for how work in blockchain might look and feel . J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 133 Many interviewees had experienced these types of blockchain meetups and conferences as meaningful networks of personal and professional support and resistance to male - dominated tech culture . On one hand , these groups and events represent a corrective response toward the hyper - masculine status quo of the field . Women have taken the proactive step to ' make a space of their own ' to learn , lead , and network . On the other hand , they can also be seen as complementary networks that increase the resources and talent of the overall , dominant space . These events are representative of the gender - conscious ' lean into blockchain ' discourse . Yet , as with events in the dominant space , they are not considered universally valuable by women who work in blockchain . At these events , women ' s involvement in blockchain is framed as advantageous both for their own professional success , and for improving the quality of the technology itself through greater diversity of talent . In this sense , blockchain offers value on both individual and collective levels . ' By women , for women ' events range from ' blockchain 101 ' education and competitions , to private socials and full conferences . Each of the gender equity initiatives described all three frames may be loosely associated with different , overlapping forms of feminism , but they all take place in the broader postfeminist social context . Across these contexts , I observed belief in ‘trickle - down feminism , ’ or the idea that ‘once a few women break the glass ceiling and achieve prominent positions in business and politics , this power will trickle down the ranks and empower all women’ ( Kennedy , 2013 , p . 6 ) . This idea is demonstrated in some scenarios described below , and challenged in others . I named this frame ‘lean into blockchain’ based on one of the stories I heard in my interviews . Part of Sheryl Sandberg’s ‘Lean In’ ( 2013 ) philosophy involves women’s active involvement in forming local ‘Lean In Circles’ as part of the material network of women supporting women in the workplace . Interviewee Miranda founded a ‘Lean into Blockchain’ meetup group to do exactly this : It brings together women that are actively working in the blockchain space , leading blockchain companies , or just passionate about the space . And we meet on a monthly basis to talk about various technical topics , to network , and to kind of support each other in our explorations in the tech space . We ' ve had one woman actually be hired by another woman in our group who leads a cryptocurrency algorithm trading platform . So we ' ve been able to kind of concretely support each other in our career pathways , which is really , really exciting . Miranda describes how these types of ‘by women , for women’ groups can be personally supportive and professionally productive . They exemplify the ethos of the ‘lean in’ discursive frame , which is to equip women with the skills , confidence , and connections to succeed within the dominant space . Faludi ( 2013 ) argues that these circles promote individualistic approaches to organizational equity , by aligning feminist and neoliberal values . Women’s involvement in ‘by women , for women’ social networks is key to their overall success within the dominant professional sphere . Recent research by Yang et . al . ( 2019 ) shows that while both men and women who occupy central F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 134 positions in their social networks are most likely to achieve greater prestige and pay at work , women in particular also had to have an inner circle of close female contacts to achieve these success levels , even if they had similar qualifications to the men in the study . My findings on WiB groups demonstrate the value of precisely these social networks . Since women often face cultural and political hurdles in tech that remain subtle but pervasive , they benefit from the chance to share private information about blockchain organizations ' attitudes toward women , opportunities in the space , and hazards to avoid . According to the data , one of the top reasons participants valued WiB events was their sense of a comfort zone or non - threatening women - only space to connect about blockchain and other similar interests . Facilitating these ‘infrastructures of support’ among women is a prime example of the practical solutions Sara Ahmed ( 2017 ) outlines in her book Living a Feminist Life . These networks connote several assumptions , as described by Alice , who had attended various WiB meetups in Vancouver , Oakland , and New York : There’s sort of an edge that ‘for women’ groups have , and it’s an assumption of inclusion instead of ‘prove something to us right now . ’ Because I’ve been in those environments , and the contrast is that you can just let your guard down . Just a feeling of solidarity . Why I’m mentioning it is because at other tech events , or most male - dominated areas , there’s always kind of the itching question of “is this for work ? Or are they trying to hit on me ? ” So you can kind of let that go a bit more . Alice sought out WiB meetups as ideal spaces to meet like - minded people as she visited different cities . Many participants echoed an appreciation for the sense of ease found within these groups , based on the assumption that attendees are generally there to support , encourage , and connect one another to new opportunities . Attendees can worry less about the layers of social labor they need to toggle between at other professional or meetup settings . For many who are the only women at their workplace , they look forward to talking shop in an environment where they are not the ' other ' in the room . Their sense of relief highlights the gendered micro - interactions of everyday social life that require additional social labor for women in the dominant blockchain scene . While most blockchain scenes in this space would view their lack of specificity in terms of who the event is designed for as an open stance , women’s experiences demonstrate how this lack of formal definition may become an additional burden to some . ‘By women , for women’ events bring clarity to the attendees’ expectations of the scene . For example , Alice conveyed that after working all day as the sole woman on her team , she would think twice about whether to go to a male - dominated blockchain meetup , “even if it wasn ' t always overly ‘bro - y , ’ " or hypermasculine in its social context . The prospect of potentially debating issues with people who view the space through the dominant lens is a form of additional social labor that takes a psychological toll : " I kind of save my energy in case I would have to get into those conversations . I don’t want to ‘work’ everywhere I go . " In a J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 135 compelling conversation on hackerspaces and the human condition , Gabriella Coleman and Petar Jandri ć discuss how “structurelessness is a limitation on egalitarian - like spaces , ” such as blockchain events , due to the inevitable shift toward hierarchies of social power that often go un - checked ( 2019 , p . 545 ) . They suggest that even egalitarianism spaces such as anarchist collectives require procedures , vigilance , and ongoing moderation . Consistent with the broader postfeminist social context of the moment , I found that many of the women who organize or attend women in blockchain meetups and events would not necessarily consider themselves feminists , activists , or organizers ( Bobel , 2007 ) , even as they pioneer work that aligns with precisely these values . They view themselves primarily as individuals aiming to further their careers . This reflects the contemporary ethos of ‘networked individualism , ’ which shifts the primary focus from social groups , organizations , and institutions , toward individuals as the primary units of connectivity ( Castells , 2001 ; Wellman et . al , 2003 ; Miyata et . al , 2005 ) . The rise of social media , in which each person is a switchboard between ties and networks , is a prime manifestation of this . For example , interviewee Anna founded an informal , invite - only , monthly gathering of women who work in blockchain , averaging around ten attendees at each event . Participants shared local blockchain information , ' asks and offers ' to do with hiring or switching jobs , and requests for speakers at events , both in person and via email . These events provide a safe space for networking , and a welcoming platform for women to share blockchain expertise . Yet the social ties that bind these WiB groups are often rooted in their instrumental value for building their careers and affinity group networks ( Joseph , 2013 ) . The data showed that the founders of WiB groups were confident and capable in their own tech or finance careers , and none of them had originally aspired to cultivate such communities . Rather they pivoted , paused , or added it to their primary line of work , out of a sense of necessity to grow their networks and help other women in the space . They shared the dominant view that blockchain is a revolutionary innovation , which motivated them to ameliorate the gender gap for different reasons including : advancing women’s careers opportunities in the early stages of this emerging tech , improving the diversity of the field so that the technology is developed as wisely as possible , and promoting greater blockchain adoption by exposing a wider demographic to its benefits . Without a clear roadmap or plan , most of them simply sought to create more space and opportunity for women in blockchain , each with their own focus , style , and goal . This is a good example of ‘enacting everyday feminist collaborations , ’ whether or not they consider themselves feminist at all , through practices such as reflexive growth , proactive improvisation , and co - learning partnerships ( Yang et . al . , 2019 ) . That is precisely what Jessie did when she and a co - founder swiftly launched the ' Women on the Block ' conference in New York in 2018 ( Moy , 2018 ) . Over 50 women in the industry gathered to present their expertise on topics such as raising F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 136 capital , creating startups , and legal issues , with proceeds going toward a charitable fund to support women and girls in technology : I was busy with my own work , but then I accidentally co - founded Women on the Block . It was the first conference that featured female thought leaders in blockchain . I guess it was making a statement : women exist in this space . And it went bananas , right . It was a super duper success . Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney came . It was all volunteer . Because I think it was a reaction to the conferences that men were dominating , and the after - parties at strip clubs . It was about doing something , instead of just talking about the problem . My philosophy is like , I ' m not going to ask for permission , I ' m going to try to make it happen . Although they may sound similar to WiB panels , ' by women , for women ' events represent a distinctly different set of gender power relations . On WiB panels at male - dominated events , women are invited based primarily on their gender . At a women ' s - focused event , women are invited primarily for their professional expertise . At these gatherings , there is no need for a WiB panel . Gender is , ironically , taken out of the equation for a moment . There is no need to overtly discuss the gendered experience of working in the field , so more attention can be given to professional and technical conversations . While some ‘by women , for women’ groups focus on connecting women who are already working in the blockchain field , others focus on the role of education and information for blockchain beginners of any age or stage . This work addresses the often - debated ' pipeline problem ' of equipping more women to apply for the burgeoning number of jobs in the space . For example , CryptoChicks is a non - profit organization focused on educating women and youth about blockchain , with chapters in Canada , the United States , the Bahamas , Pakistan and Switzerland . Its founders , women with extensive education and experience in technology , formed the group after installing an Ethereum wallet on one of their computers . They were excited by the concept of blockchain , but felt that the process should be more user - friendly , and more widely understood by women in particular for it to be successful . Their non - profit achieves this by running mentorship programs and idea incubators such as ' CryptoChicks Hatchery , ' and hosting conferences and hackathons exclusively for women participants . A hackathon is a design sprint event , in which teams of computer programmers , graphic designers , project managers , and domain experts collaborate intensively on projects , to create the best functioning software or hardware by the end of the event . Blockchain events including hackathons tend to be heavily male - dominated . Brooke ( 2020 ) recently conducted a study of gender performance and boundary - making at one of these types of hackathons . By participating in the hackathon with teammates over an intensive 24 - hour period , she observed through the sharing of memes and ironic jokes , that gender is the mediator of legitimate technical knowledge in these spaces . Her study argues that sexism is a fundamental part of tech culture . In contrast , the CryptoChicks hackathons are events designed ‘by women , for women , ’ which also include mentors and influential judges of all J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 137 genders . Hundreds of CryptoChicks participants have been hired in blockchain and AI , or started their own businesses in the space . One aspect of liberal and popular feminisms associated with this negotiated frame , that has been heavily critiqued by third wave feminists , is the idea that women need more technical skill and confidence to succeed in dominant , meritocratic spaces . But my observations and interviews reflected how important each of these elements are . Elise from Crypto Chicks described the differences in gendered socialization in relation to technology : We’re not trying to drag women into it . We’re just telling them about the technology and teaching them how easy it is . What I see , because we do events sometimes for men as well , is that men don’t even think about it . Sometimes they enter the competition without even having any doubt that they can do it , right ? First they enter , and then they think . Women though , I have hundreds of emails from them , and they’re asking “Did I do this right ? ” or “I think maybe I ' m not ready , maybe I’ll do it next year , ” this kind of thing . So it’s not that they’re not interested , it ' s just that they ' re not sure . It’s the mindset . By encouraging women in these scenarios to participate whether or not they feel qualified , CryptoChicks has been successful in promoting education and opportunity for women in the space . They reassure participants that they do not need coding skill to compete in a hackathon , since people work in teams with different roles , including business , communication , or legal aspects of the innovation . The quote above illustrates the work necessary to dismantle well - worn , binary perceptions about gender and technology – not only to do with stereotypical perceptions about who is an expert in tech , but personal , internalized sociocultural norms and expectations . ‘By women , for women’ events can help to rewrite the script , in terms of individual and collective perceptions of women and technology . Although the excerpts above demonstrate the immense value of ' by women , for women ' gatherings , these spaces are not universally useful to women working in blockchain . The intersectional challenges of finding a meaningful affinity group can often be overlooked in this emerging movement . Some interviewees indicated ways in which these groups were problematic , or not meaningful for them at all . Just as women have often been sidelined in the dominant , male - dominated space , the voices and experiences of women of color , LGBTQ women , disabled women , transgender , and non - binary folks tend to be sidelined within mainstream WiB circles . They are often dominated by white , straight , cisgender women . Recent research has shown that a narrow focus on gender in gender - inclusive meetups can result in centering whiteness – even when intersectionality is stated as a goal in their mission statement ( Dennissen et . al . , 2020 ) . Practicing intersectionality remains a challenge for many ' by women , for women ' groups in blockchain . Meaningful affinity groups are not created based on one - dimensional similarities in gender . Age , race , sexuality , professional role , and level of blockchain expertise are other axes of difference that matter . For example , as programmer Bailey reflected : F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 138 I haven ' t - bizarrely actually , being a lesbian - found women - only spaces to be particularly useful , I guess ? ' Designed by women for women ' is great if you want to talk about certain blockchain topics or gendered experiences . But events that are explicitly for networking like the drinks nights , I don ' t find I get a ton of value because I ' m often the only technical person there . So even talking about the sort of work I do , I may as well be speaking a different language , because I’m in a totally different area . If I ' m going to a conference , it ' s probably a technical conference . I want to talk to people who could have an impact on my thinking , or I could have an impact on theirs , which is orthogonal to their gender . In Bailey’s scenario , shared gender does not equal shared experience . These groups do not provide a path to the types of support or resistance that might be most useful in her day - to - day work in blockchain . Most of the women ' s meetup spaces in this study were dominated by those in business , communication , or operational roles . This highlights the intersectional challenges related to finding belonging among these groups . In terms of racial inequality , women of color make up their own minority group within the WiB minority group . Several of the interviewees had helped to launch ' by women for women ' spaces that create more meaningful affinity groups for themselves and others like them . For example , Taylor , an entrepreneur and consultant with a doctorate in public health , is a key stakeholder in a blockchain group specifically for Black women and girls : I think blockchain is a field where there can be silos . A lot of times you start seeing the same faces , same people , same voices . And so the goal with Black Women Blockchain Council is to create a platform to give women of color access to funding , to create funding , as well as more opportunities to work together . It’s a way of elevating those of us who are already working in the space , as well as those who are coming up or unaware of what blockchain is . We ' re trying to build an entry point to get more women involved , especially women of color . Utilising their current levels of expertise in business , law , or science or health . All these different areas that play into the future of blockchain . Black Women Blockchain Council serves to educate and promote individual Black women and girls in blockchain and Fintech ( financial technologies ) using blockchain , as part of its overall goal to promote social and economic inclusion . They support the development of cryptocurrency as an important tool for eliminating traditional barriers to wealth creation , which disproportionately affect Black communities . The group ' s monthly newsletter features news and articles written by members , educational resources , and links to work by Black blockchain thought leaders such as Isaiah Jackson ' s ( 2019 ) Bitcoin and Black America . This race - and gender - conscious discourse , in reference to Bitcoin ' s pseudonymous inventor opens up new possibilities for what blockchain can mean for stakeholders who are often made to feel marginalized or minoritized in the space . Founders of WiB meetups and conferences aim to cultivate networks of support , education , and resistance , to increase the quality and quantity of women’s participation in the space at large . As a secondary goal , these groups promote J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 139 awareness that a more diverse blockchain culture would increase the technology’s adoption , usability , and applicability . But these discourses , commonly circulated within WiB groups , are often dismissed or overlooked in the dominant space . The vision to bridge this gap is seen in the third type of event I observed , ' by women , for all genders ' events . Meetups and conferences of this type represent a pathway for what a more genuinely inclusive blockchain space might look like , and how this might affect the technology and society at large . 4 . 3 Frame 3 : Intersectional inclusion ‘By women , for everyone’ events Blockchain events that exemplify the third , oppositional discursive frame , ‘intersectional inclusion , ’ include those designed by women , where people of all genders are welcome . The names of these events may or may not include anything about gender or diversity . Yet the hallmarks of these gatherings include : ( 1 ) a heightened sensitivity to intersectionality ( Crenshaw , 1990 ) ; ( 2 ) a stance of proactive inclusion that amplifies the voices of women , racial minorities , non - Western perspectives , and LGBTQ experts in blockchain ; and ( 3 ) a vision for transforming the dominant blockchain space , motivated by social justice as opposed to ‘adding value . ’ Acknowledging the importance of intersectionality is not a way of saying we ought to consider race , class , and ( dis ) ability as well as gender - it is to admit that we do not properly understand how gender operates unless we meaningfully engage with a wide array of other social axes . Catharina Landström ( 2007 ) articulates this in her paper on queering feminist technology studies , critiquing the habitual reproduction of heteronormativity in the tech communities studied as counterproductive to the feminist aims of this theoretical approach . Participants grounded in this school of thought recognize various axes of social inequity and seek to improve the blockchain space , and society at large , by ameliorating them . In this sense , these types of blockchain scenes involve " a transformative work carried out upon materials and resources " ( Straw , 2015 , p . 479 ) . I had not heard of these types of groups or events before conducting this research . Even though they make up the smallest ratio of the types of events I studied , ‘by women , for everyone’ gatherings represent an important signal for progress in the space . These types of meetups and conferences aim to cultivate a more sustainable , equitable blockchain , through proactive efforts toward genuine inclusion . They are designed to break out of the silos of women - only spaces . They do so by rallying the education and support of male allies to promote gender inequity in the dominant space , and actively gatekeeping toxic patriarchal behavior out of these inclusively designed spaces . According to Ahmed ( 2017 ) , to build a fair and equitable world , we must first critique the problematic dwellings that have been built , and then start to envision and build new ones as a hopeful collective . Acknowledging gender inequity is a crucial first step to addressing it . Even in domains where women have reached gender parity in terms of representation , F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 140 gender bias persists in terms of women’s quality of experience and opportunities for leadership – and this is perpetuated most often by those who believe it is not happening ( Begeny et . al . , 2020 ) . Stakeholders in the ‘intersectional inclusion’ frame see this as a current problem to be solved in blockchain . As third wave feminists have highlighted , gender inequity requires more than the collective action of women . It must also include men who promote and exemplify gender equity in the dominant social sphere . In contrast to the prevailing postfeminist milieu , which aligns more easily with meritocracy and neoliberalism , third wave feminism argues for the active promotion of intersectionality , equal pay and opportunity for women , and the dismantling of rigid gender norms and binaries that harm boys and men as well ( Finneman & Volz , 2020 ; Heywood , 2006 ) . Blockchain events that exemplify this discursive frame are designed to amplify women’s expertise and welcome men as allies and advocates in order to transform the dominant space . As Wajcman contends , " new technologies may be ‘epistemologically open , ’ but many of their current forms are similar in their material relations to pre - existing technologies " ( 2004 , p . 75 ) . In the case of blockchain , its early social infrastructures are rooted in the historically male - dominated cultures of tech and finance . These types of events aim to critique and transform the dominant space , in a particular way that ' by women for women ' groups are not designed to focus on . Since critiquing the dominant space is a risky move for those who are already marginalized in the space , influencing change requires a strategic , palatable approach . This is evident in the way one meetup founder described navigating through the dominant ‘gender - blind meritocracy’ in blockchain : I will say that it is a very complicated issue . You can’t convince someone , right ? They have to see it . And even for me , it wasn ' t until I got into the space , and it was all young dudes . I’m like , this is crazy . This is like 30 years ago with the Internet . And yet , I think it’s wrong to accuse people of being ' exclusive . ' No one’s going to react well to that , so let’s stop doing that . ‘Cuz we know the response is , " It’s an open invite , if you don’t want to come , that’s on you . " Well , yes , but that’s the problem right ? It’s not that you’re being exclusive , you’re just not being intentionally inclusive . And if we believe in this technology , and we think it can impact the world for the better , and we want to stay in this space , then we need to be intentionally inclusive . Organizers of blockchain conferences often defend their male - dominated speaking rosters by arguing that no women or people of color applied to present . Yet with the rise of diversity and inclusion awareness over the past several years , organizers of the biggest and most popular tech conferences , including WebSummit , CES , and TechCrunch Disrupt , have begun to actively research and invite a more diverse line - up of speakers . They do not rely on inbound applications . They make outbound offers . This stance is predicated on the understanding that white and Asian men are most often afforded these types of opportunities in blockchain , and “if women of color and non - gender conforming immigrants had the same opportunities and benefit of the doubt , they would be just as well known” ( Kostecki , J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 141 2019 ) . This discursive frame reinforces that greater mindfulness in curating speaker line - ups is necessary to avoid perpetuating an echo chamber of speakers . Jessie illustrates the difference between speaking opportunities in well - established industries like finance , versus emerging spaces like blockchain where she has advocated for intersectional inclusion : I hear women say , “who cares about gender , just do the work , you’ll get recognized . ” But again , it’s about intentional inclusion . So what I would say to them is , I was on Wall Street in structure product for 20 plus years . And I had a very good reputation . All the sales guys came to me . I knew what I was talking about . Of all the conferences I went to , I got stuck with meetings ‘cuz I was also doing investor relations . Not once was I asked to be on the panel . I ' m in blockchain for less than two years , and I ' ve been on stage at the US Chamber of Commerce . There is a hopeful sense that things could be different if advocates intervene to welcome more types of people and their situated knowledges ( Haraway , 1988 ) to the space . This hopeful sense speaks to the fact that blockchain’s interpretive flexibility is still perceived as malleable in these early developmental stages , and not yet stabilized or closed . When men are invited to join ' by women , for everyone ' meetups , conferences , or hackathons , the typical gender ratio of blockchain meetups is inverted . For instance , one participant involved with the Crypto Chicks describes how this dynamic operates at their hackathons for women : I mean four years ago , there were no women . You’d go to a conference with a couple thousand people and there’d be like… three . We didn’t even make up one percent . So now when I go to events globally , it’s significantly better . You do have young women coming into play . It ' s still predominantly male , however it ' s not as skewed as it used to be . Our hackathons are all - women blockchain teams , but the mentorship is diverse . We have a lot of guy mentors so it’s actually really great to see that kind of technology transfer . This participant describes how their hackathons have helped to flip the typical gender ratio at blockchain events and to incorporate the important element of male allyship . This is not a dynamic that happens spontaneously based on the number of women in the room , but through intentionally inclusive design . As a contrast , when discounted tickets are sold to women to increase their numbers at a male - dominated tech conferences , it fosters a useful but different dynamic . At events like the Crypto Chicks hackathon , the social conditions are intentionally designed by and for women , along with the support of male allies . These gatherings present new alternatives for what the blockchain space might look like . The simple , radical act of women designing their own events , and featuring women as knowledgeable speakers on blockchain , alters the typical narrative of who is seen as an expert in the field . Blockchain events organized and headlined by women , are usually decoded as ' events for women , ' even if they are encoded ‘for everyone , ’ and the intended audience is people of all genders . When women F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 142 organize blockchain events for other women , the dominant discourse is not challenged , so there is typically less backlash . But when women position themselves and other women as top speakers in the dominant space , they are more likely to receive an equally bold sexist response from the more patriarchal corners of the field . Sarah Banet - Weiser ( 2018 ) details how displays of popular feminism are swiftly and harshly met with displays of popular misogyny . Interviewee Kacia , a project manager at a crypto mining company , recalled the reaction to one well - known blockchain event that breaks this mold as a ' by women , for everyone ' conference : I would say one of the stand - out events that I went to was Crypto Springs , which was in Palm Springs . It was made by women , and it wasn ' t necessarily for women , but I think in a way it became that because of the speakers that were brought on . However , there were definitely male attendees . I would say about 20 % . The ' crypto bros , ' which we like to call them , which are just the headstrong crypto enthusiasts that you can ' t get away from on Twitter , they were hating on the event a lot at the early stages because the branding had some pink in it and the speakers were female . I think it was about 30 % male speakers , 70 % female speakers . And the founders of the event were simply saying , “these are the most influential speakers that we see in the industry right now , who can talk to projects that are making moves and technology that ' s innovative , so this is what we ' re doing . ” And the crypto bros were not having it . They did not want to accept that as reality . They wanted to say that it was discriminating against them and all this bullshit . This reveals both the ground - breaking nature of ‘by women , for everyone’ events , and some of the thorny backlash associated with them . They challenge the male - dominated status quo , as women position themselves as influential voices in the field instead of staying in their own self - contained groups . As Wajcman argues , " to be in command of the very latest technology signifies a greater involvement in , if not power over , the future” ( 2004 , p . 12 ) . Since the cultures of masculinity and technology are deeply coterminous , women ' s leadership in technology spaces is decoded as an affront to the very identity of a hypermasculine crypto bro . Kacia contrasted the open , relaxed culture of Crypto Springs to previous crypto conferences she had attended characterized by ' bro culture , ' where women in the industry had made meaningful connections with one another while avoiding guys standing next to their Lamborghinis with bikini - clad women on them . Crypto Springs was their response to these conferences . She also mentioned that besides the contingent of vocal dissenters , many men who attended the event publicly applauded it as the most valuable blockchain event they had attended that year . So are these types of events more progressive than ' by women , for women ' events ? Not necessarily . Again , each of these events enables and constrains women in different ways . One interviewee offered a compelling reminder of the importance of women - only spaces in blockchain . She recounted meeting " a young woman from a very traditional family at a hackathon who would never have been allowed to attend the hackathon if it weren ' t an all - women ' s event . " In other words , her family would not have allowed her to work on a team with men , competing around the J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 143 clock in a 48 - hour hackathon . She was only permitted to compete because her family perceived an all - women’s event as a safe , appropriate space to learn more about the technology . Stories like these highlight the need for both women - only spaces , as well as women - centered spaces for all genders . These variations in social context promote greater blockchain accessibility , accommodating a diverse range of preferences and cultural backgrounds . For financial advisor and meetup founder Jessie , the goals of diversity and inclusion are realized in a ' quality not quantity ' style . This influenced the design of her lunch gatherings featuring a short talk by a woman in blockchain . She reached out and invited specific men and women to join , keeping the groups small enough to foster genuine connections , and facilitating communication for attendees to remain in touch . At the end of each event , she would briefly but overtly petition the mixed - gender audience to be active allies , by suggesting several concrete steps to take at other meetups and conferences in the space : I say , “First , let’s not moderate an all - male panel . Insist on diversity . Second , let’s not participate in an all - male panel . And third , if you see an all - male panel , point it out to the organizer . Tell them to be intentionally inclusive . You don’t have to give up your life , your career . You don’t have to give away money . These are very simple things . They take seconds , but if we all do them , we’re going to see changes , right ? Let’s commit to doing this for even one year and see where we land . ” Jessie’s appeal to male allies in the room highlights that they can actively support women in the space without giving up money , time , or power in the process . This dismantles the myth that gender equity is a zero - sum game of winners and losers . It is a concrete bid for men to practice micro - inclusions , or small , symbolic acts which “signal to those at the margins that they are included” ( McDowell , 2016 ) . The discourse of intersectional inclusion highlights that without proactively welcoming a diversity of voices to shape the technology , blockchain is in danger of re - inscribing the existing power structures it purports to dismantle . Participants , like Kate , the co - founder of a crypto mining company , have been encouraged to see men practicing Jessie’s suggestions above . She was involved in a group conversation about an upcoming conference . People were debating whether it was worth attending . As she explains : “There were several men in the conversation who said they will not attend any conference where the panels are not [ gender balanced ] 50 / 50 . So I see that as very positive . When I see men taking that stand , that’s helpful . " My observations showed another way organizers of ‘by women , for everyone’ events demonstrate intersectional inclusion is through their role as gatekeepers who set the tone and create safe spaces for women to speak and participate . Miranda , a blockchain consultant with a tech firm , commented on how one meetup organizer proactively stated the group ' s discussion guidelines to ensure women ' s voices were heard : F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 144 There is a ‘women in blockchain’ meetup here in Seattle , led by a lawyer who helps startups position themselves for token sales and other go - to - market strategy . And that was really the first meetup that I went to in Seattle where I felt , it ' s just an amazing community . Very welcoming . So all the speakers are female . We have rules like , if you’re a man you’re welcome to attend , but you always have to let a female ask a question or make a comment ahead of you . And so I think [ the organizer ] has done a really great job of bringing in a lot of voices that I haven ' t heard anywhere else in any of the other meetups in the space . The efficacy of this discursive gatekeeping technique was confirmed in a recent study that measured women ' s visibility at seminars by the question - asking behavior of participants , through observations and surveys ( Carter et . al . , 2018 ) . Researchers found that men are more than 2 . 5 times more likely to pose follow - up questions to the speakers , but only when a man asked the first question . When a woman did so , the gender split disappeared . Blockchain scenes in this discursive frame can be viewed as " ethical worlds shaped by the working out and maintenance of behavioral protocols " ( Straw , 2015 , p . 477 ) . For example , in the case of a cryptocurrency mining conference I attended , I learned of the organizer ' s effective gatekeeping role in curating the speaker line - up when I later interviewed her . Tara , an economist and CEO of a blockchain research group , shared about how she dealt with a difficult situation . It was brought to her attention that one of the speakers they had signed on had a popular Twitter profile that included " racist , bigoted , gender - violent material . " She felt strongly against giving a speaking platform to this person . This launched a discussion with her male - dominated team about the limits of free speech . They would likely have let it go , but she felt compelled to address it directly : It became really , really stressful . Finally I said , “That ' s it , I ' m not leading a company that ' s going to give a platform to this type of voice , so let ' s talk to him directly . ” And we did . And he was so shocked . I said , “we’re revoking your invitation as a speaker , but if you clean up some of this material online you ' re more than welcome to come as a guest . ” And within 24 hours everything was cleaned up . We had a couple of reconciliation calls where he said , “I realize my behavior is inappropriate , and the damage it can do , and how it can make people feel unsafe , ” yadda yadda . But I think it was also a bit of a life - changing moment . He said , “people have been saying this to me all along but now that it ' s implicated my profession and my business , I understand that this is real . ” As the leader , and only woman , in a small blockchain organization , Tara used her influence to make a difficult , proactive decision to respond to the complaint about the speaker with the offensive Twitter feed . Where her colleagues were more apt to view this behavior as separate from his blockchain expertise , she did not view it this way . Even though the event itself featured mostly male speakers and attendees , she did not want to amplify a voice that had perpetuated racist , sexist messaging . She demonstrated an understanding of how to cultivate an inclusive space , even if it was male - dominated . J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 145 One of the most prominent constraints for blockchain stakeholders who view the space through the ‘intersectional inclusion’ frame is burnout for advocates . Ultimately , and ironically , the goal of women in blockchain groups and events is to eradicate the need for them at all . Jessie has organized a ‘blockchain lunch’ series for all genders , as well as the ' Women on the Block ' conference for women . She reflected : Now there ' s more diversity - conscious events in blockchain , and I ' m very happy to see that . My goal is to not have to do this anymore . So I can focus on being an operator and learn more , and write thoughtful pieces on the tech . I don ' t have time to do that right now . I ' m so exhausted by this narrative . It ' s always , " what about women ? " I don ' t want to be seen as this martyr . I’m exhausted by it . If we do any future events , we are working on changing the name of ‘Women on the Block’ to ' Satoshi ' s Table . ' This tension highlights a significant contrast between two discourses : in the dominant space of the gender - blind meritocracy , the ‘lean into blockchain’ narrative is seen as a distraction from ‘the real work’ of blockchain . Yet , gender - conscious advocates argue that correcting the gender disparity in the space relates directly to developing more robust , useful versions of blockchain . If talented women in tech spend inordinate amounts of time building their communities , that translates to a loss of resources from prospective advocates , analysts , and applicators of the technology . Jessie’s comment about changing the name of the group highlights a discursive aspiration toward progress . If the goal of this type of advocacy work is to promote gender parity in the space on a material level , then one way to work toward that on a discursive level is to change the group name to the gender - neutral ‘Satoshi’s Table , ’ although it would remain a ‘by women , for women’ initiative . This shows their understanding of an important concept STS scholars have highlighted – that language not only describes but also tends to produce the phenomena they set out to describe ( Star , 1999 ) . In other words , these stakeholders realize that words create worlds . Although blockchain scenes in the ‘intersectional inclusion’ frame reflect some of the most progressive ideas in the space , individuals operating within this frame represent a minority within a minority group . Taking on the challenge of transforming the dominant space is a David and Goliath scenario , but the underdogs are filled with precisely that kind of hope . 5 CONCLUSION By elevating women’s diverse experiences in various blockchain scenes , this study deepens scholarly understanding of how gender and technology shape one another . Meetups , conferences , and hackathons served as ideal places to observe both gender and technology in the making . As cultural practices they are an " essential site of struggle " that can " play an incalculable role in the raising of consciousness and the transformation of our subjectivity " ( Barrett , 2014 , p . 113 ) . The discursive F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 146 complexities surrounding the acknowledgement of gender in blockchain make for thorny terrain to navigate . In this paper , I explored how women’s participation in a variety of blockchain events was both enabling and constraining , depending on the design and social conditions of the event . Gender equity initiatives that sound similar were experienced differently by interviewees . For instance , ‘by women , for women’ blockchain meetups serve as important spaces of resistance and support for many , whereas ‘women in blockchain’ panels at blockchain conferences ring hollow as inclusivity gestures , instead highlighting the exclusivity of the male - dominated status quo . The technofeminist discourse analysis in this paper demonstrates how gender equity initiatives are encoded and decoded in different ways that shape social contexts and outcomes . It also reinforces the importance of intersectional approaches that highlight women’s diverse experiences in the space . None of the events discussed above were ‘one size fits all’ in terms of their value to interviewees . To recap the discursive frames presented in this paper , I compare and contrast them to one another : ( 1 ) the dominant ‘gender - blind meritocracy’ frame suggests that technology can solve social problems and everyone is currently welcome to participate ; ( 2 ) the negotiated ‘lean into blockchain’ frame suggests that technology can solve social problems , but we need to support more women to join the space in order to improve both the workplace and the technology ; and ( 3 ) the oppositional ‘intersectional inclusion’ frame suggests that social solutions are required to solve social problems . Furthermore , it suggests that technology is an important space to increase social equities , which may then enact more equitable technical solutions . As new technologies increasingly mediate more aspects of everyday life , this study contributes a set of discursive frames that scholars of STS , feminist technoscience , blockchain , and discourse analysis may adapt to analyze social equities in various tech scenes . Wajcman ( 2004 ) reminds us that the project of technofeminism is twofold : " it offers a different way of understanding the nature of agency and change in a post - industrial world , as well as the means of making a difference " ( p . 130 ) . This technofeminist discourse analysis seeks to contribute towards both of these aims . The discursive tensions at stake between each frame represent moments of instability that open the possibility for greater gender equity in blockchain . Furthermore , this study aims to challenge and refine the concept of technofeminism as a more powerful intersectional lens of analysis . For example , nearly 20 years ago when Wajcman introduced the concept , she observed that the “culture of masculinity is largely coterminous with the culture of technology , " and therefore , " to enter this world , to learn its language , women have first to forsake their femininity " ( 2004 , p . 15 ) . The findings of this study problematize some of these assumptions , demonstrating that some blockchain spaces are distinctly feminized yet still problematic . This study also decouples masculinity from the problem of gender equity in the space – women were constrained , more specifically , by patriarchal and misogynist scenes within blockchain . Women were also enabled in J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 147 the few male - dominated scenes that explicitly embraced feminist values , humanizing people of all genders . Each of the gender - conscious initiatives described across the three discursive frames is associated with different forms of feminism , but they all take place in the broader postfeminist social context . Therefore , one of the barriers for making lasting social change on a broad scale , through the events described in this paper , is that the supportive social bonds formed both online and in place - based networks are typically designed to facilitate women’s individual empowerment and entrepreneurialism , as opposed to that of the collective . Organizers of diversity - focused events were prone to speak of them as simply ‘more inclusive’ or ‘improving the space’ as opposed to anything to do with feminism or activism . And participants who subscribed to the dominant ‘gender - blind meritocracy’ as their primary lens on the space dismissed gender as an important factor to blockchain . This is their way of asserting that women are already empowered and successful in the space , and that others can be too , through the idea of ‘trickle down feminism’ ( Kennedy , 2013 ) . Yet while women are knowledgeable and successful in blockchain , they are not often recognized or rewarded as such . This brings us back to the questions of ‘whose voices are heard , in which social contexts ? ’ and ‘whose knowledge counts ? ’ from the beginning of the paper . The reason participants improvise and develop ‘by women , for women’ and ‘by women , for everyone’ events is precisely to create spaces for women’s voices to be heard , and to increase the likelihood for women’s knowledge to count in the dominant space . These blockchain scenes mediate an important " space of transit between visibility and invisibility " ( Straw , 2015 , p . 483 ) . They may be generative , accessible spaces for some women to innovate within the blockchain space , but they are not coded with the same level of influence or power as male - dominated spaces . Participants in this study experienced benefits and challenges related to each of these blockchain scenes in unique and individual ways . They also signaled important ways to improve each of them , in order to build more integrated , sustainable spaces of tech innovation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author wishes to thank her supervisor Peter Chow - White , as well as lab colleagues at Simon Fraser University’s GeNA Lab , and the participants of this study for their support . The author would also like to thank the reviewers of this paper for their insightful , constructive comments . F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 148 REFERENCES Adams , P . R . , Frizzo - Barker , J . , Ackah , B . , & Chow - White , P . A . ( 2019 ) . Meetups : Making space for women on the blockchain . In M . Ragnedda & G . Destefanis ( Eds . ) , Blockchain and Web 3 . 0 : Social , Economic , and Technological Challenges ( pp . 48 – 61 ) . Routledge . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780429029530 Ahmed , S . ( 2012 ) . On Being Included : Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life ( Illustrated edition ) . Duke Univ Pr . Ahmed , S . ( 2015 ) . Introduction : Sexism - A Problem with a Name . New Formations : A Journal of Culture / Theory / Politics , 86 ( 1 ) , 5 – 13 . Ahmed , S . ( 2017 ) . Living a Feminist Life . Duke University Press . Banerjee , D . ( 2022 , April 19 ) . Inside crypto’s hiring spree : A ‘Wild West’ search for talent with one big problem [ LinkedIn ] . https : / / www . linkedin . com / pulse / inside - cryptos - hiring - spree - wild - west - search - talent - banerjee - cfa / Banet - Weiser , S . ( 2018 ) . Empowered : Popular Feminism and Popular Misogyny . Duke University Press . Barrett , M . ( 2014 ) . Women’s Oppression Today : The Marxist / feminist Encounter . Verso Books . Baym , N . , Swartz , L . , & Alarcon , A . ( 2019 ) . Convening Technologies : Blockchain and the Music Industry . International Journal of Communication , 13 ( 0 ) , 402 – 421 . Begeny , C . T . , Ryan , M . K . , Moss - Racusin , C . A . , & Ravetz , G . ( 2020 ) . In some professions , women have become well represented , yet gender bias persists—Perpetuated by those who think it is not happening . Science Advances , 6 ( 26 ) , eaba7814 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aba7814 Benjamin , R . ( 2019 ) . Race after Technology : Abolitionist tools for the New Jim Code . Polity . Benkler , Y . ( 2006 ) . The Wealth of Networks : How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . Yale University Press . Blum , A . ( 2001 ) . Scenes . Public , 7 – 35 . Bobel , C . ( 2007 ) . “I’m not an activist , though I’ve done a lot of it” : Doing Activism , Being Activist and the “Perfect Standard” in a Contemporary Movement . Social Movement Studies , 6 ( 2 ) , 147 – 159 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14742830701497277 Boczkowski , P . , & Lievrouw , L . A . ( 2008 ) . Bridging STS and communication studies : Scholarship on media and information technologies . In E . J . Hackett , O . Amsterdamska , M . Lynch , & J . Wajcman ( Eds . ) , The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies ( pp . 949 – 977 ) . MIT Press . Bourke , J . , & Espedido , A . ( 2019 , March 29 ) . Why Inclusive Leaders Are Good for Organizations , and How to Become One . Harvard Business Review . J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 149 Retrieved from https : / / hbr . org / 2019 / 03 / why - inclusive - leaders - are - good - for - organizations - and - how - to - become - one Bowles , N . ( 2018 , February 25 ) . Women in Cryptocurrencies Push Back Against ‘Blockchain Bros . ’ New York Times . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2018 / 02 / 25 / business / cryptocurrency - women - blockchain - bros . html Brooke , S . ( 2020 ) . Breaking gender code : Visibility , power , and gender in creative coding cultures [ University of Oxford ] . https : / / ora . ox . ac . uk / objects / uuid : 76f836bf - 880b - 4902 - 9226 - 8d668726f4cf Carter , A . , Croft , A . , Lukas , D . , & Sandstrom , G . ( 2018 ) . Women’s visibility in academic seminars : Women ask fewer questions than men . PLOS ONE , 13 ( 9 ) , e0202743 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0202743 Casemajor , N . , & Straw , W . ( 2017 ) . The Visuality Of Scenes : Urban Cultures And Visual Scenescapes . Imaginations : Journal of Cross - Cultural Image Studies , 7 ( 2 ) , 4 – 19 . Castells , M . ( 2000 ) . The Rise of the Network Society : The Information Age : Economy , Society , and Culture . Blackwell . Castells , M . ( 2001 ) . The Internet Galaxy : Reflections on the Internet , Business , and Society . Oxford University Press . Castilla , E . J . , & Benard , S . ( 2010 ) . The Paradox of Meritocracy in Organizations . Administrative Science Quarterly , 55 ( 4 ) , 543 – 576 . Cho , S . , Crenshaw , K . W . , & McCall , L . ( 2013 ) . Toward a Field of Intersectionality Studies : Theory , Applications , and Praxis . Signs , 38 ( 4 ) , 785 – 810 . Christensen , C . M . , Raynor , M . E . , & McDonald , R . ( 2015 ) . What Is Disruptive Innovation ? Harvard Business Review . https : / / hbr . org / 2015 / 12 / what - is - disruptive - innovation Cockburn , C . , & Ormrod , S . ( 1993 ) . Gender and technology in the making . Sage Publications . Coin Dance . ( 2022 , March ) . Bitcoin Community Engagement by Gender Summary . Coin Dance . https : / / coin . dance / stats # demographics Coleman , G . , & Jandri ć , P . ( 2019 ) . Postdigital Anthropology : Hacks , Hackers , and the Human Condition . Postdigital Science and Education , 1 ( 2 ) , 525 – 550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s42438 - 019 - 00065 - 8 Correll , S . J . ( 2017 ) . SWS 2016 Feminist Lecture : Reducing Gender Biases In Modern Workplaces : A Small Wins Approach to Organizational Change . Gender & Society , 31 ( 6 ) , 725 – 750 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0891243217738518 Cottom , T . M . ( 2017 ) . Black cyberfeminisms : Ways forward for intersectionality and digital sociology . In D . Jessie , G . Karen , & T . M . Cottom ( Eds . ) , Digitized institutions ( pp . 211 – 230 ) . Policy Press . F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 150 Crenshaw , K . ( 1990 ) . Mapping the Margins : Intersectionality , Identity Politics , and Violence against Women of Color . Stanford Law Review , 43 , 1241 . Cuen , L . ( 2018 , December 31 ) . Bitcoin’s Warrior Queen : How Lightning’s Elizabeth Stark Raised an Army . CoinDesk . https : / / www . coindesk . com / coindesk - most - influential - blockchain - 2018 - elizabeth - stark Custer , C . ( 2018 ) . Blockchain’s Gender Divide : A Data Story—Longhash . https : / / en . longhash . com / news / blockchains - gender - divide - a - data - story De Hertogh , L . B . , Lane , L . , & Ouellette , J . ( 2019 ) . “Feminist Leanings : ” Tracing Technofeminist and Intersectional Practices and Values in Three Decades of Computers and Composition . Computers and Composition , 51 , 4 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compcom . 2018 . 11 . 004 Dennissen , M . , Benschop , Y . , & van den Brink , M . ( 2020 ) . Rethinking Diversity Management : An Intersectional Analysis of Diversity Networks . Organization Studies , 41 ( 2 ) , 219 – 240 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0170840618800103 Dunbar - Hester , C . ( 2014 ) . Low Power to the People : Pirates , Protest , and Politics in FM Radio Activism . The MIT Press . Dunbar - Hester , C . ( 2020 ) . Hacking Diversity : The Politics of Inclusion in Open Technology Cultures . Princeton University Press . Elizabeth , K . ( 2018 , June 26 ) . Crypto Is Booming . But Where Are The Women ? Forbes . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / katieelizabeth1 / 2018 / 06 / 26 / crypto - is - booming - where - are - the - women / # 33206c7b1a3f Ensmenger , N . ( 2012 ) . The Computer Boys Take Over : Computers , Programmers , and the Politics of Technical Expertise ( pp . x , 320 ) . The MIT Press . Eswaran , V . ( 2019 ) . The business case for diversity is now overwhelming . Here’s why . Retrieved from World Economic Forum website : https : / / www . weforum . org / agenda / 2019 / 04 / business - case - for - diversity - in - the - workplace / Eubanks , V . ( 2018 ) . Automating Inequality : How High - Tech Tools Profile , Police , and Punish the Poor . New York , NY : St . Martin’s Press . Faludi , S . ( 2013 ) . Facebook Feminism , Like It or Not . The Baffler , 23 , 34 – 51 . Faulkner , W . ( 2009 ) . Doing gender in engineering workplace cultures : Gender in / authenticity and the in / visibility paradox . Engineering Studies , 1 ( 3 ) , 169 – 189 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 19378620903225059 Finneman , T . , & Volz , Y . ( 2020 ) . Leading the second wave into the third wave : U . S . women journalists and discursive continuity of feminism . Feminist Media Studies , 20 ( 6 ) , 863 – 878 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14680777 . 2019 . 1644658 Fraser , N . ( 2013 ) . Fortunes of Feminism : From State - Managed Capitalism to Neoliberal Crisis : Verso ; https : / / www . amazon . ca / Fortunes - Feminism - State - Managed - Capitalism - Neoliberal / dp / 1844679845 . J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 151 Fuchs , C . ( 2013 ) . Social Media : A Critical Introduction . SAGE . Gamerman , E . ( 2022 , March 11 ) . Reese Witherspoon and Gwyneth Paltrow Push for Crypto Sisterhood . Wall Street Journal . https : / / www . wsj . com / articles / reese - witherspoon - and - gwyneth - paltrow - push - for - crypto - sisterhood - 11647017051 Gerson , J . M . , & Peiss , K . ( 1985 ) . Boundaries , Negotiation , Consciousness : Reconceptualizing Gender Relations . Social Problems , 32 ( 4 ) , 317 – 331 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 800755 Gill , R . ( 2009 ) . Mediated intimacy and postfeminism : A discourse analytic examination of sex and relationships advice in a women’s magazine . Discourse & Communication , 3 ( 4 ) , 345 – 369 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1750481309343870 Gill , R . ( 2011 ) . Sexism Reloaded , or , it’s Time to get Angry Again ! Feminist Media Studies , 11 ( 1 ) , 61 – 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14680777 . 2011 . 537029 Gill , R . ( 2018 ) . Discourse analysis in media and communications research . In M . Kackman & M . C . Kearney ( Eds . ) , The Craft of Criticism : Critical Media Studies in Practice . Routledge . Green , D . J . ( 2018 , October 10 ) . We Need More Female Programmers In Blockchain . Forbes . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / jemmagreen / 2018 / 10 / 10 / we - need - more - female - programmers - in - blockchain / Griffith , E . ( 2018 ) . For Women in Cryptocurrency , a New Effort to Grow Their Ranks . WIRED . https : / / www . wired . com / story / for - women - in - cryptocurrency - a - new - effort - to - grow - their - ranks / Hall , S . ( 1980 ) . Encoding / Decoding . In S . Hall , D . Hobson , A . Lowe , & P . Willis ( Eds . ) , Culture , Media , Language : Working Papers in Cultural Studies , 1972 - 79 ( pp . 117 – 127 ) . Hutchinson . Haraway , D . ( 1988 ) . Situated Knowledges : The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective . Feminist Studies , 14 ( 3 ) , 575 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3178066 Haraway , D . J . ( 1997 ) . Modest − Witness @ Second − Millennium . FemaleMan − Meets − OncoMouse : Feminism and Technoscience . Routledge . Hardey , M . ( 2019 ) . The Culture of Women in Tech : An Unsuitable Job for a Woman ( 1st ed . ) . Emerald Group Publishing Limited . Heywood , L . ( 2006 ) . The women’s movement today : An encyclopedia of third - wave feminism . Greenwood Press . Hicks , M . ( 2017 ) . Programmed inequality : How Britain discarded women technologists and lost its edge in computing . MIT Press . Hughes , T . P . ( 1993 ) . Networks of Power : Electrification in Western Society , 1880 - 1930 ( Revised edition ) . Johns Hopkins Univ Pr . Jackson , I . ( 2019 ) . Bitcoin & Black America . Independently published . F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 152 Jenkins , H . ( 2006 ) . Convergence Culture : Where Old and New Media Collide . NYU Press . Joseph , C . ( 2013 ) . Leveraging a women’s network to attract , develop and retain high potential female talent . Strategic HR Review , 12 ( 3 ) , 132 – 137 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 14754391311324480 Kennedy , S . ( 2013 ) . Marxism and Feminism in an Age of Neoliberalism . Irish Marxist Review , 2 ( 7 ) , 5 – 16 . Kostecki , J . ( 2019 , May 22 ) . Thoughts on Diversity , Inclusion and Accessibility for Massive Adoption in Memphis . Medium . https : / / medium . com / @ jacob _ kostecki / thoughts - on - diversity - inclusion - and - accessibility - for - massive - adoption - in - memphis - db0bd8f2a2a1 Landström , C . ( 2007 ) . Queering feminist technology studies . Feminist Theory , 8 ( 1 ) , 7 – 26 . Lievrouw , L . A . , & Livingstone , S . M . ( Eds . ) . ( 2006 ) . Handbook of New Media : Student Edition . Sage Publications . MacKenzie , D . A . , & Wajcman , J . ( 1999 ) . Introductory essay : The social shaping of technology . In The Social Shaping of Technology ( 2nd ed . , pp . 3 – 26 ) . Open University Press . Marcus , G . ( 2011 ) . Multi - sited Ethnography : Five or Six Things I Know About it Now . In S . Coleman & P . V . Hellermann ( Eds . ) , Multi - sited Ethnography : Problems and Possibilities in the Translocation of Research Methods ( pp . 16 – 32 ) . Routledge . Marcus , G . E . ( 1995 ) . Ethnography in / of the World System : The Emergence of Multi - Sited Ethnography . Annual Review of Anthropology , 24 , 95 – 117 . McCall , L . ( 2005 ) . The Complexity of Intersectionality . Signs : Journal of Women in Culture and Society , 30 ( 3 ) , 1771 – 1800 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 426800 McDowell , C . ( 2016 ) . Micro - inclusion : A small step to include someone . Interaction Institute for Social Change . http : / / interactioninstitute . org / micro - inclusion - a - small - step - to - include - someone / McRobbie , A . ( 2008 ) . The Aftermath of Feminism : Gender , Culture and Social Change . SAGE Publications . Miller , N . ( 2019 , February 21 ) . She ( 256 ) wants to disrupt the male dominated field of blockchain . Newsweek . https : / / www . newsweek . com / 2019 / 03 / 08 / she256 - disrupt - male - dominated - tech - blockchain - 1339553 . html Miyata , K . , Boase , J . , Wellman , B . , & Ikeda , K . ( 2005 ) . The mobile - izing Japanese . In M . Ito , D . Okabe , & M . Matsuda ( Eds . ) , Personal , Portable , Pedestrian : Mobile Phones in Japanese Life ( pp . 143 – 164 ) . MIT Press . Morozov , E . ( 2013 ) . To Save Everything , Click Here : The Folly of Technological Solutionism . PublicAffairs . J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 153 Mougayar , W . , & Buterin , V . ( 2016 ) . The Business Blockchain : Promise , Practice , and Application of the Next Internet Technology . Wiley . Moy , J . ( 2018 , May 6 ) . Bitcoin Bros , Meet the Women On The Block . Forbes . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / jamiemoy / 2018 / 05 / 06 / bitcoin - bros - meet - the - women - on - the - block / Nakamoto , S . ( 2009 , May 24 ) . Bitcoin : A Peer - to - Peer Electronic Cash System . https : / / web . archive . org / web / 20140320135003 / https : / / bitcoin . org / bitcoin . pdf Nash , J . C . ( 2008 ) . Re - Thinking Intersectionality . Feminist Review , 89 ( 1 ) , 1 – 15 . Neff , G . ( 2012 ) . Venture Labor : Work and the Burden of Risk in Innovative Industries . MIT Press . Noble , S . U . ( 2018 ) . Algorithms of Oppression : How Search Engines Reinforce Racism . New York : NYU Press . Ogundei , O . ( 2016 , July 6 ) . It’s a Man’s World : Only 1 . 76 % of Bitcoin Community Are Women . Cointelegraph . Coin Telegraph Peck , M . ( 2019 , March 8 ) . Cryptocurrency Is Not Just a Boys’ Club . Glamour . https : / / www . glamour . com / story / meet - the - women - of - cryptocurrency Perez , C . C . ( 2019 ) . Invisible Women : Data Bias in a World Designed for Men ( First Printing edition ) . Harry N . Abrams . Petrucci , L . ( 2020 ) . Theorizing postfeminist communities : How gender - inclusive meetups address gender inequity in high - tech industries . Gender , Work & Organization , 27 ( 4 ) , 545 – 564 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / gwao . 12440 Pinch , T . , & Bijker , W . E . ( 1987 ) . The Social Construction of Facts and Artifacts : Or How the Sociology of Science and the Sociology of Technology Might Benefit From Each Other . In W . E . Bijker , T . P . Hughes , T . Pinch , & D . G . Douglas ( Eds . ) , The Social Construction of Technological Systems : New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology ( pp . 17 – 51 ) . MIT Press . Plant , S . ( 1997 ) . Zeros + Ones : Digital Women + the New Technoculture . Fourth Estate . Primack , D . ( 2018 , January 26 ) . Bitcoin conference ends at a strip club . Axios . https : / / www . axios . com / bitcoin - conference - stripclub - 1516983254 - 35e78aad - ee30 - 4872 - bfe6 - 13190dd46061 . html Rainie , L . , & Wellman , B . ( 2012 ) . Networked : The New Social Operating System . MIT Press . Rakow , L . F . ( 1986 ) . Rethinking Gender Research in Communication . Journal of Communication , 36 ( 4 ) , 11 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1460 - 2466 . 1986 . tb01447 . x Saldana , J . ( 2015 ) . The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers . SAGE . Sandberg , S . ( 2013 ) . Lean In : Women , Work , and the Will to Lead . Random House . F RIZZO - B ARKER — W OMEN ON THE B LOCK 154 Savi ć , S . , & Wuschitz , S . ( 2018 ) . Feminist Hackerspace as a Place of Infrastructure Production . https : / / scholarsbank . uoregon . edu / xmlui / handle / 1794 / 26790 Schultze , U . , & Orlikowski , W . J . ( 2001 ) . Metaphors of virtuality : Shaping an emergent reality . Information and Organization , 11 ( 1 ) , 45 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1471 - 7727 ( 00 ) 00003 - 8 Sessions , L . F . ( 2010 ) . How Offline Gatherings Affect Online Communities . Information , Communication & Society , 13 ( 3 ) , 375 – 395 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13691180903468954 Shen , C . , & Cage , C . ( 2013 ) . Exodus to the real world ? Assessing the impact of offline meetups on community participation and social capital . New Media & Society , 17 ( 3 ) , 393 – 414 . Silverstone , R . ( 2002 ) . Complicity and Collusion in the Mediation of Everyday Life . New Literary History , 33 ( 4 ) , 761 – 780 . Star , S . L . ( 1999 ) . The Ethnography of Infrastructure . American Behavioral Scientist , 43 ( 3 ) , 377 – 391 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 00027649921955326 Straw , W . ( 2015 ) . Some Things a Scene Might Be . Cultural Studies , 29 ( 3 ) , 476 – 485 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09502386 . 2014 . 937947 Swan , M . ( 2015 ) . Blockchain : Blueprint for a New Economy . O’Reilly Media . Szulc , L . ( 2020 ) . Digital Gender Disidentifications : Beyond the Subversion Versus Hegemony Dichotomy and Toward Everyday Gender Practices . International Journal of Communication , 14 . Tapscott , D . , & Tapscott , A . ( 2016 ) . Blockchain Revolution : How the Technology Behind Bitcoin Is Changing Money , Business , and the World . Portfolio . Tulshyan , R . ( 2016 ) . The Diversity Advantage : Fixing Gender Inequality in The Workplace . CreateSpace Independent Publishing . Turkle , S . ( 1995 ) . Life on the Screen . Touchstone . Vigna , P . , & Casey , M . J . ( 2016 ) . The Age of Cryptocurrency : How Bitcoin and the Blockchain Are Challenging the Global Economic Order ( Reprint edition ) . Picador . Wajcman , J . ( 1991 ) . Feminism Confronts Technology . Penn State Press . Wajcman , J . ( 2004 ) . TechnoFeminism . Polity . Wajcman , J . ( 2007 ) . From Women and Technology to Gendered Technoscience . Information , Communication & Society , 10 ( 3 ) , 287 – 298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13691180701409770 Wellman , B . , Quan - Haase , A . , Boase , J . , Chen , W . , Hampton , K . , Díaz , I . , & Miyata , K . ( 2003 ) . The Social Affordances of the Internet for Networked Individualism . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 8 ( 3 ) . Woo , B . , Rennie , J . , & Poyntz , S . R . ( 2015 ) . Scene Thinking . Cultural Studies , 29 ( 3 ) , 285 – 297 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09502386 . 2014 . 937950 J OURNAL OF D IGITAL S OCIAL R ESEARCH — V OL . 5 , N O . 2 , 2023 155 Worth , A . , Augoustinos , M . , & Hastie , B . ( 2015 ) . “Playing the gender card” : Media representations of Julia Gillard’s sexism and misogyny speech . Feminism & Psychology , 52 – 72 . Yang , Y . , Chawla , N . V . , & Uzzi , B . ( 2019 ) . A network’s gender composition and communication pattern predict women’s leadership success . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 ( 6 ) , 2033 – 2038 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1721438116