Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences ( 2019 ) 76 : 873 – 892 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 018 - 2965 - y REVIEW Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses Seyedeh‑Nafiseh Hassani 1 · Sharif Moradi 1 · Sara Taleahmad 1 · Thomas Braun 2 · Hossein Baharvand 1 , 3 Received : 9 June 2018 / Revised : 1 November 2018 / Accepted : 2 November 2018 / Published online : 12 November 2018 © Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018 Abstract Embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) are immortal stem cells that own multi - lineage differentiation potential . ESCs are commonly derived from the inner cell mass ( ICM ) of pre - implantation embryos . Due to their tremendous developmental capacity and unlimited self - renewal , ESCs have diverse biomedical applications . Different culture media have been developed to procure and maintain ESCs in a state of naïve pluripotency , and to preserve a stable genome and epigenome during serial passaging . Chromatin modifications such as DNA methylation and histone modifications along with microRNA activity and different signaling pathways dynamically contribute to the regulation of the ESC gene regulatory network ( GRN ) . Such modifications undergo remarkable changes in different ESC media and determine the quality and developmental potential of ESCs . In this review , we discuss the current approaches for derivation and maintenance of ESCs , and examine how differences in culture media impact on the characteristics of pluripotency via modulation of GRN during the course of ICM outgrowth into ESCs . We also summarize the current hypotheses concerning the origin of ESCs and provide a perspective about the relationship of these cells to their in vivo counterparts ( early embryonic cells around the time of implantation ) . Finally , we discuss genera - tion of ESCs from human embryos and domesticated animals , and offer suggestions to further advance this fascinating field . Keywords Pluripotent stem cells · Early embryogenesis · Development · Blastocyst · ESC derivation · Gene regulation · Embryo Introduction Embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) are mostly derived from the inner cell mass ( ICM ) of blastocyst - stage embryos . Although they possess infinite self - renewal ability , ESCs are able to generate virtually all derivatives of the three embryonic germ layers as well as germ cells during in vitro differentia - tion and own the potential to return to their original niche in vivo . These unique features make ESCs a convenient can - didate for studies in developmental biology , toxicology , dis - ease modeling , and drug testing [ 1 , 2 ] . However , the ability of ESCs for long - term self - renewal does not recapitulate the limited expansion of the ICM in the early embryo . This issue raises several questions . Do ESCs represent a “locked” state of ICM cells that are captured from a narrow developmental window before implantation or do they acquire specific fea - tures during in vitro derivation that distinguishes them from ICM cells ? If ESCs acquire distinct properties in vitro , can they still be considered to be natural developmental counter - parts of ICM cells ? In more practical terms , which criteria should be applied to optimize derivation and maintenance of ESCs for further applications ? Is it meaningful to maintain all features of ICM cells during ESC derivation or rather counterproductive ? Establishment of ESCs goes along with numerous changes in DNA methylation , histone modifica - tions , gene expression , epithelial / mesenchymal status , and proliferative capacity [ 3 , 4 ] . Despite these considerable and dynamic changes , the resultant ESCs are highly similar to pre - implantation epiblast cells from which they originated ; Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences Seyedeh - Nafiseh Hassani and Sharif Moradi contributed equally to this work . * Hossein Baharvand Baharvand @ Royaninstitute . org 1 Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology , Cell Science Research Center , Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology , ACECR , Tehran , Iran 2 Department of Cardiac Development and Remodelling , Max - Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research , Bad Nauheim , Germany 3 Department of Developmental Biology , University of Science and Culture , Tehran , Iran 874 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 however , ESCs exhibit certain crucial differences compared to epiblast cells [ 4 , 5 ] . In this article , we review the emer - gence of pluripotent cells in the ICM and the continuum of pluripotency around the time of implantation . We discuss the perpetuation of pluripotency in vitro with a focus on culture conditions and extrinsic regulators used to efficiently derive ESCs from the ICM . Finally , we describe the current knowl - edge about epigenetic control mechanisms and the intrinsic gene regulatory networks ( GRNs ) that govern maintenance and establishment of different ESCs . In vivo pluripotency : when to derive ESCs ? During early mammalian development , a totipotent zygote initiates a highly dynamic developmental process to produce a fully functional multicellular organism . The term totipo - tency has been defined , in its loosest sense , as the ability of a cell to generate cell types from both embryonic ( i . e . ecto - derm , mesoderm , and endoderm ) and extra - embryonic cell lineages ( e . g . trophectoderm ) . However , according to the strictest definition , totipotency is the ability of a cell to give rise to an entire embryo / fetus along with its associated extra - embryonic fetal membranes ( a feature typically exhibited by one - to two - cell embryos ) . In the blastocyst - stage embryo which is the result of the development of a totipotent zygote , the pluripotent ICM and the trophectoderm ( TE ) cells mor - phologically separate in the first cell fate bifurcation of the embryo . Global DNA demethylation occurs during the tran - sition from the zygote to the blastocyst . ICM cells undergo genome - wide DNA hypomethylation , with the exception of the parent - specific imprinting control regions ( ICRs ) that are marked by DNA methylation on one of the two parental alleles [ 6 ] . During the second cell fate specification in the embryo , ICM cells segregate into primitive endoderm ( PE ) and pluripotent epiblast ( EPI or primitive ectoderm ) lineages [ 7 ] . In fact , it has been demonstrated that EPI and PE cells are specified by Nanog and Gata6 expression , respectively ; the mutually exclusive expression patterns of Nanog and Gata6 determines the fate of ICM cell segregation into EPI or PE cell lineages , respectively [ 8 ] . Despite this association with specific TFs , it was found that modulation of Fgf / Erk signaling could still shift the Nanog - or Gata6 - expressing ICM cells towards alternative fate , suggesting that ICM cells ( from E3 . 5 blastocysts ) have not yet adopted their final fate and that the activity of Fgf / Erk pathway specifies the final lineage segregation of ICM cells [ 9 ] . In the mouse , the first and the second lineage segregations are seen on embryonic days ( E ) 3 . 5 and E4 . 5 , respectively , when the embryo is pre - paring for implantation ( Fig . 1 ) but cells maintain the abil - ity to become propagated as pluripotent stem cells ( PSCs ) in vitro until the late gastrulation stage ( E8 . 25 ) [ 10 ] . Shortly before gastrulation , primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) arise from the epiblast and are protected from the diverse differentiation stimuli during gastrulation . In contrast to global de novo DNA remethylation in somatic cells of the post - implantation embryo , the DNA of PGCs undergo global demethylation including at ICRs until de novo methylation is initiated in developing gonads , based on the sex of the embryo [ 11 , 12 ] . Since pluripotency exists until the blastocyst stage , pluripotent cells are present for approximately 5 days in the mouse embryo , a quarter of the gestation period [ 13 ] . The nature of development is the permanent progress ; hence , it is likely that a wide range of pluripotent cells with different GRNs and epigenetic signatures might exist during early development . Evidence for the existence of a pluripotency spectrum comes from the derivation and in vitro propagation of two different types of PSC lines , ESCs ( which represent naïve pluripotency ) and epiblast stem cells ( EpiSCs , which represent primed pluripotency ) from pre - and post - implantation embryos , respectively [ 14 – 16 ] . The characteristics of these two types of PSC lines have been extensively reviewed [ 17 , 18 ] and are summarized in Fig . 1 . A key point for establishing these two types of PSC lines is the use of different culture con - ditions for their derivation and long - term maintenance . The growth factors needed to maintain self - renewal in naïve cells are responsible for triggering differentiation in the primed status and vice versa [ 18 ] . When somatic cell reprogramming with ectopic expression of the tran - scription factors ( TFs ) Oct4 , Sox2 , Klf4 , and c - Myc is performed under culture conditions that favor primed or naïve pluripotency , so - called induced pluripotent stem ( iPS ) cells will be generated corresponding to the differ - ent culture media used [ 19 , 20 ] . Despite the importance of culture conditions to establish various PSC lines , it seems that the developmental window for acquiring ESCs is broader than for EpiSCs . ESCs can be generated from two - to eight - cell embryos or their isolated single blastomeres , and from the morula to blastocyst - stage embryos [ 21 ] . The developmental memories of different embryonic stages from which ESCs are derived appear to become erased with the exception of embryonic germ cells ( EGCs ) obtained from PGCs in vitro , which retain their epigenetic memory . ICRs that are erased from EGCs are not correctly re - established during in vitro or in vivo dif - ferentiation , because parent - specific genomic imprinting occurs only in the developing gonads [ 22 , 23 ] . Since stabil - ity of correct imprinting is necessary for the functionality of PSC lines ( discussed later in the manuscript ) , it is of crucial importance to use culture conditions that support derivation of ESCs with proper ICR methylation allowing unlimited expansion and use for further lineage differentiation applica - tions and other purposes . 875 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 In vitro pluripotency : how to derive ESCs ? Historically , the first ESCs were derived either from 129 strain late blastocysts [ 24 ] or from blastocysts obtained by mating SWR / J male mice to ICR females [ 25 ] . Culture con - ditions were developed based on media for in vitro cultiva - tion of teratocarcinoma - derived embryonal carcinoma cells , which included fibroblast cells as the feeder layer and fetal calf serum . Further research revealed that feeder cells and serum can be substituted by leukemia inhibitory factor ( Lif ) [ 26 ] and bone morphogenetic protein 4 ( Bmp4 ) [ 27 ] , respec - tively . Bmp4 plus Lif ( Bmp4 / L ) or , for economic reasons , serum and Lif ( S / L ) were established as the standard cul - ture media for cultivation of mouse ESCs . However , neither the culture of the ICM in undefined S / L nor in the defined Bmp4 / L conditions promoted successful / efficient generation of ESCs from mouse strains other than 129 strain [ 28 ] . In 1997 , Brook and Gardner used delayed implantation or diapause blastocysts for highly efficient generation of ESCs from different mouse strains previously considered to be refractory or non - permissive to ESC generation [ 29 ] . Diapause is a phenomenon in different species , including many mammals , which occurs in situations considered harmful for further embryo development . In mice , diapause appears naturally in lactating females and can be experi - mentally induced by ovariectomy , which prevents blasto - cysts to attach to the uterus for several weeks [ 30 ] . Diapause embryos undergo specification of ICM cells into EPI and PE cells . EPI cells from diapause embryos ( dia - EPI ) have an active pluripotency network while in a state of biosyn - thetic and proliferative quiescence , which is most likely due to downregulation of c - Myc [ 31 ] . Although Lif / Stat3 Fig . 1 Derivation of pluripotent stem cell lines from developing mouse embryos . After sperm and oocyte fertilization , global DNA demethylation occurs in the pre - implantation embryo during the development of a zygote to a blastocyst . After implantation , lineage differentiation is achieved by de novo global methylation . PGCs that emerge from post - implantation epiblast ( EPI ) are kept away from gas - trulation events and undergo global demethylation . Naïve and primed stem cells can be derived from pre - and post - implantation epiblast cells , respectively , which exhibit different molecular and functional properties . Naïve PSC lines are generated in vitro by culturing early embryos at the cleavage to blastocyst stages ( ESC lines ) , from PGCs ( EGC lines ) , and from reprogramming of post - implantation - derived EpiSCs in different culture media , which gives different characteris - tics to the derived lines . EPSCs derived from single blastomeres in a cocktail of various differentiation chemical inhibitors ( see Fig . 2 ) have the potential to undergo embryonic and extra - embryonic dif - ferentiation . The methylation status of ESCs derived and maintained in different culture conditions differ from each other and are not nec - essarily the same as their in vivo counterpart . EPI epiblasts , ESCs embryonic stem cells , EGCs embryonic germ cells , EPSCs expanded potential stem cells , EpiSCs post - implantation epiblast - derived stem cells , PGCs primordial germ cells 876 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 signal transduction is attributed to the maintenance of dia - EPI cells , it is not involved in the maintenance of ICM or normal EPI cells of E4 . 5 pre - implantation blastocysts [ 32 ] . However , Stat3 signaling has more recently been found to be active and indispensable in four - cell - stage embryos until the blastocyst stage . In four - cell embryos , it is activated by Lif signals , but in blastocysts , Stat3 phosphorylation is induced via autocrine interleukin - 6 signaling , which leads to direct Oct4 and Nanog activation by Stat3 , and is necessary for maintenance of ICM lineages ( but not for the forma - tion of ICM and TE ) in vivo [ 33 ] . These findings indicate that ESCs are probably derived from EPI progenitors in the ICM or ICM - derived EPI cells , but not from non - segregated ICM cells . The starting point of ESC generation is loosely considered at E3 . 5 of mouse embryos , when the ICM has not yet segregated into EPI and PE . This time point is well known because of the convenience of flushing blastocysts from the uterus [ 34 ] . Consistent with the idea that ESCs are not directly derived from ICM ( and , therefore , not from E3 . 5 blastocysts ) , the transcriptome and epigenome profiles of the ICM and ESCs show considerable differences . ICM cells express both PE - and EPI cell - specific TFs , whereas ESCs do not express the PE - related genes Pdgfr , Sox17 , Gata6 , and Gata4 [ 35 , 36 ] . DNA methylation of ICM cells and S / L - cultured ESCs clearly differs . Global DNA methylation in ICM cells indicates a hypomethylated state with approxi - mately 30 % CpG methylation , whereas ESCs cultured in S / L have approximately 80 % CpG methylation [ 37 – 39 ] ( Fig . 1 ) . Importantly , the highly efficient generation of ESCs from microdissected EPI cells of E4 . 5 embryos or from dia - EPI strongly suggests that ICM cells first develop into EPI cells in culture prior to ESC generation [ 28 , 29 ] . The efficiency of ESCs derived from ICM cells is remarkably enhanced with genetic or chemical inhibition of fibroblast growth fac - tor 4 ( Fgf4 ) , the main signaling pathway responsible for PE specification / differentiation [ 40 ] . The main effects of Lif and Bmp4 signaling in the maintenance of ESCs are mediated by shielding cells against endogenous pro - differentiation path - ways in ESCs , such as the autocrine Fgf4 signaling [ 28 , 41 ] . The high success rate of ESC generation from blastocysts isolated from 129 / Sv mice is likely caused by the inher - ently small number of PE cells in this strain [ 28 ] . Notably , it has been shown to be due to augmentation of Jak – Stat3 signaling pathways along with low activity of the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( Mapk ) pathway in PE cells of 129 / Sv strain of mice [ 42 ] . Therefore , the mouse strain or devel - opmental stage of the blastocysts determines the efficiency of ESC derivation under S / L conditions . Blastocysts gener - ating EPI cells as the dominant starting cells in the culture show a higher propensity to form ESC lines . The concept of ground - state pluripotency , which is achieved through efficient inhibition of endogenous pro - differentiation pathways , has facilitated the establishment of ESCs from blastocysts of various refractory and non - per - missive mouse strains as well as from rats [ 41 , 43 ] . Accord - ing to the ground - state model , ESCs can be successfully and efficiently derived and propagated when ICM cells are insulated from endogenous differentiation stimuli . Applica - tion of two small molecule chemicals ( named 2 inhibitors or 2i ) inhibiting the endogenous pro - differentiation path - ways Fgf – Erk and glycogen synthase kinase3β ( Gsk3β ) has resulted in highly effective ESC production from the ICM , thereby validating the ground - state hypothesis for stem cell generation and maintenance [ 41 ] . Of note , Gsk3β inhibition leads to indirect activation of Wnt signaling , which serves as a pro - self - renewal pathway in ESCs . Since Lif upregulates a number of pluripotency - related TFs and promotes clono - genicity , 2i plus Lif ( 2i / L ) was introduced as the optimal set - ting for establishing ESC cultures under defined serum - and feeder - free conditions [ 44 , 45 ] . More recently , several other endogenous differentiation pathways such as calcineurin – NFAT [ 46 ] , Src kinase [ 47 ] , protein kinase C ( PKC ) isoforms [ 48 ] , Tgf - β [ 21 , 49 , 50 ] , and the Jnk and p38 branches of Mapk signaling [ 51 , 52 ] have been described , which tend to promote the exit from pluripotency . Their modulation by various combinations of chemical inhibitors might become useful for efficient deriva - tion and maintenance of ESCs . Alternative approaches to ESC derivation and maintenance Cultivation of ESCs in 2i / L medium provides several impor - tant advantages over the traditional S / L medium . 2i / L cul - ture markedly enhances ESC derivation from blastocysts , and overcomes the strain type barrier for ESC production in rodents . The 2i / L medium generates ESCs with a high degree of homogeneity and high clonogenicity [ 44 ] . How - ever , 2i / L - grown ESCs suffer from extensive global DNA demethylation , even at ICRs , and genetic instability under long - term inhibition of Fgf – Erk signaling , which com - promises both the quality and developmental potential of 2i / L - grown ESCs [ 53 , 54 ] . Inhibition of other differentia - tion - stimulating pathways and / or modification of the con - ventional 2i / L cocktail might generate ESCs with superior features compared to 2i / L medium . It has been reported that replacing the small molecule inhibitor of Fgf – Erk signaling either by a Src kinase inhibitor , CGP77675 ( also known as alternative 2i or a2i ) [ 47 ] , or reducing the dosage ( from 1 to 0 . 2 μM ) of the Fgf – Erk inhibitor ( also known as titrated 2i or t2i ) gives rise to ESCs with a more stable genetic and epigenetic status [ 53 , 54 ] . Although the genetic instability in 2i / L cells is attributed to inhibition of Fgf – Erk signal - ing , surprisingly , dual inhibition of Tgf - β and Fgf – Erk path - ways ( also known as R2i culture ) leads to the generation and 877 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 maintenance of ESCs with high chromosomal integrity [ 50 ] . This finding suggests that inhibition of Fgf – Erk signaling may destabilize the ESC genomic integrity when the Tgf - β pathway is active in the cells . It has been recently reported that addition of the chemicals SB203580 ( p38 Mapk inhibitor ) , JNK inhibitor VIII , XAV939 ( Axin stabilizer ) , A - 419259 ( inhibitor of Src family kinases ) to 2i / L culture results in derivation of so - called expanded potential stem cells ( EPSCs ) from single blastomeres . EPSCs have a stable genome and enhanced developmental potential giving rise to both embryonic and extra - embryonic lineages [ 55 ] ( Fig . 2 ) . Since genome stability and a proper epigenomic status are crucial to the developmental capacity of pluripotent cells , it is necessary to use optimized culture media that promote efficient ESC derivation and maintain a stable genome over serial passaging . Mechanisms of ESC maintenance The in vitro derivation and maintenance of ESCs have revealed that modulating different signaling pathways imparts different characteristics to ESCs . In this scenario , while the judge about a signaling pathway alone does not Fig . 2 Signaling pathways in the naïve mouse pluripotent state . In pre - implantation embryos , ground - state pluripotency is established in the epiblast of the blastocyst and can become ‘primed’ during post - implantation development . These two states of pluripotency not only sustain the ability for self - renewal but also maintain the capacity to differentiate . Naïve pluripotency that can be maintained under serum and LIF ( S / L ) depends on two extracellular ligands ( Lif and Bmp4 ) . Ground - state pluripotency is achieved by the use of two inhibitors , which block Gsk3 and Mapk ( 2i ) plus Lif ( 2i / L ) . Alternatively , the ground - state condition is composed of two inhibitors of Tgf - β and Mapk signaling pathways ( R2i plus Lif or R2i / L ) . Inhibition of both Gsk3 and Src kinase ( a2i condition ) has been found to allow the deri - vation of ESCs . Block blastomeres’ differentiation by inhibition of p38 – Mapk , JNK , Src and the Parp family , and stabilization of Axin create expanded potential stem cells or EPSCs which exhibits embry - onic and extra - embryonic lineage differentiation potential . Although the growth factors and pluripotency network genes are important in the determination of a stem cell fate , various metabolic pathways , the degree of cell adhesion to the substrate , and DNA methylation may play a critical role in controlling stem cell fate . Low focal adhesion and the glycolysis pathway in terms of energy metabolism are cor - related with pluripotency maintenance of mESCs . PD0325901 inhibi - tor of Mapk kinase ( also known as MEK ) , SB203580 JNK inhibitor VIII and p38 inhibitor , A149259 Src kinase inhibitor , CGP77675 ( CGP ) Src inhibitor , XAV939 Parp family members TNKS1 / 2 inhibi - tor , AXIN stabilizer and β - catenin and Yap destruction complex , CHIR99021 ( CHIR ) GSK3 inhibitor , SB431542 ( SB43 ) inhibitor of TGFβ type I receptors ( also known as activin receptor - like kinase ( ALK ) - 4 , - 5 , and - 7 ) . ND not determined , Lif leukemia inhibitory fac - tor , Bmp4 bone morphogenetic protein 4 , mESCs mouse embryonic stem cells , EPSCs expanded potential stem cells 878 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 meet our expectation about the actual circumstances present in ESCs , we would address a limited number of molecular pathways , since how different signaling axes cross talk with each other in ESCs has remained poorly understood . Extrinsic signals that influence ESC behavior Pluripotency and self - renewal of ESCs are governed by extrinsic signaling pathways , which ripple through intracel - lular molecular networks , including metabolic processes , TFs’ regulatory circuitry , epigenetic regulators , and regula - tory non - coding RNAs ( ncRNAs ) . A number of reports have discussed pluripotency - related signaling pathways [ 56 , 57 ] . Here , we provide some examples illustrating the impact of individual signaling pathways on others and on the mainte - nance of pluripotency . Bmp signaling is among the key signaling axes regulat - ing the undifferentiated state of ESCs . BMPs drive stem cell self - renewal in S / L - based ESC medium . Bmp signaling is highly augmented through the blockade of Tgf - β signaling in R2i / L culture [ 50 ] . The Bmp pathway correlates with higher DNA methylation and is less active in 2i / L ESCs [ 58 ] where cells exhibit global DNA hypomethylation ( Fig . 2 ) . Block - age of Bmp results in massive and rapid R2i / L cell death , whereas 2i / L cells respond less severely to this treatment [ 50 ] , which highlights a key difference between these two ground - state cultures . In contrast to pro - self - renewal Bmp4 signaling , Fgf4 enhances differentiation of ESCs via autocrine signaling . Its pharmacological inhibition along with inhibition of Gsk3 ( 2i / L ) or Tgf - β ( R2i / L ) has been shown to promote self - renewal of ESCs , preventing differentiation [ 41 , 49 , 50 ] . The safety of Fgf4 inhibition has been challenged , since genomic stability is compromised when Fgf4 signaling is blocked for extended periods of time [ 53 ] , probably because Erk inhibition leads to global DNA demethylation [ 37 ] , favor - ing genomic instability and transposition of mobile genetic elements [ 59 ] . In light of this finding , the a2i or t2i condition is proposed to be a safer approach to ESC maintenance and generation [ 53 ] . We have previously reported the presence of a stable genome in R2i / L ESCs [ 50 ] , which suggests a protective effect of Tgf - β inhibition on the ESC genome . Adhesion dynamics and extracellular matrix ( ECM ) components are important factors that regulate propagation and developmental programming of ESCs . Manipulation of matrix rigidity directs lineage specification in mouse ESCs [ 60 ] . Cultured feeder - free , S / L - grown ESCs strongly adhere to gelatinized substrates and grow as a flat layer ; however , in ground state supporting media such as 2i / L and R2i / L cultures , ESCs grow as compact colonies on gelatin . Both 2i / L and R2i / L cells express lower levels of integrins com - pared to S / L cells [ 61 ] . Enhanced interaction of ESCs with ECM components , as in S / L medium , negatively affects self - renewal of ESCs via FAK [ 62 ] ( Fig . 2 ) . Overall , the dynamic activity of diverse signaling routes controls the efficiency by which ESCs are maintained in an undifferentiated state . Metabolic regulation of ESCs Metabolic pathways exert important roles in ESCs and dur - ing different stages of embryogenesis . In blastocysts , ICM cells are exposed to a hypoxic environment ; therefore , they predominantly undergo glycolysis and convert glucose to lactate [ 63 ] . Similar to ICM cells , mouse ESCs preferen - tially use glycolysis , which is necessary for rapid prolifera - tion , although an “on demand” switch from glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation ( OXPHOS ) is feasible . A recent study demonstrated that ESCs cultured in ground - state con - ditions ( 2i / L and R2i / L ) upregulate glycolytic enzymes , thereby proliferating faster than S / L ESCs [ 64 , 65 ] . Kon - doh et al . have reported that inhibition of glycolysis signifi - cantly reduces ESC self - renewal [ 66 ] . Of note , glycolysis produces less reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) than OXPHOS , and low levels of ROS support rapid proliferation of PSCs [ 67 ] . Metabolic processes are also tightly connected with epigenetic pathways in ESCs . Acetyl - CoA , which is a key metabolic mediator produced via glycolysis , serves as an essential acetyl group donor in histone lysine acetylation reactions [ 68 , 69 ] . Therefore , metabolic pathways work in concert with other processes to regulate ESC proliferation and developmental potential . Roles played by transcription factors , non‑coding RNAs , and epigenetic factors in the maintenance of ESCs An integrated regulatory circuitry composed of TFs , epigenetic modifiers , and non - coding RNAs , particu - larly microRNAs ( miRNAs ) , shapes the behavior of ESCs . Main pluripotency - associated TFs such as Nanog , Oct4 , and Sox2 form self - sustaining auto - regulatory as well as feedforward loops which maintain the long - term self - renewal of ESCs [ 70 ] . By co - occupying the regula - tory regions of thousands of genes in ESCs , these fac - tors regulate the transcription of many genes and serve as main players of a core transcriptional regulatory network which promotes the expression of genes associated with self - renewal and inhibits the transcription of those asso - ciated with differentiation lineages [ 70 , 71 ] . In addition to protein - coding genes , ESC - enriched TFs such as Oct4 and Nanog also bind to the regulatory DNA elements of miRNA genes and promote or inhibit their transcription [ 72 ] . The core pluripotency TFs promote the transcrip - tion of ESC cycle - regulating ( ESCC ) miRNAs including 879 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 miRNAs from miR - 290 – 295 and miR - 302 – 367 clusters which shape the unique cell cycle and other equally impor - tant aspects of ESCs [ 73 , 74 ] . Other sets of miRNAs such as let - 7 family members , which are inhibited by pluripo - tency - associated TFs , tend to destabilize the self - renewal program [ 75 ] . In contrast to ground - state ESCs , S / L - grown ESCs express high levels of c - Myc , which not only promotes open - ing and remodeling of chromatin to drive ESC self - renewal but also inhibits ESC differentiation into primitive endo - derm by repressing Gata6 [ 76 ] . In S / L ESCs , c - Myc appears to upregulate the miR - 290 – 295 cluster [ 72 , 77 ] . However , other regulators , such as Gadd45a [ 78 ] , might activate this miRNA locus in ground - state cells since c - Myc is silenced in ground - state ESCs ( similar to diapause embryos ) [ 31 , 50 , 79 ] . S / L ESCs also highly express the RNA - binding protein Lin28a which inhibits the maturation of precursor let - 7 miR - NAs in S / L - grown cells [ 80 ] . However , since Lin28a is lowly expressed in ground - state ESCs , some of the let - 7 miRNAs are upregulated in ground - state cells . These differentiation - associated miRNAs , which are unexpectedly upregulated in ground - state pluripotency , are reported to promote some features of ground - state pluripotency by targeting c - Myc as well as Lin28a [ 81 , 82 ] . These findings indicate that ground - state ESCs express a specific repertoire of TFs and other regulatory proteins which are assembled into a specific GRN which is different from that of S / L ESCs , giving rise to dif - ferent behaviors of these two PSC states . 2i / R2i ESCs not only express different TFs and other regulatory proteins , but also express a distinct set of miR - NAs compared to S / L - grown cells . A large miRNA cluster embedded in the 10th intron of the imprinted Sfmbt2 locus is upregulated in S / L - grown ESCs compared to ground - state cells [ 82 , 83 ] . On the other hand , another large miRNA cluster embedded in the imprinted Dlk1 – Dio3 locus is more abundantly expressed in ground - state ESCs than cells grown in S / L [ 82 ] ( Fig . 3 ) . These data highlight the potential bio - logical importance of genomic imprints in the regulation of different states of naïve pluripotency . Contrary to S / L - grown ESCs , 2i / L ESCs display global DNA demethylation [ 37 , 38 ] , probably because de novo DNA methyltransferases ( Dnmt3a / 3b and Dnmt3l ) are downregulated by Prdm14 in 2i / L cells [ 84 – 86 ] . Prdm14 was also reported to inhibit DNA methylation via promotion of active DNA demethylation via ten eleven translocation ( Tet ) enzymes and stimulation of base - excision repair ( BER ) Fig . 3 miRNA - mediated regulation of GRN in serum and ground - state ESCs . In ESCs , the pluripotency - associated TFs bind to the reg - ulatory regions of their target protein - coding and non - protein - coding genes and promote or repress their expression . In serum ESCs , c - Myc is highly expressed . In cooperation with other TFs , c - Myc promotes the expression of ESCC miRNAs . Lin28 is also highly expressed in serum ESCs and inhibits let - 7 maturation . In ground - state ESCs , Lin28 is poorly expressed . This partly explains why let - 7 miRNAs are upregulated . Since c - Myc is markedly downregulated in ground - state ESCs , other TFs might promote the high expression level of ESCC miRNAs in these cells . Ground - state ESCs abundantly express the Dlk1 - Dio3 locus - embedded miRNAs , whereas serum ESCs highly express a large miRNA cluster located in the 10th intron of the Sfmbt2 gene . It has not been determined which regulator factors control the expression of these two large miRNA clusters . GRN gene regulatory network , miRNA microRNA , TF transcription factor , ESC embryonic stem cell , ESCC miRNAs embryonic stem cell cycle - regu - lating miRNAs 880 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 [ 84 , 86 – 88 ] . However , a recent study shows that neither de novo DNA methyltransferases nor Tet enzymes are involved in global DNA hypomethylation in 2i / L cells ; instead , it is shown to be due to the 2i - induced downregulation of Uhrf1 , which recruits the maintenance DNA methyltransferase ( Dnmt1 ) to replication foci [ 89 ] . Moreover , 2i culture was observed to induce genome - wide loss of H3K9me2 mark , which is required for Uhrf1 recruitment to chromatin in a DNA replication - coupled manner [ 89 ] . Prdm14 supports the ground state of pluripotency by diminishing Fgf4 – Erk signaling , which is activated by the core pluripotency TFs Oct4 , Sox2 , and Nanog , and is associated with differentia - tion leakage observed in S / L - grown ESCs [ 85 ] ( Fig . 4 ) . In 2i / L cells , the genomic imprints are erased and remain unmethylated in somatic cells differentiated from 2i / L cells [ 54 ] . Therefore , the 2i / L culture may lead to epigenetic arte - facts , which might endanger the safety and quality of 2i / L ESCs . Of note , the R2i / L culture promotes upregulation of Dnmts and preserves a more stable genome compared to the 2i / L culture [ 37 , 87 ] . Similarly , EPSCs exhibit higher expression of Dnmts and Tet enzymes compared to 2i / L ESCs , a higher level of 5 - methylcytosine , and increased numbers of bivalent genomic regions [ 55 ] . These results indicate that ( 1 ) DNA methylation plays a major role in ESCs exhibiting high or intermediate levels of DNA meth - ylation ; ( 2 ) global DNA hypomethylation endangers the genomic and epigenomic stability of ESCs ( as in 2iL ESCs ) ; and ( 3 ) genome - wide DNA demethylation is not a common feature of ground - state pluripotency since alternative culture media which favor ground - state pluripotency exhibit global DNA hypermethylation . To inhibit differentiation pathways , Prdm14 physically interacts and cooperates with the polycomb group ( PcG ) proteins to silence target genes , such as Dnmt3a / 3b [ 85 ] . The simultaneous presence of the repressive H3K27me3 ( depos - ited by PcG proteins ) and active H3K4me3 histone modifi - cations ( deposited by trithorax group ( trxG ) proteins ) was dubbed “bivalent” and marks genes that are temporarily but nor permanently inactive [ 90 ] . ESCs grown in the presence of S / L have a higher number of bivalent chromatin marks than differentiated cells such as mouse embryonic fibroblasts [ 91 ] . Genomic regions rich in bivalent chromatin marks or H3K27me3 alone promote long - range promoter – promoter interactions . Such promoter - mediated interactions are absent in 2i / L cells because 2i / L cells contain a significantly smaller number of bivalent marks at their bivalent regions and lower amounts of H3K27me3 marks [ 92 ] . In summary , ESCs have an integrated GRN in which various regulatory molecules cooperate with each other to control ESC behavior . Fig . 4 How the ESC genome is rapidly and globally demethyl - ated in 2i culture . In 2i ESCs , Prdm14 expression is highly induced and , in conjunction with PRC2 , inhibits the expression of Dnmts . The Prdm14 – PRC2 complex also activates the expression of Tet enzymes , which catalyze the conversion of 5 - methylcytosine ( 5mC ) into 5 - hydroxymethyl - cytosine ( 5hmC ) , 5 - formyl - cytosine ( 5fC ) , and 5 - carboxyl - cytosine ( 5caC ) . Next , the products of Tet activity are converted into an unmodified cytosine through the base - excision repair ( BER ) pathway . Tet enzymes are reportedly induced by the histone modifier Jmjd2c which is inhibited by Fgf – Erk signaling . In the 2i culture , Fgf – Erk signaling along with the Gsk3 pathway is chemically inhibited , thereby leading to the rapid , genome - wide DNA hypomethylation in 2i ESCs . Of note , it has recently been sug - gested that Uhrf1 plays a more important role than other factors by recruiting Dnmt1 to replication foci . ESC embryonic stem cell , Tet ten eleven translocation , miRNAs microRNAs , FGF fibroblast growth factor 881 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 Mechanistic insights into ICM – ESC transition It is clearly important to decipher the process of how ICM transitions to ESCs with self - renewal capabilities . The rela - tionship of ESC to their in vivo embryonic counterparts would become much clearer , if we understand whether ESCs are captured from a narrow developmental window or undergo different molecular and epigenetic reprogram - ming events during ICM – ESC transition . This understanding can guide us to choose the optimum culture condition for establishment of ESCs , which in turn has a crucial impact on different characteristics of ESCs . This is not only an aca - demic question but has numerous practical ramifications , since genomic stability and epigenetic configurations of ESC will have lasting effects on ESC - derived cells . Approaches to study the mechanisms for ICM – ESC transition are based on molecular comparisons between pre - implantation embryonal cells and ESCs or on molecu - lar time - course analysis of ICM outgrowth during establish - ment of ESCs [ 3 – 5 , 93 ] . These studies , although currently incomplete , have revealed highly dynamic changes in the expression and function of key genes and cellular pathways underlying the formation of ESCs from ICM cells of blas - tocysts . A comprehensive view of temporal changes might clarify the origin of ESCs . Dynamic gene expression patterns during ESC formation Single - cell RNA - Seq analyses of ICM cells , ICM out - growths at days 3 and 5 , and established ESCs in S / L culture revealed major changes in the expression of messenger RNA and miRNA transcripts [ 3 ] . Many pluripotency - related TFs such as Sox2 , Nanog , Esrrb , Cdh1 ( E - cadherin ) , Pecam1 , Pim1 , Pim3 , and Prdm14 are highly expressed in Oct4 - expressing cells during the ICM to ESC transition . Other pluripotency - related genes such as Nodal , Eras , Smad1 , Zic3 , Id1 , Id2 , Tcf3 , and Nr0b1 are upregulated during ICM outgrowth , suggesting potential roles in the immortalization of ESCs . Genes associated with the TE , PE , and different germ layers such as Cdx2 , Gata4 , Gata6 , Hoxd8 , Bmp1 , Bmp2 , Tgfbr2 , Tgfbr3 , Jak2 , Fgf3 , Fgf10 , Fgfr3 , Fgfr4 , Sox7 , Sox9 , and Sox17 are downregulated during generation of ESC in S / L - based medium . The expression profile of a selected set of miRNAs showed highly expressed miRNAs in both ICM and ESCs such as the miR - 290 – 295 cluster ; miRNAs that upregulated in ESCs compared to ICM cells , such as miR - 302c and miR - 367 ( miR - 302 – 367 cluster ) ; and miRNAs with reduced expression in ESCs versus ICM that included the let - 7 family ( associated with differentiation ) . Interestingly , expression of Lin28 , which suppresses matura - tion of let - 7 miRNAs , was positively regulated during ESC formation [ 3 ] . These data corresponded to the gradual acqui - sition of self - renewal ability and repression of differentiation pathways during the course of ESC derivation in S / L - based ESC media . However , such studies suffer from the use of the S / L condition . The S / L culture exhibits an extremely low effi - ciency in generating ESCs from most mouse strains as well as from rats . ESCs in S / L culture tend to differentiate spon - taneously and show a high degree of heterogeneity regard - ing expression of important naïve pluripotency TFs such as Nanog [ 94 ] , Rex1 [ 95 ] , and Dppa3 ( Stella ) [ 96 ] . These shortcomings might be addressed using culture media that promote highly efficient production of ESCs and acquisition of ground - state pluripotency . Recently , the process of ESC generation has been care - fully analyzed in a time - course transcriptome study using the efficient R2i / L culture system [ 4 ] . Previous studies have revealed that the R2i / L culture system more efficiently pre - serves genomic integrity of PSC lines generated from single blastomeres of pre - implantation and from PGCs of post - implantation embryos compared to the 2i / L condition [ 21 , 50 , 97 ] . Cells were analyzed using high - throughput mRNA profiling at days 0 ( ICM ) , 0 . 5 ( 12 h after ICM seeding in R2i / L medium ) , 1 , 2 , 3 , and 5 , as well as established ESC lines at passages 2 , 4 , and 15 . Similar to generation of S / L - based ESCs , it became clear that ( 1 ) the number of differ - entially expressed genes increased considerably in a gradual manner during ground - state ESC derivation ; ( 2 ) differentia - tion - associated genes were mostly downregulated ; ( 3 ) genes associated with self - renewal and immortality were mostly upregulated , although some of the typical pluripotency - asso - ciated genes remained unchanged , which was probably due to the pluripotency of both ICM and ESCs ; and ( 4 ) metabo - lism and cell adhesion dynamics were strikingly altered . In addition , transcriptional profiles of ICM outgrowths exhib - ited the most prominent changes at the earliest time points during the course of R2i - based ESC generation . ICM out - growths at later time points as well as low - passage ESCs showed nearly identical transcriptional profiles compared to E4 . 5 EPI [ 4 ] . These collective findings have indicated that the global gene expression undergoes rapid and substantial changes over the course of ESC formation , suggesting pos - sible functions of genes that exhibit differential expression . Regulation of epithelial‑to‑mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) during ESC generation Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) and the reverse process , mesenchymal - to - epithelial transition ( MET ) , play critically important roles in tissue remodeling and normal organismal development , as well as in cancer and numer - ous other diseases [ 98 ] . During ESC derivation , this pro - cess appears to be tightly regulated and arrest of EMT is 882 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 necessary for ESC establishment in both 2i / L and R2i / L media . Cellular factors associated with epithelialization , such as E - cadherin and Klf4 , as well as some members of the ESCC miRNAs , including miR - 302c and miR - 367 along with members from the miR - 17 family , undergo upregula - tion during generation of ESCs from ICM [ 3 , 4 ] . On the other hand , mesenchymal markers such as Snail , Dab2 , Eomes , and Tgfbr2 , are downregulated during ICM to ESC transition [ 3 , 4 ] , implying that mesenchymal genes might provide a barrier for efficient establishment of ESCs from ICM . In line with these observations , it has been shown that overexpression of typical mesenchymal genes such as Snail or Tgf - β in R2i / L medium ( with ~ 100 % efficiency of ESC generation ) prevents generation of pluripotent ESC lines [ 4 ] . Loss of function of Klf4 ( as a MET driver ) is detrimental to the ICM to ESC transition and significantly reduces the effi - ciency with which ESCs are obtained [ 4 ] . These collective findings highlight the critical significance of EMT inhibition for the successful and efficient generation of ESCs . Both epithelial - associated factors and miRNAs promote de - differentiation of somatic cells into iPS cells [ 99 – 102 ] . Surprisingly , E - cadherin was reported to replace the mas - ter pluripotency TF , Oct4 , in somatic cell reprogramming to pluripotency [ 103 ] , which highlights the importance of epithelialization in cell fate reprogramming to pluripotency . Similar to the requirement of MET for the generation iPS cells and ESCs , epithelialization is also necessary for the successful induction of pluripotency in germ cells [ 104 ] . Hence , we reason that epithelialization ( MET induction / maintenance or EMT blockade ) is a common indispensable requisite for the acquisition of pluripotency from different starting cell types such as the EPI cells of the blastocyst - stage embryos . The finding that epithelialization is crucial for generation of mouse PSC from different sources will have implications for the successful and efficient derivation of ESCs from human blastocysts . Epigenetic regulations during ESC derivation Epigenetic regulation contributes substantially to the control of diverse biological processes and developmental pathways . Epigenetic regulators such as histone - modifying enzymes , chromatin - remodeling complexes , and DNA methyltrans - ferases are dynamically regulated during early embryonic development when in vivo pluripotency gradually arises around the time of ICM formation and subsequently dis - appears when specific embryonic lineages develop around the time of gastrulation [ 105 – 110 ] . In addition , epigenetic regulation modulates key aspects of ESC behavior includ - ing survival , cell death pathways , proliferation , and ESC fate decisions [ 110 – 112 ] . Since the process of ICM out - growth to generate ESCs entails in vitro immortalization of an ephemeral in vivo pluripotent state , epigenetic programs might undergo significant changes and play important functions during this transition . During the course of ESC derivation , epigenetic regulators exhibit highly dynamic patterns of expression [ 3 , 4 ] , which suggests that they may have specific functions in this context . Many of the known epigenetic factors show differential expression during ESC derivation in S / L and / or R2i / L culture conditions ; the major - ity of upregulated epigenetic modifiers ( e . g . Dnmts , Suz12 , Eed , Mat2b , Mbd2 , Mecp2 , several Hdac enzymes ) are often associated with repressive epigenetic states . In contrast , the majority of downregulated epigenomic factors such as H3K9 demethylases Jmjd2d ( also known as Kdm4d ) and Jhdm3a ( also known as Kdm4a ) , histone acetyltransferases Ncoa3 and CBP P300 , H3K27 demethylase Kdm6b ( also known as Jmjd3 ) , and H3K4 methyltransferase Mll3 ( also known as Kmt2c ) are associated with an active chromatin state [ 3 , 4 ] . Of note , the DNA demethylases Tet1 and Tet2 are abundantly expressed in both ESCs and ICM cells as well as in Oct4 - positive cells in ICM outgrowths [ 3 ] . Tet enzymes might reverse methylation at regulatory DNA ele - ments of pluripotency genes introduced by de novo DNA methyltransferases . Pharmacological inhibition of DNA methyltransferases using RG108 is detrimental to ESC formation in R2i ; how - ever , 2i / L cells are not influenced by this treatment [ 4 ] prob - ably because they already display highly reduced levels of DNA methylation . It remains to be determined whether ectopically induced hypermethylation by Dnmt overexpres - sion compromises the efficiency of ESC derivation in 2i / L culture . It will be interesting to investigate whether Dnmts and DNA methylation are of similar functional importance for efficient ESC generation in a2i and t2i media , which sup - port proper ICR methylation . A selected set of analyzed miRNAs is differentially expressed between ICM and ESCs . Pluripotency - associated miRNAs are mostly upregulated , whereas differentiation - associated miRNAs are mostly downregulated during the course of S / L - based ESC derivation [ 3 ] . We have recently determined the global expression patterns of miRNAs dur - ing the course of ESC generation from ICM in R2i / L culture and observed highly dynamic patterns of miRNA expression ( Moradi et al . , unpublished data ) . We identified two major phases of highly differential miRNA expression during this transition . These observations have suggested that miRNAs might play specific roles during ICM – ESC transition . Over - all , epigenetic regulators display differential expression pat - terns and are of crucial importance during the process of ICM outgrowth into immortal ESCs . 883 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 The role of sex differences in ESC derivation ESCs obtained from different sexes show different epigenetic features , as well as other developmental characteristics . Sex differences influence different stages of organismal devel - opment . For example , female newborns have a lower mor - tality rate than males [ 113 ] . Importantly , peri - implantation embryogenesis is also affected by sex dimorphism where female embryos develop less rapidly than male embryos [ 114 ] . Compared to male ESCs , female ESCs are in a less differentiated state , display lower global DNA methyla - tion levels , accumulate genomic aberrations at imprinted genomic regions over serial passaging , and exit pluripo - tency less rapidly / efficiently upon differentiation [ 53 , 54 , 115 ] . These features are attributed to the presence of two active X chromosomes ( XaXa ) in female ESCs . In contrast , XY and XO ESCs are similarly hypermethylated [ 115 , 116 ] . Sex - specific characteristics of female ESCs have been found to be mainly due to the X chromosome dosage - dependent inhibition of the Fgf – Erk signaling pathway , inhibition of Gsk3β ( Wnt signaling activation ) , and stimulation of Akt signaling , which results in upregulation of key naïve - asso - ciated TFs in female ESCs compared to male ESCs [ 115 ] . In principle , one or more X - linked genes such as Erk phos - phatase Dusp9 [ 117 ] along with other X - linked genes and miRNAs [ 118 ] downregulate the Fgf – Erk pathway , which leads to repression of Dnmts and global DNA hypometh - ylation ; downregulation of the epigenetic regulator Uhrf1 , which is involved in the regulation of maintenance DNA methylation ; and delayed differentiation kinetics in female ESCs [ 53 , 54 , 115 , 116 ] . Timely X chromosome inactiva - tion is an indispensable prerequisite for the female ESCs to properly exit pluripotency and effective initiation of devel - opment of different fetal cell lineages [ 115 ] . While female ICM cells retain a XaXa configuration only for a short time period in vivo , female ESCs keep XaXa during the course of prolonged cellular propagation in vitro . Since female and male ICM cells have similarly low global DNA methylation levels , sex - dependent differences in DNA methylation status arise in culture . In male ESCs , the Y chromosome is occa - sionally lost whereas female ESCs have a high tendency to lose one of their two X chromosomes ( or part of it ) during cultivation and , therefore , become XO [ 116 ] , indicating that female ESCs are intrinsically unstable in culture . Male ESCs cultivated under the hypomethylating culture condition of 2i / L are highly similar to female ESCs cultured in S / L medium in terms of global gene expression , epigenet - ics , genomic stability , and developmental potential [ 54 ] . In 2i / L cultures , the massive erasure of DNA methylation also affects imprinted loci in both male and female ESCs , which leads to biallelic expression of imprinted loci such as Impact [ 53 , 54 ] . This genome - wide DNA demethylation , which causes aberrant epigenetic changes and defects in genomic imprinting , is more prominent in ‘female’ ESCs cultured in 2i , and renders the cells incompetent for successful contribu - tion to normal full - term embryonic development in somatic cell nuclear transfer and tetraploid complementation experi - ments , although the cells are able to efficiently contribute to chimeras and two - cell - stage embryos . In contrast to female 2i - grown ESCs , female S / L - grown ESCs as well as female a2i - and t2i - grown ESCs can successfully and efficiently give rise to full - term all - ESC pups and mice . The 2i - grown ESC incompetency has appeared to be due to several chro - mosomal abnormalities and genomic instabilities , including , but not limited to , trisomy 6 and 8 in injected cells . ESC der - ivation culture media , which induce global hypermethylation and / or proper ICR imprinting ( discussed above ) , preserve a more stable genome and have a significantly higher suc - cess rate in tetraploid embryo complementation experiments [ 53 , 54 ] . Hence , it seems likely that the erasure of gamete - derived genomic imprints as well as chromosomal instability lead to compromised embryonic and placental development of 2i - derived / grown ESCs . In addition , the histone variant H2AX , which is associated with effective DNA repair and proper embryonic development [ 119 – 121 ] , is depleted at developmentally important genes in male 2i - grown ESCs and female S / L - grown ESCs compared to male S / L - grown ESCs . At many genomic loci , aberrant H2AX binding is irreversible [ 53 ] . In conclusion , different culture condi - tions influence ICM – ESC transition in specific ways . The 2i / L culture induces chromosomal and epigenomic aberra - tions that negatively affect ESC quality , while less potent inhibition of Fgf / Erk in 2i / L culture or dual suppression of Fgf – Erk and Tgf - β signaling ( R2i / L culture ) gives rise to ESCs with higher genetic and epigenetic integrity . The origin of ESCs : capturing , reprogramming , or both ? High - throughput profiling and time - resolution analyses have shed light on the relationship of ESCs to early embryonic cells . Understanding the exact embryonic origin of ESCs will help to devise further strategies for obtaining ESCs more efficiently and reproducibly and exploit this knowl - edge for improving ESC derivation from other sources , such as humans . A large amount of evidence implies that the starting cells for ESC derivation are EPI cells , which might suggest that EPI cells during in vitro ICM cultivation have been captured to form ESCs . In the S / L condition , however , not all iso - lated single EPI cells give rise to ESCs , and a maximum of three clones per embryo could be obtained [ 29 , 122 ] . This low efficiency might be caused by the heterogeneity of EPI cells , variability of undefined culture conditions , or damage 884 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 to EPI cells during microdissection [ 122 ] . On the other hand , expression of key TFs necessary for PGC development in both EPI and ESCs , as well as the high epigenetic similar - ity which exists between the ESCs and EGCs , suggests the existence of a subpopulation of EPI cells that will give rise to either PGCs or ESC clones in culture . Researchers have tracked the expression of a key gene in PGC development , Blimp1 , during transition of the ICM to ESC and determined that ESCs commonly arise from Blimp1 - expressing cells in the S / L condition [ 123 ] . Sorting of Blimp1 - positive cells from ICM outgrowths greatly increased the efficiency of ESC derivation . However , the authors have also observed that Blimp1 - negative cells , which constitute a high percent - age of EPI cells , can directly give rise to ESCs in 2i / L cul - ture [ 123 ] . Later , Blimp1 was shown to be dispensable for long - term maintenance of ESCs under both S / L and 2i / L conditions as well as during EpiSC development and the reprogramming of EpiSCs into ESCs [ 124 ] questioning the hypothesis of PGC precursor selection during the ICM to ESC transition . Expression profiling of 2i - grown ESCs and early mouse embryos from 2 - cell through post - implantation embryos ( E1 . 5 – E5 . 5 ) confirmed that the ability of ICM cells to give rise to ESCs was acquired upon specification of pre - implan - tation EPI cells [ 93 ] . While ICM cells isolated from embryos earlier than E3 . 75 and older than E5 . 5 lacked the capacity to become ESCs , all single pre - implantation EPI cells at E4 . 5 became ESCs under the 2i / L condition . Later , it was shown that 2i - grown ESCs as well as dia - EPI cells possess a nearly identical transcriptional profile as pre - implantation EPI cells . These findings indicate that ESCs are more similar to day 4 . 5 pre - implantation EPI cells than day 3 . 5 ICM cells , but did not clarify how early pluripotent embryonal cells acquire long - term self - renewal ability in vitro [ 93 ] . Despite the high transcriptional similarity of 2i - grown ESCs with dia - EPI , it needs to be explained how ‘immortal’ ESCs differ from dia - EPI cells , which are in a more silent and dormant condition in terms of cell cycling . To specify when immortality is acquired during ICM outgrowth into ESCs , a time - resolution global gene expres - sion analysis was conducted during the course of ESC gen - eration in the ground - state R2i / L culture , where ESCs can be derived from various mouse strains with almost 100 % efficiency [ 4 , 50 ] . Interestingly , most of the dynamic tran - scriptional changes during the ICM – ESC transition occurred as early as 12 h after ICM seeding , while later time points displayed less significant changes compared to the 12 - h ICM outgrowth [ 4 ] . Functional annotation of up - regulated genes 12 h after ICM culture identified an enrichment of terms related to mitotic cell cycling suggesting that the ability of ESCs for indefinite self - renewal is acquired during the earliest hours of in vitro culture of the ICM . However , the high degree of transcriptional similarity between ESCs at dif - ferent passages and late ICM outgrowths ( days 3 and 5 ) indicates that ESC identity is gained gradually in vitro , arguing for a reprogramming phenomenon . Yet , the high - est degree of similarity of different passage ESCs and the majority of time points of ICM outgrowth is to day 4 . 5 EPI cells [ 4 ] suggesting that ESCs might be obtained through a capturing process . Considering the significant differences of ESCs and EPI cells , particularly in terms of unlimited self - renewal , the enormous transcriptional and epigenetic changes over the course of ESC formation from EPI cells , and phenomena such as EMT blockage , we propose that a combination of both phenomena , i . e , capturing and repro - gramming ( also called creation ) , is involved in the genera - tion ESCs from their in vivo counterparts . Figure 5 illus - trates the most prominent events occurring during ESC formation from ICM - derived EPI cells . ESC derivation from domesticated animals The extensive information about generation and long - term maintenance of mouse ESCs may pave the way for generation of ESC from farmed animals , which are usu - ally refractory to this process . Generation of ESCs from domestic livestock and companion animal species such as cattle , pigs , dogs , chickens , and fish has significant eco - nomical values and is of great importance for the produc - tion of genetically modified animals as well as biomedi - cal models . Attempts to derive ESCs from domesticated animals are usually based on the outgrowth of ICM or early epiblast , in culture conditions that include a feeder layer and base media supplemented with serum , bFGF , and LIF ( reviewed in Ref . [ 125 ] ) . However , the creation of authentic ESC lines with long - term proliferation ability and in vitro or in vivo multi - lineage differentiation poten - tial remains challenging . The few published examples of successful establishment of ESC lines from non - rodent and non - primate species could not be reproduced [ 126 ] . Our own attempts to develop stable ESC lines from chick embryos did not meet the acceptable efficiency based on published protocols . Using the R2i / L culture , however , we generated ES - like cells up to four passages from the blastodisc of embryonated eggs [ 127 ] . Evidence from our and other studies suggests that ESCs obtained from non - rodent species exhibit a primed morphology similar to mouse EpiSCs . Recently , a study reported generation of stable bovine ESCs [ 128 ] using culture conditions , which typically support derivation of a type of mouse EpiSCs similar to the gastrulation epiblast , named “region - selec - tive PSCs” or rsPSCs [ 129 ] . The rsPSC culture condition consists of a serum - free base medium supplemented with 885 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 bFGF and an inhibitor of the canonical Wnt / β - catenin signaling , IWR1 . Since most reports dealing with the gen - eration of ESCs from non - rodent and non - primate spe - cies could not be reproduced , it is of great importance to optimize culture conditions , allowing reproducible derivation of ESCs . The current state of research suggests that further optimization of culture condition based on the current improvements of primed PSCs’ cultures might enable reproducible derivation and long - term maintenance of valuable domesticated animals . Fig . 5 Most notable mechanistic events occurring during ICM - ESC transition . ESCs are gener - ated from the ICM - derived EPI cells through a process which appears to be a combination of reprogramming and captur - ing . Although ESCs exhibit a transcriptome highly similar to EPI cells , they are highly proliferative as opposed to ICM / EPI cells which are almost in a silent condition in terms of cell cycling . Genes are highly differentially expressed over the course of ESC formation . Some transcripts are either upregu - lated ( green lines in ‘mRNA Expression’ part ) or down - regulated ( red lines in ‘mRNA Expression’ part ) , whereas others remain unchanged dur - ing ICM outgrowth ( black line in ‘mRNA Expression’ part ) . Upregulated transcripts such as , Sox2 , Nr0b1 , and Id1 appear to be necessary for ESC formation , while downregulated ones such as Cdx2 , Tgfbr2 , and Gata6 appear to have adverse effects on ICM transition to ESCs . Protein - coding ( e . g . Nanog and Eras ) and non - coding genes ( e . g . miR - 302 miRNAs ) associated with self - renewal are highly induced , while those associated with differentia - tion ( e . g . Sox17 , Hoxd8 , and some of let - 7 miRNAs ) exhibit downregulation . Importantly , epithelial - associated mRNAs and miRNAs show increased expression while those affiliated with mesenchymal phenotype are downregulated during ICM outgrowth into ESCs . Finally , in contrast to ICM cells which exhibit a global DNA hypo - methylation , ESCs grown in culture media other than 2i / L mostly show genome - wide hypermethylation of DNA 886 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 Derivation of ESCs from humans Unlimited self - renewing capability and multi - lineage dif - ferentiation potential make human ESCs a promising tool for disease modeling and regenerative medicine . Notwith - standing the inefficiency of ESC derivation from non - rodent animals , ESCs can be derived with tolerable efficiency from early human embryos through cleavage stages to late Fig . 6 Studies to generate naïve human pluripotent stem cells [ 135 – 155 ] . Naïve pluripotency can be established in human cells by direct reprograming of human somatic cells , conversion of conventional primed hESCs / hiPSCs into the naïve pluripotent state , and by direct naïve ESC derivation from pre - implantation embryos via overexpres - sion of pluripotency - related transcription factors or modification of the culture conditions . Current naïve human PSCs require additional efforts in respect of differentiation potential and genome integrity . hiPSCs human induced pluripotent stem cells , hESCs human embry - onic stem cells , hPSCs human pluripotent stem cells , hLIF human LIF , PD PD0325901 , Mek inhibitor , CHIR CHIR99021 , GSK3β inhibitor , A83 A - 83 - 01 , ALK4 / 5 / 7 inhibitor , FK forskolin , protein kinase A agonist , SB20 SB203580 , p38 inhibitor , SAHA suberoylani - lide hydroxamic acid or vorinostat , pan - histone deacetylase ( HDAC ) inhibitor , LPA lysophosphatidic acid , YAP agonist , LRH1 liver recep - tor homologue 1 or Nr5a2 , RARG retinoic acid receptor gamma , XAV939 tankyrase inhibitor 887 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 blastocysts [ 130 ] . However , because of critical issues such as sensitivity to single cell dissociation , there has been a 17 - year delay after establishment of mouse ESC lines before human ESCs were obtained [ 131 ] . However , the identifica - tion of crucial extrinsic signal molecules including bFGF or ACTIVIN , the use of ROCK inhibitor chemicals as suppres - sors of single cell - induced apoptosis , and the improvement of defined serum - free media have paved the way for large - scale cultivation of human ESCs [ 2 ] . Despite these advances , a limited number of studies have explored the molecular signature during transition of human ICM to ESCs . Human ESCs are morphologically and molecularly similar to mouse EpiSCs [ 18 ] . Recently , opti - mized culture media have been reported to generate human naïve - like ESCs directly from ICM ( see below ) , which might provide the possibility to more accurately investigate the underlying mechanisms of ESC derivation from human blas - tocysts . Human ESCs originate from a transient epiblast - like structure , designated as post - ICM intermediate ( PICMI ) [ 132 ] . PICMI undergoes X - inactivation in female cells and the transcriptional profile of these structures is close to the human epiblast disc with high expression of NODAL / ACTIVIN signaling , no canonical Wnt / β - catenin signaling , high expression of NANOG , and a mix of early epiblast and late epiblast marker gene expressions [ 132 ] . The fact that human ESCs show features of primed ESCs , however , has created some challenges for using human ESCs as an appropriate source for regenerative medicine . In recent years , much effort has been made to overcome primed - asso - ciated characteristics using two strategies : ( 1 ) by overexpres - sion of naïve - specific genes during conversion of human primed to naïve ESCs and ( 2 ) activation of naïve - related signaling pathways by modification of culture conditions during direct derivation of naïve human ESCs from ICM cells ( reviewed in [ 133 ] ) ( Fig . 6 ) . However , the molecular and functional properties of naïve human ESCs generated by such protocols differ in terms of differentiation poten - tial , resemblance to pre - implantation human embryos , and the maintenance of genomic integrity [ 134 ] . Therefore , the generation of authentic pluripotent human ESCs with naïve - specific features needs further investigation . Mechanistic insights gained from mouse ESC studies should provide a proper platform to produce human ESCs , which exhibit bona fide characteristics of naivety . Concluding remarks The different strategies used to derive and propagate ESCs in culture considerably influence the genomic and epigenetic stabilities of the cells . Culture media promoting DNA hyper - methylation and / or proper ICR methylation allow generation of ESCs with high quality and full developmental potential . Although the 2i / L culture induces global hypomethylation similar to ICM methylome in mouse ESCs , the resulting chromosomal instabilities due to extensive DNA demeth - ylation particularly at ICRs pose a potential threat . Global demethylation also negatively affects the developmental potential of ESCs propagated in 2i / L . Since these aberrations are attributed to the potent inhibition of Fgf – Erk signaling , substitution of Fgf – Erk inhibitor by a Src inhibitor or reduc - ing the dosage of the Fgf – Erk inhibitor might prevent defects associated with global DNA demethylation . We have shown that dual inhibition of Fgf – Erk and Tgf - β signaling reverses adverse effects of the inhibition of Fgf – Erk signaling on the ESCs’ ( epi ) genome and increases DNA methylation , high - lighting the protective effect of Tgf - β blockage on the ESC genome . Proper DNA methylation , particularly at ICRs , is of crucial importance for the acquisition of high - quality ESCs with full developmental potential . These insights might also be important for the induction of naivety in human PSCs , where most studies report a global DNA hypomethylation . Because ESCs are transcriptionally highly similar to day 4 . 5 EPI cells , day 4 . 5 EPI cells might be the in vivo origin of ESCs , which indicates the existence of a capturing process during ESC derivation . However , key differences between EPI and ESCs , especially the immortality and epithelializa - tion of ESCs compared to their in vivo counterpart as well as dynamic changes in the expression of TFs , epigenetic regulators , and miRNAs suggest reprogramming events . We propose that a combination of both phenomena contributes to the generation of ESCs . Further investigations are needed to clarify how ESCs are related to the embryonic cells from which they are obtained . Acknowledgements This work was supported by a grant from Royan Institute , the Iranian Council of Stem Cell Research and Technology , the Iran National Science Foundation ( INSF ) , and Iran Science Elites Federation to H . B . References 1 . Pouton CW , Haynes JM ( 2007 ) Embryonic stem cells as a source of models for drug discovery . Nat Rev Drug Discov 6 : 605 – 616 2 . Abbasalizadeh S , Baharvand H ( 2013 ) Technological progress and challenges towards cGMP manufacturing of human pluri - potent stem cells based therapeutic products for allogeneic and autologous cell therapies . Biotechnol Adv 31 : 1600 – 1623 3 . Tang F , Barbacioru C , Bao S , Lee C , Nordman E , Wang X , Lao K , Surani MA ( 2010 ) Tracing the derivation of embryonic stem cells from the inner cell mass by single - cell RNA - Seq analysis . Cell Stem Cell 6 : 468 – 478 4 . Totonchi M , Hassani SN , Sharifi - Zarchi A , Tapia N , Adachi K , Arand J , Greber B , Sabour D , Arauzo - Bravo MJ , Walter J , Pakzad M , Gourabi H , Scholer HR , Baharvand H ( 2017 ) Block - age of the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition is required for embryonic stem cell derivation . Stem Cell Rep 9 : 1275 – 1290 888 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 5 . Boroviak T , Loos R , Bertone P , Smith A , Nichols J ( 2014 ) The ability of inner - cell - mass cells to self - renew as embryonic stem cells is acquired following epiblast specification . Nat Cell Biol 16 : 516 – 528 6 . Hirasawa R , Feil R ( 2010 ) Genomic imprinting and human dis - ease . Essays Biochem 48 : 187 – 200 7 . Posfai E , Tam OH , Rossant J ( 2014 ) Mechanisms of pluripotency in vivo and in vitro . Curr Top Dev Biol 107 : 1 – 37 8 . Chazaud C , Yamanaka Y , Pawson T , Rossant J ( 2006 ) Early lineage segregation between epiblast and primitive endoderm in mouse blastocysts through the Grb2 - MAPK pathway . Dev Cell 10 : 615 – 624 9 . Yamanaka Y , Lanner F , Rossant J ( 2010 ) FGF signal - dependent segregation of primitive endoderm and epiblast in the mouse blastocyst . Development 137 : 715 – 724 10 . Kojima Y , Kaufman - Francis K , Studdert JB , Steiner KA , Power MD , Loebel DA , Jones V , Hor A , de Alencastro G , Logan GJ , Teber ET , Tam OH , Stutz MD , Alexander IE , Pickett HA , Tam PP ( 2014 ) The transcriptional and functional properties of mouse epiblast stem cells resemble the anterior primitive streak . Cell Stem Cell 14 : 107 – 120 11 . Seisenberger S , Andrews S , Krueger F , Arand J , Walter J , Santos F , Popp C , Thienpont B , Dean W , Reik W ( 2012 ) The dynam - ics of genome - wide DNA methylation reprogramming in mouse primordial germ cells . Mol Cell 48 : 849 – 862 12 . Yagi M , Yamanaka S , Yamada Y ( 2017 ) Epigenetic foundations of pluripotent stem cells that recapitulate in vivo pluripotency . Lab Investig 97 : 1133 – 1141 13 . Morgani S , Nichols J , Hadjantonakis AK ( 2017 ) The many faces of Pluripotency : in vitro adaptations of a continuum of in vivo states . BMC Dev Biol 17 : 7 14 . Brons IG , Smithers LE , Trotter MW , Rugg - Gunn P , Sun B , de Sousa Chuva , Lopes SM , Howlett SK , Clarkson A , Ahrlund - Richter L , Pedersen RA , Vallier L ( 2007 ) Derivation of pluri - potent epiblast stem cells from mammalian embryos . Nature 448 : 191 – 195 15 . Tesar PJ , Chenoweth JG , Brook FA , Davies TJ , Evans EP , Mack DL , Gardner RL , McKay RD ( 2007 ) New cell lines from mouse epiblast share defining features with human embryonic stem cells . Nature 448 : 196 – 199 16 . Nichols J , Smith A ( 2009 ) Naive and primed pluripotent states . Cell Stem Cell 4 : 487 – 492 17 . Weinberger L , Ayyash M , Novershtern N , Hanna JH ( 2016 ) Dynamic stem cell states : naive to primed pluripotency in rodents and humans . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 17 : 155 – 169 18 . Hassani SN , Totonchi M , Gourabi H , Scholer HR , Baharvand H ( 2014 ) Signaling roadmap modulating naive and primed pluri - potency . Stem Cells Dev 23 : 193 – 208 19 . Takahashi K , Yamanaka S ( 2006 ) Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors . Cell 126 : 663 – 676 20 . Takahashi K , Tanabe K , Ohnuki M , Narita M , Ichisaka T , Tomoda K , Yamanaka S ( 2007 ) Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors . Cell 131 : 861 – 872 21 . Hassani SN , Pakzad M , Asgari B , Taei A , Baharvand H ( 2014 ) Suppression of transforming growth factor beta signaling pro - motes ground state pluripotency from single blastomeres . Hum Reprod 29 : 1739 – 1748 22 . Tada T , Tada M , Hilton K , Barton SC , Sado T , Takagi N , Surani MA ( 1998 ) Epigenotype switching of imprintable loci in embry - onic germ cells . Dev Genes Evol 207 : 551 – 561 23 . Shovlin TC , Durcova - Hills G , Surani A , McLaren A ( 2008 ) Heterogeneity in imprinted methylation patterns of pluripotent embryonic germ cells derived from pre - migratory mouse germ cells . Dev Biol 313 : 674 – 681 24 . Evans MJ , Kaufman MH ( 1981 ) Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells from mouse embryos . Nature 292 : 154 – 156 25 . Martin GR ( 1981 ) Isolation of a pluripotent cell line from early mouse embryos cultured in medium conditioned by teratocarci - noma stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 78 : 7634 – 7638 26 . Smith AG , Heath JK , Donaldson DD , Wong GG , Moreau J , Stahl M , Rogers D ( 1988 ) Inhibition of pluripotential embryonic stem cell differentiation by purified polypeptides . Nature 336 : 688 – 690 27 . Ying QL , Nichols J , Chambers I , Smith A ( 2003 ) BMP induc - tion of Id proteins suppresses differentiation and sustains embry - onic stem cell self - renewal in collaboration with STAT3 . Cell 115 : 281 – 292 28 . Batlle - Morera L , Smith A , Nichols J ( 2008 ) Parameters influenc - ing derivation of embryonic stem cells from murine embryos . Genesis 46 : 758 – 767 29 . Brook FA , Gardner RL ( 1997 ) The origin and efficient derivation of embryonic stem cells in the mouse . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 5709 – 5712 30 . Ptak GE , Tacconi E , Czernik M , Toschi P , Modlinski JA , Loi P ( 2012 ) Embryonic diapause is conserved across mammals . PLoS One 7 : e33027 31 . Scognamiglio R , Cabezas - Wallscheid N , Thier MC , Altamura S , Reyes A , Prendergast AM , Baumgartner D , Carnevalli LS , Atzberger A , Haas S , von Paleske L , Boroviak T , Worsdorfer P , Essers MA , Kloz U , Eisenman RN , Edenhofer F , Bertone P , Huber W , van der Hoeven F , Smith A , Trumpp A ( 2016 ) Myc depletion induces a pluripotent dormant state mimicking diapause . Cell 164 : 668 – 680 32 . Nichols J , Chambers I , Taga T , Smith A ( 2001 ) Physiological rationale for responsiveness of mouse embryonic stem cells to gp130 cytokines . Development 128 : 2333 – 2339 33 . Do DV , Ueda J , Messerschmidt DM , Lorthongpanich C , Zhou Y , Feng B , Guo G , Lin PJ , Hossain MZ , Zhang W , Moh A , Wu Q , Robson P , Ng HH , Poellinger L , Knowles BB , Solter D , Fu XY ( 2013 ) A genetic and developmental pathway from STAT3 to the OCT4 - NANOG circuit is essential for maintenance of ICM lineages in vivo . Genes Dev 27 : 1378 – 1390 34 . Martello G , Smith A ( 2014 ) The nature of embryonic stem cells . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 30 : 647 – 675 35 . Santos J , Pereira CF , Di - Gregorio A , Spruce T , Alder O , Rod - riguez T , Azuara V , Merkenschlager M , Fisher AG ( 2010 ) Dif - ferences in the epigenetic and reprogramming properties of pluripotent and extra - embryonic stem cells implicate chroma - tin remodelling as an important early event in the developing mouse embryo . Epigenetics Chromatin 3 : 1 36 . Hermitte S , Chazaud C ( 2014 ) Primitive endoderm differentia - tion : from specification to epithelium formation . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 369 : 20130537 37 . Ficz G , Hore TA , Santos F , Lee HJ , Dean W , Arand J , Krueger F , Oxley D , Paul YL , Walter J , Cook SJ , Andrews S , Branco MR , Reik W ( 2013 ) FGF signaling inhibition in ESCs drives rapid genome - wide demethylation to the epigenetic ground state of pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 13 : 351 – 359 38 . Habibi E , Brinkman AB , Arand J , Kroeze LI , Kerstens HH , Matarese F , Lepikhov K , Gut M , Brun - Heath I , Hubner NC , Benedetti R , Altucci L , Jansen JH , Walter J , Gut IG , Marks H , Stunnenberg HG ( 2013 ) Whole - genome bisulfite sequencing of two distinct interconvertible DNA methylomes of mouse embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 13 : 360 – 369 39 . Leitch HG , McEwen KR , Turp A , Encheva V , Carroll T , Grabole N , Mansfield W , Nashun B , Knezovich JG , Smith A , Surani MA , Hajkova P ( 2013 ) Naive pluripotency is associ - ated with global DNA hypomethylation . Nat Struct Mol Biol 20 : 311 – 316 889 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 40 . Buehr M , Smith A ( 2003 ) Genesis of embryonic stem cells . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 358 : 1397 – 1402 ( discus - sion 1402 ) 41 . Ying QL , Wray J , Nichols J , Batlle - Morera L , Doble B , Woodgett J , Cohen P , Smith A ( 2008 ) The ground state of embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Nature 453 : 519 – 523 42 . Ohtsuka S , Niwa H ( 2015 ) The differential activation of intracel - lular signaling pathways confers the permissiveness of embry - onic stem cell derivation from different mouse strains . Develop - ment 142 : 431 – 437 43 . Buehr M , Meek S , Blair K , Yang J , Ure J , Silva J , McLay R , Hall J , Ying QL , Smith A ( 2008 ) Capture of authentic embryonic stem cells from rat blastocysts . Cell 135 : 1287 – 1298 44 . Wray J , Kalkan T , Smith AG ( 2010 ) The ground state of pluri - potency . Biochem Soc Trans 38 : 1027 – 1032 45 . Martello G , Bertone P , Smith A ( 2013 ) Identification of the miss - ing pluripotency mediator downstream of leukaemia inhibitory factor . EMBO J 32 : 2561 – 2574 46 . Li X , Zhu L , Yang A , Lin J , Tang F , Jin S , Wei Z , Li J , Jin Y ( 2011 ) Calcineurin - NFAT signaling critically regulates early lineage specification in mouse embryonic stem cells and embryos . Cell Stem Cell 8 : 46 – 58 47 . Shimizu T , Ueda J , Ho JC , Iwasaki K , Poellinger L , Harada I , Sawada Y ( 2012 ) Dual inhibition of Src and GSK3 maintains mouse embryonic stem cells , whose differentiation is mechani - cally regulated by Src signaling . Stem Cells 30 : 1394 – 1404 48 . Dutta D , Ray S , Home P , Larson M , Wolfe MW , Paul S ( 2011 ) Self - renewal versus lineage commitment of embryonic stem cells : protein kinase C signaling shifts the balance . Stem Cells 29 : 618 – 628 49 . Hassani SN , Totonchi M , Farrokhi A , Taei A , Larijani MR , Gourabi H , Baharvand H ( 2012 ) Simultaneous suppression of TGF - beta and ERK signaling contributes to the highly efficient and reproducible generation of mouse embryonic stem cells from previously considered refractory and non - permissive strains . Stem Cell Rev 8 : 472 – 481 50 . Hassani SN , Totonchi M , Sharifi - Zarchi A , Mollamohammadi S , Pakzad M , Moradi S , Samadian A , Masoudi N , Mirshah - valadi S , Farrokhi A , Greber B , Arauzo - Bravo MJ , Sabour D , Sadeghi M , Salekdeh GH , Gourabi H , Scholer HR , Baharvand H ( 2014 ) Inhibition of TGFbeta signaling promotes ground state pluripotency . Stem Cell Rev 10 : 16 – 30 51 . Xu P , Davis RJ ( 2010 ) c - Jun NH2 - terminal kinase is required for lineage - specific differentiation but not stem cell self - renewal . Mol Cell Biol 30 : 1329 – 1340 52 . Tan BS , Kwek J , Wong CK , Saner NJ , Yap C , Felquer F , Morris MB , Gardner DK , Rathjen PD , Rathjen J ( 2016 ) Src family kinases and p38 mitogen - activated protein kinases regulate pluripotent cell differentiation in culture . PLoS One 11 : e0163244 53 . Choi J , Huebner AJ , Clement K , Walsh RM , Savol A , Lin K , Gu H , Di Stefano B , Brumbaugh J , Kim SY , Sharif J , Rose CM , Mohammad A , Odajima J , Charron J , Shioda T , Gnirke A , Gygi S , Koseki H , Sadreyev RI , Xiao A , Meissner A , Hochedlinger K ( 2017 ) Prolonged Mek1 / 2 suppression impairs the developmental potential of embryonic stem cells . Nature 548 : 219 – 223 54 . Yagi M , Kishigami S , Tanaka A , Semi K , Mizutani E , Wakayama S , Wakayama T , Yamamoto T , Yamada Y ( 2017 ) Derivation of ground - state female ES cells maintaining gamete - derived DNA methylation . Nature 548 : 224 – 227 55 . Yang J , Ryan DJ , Wang W , Tsang JC , Lan G , Masaki H , Gao X , Antunes L , Yu Y , Zhu Z , Wang J , Kolodziejczyk AA , Campos LS , Wang C , Yang F , Zhong Z , Fu B , Eckersley - Maslin MA , Woods M , Tanaka Y , Chen X , Wilkinson AC , Bussell J , White J , Ramirez - Solis R , Reik W , Gottgens B , Teichmann SA , Tam PPL , Nakauchi H , Zou X , Lu L , Liu P ( 2017 ) Establishment of mouse expanded potential stem cells . Nature 550 : 393 – 397 56 . Menchero S , Rayon T , Andreu MJ , Manzanares M ( 2017 ) Signaling pathways in mammalian preimplantation develop - ment : linking cellular phenotypes to lineage decisions . Dev Dyn 246 : 245 – 261 57 . Zhao H , Jin Y ( 2017 ) Signaling networks in the control of pluri - potency . Curr Opin Genet Dev 46 : 141 – 148 58 . Gomes Fernandes M , Dries R , Roost MS , Semrau S , de Melo Bernardo A , Davis RP , Ramakrishnan R , Szuhai K , Maas E , Umans L , Abon Escalona V , Salvatori D , Deforce D , Van Criekinge W , Huylebroeck D , Mummery C , Zwijsen A , de Sousa Chuva , Lopes SM ( 2016 ) BMP - SMAD signaling regulates line - age priming , but is dispensable for self - renewal in mouse embry - onic stem cells . Stem Cell Rep 6 : 85 – 94 59 . Walter M , Teissandier A , Perez - Palacios R , Bourc’his D ( 2016 ) An epigenetic switch ensures transposon repression upon dynamic loss of DNA methylation in embryonic stem cells . Elife 5 : e11418 60 . Chowdhury F , Na S , Li D , Poh YC , Tanaka TS , Wang F , Wang N ( 2010 ) Material properties of the cell dictate stress - induced spreading and differentiation in embryonic stem cells . Nat Mater 9 : 82 – 88 61 . Taleahmad S , Mirzaei M , Samadian A , Hassani SN , Haynes PA , Salekdeh GH , Baharvand H ( 2017 ) Low focal adhesion signaling promotes ground state pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells . J Proteome Res 16 : 3585 – 3595 62 . Hayashi Y , Furue MK , Okamoto T , Ohnuma K , Myoishi Y , Fukuhara Y , Abe T , Sato JD , Hata R , Asashima M ( 2007 ) Integ - rins regulate mouse embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Stem Cells 25 : 3005 – 3015 63 . Hewitson LC , Leese HJ ( 1993 ) Energy metabolism of the tro - phectoderm and inner cell mass of the mouse blastocyst . J Exp Zool 267 : 337 – 343 64 . Taleahmad S , Hassani SN , Hosseini Salekdeh G , Baharvand H ( 2018 ) Metabolic signature of pluripotent stem cells . Cell J 20 : 388 – 395 65 . Taleahmad S , Mirzaei M , Parker LM , Hassani SN , Mollamoham - madi S , Sharifi - Zarchi A , Haynes PA , Baharvand H , Salekdeh GH ( 2015 ) Proteome analysis of ground state pluripotency . Sci Rep 5 : 17985 66 . Kondoh H , Lleonart ME , Nakashima Y , Yokode M , Tanaka M , Bernard D , Gil J , Beach D ( 2007 ) A high glycolytic flux sup - ports the proliferative potential of murine embryonic stem cells . Antioxid Redox Signal 9 : 293 – 299 67 . Ward PS , Thompson CB ( 2012 ) Metabolic reprogramming : a cancer hallmark even warburg did not anticipate . Cancer Cell 21 : 297 – 308 68 . Kaelin WG Jr , McKnight SL ( 2013 ) Influence of metabolism on epigenetics and disease . Cell 153 : 56 – 69 69 . Xu W , Wang F , Yu Z , Xin F ( 2016 ) Epigenetics and cellular metabolism . Genet Epigenetics 8 : 43 – 51 70 . Boyer LA , Lee TI , Cole MF , Johnstone SE , Levine SS , Zucker JP , Guenther MG , Kumar RM , Murray HL , Jenner RG , Gifford DK , Melton DA , Jaenisch R , Young RA ( 2005 ) Core transcrip - tional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells . Cell 122 : 947 – 956 71 . Cole MF , Johnstone SE , Newman JJ , Kagey MH , Young RA ( 2008 ) Tcf3 is an integral component of the core regulatory cir - cuitry of embryonic stem cells . Genes Dev 22 : 746 – 755 72 . Marson A , Levine SS , Cole MF , Frampton GM , Brambrink T , Johnstone S , Guenther MG , Johnston WK , Wernig M , Newman J , Calabrese JM , Dennis LM , Volkert TL , Gupta S , Love J , Han - nett N , Sharp PA , Bartel DP , Jaenisch R , Young RA ( 2008 ) Con - necting microRNA genes to the core transcriptional regulatory circuitry of embryonic stem cells . Cell 134 : 521 – 533 890 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 73 . Wang Y , Melton C , Li YP , Shenoy A , Zhang XX , Subramanyam D , Blelloch R ( 2013 ) miR - 294 / miR - 302 promotes proliferation , suppresses G1 - S restriction point , and inhibits ESC differentia - tion through separable mechanisms . Cell Rep 4 : 99 – 109 74 . Moradi S , Braun T , Baharvand H ( 2018 ) miR - 302b - 3p promotes self - renewal properties in leukemia inhibitory factor - withdrawn embryonic stem cells . Cell J 20 : 61 – 72 75 . Melton C , Judson RL , Blelloch R ( 2010 ) Opposing microRNA families regulate self - renewal in mouse embryonic stem cells . Nature 463 : 621 – 626 76 . Smith KN , Singh AM , Dalton S ( 2010 ) Myc represses primitive endoderm differentiation in pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 7 : 343 – 354 77 . Judson RL , Babiarz JE , Venere M , Blelloch R ( 2009 ) Embryonic stem cell - specific microRNAs promote induced pluripotency . Nat Biotechnol 27 : 459 – 461 78 . Li L , Chen K , Wu Y , Long Q , Zhao D , Ma B , Pei D , Liu X ( 2017 ) Gadd45a opens up the promoter regions of miR - 295 facilitating pluripotency induction . Cell Death Dis 8 : e3107 79 . Marks H , Kalkan T , Menafra R , Denissov S , Jones K , Hofe - meister H , Nichols J , Kranz A , Stewart AF , Smith A , Stunnen - berg HG ( 2012 ) The transcriptional and epigenomic foundations of ground state pluripotency . Cell 149 : 590 – 604 80 . Viswanathan SR , Daley GQ , Gregory RI ( 2008 ) Selective block - ade of microRNA processing by Lin28 . Science 320 : 97 – 100 81 . Kumar RM , Cahan P , Shalek AK , Satija R , DaleyKeyser A , Li H , Zhang J , Pardee K , Gennert D , Trombetta JJ , Ferrante TC , Regev A , Daley GQ , Collins JJ ( 2014 ) Deconstructing transcriptional heterogeneity in pluripotent stem cells . Nature 516 : 56 – 61 82 . Moradi S , Sharifi - Zarchi A , Ahmadi A , Mollamohammadi S , Stubenvoll A , Gunther S , Salekdeh GH , Asgari S , Braun T , Baharvand H ( 2017 ) Small RNA sequencing reveals Dlk1 - Dio3 locus - embedded microRNAs as major drivers of ground - state pluripotency . Stem Cell Rep 9 : 2081 – 2096 83 . Yan Y , Yang X , Li TT , Gu KL , Hao J , Zhang Q , Wang Y ( 2017 ) Significant differences of function and expression of microRNAs between ground state and serum - cultured pluripotent stem cells . J Genet Genom 44 : 179 – 189 84 . Hackett JA , Dietmann S , Murakami K , Down TA , Leitch HG , Surani MA ( 2013 ) Synergistic mechanisms of DNA demethyla - tion during transition to ground - state pluripotency . Stem Cell Rep 1 : 518 – 531 85 . Yamaji M , Ueda J , Hayashi K , Ohta H , Yabuta Y , Kurimoto K , Nakato R , Yamada Y , Shirahige K , Saitou M ( 2013 ) PRDM14 ensures naive pluripotency through dual regulation of signaling and epigenetic pathways in mouse embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 12 : 368 – 382 86 . Sim YJ , Kim MS , Nayfeh A , Yun YJ , Kim SJ , Park KT , Kim CH , Kim KS ( 2017 ) 2i maintains a naive ground state in ESCs through two distinct epigenetic mechanisms . Stem Cell Rep 8 : 1312 – 1328 87 . Okashita N , Kumaki Y , Ebi K , Nishi M , Okamoto Y , Nakayama M , Hashimoto S , Nakamura T , Sugasawa K , Kojima N , Takada T , Okano M , Seki Y ( 2014 ) PRDM14 promotes active DNA demethylation through the ten – eleven translocation ( TET ) - mediated base excision repair pathway in embryonic stem cells . Development 141 : 269 – 280 88 . Okashita N , Sakashita N , Ito K , Mitsuya A , Suwa Y , Seki Y ( 2015 ) PRDM14 maintains pluripotency of embryonic stem cells through TET - mediated active DNA demethylation . Biochem Bio - phys Res Commun 466 : 138 – 145 89 . von Meyenn F , Iurlaro M , Habibi E , Liu NQ , Salehzadeh - Yazdi A , Santos F , Petrini E , Milagre I , Yu M , Xie Z , Kroeze LI , Nes - terova TB , Jansen JH , Xie H , He C , Reik W , Stunnenberg HG ( 2016 ) Impairment of DNA methylation maintenance is the main cause of global demethylation in naive embryonic stem cells . Mol Cell 62 : 848 – 861 90 . Bernstein BE , Mikkelsen TS , Xie X , Kamal M , Huebert DJ , Cuff J , Fry B , Meissner A , Wernig M , Plath K , Jaenisch R , Wagschal A , Feil R , Schreiber SL , Lander ES ( 2006 ) A bivalent chroma - tin structure marks key developmental genes in embryonic stem cells . Cell 125 : 315 – 326 91 . Mikkelsen TS , Ku M , Jaffe DB , Issac B , Lieberman E , Gian - noukos G , Alvarez P , Brockman W , Kim TK , Koche RP , Lee W , Mendenhall E , O’Donovan A , Presser A , Russ C , Xie X , Meiss - ner A , Wernig M , Jaenisch R , Nusbaum C , Lander ES , Bernstein BE ( 2007 ) Genome - wide maps of chromatin state in pluripotent and lineage - committed cells . Nature 448 : 553 – 560 92 . Joshi O , Wang SY , Kuznetsova T , Atlasi Y , Peng T , Fabre PJ , Habibi E , Shaik J , Saeed S , Handoko L , Richmond T , Spivakov M , Burgess D , Stunnenberg HG ( 2015 ) Dynamic reorganization of extremely long - range promoter - promoter interactions between two states of pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 17 : 748 – 757 93 . Boroviak T , Loos R , Lombard P , Okahara J , Behr R , Sasaki E , Nichols J , Smith A , Bertone P ( 2015 ) Lineage - specific profiling delineates the emergence and progression of naive pluripotency in mammalian embryogenesis . Dev Cell 35 : 366 – 382 94 . Chambers I , Silva J , Colby D , Nichols J , Nijmeijer B , Robertson M , Vrana J , Jones K , Grotewold L , Smith A ( 2007 ) Nanog safe - guards pluripotency and mediates germline development . Nature 450 : 1230 – 1234 95 . Toyooka Y , Shimosato D , Murakami K , Takahashi K , Niwa H ( 2008 ) Identification and characterization of subpopulations in undifferentiated ES cell culture . Development 135 : 909 – 918 96 . Hayashi K , Lopes SM , Tang F , Surani MA ( 2008 ) Dynamic equilibrium and heterogeneity of mouse pluripotent stem cells with distinct functional and epigenetic states . Cell Stem Cell 3 : 391 – 401 97 . Attari F , Sepehri H , Ansari H , Hassani SN , Esfandiari F , Asgari B , Shahverdi A , Baharvand H ( 2014 ) Efficient induction of pluri - potency in primordial germ cells by dual inhibition of TGF - beta and ERK signaling pathways . Stem Cells Dev 23 : 1050 – 1061 98 . Acloque H , Adams MS , Fishwick K , Bronner - Fraser M , Nieto MA ( 2009 ) Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions : the importance of changing cell state in development and disease . J Clin Investig 119 : 1438 – 1449 99 . Li R , Liang J , Ni S , Zhou T , Qing X , Li H , He W , Chen J , Li F , Zhuang Q , Qin B , Xu J , Li W , Yang J , Gan Y , Qin D , Feng S , Song H , Yang D , Zhang B , Zeng L , Lai L , Esteban MA ( 2010 ) A mesenchymal - to - epithelial transition initiates and is required for the nuclear reprogramming of mouse fibroblasts . Cell Stem Cell 7 : 51 – 63 100 . Samavarchi - Tehrani P , Golipour A , David L , Sung HK , Beyer TA , Datti A , Woltjen K , Nagy A , Wrana JL ( 2010 ) Functional genomics reveals a BMP - driven mesenchymal - to - epithelial tran - sition in the initiation of somatic cell reprogramming . Cell Stem Cell 7 : 64 – 77 101 . Wang G , Guo X , Hong W , Liu Q , Wei T , Lu C , Gao L , Ye D , Zhou Y , Chen J , Wang J , Wu M , Liu H , Kang J ( 2013 ) Criti - cal regulation of miR - 200 / ZEB2 pathway in Oct4 / Sox2 - induced mesenchymal - to - epithelial transition and induced pluripotent stem cell generation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : 2858 – 2863 102 . Moradi S , Asgari S , Baharvand H ( 2014 ) Concise review : har - monies played by microRNAs in cell fate reprogramming . Stem Cells 32 : 3 – 15 103 . Redmer T , Diecke S , Grigoryan T , Quiroga - Negreira A , Birch - meier W , Besser D ( 2011 ) E - cadherin is crucial for embryonic stem cell pluripotency and can replace OCT4 during somatic cell reprogramming . EMBO Rep 12 : 720 – 726 104 . An J , Zheng Y , Dann CT ( 2017 ) Mesenchymal to epithelial tran - sition mediated by CDH1 promotes spontaneous reprogramming 891 Transition of inner cell mass to embryonic stem cells : mechanisms , facts , and hypotheses 1 3 of male germline stem cells to pluripotency . Stem Cell Rep 8 : 446 – 459 105 . Shi L , Wu J ( 2009 ) Epigenetic regulation in mammalian preim - plantation embryo development . Reprod Biol Endocrinol 7 : 59 106 . Smith ZD , Chan MM , Mikkelsen TS , Gu H , Gnirke A , Regev A , Meissner A ( 2012 ) A unique regulatory phase of DNA methyla - tion in the early mammalian embryo . Nature 484 : 339 – 344 107 . Smith ZD , Meissner A ( 2013 ) DNA methylation : roles in mam - malian development . Nat Rev Genet 14 : 204 – 220 108 . Marcho C , Bevilacqua A , Tremblay KD , Mager J ( 2015 ) Tissue - specific regulation of Igf2r / Airn imprinting during gastrulation . Epigenetics Chromatin 8 : 10 109 . Canovas S , Ross PJ ( 2016 ) Epigenetics in preimplantation mam - malian development . Theriogenology 86 : 69 – 79 110 . Mohammed H , Hernando - Herraez I , Savino A , Scialdone A , Macaulay I , Mulas C , Chandra T , Voet T , Dean W , Nichols J , Marioni JC , Reik W ( 2017 ) Single - cell landscape of transcrip - tional heterogeneity and cell fate decisions during mouse early gastrulation . Cell Rep 20 : 1215 – 1228 111 . Bibikova M , Laurent LC , Ren B , Loring JF , Fan JB ( 2008 ) Unraveling epigenetic regulation in embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 2 : 123 – 134 112 . Morey L , Santanach A , Blanco E , Aloia L , Nora EP , Bruneau BG , Di Croce L ( 2015 ) Polycomb regulates mesoderm cell fate - specification in embryonic stem cells through activation and repression mechanisms . Cell Stem Cell 17 : 300 – 315 113 . Migeon BR ( 2007 ) Why females are mosaics , X - chromosome inactivation , and sex differences in disease . Gend Med 4 : 97 – 105 114 . Seller MJ ( 1987 ) Neural tube defects and sex ratios . Am J Med Genet 26 : 699 – 707 115 . Schulz EG , Meisig J , Nakamura T , Okamoto I , Sieber A , Picard C , Borensztein M , Saitou M , Bluthgen N , Heard E ( 2014 ) The two active X chromosomes in female ESCs block exit from the pluripotent state by modulating the ESC signaling network . Cell Stem Cell 14 : 203 – 216 116 . Zvetkova I , Apedaile A , Ramsahoye B , Mermoud JE , Cromp - ton LA , John R , Feil R , Brockdorff N ( 2005 ) Global hypometh - ylation of the genome in XX embryonic stem cells . Nat Genet 37 : 1274 – 1279 117 . Choi J , Clement K , Huebner AJ , Webster J , Rose CM , Brum - baugh J , Walsh RM , Lee S , Savol A , Etchegaray JP , Gu H , Boyle P , Elling U , Mostoslavsky R , Sadreyev R , Park PJ , Gygi SP , Meissner A , Hochedlinger K ( 2017 ) DUSP9 modulates DNA hypomethylation in female mouse pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 20 ( 706 – 719 ) : e7 118 . Song R , Ro S , Michaels JD , Park C , McCarrey JR , Yan W ( 2009 ) Many X - linked microRNAs escape meiotic sex chromosome inactivation . Nat Genet 41 : 488 – 493 119 . Celeste A , Difilippantonio S , Difilippantonio MJ , Fernandez - Capetillo O , Pilch DR , Sedelnikova OA , Eckhaus M , Ried T , Bonner WM , Nussenzweig A ( 2003 ) H2AX haploinsufficiency modifies genomic stability and tumor susceptibility . Cell 114 : 371 – 383 120 . Xiao A , Li H , Shechter D , Ahn SH , Fabrizio LA , Erdjument - Bromage H , Ishibe - Murakami S , Wang B , Tempst P , Hofmann K , Patel DJ , Elledge SJ , Allis CD ( 2009 ) WSTF regulates the H2A . X DNA damage response via a novel tyrosine kinase activ - ity . Nature 457 : 57 – 62 121 . Wu T , Liu Y , Wen D , Tseng Z , Tahmasian M , Zhong M , Rafii S , Stadtfeld M , Hochedlinger K , Xiao A ( 2014 ) Histone variant H2A . X deposition pattern serves as a functional epigenetic mark for distinguishing the developmental potentials of iPSCs . Cell Stem Cell 15 : 281 – 294 122 . Zwaka TP , Thomson JA ( 2005 ) A germ cell origin of embryonic stem cells ? Development 132 : 227 – 233 123 . Chu LF , Surani MA , Jaenisch R , Zwaka TP ( 2011 ) Blimp1 expression predicts embryonic stem cell development in vitro . Curr Biol 21 : 1759 – 1765 124 . Bao S , Leitch HG , Gillich A , Nichols J , Tang F , Kim S , Lee C , Zwaka T , Li X , Surani MA ( 2012 ) The germ cell determinant blimp1 is not required for derivation of pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 11 : 110 – 117 125 . Ezashi T , Yuan Y , Roberts RM ( 2016 ) Pluripotent stem cells from domesticated mammals . Annu Rev Anim Biosci 4 : 223 – 253 126 . Chen X , Ye S , Ying QL ( 2015 ) Stem cell maintenance by manip - ulating signaling pathways : past , current and future . BMB Rep 48 : 668 – 676 127 . Farzaneh M , Zare M , Hassani SN , Baharvand H ( 2018 ) Effects of various culture conditions on pluripotent stem cell derivation from chick embryos . J Cell Biochem 119 : 6325 – 6336 128 . Bogliotti YS , Wu J , Vilarino M , Okamura D , Soto DA , Zhong C , Sakurai M , Sampaio RV , Suzuki K , Izpisua Belmonte JC , Ross PJ ( 2018 ) Efficient derivation of stable primed pluripotent embryonic stem cells from bovine blastocysts . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115 : 2090 – 2095 129 . Wu J , Okamura D , Li M , Suzuki K , Luo C , Ma L , He Y , Li Z , Benner C , Tamura I , Krause MN , Nery JR , Du T , Zhang Z , Hishida T , Takahashi Y , Aizawa E , Kim NY , Lajara J , Guillen P , Campistol JM , Esteban CR , Ross PJ , Saghatelian A , Ren B , Ecker JR , Izpisua Belmonte JC ( 2015 ) An alternative pluripo - tent state confers interspecies chimaeric competency . Nature 521 : 316 – 321 130 . Taei A , Hassani SN , Eftekhari - Yazdi P , Rezazadeh Valojerdi M , Nokhbatolfoghahai M , Masoudi NS , Pakzad M , Gourabi H , Baharvand H ( 2013 ) Enhanced generation of human embry - onic stem cells from single blastomeres of fair and poor - quality cleavage embryos via inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase beta and Rho - associated kinase signaling . Hum Reprod 28 : 2661 – 2671 131 . Thomson JA , Itskovitz - Eldor J , Shapiro SS , Waknitz MA , Swier - giel JJ , Marshall VS , Jones JM ( 1998 ) Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts . Science 282 : 1145 – 1147 132 . O’Leary T , Heindryckx B , Lierman S , van Bruggen D , Goe - man JJ , Vandewoestyne M , Deforce D , de Sousa Lopes SM , De Sutter P ( 2012 ) Tracking the progression of the human inner cell mass during embryonic stem cell derivation . Nat Biotechnol 30 : 278 – 282 133 . Ware CB ( 2017 ) Concise review : lessons from naive human pluripotent cells . Stem Cells 35 : 35 – 41 134 . Liu X , Nefzger CM , Rossello FJ , Chen J , Knaupp AS , Firas J , Ford E , Pflueger J , Paynter JM , Chy HS , O’Brien CM , Huang C , Mishra K , Hodgson - Garms M , Jansz N , Williams SM , Blewitt ME , Nilsson SK , Schittenhelm RB , Laslett AL , Lister R , Polo JM ( 2017 ) Comprehensive characterization of distinct states of human naive pluripotency generated by reprogramming . Nat Methods 14 : 1055 – 1062 135 . Li W , Wei W , Zhu S , Zhu J , Shi Y , Lin T , Hao E , Hayek A , Deng H , Ding S ( 2009 ) Generation of rat and human induced pluripotent stem cells by combining genetic reprogramming and chemical inhibitors . Cell Stem Cell 4 : 16 – 19 136 . Hanna J , Cheng AW , Saha K , Kim J , Lengner CJ , Soldner F , Cassady JP , Muffat J , Carey BW , Jaenisch R ( 2010 ) Human embryonic stem cells with biological and epigenetic character - istics similar to those of mouse ESCs . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 9222 – 9227 137 . Buecker C , Chen HH , Polo JM , Daheron L , Bu L , Barakat TS , Okwieka P , Porter A , Gribnau J , Hochedlinger K , Geijsen N ( 2010 ) A murine ESC - like state facilitates transgenesis and homologous recombination in human pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 6 : 535 – 546 892 S . - N . Hassani et al . 1 3 138 . Wang W , Yang J , Liu H , Lu D , Chen X , Zenonos Z , Campos LS , Rad R , Guo G , Zhang S , Bradley A , Liu P ( 2011 ) Rapid and efficient reprogramming of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells by retinoic acid receptor gamma and liver receptor homolog 1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 18283 – 18288 139 . Pomp O , Dreesen O , Leong DF , Meller - Pomp O , Tan TT , Zhou F , Colman A ( 2011 ) Unexpected X chromosome skewing dur - ing culture and reprogramming of human somatic cells can be alleviated by exogenous telomerase . Cell Stem Cell 9 : 156 – 165 140 . Hirano K , Nagata S , Yamaguchi S , Nakagawa M , Okita K , Kotera H , Ainscough J , Tada T ( 2012 ) Human and mouse induced pluri - potent stem cells are differentially reprogrammed in response to kinase inhibitors . Stem Cells Dev 21 : 1287 – 1298 141 . Valamehr B , Robinson M , Abujarour R , Rezner B , Vranceanu F , Le T , Medcalf A , Lee TT , Fitch M , Robbins D , Flynn P ( 2014 ) Platform for induction and maintenance of transgene - free hiPSCs resembling ground state pluripotent stem cells . Stem Cell Rep 2 : 366 – 381 142 . Ware CB , Wang L , Mecham BH , Shen L , Nelson AM , Bar M , Lamba DA , Dauphin DS , Buckingham B , Askari B , Lim R , Tewari M , Gartler SM , Issa JP , Pavlidis P , Duan Z , Blau CA ( 2009 ) Histone deacetylase inhibition elicits an evolutionarily conserved self - renewal program in embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 4 : 359 – 369 143 . Xu Y , Zhu X , Hahm HS , Wei W , Hao E , Hayek A , Ding S ( 2010 ) Revealing a core signaling regulatory mechanism for pluripotent stem cell survival and self - renewal by small molecules . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 8129 – 8134 144 . Ware CB , Nelson AM , Mecham B , Hesson J , Zhou W , Jonlin EC , Jimenez - Caliani AJ , Deng X , Cavanaugh C , Cook S , Tesar PJ , Okada J , Margaretha L , Sperber H , Choi M , Blau CA , Treuting PM , Hawkins RD , Cirulli V , Ruohola - Baker H ( 2014 ) Derivation of naive human embryonic stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 : 4484 – 4489 145 . Smagghe BJ , Stewart AK , Carter MG , Shelton LM , Bernier KJ , Hartman EJ , Calhoun AK , Hatziioannou VM , Lillacci G , Kirk BA , DiNardo BA , Kosik KS , Bamdad C ( 2013 ) MUC1 * ligand , NM23 - H1 , is a novel growth factor that maintains human stem cells in a more naive state . PLoS One 8 : e58601 146 . Gafni O , Weinberger L , Mansour AA , Manor YS , Chomsky E , Ben - Yosef D , Kalma Y , Viukov S , Maza I , Zviran A , Rais Y , Shipony Z , Mukamel Z , Krupalnik V , Zerbib M , Geula S , Caspi I , Schneir D , Shwartz T , Gilad S , Amann - Zalcenstein D , Benja - min S , Amit I , Tanay A , Massarwa R , Novershtern N , Hanna JH ( 2013 ) Derivation of novel human ground state naive pluripotent stem cells . Nature 504 : 282 – 286 147 . Chan YS , Goke J , Ng JH , Lu X , Gonzales KA , Tan CP , Tng WQ , Hong ZZ , Lim YS , Ng HH ( 2013 ) Induction of a human pluripotent state with distinct regulatory circuitry that resembles preimplantation epiblast . Cell Stem Cell 13 : 663 – 675 148 . Takashima Y , Guo G , Loos R , Nichols J , Ficz G , Krueger F , Oxley D , Santos F , Clarke J , Mansfield W , Reik W , Bertone P , Smith A ( 2014 ) Resetting transcription factor control circuitry toward ground - state pluripotency in human . Cell 158 : 1254 – 1269 149 . Theunissen TW , Powell BE , Wang H , Mitalipova M , Faddah DA , Reddy J , Fan ZP , Maetzel D , Ganz K , Shi L , Lungjangwa T , Imsoonthornruksa S , Stelzer Y , Rangarajan S , D’Alessio A , Zhang J , Gao Q , Dawlaty MM , Young RA , Gray NS , Jaenisch R ( 2014 ) Systematic identification of culture conditions for induc - tion and maintenance of naive human pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 15 : 471 – 487 150 . Duggal G , Warrier S , Ghimire S , Broekaert D , Van der Jeught M , Lierman S , Deroo T , Peelman L , Van Soom A , Cornelissen R , Menten B , Mestdagh P , Vandesompele J , Roost M , Slieker RC , Heijmans BT , Deforce D , De Sutter P , De Sousa Lopes SC , Heindryckx B ( 2015 ) Alternative routes to induce naive pluripo - tency in human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 33 : 2686 – 2698 151 . Chen H , Aksoy I , Gonnot F , Osteil P , Aubry M , Hamela C , Rog - nard C , Hochard A , Voisin S , Fontaine E , Mure M , Afanassieff M , Cleroux E , Guibert S , Chen J , Vallot C , Acloque H , Gen - thon C , Donnadieu C De , Vos J , Sanlaville D , Guerin JF , Weber M , Stanton LW , Rougeulle C , Pain B , Bourillot PY , Savatier P ( 2015 ) Reinforcement of STAT3 activity reprogrammes human embryonic stem cells to naive - like pluripotency . Nat Commun 6 : 7095 152 . Qin H , Hejna M , Liu Y , Percharde M , Wossidlo M , Blouin L , Durruthy - Durruthy J , Wong P , Qi Z , Yu J , Qi LS , Sebastiano V , Song JS , Ramalho - Santos M ( 2016 ) YAP induces human naive pluripotency . Cell Rep 14 : 2301 – 2312 153 . Zimmerlin L , Park TS , Huo JS , Verma K , Pather SR , Talbot CC Jr , Agarwal J , Steppan D , Zhang YW , Considine M , Guo H , Zhong X , Gutierrez C , Cope L , Canto - Soler MV , Friedman AD , Baylin SB , Zambidis ET ( 2016 ) Tankyrase inhibition promotes a stable human naive pluripotent state with improved functionality . Development 143 : 4368 – 4380 154 . Lengner CJ , Gimelbrant AA , Erwin JA , Cheng AW , Guenther MG , Welstead GG , Alagappan R , Frampton GM , Xu P , Muffat J , Santagata S , Powers D , Barrett CB , Young RA , Lee JT , Jaenisch R , Mitalipova M ( 2010 ) Derivation of pre - X inactivation human embryonic stem cells under physiological oxygen concentrations . Cell 141 : 872 – 883 155 . Guo G , von Meyenn F , Santos F , Chen Y , Reik W , Bertone P , Smith A , Nichols J ( 2016 ) Naive pluripotent stem cells derived directly from isolated cells of the human inner cell mass . Stem Cell Rep 6 : 437 – 446