Neuron , Vol . 38 , 447 – 460 , May 8 , 2003 , Copyright  2003 by Cell Press Hippocampal LTP Is Accompanied by Enhanced F - Actin Content within the Dendritic Spine that Is Essential for Late LTP Maintenance In Vivo nounced characteristic of the dendritic spine is an en - richment of cytoskeletal actin , and indeed the actin fila - ment ( F - actin ) is the major cytoskeletal element in the dendritic spine ( Fifkova and Morales , 1992 ; Matus et al . , 1982 ) . The F - actin is particularly prevalent in the spine Yugo Fukazawa , 1 , 2 , 6 Yoshito Saitoh , 1 , 6 Fumiko Ozawa , 1 Yasuhiko Ohta , 3 Kensaku Mizuno , 4 and Kaoru Inokuchi 1 , 5 , * 1 Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life Sciences ( MITILS ) head , the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) , and the spine Machida , Tokyo 194 - 8511 apparatus ( Capani et al . , 2001 ) . It appears that the cy - Japan toskeleton formed by the F - actin in the dendritic spine 2 Division of Cerebral Structure ismore dynamicthanwas previouslythought . Forexam - National Institute for Physiological Sciences ple , the dendritic spines of cultured hippocampal neu - Okazaki 444 - 8585 rons exhibit a rapid actin - based motility that is regulated Japan by glutamate receptor activation ( Fischer et al . , 1998 , 3 Laboratory of Animal Science 2000 ) . The ability of the dendritic spine to swiftly alter Tottori University its actin cytoskeleton is also shown by the remarkable Tottori 680 - 8553 fact that over 80 % of the spine actin is in a dynamic Japan state with a turnover time of less than a minute ( Star et 4 Department of Biomolecular Sciences al . , 2002 ) . That the F - actin in the dendritic spine contrib - Graduate School of Life Sciences utes to synaptic plasticity is suggested by studies show - Tohoku University ing that actin assembly plays an essential role in the Sendai 980 - 8578 molecular process underlying hippocampal long - term Japan potentiation ( LTP ) , a typical form of synaptic plasticity . 5 Graduate School of Environment and Information In these studies , actin assembly was pharmacologically Sciences inhibited and it was found that this either decreases the Yokohama National University LTP magnitude or impairs early LTP maintenance in Yokohama 240 - 8501 hippocampal slice preparations ( Kim and Lisman , 1999 ; Japan Krucker et al . , 2000 ) . How the cytoskeletal actin in the dendritic spine could contribute to synaptic plasticity is unclear , but there are Summary several possibilities . First , it probably plays a central roleinthemorphologicalchangesofthespinethatoccur The dendritic spine is an important site of neuronal in response to a variety of neural activity including the plasticity and contains extremely high levels of cyto - electrical stimuli that evoke LTP ( Colicos et al . , 2001 ; skeletal actin . However , the dynamics of the actin cy - Engert and Bonhoeffer , 1999 ; Geinisman et al . , 1996 ; toskeleton during synaptic plasticity and its in vivo Maletic - Savatic et al . , 1999 ; Toni et al . , 1999 ; Trachten - functionremainunclear . Here weused aninvivodentate berg et al . , 2002 ; Wu et al . , 2001 ) . These morphological gyrus LTP model to show that LTP induction is associ - changes , which may reflect the formation of new syn - ated with actin cytoskeletal reorganization character - apses , include the protrusion of new dendritic filopodia ized by a long - lasting increase in F - actin content within and spine outgrowth . They are input specific and corre - dendritic spines . This increase in F - actin content is late with the induction of LTP . These changes in spine dependent on NMDA receptor activation and involves morphology are mainly mediated by the actin cytoskele - the inactivation of actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin . ton ( Colicos et al . , 2001 ) . Another way the actin cytoskel - Inhibition of actin polymerization with latrunculin A eton could contribute to synaptic plasticity is by mediat - impaired late phase of LTP without affecting the initial ing the exocytosis and endocytosis of AMPA - type amplitudeandearlymaintenanceofLTP . Theseobserva - glutamate receptors ( AMPARs ) at postsynaptic sites . tions suggest that mechanisms regulating the spine ac - These events are important in the maintenance of early tin cytoskeleton contribute to the persistence of LTP . LTP ( E - LTP ) ( Carroll et al . , 2001 ; Malinow et al . , 2000 ; Sheng et al . , 2001 ) , and endocytotic and exocytotic pro - Introduction cesses depend in general on the actin cytoskeleton ( Cremona and De Camilli , 2001 ; Qualmann et al . , 2000 ; Synaptic plasticity , a long - lasting change in synaptic Schafer , 2002 ) . The actin filament could also serve as a efficacy in response to neural activity , is thought to be path for local protein trafficking within the dendritic involved in a wide variety of brain functions including spine ( Kaech et al . , 2001 ; Langford and Molyneaux , learning andmemory . Itappears thatthe dendriticspine , 1998 ) . Finally , as F - actin acts as an anchor for postsyn - a specialized structure in the mature brain on which the aptic macromolecular complexes , a change in the actin majority of excitatory glutamatergic synapses is formed , cytoskeleton would probably alter the functional state is a critical site for synaptic plasticity ( Halpain , 2000 ; of postsynaptic proteins , which in turn could affect syn - Matus , 2000 ; van Rossum and Hanisch , 1999 ) . A pro - aptic efficacy ( Allison et al . , 1998 ; Halpain , 2000 ; Lisman andZhabotinsky , 2001 ; vanRossumandHanisch , 1999 ) . Hippocampal LTP consists of at least two distinct * Correspondence : kaoru @ libra . ls . m - kagaku . co . jp 6 These authors contributed equally to this work . phases , namely , an early LTP ( E - LTP ) phase that is inde - Neuron448 pendent of macromolecule synthesis , and a late LTP ( L - LTP ) phase that is dependent on protein synthesis ( Bailey et al . , 1996 ) . E - LTP lasts 2 – 3 hr in hippocampal slice preparations and several hours in intact animals , while L - LTP persists for several hours in slices and days or even weeks in unanesthetized animals ( Abraham et al . , 1993 ; Freyetal . , 1993 , 1996 ; Krugetal . , 1984 ; Matsuo et al . , 2000 ; Nguyen et al . , 1994 ; Nguyen and Kandel , 1996 ) . A number of genes that are upregulated following L - LTP induction have been identified ( Matsuo et al . , 2000 ; Nedivi et al . , 1993 ; Qian et al . , 1993 ; Yamagata et al . , 1993 ) . Interestingly , they include the genes encoding the actin - associated proteins synaptopodin and Arc ( Link et al . , 1995 ; Lyford et al . , 1995 ; Yamazaki et al . , 2001 ) . This suggests that the spine actin cytoskeleton is not only involved in the rapid and reversible motility that occurs within seconds or minutes , but it may also be involved in morphological changes that occur slowly and are sustained over hours and days to maintain the L - LTP . In this paper we induced LTP in the dentate gyrus of living animals and examined the effect of this on the actincytoskeletoninthespine . WeobservedthatF - actin content of spines was increased and found that this is mediatedinpartbytheinactivationofactindepolymeriz - ing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin , and inhibition of actin polymer - ization by latrunculin A treatment blocked the late phase pathway . Right : schematic illustration of a single granule cell in the upper blade of the dentate gyrus and the incoming presynaptic fibers MPP ( red ) and LPP ( green ) originating from the medial and lateral entorhinal cortex , respectively . This figure is superimposed onto a microscopic image stained with H33258 to show the nuclear distribution of individual cells . The broken line indicates the hippo - campal fissure . Abbreviations : DG , dentate gyrus ; RE , recording electrode ; OML , outermolecularlayer ; MML , middlemolecularlayer ; IML , inner molecular layer ; and GCL , granule cell layer . ( B ) DurationofMPP - LTP . Populationspike ( PS ) amplitudewasmoni - tored at the times indicated after the delivery of HFS . The potentia - tion of PS amplitudes persisted for at least 1 week when a strong HFS [ HFS ( 2400 ) , HFS ( 500 ) , or HFS ( 300 ) ] was delivered . When a weak HFS [ HFS ( 90 ) ] was delivered , the potentiation of PS ampli - tudes persisted for 1 day but decayed to basal level within 1 week . Typical fEPSP traces evoked before ( left ) and 45 min after ( right ) HFS ( 2400 ) of the MPP or LPP are also shown ( top panel ) . ( C – F ) The HFS indicated was delivered to the MPP ( D and E ) or LPP ( F ) fiberstoelicitLTPattheMMLorOMLsynapses , respectively . The brain was dissected 45 min after beginning the HFS and subjected to phalloidin - TRITC staining . Left : CCD images showing phalloidin reactivity ( F - actin ) in the LTP side ( D – F ) and control ( contralateral ) side ( C ) of the hippocampus are shown . Arrowheads indicate areas thathaveanincreasedphalloidinreactivity . Thebarin ( F ) represents 500 (cid:1) m . Right : magnified images showing phalloidin reactivity 45 min after beginning the HFS . Bar in ( F ) represents 100 (cid:1) m . ( G ) The fluorescent intensity of phalloidin - TRITC was quantified acrossthemolecularandgranulecelllayers . Aschematicillustration of an area of fluorometric measurement ( white rectangle ) and a reference area ( upper small square ) whose mean fluorescent inten - sity was used for normalization are shown in ( C ) ( right ) . The brain wasdissected45minafterbeginningtheHFSindicated . Thefluores - cence intensity of the phalloidin - TRITC signal ( 0 – 256 grading ) at each pixel was divided by the averaged fluorescence intensity in the reference area and expressed as a normalized fluorescence unit . Data ( mean (cid:2) SEM ) fromtheLTPandthecontrol ( contralateral ) Figure 1 . LTP Is Accompanied by an Increase in Histochemical Re - sides of the dentate gyrus are shown in red or black , respectively . activity to F - Actin in an Input - Specific Manner * , p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , compared with control side , t test . n , number of animals ( A ) Left : anatomical organization of the entorhinal - dentate gyrus used for quantification . Spine Actin Reorganization and LTP Maintenance 449 of LTP . These results indicate the crucial role that activ - persistence and increases in phalloidin reactivity . Con - sequently , HFSs of ( 300 ) or higher will be used inter - ity - dependent regulation of spine actin dynamics plays in synaptic plasticity . changeably as strong HFSs in the following experi - ments . Wenextmeasuredthelevelsofthesolublemonomeric Results actin ( G - actin ) and the insoluble filamentous polymer - ized actin ( F - actin ) in the MML following the induction F - Actin Content in Synaptic Layers Undergoes of L - LTP via the MPP ( Figure 2 ) . MMLs were collected by a Net Increase after LTP Induction means of the Laser Capture Microdissection technique To study actin cytoskeletal changes during neural activ - ( Simone et al . , 2000 ) from dehydrated frozen sections ity - dependent synaptic plasticity , we examined LTP in of the brain dissected 3 hr after beginning HFS ( 2400 ) the dentate gyrus of freely moving unanesthetized rats . of the MPP ( Figure 2A ) . The MML tissues were fraction - In the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus , each granule ated by a buffer containing 1 % Triton X - 100 , and the cell receives two distinct inputs from the entorhinal cor - soluble and insoluble materials were subjected to quan - tex known as the medial and lateral perforant pathways titative Western blot analysis ( Figure 2B ) . The total actin ( MPP and LPP , respectively ) ( Figure 1A ; Hjorth , 1972 ; levels ( G - actin (cid:4) F - actin ) of the MMLs from the control Hjorth and Jeune , 1972 ; McNaughton , 1980 ; McNaugh - and LTP sides did not differ significantly ( Figure 2C , ton and Barnes , 1977 ; Steward , 1976 ) . MPP fibers origi - number of animals tested (cid:5) 3 ) . However , in the LTP side , nate from the medial entorhinal area and terminate in the ratio ( R ) of F - actin ( insoluble ) to G - actin ( soluble ) was the middle one - third of the molecular layer ( MML ) of the higher compared to that of the control side ( Figure 2C , hippocampus while the LPP fibers originate from the R LTP / R control (cid:5) 1 . 31 (cid:2) 0 . 14 ) . Thus , theincreaseinphalloidin lateral entorhinal area and terminate in the outer one - reactivity in the MML observed after LTP induction in - third of the molecular layer ( OML ) . As noted previously deed reflects an increase in the F - actin content in the by McNaughton ( McNaughton and Barnes , 1977 ) and synaptic layer . confirmed by our own recordings ( Figure 1B , top panel ) , electrical stimulation of these fibers produces a charac - teristic waveform of evoked field excitatory postsynap - Induction of L - LTP Increases F - Actin Levels in Dendritic Spines tic potential ( fEPSP ) superimposed by a population spike . The fEPSP traces obtained by stimulating the Dendritic spines are extremely enriched in actin mole - cules ( Capani et al . , 2001 ; Fifkova , 1985 ; Matus et al . , MPP fibers show shorter latent periods prior to the peak andshorterhalf - widthscomparedwiththetracesfollow - 1982 ) . Confirming this is that laser confocal microscopy on control MML and inner molecular layer ( IML ) stained ingLPPstimulation . Furthermore , high - frequencystimu - lation ( HFS ) of the MPP and the LPP fibers specifically with phalloidin revealed multiple punctate signals that indicates the F - actin in the spine ( Figure 3A , left ) . When results in LTP at the MML ( Figure 1B , bottom panel ) and OML ( not shown ) synapses , respectively ( also see the MPP received HFS ( 2400 ) , the intensity of the punc - tate signals in the MML were elevated without changing McNaughton and Barnes , 1977 ) . We used this model of LTP in unanesthetized animals throughout this work in the IML , which suggests that the F - actin in the den - dritic spine increases after LTP induction ( Figure 3A , except when we examined the effect of drug infusion on LTP persistence , which required the use of urethane - right ) . To investigate this phenomenon further , we examined anesthetized animals ( Figures 5 , 6D , and 6E ) . We found that when a strong HFS [ HFS ( 2400 ) , HFS MMLs by electron microscopy using a recently described high - resolution photoconversion method ( Capani et al . , ( 500 ) , or HFS ( 300 ) ; numbers in parenthesis indicate the total number of stimulation pulses , see Experimental 2001 ) to visualize the precise distribution of F - actin . Phalloidin conjugated to the fluorophore eosin was used Procedures for details ] was delivered to MPP fibers , L - LTP was elicited in MML synapses that lasted more to label F - actin . The oxygen radicals released by eosin excitation oxidize diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride than a week ( Figure 1B ) , which confirms previous obser - vations ( Abrahamet al . , 1993 ; Matsuoet al . , 2000 ) . Histo - ( DAB ) , which then becomes electron - dense when it is treated withosmium . Figure3B showsexamples ofelec - chemical examination of the dentate gyrus of these rats revealed that the MML had marked increase in reactivity tron micrographs taken of the MML 45 min after HFS ( 2400 ) hadbegun . Thelargeandmorphologicallydiverse tophalloidin , aspecificprobeforF - actin [ Figures1C – 1E , 45 min after the beginning of HFS ; see also Figure 7A for dendritic spines ( arrows ) showed intense phalloidin re - activity throughout their spine cytoplasm and PSD , HFS ( 300 ) ] . In addition , the quantification of the average fluorescence intensities of the molecular and granule whereas the small and morphologically simple spines ( arrowheads ) showed intense phalloidin reactivity mainly cell layers in the upper blade of the phalloidin - stained dentate gyrus revealed that the phalloidin reactivity of at PSD . These observations confirm those of Capani et al . ( 2001 ) . Electron micrographs of MML of the LTP side the MML had increased significantly ( Figure 1G ) . Simi - larly , HFS ( 2400 ) of the LPP fiber , which elicits L - LTP in without photoconversion show weaker electron density in the PSD ( Figure 3B , bottom ) , indicating that the dark the OML synapses ( data not shown ) , significantly en - hanced phalloidin reactivity in the OML ( Figures 1F and PSD staining after photoconversion is indeed due to the presence of actin in the PSD . 1G , 45 min after beginning HFS ) . These results clearly demonstrate that only the synaptic layers that had un - We counted the MML synapses with intensely phalloi - din - reactive spines . We defined intensely phalloidin - dergone LTPshowed an increase inphalloidin reactivity . The three strong HFSs of MPP fibers [ HFS ( 2400 ) , HFS reactive spines as those whose phalloidin staining throughout their spine cytoplasm is stronger than in the ( 500 ) , and HFS ( 300 ) ] induced equivalent degree of LTP Neuron450 Figure 2 . LTP Is Accompanied by a Net Enhancement of F - Actin Content in the Molecular Layer ( A ) Brain was dissected 3 hr after HFS ( 2400 ) of the MPP fibers . MML was collected from the hippocampal section ( 30 (cid:1) m thickness ) with the Laser Capture Microdissection System LM2000 . After the laser treatment , the section was stained with phalloidin - TRITC . The area corresponding to the MML ( black zone ) is indicated by white arrowheads . The yellow arrows show the GCL ( dark zone ) . ( B ) MML tissues from hippocampal sections dissected 3 hr after HFS ( 2400 ) of the MPP fibers were collected and fractionated . The total ( T ) , soluble ( S ) , and insoluble ( I ) materials were then separated by SDS - PAGE and silver - stained ( top panel ) or Western blotted with an anti - actin antibody ( bottom panel ) . Silver - staining image demonstrates that all the proteins were prepared without any degradation . Arrowheads indicate a signal of actin molecule . ( C ) The immunopositive signals on the Western blot were quantified by LAS - 1000 . T LTP , total actin in the LTP side ; T control , total actin in the control side ; R LTP and R control , ratio of insoluble actin to soluble actin in the LTP and control sides , respectively . corresponding presynaptic terminal , and weakly phal - al . , 1987 ) . The prolonged maintenance of dentate gyrus loidin - reactive spines as those having equal or less LTP requires de novo protein synthesis that takes place staining in the spine cytoplasm than in the presynaptic around the time of HFS delivery ( Abraham et al . , 1993 ) . terminal . Intensely phalloidin - reactive spines occurred Wephalloidin - stainedbrainslicesfromratsinjectedwith significantly more frequently in the LTP side ( 64 . 3 % (cid:2) MK801 , an NMDA receptor antagonist , that were then 0 . 9 % ) than in the control side ( 31 . 5 % (cid:2) 7 . 9 % ; * p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , given HFS ( 500 ) and dissected 20 min later . We found Welch t test , number of slices (cid:5) 3 ; synapse numbers that the HFS - induced increase in phalloidin reactivity examined , 975 for LTP side and 1199 for control side ) was completelyblocked by the MK801treatment ( Figure ( Figure 3C ) . However , the actual synaptic density in the 4A ) . In contrast , preadministration of cycloheximide , an MMLs of the control and LTP sides did not differ signifi - inhibitor of protein synthesis , did not alter the increase cantly ( control versus LTP , 6 . 8 (cid:2) 0 . 63 versus 5 . 8 (cid:2) 0 . 74 in phalloidin reactivity induced by HFS ( 500 ) ( Figure 4A ) . synapses / 10 (cid:1) m 2 ) ( Figure 3D ) . We further determined Thus , the enhancement of F - actin content in the den - the length of the synaptic apposition in a total of 401 dritic spine depends on NMDA receptor signaling , not and 370 synapses in the MMLs of the control and LTP on de novo protein synthesis . sides , respectively ( Figure 3E ) . In the control side , the synaptic appositions of intensely phalloidin - reactive The Increase in F - Actin Persists for Five Weeks spines were markedly longer than that of the weakly and Correlates with LTP Persistence phalloidin - reactive spines ( weak versus intense , 170 (cid:2) When the phalloidin reactivity of the brain was examined 3 . 6 versus 347 (cid:2) 12 . 6 nm , p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , Welch t test ) . Essen - 20 min , 24 hr , 1 week , and 5 weeks after HFS ( 500 ) of tially the same result was obtained with the LTP side the MPP fibers , it was found that the elevated phalloidin ( weak versus intense , 184 (cid:2) 8 . 2 versus 370 (cid:2) 9 . 5 nm , reactivity in the MML was sustained at high levels for p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , Welch t test ) , except that there were signifi - 1 week ( Figure 4B ) . Elevated reactivity was also still cantly more synapses with an intensely phalloidin - reac - observed at 5 weeks , although to a lesser extent . In tive spine and a long synaptic apposition than in the contrast , although weak HFS ( 90 ) of MPP fibers also control side , with complementary decrease in synapses increased F - actin content in the MML at 45 min , the with a small and weakly phalloidin - reactive spine ( Figure increase did not persist at 1 week ( Figure 4C ) . This pat - 3E ) . Thus , 45 min after beginning HFS of MPP fibers , tern correlates with the persistence of LTP , as LTP elic - pre - existingspinesshowenhancedactinpolymerization ited by strong HFS ( 500 ) persists for 1 week , while LTP or suppressed depolymerization but there is no increase caused by weak HFS ( 90 ) has returned to basal levels in synapse numbers . It remains to be determined at 1 week ( Figure 1B ) . Thus , LTP persistence correlates whether the synapse numbers increase at later time with the duration that spine F - actin content is elevated . points . Disruption of Actin Reorganization Impairs The Increase in F - Actin Is Dependent on NMDA the Late Phase of LTP Receptor Activation but not on De Novo To further investigate the role spine actin dynamics play Protein Synthesis in LTP , we examined whether actin dynamics inhibitors The induction of dentate gyrus LTP depends on NMDA receptor activation that occurs upon HFS ( Errington et ( ADIs ) can modulate dentate gyrus LTP . To do this , we Spine Actin Reorganization and LTP Maintenance 451 used urethane - anesthetized rats implanted with a re - cording electrode ( stainless steel pipe electrode ) linked to a syringe that can deliver various pharmacological agents to the dentate gyrus ( see Experimental Proce - dures for details ) . We tested ADIs , a protein synthesis inhibitor , or vehicle alone ( Figure 5 ) . When we tested latrunculin A ( 50 (cid:1) M ) , which sequesters G - actin and consequently causes F - actin depolymerization ( Spector et al . , 1989 ) , or the protein synthesis inhibitor cyclohexi - mide ( 10 mg / ml ) on unstimulated rats , the basal synaptic transmission over 12 hr did not vary compared to the case when the vehicle was applied ( Figure 5A ) . With regards to LTP elicited by HFS ( 2000 ) , when the recording electrode delivered cycloheximide , the LTP decayed to basal levels within 8 hr ( Figure 5B , 103 . 6 % (cid:2) 5 . 13 % at 8 hr ) , indicating that E - LTP , which does not require de novo protein synthesis , decays within 8 hr in this LTP model . Importantly , latrunculin A blocked the development of late - phase LTP , as the LTP induced by HFS ( 2000 ) delivered 1 hr after administering the latrun - culinAdecayed8hrlater to98 . 9 % (cid:2) 5 . 69 % ofthefEPSP slope obtained in the 60 min preceding HFS ( Figure 5B ) . However , latrunculin A did notaffect the initial amplitude and early maintenance of LTP , as at 30 – 50 min the LTP was 123 % (cid:2) 4 . 7 % of the fEPSP slope obtained in the 60 min preceding HFS . The difference in the HFS ( 2000 ) - evoked responseby thecontrol andlatrunculin Agroups became statistically significant at 8 hr ( p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ) , and the decay of the LTP in the presence of latrunculin A resembled that of cycloheximide - treated LTP . To exclude the possibility that latrunculin A does not affect LTP induction because it is inefficiently infused into the neurons at the time of HFS , the tube delivering latrunculin A was cut to promote drug infusion into the dentate gyrus and HFS was delivered 4 or 7 . 5 hr later ( rather than 1 hr later ) ( Figure 5C ) . At both of these time points , the LTP amplitudes of the control and latrunculin A groups in the previous experiment differed . Infusion of latrunculin A even 7 . 5 hr prior to HFS had no effect on the initial LTP amplitude ( control , 112 . 7 % (cid:2) 2 . 36 % ; latrunculin A , 113 . 3 % (cid:2) 3 . 07 % , p (cid:5) 0 . 88 , Student’s t test ) . Thus , the inhibition of actin assembly inhibits L - LTP without affecting E - LTP . These observations strongly suggest that a net increase in F - actin in the Figure 3 . HFS of MPP Induces a Net Increase in the F - actin of the Dendritic Spines in the MML dendritic spine is important in the late phase of dentate ( A ) Confocal images of the phalloidin reactivity of the border be - gyrus LTP . tween MML and IML . Left : unstimulated side . Right : MML / IML bor - Another ADI , cytochalasin B , which caps the barbed der dissected 45 min after beginning HFS ( 2400 ) of the MPP . The end of F - actin and decreases F - actin levels ( Cooper , punctate signals may indicate the F - actin in the dendritic spines . 1987 ) , did not significantly impair either the early or late The bar represents 5 (cid:1) m . phase of LTP at a dose of 50 (cid:1) M ( Figure 5D ) . Cytocha - ( B ) Typical electronmicrographs showingphalloidin reactivityof the lasin B at a higher dose ( 250 (cid:1) M ) partially impaired the MML . TheMPPwasgivenHFS ( 2400 ) toelicitLTPinMMLsynapses , and 45 min after beginning HFS brain was subjected to electron microscopic analysis . Phalloidin reactivity was visualized by the photoconversion method . Top panels : electron micrographs were taken from areas that had been exposed to light ( 515 nm ) from a given HFS ( 2400 ) were counted . A total of 1199 and 975 synapses mercury lamp . Note the intense signal throughout the spine cyto - in the MMLs of the control and LTP sides , respectively , were exam - plasm in the large and morphologically diverse spines ( arrows ) . The ined . * , p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , Welch t test , number of slices (cid:5) 3 . arrowheads indicate the small and morphologically simple spines . ( D ) The synaptic density in the MML of the LTP side [ 45 min after Thelengthofpre - andpostsynapticapposition , whichissandwiched the beginning of HFS ( 2400 ) ] did not differ significantly from that of bysmallbars , wasmeasuredtoevaluatemorphologicalcharacteris - the control side . The number of synapses examined was same as tics of each spine . Bottom panels : electron micrographs taken from in ( C ) . MML areas outside of the light - exposed area ( without photoconver - ( E ) Histograms showing the distribution of the length of synaptic sion ) . The scale bar represents 500 nm . PC , photoconversion . apposition in the MML of the control and LTP [ 45 min after the ( C ) The synapses with intensely phalloidin - reactive spine in three beginning of HFS ( 2400 ) ] sides . PR , phalloidin reactivity . Numbers sections ( 100 (cid:1) m apart ) of the MML 45 min after the MPP had been in parentheses indicate number of synapses examined . Neuron452 Figure 4 . Effect of Pharmacological Agents on Actin Polymerization and Duration of Actin Polymerization Phalloidin reactivity was quantified as in Figure 1G . LTP , ipsilateral LTP side ; control , contralateral side . * , p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , compared with control side , t test . n , number of animals used for quantification . ( A ) Phalloidin reactivity of brain slices of rats intraperitoneally injected with MK801 , an NMDA receptor inhibitor ( 2 mg / kg body weight ) , or cycloheximide , aproteinsynthesisinhibitor ( 50mg / kgbodyweight ) , givenHFS ( 500 ) 45minlateranddissectedafter20min . CHX , cycloheximide . ( B ) Time - dependent changes in the phalloidin reactivity of the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus after HFS ( 500 ) ( 20 min , 24 hr , 1 week , and 5 weeks ) . Scale bar equals 100 (cid:1) m . ( C ) F - actin levels in the MML following weak HFS ( 90 ) . late phase of LTP , although statistically not significant . actin filament turnover that is thought to lead to growth cone collapse ( Aizawa et al . , 2001 ) . This may be attributed to the fact that the F - actin within the dendritic spines of cultured hippocampal neurons The F - actin depolymerizing activity of ADF / cofilin is negatively regulated by phosphorylation at a single site is more resistant to the action of cytochalasin than to latrunculin A ( Allison et al . , 1998 ) . ( Ser - 3 ) ( Agnew et al . , 1995 ; Moriyama et al . , 1996 ) , and excessive actin polymerization is observed in mamma - lian and fly cells with highly phosphorylated ADF / cofilin Importance of Actin - Depolymerizing Factor ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Niwa et al . , 2002 ; Toshima et al . , ( ADF ) / Cofilin in L - LTP 2001 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . We therefore asked whether The turnover of actin filaments can be regulated by a the level of ADF / cofilin phosphorylation in the dentate number of actin binding proteins , including the ADF / gyrus changes after L - LTP is induced ( Figure 6 ) . Be - cofilin family of proteins . These molecules have F - actin cause anti - phospho ( Ser - 3 ) - ADF / cofilin antibody used severing and F - actin depolymerizing activities and con - in this study was not suitable for immunohistochemistry , sequently stimulate actin filament turnover ( for reviews , we carried out immunoblot to examine the change in see Carlier andPantaloni , 1997 ; Chen etal . , 2000 ; Panta - the phosphorylation level . MMLs with and without HFS loni et al . , 2001 ) . There is ample evidence that ADF / ( 500 ) were collected using the Laser Microdissection cofilin plays a pivotal role in regulating actin dynamics System LMD ( Figure 6A ) and subjected to quantitative in the nervous system , as it is highly expressed in the Western blot analysis with anti - phospho ( Ser - 3 ) - ADF / nervous system ( Bamburg and Bray , 1987 ) and its activ - cofilin antibody . This revealed that HFS ( 500 ) of the MPP ity regulates process extinction and neurite outgrowth fibers significantly increased the phosphorylation of in cortical neurons ( Meberg and Bamburg , 2000 ) . Fur - thermore , its phosphorylation is believed to regulate the Ser - 3 of ADF / cofilin ( Figures 6B and 6C ) . This increase Spine Actin Reorganization and LTP Maintenance 453 Figure 5 . Inhibition of Actin Reorganization Specifically Blocks the Late Phase of LTP All the LTP experiments in this figure were performed with urethane - anesthetized rats . ( A ) EffectoflatrunculinA ( 50 (cid:1) M , closedcircle ) , cycloheximide ( 10 mg / ml , closed square ) , and vehicle ( saline containing 0 . 1 % DMSO , open circle ) on basal synaptic transmission . The polyethylene tube delivering the drug was cut at time (cid:6) 0 . 5 hr to promote infusion of the solution into the tissue . The average of the fEPSP slope during the 60 min prior to time 0 served as the baseline ( 100 % ) . ( B ) Effect of latrunculin A ( 50 (cid:1) M , closed cir - cle ) and cycloheximide ( 10 mg / ml , closed square ) on LTP persistence . HFS ( 2000 ) was delivered at time 0 . The polyethylene tube was cut 1 hr before HFS ( 2000 ) . A faster LTP decay was observed both in the latrunculin A group [ versus DMSO group , F ( 1 , 14 ) (cid:5) 5 . 124 , p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ] andthe cycloheximidegroup [ versus DMSO group , F ( 1 , 14 ) (cid:5) 6 . 009 , p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ] . An asterisk indicates a statistically sig - nificant difference between the DMSO and cycloheximide groups , while a dagger indicates a statistically significant difference between the DMSO and latrunculin A groups . ( C ) Latrunculin A specifically inhibits the late phase of LTP without affecting LTP induction . HFS ( 2000 ) was delivered 1 , 4 , or 7 . 5 hr after cutting the tube delivering latrunculin A . The relative change in the fEPSP slope 30 min after the HFS delivery is shown . ( D ) Effect of cytochalasin B on LTP persistence . HFS ( 2000 ) was delivered 1 hr after cutting the tube delivering cytochalasin B . Cytochalasin B had no significant effect on LTP ( saline versus Cyto . B 50 , p (cid:7) 0 . 05 ; saline versus Cyto . B 250 , p (cid:7) 0 . 05 , Student’s t test ) . Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of animals used . Abbreviations : Lat . A , latrunculin A ; CHX , cycloheximide ; Cyto . B , cytochalasin B ; nd , not determined . was observed at 30 min and persisted for at least 5 hr . a higher concentration of the S3 - 11R peptide ( 300 ng / (cid:1) l ) , the LTP decayed even more rapidly compared to This strongly suggests that the net increase in F - actin levels during L - LTP is caused and maintained , at least the control animals without affecting the initial LTP am - plitude ( Figure 6E , right ) . in part , by a decrease in the actin - depolymerizing activ - ity of ADF / cofilin . If the net enhancement of F - actin content in the den - Immunoreactivities to Actin - Associated Proteins Increase in the MML after LTP Induction dritic spine during L - LTP is mediated by a downregula - tion of the ADF / cofilin activity , then we can expect that That LTP induction causes anet enhancement of F - actin content in the dendritic spine suggests that LTP induc - inhibiting ADF / cofilin phosphorylation would affect L - LTP . To assess this , we synthesized a hybrid peptide tion is accompanied by a change in the molecular com - positionofthedendriticspine . Wetestedthisbyexamin - comprised of a unique sequence consisting of the phos - phorylation site of ADF / cofilin ( S3 - peptide ) that would ing the MML after HFS ( 300 ) for immunoreactivities against drebrin and synaptopodin , two actin - associated act as a competitive inhibitor for ADF / cofilin phosphory - lation ( Aizawa et al . , 2001 ) , and a stretch of arginines proteins known to localize in the dendritic spine ( Figure 7 ) . While both proteins were equally distributed through - ( 11R ) that would ensure the efficient delivery of the pep - tide into the hippocampal neurons ( Matsushita et al . , out the molecular layer of the control dentate gyrus , 45 min after delivering HFS ( 300 ) to the MMP , an intense 2001 ) . A control peptide was also synthesized that has the reverse sequence of the S3 - peptide followed by immunoreactivity that localized specifically to the MML was observed ( Figure 7A ) . This staining pattern is almost 11R . These synthetic peptides were indeed efficiently incorporated into the granule cells of the dentate gyrus identical to that of phalloidin and persisted partially for 3 weeks ( Figure 7B , n (cid:5) 5 ) . Thus , the actin - based molec - when delivered through the recording electrode ( Figure 6D ) . In the urethane - anesthetized rats , strong HFS ular composition of the activated dendritic spines alters after LTP is induced . This change may cause a dynamic ( 2000 ) in the presence of the control peptide ( Rev - 11R ) elicited L - LTP in the dentate gyrus that lasted at least rearrangement of functional synaptic proteins such as receptors and signaling molecules and could further 12 hr ( Figure 6E ) . Control peptides ( 150 ng / (cid:1) l and 300 ng / (cid:1) l ) had no significant effect on LTP ( saline versus trigger a morphological change in the dendritic spine , which are two events that appear to be important for Rev - 11R , p (cid:7) 0 . 05 ) . In contrast , while injection of the inhibiting peptide S3 - 11R ( 150 ng / (cid:1) l ) had no effect on the maintenance of L - LTP . In contrast to the actin - associated proteins , the LTP the induction and early maintenance of dentate gyrus LTP , it partially affected the late phase of LTP ( Figure and control hippocampal sections do not appear to differ in their immunoreactivities against microtubule - associ - 6E , left , S3 - 11R ) . That is , the LTP amplitude observed in the inhibiting peptide group was similar to that of the ated protein - 2 ( MAP - 2 ) and neuron - specific (cid:8) - tubulin ( iso - type 6 ) ( Figure 7A , at 45 min ) . Both MAP - 2 and (cid:8) - tubulin , control peptide group until 6 hr after HFS ( 2000 ) , at which point it steadily declined to reach a plateau of which are important in neuronal functions , are compo - nents of the tubulin cytoskeleton . Taken together , these about 105 % of the baseline . In the animals infused with Neuron454 Discussion Spine Actin Reorganization Is Critical for the Maintenance of LTP In this study , we found that dentate gyrus LTP induction is associated with actin cytoskeletal reorganization characterized by a net increase in F - actin content in the dendritic spines . The increase is rapid , being observed asearlyas20minafterstimulation , andisthensustained for at least 5 weeks . Since the synapse number has not changed 45 min after the L - LTP induction , the HFS - dependent increase in phalloidin reactivity observed at 45 min must reflect an increase in the amounts of F - actin in each spine . Intensely phalloidin - reactive spines have longer synaptic appositions than weakly phalloidin - reactive spines in both LTP and control sides . Further - more , the ratio of intensely phalloidin - reactive spines versus weakly phalloidin - reactive spines is higher in the LTP side than in the control side . These observations suggest that a spine actin reorganization triggered by HFS results in morphological changes of the spine shape . This is consistent with a previous observation that HFS enlarges the PSD area of polyribosome - con - taining spines in the hippocampal CA1 region ( Ostroff et al . , 2002 ) . Whether the increased phalloidin reactivity observed at later time points , for example at 24 hr , is due to the formation of new spines still has to be investi - gated . When actin polymerization is inhibited by latrunculin A treatment , the initial amplitude and the early mainte - nance of LTP are not affected but the late phase of LTP is completely inhibited , indicating that the late phase is Figure 6 . Involvement of ADF / Cofilin in Hippocampal LTP dependent on the restructuring of the actin cytoskele - ( A ) Representative images of the phalloidin staining of hippocampal ton . The abundance of F - actin in the dendritic spines sections obtained after collecting the MML tissues using the Laser may , therefore , be a structural indicator for the ability of Microdissection System ( LMD ) . Arrows indicate theareas collected . the synapses to maintain a change in synaptic efficacy . Left , control side ; right , LTP side . ( B ) ADF / cofilinandphospho - ADF / cofilin ( p - cofilin ) antibodystaining Supporting this is that in contrast to latrunculin A , cyto - in Western blots of MML from frozen sections of brains that had chalasin B did not significantly affect the late phase of been removed 30 min or 5 hr after HFS ( 500 ) . Two representative LTP . Cytochalasin effectively disrupts the F - actin within examples for each time point are shown . C , control side ; L , LTP the soma and the dendritic shaft but not the F - actin side . within the spine ( Allison et al . , 1998 ) . Importantly , we ( C ) Quantification of immunoblots were carried out for signal inten - found a strong correlation between LTP persistence and sitytoyieldthephosphorylationindexofADF / cofilin . Thephosphor - the duration of F - actin augmentation . This may indicate ylation index ( PI ) was calculated as follows : PI (cid:5) ( pAC LTP / AC LTP ) / ( pAC control / AC control ) , where pAC and AC are signal intensities of phos - that the increase of F - actin content in the pre - existing pho - ADF / cofilin and ADF / cofilin , respectively . Data from the 30 min spines and the subsequent enlargement of spine mor - ( n (cid:5) 4 ) and 45 min ( n (cid:5) 4 ) brains were combined . * , p (cid:3) 0 . 01 ; one phology are critical for the late phase of LTP . Alterna - sample ttest against hypotheticalmean (cid:5) 1 . 0 . n , numberof animals tively , at later time points , such as at 24 hr , formation tested . of new spines ( Trachtenberg et al . , 2002 ) occurs and ( D ) FITC - labeledS3 - 11Rpeptide ( left ) orFITC - labeledRev - 11Rpep - this contributes to the enhancement of phalloidin reac - tide ( right ) was injected into the dentate gyrus of urethane - anesthe - tivity as well as the late maintenance of LTP . tizedratthroughtherecordingelectrode , andahippocampalsection was made 4 hr later to visualize the FITC fluorescence in the GCL . That latrunculin A and the protein synthesis inhibitor Position of the electrode is just left outside of each picture . GCL , cycloheximide both have equivalent effects in that they granule cell layer ; IML , inner molecular layer . Scale bar equals block the late phase of LTP , yet the accumulation of 100 (cid:1) m . F - actin is not dependent on protein synthesis , suggests ( E ) Effect of S3 - 11R and Rev - 11R peptide on dentate gyrus LTP that the actin cytoskeleton is important for the function - of urethane - anesthetized rats . HFS ( 2000 ) was delivered 1 hr after ing of newly synthesized proteins that are necessary for cuttingthetubetoadministerthepeptides . Numbersinparentheses indicate the number of animals used . the late phase of LTP . Experiments with hippocampal Note that the LTP experiments in ( A ) – ( C ) were carried out with un - CA1 slices have shown that the application of ADIs in - anesthetizedrats , while theLTPin ( E ) was performedwithurethane - hibit the pre - and postsynaptic functions needed for anesthetized rats . glutamatergic transmission and plasticity . These effects are dependent on the ADI drug concentration , as the observations suggest that LTP induction is specifically postsynaptic function is more sensitive to ADIs ( Kim accompanied by a change in the actin cytoskeleton and and Lisman , 1999 ; Krucker et al . , 2000 ) . Consistent with our observations , a low dose of ADIs specifically inhibits its associated proteins in the activated synaptic layer . Spine Actin Reorganization and LTP Maintenance 455 Figure 7 . HFS of the MPP Specifically Alters Immunoreactivities of Postsynaptic Actin - Associated Proteins in the MML The distributions of drebrin , synaptopodin , MAP - 2 , and neuron - specific class III (cid:8) - tubulin were examined by immunohistochemistry 45 min ( A ) and 3 weeks ( B ) after HFS ( 300 ) of the MPP . Quantification of phalloidin reactivity was carried out as in Figure 1G . * , p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , compared with control side , t test . n , number of animals used for quantification . Scale bar equals 100 (cid:1) m . the maintenance phase of LTP of AMPAR component isknownthatprolongedchangesinsynapticefficacyareaccompaniedbyastructuralremodelingofthedendritic without affecting the induction ( Krucker et al . , 2000 ) . It should be noted that our observations do not necessar - spines , including the formation of multiple synaptic bou - tons and the sprouting of the postsynaptic architecture ily exclude the possibility that L - LTP has a more strict requirement for actin cytoskeletal reorganization than toward the presynaptic terminal ( Buchs and Muller , 1996 ; Colicos et al . , 2001 ; Geinisman et al . , 1996 ; Toni E - LTP . et al . , 1999 ; Trommald et al . , 1996 ; Weeks et al . , 1998 ) . Since pharmacological and genetic perturbation of actin Potential Mechanisms by which Reorganized Spine Actin Cytoskeleton Promotes the Late dynamics affects spine structures ( Meng et al . , 2002 ; Nakayama et al . , 2000 ; Pak et al . , 2001 ; Penzes et al . , Phase of LTP How can the reorganized spine actin cytoskeleton par - 2001 ; Tashiro et al . , 2000 ) , the actin cytoskeleton is the most likely target that regulates spine morphology . ticipate in the molecular mechanisms underlying the late phase of hippocampal LTP ? The actin cytoskeleton Spine morphology is tightly correlated with the distribu - tion of AMPARs within the spines ( Matsuzaki et al . , playsmultiple rolesina widevarietyof cellularfunctions , including membrane trafficking , local protein trafficking , 2001 ) , indicating that actin - based morphogenetic regu - lation of the dendritic spines is critical to the synaptic acting as a protein - anchoring scaffold , and establishing cell morphology ( for reviews , see Halpain , 2000 ; Lang - efficacy . Thus , net enhancement of F - actin content may becoupledtoachangeinthespinemorphology , thereby ford and Molyneaux , 1998 ; Matus , 2000 ; Schafer , 2002 ) . The actin filaments in the dendritic spines may thus modulating the LTP persistence . Alternatively , the in - crease in F - actin reflects the stable postsynaptic actin contribute to the late phase of LTP through several mechanisms . sprouting that follows multiple tetanic stimuli ( Colicos et al . , 2001 ) , which may contribute to L - LTP persistence First , they could facilitate a morphological change in the dendritic spine that supports L - LTP maintenance . It through the formation of new synapses . Neuron456 Second , the actin filaments in the dendritic spines Signaling Mechanism Regulating Spine Actin Dynamics may support membrane trafficking . A large number of Little is known about the molecular mechanisms that recent studies have provided strong evidence that the regulate actin reorganization in the dendritic spine , but insertion of AMPARs into the synaptic membrane and our results demonstrate that ADF / cofilin is involved in the internalization of the AMPARs from the synaptic regulating the actin dynamics during LTP . ADF / cofilin membrane are both important in determining synaptic has F - actin severing and F - actin depolymerizing activity efficacy , as the insertion and internalization of AMPARs and consequently stimulates actin filament turnover mediate LTP and long - term depression ( LTD ) , respec - ( Carlier and Pantaloni , 1997 ; Chen et al . , 2000 ; Pantaloni tively ( Carroll et al . , 2001 ; Hayashi et al . , 2000 ; Lledo et et al . , 2001 ) . We found that a strong HFS that elicits al . , 1998 ; Sheng et al . , 2001 ; Shi et al . , 1999 , 2001 ) . Both L - LTP enhances the phosphorylation of ADF / cofilin at of these events are mediated by membrane trafficking its Ser - 3 residue in the molecular layer , indicating that since the receptors are inserted and removed from the the activity of ADF / cofilin is suppressed by LTP - induc - synaptic membrane by the endocytosis and exocytosis , ing stimuli . Furthermore , when the ADF / cofilin phos - respectively , of AMPAR - containing vesicles . The actin phorylation , which deactivates the molecule , was inhib - cytoskeleton is involved in several distinct processes ited , the late phase of LTP was partially impaired . of both endocytosis and exocytosis ( Cremona and De What could be the signaling pathway that regulates Camilli , 2001 ; Qualmann et al . , 2000 ; Schafer , 2002 ) . the ADF / cofilin activity within the dendritic spine ? One Supporting this is that when F - actin is disrupted by candidate could be the Rho family of small GTPases , latrunculin A , AMPAR is internalized ( Zhou et al . , 2001 ) . which is known to be a key regulator of actin cytoskele - Furthermore , AMPAR internalization is blocked by jas - ton dynamics in a variety of cell types ( for a review , see plakinolide , an F - actin - stabilizing reagent ( Zhou et al . , Bishop and Hall , 2000 ) . Rac and Rho , two members of 2001 ) . Thus , the stabilization of the F - actin in the spines this family , are implicated in spine shape changes in following LTP induction that we observed in this study that the signaling pathway involving Rac promotes the may increase synaptic efficacy by blocking AMPAR en - formation and maintenance of the spine structure while docytosis . the Rho pathway promotes spine retraction and pre - Third , the actin filaments in the dendritic spines may vents spine formation ( Nakayama et al . , 2000 ; Tashiro also support local protein trafficking . Gene expression et al . , 2000 ) . Both of these pathways , which lead to an and protein synthesis are necessary for L - LTP . Some altered actin cytoskeleton , involve ADF / cofilin phos - of the proteins synthesized in the soma in response to phorylation downstream of Rho and Rac activity . Both a synaptic input , such as Vesl - 1S / Homer - 1a , synapto - the Rac and Rho GTPases activate LIM kinase ( LIMK ) through the serine / threonine kinases Pak1 and ROCK podin , and arcadlin ( Brakeman et al . , 1997 ; Kato et al . , ( Roc ) , respectively ( Edwards et al . , 1999 ; Maekawa et 1997 ; Yamagata et al . , 1999 ; Yamazaki et al . , 2001 ) , must al . , 1999 ) , and LIMK then in turn downregulates ADF / be transported to the postsynaptic membrane or PSD cofilin activity by phosphorylating Ser - 3 ( Arber et al . , to exert their function in L - LTP . Indeed , we found an 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , it may be that the Rac and increase in synaptopodin immunoreactivity of the syn - Rho pathways could regulate the spine morphological aptic layer after LTP is induced . F - actin is the sole cy - changes supporting L - LTP by phosphorylating the toskeleton present in the dendritic spines and thus it downstream effector ADF / cofilin , which blocks its actin must constitute the track that delivers these proteins depolymerizingactivity . Supportingthisisarecentstudy from the dendritic shaft to the postsynaptic site through with LIMK - 1 knockout mice which revealed that LIMK - 1 the spine cytoplasm . The subsequent fusion of mem - plays a crucial role in spine morphogenesis ( Meng et brane proteins with the postsynaptic membrane occurs al . , 2002 ) . The accumulation of F - actin in the dendritic by exocytosis and therefore also depends on the actin spine was much lower in LIMK - 1 knockout mice than cytoskeleton . Thus , the actin cytoskeleton plays an es - in wild - type mice , and an abnormal spine morphology sential role in the delivery of the appropriate postsynap - characterized by thicker necks and smaller heads was tic proteins . observed . However , as the inhibition of ADF / cofilin Fourth , the actin filaments may also act as a scaffold phosphorylation does not suppress L - LTP completely , on which proteins are anchored . The F - actin in dendritic it is possible that other regulators of actin organization , spines anchors macromolecular complexes ( Allison et such as WASP and Arp , which promote actin polymer - al . , 1998 ; Halpain , 2000 ; van Rossum and Hanisch , 1999 ; ization , may also be involved in regulating the organiza - Ziff , 1997 ) . Plasticity - dependent changes in actin dy - tion of spine actin during LTP . namics could alter the arrangement and functional state Experimental Procedures of postsynaptic proteins , including neurotransmitter re - ceptors , signaling molecules , and scaffold proteins , Animals thereby modulating the synaptic plasticity . Indeed , a Allproceduresinvolvingtheuseofanimalscompliedwiththeguide - criticalroleforPSDF - actinisimplicatedintheanchoring lines of the National Institute of Health and were approved by the of AMPARs at postsynaptic sites during LTP ( Lisman Animal Care and Use Committee of Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life Sciences . Male Wistar ST rats approximately 20 weeks of age and Zhabotinsky , 2001 ) . Moreover , actin dynamics are were used for LTP experiments . suggested to be involved in LTD mechanism , where deanchoring of the AKAP - PKA complex from the PSD Reagents and Antibodies associated with F - actin remodeling triggers the endocy - All reagents usedin this study were purchasedfrom Nacalai Tesque ( Kyoto , Japan ) unlessotherwiseindicated . Thephalloidin - eosincon - tosis of AMPARs ( Gomez et al . , 2002 ) . Spine Actin Reorganization and LTP Maintenance 457 jugate and latrunculin A were from Molecular Probes ( Oregon ) , and implantation . The baseline synaptic transmission was further moni - tored for 1 , 4 , or 7 . 5 hr , after which the HFS was delivered . LTP bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , phalloidin - tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate ( TRITC ) conjugate , and cycloheximide ( CHX ) were was induced by HFS ( 2000 ) , which consisted of five trains at 2 min intertrain intervals . Each train consisted of 400 pulses at 400 Hz . fromSigmaChemical ( Missouri ) . Mouseanti - MAP2monoclonalanti - bodyandFITC - conjugatedgoatanti - mouseandanti - rabbitsecondary Test stimuli were delivered at 40 s intervals to monitor fEPSP . The body temperature of the animals was kept at 37 (cid:9) C throughout the antibodieswerefromChemicon ( California ) , whilerhodamine - conju - gatedgoatanti - mouseIgMsecondaryantibodywaspurchasedfrom LTPexperimentsbytheAnimalBlanketSystemMK - 900 ( Muromachi Kikai Co . , Tokyo , Japan ) . ICN ( California ) . The mouse monoclonal anti - cofilin antibody ( MAB - 22 ) ( Abe et al . , 1989 ) and the rabbit anti - neuron - specific class III (cid:8) - tubulin ( M (cid:8) 6 ) antibody ( Takiguchietal . , 1998 ) werekindlydonated Histochemistry Rats were sacrificed under anesthesia and the brain was immedi - by Dr . T . Obinata at the Chiba University and Dr . Y . Arimatsu at the Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life Sciences , respectively . The ately removed , frozen in dry ice , and then cut coronally with a cryo - stat microtome at 10 (cid:1) m thickness . Sections were fixed for 30 min fluorescein ( FITC ) - labeledS3 - 11Rpeptide ( HMASGVAVSDGVIKVFN MRRRRRRRRRRRK - FITC ) and the reverse S3 - 11R peptide ( Rev - in50mMphosphate - bufferedsaline ( PBS ) containing4 % paraform - aldehyde , treatedwithPBScontaining0 . 1 % TritonX - 100 , incubated 11R , HNFVKIVGDSVAVGSAMMRRRRRRRRRRRK - FITC ) were syn - thesized by Multiple Peptide Systems ( California ) . with PBS containing 2 . 5 % BSA and 2 . 5 % whole goat serum ( ICN Biochemicals , Ohio ) , and then incubated overnight at 4 (cid:9) C with phal - loidin - TRITC ( 0 . 1 ng / ml ) , FITC - DNase I ( 9 (cid:1) g / ml ) , or a primary anti - Dentate Gyrus LTP in Unanesthetized Freely Moving Animals body against actin ( 10 (cid:1) g / ml ) , synaptopodin ( Progen , Heidelberg , We used the surgical procedure described previously ( Kato et al . , Germany ) , drebrin ( 1 (cid:1) g / ml ; MBL , Nagoya , Japan ) , MAP2 ( 1 / 100 ) , 1997 , 1998 ) with a slight modification . Briefly , a bipolar stimulating or (cid:8) - tubulin ( 1 / 500 ) . After several washes with PBS , sections were electrode and a monopolar recording electrode made of tungsten incubated with a secondary antibody ( FITC - or rhodamine - conju - wire were positioned stereotaxically so as to selectively stimulate gatedanti - rabbitoranti - mouseantibody , Chemicon , 1 / 200dilution ) . MPP and LPP projections while recording in the dentate gyrus . Fluorescent images were acquired either by a cooled 3CCD camera The electrode stimulating the MPP fibers was positioned 8 . 7 mm ( Hamamatsu Photonics , Shizuoka , Japan ) with MacScope software posterior , 5 . 3 mm lateral , and 5 . 3 mm inferior to the bregma . The ( Mitani Co . , Tokyo , Japan ) or by a laser - scanning confocal micro - electrode stimulating the LPP fibers was positioned 7 . 4 mm poste - scope LSM 5 PASCAL ( Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) . Fluorescence rior , 5 . 9 mm lateral , and 7 . 0 mm inferior to the bregma . A recording intensity was measured using the MacScope software and all the electrode was implanted ipsilaterally 4 . 0 mm posterior , 2 . 5 mm lat - imagepreparationswereperformedbyPhotoshopsoftware ( Adobe , eral , and3 . 8mminferiortothebregma . Ratswereallowedtorecover California ) . for at least 2 weeks in individual home cages . LTP experiments on freely moving and unanesthetized animals Electron Microscopy by the Fluorescence were performed as described previously ( Matsuo et al . , 2000 ) with Photooxidation Method the following modifications . We used three strong tetanic stimuli Observation of phalloidin reactivity by electron microscopy was ( biphasicsquarewaveform , 200 (cid:1) spulsewidth ) , namelyHFS ( 2400 ) , performed using a procedure based on a previously described HFS ( 500 ) , andHFS ( 300 ) , all ofwhich elicitlong - lasting L - LTP ( num - method ( Capani et al . , 2001 ) . Briefly , rats were deeply anesthetized bers in parentheses indicate total stimulation pulses ) ( Figure 1B ) . with pentobarbital and fixed by cardiac perfusion with 150 ml of HFS ( 2400 ) consisted of four trains with 15 min intertrain intervals . PLP fixative ( 0 . 01 M NaIO 4 , 0 . 75 M lysine , 2 % paraformaldehyde ) . Each train consisted of 20 bursts of 30 pulses at 400 Hz , delivered The brain was removed , immersed in PBS containing 20 % sucrose , at 5 s interburst intervals . HFS ( 500 ) and HFS ( 300 ) consisted of ten and then frozen in dry ice . Cryo - sections ( 20 (cid:1) m ) were immersed and six trains with 1 min intertrain intervals , respectively . Each train in PBS containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , treated with PBS containing consisted of five bursts of ten pulses at 400 Hz , delivered at 1 s 0 . 05 M glycine and 0 . 5 % cold - water fish gelatin ( PBSGG ) , and then interburstintervals . TheweaktetanicstimulationHFS ( 90 ) consisted eachsectionwasincubatedovernightat4 (cid:9) Cwith10Ueosin - phalloi - of six trains at 10 s intertrain intervals . Each train consisted of 15 din ( Molecular Probes , Inc . , Oregon ) in 100 (cid:1) l of PBSGG . Sections pulses at 200 Hz ( biphasic square wave form , 200 (cid:1) s pulse width ) . were then exposed to light ( 515 nm ) from a mercury lamp for 30 In someexperiments , animals wereinjected intraperitoneally45 min minin 0 . 1Msodiumcacodilate buffercontaining2 . 8mM DABunder prior to the beginning of HFS ( 500 ) with the NMDA receptor inhibitor continuous O 2 bubbling , and then post - fixed with 1 % osmium . After dizocilpine maleate ( MK801 ; 2 mg / kg body weight ) or the protein dehydration and embedding in resin , ultrathin sections were cut on synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide ( 50 mg / kg body weight ) . a Poter - Blum MT2 - B ultramicrotome and examined with a Hitachi H - 600A electron microscope . Dentate Gyrus LTP in Urethane - Anesthetized Animals and Drug Delivery Actin Analysis LTP experiments with urethane - anesthetized rats were carried out Three rats were sacrificed 3 hr after the delivery of HFS ( 2400 ) . Ten as described previously ( Inokuchi et al . , 1996 ; Matsuo et al . , 1998 ) cryo - sections ( coronal cut at 30 (cid:1) m thickness ) from each animal with the following modifications . A bipolar tungsten electrode was were fixed with 70 % ethanol for 90 s , dehydrated with ethanol , used for stimulation and a stainless steel pipe electrode ( i . d . , 80 immersed in xylene , and then air - dried . The MMLs were dissected (cid:1) m ; o . d . , 200 (cid:1) m ) for recording and drug delivery . The recording and collected using the Laser Capture Microdissection System electrode was connected to a microsyringe via a polyethylene tube . ( LM2000 , ArcturusEng . Inc . , California ) ( Simoneet al . , 2000 ) . F - actin Before implantation , the recording electrode was filled with either and G - actin were separated as described ( Patterson et al . , 1999 ) . latrunculin A , cytochalasin B , cycloheximide , synthetic peptide , or Briefly , ten dissected tissues were lysed in 50 (cid:1) l lysis buffer ( 1 % the vehicle solution ( saline containing 0 . 1 % or 0 . 5 % DMSO ) . The Triton X - 100 , 20 mM HEPES - HCl [ pH 7 . 2 ] , 100 mM NaCl , 1 mM stimulating electrode ( 8 . 0 mm posterior , 4 . 5 mm lateral , and 5 . 0 Pefabloc ) for3hrandthelysatewasthensubjectedtocentrifugation mm inferior to the bregma ) and the recording electrode ( 4 . 0 mm at 10 , 000 (cid:10) g for 20 min . Ten microliter aliquots of the G - actin posterior , 2 . 5 mm lateral , and 3 . 8 mm inferior to the bregma ) were fraction ( supernatant ) and the F - actin fraction ( pellet , dissolved in implanted unilaterally after the animal had been anesthetized by 50 (cid:1) l SDS sample buffer ) were subjected to SDS - PAGE ( 10 % poly - urethane ( i . p . , 1 . 0 g / kg body weight ) . All the stimuli were biphasic acrylamide ) . Western blot analysis was performed with the anti - square wave pulses ( 200 (cid:1) s width ) , and their intensities were set actin antibody and the immunopositive signals were visualized and at the current that evoked 40 % of the maximum population spike quantified by LAS - 1000 Plus Luminescent Image Analyzer ( Fujifilm , amplitude . After monitoring a stable basal transmission for at least Tokyo , Japan ) . 30 min , the polyethylene tube that connected the recording elec - trode to the microsyringe was cut to promote infusion of drug solu - Analysis of Phospho - ADF / Cofilin tion intothe dentate gyrusthrough thetip of therecording electrode Rats were sacrificed 30 – 45 min or 5 hr after the delivery of HFS ( 500 ) . Ten cryo - sections from each animal ( coronal cut at 20 (cid:1) m ( Stewardetal . , 1998 ) . Thisusuallyoccurred3 – 4hraftertheelectrode Neuron458 thickness ) were air - dried , and the MMLs of each side of the dentate Bamburg , J . R . , andBray , D . ( 1987 ) . Distributionandcellularlocaliza - tion of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 2817 – 2825 . gyrus were dissected and collected separately using the Laser Mi - crodissection System ( LMD ; Leica Microsystems , Wetzlar GmbH , Bishop , A . L . , and Hall , A . ( 2000 ) . Rho GTPases and their effector Germany ) . The collected tissue was treated with 100 (cid:1) l of SDS proteins . Biochem . J . 348 , 241 – 255 . sample buffer ( 2 % SDS , 100 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 6 . 8 ] , 33 mM NaCl , 1 Brakeman , P . R . , Lanahan , A . A . , O’Brien , R . , Roche , K . , Barnes , C . A . , mM EDTA , 40 mM DTT , 0 . 01 % BPB , 10 % glycerol ) to extract pro - Huganir , R . L . , and Worley , P . F . ( 1997 ) . Homer : a protein that selec - teins . One - fifth of each extract ( 20 (cid:1) l ) was subjected to SDS - PAGE tivelybindsmetabotropicglutamatereceptors . Nature 386 , 284 – 288 . ( 12 % polyacrylamide ) and transferred to a PVDF membrane ( Milli - Buchs , P . A . , and Muller , D . ( 1996 ) . Induction of long - term potentia - pore , Massachusetts ) followed byimmunodetection with anti - phos - tion is associated with major ultrastructural changes of activated pho ( Ser - 3 ) - ADF / cofilin antibody ( Toshima et al . , 2001 ) . After the synapses . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 8040 – 8045 . complete stripping of primary and secondary antibodies by treating Capani , F . , Martone , M . E . , Deerinck , T . J . , and Ellisman , M . H . ( 2001 ) . the membrane with antibody - stripping solution ( 100 mM 2 - mercap - SelectivelocalizationofhighconcentrationsofF - actininsubpopula - toethanol , 2 % SDS , 62 . 5 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 6 . 7 ] ) for 30 min at 50 (cid:9) C , tions of dendritic spines in rat central nervous system : a three - the same membrane was reblotted with anti - cofilin antibody ( MAB - dimensional electron microscopic study . J . Comp . Neurol . 435 , 22 ) to detect cofilin . The immunopositive signals were visualized 156 – 170 . and quantified by the LAS - 1000 Plus Luminescent Image Analyzer . Carlier , M . F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Control of actin dynamics in cell motility . J . Mol . Biol . 269 , 459 – 467 . Data Analysis Data were expressed as means (cid:2) standard error and statistically Carroll , R . C . , Beattie , E . C . , von Zastrow , M . , and Malenka , R . C . analyzed with InStat 3 software ( GraphPad software , California ) and ( 2001 ) . Role of AMPA receptor endocytosis in synaptic plasticity . Statview software ( Abacus Concept Inc . , California ) . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 2 , 315 – 324 . Chen , H . , Bernstein , B . W . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Regulating Acknowledgments actin - filament dynamics in vivo . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 19 – 23 . Colicos , M . A . , Collins , B . E . , Sailor , M . J . , andGoda , Y . ( 2001 ) . Remod - WethankDrs . T . Obinata ( ChibaUniversity ) andY . Arimatsu ( MITILS ) eling of synaptic actin inducedby photoconductive stimulation . Cell for the monoclonal mouse anti - cofilin antibody and the rabbit anti - 107 , 605 – 616 . neuron - specific (cid:8) - tubulin antibody , respectively , and K . Ohashi , M . Cooper , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin . Takahashi , H . Ohnishi , and S . Ono for their helpful discussions . We J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1473 – 1478 . also thank A . Murayama for technical assistance . This work was Cremona , O . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Phosphoinositides in mem - performedthroughSpecialCoordinateFundsforPromotingScience brane traffic at the synapse . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1041 – 1052 . and Technology from the Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Science , and Technology of the Japanese Government . This work Edwards , D . C . , Sanders , L . C . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1999 ) . was supported in part by Grant - in - Aid for Scientific Research ( no . Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase sig - 14780610 ) to Y . F . and by grants for Scientific Research on Priority nalling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 253 – 259 . Areas ( A ) - Neural Circuit Project and ( C ) - Advanced Brain Science Engert , F . , and Bonhoeffer , T . ( 1999 ) . Dendritic spine changes asso - Project to K . I . from the Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Sci - ciated with hippocampal long - term synaptic plasticity . Nature 399 , ence , and Technology of the Japanese Government . 66 – 70 . Errington , M . L . , Lynch , M . A . , andBliss , T . V . ( 1987 ) . Long - termpoten - Received : September 10 , 2002 tiation in the dentate gyrus : induction and increased glutamate re - Revised : March 11 , 2003 lease are blocked by D ( - ) aminophosphonovalerate . Neuroscience Accepted : March 20 , 2003 20 , 279 – 284 . Published : May 7 , 2003 Fifkova , E . ( 1985 ) . Actin in the nervous system . Brain Res . 356 , 187 – 215 . References Fifkova , E . , and Morales , M . ( 1992 ) . Actin matrix of dendritic spines , synaptic plasticity , and long - term potentiation . Int . Rev . Cytol . 139 , Abe , H . , Ohshima , S . , and Obinata , T . ( 1989 ) . A cofilin - like protein 267 – 307 . is involved in the regulation of actin assembly in developing skeletal Fischer , M . , Kaech , S . , Knutti , D . , and Matus , A . ( 1998 ) . Rapid actin - muscle . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) 106 , 696 – 702 . based plasticity in dendritic spines . Neuron 20 , 847 – 854 . Abraham , W . C . , Mason , S . E . , Demmer , J . , Williams , J . M . , Richard - Fischer , M . , Kaech , S . , Wagner , U . , Brinkhaus , H . , and Matus , A . son , C . L . , Tate , W . P . , Lawlor , P . A . , andDragunow , M . ( 1993 ) . Correla - ( 2000 ) . Glutamate receptors regulate actin - based plasticity in den - tions between immediate early gene induction and the persistence dritic spines . Nat . Neurosci . 3 , 887 – 894 . of long - term potentiation . Neuroscience 56 , 717 – 727 . Frey , U . , Huang , Y . Y . , and Kandel , E . R . ( 1993 ) . Effects of cAMP Agnew , B . J . , Minamide , L . S . , andBamburg , J . R . ( 1995 ) . Reactivation simulate a late stage of LTP in hippocampal CA1 neurons . Science of phosphorylated actin depolymerizing factor and identification of 260 , 1661 – 1664 . the regulatory site . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 17582 – 17587 . Frey , U . , Frey , S . , Schollmeier , F . , and Krug , M . ( 1996 ) . Influence of Aizawa , H . , Wakatsuki , S . , Ishii , A . , Moriyama , K . , Sasaki , Y . , Ohashi , actinomycin D , a RNA synthesis inhibitor , on long - term potentiation K . , Sekine - Aizawa , Y . , Sehara - Fujisawa , A . , Mizuno , K . , Goshima , in rat hippocampal neurons in vivo and in vitro . J . Physiol . 490 , Y . , and Yahara , I . ( 2001 ) . Phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase 703 – 711 . is necessaryfor semaphorin 3A - induced growthcone collapse . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 367 – 373 . Geinisman , Y . , Detoledo , M . L . , Morrell , F . , Persina , I . S . , and Beatty , M . A . ( 1996 ) . Synapserestructuringassociatedwiththemaintenance Allison , D . W . , Gelfand , V . I . , Spector , I . , andCraig , A . M . ( 1998 ) . Roleof phaseofhippocampallong - termpotentiation . J . Comp . Neurol . 368 , actin in anchoring postsynaptic receptors in cultured hippocampal 413 – 423 . neurons : differential attachment of NMDA versus AMPA receptors . J . Neurosci . 18 , 2423 – 2436 . Gomez , L . L . , Alam , S . , Smith , K . E . , Horne , E . , and Dell’Acqua , M . L . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of A - kinase anchoring protein 79 / 150 - cAMP - Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , dependentproteinkinasepostsynaptictargetingbyNMDAreceptor C . A . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dynam - activation of calcineurin and remodeling of dendritic actin . J . Neu - ics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 , rosci . 22 , 7027 – 7044 . 805 – 809 . Halpain , S . ( 2000 ) . Actin and the agile spine : how and why do den - Bailey , C . H . , Bartsch , D . , and Kandel , E . R . ( 1996 ) . Toward a molecu - dritic spines dance ? Trends Neurosci . 23 , 141 – 146 . lar definition of long - term memory storage . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 13445 – 13452 . Hayashi , Y . , Shi , S . H . , Esteban , J . A . , Piccini , A . , Poncer , J . C . , and Spine Actin Reorganization and LTP Maintenance 459 Malinow , R . ( 2000 ) . Driving AMPA receptors into synapses by LTP demonstratingtheroleofPKAinlong - lastinglong - termpotentiation . J . Neurosci . 21 , 6000 – 6007 . and CaMKII : requirement for GluR1 and PDZ domain interaction . Science 287 , 2262 – 2267 . Matsuzaki , M . , Ellis - Davies , G . C . , Nemoto , T . , Miyashita , Y . , Iino , Hjorth , S . A . ( 1972 ) . Projection of the lateral part of the entorhinal M . , and Kasai , H . ( 2001 ) . Dendritic spine geometry is critical for area to the hippocampus and fascia dentata . J . Comp . Neurol . 146 , AMPA receptor expression in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons . 219 – 232 . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 1086 – 1092 . Hjorth , S . A . , and Jeune , B . ( 1972 ) . Origin and termination of the Matus , A . ( 2000 ) . Actin - based plasticity in dendritic spines . Science hippocampalperforantpathintheratstudiedbysilverimpregnation . 290 , 754 – 758 . J . Comp . Neurol . 144 , 215 – 232 . Matus , A . , Ackermann , M . , Pehling , G . , Byers , H . R . , and Fujiwara , Inokuchi , K . , Kato , A . , Hirai , K . , Hishinuma , F . , Inoue , M . , andOzawa , K . ( 1982 ) . High actin concentrations in brain dendritic spines and F . ( 1996 ) . IncreaseinactivinbetaAmRNAinrathippocampusduring postsynaptic densities . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 79 , 7590 – 7594 . long - term potentiation . FEBS Lett . 382 , 48 – 52 . McNaughton , B . L . ( 1980 ) . Evidence for two physiologically distinct Kaech , S . , Parmar , H . , Roelandse , M . , Bornmann , C . , and Matus , A . perforant pathways to the fascia dentata . Brain Res . 199 , 1 – 19 . ( 2001 ) . Cytoskeletal microdifferentiation : a mechanism for organiz - McNaughton , B . L . , andBarnes , C . A . ( 1977 ) . Physiologicalidentifica - ing morphological plasticity in dendrites . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA tion and analysis of dentate granule cell responses to stimulation 98 , 7086 – 7092 . of the medial and lateral perforant pathways in the rat . J . Comp . Kato , A . , Ozawa , F . , Saitoh , Y . , Hirai , K . , and Inokuchi , K . ( 1997 ) . Neurol . 175 , 439 – 454 . vesl , a gene encoding VASP / Ena family related protein , is upregu - Meberg , P . J . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Increase in neurite out - lated during seizure , long - term potentiation and synaptogenesis . growth mediated by overexpression of actin depolymerizing factor . FEBS Lett . 412 , 183 – 189 . J . Neurosci . 20 , 2459 – 2469 . Kato , A . , Ozawa , F . , Saitoh , Y . , Fukazawa , Y . , Sugiyama , H . , and Meng , Y . , Zhang , Y . , Tregoubov , V . , Janus , C . , Cruz , L . , Jackson , Inokuchi , K . ( 1998 ) . Novel members of the Vesl / Homerfamily of PDZ M . , Lu , W . Y . , MacDonald , J . F . , Wang , J . Y . , Falls , D . L . , and Jia , Z . proteins that bind metabotropic glutamate receptors . J . Biol . Chem . ( 2002 ) . Abnormal spine morphology and enhanced LTP in LIMK - 1 273 , 23969 – 23975 . knockout mice . Neuron 35 , 121 – 133 . Kim , C . H . , andLisman , J . E . ( 1999 ) . Aroleofactinfilamentinsynaptic Moriyama , K . , Iida , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1996 ) . Phosphorylation of transmission and long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . 19 , 4314 – 4324 . Ser - 3 of cofilin regulates its essential function on actin . Genes Cells Krucker , T . , Siggins , G . R . , and Halpain , S . ( 2000 ) . Dynamic actin 1 , 73 – 86 . filaments arerequired forstable long - termpotentiation ( LTP ) inarea Nakayama , A . Y . , Harms , M . B . , and Luo , L . ( 2000 ) . Small GTPases CA1 of the hippocampus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 6856 – 6861 . Rac and Rho in the maintenance of dendritic spines and branches Krug , M . , Lossner , B . , and Ott , T . ( 1984 ) . Anisomycin blocks the late in hippocampal pyramidal neurons . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5329 – 5338 . phaseoflong - termpotentiationinthedentategyrusoffreelymoving Nedivi , E . , Hevroni , D . , Naot , D . , Israeli , D . , and Citri , Y . ( 1993 ) . rats . Brain Res . Bull . 13 , 39 – 42 . Numerous candidate plasticity - related genes revealed by differen - Langford , G . M . , and Molyneaux , B . J . ( 1998 ) . Myosin V in the brain : tial cDNA cloning . Nature 363 , 718 – 721 . mutations lead to neurological defects . Brain Res . Brain Res . Rev . Nguyen , P . V . , and Kandel , E . R . ( 1996 ) . A macromolecular synthesis - 28 , 1 – 8 . dependent late phase of long - term potentiation requiring cAMP in Link , W . , Konietzko , U . , Kauselmann , G . , Krug , M . , Schwanke , B . , themedialperforantpathwayofrathippocampalslices . J . Neurosci . Frey , U . , and Kuhl , D . ( 1995 ) . Somatodendritic expression of an 16 , 3189 – 3198 . immediate early gene is regulated by synaptic activity . Proc . Natl . Nguyen , P . V . , Abel , T . , and Kandel , E . R . ( 1994 ) . Requirement of a Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 5734 – 5738 . critical period of transcription for induction of a late phase of LTP . Lisman , J . E . , and Zhabotinsky , A . M . ( 2001 ) . A model of synaptic Science 265 , 1104 – 1107 . memory : a CaMKII / PP1 switch that potentiates transmission by Niwa , R . , Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Takeichi , M . , Mizuno , K . , and Uemura , organizing an AMPA receptor anchoring assembly . Neuron 31 , T . ( 2002 ) . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of 191 – 201 . phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell 108 , 233 – 246 . Lledo , P . - M . , Zhang , X . , Sudhof , T . C . , Malenka , R . C . , andNicoll , R . A . Ostroff , L . E . , Fiala , J . C . , Allwardt , B . , and Harris , K . M . ( 2002 ) . Polyri - ( 1998 ) . Postsynaptic membrane fusion and long - term potentiation . bosomesredistributefromdendriticshaftsintospineswithenlarged Science 279 , 399 – 403 . synapses during LTP in developing rat hippocampal slices . Neuron Lyford , G . L . , Yamagata , K . , Kaufmann , W . E . , Barnes , C . A . , Sanders , 35 , 535 – 545 . L . K . , Copeland , N . G . , Gilbert , D . J . , Jenkins , N . A . , Lanahan , A . A . , and Pak , D . T . , Yang , S . , Rudolph - Correia , S . , Kim , E . , and Sheng , M . Worley , P . F . ( 1995 ) . Arc , agrowthfactorandactivity - regulatedgene , ( 2001 ) . Regulation of dendritic spine morphology by SPAR , a PSD - encodes a novel cytoskeleton - associated protein that is enriched 95 - associated RapGAP . Neuron 31 , 289 – 303 . in neuronal dendrites . Neuron 14 , 433 – 445 . Pantaloni , D . , Le Clainche , C . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2001 ) . Mechanism Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Boku , S . , Watanabe , N . , Fujita , A . , Iwa - of actin - based motility . Science 292 , 1502 – 1526 . matsu , A . , Obinata , T . , Ohashi , K . , Mizuno , K . , and Narumiya , S . ( 1999 ) . Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein Patterson , R . L . , van Rossum , D . B . , and Gill , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Store - oper - kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 , 895 – 898 . ated Ca2 (cid:4) entry : evidence for a secretion - like coupling model . Cell 98 , 487 – 499 . Maletic - Savatic , M . , Malinow , R . , and Svoboda , K . ( 1999 ) . Rapid dendritic morphogenesis in CA1 hippocampal dendrites induced by Penzes , P . , Johnson , R . C . , Sattler , R . , Zhang , X . , Huganir , R . L . , Kam - synaptic activity . Science 283 , 1923 – 1927 . bampati , V . , Mains , R . E . , and Eipper , B . A . ( 2001 ) . The neuronal Rho - GEF Kalirin - 7 interacts with PDZ domain - containing proteins and Malinow , R . , Mainen , Z . F . , and Hayashi , Y . ( 2000 ) . LTP mechanisms : regulates dendritic morphogenesis . Neuron 29 , 229 – 242 . from silence to four - lane traffic . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 10 , 352 – 357 . Qian , Z . , Gilbert , M . E . , Colicos , M . A . , Kandel , E . R . , and Kuhl , D . Matsuo , R . , Kato , A . , Sakaki , Y . , and Inokuchi , K . ( 1998 ) . Cataloging ( 1993 ) . Tissue - plasminogen activator is induced as an immediate - alteredgeneexpressionduringrathippocampallong - termpotentia - early gene during seizure , kindling , and long - term potentiation . Na - tion by means of differential display . Neurosci . Lett . 244 , 173 – 176 . ture 361 , 453 – 457 . Matsuo , R . , Murayama , A . , Saitoh , Y . , Sakaki , Y . , and Inokuchi , K . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 2000 ) . Molecular links ( 2000 ) . Identification and cataloging of genes induced by long - last - between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , ing long - term potentiation in awake rats . J . Neurochem . 74 , 2239 – 111F – 116F . 2249 . Matsushita , M . , Tomizawa , K . , Moriwaki , A . , Li , S . T . , Terada , H . , Schafer , D . A . ( 2002 ) . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dy - namics during endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 76 – 81 . and Matsui , H . ( 2001 ) . Ahigh - efficiency protein transduction system Neuron460 Sheng , M . , Lee , S . H . , Kaech , S . , Parmar , H . , Roelandse , M . , Born - Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by mann , C . , and Matus , A . ( 2001 ) . AMPA receptor trafficking and the control of synaptic transmission . Cell 105 , 825 – 828 . LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Na - ture 393 , 809 – 812 . Shi , S . H . , Hayashi , Y . , Petralia , R . S . , Zaman , S . H . , Wenthold , R . J . , Zhou , Q . , Xiao , M . - Y . , and Nicoll , R . A . ( 2001 ) . Contribution of cy - Svoboda , K . , andMalinow , R . ( 1999 ) . Rapidspinedeliveryandredis - toskeleton to the internalization of AMPA receptors . Proc . Natl . tribution of AMPA receptors after synaptic NMDA receptor activa - Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 1261 – 1266 . tion . Science 284 , 1811 – 1816 . Ziff , E . B . ( 1997 ) . Enlightening the postsynaptic density . Neuron 19 , Shi , S . , Hayashi , Y . , Esteban , J . A . , and Malinow , R . ( 2001 ) . Subunit - 1163 – 1174 . specific rules governing AMPA receptor trafficking to synapses in hippocampal pyramidal neurons . Cell 105 , 331 – 343 . Simone , N . L . , Remaley , A . T . , Charboneau , L . , Petricoin , E . F . , 3rd , Glickman , J . W . , Emmert - Buck , M . R . , Fleisher , T . A . , and Liotta , L . A . ( 2000 ) . Sensitive immunoassay of tissue cell proteins procured by laser capture microdissection . Am . J . Pathol . 156 , 445 – 452 . Spector , I . , Shochet , N . R . , Blasberger , D . , and Kashman , Y . ( 1989 ) . Latrunculins - novel marine macrolides that disrupt microfilament or - ganization and affect cell growth : I . Comparison with cytochalasin D . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 13 , 127 – 144 . Star , E . N . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , andMurthy , V . N . ( 2002 ) . Rapidturnover of actin in dendritic spines and its regulation by activity . Nat . Neu - rosci . 5 , 239 – 246 . Steward , O . ( 1976 ) . Topographicorganizationoftheprojectionsfrom theentorhinalareatothehippocampalformationoftherat . J . Comp . Neurol . 167 , 285 – 314 . Steward , O . , Wallace , C . S . , Lyford , G . L . , and Worley , P . F . ( 1998 ) . Synaptic activation causes the mRNA for the IEG Arc to localize selectively near activated postsynaptic sites on dendrites . Neuron 21 , 741 – 751 . Takiguchi , H . K . , Sato , M . , Sugo , N . , Ishida , M . , Sato , K . , Uratani , Y . , and Arimatsu , Y . ( 1998 ) . Latexin expression in smaller diameter primary sensory neurons in the rat . Brain Res . 801 , 9 – 20 . Tashiro , A . , Minden , A . , and Yuste , R . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of dendritic spine morphology by the rho family of small GTPases : antagonistic roles of Rac and Rho . Cereb . Cortex 10 , 927 – 938 . Toni , N . , Buchs , P . A . , Nikonenko , I . , Bron , C . R . , andMuller , D . ( 1999 ) . LTP promotes formation of multiple spine synapses between a sin - gle axon terminal and a dendrite . Nature 402 , 421 – 425 . Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Amano , T . , Yang , N . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by protein kinase testicu - larproteinkinase1anditsroleinintegrin - mediatedactinreorganiza - tion and focal adhesion formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1131 – 1145 . Trachtenberg , J . T . , Chen , B . E . , Knott , G . W . , Feng , G . , Sanes , J . R . , Welker , E . , and Svoboda , K . ( 2002 ) . Long - term in vivo imaging of experience - dependent synaptic plasticity in adult cortex . Nature 420 , 788 – 794 . Trommald , M . , Hulleberg , G . , and Andersen , P . ( 1996 ) . Long - term potentiation is associated with new excitatory spine synapses on rat dentate granule cells . Learn . Mem . 3 , 218 – 228 . van Rossum , D . , and Hanisch , U . K . ( 1999 ) . Cytoskeletal dynamics in dendritic spines : direct modulation by glutamate receptors ? Trends Neurosci . 22 , 290 – 295 . Weeks , A . , Ivanco , T . L . , LeBoutillier , J . C . , Racine , R . J . , and Petit , T . L . ( 1998 ) . The degree of potentiation is associated with synaptic number during the maintenance of long - term potentiation in the rat dentate gyrus . Brain Res . 798 , 211 – 216 . Wu , G . Y . , Deisseroth , K . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2001 ) . Spaced stimuli stabilize MAPK pathway activation and its effects on dendritic mor - phology . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 151 – 158 . Yamagata , K . , Andreasson , K . I . , Kaufmann , W . E . , Barnes , C . A . , and Worley , P . F . ( 1993 ) . Expressionofamitogen - induciblecyclooxygen - ase in brain : regulation by synaptic activity and glucocorticoids . Neuron 11 , 371 – 386 . Yamagata , K . , Andreasson , K . I . , Sugiura , H . , Maru , E . , Dominique , M . , Irie , Y . , Miki , N . , Hayashi , Y . , Yoshioka , M . , Kaneko , K . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Arcadlin is a neural activity - regulated cadherin involved in long term potentiation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 19473 – 19479 . Yamazaki , M . , Matsuo , R . , Fukazawa , Y . , Ozawa , F . , and Inokuchi , K . ( 2001 ) . Regulated expression ofan actin - associated protein , syn - aptopodin , during long - term potentiation . J . Neurochem . 79 , 192 – 199 .