Blayne A . Roeder Student Mem . ASME School of Mechanical Engineering , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN 47907 - 1288 e - mail : blayne @ ecn . purdue . edu Klod Kokini Mem . ASME School of Mechanical Engineering / Department of Biomedical Engineering , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN 47907 - 1288 e - mail : kokini @ ecn . purdue . edu Jennifer E . Sturgis Department of Basic Medical Sciences , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN 47907 - 1515 e - mail : jennie @ flowcyt . cyto . purdue . edu J . Paul Robinson e - mail : jpr @ flowcyt . cyto . purdue . edu Sherry L . Voytik - Harbin 1 e - mail : voytik @ ecn . purdue . edu Department of Basic Medical Sciences / Department of Biomedical Engineering , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN 47907 - 1515 Tensile Mechanical Properties of Three - Dimensional Type I Collagen Extracellular Matrices With Varied Microstructure The importance and priority of speciﬁc micro - structural and mechanical design param - eters must be established to effectively engineer scaffolds ( biomaterials ) that mimic the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) environment of cells and have clinical applications as tissue substitutes . In this study , three - dimensional ( 3 - D ) matrices were prepared from type I collagen , the predominant compositional and structural component of connective tissue ECMs , and structural - mechanical relationships were studied . Polymerization conditions , including collagen concentration ( 0 . 3 – 3 mg / mL ) and pH ( 6 – 9 ) , were varied to obtain matrices of collagen ﬁbrils with different microstructures . Confocal reﬂection microscopy was used to assess speciﬁc micro - structural features ( e . g . , diameter and length ) and organization of component ﬁbrils in 3 - D . Microstructural analyses revealed that changes in collagen concentration affected ﬁbril density while maintaining a relatively constant ﬁbril diameter . On the other hand , both ﬁbril length and diameter were affected by the pH of the polymerization reaction . Mechanically , all matrices exhibited a similar stress - strain curve with identiﬁable ‘‘toe , ’’ ‘‘linear , ’’ and ‘‘failure’’ regions . However , the linear modu - lus and failure stress increased with collagen concentration and were correlated with an increase in ﬁbril density . Additionally , both the linear modulus and failure stress showed an increase with pH , which was related to an increased ﬁbril length and a decreased ﬁbril diameter . The tensile mechanical properties of the collagen matrices also showed strain rate dependence . Such fundamental information regarding the 3 - D microstructural - mechanical properties of the ECM and its component molecules are important to our overall understanding of cell - ECM interactions ( e . g . , mechanotransduction ) and the de - velopment of novel strategies for tissue repair and replacement . @ DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 1449904 # Keywords : Collagen , Extracellular Matrix , Three - Dimensional , Microstructure , Confo - cal Reﬂection Microscopy , Mechanical Properties Introduction One of the most critical aspects of tissue engineering is the ability to mimic extracellular matrix ~ ECM ! scaffolds that natu - rally serve to organize cells and regulate their behavior @ 1 # . The ECM provides relevant micro - environmental information to the cells biochemically through soluble and insoluble mediators and biophysically through imposition of structural and mechanical constraints ~ see Chiquet for review @ 2 # ! . To date , signiﬁcant ad - vances have been made in our understanding of how speciﬁc mol - ecules of the ECM affect fundamental cellular responses . How - ever , less is known regarding the mechanisms by which speciﬁc geometric and mechanical properties of the ECM inﬂuence cell behavior . Likewise , the mechanisms by which the ECM trans - duces force and deformation from the macro - level ~ tissue - organ ! to the micro - level ~ cell - ECM ! remain to be elucidated . In this way , the physical state of the ECM , not just its molecular compo - sition , provides the basis of cell - ECM interactions and must be considered in the design of new and improved scaffolds ~ bioma - terials ! for tissue repair and replacement . To further the understanding of ECM biomechanics and its role in cell and tissue dynamics , we have developed an experimental approach in which micro - structural and subsequent mechanical properties of a simpliﬁed model of the ECM can be controlled . Our approach involves preparation of three - dimensional ~ 3 - D ! matrices from puriﬁed type I collagen . Of the many component molecules of the ECM , type I collagen is the most abundant within connective tissue structures , including tendon , ligament , dermis , and blood vessel , and is the primary determinant of tensile properties @ 3 # . In addition , type I collagen exhibits the ability to polymerize and form complex , 3 - D supramolecular assemblies in vitro , a process known as ‘‘self - assembly . ’’ Collagen ﬁbrils formed in vitro have structural similarities ~ e . g . , axial periodicity ! to those formed in vivo and have been used extensively as a model system for understanding the collagen assembly process @ 4 # . Collagen ﬁbril dimensions and organization can be varied by adjusting parameters of the polymerization reaction ~ i . e . , collagen concentration , pH , and ionic strength ! @ 5 # . Taken together , these characteristics of type I collagen make it an ideal biologically derived polymer for scaffold design . In fact , a number of bioma - terials have been fashioned from type I collagen for restoration and reconstruction of speciﬁc tissues and organs . Likewise , 3 - D collagen matrices have long been used as scaffolds for the culture of cells in vitro . Such in vitro systems have been shown to support a more in vivo like cellular phenotype and function and are in - strumental in the study of the mechanisms involved in cell - ECM interactions @ 6 # . Proposed relationships between collagen ﬁbril morphology and the mechanical behavior of collagen - based tissues , scaffolds , ex - truded ﬁbers , and matrices have been documented in a variety of contexts . Parry correlated speciﬁc structural features of collagen 1 Corresponding author Contributed by the Bioengineering Division for publication in the J OURNAL OF B IOMECHANICAL E NGINEERING . Manuscript received by the Bioengineering Divi - sion May 31 , 2001 ; revised manuscript received October 8 , 2001 . Associate Editor : L . A . Taber . 214 (cid:213) Vol . 124 , APRIL 2002 Copyright © 2002 by ASME Transactions of the ASME ﬁbrils ~ e . g . , total collagen content , ﬁbril length , ﬁbril diameter distribution , and ﬁbril orientation ! within intact tissues to tissue - speciﬁc mechanical properties @ 7 # . Another series of studies has focused on the structural - mechanical properties of collagen scaf - folds for the primary purpose of designing functional biomaterials for clinical applications . For example , the inﬂuence of speciﬁc glycosaminoglycans and cross - linking agents on type I collagen scaffold structure and mechanics has been evaluated in the devel - opment of artiﬁcial skin replacements @ 8 – 11 # . Speciﬁcally , the glycosaminoglycans chondroitin - 6 - sulfate and dermatan sulfate increased the mechanical strength of a collagen based artiﬁcial skin , but did not cause micro - structural modiﬁcation that could be appreciated with scanning electron microscopy @ 9 # . In addition , extensive studies deﬁning the structural - mechanical relationship of extruded collagen ﬁbers have been performed with hopes of developing replacement constructs for tissues such as tendon and ligament @ 12 – 17 # . The diameter of ﬁbril subunits within extruded collagen ﬁbers was correlated with low strain modulus but not ultimate tensile strength or high strain modulus @ 17 # . Less is known , however , regarding the structural - mechanical properties of low concentration collagen matrices or gels . These matrices constitute collagen concentration of 5 mg / mL or less rather than 30 - 40 mg / mL characteristic of connective tissues in vivo @ 18 # . Since low concentration matrices are routinely used for the culture and study of cells in vitro , determination of such fun - damental structural - mechanical properties is necessary for predict - ing and interpreting the overall cellular response . In addition , knowledge of these collagen properties will contribute to the basic principles that will drive the engineering and development of clinically useful biomaterials . A purely mechanical study performed by O¨zerdem and To¨zeren demonstrated the viscoelastic behavior ~ e . g . , stress - relaxation ! of type I collagen matrices by imposing quick stretches @ 19 # . In a second study , the rheological behavior of type I collagen matrices was described using conﬁned compression testing @ 20 # . Finally , Osborne et al . have reported the tensile properties of type I col - lagen matrices in the presence and absence of speciﬁc glycosami - noglycans @ 21 # . In addition , they investigated the effects of vari - ous cross - linking techniques on the mechanical behavior of these matrices . To date , the only published study evaluating both the structural and mechanical properties of type I collagen matrices was performed by Hsu and co - workers @ 22 # . In this particular study , collagen matrices were formed at various ionic strengths and with differing glycosaminoglycan contents , and the relation - ship between the rheological behavior and ﬁbril morphology was investigated . For the structural analysis in this study as well as in others , traditional electron microscopy techniques were utilized . Limitations of these techniques include derivation of structural information in a 2 - D rather than 3 - D format and induction of structural artifacts due to extensive specimen processing . To our knowledge , the relationship between the 3 - D microstructure and the tensile mechanical properties of low - concentration , type I col - lagen matrices has not been previously reported . In the present study , we report polymerization of puriﬁed type I collagen at different collagen concentrations and pH values to form 3 - D matrices differing both structurally and mechanically . Confocal reﬂection microscopy was used to establish and compare 3 - D micro - structural differences between the matrices in their na - tive , hydrated state . This information was then correlated with features of the stress - strain relationship , including linear modulus , failure stress , and failure strain derived from tensile mechanical tests . Materials and Methods Collagen ECM Preparation . Type I collagen prepared from calf skin was obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO , and dissolved in 0 . 01 M hydrochloric acid ~ HCl ! to achieve de - sired concentrations . Three - dimensional collagen matrices were prepared by neutralizing the collagen solutions in 10X phosphate buffered saline ~ PBS ! followed by incubation at 37°C in humidi - ﬁed chambers . To determine the effect of collagen concentration on collagen matrix structure and mechanical properties , solutions varying in collagen content were neutralized to achieve ﬁnal col - lagen concentrations of 0 . 3 , 1 . 0 , 2 . 0 and 3 . 0 mg / mL while main - taining the same total phosphate , ionic strength ~ 0 . 14 M ! , and pH ~ 7 . 4 ! . The effect of pH was studied by neutralizing collagen solu - tions with 10X PBS buffers with altered ratios of Na 2 HPO 4 and KH 2 PO 4 . 10X PBS buffers of pH 6 . 0 , 7 . 0 , 7 . 4 , 8 . 0 , and 9 . 0 were used for these experiments . Confocal Reﬂection Microscopy . Unstained 3 - D matrices of type I collagen were polymerized on coverglasses and imaged using confocal reﬂection microscopy as previously described @ 23 , 24 # . In brief , confocal reﬂection microscopy was performed using a BioRad ~ Hercules , CA ! MRC1024 confocal on a Diaphot 300 ~ Nikon Corp . , Tokyo , Japan ! microscope equipped with a 60 3 , 1 . 4 NA oil immersion lens ~ Nikon ! via a quarter wave plate . Specimens were illuminated with 488 nm light generated by an Innova Enterprise argon ion laser ~ Coherent Laser Group , Santa Clara , CA ! and the reﬂected light was detected with a photomul - tiplier tube using a blue reﬂection ﬁlter ~ 488 nm ! . A z - step of 0 . 2 m m was used to optically section the samples to depths of up to 300 m m . When necessary , nonuniform background caused by in - terference and reﬂection from the optical pathway was removed from the images using standard rank leveling procedures on each x - y section as described previously @ 24 # . Three - dimensional im - ages of the matrices were either compiled into a single view pro - jection using Laser Sharp ~ BioRad ! image - processing software or compiled into a 3 - D projection using Voxel - View reconstruction software ~ Vital Images , Inc . , Plymouth , MN ! . At present , high - throughput computer algorithms are being de - veloped to facilitate the quantiﬁcation of speciﬁc structural param - eters of collagen matrices , including ﬁbril diameter , ﬁbril density , ﬁbril length , and ﬁbril orientation . As a ﬁrst approach to quanti - tatively assess ﬁbril diameter , a z - series of images representing a collagen matrix was divided into quadrants and 10 ﬁbrils within each quadrant were randomly selected ~ i . e . , all ﬁbrils weighted equally ! for ﬁbril diameter quantiﬁcation . Using Voxel - View re - construction software , a threshold was determined for the z - series and the images binarized . Five lines were then drawn perpendicu - lar to the long axis of each ﬁbril using the trace feature of the software . The average number of white pixels traversed by the trace lines ~ representing the ﬁbril diameter ! was determined and converted into nanometers based upon pixel dimensions . Measurement of Mechanical Properties . Samples for me - chanical testing were prepared by polymerizing the neutralized collagen solution in a ‘‘dog bone’’ shaped mold ~ Fig . 1 ~ a ! ! . The mold consisted of a glass plate and a piece of ﬂexible silicone gasket . The gauge section of the mold measured 10 mm in length , 4 mm in width , and approximately 1 . 8 mm in thickness ~ Fig . 1 ~ b ! ! . Neutralized collagen solution ~ 1 mL ! was added to each mold and the mold incubated at 37°C in a humidiﬁed environ - ment . Polypropylene mesh was embedded in the ends of the ma - trices to facilitate clamping of each specimen for mechanical test - ing . Following polymerization of the collagen matrix , both thickness and width measurements were made on the gauge sec - tion of the specimens using dial calipers . Total thickness measure - ments representing the width of both the specimen and glass plate were made by lowering the calipers until they touched the top of the matrix ; this event was marked by the liquid being pulled into contact with the caliper edge via surface tension . Specimen thick - ness was calculated by subtracting the thickness of the glass plate from the total thickness ~ matrix 1 glass plate ! measurement . To measure specimen width , the collagen matrix was placed under a Zeiss Stemi 2000 ~ Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ! stereo microscope ~ 2 . 5 3 magniﬁcation ! and the caliper tips were matched to the width of the matrix . The dial caliper measurements are accurate to 0 . 02 mm . Journal of Biomechanical Engineering APRIL 2002 , Vol . 124 (cid:213) 215 Tensile properties of 3 - D collagen matrices were measured us - ing a modiﬁed Minimat 2000 miniature materials tester ~ Rheomet - ric Scientiﬁc , Inc . , Piscataway , NJ ! and standard testing proce - dures for matrices of low mechanical strength ~ Fig . 2 ! @ 19 , 25 – 27 # . One end of each specimen was attached to a stepper motor con - trolled linear actuator and the other end was attached to a load cell . For these experiments , a load cell designed with a sensitivity of 0 . 0003 N was utilized . Clamps offset the loading axis and allowed the matrix to be submerged longitudinally within a bath of PBS , pH 7 . 4 , at approximately 37°C . For most experiments , an extension rate of 10 mm / min ~ 38 . 5 percent / min strain rate ! was employed . For experiments investigating the effect of strain rate on the mechanical properties , strain rates of 19 . 2 , 192 , and 385 percent / min were applied . For all mechanical tests , no precondi - tioning was applied . Engineering stress and strain were calculated from the load displacement data from the experiments . Engineer - ing stress ( s e ) was calculated as s e 5 F A 0 ( 1 ) where F is the force recorded by the Minimat and A 0 is the initial cross - sectional area ~ width 3 thickness ! of the gauge section of the matrix specimen . Engineering strain ( « e ) was calculated as the change in length or cross - head displacement ( D l ) divided by the original length ( l 0 ) . « e 5 D l l 0 ( 2 ) In preliminary experiments , 20 m m polystyrene beads were em - bedded into matrices and used as markers to determine longitudi - nal strain . Relative displacements of the beads were imaged , uti - lizing a Zeiss Stemi 2000 stereo microscope ~ 2 . 5 3 magniﬁcation ! , and strains extracted . Experimentally determined strain measure - ments were found to correlate with cross - head displacement di - vided by the distance between the mesh ~ 26 mm ! . Accordingly , for all the experiments , the distance between the mesh was used as the unstretched or original length of the specimen . The linear modulus was deﬁned as the slope of the ‘‘linear’’ region between 20 percent and 80 percent of the maximum stress as determined by linear regression analysis . Failure stress represented the maxi - mum stress value achieved during loading and failure strain was the strain at which each collagen matrix experienced total failure ~ Fig . 3 ! . Each experiment ~ a particular collagen concentration , strain rate and pH combination ! was repeated in at least triplicate , with each repetition including three to six samples . Statistical Analysis . An analysis of variance was conducted on structural and mechanical property data obtained for matrices using the SAS Statistical Software package ~ SAS Institute Inc . , Cary , NC ! . The Student Neuman Keuls method for multiple com - parisons ( p , 0 . 05 ) was then applied . Results 3 - D Structural Properties . Adjustment of collagen polymer - ization conditions , including collagen concentration and pH , gen - erated 3 - D collagen matrices ~ Fig . 4 ! with distinct structural prop - Fig . 1 Construction of the mold used to prepare collagen ma - trix test specimens (cid:132) a (cid:133) . Schematic showing the dimensions of the collagen matrix test specimen with polypropylene mesh re - inforcement (cid:132) b (cid:133) . Fig . 2 Cut away view of the experimental setup used for me - chanical testing of collagen matrices . Collagen matrices were tested while submerged in PBS , pH 7 . 4 at 37°C . Fig . 3 Representative stress - strain curve of a collagen matrix (cid:132) 2 mg (cid:213) mL , pH 7 . 4 (cid:133) tested at a strain rate of 38 . 5 percent (cid:213) min . The stress strain curve can be separated into three distinct regions designated ‘‘toe , ’’ ‘‘linear , ’’ and ‘‘failure . ’’ Determina - tions of linear modulus , failure stress and failure strain are demonstrated . 216 (cid:213) Vol . 124 , APRIL 2002 Transactions of the ASME erties . Confocal reﬂection microscopy revealed that changes in collagen concentration affected ﬁbril density while maintaining a relatively consistent ﬁbril diameter ~ Fig . 5 ! . An increase in col - lagen ﬁbril density was observed with increasing collagen concen - tration . Fibril diameter measurements for matrices prepared at dif - ferent collagen concentrations were not signiﬁcantly different ( P , 0 . 05 ) and are summarized in Table 1 . Based upon qualitative assessment , both ﬁbril length and diameter were affected by the pH of the polymerization reaction ~ Fig . 6 ! . Fibrils formed at pH 6 . 0 were visually shorter and thicker , while those formed at pH 9 . 0 were longer and thinner . Fibril diameter measurements as a function of pH are provided in Table 1 . Mechanical Property Measurements . When tested me - chanically , all matrices exhibited a similar stress - strain relation - ship . All stress - strain curves showed identiﬁable ‘‘toe , ’’ ‘‘linear , ’’ and ‘‘failure’’ regions characteristic of intact biological tissues ~ Fig . 3 ! . Time - lapse photographs of a characteristic tensile test are shown in Fig . 7 . In addition to large longitudinal displacement imparted by the testing equipment , substantial deformation in the lateral direction was also noted . The majority of specimens failed at or near the middle of the gauge section . Collagen matrices that did not exhibit midgauge failure were not included in the data analysis . Mechanical properties of 3 - D collagen matrices were found to be dependent upon polymerization time . The variation of me - chanical properties with polymerization time for 1 . 0 , 2 . 0 and 3 . 0 mg / mL ~ pH 7 . 4 ! collagen matrices is shown in Fig . 8 . Similarly the variation of mechanical properties with polymerization time for pH 6 . 0 , pH 7 . 4 and pH 9 . 0 ~ 2 . 0 mg / mL ! collagen matrices is shown in Fig . 9 . Collagen solutions were neutralized , aliquoted into the dog bone - shaped mold , and incubated in a humidiﬁed Fig . 4 Representative 3D reconstructed confocal reﬂection image of a matrix prepared from puriﬁed type I collagen (cid:132) 1 mg (cid:213) mL , pH 7 . 4 (cid:133) Fig . 5 Confocal reﬂection images comparing the microstruc - ture of collagen matrices prepared at concentrations of 0 . 3 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:132) a (cid:133) , 1 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:132) b (cid:133) , 2 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:132) c (cid:133) , and 3 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:132) d (cid:133) . An increase in ﬁbril density was observed with increasing collagen concentration (cid:132) 10 m m bar is applicable to all images (cid:133) . Fig . 6 Confocal reﬂection images comparing the microstruc - ture of collagen matrices (cid:132) 2 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:133) prepared at pH of 6 . 0 (cid:132) a (cid:133) , 7 . 0 (cid:132) b (cid:133) , 8 . 0 (cid:132) c (cid:133) , and 9 . 0 (cid:132) d (cid:133) . Both ﬁbril diameter and length were affected by pH . Fibrils formed at lower pH were shorter and thicker than those produced at higher pH (cid:132) 10 m m bar is appli - cable to all images (cid:133) . Table 1 Summary of ﬁbril diameter measurements (cid:132) mean ` standard deviation (cid:133) in nanometers derived from the confocal images Journal of Biomechanical Engineering APRIL 2002 , Vol . 124 (cid:213) 217 chamber at 37°C for periods of time ranging from 1 to 18 h . A progressive increase in failure stress and linear modulus was ob - served with matrices polymerized for up to 10 h . After that time , these parameters did not change signiﬁcantly . Failure strain was found to be independent of polymerization time . Based upon these data , a polymerization time of at least 15 h was established and applied for subsequent experiments . Variation of collagen concentration while all other polymeriza - tion reaction variables ~ e . g . , pH and ionic strength ! were held constant signiﬁcantly affected the mechanical integrity of the 3 - D collagen matrices ~ Fig . 10 ! . Collagen matrices suitable for tensile testing using our experimental setup could be reproducibly pre - pared at collagen concentration 0 . 3 mg / mL and greater . Linear modulus and failure stress values increased linearly over the range of collagen concentrations evaluated ~ 0 . 3 - 3 mg / mL ! . Linear modulus values ranged from 1 . 5 kPa for 0 . 3 mg / mL collagen ma - trices to 24 . 3 kPa for 3 mg / mL collagen matrices . Likewise , a 10 - fold increase in collagen concentration resulted in a nearly 18 - fold increase in failure stress . Except for 0 . 3 mg / mL , the fail - ure strain of the collagen matrix was independent of collagen concentration ( p , 0 . 05 ) . Differences in the mechanical properties of collagen matrices were also noted when the pH of the polymerization reaction was adjusted between 6 and 9 ~ Fig . 11 ! . Collagen matrices polymer - ized at normal physiologic pH ~ 7 . 4 ! had a linear modulus and failure stress of 16 . 6 and 6 . 0 kPa , respectively . Matrices formed under increasingly acidic conditions showed a progressive de - crease in failure stress and linear modulus values ( p , 0 . 05 ) . The tensile strength of collagen matrices was enhanced by polymer - ization under basic conditions , with the greatest mechanical integ - rity being exhibited by matrices formed at pH 9 . 0 . Failure strain remained relatively constant ~ approximately 0 . 6 mm / mm ! over the range of pH values tested . Finally , the mechanical properties of the collagen matrices were found to be dependent upon strain rate ~ Fig . 12 ! . Over the range of strain rates tested , failure stress increased from 5 . 4 to 8 . 7 kPa and the linear modulus increased from 15 . 7 to 25 kPa . Failure strain was independent of strain rate ( p , 0 . 05 ) . A summary of the de - pendence of tensile mechanical properties of collagen matrices as a function of collagen concentration , pH , and strain rate is pro - vided in Table 2 . The length of the ‘‘toe’’ region ~ deﬁned as the distance between zero strain and the intersection of the linear ﬁt and the strain axis ! was quantiﬁed for each mechanical test . Upon statistical analysis , no correlation was identiﬁed between ‘‘toe’’ region length and polymerization conditions . Characterization of a low strain modu - lus ~ the slope of the ‘‘toe’’ region ! was not completed due to the low signal to noise ratio in this region . Discussion In the present study , the 3 - D microstructure of type I collagen matrices prepared in vitro under different assembly conditions was determined and correlated with tensile mechanical properties . Within the ECM of connective tissues in vivo , collagen molecules are organized into hierarchical structures consisting of highly or - dered ﬁbrils that subsequently are aggregated into ﬁbers or ﬁber bundles . Depending upon the speciﬁc tissue studied , collagen ﬁbrils have been identiﬁed with diameters in the range of 25 – 500 nanometers @ 28 , 29 # . On the other hand , ﬁber bundles have been Fig . 7 Time - lapse images demonstrating the tensile testing of a collagen matrix (cid:132) 2 mg (cid:213) mL , pH 7 . 4 (cid:133) at a strain rate of 38 . 5 percent (cid:213) min Fig . 8 Effect of polymerization time on the linear modulus , failure stress and failure strain of 1 . 0 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:132) m (cid:133) , 2 . 0 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:132) d (cid:133) , and 3 . 0 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:132) j (cid:133) collagen matrices (cid:132) pH 7 . 4 (cid:133) tested at a strain rate of 38 . 5 percent (cid:213) min . Exponential curve ﬁts are shown for the linear modulus and failure stress data . 218 (cid:213) Vol . 124 , APRIL 2002 Transactions of the ASME reported as large as several hundred micrometers @ 28 , 29 # . It has been established that the distribution of collagen ﬁbril sizes ~ i . e . , length and diameter ! together with their speciﬁc organization is an important determinant of the mechanical properties of tissues . In particular , it has been suggested that the creep - inhibition property of a tissue , i . e . , its ability to resist plastic deformation , is directly related to the percentage of small diameter ﬁbrils present @ 7 # . On the other hand , the ability of the tissue to withstand high stress levels is related to the percentage of large diameter ﬁbrils in the tissue . Differences in the mechanical behavior of tissues can also be attributed to variation in content and composition of noncol - lagenous components present in the ECM , including proteogly - cans , glycosaminoglycans , and elastic ﬁbers @ 7 # . The tremendous diversity of ECM components and their complex organization in vivo make it difﬁcult to decipher the importance of individual molecules to the ECM structural and mechanical properties that ultimately regulate cellular behavior . Herein , a simpliﬁed model of the ECM represented by 3 - D , self - assembled matrices of type I collagen were used to determine the relationship between collagen ﬁbril microstructure and mechanical behavior . Herein , polymerization reaction conditions including collagen concentration and pH were varied to obtain 3 - D collagen matrices with distinct microstructures . A key feature of this study was the application of confocal reﬂection microscopy to collect and ana - lyze 3 - D micro - structural details . This technique allowed collagen ﬁbril parameters and organization to be visualized and quantiﬁed in a 3 - D format in the absence of specimen processing ~ e . g . , ﬁxa - tion , dehydration , and staining ! . Traditionally , structural informa - tion regarding collagen ﬁbrils both in vivo and in vitro has been collected using light and electron microscopy techniques . These techniques provide structural information in a 2 - D rather than 3 - D format and require extensive specimen processing that often re - sults in structural artifacts @ 17 , 30 , 31 # . Three - dimensional images of collagen matrices in their native state allow for more accurate measurement of ﬁbril parameters ~ i . e . , diameter ! and inspection of interﬁbril relationships . Confocal reﬂection microscopy revealed that varying the col - lagen concentration of the polymerization reaction affects the ﬁbril density of the collagen matrices . Quantitative analyses showed that ﬁbril diameter did not vary signiﬁcantly with col - lagen concentration . Fibril diameters for these matrices were ap - proximately 450 nm , which falls into the range of ﬁbril diameters of intact tissues . The dependence of ﬁbril density but not ﬁbril diameter on collagen concentration is consistent with previous studies by Wood and Keech @ 5 # . Acidic conditions produced ﬁbrils that were increased in diam - eter and decreased in length as compared to ﬁbrils produced at basic conditions . The effect of pH on ﬁbril diameter , but not length , has been previously shown in studies on matrices and extruded collagen ﬁbers @ 5 , 17 # . This study is the ﬁrst to show the effect of pH on the length of collagen ﬁbrils . The fact that type I collagen is a major determinant of the mechanical properties of the ECM was apparent in that the stress - strain curves for in vitro assembled matrices were similar in shape to those for intact tissues . As observed with intact tissues @ 32 # , 3 - D collagen matrices exhibited nonlinear stress - strain curves with three distinct regions . The region of small strains ~ ‘‘toe’’ region ! corresponds to the removal of a crimp in the collagen ﬁbrils ﬁrst at the ﬁbrillar level and then at the molecular level Fig . 9 Effect of polymerization time on the linear modulus , failure stress and failure strain of pH 6 . 0 (cid:132) . (cid:133) , pH 7 . 4 (cid:132) d (cid:133) , and pH 9 . 0 (cid:132) l (cid:133) collagen matrices (cid:132) 2 . 0 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:133) tested at a strain rate of 38 . 5 percent (cid:213) min . Exponential curve ﬁts are shown for the lin - ear modulus and failure stress data . Fig . 10 Effect of collagen concentration (cid:132) 0 . 3 – 3 . 0 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:133) on the linear modulus (cid:132) d (cid:133) , failure stress (cid:132) l (cid:133) , and failure strain (cid:132) s (cid:133) of collagen matrices (cid:132) pH 7 . 4 (cid:133) tested at 38 . 5 percent (cid:213) min Journal of Biomechanical Engineering APRIL 2002 , Vol . 124 (cid:213) 219 @ 33 # . In the ‘‘linear’’ region , the stiffness of the collagen ﬁbrils increases considerably with extension . This region has been asso - ciated with stretching of the collagen triple helices or of the cross - links between the helices , implying a side - by - side gliding of neighboring molecules @ 34 # . Finally , the ‘‘failure’’ region repre - sents disruption of ﬁbril structure . Additionally , the stress - strain response of the 3 - D collagen matrices was shown to be sensitive to strain rate , a characteristic of viscoelastic materials . Nearly all living tissues show some level of viscoelasticity @ 35 # . Speciﬁcally , the viscoelastic material properties of both collagen ﬁbers derived from rat - tail tendon @ 36 # and extruded collagen ﬁbers have been demonstrated @ 37 # . Again , the mechanical nature of the collagen matrices is shown to be consistent with properties of their main structural component , collagen ﬁbrils . Interestingly , the stress - strain behavior of the collagen matrices was found to be dependent upon the time of polymerization . The mechanical integrity of the matrices increased with polymeriza - tion time and then stabilized after 10 h . This result was somewhat surprising since the bulk of the visible ﬁbril formation events in the self - assembly process are thought to be complete after 30 – 120 min , based upon traditional spectrophotometric ~ turbidity ! @ 38 # and time - lapse confocal reﬂection microscopy experiments @ 24 # . Changes in the intermolecular hydrophobic interactions might have contributed to this observation . Comparison of mechanical data obtained from the present experiments was facilitated by us - ing a polymerization time in which the mechanical integrity of the collagen matrices was determined to be stable ~ greater than 15 h ! . As observed previously with intact tissues , mechanical behavior of in vitro assembled collagen matrices was dependent upon struc - tural properties . As expected , the linear modulus and failure strength increased linearly with increasing collagen concentration , and therefore collagen ﬁbril density . As a ﬁrst approach , the col - lagen matrix can be represented as a composite consisting of an interstitial ﬂuid reinforced with randomly oriented collagen ﬁbrils . Parry presented a theoretical model for a randomly oriented ﬁ - brous composite that predicted that the Young’s modulus was pro - portional to the volume fraction of collagen ﬁbrils @ 7 # . Addition - ally , he showed that higher collagen concentrations correlate with increased tensile strength . Fig . 11 Effect of phosphate buffer pH (cid:132) 6 . 0 – 9 . 0 (cid:133) on the linear modulus (cid:132) d (cid:133) , failure stress (cid:132) l (cid:133) , and failure strain (cid:132) s (cid:133) of col - lagen matrices (cid:132) 2 mg (cid:213) mL (cid:133) tested at a strain rate of 38 . 5 percent (cid:213) min Fig . 12 Effect of strain rate (cid:132) 19 . 2 – 385 percent (cid:213) min (cid:133) on the lin - ear modulus (cid:132) d (cid:133) , failure stress (cid:132) l (cid:133) , and failure strain (cid:132) s (cid:133) of collagen matrices (cid:132) 2 mg (cid:213) mL , pH 7 . 4 (cid:133) Table 2 Results of the tensile tests 220 (cid:213) Vol . 124 , APRIL 2002 Transactions of the ASME In this study , collagen matrices prepared at 3 mg / mL showed the greatest failure stress ~ 9 . 54 kPa ! and linear modulus ~ 24 . 3 kPa ! . Comparable tensile mechanical properties for this speciﬁc collagen concentration were also obtained by Osborne et al . @ 21 # . In contrast , mechanical property data obtained in the present study was signiﬁcantly greater than those reported by O¨zerdem and To¨z - eren @ 19 # . This discrepancy can best be explained by their use of pepsin treated rather that acid solubilized collagen @ 39 # . The dependence of collagen matrix mechanical properties on structure was also observed when the pH of the polymerization reaction was changed . Linear modulus and failure stress increased for matrices prepared under increasingly basic conditions up to pH 9 . 0 . The increase in mechanical integrity was correlated with ﬁbrils that were increased in length but decreased in diameter . Assuming a constant ﬁbril diameter , an increase in length of the ﬁbrils will increase the mechanical integrity ~ linear modulus and failure stress ! of a ﬁbrous composite system @ 40 # . The increase in mechanical properties with increased ﬁbril length and decreased ﬁbril diameter suggests that ﬁbril length has a greater effect on the mechanical properties of the 3 - D collagen matrix construct than does the ﬁbril diameter . This apparent trade - off between ﬁbril di - ameter and length in dictating the mechanical properties of col - lagen based materials has not been previously reported . The calculation of ‘‘engineering’’ rather than ‘‘true’’ stress and strain is consistent with previous studies involving collagen ma - trices @ 19 , 21 # and facilitated data comparison . However , the pho - tograph in Fig . 7 shows that the cross - sectional area of the speci - men does experience a signiﬁcant reduction . Thus , the ‘‘true’’ stress within the specimen is clearly greater than the calculated ‘‘engineering’’ stress values . Consistent with previous studies , this area reduction was not systematically measured in this study . However , in order to estimate the difference between ‘‘true’’ stress and ‘‘engineering’’ stress values , the area reduction in the speci - mens of Fig . 7 was approximated . We assumed that the specimen behaved isotropically and that the relative changes in width and thickness measurements at a given load were the same . Based upon these assumptions , ‘‘true’’ stress values were approximated over the various regions of the stress - strain curve and compared with calculated ‘‘engineering’’ stress ~ Fig . 13 ! . The ‘‘true’’ stress is indicated as a dashed line since it is an approximate and not a directly measured quantity . Note that the largest difference be - tween ‘‘engineering’’ and ‘‘true’’ stress values is observed in the ‘‘failure’’ region . At present , more sophisticated methods are needed for determining changes in cross - sectional area of speci - mens during mechanical loading so that ‘‘true’’ stress can be cal - culated accurately . Such methods are currently being investigated in our laboratory . Our results represent the ﬁrst extensive study on the effects of pH and collagen concentration on the mechanical behavior of col - lagen matrices . In turn , mechanical properties have been corre - lated to micro - structural changes in the collagen matrices . The ability to speciﬁcally modify ECM structure to yield predictable and reproducible mechanical properties will provide a useful tool for the study of cell - ECM interaction . In particular , the inﬂuence of ECM structure - mechanics on cell behavior can be explored . Structural variation will elicit an array of loading and deformation conditions on cells seeded within the matrices . Speciﬁc cellular responses to the different micromechanical environments can then be studied and mechanisms derived . This simpliﬁed system also can be used to determine speciﬁc molecular interactions ~ e . g . , type I collagen plus speciﬁc glycosaminoglycans ! that inﬂuence ECM structure - mechanics . Thus , experiments that provide quantitative as well as qualitative information regarding the ECM and its in - ﬂuence on cells will ultimately elucidate the basic principles that will drive the next generation of biomaterials and devices for tis - sue engineering applications . Acknowledgments The authors thank Kirk Foster for his technical assistance with the Minimat load cell modiﬁcation . The authors thank Andrew O . Brightman and Gretchen Lawler for their editorial review of this work . This research was funded by NSF Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training ~ IGERT ! Program in Therapeu - tic and Diagnostic Devices Grant DGE - 99 - 72770 . Blayne A . Roeder is an NSF IGERT fellow . References @ 1 # Ingber , D . , 2000 , ‘‘Mechanical and Chemical Determinants of Tissue Devel - opment , ’’ Principles of Tissue Engineering , 2nd Edition , eds . , R . P . Lanza et al . , Academic Press , Inc . , San Diego , CA , pp . 101 – 110 . @ 2 # Chiquet , M . , 1999 , ‘‘Regulation of Extracellular Gene Expression by Mechani - cal Stress , ’’ Matrix Biology , 18 , pp . 417 – 426 . @ 3 # Bateman , J . F . , Lamande , S . R . , and Ramshaw , J . A . M . , 1996 , ‘‘Collagen Superfamily , ’’ Extracellular Matrix Vol . 2 . , Molecular Components and Inter - action , ed . , W . D . Comper , Harwood Academic Publishers , The Netherlands , pp . 22 – 67 . @ 4 # Veis , A . , and George A . , 1994 , ‘‘Fundamentals of Interstitial Collagen Assem - bly , ’’ Extracellular Matrix Assembly and Structure , eds . , P . D . Urchenco et al . , Academic Press , Inc . , San Diego , CA , pp . 15 – 45 . @ 5 # Wood , G . C . , and Keech , M . K . , 1960 , ‘‘The Formation of Fibrils from Col - lagen Solutions . The Effect of Experimental Conditions : Kinetic and Electron Microscopic Studies , ’’ Biochem . J . , 75 , pp . 588 – 598 . @ 6 # Voytik - Harbin , S . L . , 2001 , ‘‘Three - Dimensional Extracellular Matrix Sub - strates for Cell Culture , ’’ Methods Cell Biol . , 63 , pp . 561 – 581 . @ 7 # Parry , D . A . , 1988 , ‘‘The Molecular and Fibrillar Structure of Collagen and its Relationship to the Mechanical Properties of Connective Tissue , ’’ Biophys . Chem . , 29 , pp . 195 – 209 . @ 8 # Yannas , I . V . , and Burke , J . F . , 1980 , ‘‘Design of an Artiﬁcial Skin . I Basic Design Principles , ’’ J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , 14 , pp . 65 – 81 . @ 9 # Matsuda , K . , Suzuki , S . , Isshiki , N . , Yoshioka , K . , Okada , T . , and Ikada , Y . , 1990 , ‘‘Inﬂuence of Glycosaminoglycans on the Collagen Sponge Component of a Bilayer Artiﬁcial Skin , ’’ Biomaterials , 11 , pp . 351 – 355 . @ 10 # Matsuda , K . , Suzuki , S . , Issihiki , N . , and Ikada , Y . , 1993 , ‘‘Re - freeze Dried Bilayer Artiﬁcial Skin , ’’ Biomaterials , 14 , pp . 1030 – 1035 . @ 11 # Chen , C . S . , Yannas , I . V . , and Spector , M . , 1995 , ‘‘Pore Strain Behavior of Collagen Glycosaminoglycan Analogues of Extracellular Matrix , ’’ Biomateri - als , 16 , pp . 777 – 783 . @ 12 # Pins , G . D . , Huang , E . K . , Christiansen , D . L . , and Silver , F . H . , 1997 , ‘‘Effects of Static Axial Strain on the Tensile Properties and Failure Mechanisms of Self - Assembled Collagen Fibers , ’’ J . Appl . Polym . Sci . , 63 , pp . 1429 – 1440 . @ 13 # Pins , G . D . , Christiansen , D . L . , Patel , R . , and Silver , F . H . , 1997 , ‘‘Self - Assembly of Collagen Fibers . Inﬂuence of Fibrillar Alignment and Decorin on Mechanical Properties , ’’ Biophys . J . , 73 , pp . 2164 – 2172 . @ 14 # Silver , F . H . , Christiansen , D . L . , Snowhill , P . B . , and Chen , Y . , 2000 , ‘‘Role of Storage on Changes in the Mechanical Properties of Tendon and Self - Assembled Collagen Fibers , ’’ Connect . Tissue Res . , 41 , pp . 155 – 164 . @ 15 # Law , J . K . , Parsons , J . R . , Silver , F . H . , and Weiss , A . B . , 1989 , ‘‘An Evalua - tion of Puriﬁed Reconstituted Type I Collagen Fibers , ’’J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , 23 , pp . 961 – 977 . @ 16 # Dunn , M . G . , Avasarala , P . N . , and Zawadsky , J . P . , 1993 , ‘‘Optimization of Fig . 13 Comparison of ‘‘true’’ stress (cid:132) approximated (cid:133) and ‘‘en - gineering’’ stress (cid:132) calculated (cid:133) as a function of strain for a col - lagen matrix (cid:132) 2mg (cid:213) mL , pH 7 . 4 (cid:133) Journal of Biomechanical Engineering APRIL 2002 , Vol . 124 (cid:213) 221 Extruded Collagen Fibers for ACL Reconstruction , ’’ J . Biomed . Mater . Res . , 27 , pp . 1545 – 1552 . @ 17 # Christensen , D . L . , Huang , E . K . , and Silver , F . H . , 2000 , ‘‘Assembly of Type I Collagen : Fusion of Fibril Subunits and the Inﬂuence of Fibril Diameter on Mechanical Properties , ’’ Matrix Biology , 19 , pp . 409 – 420 . @ 18 # Miller , E . J . , and Rhodes , E . K . , 1982 , ‘‘Preparation and Characterization of Different types of Collagen , ’’ Methods Enzymol . , 82 , pp . 33 – 64 . @ 19 # O¨zerdem , B . , and To¨zeren , A . , 1995 , ‘‘Physical Response of Collagen Gels to Tensile Strain , ’’ASME J . Biomech . Eng . , 117 , pp . 397 – 401 . @ 20 # Knapp , D . M . , Barocas , V . H . , and Moon , A . G . , Yoo , K . , Petzold , L . R . , Tranquillo , R . T . , 1997 , ‘‘Rheology of Reconstituted Type I Collagen Gel in Conﬁned Compression , ’’ J . Rheol . , 41 , pp . 971 – 993 . @ 21 # Osborne , C . S . , Barbenel , J . C . , Smith , D . , Savakis , M . , and Grant , M . H . , 1998 , ‘‘Investigation into the Tensile Properties of Collagen / Chondroitin - 6 - sulphate Gels : The Effect of Crosslinking Agents and Diamines , ’’ Med . Biol . Eng . Comput . , 36 , pp . 129 – 134 . @ 22 # Hsu , S . , Jamieson , A . M . , and Blackwell , J . , 1994 , ‘‘Viscoelastic Studies of Extracellular Matrix Interactions in a Model Native Collagen Gel System , ’’ Biorheology , 31 , pp . 21 – 36 . @ 23 # Voytik - Harbin , S . L . , Rajwa , B . , and Robinson , J . P . , 2000 , ‘‘3D Imaging of Extracellular Matrix and Extracellular Matrix - Cell Interactions , ’’Methods Cell Biol . , 63 , pp . 583 – 597 . @ 24 # Brightman , A . O . , Rajwa , B . P . , Sturgis , J . E . , McCallister , M . E . , Robinson , J . P . , and Voytik - Harbin , S . L . , 2000 , ‘‘Time - Lapse Confocal Reﬂection Micros - copy of Collagen Fibrillogenesis and Extracellular Matrix Assembly In Vitro , ’’ Biopolymers , 54 , pp . 222 – 234 . @ 25 # Kolodney , M . S . , and Wysolmerski , R . B . , 1992 , ‘‘Isometric Contraction by Fibroblasts and Endothelial Cells in Tissue Culture : A Quantitative Study , ’’ J . Cell Biol . , 117 , pp . 73 – 82 . @ 26 # Delvoye , P . , Wiliquet , P . , Leveque , J . L . , Nusgens , B . V . , and Lapiere , C . M . , 1991 , ‘‘Measurement of Mechanical Forces Generated by Skin Fibroblasts Embedded in a Three Dimensional Collagen Gel , ’’J . Invest . Dermatol . , 97 , pp . 898 – 902 . @ 27 # Benkherourou , M . , Rochas , C . , Tracqui , P . , Tranqui , L . , and Gume´ry , P . Y . , 1999 , ‘‘Standardization of a Method for Characterizing Low - Concentration Biogels : Elastic Properties of Low Concentration Agarose Gels , ’’ ASME J . Biomech . Eng . , 121 , pp . 184 – 187 . @ 28 # Baer , E . , Cassidy , J . J . , and Hiltner , A . , 1991 , ‘‘Hierarchical Structure of Col - lagen Composite Systems , ’’ Pure Appl . Chem . , 63 , pp . 961 – 973 . @ 29 # Birk D . E . , Silver F . H . , and Trelstad R . L . , 1991 , ‘‘Matrix Assembly , ’’ The Cell Biology of the Extracellular Matrix , 2nd Edition , ed . , E . D . Hay , Aca - demic Press , Inc . , New York , pp . 221 . @ 30 # Voytik - Harbin , S . L . , Brightman , A . O . , Waisner , B . Z . , Robinson , J . P . , and Lamar , C . H . , 1998 , ‘‘Small Intestinal Submucosa : ATissue - Derived Extracel - lular Matrix that Promotes Tissue - Speciﬁc Growth and Differentiation of Cells In Vitro , ’’ Tissue Eng . , 4 , pp . 157 – 174 . @ 31 # Allen , T . D . , Schor , S . L . , and Schor , A . M . , 1984 , ‘‘An Ultrastructural Review of Collagen Gels , a Model System for Cell - Matrix , Cell - Basement Membrane and Cell - Cell Interactions , ’’ Scan . Electron Microsc . , 1 , pp . 375 – 390 . @ 32 # Abrahams , M . , 1967 , ‘‘Mechanical Behavior of Tendon In Vitro , ’’ Med . Biol . Eng . , 5 , pp . 433 – 443 . @ 33 # Diamant , J . , Keller , A . , Baer , E . , Litt , M . , and Arridge , R . G . C . , 1972 , ‘‘Col - lagen ; Ultrastructure and its Relation to Mechanical Properties as a Function of Aging , ’’ Proc . R . Soc . London , Ser . B , 180 , pp . 293 – 315 . @ 34 # Folkhard , W . E . , Mosler , E . , Geerken , E . , Knorzer , E . , Nemetschek - Gonsler , H . , Nemetschek , T . , and Koch , M . H . , 1986 , ‘‘Quantitative Analysis of the Molecular Sliding Mechanism in Native Tendon Collagen—Time - Resolved Dynamic Studies Using Synchrotron Radiation , ’’ Int . J . Biol . Macromol . , 9 , pp . 169 – 175 . @ 35 # Fung , Y . C . , 1993 , Biomechanics : Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues , Springer - Verlag , New York , NY . @ 36 # Haut , R . C . , and Little , R . W . , 1972 , ‘‘A Constitutive Equation for Collagen Fibers , ’’ J . Biomech . , 5 , pp . 423 – 430 . @ 37 # Kato , Y . P . , Christiansen , D . L . , Hahn , R . A . , Shieh , S - J . , Goldstein , J . D . , and Silver , F . H . , 1989 , ‘‘Mechanical Properties of Collagen Fibers : A Comparison of Reconstituted and Rat Tail Tendon Fibers , ’’ Biomaterials , 10 , pp . 38 – 42 . @ 38 # Comper , W . D . , and Veis , A . , 1977 , ‘‘Characterization of Nuclei in In Vitro Collagen Fibril Formation , ’’ Biopolymers , 16 , pp . 2133 – 2142 . @ 39 # Snowden , J . M . , and Swann , D . A . , 1979 , ‘‘The Formation and Thermal Sta - bility of In Vitro Assemble Fibrils From Acid - Soluble and Pepsin Treated Collagens , ’’ Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 580 , pp . 372 – 381 . @ 40 # Callister , W . D . , Jr . , 1994 , Material Science and Engineering : An Introduction , John Wiley and Sons , New York , NY . 222 (cid:213) Vol . 124 , APRIL 2002 Transactions of the ASME