State Ownership and Technology Adoption : The Case of Electric Utilities and Renewable Energy Bjarne Steffen , Valerie J . Karplus , and Tobias S . Schmidt M A S S A C H U S E T T S I N S T I T U T E O F T E C H N O L O G Y August 2020 CEEPR WP 2020 - 016 Working Paper Series State ownership and technology adoption : The case of electric utilities and renewable energy August 2020 Bjarne Steﬀen a , b , c , 1 , Valerie J . Karplus c , d , Tobias S . Schmidt a , b a Department of Humanities , Social and Political Sciences , Energy Politics Group , ETH Zurich b Institute of Science , Technology , and Policy , ETH Zurich c Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research , Massachusetts Institute of Technology d Department of Engineering and Public Policy , Carnegie Mellon University Abstract : Technological change in industries that are characterized by large technical systems often occurs incrementally along given technological trajectories . Given pressing issues such as climate change , much research has studied how to induce and accelerate socio - technical transitions in such sectors , for instance the transition to renewables in electricity . The adoption of new technologies by players such as incumbent electric utilities is a key step in the transition , but not a given . Particularly , little is known on how the ownership structure of utilities aﬀects technology adoption . Following liberalization , the electricity industry in many countries is now characterized by a co - existence of state - owned and private utilities . Economic ownership literature has studied pros and cons of these options in terms of productivity and market power , amongst other factors , but the role of ownership on the adoption of low - carbon technologies remains elusive . To ﬁll this gap , here we bring together innovation literature and economic ownership literature to derive hypotheses how owner - ship could aﬀect renewable energy adoption by utilities , including through drivers like incentives to innovate , the exploitation of state ownership to advance climate policy , the role of general climate policy stringency , and the impact of incomplete contracting . Taking incumbent utilities in the European Union ( EU ) during 2005 – 2016 as a case , we test the hypotheses using regression analyses and qualitative case studies . Results suggest that in the EU , state - owned utilities have a higher tendency to invest in renewables , though state ownership does not exert its inﬂuence in a vacuum : It interacts with the existence of pro - adoption policies and state enforcement capabilities . Based on our ﬁndings , we discuss the larger implications for the role of state - owned enterprises in directed technological change in the energy sector and beyond . JEL classiﬁcation : L33 , L94 , O33 , Q42 , Q48 1 E - Mail bjarne . steffen @ gess . ethz . ch 2 “Technological change is at once the most important and least understood feature driving the future cost of climate change mitigation” ( Pizer and Popp , 2008 , p . 2768 ) . 1 Introduction Technological change is not only the key driver of economic development ( Romer , 1990 ; Schumpeter , 1942 ) but also plays a central role in addressing pressing societal issues ( Markard et al . , 2012 ) . One such issue is climate change . Preventing dangerous levels of global warming requires a rapid and deep decarbonization of many industries by means of socio - technical transitions ( Frank W Geels et al . , 2017 ; IPCC , 2014 ; Masson - Delmotte et al . , 2018 ) . Besides the invention and innovation of new technologies , the adoption of low - carbon technologies also needs to be accelerated to this end ( Grubler et al . , 2016 ; IPCC , 2014 ) . This is particularly diﬃcult in industries in which innovation typically only occurs incremen - tally along a given technological trajectory , and in which “lock - in” to established high - carbon technologies prevents the adoption of radically new technologies ( Islas , 1997 ; Schmidt et al . , 2016 ; Unruh , 2000 ) . A number of those industries crucial for climate change mitigation are characterized by large , long - lived technical systems , in which interdependencies and standards are powerful barriers to the diﬀusion of new technologies ( Hughes , 1987 ; Markard and Truﬀer , 2006 ; Seto et al . , 2016 ) . Accordingly , a broad literature has studied how public policy can induce and accelerate a socio - technical transition in these industries , including by subsidizing investment in or the operation of new technologies , enacting new technical standards , or more generally supporting a conducive environment for new technologies ( for an overview , see Kern et al . , 2019 ) . Much of the empirical literature centers on the question of which policy instru - ments , mixes , and designs foster technology innovation and adoption eﬃciently and eﬀectively ( see e . g . Polzin et al . , 2019 ; Schmalensee , 2012 ; Schmidt and Sewerin , 2019 ) . By contrast , the 3 impact of the ownership structure of companies on technology adoption has been little studied ( an exeption is Rose and Joskow , 1990 ) . This research gap is surprising given that the re - structuring of industry ownership has been a key policy area in industrialized countries for decades , which encompasses the question of whether large technical systems should be oper - ated by state - owned or privately - owned companies . However , past research on ownership has often been concerned with pressing topics other than technological change , such as how to increase operational eﬃciency and how to prevent the abuse of market power ( cf . e . g . Boardman and Vining , 1989 ; Crew and Kleindorfer , 1979 ; Goldeng et al . , 2008 ; Shleifer , 1998 ) . Regarding innovation , ownership is eclipsed by a focus on how changing market con - centration , liberalization , and regulatory treatment aﬀect R & D in the electricity industry ( Jamasb and Pollitt , 2008 ; Markard and Truﬀer , 2006 ) . Hence , the impact of public versus private ownership on the adoption of new technologies remains elusive . While the role of ownership in the adoption of ( low - carbon ) innovation is relevant in multiple ( polluting ) industries ( e . g . , aviation ) , here we focus on the electricity industry . While elec - tricity is a ubiquitous input to many industries , its generation is the single largest contributor to anthropogenic CO 2 emissions ( IPCC , 2014 ) . At the same time , it is a hard - to - store com - modity that can be produced using an array of diﬀerent technologies , including very carbon - intensive ( e . g . , coal ) as well as largely carbon - free technologies ( renewables ) . Consequently , a massive shift toward non - CO 2 - emitting renewable energy technologies is assumed in all path - ways toward reaching the Paris Agreement’s targets that are considered by climate economists ( Luderer et al . , 2018 ) . Importantly , however , the industry was , until recently , characterized by a strong “lock - in” to high - carbon technologies ( Carley , 2011 ) . How to accelerate the tran - sition of the electricity industry toward renewables is thus an important research area within the sustainability transition literature ( Grubler , 2012 ; Schmidt and Sewerin , 2019 ; Strunz , 4 2014 ; Verbong and Geels , 2007 ; Wainstein and Bumpus , 2016 ) . This literature has also ad - dressed the question of which actors should undertake the required massive investments in innovative renewable energy technologies ( Mazzucato and Semieniuk , 2018 ; McCollum et al . , 2018 ) . Historically , power plants and grids were often built by state - owned utilities , as electricity was considered an essential service to be delivered by either local or central governments ( Wollmann , 2011 ) . While acknowledging that public ownership may be appropriate given the natural monopoly nature of the utility business , economic theory since the 1970s has empha - sized that shifting to ( regulated ) private ownership models can increase the eﬃciency of utility operation ( cf . Crew and Kleindorfer , 1979 ; Megginson and Netter , 2001 ; Shleifer , 1998 ) . This argument is supported by a large empirical literature showing that private ﬁrms generally deliver better commercial performance compared to state - owned enterprises ( e . g . Boardman and Vining , 1989 ; Dewenter and Malatesta , 2001 ; Ehrlich et al . , 1994 ; Goldeng et al . , 2008 ; Megginson and Netter , 2001 ) . Accordingly , the privatization of electric utilities has been the general trend in many countries since the 1980s ( Holburn and Zelner , 2010 ; Markard and Truﬀer , 2006 ; Wollmann , 2011 ) . However , public ownership models nevertheless remained common alongside privately - owned utilities , resulting in the co - existence of state - owned and private utilities in the electricity industry in many countries ( e . g . , much of Europe ) . Govern - ments generally motivate the residual public ownership of some utilities in terms of the non - commercial priorities the state may have for their operation , including preventing the abuse of monopoly power , incomplete contracting , and industrial policy strategies ( Christiansen , 2013 ; Crew and Kleindorfer , 1979 ; Goldeng et al . , 2008 ; Laﬀont and Tirole , 1993 ) . Since the 2010s , mitigating climate change has become an emerging priority of policymakers . Amid growing pressure to mitigate climate change and a growing dissatisfaction with private 5 utility operation , political debates have emerged over whether state ownership of utilities is needed to accelerate the adoption of new low - carbon technologies in the industry . Some coun - tries recently witnessed a trend of establishing new state - owned utilities , motivated in part by the expectation that state - owned enterprises would make more sustainable investment decisions ( Wollmann , 2011 ) . For instance , in Germany , two large utilities , EnBW and Steag , have been re - nationalized , and about 90 new municipal - owned utilities were founded over the last few years ( Bönker et al . , 2016 ) . The nationalization of parts of the electricity industry was also ﬁercely debated during the U . K . election campaign and the U . S . primary election campaign in 2019 ( Bade , 2020 ; Hodges , 2019 ) . The idea that state ownership accelerates technological change is contested . From a theoret - ical perspective , private companies are generally considered to be more innovative than state - owned enterprises , but past ownership literature mainly considered the pros and cons of state ownership in a given socio - technical regime . In the case of climate change mitigation , however , the key issue is how ownership contributes to changes in socio - technical regimes . At the same time , the large amount of interdisciplinary literature on socio - technical transitions remains largely detached from the economic ownership literature to date . From an empirical perspec - tive , there are examples of high - carbon and low - carbon technologies chosen by state - owned and private utilities alike ( Frei et al . , 2018 ; Pahle , 2010 ; Richter , 2013 ) , and no systematic assessment of the relationship between the ownership model and the tendency to adopt low - carbon technologies is currently available . To ﬁll these research gaps , we study the relationship between utility ownership structures , i . e . , state - owned vs . private utilities , and investments in renewables ( e . g . , wind turbines , solar PV plants ) as opposed to fossil fuel - based alternatives ( e . g . , coal - ﬁred plants , gas - ﬁred plants ) . Innovation scholars have suggested that the large - scale adoption of new renewable energy 6 technologies is crucial for renewables to drive a low carbon transition , because innovation and cost reductions are largely driven by the processes of learning - by - doing and learning - by - using in commercial deployment ( Hoppmann et al . , 2013 ; Huenteler et al . , 2016 ; Kavlak et al . , 2018 ; Nemet , 2019 ) . Improving understanding of ownership and technological change in the elec - tricity industry is thus important in itself , but it can also serve to derive insights applicable to ownership and technological change more generally . We start with a review of literature and a discussion of the theoretical rationales behind why state - owned utilities could have a lower or higher tendency to invest in renewables . Testable hypotheses are derived that add to previous literature on state - owned enterprises by consid - ering the adoption of an emerging technology during transition periods featuring changing socio - technical regimes . Next , we empirically consider the case of incumbent utilities in Eu - ropean Union ( EU ) countries during 2005 – 2016 ( a period in which the EU was bound by the Kyoto protocol , and all EU countries had binding targets to increase the share of renewable energy in their energy mix ) . A large - n regression analysis of state - owned and private utilities’ investment decisions allows us to test our hypotheses with observational data . Third , we present a qualitative analysis of the investment motives for a selection of utilities with re - markable shifts to renewables , complementing the regression analysis with further evidence using an explanatory sequential research design . Finally , we discuss the larger implications for the role of state - owned enterprises in directed technological change , lay out an agenda for future research , and conclude . 2 Theory and hypotheses While the literature , to our knowledge , has not explicitly addressed the role of ownership for technology adoption during transitions , two streams of literature relate to our research topic . 7 First , innovation literature analyzes the interplay between technological change and electricity market liberalization more generally , considering the broader changes in market structures coming with liberalization and privatization ( but not the role of ownership in liberalized market structures speciﬁcally ) . Socio - technical transition scholars emphasize the importance of new entrants to break - up the socio - technical lock - in in industries such as electricity ( Frank W . Geels et al . , 2017 ; Unruh , 2000 ) . The liberalization of electricity industries in many cases created such space for new entrants ( even though “technical progress has neither been a driving force nor an objective of the [ electricity sector liberalization ] reform agenda” ( Jamasb and Pollitt , 2008 , p . 1007 ) ) . Markard and Truﬀer ( 2006 ) analyze how liberalization and pri - vatization processes changed the environment for technological change in the electricity in - dustry , tentatively concluding that a liberalized market environment allows for more hetero - geneous utility strategies with respect to new technologies . Indeed , later empirical studies showed that private new entrants played an important role in the deployment of renewables in a number of countries ( IEA , 2016 ; Steﬀen , 2018 ; Steﬀen et al . , 2018 ) . Notwithstanding the role of new entrants , it is a separate important question whether or not the ownership struc - ture of the remaining incumbents aﬀects their technology choices , a topic not analyzed by the literature on market liberalization . Still , today incumbent utilities remain major players in power generation in most countries ( IEA , 2016 ) . Given many utilities’ integrated structure comprising both power generation and distribution , as well as their considerable organiza - tional knowledge in electricity system operation , incumbent utilities might even become more important for integrating higher shares of renewables in the future ( Frei et al . , 2018 ; Markard , 2018 ) . Comparing the German with the UK energy transition , Geels et al . ( 2016 ) identify the important role of incumbents in driving the transition toward renewables in the UK . In ad - dition , incumbent utilities ( both state - owned and private ) typically have good access to de - cision - makers in the public administration , allowing them to lobby for regulations that keep them in business , even in a changing environment ( Jacobsson and Lauber , 2006 ; Stokes , 8 2020 ) . Hence , a rapid and deep low - carbon energy transition requires that also incumbent utilities adopt new low - carbon technologies . In many countries , the electricity sector liberal - ization led to the co - existence of private and state - owned companies in the same market 2 , a heterogeneity that has largely been ignored by extant research . We thus extend the literature on market liberalization and technological change by analyzing the impact of speciﬁc owner - ship types on technology adoption by incumbents within liberalized industries . Second , a separate stream of research , mainly from the economic ownership literature , com - pares the research and development ( R & D ) activities of state - owned and private ﬁrms in a variety of industries and settings . While classical R & D investments typically play a smaller role in electric utilities as compared to equipment manufacturers ( as they are users of tech - nologies , not developers ) ( Rogge et al . , 2011 ; Schmidt et al . , 2012 ) , ﬁndings on ownership and R & D could be relevant to explain the adoption of innovative technologies as well . Analyzing privatization cases in various industries during the 1980s – 1990s , Munari et al . ( 2002 ) devel - oped a framework for how corporate R & D activities change with privatization . They conclude that eﬃciency pressure and tighter management control lead to lower R & D investment but also to a greater focus on using remaining investments toward applied research projects that increase productivity ( as compared to basic research , which is often preferred by state - owned companies ) . Reviewing the industrial organization literature with a view to predict R & D activities after the liberalization of the electricity industry , Jamasb and Pollitt ( 2008 ) come to similar conclusions : privatization can change corporate governance towards viewing long - term R & D projects as candidates for quick cost - cutting but can also increase the incentive for appropriable ( i . e . , patentable ) developments that create a competitive advantage in the liberalized market . In line with these theoretical considerations , several empirical studies of 2 Note that , while somewhat special , this constellation exists in other industries as well ( e . g . , aviation , health services , higher educa - tion ) . 9 the electricity industry accordingly found that private electricity companies have lower R & D budgets but sometimes higher patenting activities compared to state - owned enterprises ( Cambini et al . , 2016 ; Defeuilley and Furtado , 2000 ; Jamasb and Pollitt , 2011 ) . While the link between ownership and R & D is well - understood , R & D projects are , of course , only one of the steps required for technological change . As Markard and Truﬀer ( 2006 , p . 624 ) under - line , “innovation activities [ … ] might be well diﬀerent from actual investment behavior of electric utilities” . Not only R & D projects but also technology adoption ( via large - scale invest - ments ) are required for technological change in large technical systems . The impact of private or state ownership on technology adoption might be diﬀerent from the impact on R & D ac - tivities . Our analysis extends the literature on ownership and R & D to include the context of adoption . In this paper , we combine insights from the innovation literature and ownership literature in economics to derive predictions of the potential impact of ownership on technology adop - tion . We derive ﬁve hypotheses and test them in the empirical analysis that follows . For clarity of analyses , the hypotheses are formulated directly with respect to the adoption of renewable energy technologies by incumbent utilities ; the transferability to other industries will be taken up in the discussion section later . 2 . 1 Ownership and incentives to innovate Well beyond the electricity industry , there is a broad consensus among economists that private ﬁrms are more productive than state - owned enterprises ( Megginson and Netter , 2001 ; Shleifer , 1998 ) . While empirical studies typically consider direct productivity measures ( e . g . , from accounting data ) , a common belief is that private ﬁrms are also superior in terms of the adoption of new technologies , which comprise a prerequisite for long - term productivity growth in what Shleifer ( 1998 , p . 136 ) summarizes as the “appreciation of the innovative 10 potential of entrepreneurial ﬁrms” , which contrasts with the “politicization of production” of state - owned enterprises . Theoretical explanations refer to managers of state - owned enter - prises being subject to multiple and complex goals preventing them from making productiv - ity - enhancing ( innovative ) investments ( Tirole , 1994 ) as well as the soft incentives of public managers stemming from the contractual implications of the ownership setup . The argument concerning the latter is that public managers have weak incentives to invest in innovation because , if successful , they proﬁt less from higher productivity when compared to private owners or their properly incentivized managers ( Hart et al . , 1997 ) . While these arguments consider investments for innovation at the ﬁrm level , the line of thought can be extended to innovation and technological change at the industry level , of which widespread technology adoption is a major component . In the discussion of their review of empirical privatization studies , Megginson and Netter ( 2001 , p . 382 ) accordingly suggest that “technological break - throughs have transformed the global telecommunications industry during the past decade , and privatized telecom companies have been at the forefront of this revolution . Indeed , it is unlikely that this most dynamic of industries would have been able to grow nearly as rapidly under the former state ownership model . ” In the electricity industry , utilities ( both state - owned and private ) have faced a new market environment since liberalization , in which entrepreneurial decisions to invest in new technologies can lead to a competitive advantage ( Markard and Truﬀer , 2006 ) . Particularly given the commodity nature of electricity , oﬀering electricity generated from renewable energy sources is one of the few possibilities for diﬀer - entiating a company’s output in the market and winning or retaining customers ( Truﬀer et al . , 2001 ) . Applying the theory on ownership and innovation incentives thus leads us to our ﬁrst hypothesis : H 1 : Assuming a general commercial viability of renewables , private utilities more often decide to invest in renewables than state - owned utilities . 11 2 . 2 Exploiting state ownership to advance climate policy While our ﬁrst hypothesis is largely based on the assumption that utilities pursue the ob - jective of long - term proﬁtability , it could be the case that the additional non - commercial priorities of state - owned utilities impact technology adoption . For example , either environ - mental objectives , or socio - economic objectives superseding any environmental concern , could play a role . While the literature on state ownership includes examples of state - owned enterprises as environmental laggards ( e . g . , in Eastern Europe ( Grossman and Krueger , 1991 ) ) , this is not a foregone conclusion . After all , the priorities of governments can change . State - owned enterprises are essentially agents of the state and are thus bound by state policies and directives via a channel of direct inﬂuence or control , especially in the case of ﬁrms dependent on the state for resources , market access , or other essential support ( Hart , 2003 ) . Thus , a state authority that prioritized , for example , climate change mitigation , could direct state - owned utilities to reduce emissions by ﬁat . Governments can also exploit state ownership for policy targets by choosing managers whose worldviews ( Lodge et al . , 2010 ) are aligned with governmental priorities of changing technological trajectories and industry structures . Empirically , worldviews have been shown to impact the perception of the risks and opportunities related to investments in renewable energy ( Chassot et al . , 2014 ) as well as renewable energy deployment more generally ( West et al . , 2010 ) . While the investment decisions of both private and state - owned utilities likely to a large degree still reﬂect commercial priorities and technological necessities , for state - owned utili - ties , the owner’s climate policy targets—which , in the electricity sector have typically been translated into targets of increasing the share of renewables ( REN21 , 2019 ) —can add to the variables to be considered . Direct ﬁat and choosing managers by worldview are two channels that could explain how such targets transmit to investment decisions . While the impact of climate policy targets might diﬀer depending on the governance of individual state - owned 12 utilities , the exploitation of state ownership for climate policy targets should lead to an eﬀect in the aggregate , leading to a hypothesis that competes with H1 above : H 2 : When governments enact a political target to increase the share of renewables , state - owned utilities more often decide to invest in renewables than privately - owned utilities . Indeed , many countries have targets for increasing the share of renewables , including all EU countries ( REN21 , 2019 ) , but there is substantial variation in the stringency of policy inter - ventions to that end ( Schmidt and Sewerin , 2019 ) . A large body of literature stresses the importance of ambitious policy interventions in redirecting technological change in the en - ergy sector ( e . g . , Acemoglu et al . , 2012 ; Nemet , 2009 ) , and , more speciﬁcally , to induce investments into RE ( see Polzin et al . , 2019 ) . Given the multiple market failures involved in technological change , particularly in the energy sector ( Gillingham and Sweeney , 2012 ) , an entire mix of stringent policy instruments is required ( Kern et al . , 2019 ) . Empirically , it has been shown that more stringent policy mixes indeed result in wider RE technology diﬀusion ( Schmidt and Sewerin , 2019 ) . Hence , the stringency of renewable energy and climate policies reﬂects how serious a government is about climate policy , which should also be reﬂected in a higher propensity to exploit the state ownership of utilities for a low - carbon energy tran - sition . Beyond direct ﬁat and the deliberate choice of managers , state inﬂuence could aﬀect the investment decisions of state - owned utilities because populations and stakeholders generally expect that state - owned enterprises act in greater alignment with social preferences com - pared to private companies ( Christiansen , 2013 ) . More stringent climate policies reﬂect a greater social preference for ambitious action toward climate change mitigation ( Drummond et al . , 2018 ) . Accordingly , managers of state - owned utilities might tend toward investment 13 decisions that comply with the social norm of shifting toward RE and more readily so com - pared to managers of private utilities given that society holds them to higher standards of prosocial behavior ( Christiansen , 2013 ) . The literature on management in public service provision underlines that behavior in such organizations also follows non - commercial “mis - sions” that are shared between principals and agents ( Besley and Ghatak , 2003 ) , for which the transition to RE is a prime example ( Mendonça et al . , 2018 ) . Both reasons result in a more speciﬁc hypothesis concerning the impact of climate policy targets : H3 : The greater propensity to invest in renewables of state - owned utilities vis - à - vis private utilities is more pronounced in countries with more stringent climate policies . While H2 and H3 concern government priorities and the reaction of managers , it is important to also consider in which context the exploitation of state ownership for climate policy could be beneﬁcial from a societal point of view . Given that state - owned enterprises often come at a societal cost of less eﬃcient operation ( Boardman and Vining , 1989 ; Dewenter and Malatesta , 2001 ) , one would expect benevolent policymakers to only resort to exploiting state ownership if doing so addresses speciﬁc market or government failures better than regulation or contracts ( Crew and Kleindorfer , 1979 ; Shleifer , 1998 ; compare Shleifer and Vishny , 1994 ) , as we discuss next . 2 . 3 State ownership and regulatory quality In markets where private ownership dominates , governments rely primarily on regulation to inﬂuence the behavior of private ﬁrms . This “contracting” channel aﬀects policy stringency , as the state dictates or negotiates with regulated parties , and its sway over ﬁrms depends on the enforcement incentives and capabilities of the state ( Hart , 2010 ) . Prior work has found that , in weak enforcement environments , state ownership is eﬀective as a tool for 14 advancing environmental goals . For example , energy intensity reduction target achievement was included among the “binding targets” for China’s state - owned enterprises ( SOEs ) , whereas private ﬁrms faced no such channel ( Karplus et al . , 2020 ) . SOEs in China’s coal power sector were also found to account for a larger share of the overall SO 2 pollution reduction achieved during the Eleventh Five - Year Plan ( Karplus et al . , 2017 ) . Hence , gov - ernments could resort to exploiting state ownership for climate policy targets , especially in such weak enforcement environments , leading us to formulate the ﬁrst of two competing hypotheses with respect to regulatory quality : H4 : The greater propensity of state - owned utilities vis - à - vis private utilities to invest in renewables is more pronounced in countries with a weak enforcement environment . However , the eﬀectiveness of state ownership as a driver of prosocial technological change is not a given if a weak institutional environment means that policy directives exist only on paper and , due to the relative inﬂuence of established industries , are not well enforced through oﬃcial channels ( Hallward - Driemeier and Pritchett , 2015 ) . If risk aversion toward new technologies is a general feature of utilities , public companies could exploit their close entanglement with the government to maintain their established way of doing business . In the present case of renewable energy in Europe , this would result in lower levels of adoption by state - owned companies compared to private companies . The strength of these inﬂuences will depend on how “capture - prone” the political system in a country is . Capture may be easier to achieve in settings when state capacity is weak . H5 : The greater propensity to invest in renewables of public utilities vis - à - vis private utilities is less pronounced in countries with a weak enforcement environment . In sum , these ﬁve hypotheses describe rationales that are potentially relevant for utilities in the renewable energy transition . It should be noted that , in this case , one classical eﬀect of 15 state ownership is less relevant , namely the possibility to enhance access to capital via im - plicit state guarantees ( Christiansen , 2013 ; Tõnurist and Karo , 2016 ) . In the context of low - carbon transitions , Mazzucato and Semieniuk ( 2018 ) argue that the private sector lacks patient capital for large - scale investments in innovative technologies ; indeed , renewables like solar photovoltaics and wind power are more capital - intensive then many fossil fuel - based technologies ( Schmidt et al . , 2019 ) . However , in industrialized countries during our study period , access to capital for investments in new renewables typically did not depend on the ﬁnancial strength of the sponsor ( utilities or independent project developers ) : in most EU countries , for instance , electricity generated by renewables received a ﬁxed remuneration over the lifetime of the plant , e . g . , through feed - in tariﬀ or auctioned power purchase agree - ments . These investments are typically realized in project ﬁnance structures ( Henderson , 2016 ; Steﬀen , 2018 ) 3 . In many EU countries , long - term debt for the realization of renewable energy projects is partly provided by state investment banks ( e . g . , the German KfW is active in renewables project ﬁnance across Europe ( Geddes et al . , 2018 ) ) for projects sponsored by state - owned and private utilities alike . Commercial bank debt is provided based on the via - bility of the individual project , not the project sponsor ( Henderson , 2016 ; Steﬀen , 2018 ) . In the United States , non - recourse YieldCo structures are common ( Urdanick , 2014 ) . In sum , project - ﬁnanced renewable energy investments are a special case concerning access to the capital market . We recognize that , in other industries , state ownership might still play a role in improving access to capital . We thus take up the topic in the discussion section . 3 “In project finance , the sponsor creates a self - contained legal entity ( or special purpose vehicle , SPV ) to hold the renewable energy asset , which then is financed by debt and equity on the level of the SPV . For repayment , equity investors and debt providers depend solely on the future cash flows of the project , and cannot recourse on other assets of the project sponsor . ” ( Steffen , 2020 ) 16 3 Empirical approach 3 . 1 Research case Our empirical study considers the development in the EU during 2005 – 2016 , a “typical case” that allows for an in - case analysis of the phenomena described by our hypotheses ( Seawright and Gerring , 2008 ) . Analyzing EU countries is a typical case for several reasons . First , since the 2000s , the European electricity industry has been liberalized , with the Electricity Market Directive 03 / 54 / EC requiring free entry into electricity generation in all EU countries ( EC , 2003 ) . In the process , many countries privatized some utilities and took further measures to introduce competition into the electricity supply . As a consequence , in many EU countries , the industry is now characterized by the co - existence of state - owned and private utilities , which operate under essentially the same regulatory conditions ( Pollitt , 2009 ) . 4 This includes regulation around renewables ; so , within a given country and year , whether certain technol - ogies are proﬁtable to invest in should be no diﬀerent for state - owned versus private utilities . Second , EU countries added a signiﬁcant amount of power generation capacity during 2005 – 2016 , from both fossil fuel - based and renewable energy plants ( see analysis below ) . Third , the 28 EU countries exhibit some variance in climate policy stringency and the quality of regulation that can be exploited . At the same time , however , all countries had a clear policy goal of increasing the share of RE during the study period : since 2005 , the EU was bound by the Kyoto protocol , which required signiﬁcant CO 2 emission reductions ( UNFCCC , 1997 ) . To ensure that all countries contribute to reaching the EU commitments , binding targets for increasing the share of renewable energy in ﬁnal energy consumption were ﬁxed at a country level ( EC , 2009 ) . The levels to be reached thus diﬀered depending on each country’s starting 4 Unlike in the United States , there are only very few cooperative - owned utilities in the EU . While cooperative models exist among new - entrant independent power producers for renewable energy , the incumbent electric utilities we analyze in this paper are , with few excep - tions , either state - owned or privately - owned ( the latter are typically listed stock companies ) . 17 position ; for instance , Malta had to increase the RE share from 0 % from 10 % during 2005 – 2020 , while Sweden had to achieve an increase from 39 . 8 % to 49 % during the same period ( see table S1 in the appendix ) . As a result , all EU countries had to take measures to foster the deployment of renewable energy technologies and thus typically focused on the electricity sector ( where increasing the share of renewables proved easier when compared to transport , buildings , etc . ) . Hence , the EU is a suitable case for studying the impact of utility ownership structures in countries with a political goal of increasing the share of renewables . Given the importance of incumbent utilities in terms of creating fundamental change in the electricity industry structure ( see introduction ) , we focus on utilities that were active in elec - tricity generation and / or distribution before 2005 already . Most of these companies are active in both power generation and sales and , in some cases , in the operation of distribution grids as well ( in the EU , transmission grids are unbundled from power generation ) . We are inter - ested in all utilities that expanded their electricity capacity during 2005 – 2016 , including both large ( inter - ) national and medium - sized regional utilities . In addition , some European coun - tries have many small regional or municipal utilities . Most of these , however , do not own power generation capacity ( but purchase electricity on the wholesale market ) , and are hence not within the scope of our analysis . 18 3 . 2 Research methodology We follow a mixed method research design that primarily relies on a quantitative analysis of investment portfolios from the full set of relevant utilities . In a second step , the quantita - tive analysis is complemented by qualitative case studies to add further evidence concerning the mechanisms involved . For the quantitative analysis , we take the utility as the unit of analysis . We consider the share of investments that are allocated to non - hydro RE technologies as the variable of interest , since choosing the technologies to meet electricity demand is a prime responsibility of utilities ( overall capacity additions , in contrast , are , to a greater extent , driven by factors that are external to utilities , such as electricity demand growth , age of the incumbent plant ﬂeet , etc . ) . As power plant investments are lumpy ( decisions are not being made every year ) , we consider the share of non - hydro RE in total power plant investments leading to capacities added during the multi - year period 2005 – 2016 ( the starting point being deﬁned by the Kyoto protocol , the end point by data availability ) . While the analysis primarily exploits the cross - section variance ( including between state - owned and private utilities within the same coun - try ) , we also study temporal patterns by dividing the time range into several sub - periods . Variation in the explanatory variables at the country level are used to assess the hypotheses derived in Section 2 . As the quantitative results are consistent with the hypotheses related to using state control to advance climate policy targets , we complement the large n - analysis by a qualitative anal - yses of inﬂuential observations ( Seawright and Gerring , 2008 ) . These case studies add evi - dence that cannot be obtained from the large n - analysis of observational data alone . 19 3 . 3 Quantitative data Our analysis is based on the S & P 2017 World Electric Power Plants Data Base ( also known as the “Platts database” ) , a comprehensive inventory of power generation units globally ( S & P Global Market Intelligence , 2017 ) . The database contains technical parameters as well as location , commission date , and ownership information at the unit level . We ﬁlter the entries , aggregate the data at the level of utilities , and add further utility - level information in several steps . First , we limit the analysis to operational power plant units owned by a utility 5 located in the EU - 28 countries and that have a commissioning date between 2005 – 2016 . Based on Platts’ information on unit type ( e . g . , gas turbine , steam turbine ) and fuel type ( e . g . , natural gas , biogas ) , we classify all units into power plant types , which are then marked as renewa - bles , non - hydro renewables , or non - renewables . We exclude combined heat and power plants as well as waste - to - energy plants , as these technologies are typically not built for the purpose of generating electricity alone . Pumped - hydro storage plants are also excluded . Table 1 shows capacity additions during the study period by country , which vary between 83 MW in Cro - atia and 16 ' 501 MW in Italy . About two thirds of the countries added both conventional power plants and non - hydro renewables . In the subsequent analysis , we focus on the share 5 The Platts database distinguishes between three types of owners / operating companies , namely utilities ( companies engaging in electricity generation and the distribution of electricity for sale generally in a regulated market ) ; auto - producers ( industrial or commercial enterprises generating their own electricity ) , and independent power plant / merchant plant developers ( private companies that have built new power plants but excluding those that have taken over distribution and / or retail functions previously under the control of state - owned entities , with or without associated power plants ) . Here , we focus on utilities , which includes companies of various ownership structures , e . g . , investor - owned utilities , municipal and provincial utilities , national state - owned utilities , and cooperative utilities ) . See S & P Global Market Intelligence ( 2017 ) for details . 20 of non - hydro renewables ( i . e . , primarily wind and solar , but not hydro ) , because the possi - bility to add hydro power capacity depends largely whether any unexploited hydro capacity remains in a utility’s area . Second , we aggregate capacity additions during diﬀerent time periods ( compare Section 3 . 4 ) at the level of utilities , taking the utility name and country as identiﬁers . To ensure that only incumbents are included , we check whether the utilities own any power plant that was commissioned before 2005 . If not , observations were only kept if hand - collected archives showed that they had other electricity sector activity before 2005 ( e . g . , distribution and sales ) and were otherwise deleted . We also dropped utilities that added capacity during 2005 – 2016 of less than 1 MW ( to prevent bias , since the coverage of very small plants in Platts is not comprehensive or representative ) . In sum , we retained 202 incumbent utilities for our analysis period ( compare Table 2 ) . Third , we calculate the share of capacity additions using non - hydro renewable energy tech - nologies for each utility company and time period . To get an estimate of investments dedi - cated to each technology , the capital expenditure per MW installed capacity is assumed per plant type , using average European values and taking into account the cost reductions over time for solar PV ( see Table S2 in the appendix ) . The share of investment dedicated to non - hydro renewable energy technologies by company is then calculated in the same way as the share of capacities . While we report all results with respect to these investment shares ( which relates more closely to the hypotheses ) , considering capacity shares yields comparable re - sults—hence , the ﬁndings are not driven by the capex assumptions ( see appendix for de - scriptives , regression results available on request ) . 21 Table 1 : Capacity additions during 2005 – 2016 ( including all utilities in our sample ) . Country Total capacity additions ( MW ) Share of non - hydro renewable ca - pacity additions Austria 2 ' 395 18 % Belgium 1 ' 218 45 % Bulgaria 123 13 % Croatia 86 0 % Cyprus 673 0 % Republic 176 71 % Denmark 820 100 % Estonia 385 22 % Finland 725 2 % France 4 ' 441 14 % Germany 12 ' 099 13 % Greece 2 ' 170 0 % Hungary 829 0 % Ireland 597 3 % Italy 16 ' 501 8 % Latvia 144 0 % Lithuania 479 5 % Luxembourg 202 1 % Malta 149 0 % Netherlands 5 ' 889 12 % Poland 1 ' 768 47 % Portugal 2 ' 660 1 % Romania 951 0 % Slovakia 479 0 % Slovenia 318 0 % Spain 10 ' 518 3 % Sweden 1 ' 424 61 % Kingdom 7 ' 231 28 % Total 75 ' 450 14 % Fourth , the ownership structure of utilities is assessed with great scrutiny , as it is the key variable for our analysis . The Platts database indicates the “business type” of the utilities , diﬀerentiating between investor - owned utilities , national / regional / municipal government - owned utilities , cooperative - owned utilities , and others . However , an inspection of the data showed that this information is not always accurate , such as in cases where utilities were privatized before 2005 ( but are still coded as state - owned in Platts ) . We therefore matched 22 the utility names 6 to the Orbis company database ( Moody’s / Bureau van Dijk ) and extracted the global ultimate owner of the utilities , i . e . , the highest - level entity when tracing back the ownership structures . Manual research was conducted for all entities , 7 and they were marked “state - owned” if at least 50 % of the global ultimate owner during 2005 – 2016 was a public entity and “private” otherwise . State ownership can thereby include diﬀerent levels of gov - ernment ( national , federal states or regions , municipalities ) . Table 2 shows the number of utilities in our sample by country : 14 countries saw both state - owned and private utilities add power generation capacity during 2005 – 2016 , whereas , in 12 countries , there were only state - owned , while , in 2 countries , there were only privately - owned companies with power generation investment during the period . Finally , we add data for the explanatory variables , which are deﬁned in terms of our hy - potheses at the country level . To control for country characteristics in general when evaluating H1 and H2 , we consider the GDP per capita [ purchasing power standards EU - 28 ] per country and year ( Eurostat , 2019 ) , the CO 2 emission intensity from electricity generation [ g CO 2 / kWh ] per country and year ( European Environment Agency , 2018 ) , and country - ﬁxed eﬀects in some speciﬁcations . 6 Country , city , sector and business descriptions were used as further information to ensure matching to the right companies . 7 The ORBIS database provides the type of global ultimate owner , namely “public authority , state , government” or “corporate” . However , inspections showed that this was not always accurate , e . g . , coding utilities in Germany and Italy that are whole owned by regionals states as corporate . Hence , the classification of all the utilities was verified by manual desk research . 23 Table 2 : Sample of utilities with capacity additions above 1 MW in 2005 – 2016 Country No . of privately - owned utilities No . of state - owned utilities Austria 4 23 Belgium 1 3 Bulgaria - 3 Croatia - 1 Cyprus - 1 Czech Republic 1 1 Denmark - 3 Estonia - 1 Finland 1 10 France 3 8 Germany 11 38 Greece - 1 Hungary 3 1 Ireland - 1 Italy 6 13 Latvia - 1 Lithuania - 1 Luxembourg 2 - Malta - 1 Netherlands 3 3 Poland 3 3 Portugal 3 3 Romania - 2 Slovakia 2 1 Slovenia - 3 Spain 7 - Sweden 2 17 United Kingdom 5 2 Total 57 145 For the more speciﬁc hypotheses H3 – H5 , we use two diﬀerent measures for each variable of interest . Concerning climate policy stringency , we consider the climate and energy policy density ( i . e . , the number of enacted policies in the domain ) , a common measure to compare policy stringency between countries ( Albrecht and Arts , 2005 ; Jahn and Kuitto , 2011 ; Knill et al . , 2010 ) . We use data from the International Energy Agency’s Policies Database , which includes energy policies related to renewables , energy eﬃciency , climate change , and carbon 24 capture and storage ( IEA , 2020 ) . As an alternative measure , we use a qualitative rating from the Climate Change Performance Index ( CCPI ) that has been published by the NGO Ger - manwatch annually since 2005 . The CCPI climate policy score is a performance rating by climate and energy policy experts from non - governmental organizations , universities , and think tanks in the diﬀerent countries being analyzed ( Burck et al . , 2020 ) . Concerning the enforcement of regulation , we resort to the Worldwide Governance In - dicators ( WGI ) , a research dataset summarizing the views on the quality of governance from a large number of enterprise , citizen , and expert survey respondents , curated by World Bank economists ( World Bank , 2020 ) . Speciﬁcally , we use the indicator for regulatory quality , which reﬂects “perceptions of the ability of government to formulate and implement sound policies and regulations” , and the indicator for control of corruption , which reﬂects “percep - tions of the extent to which public power is exercised for private gain , including both petty and grand forms of corruption , as well as " capture " of the state by elites and private inter - ests” ( World Bank , 2020 ) . Like with all other explanatory variables , the values are averaged across the diﬀerent years within a period . To simplify a comparison of regression coeﬃcients , we follow the standard approach to scale the non - binary variables by dividing by two stand - ard deviations ( compare Gelman , 2008 ) . 3 . 4 Model speciﬁcations To assess whether the hypotheses hold for our case , we ﬁrst present descriptive analyses of state - owned vs . private utility investment behavior at the country level . Next , we show re - gression analyses with the utility as the unit of analysis , taking the share of non - hydro re - newables in investments as the dependent variable . The independent variables include a dummy indicating whether the utility is state - owned as well as further explanatory variables 25 at the country level , as described above . We estimate both an ordinary least square ( OLS ) and a Tobit model ( given the censored nature of the dependent variable ranging between 0 % and 100 % only ) . For the simplicity of exposition , only the OLS results are shown in the main text , while the Tobit results , which are qualitatively comparable , are available on request . All regressions are shown for data considering the entire study period of 2005 – 2016 ( see Section 3 . 2 ) as well as for data broken up into three sub - periods ( 2005 – 2008 , 2009 – 2012 , and 2013 – 2016 ) to assess how eﬀects might change over time . We split the time into three periods , because diﬀerentiating only two periods allows for fewer insights into temporal patterns , and diﬀerentiating four periods would reduce the data points signiﬁcantly ( due to the lumpiness of power plant investments ) . 3 . 5 Case study analysis The qualitative analysis aims to complement the quantitative analysis with further evidence , particularly concerning the mechanisms behind the eﬀect of general climate policy priorities observed in the regressions , as reported below . To this end , we follow a sequential explana - tory mixed - method research design , taking inﬂuential observations as case studies ( Seawright and Gerring , 2008 ) . As the quantitative analyses underline that the eﬀect of state ownership has been driven by an increasing renewables share among state - owned utilities from 2009 on ( see results section ) , we consider the ten utilities with the highest increases in their non - hydro renewables investment shares between the 2005 – 2008 and 2009 – 2012 periods . We focus on these utilities that pivoted towards renewables , because changes in strategy are typically explained to investors and the public , allowing us to analyze the underlying motivations for the investment decisions . For the ten case study utilities , we searched public archival infor - mation for discussions of their ( renewables ) investment strategies , using the research tool Factiva , which includes business - relevant sources , such as press statements and interviews 26 with utility CEOs , annual reports , and reports from ﬁnancial statement press conferences . The search terms include the name of the utility ( including the names of major subsidiaries , where applicable ) AND the terms strategy OR energy transition OR renewable OR regen - erative OR wind OR photovoltaics OR solar OR biomass—both in English and the respec - tive local languages . The resulting texts were scanned for whether they describe power gen - eration investment plans / strategies or speciﬁc investment decisions of the respective utility— for those that do , the reasons given to choose conventional or renewable energy technologies are summarized . Then , each entry is classiﬁed according to whether ( i ) the decision tends to increase the share of renewables , tends to decrease the share of renewables , or is ambigu - ous concerning the share of renewables and ( ii ) with respect to the type of motivation pro - vided for the decision ( primarily a commercial / proﬁtability - related argument , primarily a public policy priority - related argument , or another argument ) . Summaries of all entries and classiﬁcations are provided in Table 8 in the results section . 4 Quantitative results 4 . 1 Overall impact of state - ownership on renewable energy invest - ment To assess the two most general—and competing—hypotheses H1 ( state - owned utilities invest less in renewables ) and H2 ( state - owned utilities invest more in renewables ) , we ﬁrst show the share of investments dedicated to non - hydro renewables by utility ownership in the diﬀerent countries ( Figure 1 ) . In total for the EU , state - owned utilities clearly dedicated a higher share of investment in non - hydro renewables ( 33 % ) when compared to private players ( 11 % ) . In our data , 14 countries featured power generation investment from both state - owned and private utilities . In 11 of these , the non - hydro renewables share of the state - 27 owned utilities is higher at a country level , including countries with large total investments like France , Germany , Netherlands , Poland , Portugal , and the United Kingdom . The only exceptions are Hungary and Slovakia , in which both state - owned and private utilities have non - hydro renewables shares of close to zero , and Italy , where private companies have a much higher share in renewables . In sum , these descriptive results suggest that H2 ( state - owned utilities invest more in renewables ) is an appropriate description of the pattern in our data , as will be further evaluated via the regression analysis below . Figure 1 : Investment by technology type and utility ownership at the country level 10 % Italy Austria France Ireland 51 % 8 % Finland 4 % Estonia Belgium 0 % 0 % Bulgaria 853 1 % 7 % 92 % 0 % Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic 0 % 1 % 100 % Denmark 40 % 0 % 1 % Greece 25 % 2 % 16 % 48 % Sweden Germany 2 % 2’732 38 % 0 % 0 % 0 % 0 % Hungary Spain 0 % 5 % 20 % Latvia 104 0 % 19 % Lithuania Luxembourg 0 % Malta 54 % Netherlands Slovenia 98 % Poland 1’732 7’910 11 % United Kingdom 26 % 0 % Portugal Romania Slovakia 0 % 9’108 5 % 50 % 89 10 % 5’966 64 % 33 % 2’912 Total 5’95735 567 624 317 236 468 79 % 18 300 572417 2’898 841 398 1’883 30554 457 10’762 553 212 4’421 1374’524 3’515 19351 680 10’174 2’99346 5’459 45’23549’619 3’032 State - owned utilities Private utilities Total investment ( €M ) Share of non - hydro renewables Country 28 To analyze how the diﬀerences between state - owned and private companies develop over time , Figure 2 shows the non - hydro renewables shares for diﬀerent time periods for the EU - 28 and those 14 countries with investments in both types of utilities . For the EU overall , the ﬁgure illustrates that the higher renewables share of state - owned utilities is driven by the higher propensity pursue these new technologies in later years : While during 2005 – 2008 , the share was relatively similar for private and state - owned utilities at 17 % and 19 % , respec - tively , it signiﬁcantly increased after 2009 for state - owned companies ( to 41 % in 2013 – 2016 ) while decreasing for private companies ( to 9 % in 2013 – 2016 ) . This same pattern is also visible in some countries , like Austria , Germany , and Portugal . In others , however , the pat - tern is less clear , with the renewables share sometimes also increasing and decreasing for state - owned utilities ( e . g . , in Finland ) or private ones ( e . g . , in Sweden ) . When interpreting this chart , one should note that some smaller countries only saw a few large investments during the sub - periods . Figure 2 : Investment shares over time 29 To gain further insight , we switch to the utility as the unit of analysis . To test hypotheses H1 and H2 , the ﬁrst set of regressions in Table 3 includes an indicator as to whether the utilities are state - owned , in addition to general country characteristics in columns 1 – 4 and country - ﬁxed eﬀects in columns 5 – 8 . Column 1 shows that , over the entire period , state ownership has a statistically signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on investments in non - hydro renewa - bles , even when controls are included ( the CO 2 intensity of the power mix as a proxy for the “urgency to act” shows no eﬀect , and the GDP per capita as a proxy for country wealth level and investment ability shows a positive eﬀect ) . When country - ﬁxed eﬀects are consid - ered instead of country - level controls , the eﬀect of state ownership remains signiﬁcant at the 10 % level ( column 5 for the entire period ) . Country - ﬁxed eﬀects explain much of the diﬀer - ences in the share of non - hydro renewables ( compared the high R - squared in columns 5 – 8 ) ; however , even in this speciﬁcation , there is a positive eﬀect of state ownership , which is driven by the diﬀerences between state - owned and private utilities in the same country . Indeed , the indicator for state ownership has a positive coeﬃcient in all the regression spec - iﬁcations we will discuss below ( although , in a few cases it is not statistically signiﬁcant ) . 8 Hence , based on our data , hypothesis H1 can be rejected , and there is evidence supporting H2 . State - owned utilities show a higher propensity to invest in non - hydro renewables . Concerning the pattern over time , columns 2 – 4 and 6 – 8 analyze the diﬀerent time periods for the speciﬁcations with country - level controls and country - ﬁxed eﬀects , respectively . In these shorter time periods , there are fewer utilities that undertook power plant investments , reducing the number of observations . Nevertheless , the results suggest that the positive eﬀect of state ownership is primarily driven by investments in the second and third periods ( the 8 Some specifications include an interaction term between the state ownership indicator and a country - level variable ; in these cases , there are positive coefficients for these interaction terms . See discussion below . 30 latter of which is only signiﬁcant with country - ﬁxed eﬀects ) , an observation in line with the pattern observed in Figure 2 . Table 3 : Regression results regarding overall impact of state ownership on renewable energy in - vestment Dependent variable : Share of non - hydro renewables in investments ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 State - owned utility 0 . 142 * * 0 . 0625 0 . 163 * 0 . 166 0 . 149 * 0 . 0726 0 . 178 * 0 . 220 * ( 0 . 0706 ) ( 0 . 0884 ) ( 0 . 0890 ) ( 0 . 113 ) ( 0 . 0779 ) ( 0 . 101 ) ( 0 . 0969 ) ( 0 . 122 ) CO 2 intensity 0 . 000192 0 . 000363 * 0 . 000265 0 . 000384 ( 0 . 000163 ) ( 0 . 000213 ) ( 0 . 000203 ) ( 0 . 000240 ) GDP per capita 1 . 30e - 05 * * * 2 . 23e - 05 * * * 1 . 68e - 05 * * 2 . 84e - 06 ( 4 . 77e - 06 ) ( 6 . 87e - 06 ) ( 7 . 86e - 06 ) ( 6 . 86e - 06 ) Constant - 0 . 159 - 0 . 420 * - 0 . 233 0 . 125 0 . 0788 0 . 117 0 . 0586 0 . 0880 ( 0 . 175 ) ( 0 . 251 ) ( 0 . 258 ) ( 0 . 268 ) ( 0 . 105 ) ( 0 . 135 ) ( 0 . 147 ) ( 0 . 169 ) Country - ﬁxed eﬀects No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 202 125 138 98 202 125 138 98 R - squared 0 . 054 0 . 082 0 . 064 0 . 042 0 . 262 0 . 300 0 . 318 0 . 322 Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 4 . 2 Interaction of state ownership and climate policy stringency To further assess the interaction of state ownership and climate policy , our third hypothesis relates the higher propensity to invest in renewables of state - owned utilities to the stringency of climate policy in their countries . To test H3 , Table 4 and 5 show regressions that include two measures for policy stringency , namely climate policy density ( columns 1 – 4 of each table ) and the CCPI climate policy score ( columns 5 – 8 of each table ) . For both measures , Table 4 shows a strong eﬀect of stringent climate policy on the share of utility investments in renewables , as would be expected if climate policies are eﬀective ( note that , in the EU , 31 climate policies generally aﬀect state - owned and private utilities alike ) . Nevertheless , the regressions still show a signiﬁcantly higher renewables investment share for state - owned util - ities for the entire time period ( columns 1 and 5 ) as well as for the second sub - period ( col - umns 3 and 7 ) . Thus , the eﬀect of state ownership remains in place when controlling for climate policy stringency at the country level . In Table 5 , we introduce interaction terms between state ownership and the climate policy measures . In these speciﬁcations , the coeﬃcient for the state ownership dummy alone is no longer signiﬁcant , as much of the eﬀect moves to the interaction term . While the signiﬁcance levels are generally lower , the analysis of the sub - periods shows an interesting time pattern ( compare columns 2 – 4 and 6 – 8 ) : In the ﬁrst period ( 2005 – 2008 ) , there is a clear eﬀect of climate policy on renewables investment , independently from utility ownership ( compare the coeﬃcients for policy stringency measures without interaction ) . In later years , however , the coeﬃcients of the interaction terms become signiﬁcantly positive , meaning that , from 2009 on , especially state - owned utilities in countries with stringent climate policies dedicate a high share of their investments to renewables . This pattern is in line with H3 ( claiming that the higher propensity to invest in renewables of state - owned utilities is more pronounced in countries with more stringent climate policies ) . Nevertheless , the evidence for H3 is not very strong given the low signiﬁcance level in the regressions shown in Table 5 , so we will revisit the impact of climate policy priorities in the qualitiative analysis . 32 Table 4 : Regression results regarding impact of state ownership and climate policy targets ( part 1 ) Dependent variable : Share of non - hydro renewables in investments ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 State - owned utility 0 . 140 * * 0 . 0387 0 . 197 * * 0 . 149 0 . 116 * 0 . 0344 0 . 176 * * 0 . 115 ( 0 . 0695 ) ( 0 . 0865 ) ( 0 . 0874 ) ( 0 . 111 ) ( 0 . 0668 ) ( 0 . 0859 ) ( 0 . 0847 ) ( 0 . 108 ) Climate policy density 0 . 198 * * * 0 . 276 * * * 0 . 200 * * 0 . 141 ( 0 . 0623 ) ( 0 . 0829 ) ( 0 . 0804 ) ( 0 . 0965 ) CCPI clim . policy score 0 . 322 * * * 0 . 294 * * * 0 . 305 * * * 0 . 301 * * * ( 0 . 0608 ) ( 0 . 0824 ) ( 0 . 0786 ) ( 0 . 0978 ) Constant 0 . 103 0 . 110 0 . 124 0 . 204 - 0 . 285 * * - 0 . 294 - 0 . 133 - 0 . 108 ( 0 . 0821 ) ( 0 . 100 ) ( 0 . 104 ) ( 0 . 136 ) ( 0 . 121 ) ( 0 . 192 ) ( 0 . 133 ) ( 0 . 174 ) Country - ﬁxed eﬀects No No No No No No No No Observations 202 125 138 98 202 125 138 98 R - squared 0 . 066 0 . 084 0 . 073 0 . 037 0 . 140 0 . 096 0 . 128 0 . 105 Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 Table 5 : Regression results regarding impact of state ownership and climate policy targets ( part 2 ) Dependent variable : Share of non - hydro renewables in investments ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 State - owned utility 0 . 0589 0 . 123 - 0 . 00418 - 0 . 282 - 0 . 120 - 0 . 0322 - 0 . 395 - 0 . 331 ( 0 . 155 ) ( 0 . 184 ) ( 0 . 189 ) ( 0 . 254 ) ( 0 . 245 ) ( 0 . 384 ) ( 0 . 257 ) ( 0 . 348 ) Climate policy density 0 . 129 0 . 352 * * 0 . 0281 - 0 . 203 ( 0 . 133 ) ( 0 . 170 ) ( 0 . 164 ) ( 0 . 206 ) State - owned utility × Climate policy density 0 . 0888 - 0 . 100 0 . 226 0 . 437 * ( 0 . 151 ) ( 0 . 195 ) ( 0 . 188 ) ( 0 . 232 ) CCPI clim . policy score 0 . 230 * * 0 . 274 * 0 . 0293 0 . 0924 ( 0 . 110 ) ( 0 . 139 ) ( 0 . 141 ) ( 0 . 183 ) State - owned utility × CCPI clim . policy score 0 . 132 0 . 0309 0 . 395 * * 0 . 291 ( 0 . 132 ) ( 0 . 173 ) ( 0 . 168 ) ( 0 . 216 ) Constant 0 . 166 0 . 0460 0 . 280 * 0 . 549 * * - 0 . 122 - 0 . 250 0 . 263 0 . 206 ( 0 . 136 ) ( 0 . 160 ) ( 0 . 166 ) ( 0 . 227 ) ( 0 . 203 ) ( 0 . 310 ) ( 0 . 214 ) ( 0 . 291 ) Country - ﬁxed eﬀects No No No No No No No No Observations 202 125 138 98 202 125 138 98 R - squared 0 . 067 0 . 086 0 . 083 0 . 072 0 . 144 0 . 096 0 . 163 0 . 122 Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 33 4 . 3 Interaction of state ownership and regulatory quality Our last two competing hypotheses H4 and H5 concern the moderating eﬀect of the enforce - ment environment on state - owned utilities’ higher tendency to invest in renewables . To study this eﬀect , Table 6 and 7 show regressions including two diﬀerent variables describing the regulatory environment ( see Section 3 . 2 ) : “regulatory quality” , measuring the extent to which governments are able to implement regulations ( higher values indicating better gov - ernance performance ) , and “corruption control” , measuring the exercise of public power for private gain or the capture of the state by private interest ( higher values again indicating better governance performance ) . Table 6 shows that both these measures have a strong positive eﬀect on renewable energy investment . The coeﬃcient for state ownership stays positive , although it is only signiﬁcant in the second period ( where the eﬀect of state own - ership is largest , as previously shown ) . Table 7 includes interaction eﬀects between state ownership and regulatory quality , showing that state ownership has a positive eﬀect on renewables investment in countries where regulatory quality is high and where corruption is being well - controlled . The corresponding coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant for the second and third periods ( where state - owned and private utilities diﬀer ) , compare columns 3 – 4 and 7 – 8 . Hence , H4 can be rejected : it is not the case that weak enforcement environments amplify the positive eﬀect of state ownership on renewables investment . In contrast , there is some evidence for the competing H5 , suggesting that only when the quality of regulation is high and corruption is low does the state ownership of utilities lead to more renewable energy investment . 34 Table 6 : Regression results regarding impact of state ownership and regulatory quality ( part 1 ) Dependent variable : Share of non - hydro renewables in investments ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 State - owned utility 0 . 110 0 . 0234 0 . 147 * 0 . 131 0 . 102 0 . 00473 0 . 145 * 0 . 128 ( 0 . 0691 ) ( 0 . 0876 ) ( 0 . 0865 ) ( 0 . 112 ) ( 0 . 0693 ) ( 0 . 0882 ) ( 0 . 0863 ) ( 0 . 112 ) Regulatory quality 0 . 606 * * * 0 . 646 * * * 0 . 651 * * * 0 . 271 ( 0 . 159 ) ( 0 . 228 ) ( 0 . 194 ) ( 0 . 217 ) Corruption control 0 . 463 * * * 0 . 441 * * * 0 . 493 * * * 0 . 234 ( 0 . 120 ) ( 0 . 159 ) ( 0 . 143 ) ( 0 . 199 ) Constant - 0 . 104 - 0 . 0774 - 0 . 0939 0 . 159 0 . 0244 0 . 0915 0 . 0403 0 . 202 ( 0 . 118 ) ( 0 . 165 ) ( 0 . 139 ) ( 0 . 178 ) ( 0 . 0891 ) ( 0 . 116 ) ( 0 . 105 ) ( 0 . 156 ) Country - ﬁxed eﬀects No No No No No No No No Observations 202 125 138 98 202 125 138 98 R - squared 0 . 085 0 . 063 0 . 106 0 . 032 0 . 087 0 . 060 0 . 109 0 . 030 Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 Table 7 : Regression results regarding impact of state ownership and climate policy targets ( part 2 ) Dependent variable : Share of non - hydro renewables in investments ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 2005 - 2016 2005 - 2008 2009 - 2012 2013 - 2016 State - owned utility - 0 . 151 0 . 0123 - 0 . 442 - 0 . 434 - 0 . 0919 - 0 . 0890 - 0 . 301 - 0 . 424 ( 0 . 246 ) ( 0 . 357 ) ( 0 . 301 ) ( 0 . 353 ) ( 0 . 175 ) ( 0 . 235 ) ( 0 . 202 ) ( 0 . 301 ) Regulatory quality 0 . 313 0 . 633 - 0 . 0828 - 0 . 318 ( 0 . 310 ) ( 0 . 458 ) ( 0 . 408 ) ( 0 . 410 ) State - owned utility × Regulatory quality 0 . 399 0 . 0169 0 . 942 * * 0 . 810 * ( 0 . 361 ) ( 0 . 529 ) ( 0 . 462 ) ( 0 . 481 ) Corruption control 0 . 215 0 . 320 - 0 . 120 - 0 . 416 ( 0 . 238 ) ( 0 . 323 ) ( 0 . 289 ) ( 0 . 384 ) State - owned utility × Corruption control 0 . 333 0 . 161 0 . 802 * * 0 . 880 * ( 0 . 276 ) ( 0 . 372 ) ( 0 . 330 ) ( 0 . 446 ) Constant 0 . 0837 - 0 . 0691 0 . 356 0 . 565 * 0 . 164 0 . 160 0 . 370 * * 0 . 602 * * ( 0 . 207 ) ( 0 . 306 ) ( 0 . 260 ) ( 0 . 299 ) ( 0 . 146 ) ( 0 . 198 ) ( 0 . 171 ) ( 0 . 255 ) Country - ﬁxed eﬀects No No No No No No No No Observations 202 125 138 98 202 125 138 98 R - squared 0 . 090 0 . 063 0 . 132 0 . 060 0 . 093 0 . 062 0 . 147 0 . 068 Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 0 . 05 , * p < 0 . 1 35 5 Qualitative results While the regressions show that state - owned utilities show a higher tendency to invest in renewables ( H2 ) and even more so in countries with stringent climate policies ( H3 ) , the quantitative analysis alone cannot tell whether the mechanisms leading to this pattern are in line with the theoretical considerations that lead to the hypotheses . We thus draw further evidence from a case study analysis of the ten utilities that between 2005 – 2008 and 2009 – 2012 increased their non - hydro renewables investment share the most . Table 8 shows the analysis of the investment strategies / decisions as well as the motivations behind them . While the public explanation of managers should not be taken entirely at face value ( e . g . , they might tactically refer to environmental considerations if politically opportune ) , the variety of arguments allow for insights into investment motives across utilities and over time . All ten utilities that undertook major shifts to renewables investment in Table 8 are state - owned ( which is in line with the quantitative result that primarily state - owned utilities pivoted to renewables ) and represent six diﬀerent countries : Germany , Sweden , Czech Re - public , Austria , Portugal , and Estonia . The case studies thus span countries with varying electricity mixes and thus varying need for action to comply with energy transition targets ( compare Table A . 1 ) . We found arguments describing the choice of power generation invest - ment during the study period for all companies . For two of the utilities ( Skelleftea Kraft and Rheinenergie ) , the arguments are primarily commercial - / proﬁtability - related , but , for the other eight companies , there is evidence that the policy priorities of state owners also played a role . Such policy priorities mostly relate to climate policy targets ( for Enervie , Mainova , CEZ , EnBW , Energie AG Oberösterreich , EDA , Stadtwerke München , Eesti Energia ) , but , in some cases , they also include other policy priorities , such as reducing local pollution ( for Eesti Energie ) and gaining / keeping independency from fuel imports ( for CEZ ) . Typically , 36 these utilities also mention commercial - / proﬁtability - related investment motives , so the po - litical motives do not replace economic considerations . However , given the economic viability of renewables investments , here , governments seem to exert inﬂuence on state - owned utilities in line with climate policy targets , as per hypotheses H2 and H3 . The case studies also provide some insights into the mechanisms employed by governments to exploit utility state control for climate policy targets . There are examples of direct ﬁat , with government and parliament decisions made to mandate utilities to develop ambitious renewable energy investment strategies ( Mainova , EnBW , EDA ) , forbid investments in coal - ﬁred power plants ( EnBW , Stadtwerke München ) , or mandate meeting a certain share of electricity demand by renewables only ( Stadtwerke München ) . Using a diﬀerent mechanism , the utility EnBW is also an example for governments choosing managers ( supervisory board members and , subsequently , the CEO ) whose worldviews are aligned with governmental climate policy priorities . The same utility also receives a capital increase that shall enhance its capacity to invest in power generation , including renewables . All these mechanisms are in line with the theoretical considerations as to how state control could aﬀect renewable energy investment . A ﬁnal observation concerns to the level of government that inﬂuences the utilities : especially the German utilities respond not only to European or national policy targets but also to speciﬁc objectives at the level of their federal state ( e . g . , North - Rhine Westphalia , Baden - Württemberg ) or large municipality ( e . g . , Frankfurt , Munich ) . This fact illustrates that exploiting state ownership can also serve as a policy instrument for subna - tional governments , who cannot resort to the many other policy instruments reserved for the national government . In sum , the qualitative evidence supports the notion that state 37 ownership can result in higher renewable energy investment if it is a policy priority of the government owner . Table 8 : Stated motivations for investments in power generation technologies by case study utilities Primarily commercial / proﬁtability - related arguments Primarily public policy priority - related arguments  Other arguments Utility name ( Country ) Ownership ( RE share ) Investment strategies / decisions and stated motivation for technology choice Eﬀect on RE share Type of argument ENERVIE Südwestfalen Energie ( Germany ) State - owned ( 0 %  100 % ) ‒ Utility deﬁnes company target to increase share of wind power until 2020 and plans to build pumped - hydro plant as a complement , stating that it thereby aims to make a notable contribution to the energy transition in North - Rhine Westphalia ( the fed - eral state where the utility operates ) ( press reports 2010 and 2011 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility stops all planned investments in gas CCGT plants , arguing that gas plants are no longer proﬁtable with low wholesale prices for conventional electricity ( would be willing to invest again in conventional plants if market situation improved ) ( an - nual report 2011 , ﬁnancial statement press conference , 2012 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility will focus future power generation investments on wind power and potentially pumped - storage , ( also ) to fully align with the politically pushed energy transition ( annual report 2011 , ﬁnancial statement press conference , 2012 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility stops all investments in solar PV plants , because operating new plants is considered to be no longer proﬁtable after changes in renewable energy law ( annual report 2012 ) Contra RE Mainova AG ( Germany ) State - owned ( 0 %  100 % ) ‒ Utility announces to invest €500M in power generation , in both high - eﬃciency gas - powered plants and renewables , as part of new company strategy to increase the share of self - produced electricity from 40 % to 100 % ( ﬁnancial statement press con - ference , 2009 , strategy presentation 2010 ) Ambiguous  ‒ Climate strategy of the city of Frankfurt ( main shareholder of utility ) foresees an important role for renewables ; accordingly , utility underlines to channel half of €500M investment budget to wind power ( press report 2010 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility puts into question investment in gas - powered plant as nuclear lifetime exten - sion reduces their proﬁtability but keeps plans for new wind power and biomass plants ( which remain proﬁtable due to feed - in tariﬀ ) in place . Also plans investment in oﬀshore wind power ( press reports , 2011 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility conducts strategy review after huge losses from conventional power genera - tion , announces to primarily focus investments on wind power in the future , increases planned amount for onshore wind from €250M to €355M ( ﬁnancial statement press conference , 2012 , press reports , 2012 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility decreases planned investment in bioenergy from €100M to €15M because study showed limited bioenergy feedstock potential in home region ( ﬁnancial state - ment press conference , 2012 ) Contra RE  Skel - lefteakraft AB ( Sweden ) State - owned ( 0 %  100 % ) ‒ After previously primarily relying on hydropower and nuclear , utility announces big program to invest USD464M in wind power , arguing that wind power ﬁts well with environmental proﬁle of the utility and became a proﬁtable investment given green certiﬁcate system ( press report , 2006 ) Pro RE  CEZ AS ( Czech Re - public ) State - owned ( 0 %  96 % ) ‒ In the mid - term , a new generation of coal - ﬁred plants is foreseen by utility , in line with the Czech Republic ' s energy strategy priority to be independent from external sources and use domestic energy sources like lignite and uranium ( press reports , 2006 ) Contra RE ‒ Utility is hesitant to commit investment in coal power generation plants after EU energy strategy aims at reducing emissions and ﬁxes legally binding renewable energy targets for the Czech Republic ( press report 2007 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility steps up investment in wind power because of economic proﬁtability with high remuneration ( press reports , 2007 and 2008 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility changes strategy to stop investments in coal - ﬁred power plants or renewables in the Czech Republic for economic reasons , keeping investment in renewables abroad where governments are supportive ( strategy presentation , 2011 ) Ambiguous 38 EnBW Ener - gie Baden - Württemberg ( Germany ) State - owned ( 0 %  82 % ) ‒ Utility invests in geothermal power plant to demonstrate technology feasibility and build - up competencies ( press reports 2005 – 2008 ) Pro RE  ‒ Utility invests heavily in eﬃcient coal - ﬁred power plants and renewables like oﬀshore wind to replace nuclear capacity and as a commercial growth area ( press reports , 2008 ) Ambiguous ‒ Utility reconsiders investment in new coal plants , as increasing carbon prices could make them unviable ( press report , 2009 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility announces strategy review concerning renewables after large ownership share went from French government to German federal state Baden - Württemberg ( 2010 ) Pro RE ‒ Following elections , the new state parliament and government announce the utility should restructure toward renewables . The coalition agreement of the new govern - ment regulates that no investments in new coal plants by the utility will be allowed . New supervisory board member from pro - renewables parties ( greens , socio - demo - crats ) are appointed ( press reports , 2011 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility receives capital increase from public owners to accelerate investment in re - newables ( press reports , 2012 ) Pro RE ‒ Supervisory board does not extent contract of long - time ( pro nuclear and pro coal ) CEO , as new state government prefers a change . Renewable energy expert appointed as new CEO ( press reports , 2012 ) Pro RE Rheinenergie AG ( Germany ) State - owned ( 27 %  100 % ) ‒ Utility plans to invest in renewables ( bioenergy and solar PV ) as element of strategy to make company " future - proof " , partly because it is economically viable given sup - port policies and partly to build - up competencies early - on ( press report 2005 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility stops plans for investment in hard coal power plant , because increased con - struction costs render it economically unviable ( press report , 2007 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility plans to invest in new gas plant and potentially later in oﬀshore wind power , motivated by opportunities created by nuclear phase - out ( ﬁnancial statement press conference , 2011 ) Ambiguous ‒ Utility reconsiders investment in gas plant as political will to prioritize renewables worsens commercial outlook for gas plants ( press report , 2012 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility announces to only invest in renewables going forward because market has no need for additional conventional capacity , rendering it uneconomical ( 2015 ) Pro RE Energie AG Oberöster - reich ( Austria ) State - owned ( 1 %  72 % ) ‒ Utility evaluates how to reinforce investments in renewables because of clear political will to increase renewables , both from the national government , aiming to make the electricity system more green , and the regional government Oberösterreich , aiming to increase local renewables , such as from remaining hydro resources , solar PV , and wind at a few suitable sites ( press reports 2010 , 2011 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility reconsiders power generation investment because un - subsidized power plants are considered no longer economically viable . Accordingly , it cancels new hydro power plant and decommissions coal - ﬁred plant ( instead of soon re - ﬁtting it as CCGT gas plant , which was planned previously ) ( press reports , 2013 ) Ambiguous EMP Electri - cidade Acores ( EDA ) ( Portugal ) State - owned ( 36 %  100 % ) ‒ Utility is reminded by the president of the regional government of the Azores to deﬁne a strategy that allows for investment in renewable energy ; regional minister underlines that government aims to double renewables generation within three years ( press reports 2005 and 2006 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility plans investment in solar and storage systems , since a new strategic plan by the regional government aims at increasing renewables share on the island from 28 % to 75 % within 10 years ( press report 2008 ) Pro RE Stadtwerke München GmbH ( Germany ) State - owned ( 35 %  90 % ) ‒ City council decides that the city - owned utility must not invest in new coal plant considered to replace nuclear and requires utility to develop strategy to increase share of renewables to 20 % by 2020 ( press reports 2007 – 2009 ) Pro RE ‒ City council raises mid - term renewables target for the utility to 100 % by 2025 ; utility invests heavily in renewables to comply with target ( press reports 2008 – 2009 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility stops investment in domestic renewables project given uncertainty on proﬁt - ability with pending changes to renewable energy law ( press report 2013 ) Contra RE ‒ Utility re - starts investment in renewables after renewable energy law changes are less unfavorable for proﬁtability as feared ( press report2014 ) Pro RE Eesti Energia SA ( Estonia ) State - owned ( 57 %  100 % ) ‒ Utility will start investing on a large scale in wind power , in line with its mid - term goal to produce more from renewables ( wind , biomass ) and less from shale oil - ﬁred plants ( its main fuel source ) due to tightening environmental requirements and Es - tonia ' s need to comply with EU targets ( press report , 2007 ) Pro RE ‒ Utility intends to double biomass generation ; the extent to which biomass will be used in new plant shall depend on competitiveness given carbon prices and electricity prices ( press report 2012 ) Pro RE 39 6 Discussion and conclusion Taken together , the quantitative and qualitative results in this paper show a consistent pattern concerning the role of ownership on renewable energy investment among European utilities : state - owned utilities dedicate higher shares of investments to renewables , particu - larly in countries with stringent climate policies and when the general quality of regulation is high . These ﬁndings have implications for research , policy , and practice as it relates to the low carbon energy transition . Further , some ﬁndings may be relevant for other industries as well , and the insights from our analysis can enhance understanding of how ownership matters in diﬀerent institutional settings . These three perspectives—implications for the energy tran - sition , other industries , and the role of institutional settings—are discussed in the following sections . 6 . 1 State ownership and the renewable energy transition Our results are important in terms of the understanding and management of the ongoing energy transition . The analyses show that , among the incumbent utilities in Europe , state - owned companies have shown a higher tendency to invest in renewables , with much evidence supporting the hypothesis that this eﬀect is driven by governments exploiting state control to achieve climate policy targets . Hence , from a societal point of view , state ownership can help accelerate the adoption of socially desirable technologies ; however , this does not seem to be an eﬀect of state ownership per se and requires clear policy targets and dedicated government action to use state ownership toward these objectives . Exploiting state owner - ship in this sense has not previously been documented in the context of renewable energy 40 support policies , but it should be included in comparative analyses of renewable energy support policy instruments in the future . In this context , it is important to note that , in the European countries we studied , exploiting state ownership was typically not the only policy instrument used to accelerate the deploy - ment of renewables ( Schmidt and Sewerin , 2019 ) . Past research suggests that inducing tran - sitions eﬀectively requires well - balanced policy mixes ( Kern et al . , 2019 ; Kern and Howlett , 2009 ; Rogge and Reichardt , 2016 ; Schmidt and Sewerin , 2019 ) . This requirement is also apparent in our qualitative analyses , in which the existence of adequate renewable energy support instruments ( feed - in tariﬀs , green certiﬁcates ) are often cited as a prerequisite for investments in renewables by state - owned utilities as well . Thus , it seems to be the interplay of ( i ) support policies that make renewables economically viable ( for all types of utilities ) and ( ii ) pressure from governments on their utilities to actually use these economic oppor - tunities that results in the high propensity to invest in renewables among state - owned util - ities . From a sustainability transitions perspective , the temporal development of investment ac - tivities matters . Here , we studied incumbent utilities , and it seems that , for them , state ownership only made a diﬀerence in the second and third periods considered ( i . e . , from 2009 onward ) —periods in which both wind power and solar photovoltaic reached technological maturity , and investment in wind and solar became mainstreamed ( Egli et al . , 2018 ) . It could be the case that , in the early days of a new technology , when it is still developing in niches , ( private ) new entrants are important technology adopters ( e . g . , private project de - velopers opened the local markets for new renewables in a number of countries ( Steﬀen et al . , 2018 ) ) . However , when the technology shall enter the regime and how fast it scales up by being adopted by large incumbent companies may be inﬂuenced by state ownership . 41 Given that the energy transition has now arguably entered such a second phase ( Markard , 2018 ) , there is a growing amount of literature on the role of incumbents in sustainability transitions ( Berggren et al . , 2015 ; Berlo et al . , 2016 ; Frei et al . , 2018 ; Smink et al . , 2015 ; Steen and Weaver , 2017 ; van Mossel et al . , 2018 ) . Based on our results , we suggest that this stream of research should also consider ownership structures ( Mühlemeier , 2019 ) in addition to how state - owned versus private incumbents might play diﬀerent roles in the transition . From an empirical point of view , we consider the present analysis as a starting point for broader analyses of the dynamics of new technology adoption in the energy industry at large . Besides new renewables , future research should analyze the adoption of other low - carbon technologies as well , such as innovations in the electricity transmission and distribution systems , energy storage technologies , and low - carbon options in the heating sector . Our results suggest that policy may complement ownership in important ways in these cases as well . Importantly , such assets are typically not realized in project ﬁnance structures but on the balance sheet of utilities ; thus , the potential advantages of state - owned utilities in capital access could add to the eﬀects discussed in this article . Finally , we would like to emphasize that , in this research , we analyzed the impact of state ownership on renewable energy investment , but not on other outcomes . The question of how ownership structures aﬀect socially desirable technology adoption is separate from the ques - tion of how ownership aﬀects commercial performance ; hence , the present results do not contradict past research underlining the productivity challenges associated with state own - ership in many cases . Thus , potential advantages of state ownership from a technology adop - tion point of view will need to be weighed against any disadvantages from a productivity point of view . In this sense , our results should not be considered an argument for nationali - zation . However , we suggest that , in the cases where state ownership anyway exists—such 42 as among electric utilities in Europe—policymakers can strategically exploit this ownership structure for climate policy targets . 6 . 2 State ownership and technology adoption in other industries While we focused on the electricity industry in this paper , the potential relationship between ownership and technology adoption can be of interest in many other industries as well . On principle , the eﬀects such as those described in this paper might exist in all industries where both ownership types can and do co - exist . Examples include many network industries , such as gas and water utilities , railways , and telecommunications , as well as industries like health care and higher education . Indeed these industries diﬀer in many aspects , so ﬁndings from the electricity industry will not necessarily be transferable . Instead , we believe that addi - tional industry studies—building on the theoretical and methodological contributions of this work—are both relevant in their own right and could facilitate an understanding of the generalizability of some of the insights developed here . Fueled by the general digitization of many business processes , technological change matters to most industries . The adoption of innovative technologies by companies is often socially desirable , as many new technologies allow for increased productivity . Of particular interest to transition researchers , however , should be the role of ownership structures in industries that require a radical , directed transition toward a new technological regime , such as the transition towards low - carbon technologies . Particularly industries characterized by exten - sive government regulation and large technical systems prone to a “lock - in” in established regimes are worth studying in this regard . One example worth analyzing is airlines . On many travel routes , state - owned and private airlines compete for customers . Clearly , the industry requires a radical transformation to achieve a climate pathway in line with the Paris Agreement , and airlines will have to adopt new technologies to that end ( Kim et al . , 43 2019 ; Schäfer et al . , 2019 ; Wise et al . , 2017 ) . As in the case of utilities , the development of new technologies is primarily driven by technology suppliers , but the adoption of these in - novations is crucial for large - scale technological change . Analyzing whether and how state ownership can make a diﬀerence in that regard could aid decarbonization policymaking in the industry . A potential impact of airline ownership on new technology adoption recently gained in im - portance . While state ownership of airlines has been common before , in 2020 many countries significantly increased their ownership shares of and influence on airlines through bailout packages during the COVID - 19 crisis , raising the question of how to potentially exploit this position for climate policy targets ( Steffen et al . , 2020 ) . A related example is the bailout of U . S . automakers following the global financial crisis in 2009 , where growing government influence was linked to a tightening of fuel economy standards ( Hall , 2011 ) . These cases illustrate that state ownership can not only affect low - carbon innovation in situations where state ownership is a historical legacy , but also in situations of temporal state ownership e . g . caused by bail - outs during economic crises . 6 . 3 State ownership and institutional context Beyond the complementarities with climate policy , our ﬁndings illustrate that the role of state ownership can hinge on the ability of the state to enforce its agenda at the company level . Regulatory capture is a global phenomenon in which companies seek to inﬂuence their interests by exerting inﬂuence through the political process ( Dal Bó , 2006 ) . However , the balance of inﬂuence in the relationship between state - owned enterprises and their govern - ment overseers can determine the extent to which state ownership advances prosocial goals via SOEs or SOEs realize their own interests via the government . Comparing the Chinese and European settings is instructive here , in China , the empirical evidence suggests that 44 state control was a substitute for systematic enforcement , resulting in greater regulatory responses by SOEs compared to private ﬁrms ( Karplus et al . , 2017 , 2020 ) . In Europe , which has arguably a more arms - length relationship with its SOEs , we ﬁnd that systematic en - forcement complements state ownership , limiting capture and providing a credible signal that policy will be enforced , even if it is not aligned with commercial priorities . Given this contextual importance , we suggest that scholars replicate our study in other contexts . Spe - ciﬁcally , comparing technology adoption under diﬀerent ownership structures in the United States—where both state - owned and private electric utilities also exist ( though typically do not compete in the same region and are subject to diﬀerent regulatory requirements ) —could add to the emerging literature on electric utility regulation and the energy transition ( Downie , 2017 ; cf . Stokes , 2020 ) . 6 . 4 Conclusion In sum , our analysis has shed new light on the role of ownership in industrial transitions by studying the case of renewable energy adoption in a major regulated industry : electric util - ities . Our analysis highlights that ownership is important , but it does not exert its inﬂuence in a vacuum , but it interacts with the existence of pro - adoption policy and state enforcement capabilities to determine the extent to which the sector as a whole tilts toward renewable alternatives . Acknowledgements L . Lanz , C . W . Noga , W . Reerink , and N . Stolz provided excellent research assistance . Fund - ing : This work was partly supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation , AP Energy Grant PYAPP1 _ 166905 . 45 References Acemoglu , D . , Aghion , P . , Bursztyn , L . , Hemous , D . , 2012 . The Environment and Directed Technical Change . Am . Econ . Rev . 102 , 131 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / aer . 102 . 1 . 131 Albrecht , J . , Arts , B . , 2005 . Climate policy convergence in Europe : an assessment based on National Communications to the UNFCCC . J . Eur . Public Policy 12 , 885 – 902 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13501760500161571 Bade , G . , 2020 . Power to the people : Bernie calls for federal takeover of electricity production . Politico . Berggren , C . , Magnusson , T . , Sushandoyo , D . , 2015 . Transition pathways revisited : Established firms as multi - level actors in the heavy vehicle industry . Res . Policy 44 , 1017 – 1028 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2014 . 11 . 009 Berlo , K . , Wagner , O . , Heenen , M . , Berlo , K . , Wagner , O . , Heenen , M . , 2016 . The Incumbents’ Conservation Strategies in the German Energy Regime as an Impediment to Re - Municipalization—An Analysis Guided by the Multi - Level Perspective . Sustainability 9 , 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su9010053 Besley , T . , Ghatak , M . , 2003 . Incentives , Choice , and Accountability in the Provision of Public Services . Oxford Rev . Econ . Policy 19 , 235 – 249 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / oxrep / 19 . 2 . 235 Boardman , A . E . , Vining , A . R . , 1989 . Ownership and Performance in Competitive Environments : A Comparison of the Performance of Private , Mixed , and State - Owned Enterprises . J . Law Econ . 32 , 1 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 467167 Bönker , F . , Libbe , J . , Wollmann , H . , 2016 . Remunicipalisation Revisited : Long - Term Trends in the Provision of Local Public Services in Germany , in : Public and Social 46 Services in Europe . Palgrave Macmillan UK , London , pp . 71 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / 978 - 1 - 137 - 57499 - 2 _ 6 Burck , J . , Hagen , U . , Bals , C . , Helling , V . , Höhne , N . , Nascimento , L . , 2020 . Climate Change Performance Index - Background and Methodology . Cambini , C . , Caviggioli , F . , Scellato , G . , 2016 . Innovation and market regulation : evidence from the European electricity industry . Ind . Innov . 23 , 734 – 752 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13662716 . 2016 . 1206464 Carley , S . , 2011 . Historical analysis of U . S . electricity markets : Reassessing carbon lock - in . Energy Policy 39 , 720 – 732 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2010 . 10 . 045 Chassot , S . , Hampl , N . , Wüstenhagen , R . , 2014 . When energy policy meets free - market capitalists : The moderating influence of worldviews on risk perception and renewable energy investment decisions . Energy Res . Soc . Sci . 3 , 143 – 151 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . erss . 2014 . 07 . 013 Christiansen , H . , 2013 . Balancing Commercial and Non - Commercial Priorities of State - Owned Enterprises ( No . 6 ) , OECD Corporate Governance Working Papers . Crew , M . A . , Kleindorfer , P . R . , 1979 . Public Utility Economics . St . Martin’s Press , New York . Dal Bó , E . , 2006 . Regulatory capture : A review . Oxford Rev . Econ . Policy . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / oxrep / grj013 Defeuilley , C . , Furtado , A . T . , 2000 . Impacts de l’ouverture à la concurrence sur la R & D dans le secteur électrique . Ann . Public Coop . Econ . 71 , 5 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8292 . 00131 Dewenter , K . L . , Malatesta , P . H . , 2001 . State - Owned and Privately Owned Firms : An Empirical Analysis of Profitability , Leverage , and Labor Intensity . Am . Econ . Rev . 47 91 , 320 – 334 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / aer . 91 . 1 . 320 Downie , C . , 2017 . Business actors , political resistance , and strategies for policymakers . Energy Policy 108 , 583 – 592 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . ENPOL . 2017 . 06 . 018 Drummond , A . , Hall , L . C . , Sauer , J . D . , Palmer , M . A . , 2018 . Is public awareness and perceived threat of climate change associated with governmental mitigation targets ? Clim . Change . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10584 - 018 - 2230 - 2 EC , 2009 . Directive 2009 / 28 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001 / 77 / EC and 2003 / 30 / EC . EC , 2003 . Directive 2003 / 54 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2003 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 96 / 92 / EC . Egli , F . , Steffen , B . , Schmidt , T . S . , 2018 . A dynamic analysis of financing conditions for renewable energy technologies . Nat . Energy 3 , 1084 – 1092 . Ehrlich , I . , Gallais - Hamonno , G . , Liu , Z . , Lutter , R . , 1994 . Productivity Growth and Firm Ownership : An Analytical and Empirical Investigation . J . Polit . Econ . 102 , 1006 – 1038 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 261962 European Environment Agency , 2018 . Dataset CO2 - emission intensity from electricity generation [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / www . eea . europa . eu / ds _ resolveuid / 42bdf75852144536bccecb4a3fe4bcfd Eurostat , 2019 . Dataset Purchasing power adjusted GDP per capita [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / ec . europa . eu / eurostat / tgm / table . do ? init = 1 & language = en & pcode = sdg _ 10 _ 10 Frei , F . , Sinsel , S . R . , Hanafy , A . , Hoppmann , J . , 2018 . Leaders or laggards ? The evolution 48 of electric utilities’ business portfolios during the energy transition . Energy Policy 120 , 655 – 665 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . ENPOL . 2018 . 04 . 043 Geddes , A . , Schmidt , T . S . , Steffen , B . , 2018 . The multiple roles of state investment banks in low - carbon energy finance : An analysis of Australia , the UK and Germany . Energy Policy 115 , 158 – 170 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2018 . 01 . 009 Geels , F . W . , Kern , F . , Fuchs , G . , Hinderer , N . , Kungl , G . , Mylan , J . , Neukirch , M . , Wassermann , S . , 2016 . The enactment of socio - technical transition pathways : A reformulated typology and a comparative multi - level analysis of the German and UK low - carbon electricity transitions ( 1990 - 2014 ) . Res . Policy 45 , 896 – 913 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2016 . 01 . 015 Geels , Frank W , Sovacool , B . K . , Schwanen , T . , Sorrell , S . , 2017 . Accelerating innovation is as important as climate policy . Science ( 80 - . ) . 357 , 1242 – 1244 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aao3760 Geels , Frank W . , Sovacool , B . K . , Schwanen , T . , Sorrell , S . , 2017 . The Socio - Technical Dynamics of Low - Carbon Transitions . Joule . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joule . 2017 . 09 . 018 Gelman , A . , 2008 . Scaling regression inputs by dividing by two standard deviations . Stat . Med . 27 , 2865 – 2873 . Gillingham , K . , Sweeney , J . , 2012 . Barriers to implementing low - carbon technologies , in : Climate Change Economics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1142 / S2010007812500194 Goldeng , E . , Grünfeld , L . A . , Benito , G . R . G . , 2008 . The Performance Differential between Private and State Owned Enterprises : The Roles of Ownership , Management and Market Structure . J . Manag . Stud . 45 , 1244 – 1273 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 6486 . 2008 . 00790 . x 49 Grossman , G . , Krueger , A . , 1991 . Environmental Impacts of a North American Free Trade Agreement . Natl . Bur . Econ . Res . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3386 / w3914 Grubler , A . , 2012 . Energy transitions research : Insights and cautionary tales . Energy Policy 50 , 8 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2012 . 02 . 070 Grubler , A . , Wilson , C . , Nemet , G . , 2016 . Apples , oranges , and consistent comparisons of the temporal dynamics of energy transitions . Energy Res . Soc . Sci . 22 , 18 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . erss . 2016 . 08 . 015 Hall , L . , 2011 . The Evolution of CAFE Standards : Fuel Economy Regulation Enters its Second Act . Transp . Law J . 39 . Hallward - Driemeier , M . , Pritchett , L . , 2015 . How Business is Done in the developing world : Deals versus rules , in : Journal of Economic Perspectives . American Economic Association , pp . 121 – 140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / jep . 29 . 3 . 121 Hart , O . , 2003 . Incomplete contracts and public ownership : Remarks , and an application to public - private partnerships . Econ . J . 113 , C69 – C76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1468 - 0297 . 00119 Hart , O . , Shleifer , A . , Vishny , R . W . , 1997 . The Proper Scope of Government : Theory and an Application to Prisons . Q . J . Econ . 112 , 1127 – 1161 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / 003355300555448 Henderson , M . , 2016 . Financing Renewable Energy , in : Morrison , R . ( Ed . ) , The Principles of Project Finance . Routledge , New York , pp . 163 – 182 . Hodges , J . , 2019 . U . K . Utility Nationalization Plan Unveiled by Labour Party . Bloomberg . Holburn , G . L . F . , Zelner , B . A . , 2010 . Political capabilities , policy risk , and international investment strategy : evidence from the global electric power generation industry . Strateg . Manag . J . 31 , 1290 – 1315 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 860 50 Hoppmann , J . , Peters , M . , Schneider , M . , Hoffmann , V . H . , 2013 . The two faces of market support—How deployment policies affect technological exploration and exploitation in the solar photovoltaic industry . Res . Policy 42 , 989 – 1003 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2013 . 01 . 002 Huenteler , J . , Schmidt , T . S . , Ossenbrink , J . , Hoffmann , V . H . , 2016 . Technology life - cycles in the energy sector - Technological characteristics and the role of deployment for innovation . Technol . Forecast . Soc . Change 104 , 102 – 121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2015 . 09 . 022 Hughes , Thomas P . , 1987 . The evolution of large technological systems , in : Bijker , W . , Hughes , T . P . , Pinch , T . ( Eds . ) , The Social Construction of Technological Systems . Cambridge , MA , pp . 51 – 82 . IEA , 2020 . IEA Policies Database [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / www . iea . org / policies ( accessed 2 . 7 . 20 ) . IEA , 2016 . World Energy Investment 2016 . Paris . IPCC , 2014 . Summary for policymakers , in : Climate Change 2014 : Mitigation of Climate Change . Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . pp . 1 – 33 . IRENA , 2012 . Renewable Energy Technologies Cost Analysis Series : Wind Power . Abu Dhabi . Islas , J . , 1997 . Getting round the lock - in in electricity generating systems : The example of the gas turbine . Res . Policy 26 , 49 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0048 - 7333 ( 96 ) 00912 - 2 Jacobsson , S . , Lauber , V . , 2006 . The politics and policy of energy system transformation - Explaining the German diffusion of renewable energy technology . Energy Policy 34 , 51 256 – 276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2004 . 08 . 029 Jahn , D . , Kuitto , K . , 2011 . Taking stock of policy performance in Central and Eastern Europe : Policy outcomes between policy reform , transitional pressure and international influence . Eur . J . Polit . Res . 50 , 719 – 748 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1475 - 6765 . 2010 . 01981 . x Jamasb , T . , Pollitt , M . , 2008 . Liberalisation and R & D in network industries : The case of the electricity industry . Res . Policy 37 , 995 – 1008 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2008 . 04 . 010 Jamasb , T . , Pollitt , M . G . , 2011 . Electricity sector liberalisation and innovation : An analysis of the UK’s patenting activities . Res . Policy 40 , 309 – 324 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2010 . 10 . 010 Karplus , V . , Huang , Y . , Zhang , D . , 2017 . State Control as a Substitute for Environmental Regulation ? Evidence from Chinese Cities . SSRN Electron . J . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 3054141 Karplus , V . J . , Shen , X . , Zhang , D . , 2020 . Herding Cats : Firm Non - Compliance in China’s Industrial Energy Efficiency Program . Energy J . 41 . Kavlak , G . , McNerney , J . , Trancik , J . E . , 2018 . Evaluating the causes of cost reduction in photovoltaic modules . Energy Policy 123 , 700 – 710 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . ENPOL . 2018 . 08 . 015 Kern , F . , Howlett , M . , 2009 . Implementing transition management as policy reforms : a case study of the Dutch energy sector . Policy Sci . 42 , 391 – 408 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11077 - 009 - 9099 - x Kern , F . , Rogge , K . S . , Howlett , M . , 2019 . Policy mixes for sustainability transitions : New approaches and insights through bridging innovation and policy studies . Res . Policy . 52 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2019 . 103832 Kim , Y . , Lee , J . , Ahn , J . , 2019 . Innovation towards sustainable technologies : A socio - technical perspective on accelerating transition to aviation biofuel . Technol . Forecast . Soc . Change 145 , 317 – 329 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2019 . 04 . 002 Knill , C . , Debus , M . , Heichel , S . , 2010 . Do parties matter in internationalised policy areas ? The impact of political parties on environmental policy outputs in 18 OECD countries , 1970 - 2000 . Eur . J . Polit . Res . 49 , 301 – 336 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1475 - 6765 . 2009 . 01903 . x Konstantin , P . , 2009 . Praxisbuch Energiewirtschaft . Springer , Berlin Heidelberg . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 78592 - 7 Laffont , J . - J . , Tirole , J . , 1993 . A theory of incentives in procurement and regulation . MIT Press . Lodge , M . , Wegrich , K . , Mcelroy , G . , 2010 . Dodgy kebabs everywhere ? Variety of worldviews and regulatory change . Public Adm . 88 , 247 – 266 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9299 . 2010 . 01811 . x Luderer , G . , Vrontisi , Z . , Bertram , C . , Edelenbosch , O . Y . , Pietzcker , R . C . , Rogelj , J . , De Boer , H . S . , Drouet , L . , Emmerling , J . , Fricko , O . , Fujimori , S . , Havlík , P . , Iyer , G . , Keramidas , K . , Kitous , A . , Pehl , M . , Krey , V . , Riahi , K . , Saveyn , B . , Tavoni , M . , Van Vuuren , D . P . , Kriegler , E . , 2018 . Residual fossil CO2 emissions in 1 . 5 – 2 °C pathways . Nat . Clim . Chang . 8 , 626 – 633 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41558 - 018 - 0198 - 6 Markard , J . , 2018 . The next phase of the energy transition and its implications for research and policy . Nat . Energy 3 , 628 – 633 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41560 - 018 - 0171 - 7 Markard , J . , Raven , R . , Truffer , B . , 2012 . Sustainability transitions : An emerging field of 53 research and its prospects . Res . Policy 41 , 955 – 967 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2012 . 02 . 013 Markard , J . , Truffer , B . , 2006 . Innovation processes in large technical systems : Market liberalization as a driver for radical change ? Res . Policy 35 , 609 – 625 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . RESPOL . 2006 . 02 . 008 Masson - Delmotte , V . , Zhai , P . , Pörtner , H . - O . , Roberts , D . , Skea , J . , Shukla , P . R . , Pirani , A . , Moufouma - Okia , W . , Péan , C . , Pidcock , R . , Connors , S . , Matthews , J . B . R . , Chen , Y . , Zhou , X . , Gomis , M . I . , Lonnoy , E . , Maycock , T . , Tignor , M . , Waterfield , T . , 2018 . IPCC Special Report 1 . 5 - Summary for Policymakers , IPCC . Mazzucato , M . , Semieniuk , G . , 2018 . Financing renewable energy : Who is financing what and why it matters . Technol . Forecast . Soc . Change 127 , 8 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2017 . 05 . 021 McCollum , D . L . , Zhou , W . , Bertram , C . , de Boer , H . - S . , Bosetti , V . , Busch , S . , Després , J . , Drouet , L . , Emmerling , J . , Fay , M . , Fricko , O . , Fujimori , S . , Gidden , M . , Harmsen , M . , Huppmann , D . , Iyer , G . , Krey , V . , Kriegler , E . , Nicolas , C . , Pachauri , S . , Parkinson , S . , Poblete - Cazenave , M . , Rafaj , P . , Rao , N . , Rozenberg , J . , Schmitz , A . , Schoepp , W . , van Vuuren , D . , Riahi , K . , 2018 . Energy investment needs for fulfilling the Paris Agreement and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals . Nat . Energy 3 , 589 – 599 . Megginson , W . L . , Netter , J . M . , 2001 . From State to Market : A Survey of Empirical Studies on Privatization . J . Econ . Lit . 39 , 321 – 389 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / jel . 39 . 2 . 321 Mendonça , H . L . , van Aduard de Macedo - Soares , T . D . L . , Fonseca , M . V . de A . , 2018 . Working towards a framework based on mission - oriented practices for assessing renewable energy innovation policies . J . Clean . Prod . 54 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jclepro . 2018 . 05 . 064 Mühlemeier , S . , 2019 . Dinosaurs in transition ? A conceptual exploration of local incumbents in the swiss and German energy transition . Environ . Innov . Soc . Transitions 31 , 126 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eist . 2018 . 12 . 003 Munari , F . , Roberts , E . B . , Sobrero , M . , 2002 . Privatization processes and the redefinition of corporate RandD boundaries . Res . Policy 31 , 31 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0048 - 7333 ( 01 ) 00108 - 1 Nahmmacher , Schmid , E . , Knopf , B . , 2014 . Documentation of LIMES - EU - A long - term electricity system model for Europe . Nemet , G . F . , 2019 . How Solar Energy Became Cheap : A Model for Low - Carbon Innovation . Routledge . Nemet , G . F . , 2009 . Demand - pull , technology - push , and government - led incentives for non - incremental technical change . Res . Policy 38 , 700 – 709 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2009 . 01 . 004 Pahle , M . , 2010 . Germany’s dash for coal : Exploring drivers and factors . Energy Policy 38 , 3431 – 3442 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2010 . 02 . 017 Pizer , W . A . , Popp , D . , 2008 . Endogenizing technological change : Matching empirical evidence to modeling needs . Energy Econ . 30 , 2754 – 2770 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eneco . 2008 . 02 . 006 Pollitt , M . G . , 2009 . Electricity Liberalisation in the European Union : A Progress Report . EPRG Working Paper 0929 . Cambridge . Polzin , F . , Egli , F . , Steffen , B . , Schmidt , T . S . , 2019 . How do policies mobilize private finance for renewable energy ? —A systematic review with an investor perspective . Appl . Energy 236 , 1249 – 1268 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . APENERGY . 2018 . 11 . 098 55 REN21 , 2019 . Renewables 2019 Global Status Report . Richter , M . , 2013 . Business model innovation for sustainable energy : German utilities and renewable energy . Energy Policy 62 , 1226 – 1237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . ENPOL . 2013 . 05 . 038 Rogge , K . S . , Reichardt , K . , 2016 . Policy mixes for sustainability transitions : An extended concept and framework for analysis . Res . Policy 45 , 1620 – 1635 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . RESPOL . 2016 . 04 . 004 Rogge , K . S . , Schneider , M . , Hoffmann , V . H . , 2011 . The innovation impact of the EU Emission Trading System - Findings of company case studies in the German power sector . Ecol . Econ . 70 , 513 – 523 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ecolecon . 2010 . 09 . 032 Romer , P . M . , 1990 . Capital , Labor , and Productivity . Brookings Pap . Econ . Act . Microeconomics 337 – 367 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2534785 Rose , N . L . , Joskow , P . L . , 1990 . The Diffusion of New Technologies : Evidence from the Electric Utility Industry . RAND J . Econ . 21 , 354 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2555614 S & P Global Market Intelligence , 2017 . Data Base Description and Research Methodology World Electric Power Plants Data Base . Schäfer , A . W . , Barrett , S . R . H . , Doyme , K . , Dray , L . M . , Gnadt , A . R . , Self , R . , O’Sullivan , A . , Synodinos , A . P . , Torija , A . J . , 2019 . Technological , economic and environmental prospects of all - electric aircraft . Nat . Energy 4 , 160 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41560 - 018 - 0294 - x Schmalensee , R . , 2012 . Evaluating policies to increase electricity generation from renewable energy . Rev . Environ . Econ . Policy . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / reep / rer020 Schmidt , T . S . , Battke , B . , Grosspietsch , D . , Hoffmann , V . H . , 2016 . Do deployment policies pick technologies by ( not ) picking applications ? —A simulation of investment 56 decisions in technologies with multiple applications . Res . Policy 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2016 . 07 . 001 Schmidt , T . S . , Schneider , M . , Rogge , K . S . , Schuetz , M . J . A . , Hoffmann , V . H . , 2012 . The effects of climate policy on the rate and direction of innovation : A survey of the EU ETS and the electricity sector . Environ . Innov . Soc . Transitions 2 , 23 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eist . 2011 . 12 . 002 Schmidt , T . S . , Sewerin , S . , 2019 . Measuring the temporal dynamics of policy mixes – An empirical analysis of renewable energy policy mixes’ balance and design features in nine countries . Res . Policy 48 , 103557 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2018 . 03 . 012 Schmidt , T . S . , Steffen , B . , Egli , F . , Pahle , M . , Tietjen , O . , Edenhofer , O . , 2019 . Adverse effects of rising interest rates on sustainable energy transitions . Nat . Sustain . 2 , 879 – 885 . Schröder , A . , Kunz , F . , Meiss , J . , Mendelevitch , R . , Hirschhausen , C . von , 2013 . Current and Prospective Costs of Electricity Generation until 2050 . Schumpeter , J . , 1942 . Capitalism , Socialism and Democracy . Harper & Brothers , New York . Seawright , J . , Gerring , J . , 2008 . Case Selection Techniques in Case Study Research . Polit . Res . Q . 61 , 294 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1065912907313077 Seto , K . C . , Davis , S . J . , Mitchell , R . B . , Stokes , E . C . , Unruh , G . , Ürge - Vorsatz , D . , 2016 . Carbon Lock - In : Types , Causes , and Policy Implications . Annu . Rev . Environ . Resour . 41 , 425 – 452 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - environ - 110615 - 085934 Shleifer , A . , 1998 . State versus Private Ownership . J . Econ . Perspect . 12 , 133 – 150 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / jep . 12 . 4 . 133 Shleifer , A . , Vishny , R . W . , 1994 . Politicians and Firms . Q . J . Econ . 109 , 995 – 1025 . 57 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2118354 Smink , M . M . , Hekkert , M . P . , Negro , S . O . , 2015 . Keeping sustainable innovation on a leash ? Exploring incumbents’ institutional strategies . Bus . Strateg . Environ . 24 , 86 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 1808 Steen , M . , Weaver , T . , 2017 . Incumbents’ diversification and cross - sectorial energy industry dynamics . Res . Policy 46 , 1071 – 1086 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2017 . 04 . 001 Steffen , B . , 2020 . Estimating the cost of capital for renewable energy projects . Energy Econ . 88 , 104783 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eneco . 2020 . 104783 Steffen , B . , 2018 . The importance of project finance for renewable energy projects . Energy Econ . 69 , 280 – 294 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eneco . 2017 . 11 . 006 Steffen , B . , Egli , F . , Pahle , M . , Schmidt , T . S . , 2020 . Navigating the Clean Energy Transition in the COVID - 19 Crisis . Joule 4 , 1137 – 1141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . joule . 2020 . 04 . 011 Steffen , B . , Matsuo , T . , Steinemann , D . , Schmidt , T . S . , 2018 . Opening new markets for clean energy : The role of project developers in the global diffusion of renewable energy technologies . Bus . Polit . 20 , 553 – 587 . Steffen , B . , Weber , C . , 2013 . Efficient storage capacity in power systems with thermal and renewable generation . Energy Econ . 36 , 556 – 567 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eneco . 2012 . 11 . 007 Stokes , L . C . , 2020 . Short Circuiting Policy : Interest Groups and the Battle Over Clean Energy and Climate Policy in the American States . Oxford University Press , New York . Strunz , S . , 2014 . The German energy transition as a regime shift . Ecol . Econ . 100 , 150 – 58 158 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ecolecon . 2014 . 01 . 019 Tirole , J . , 1994 . The internal organization of government . Oxf . Econ . Pap . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / oxfordjournals . oep . a042114 Tõnurist , P . , Karo , E . , 2016 . State owned enterprises as instruments of innovation policy . Ann . Public Coop . Econ . 87 , 623 – 648 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / apce . 12126 Truffer , B . , Markard , J . , Wüstenhagen , R . , 2001 . Eco - labeling of electricity - Strategies and tradeoffs in the definition of environmental standards . Energy Policy 29 , 885 – 897 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0301 - 4215 ( 01 ) 00020 - 9 UNFCCC , 1997 . Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change adopted at COP3 in Kyoto , Japan , on 11 December 1997 . Unruh , G . C . , 2000 . Understanding carbon lock - in . Energy Policy 28 , 817 – 830 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0301 - 4215 ( 01 ) 00098 - 2 Urdanick , M . , 2014 . A Deeper Look into Yieldco Structuring . National Renewable Energy Laboratory . van Mossel , A . , van Rijnsoever , F . J . , Hekkert , M . P . , 2018 . Navigators through the storm : A review of organization theories and the behavior of incumbent firms during transitions . Environ . Innov . Soc . Transitions 26 , 44 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eist . 2017 . 07 . 001 Verbong , G . , Geels , F . , 2007 . The ongoing energy transition : Lessons from a socio - technical , multi - level analysis of the Dutch electricity system ( 1960 - 2004 ) . Energy Policy 35 , 1025 – 1037 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2006 . 02 . 010 Wainstein , M . E . , Bumpus , A . G . , 2016 . Business models as drivers of the low carbon power system transition : A multi - level perspective . J . Clean . Prod . 126 , 572 – 585 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jclepro . 2016 . 02 . 095 59 West , J . , Bailey , I . , Winter , M . , 2010 . Renewable energy policy and public perceptions of renewable energy : A cultural theory approach . Energy Policy 38 , 5739 – 5748 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2010 . 05 . 024 Wise , M . , Muratori , M . , Kyle , P . , 2017 . Biojet fuels and emissions mitigation in aviation : An integrated assessment modeling analysis . Transp . Res . Part D Transp . Environ . 52 , 244 – 253 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . trd . 2017 . 03 . 006 Wollmann , H . , 2011 . Provision of Public Services in European Countries : From Public / Municipal to Private and Reverse . Croat . Comp . Public Adm . 11 . World Bank , 2020 . World Governance Indicators - Documentation [ WWW Document ] . URL https : / / info . worldbank . org / governance / wgi / Home / Documents 60 Appendix A Background information and input data Table A1 : EU targets for share of energy from renewable sources in gross ﬁnal consumption of energy by country . Note that these values refer to total ﬁnal energy consumption ( including sectors in which the transition to renewable sources has been more diﬃcult than in the electricity sector , such as transport , heating , etc . ) . Hence , in order to reach these targets , countries had to increase their share of renewable energy in electricity disproportionately . Source : ( EC , 2009 ) Country Actual 2005 Binding target 2020 Belgium 2 . 2 % 13 % Bulgaria 9 . 4 % 16 % Czech Republic 6 . 1 % 13 % Denmark 17 . 0 % 30 % Germany 5 . 8 % 18 % Estonia 18 . 0 % 25 % Ireland 3 . 1 % 16 % Greece 6 . 9 % 18 % Spain 8 . 7 % 20 % France 10 . 3 % 23 % Italy 5 . 2 % 17 % Cyprus 2 . 9 % 13 % Latvia 32 . 6 % 40 % Lithuania 15 . 0 % 23 % Luxembourg 0 . 9 % 11 % Hungary 4 . 3 % 13 % Malta 0 . 0 % 10 % Netherlands 2 . 4 % 14 % Austria 23 . 3 % 34 % Poland 7 . 2 % 15 % Portugal 20 . 5 % 31 % Romania 17 . 8 % 24 % Slovenia 16 . 0 % 25 % Slovak Republic 6 . 7 % 14 % Finland 28 . 5 % 38 % Sweden 39 . 8 % 49 % United Kingdom 1 . 3 % 15 % 61 Table A2 : Assumptions for capital expenditure ( CAPEX ) per installed capacity of diﬀerent power generation technologies . For simplicity and due to a lack of better data , uniform values across countries and over time are assumed—except for solar PV , which experienced a threefold cost reduction during the study period ( wind turbines , in contrast , also saw a large cost reduction per MWh electricity produced but less per MW capacity , as improvements primarily came from increased turbine sizes and capacity factors during the study period ) . To test whether the results hold irrespective of these simpliﬁed CAPEX assumptions , the analysis has been repeated considering capacity shares instead of investment shares ( compare Appendix B ) . Sources : ( IRENA , 2012 ; Konstantin , 2009 ; Nahmmacher et al . , 2014 ; Schröder et al . , 2013 ; Steﬀen , 2018 ; Steﬀen and Weber , 2013 ) Power plant type CAPEX assumption ( EUR per kW ) Coal plant 1 , 500 Gas plant ( combined cycle ) 800 Gas plant ( open cycle ) 400 Hydropower plant 2 , 750 Nuclear plant 4 , 000 Solar PV plant ( 2005 – 2016 ) 3 , 500 – 1 , 250 Wind turbine plant ( onshore ) 1 , 400 Wind turbine plant ( oﬀshore ) 4 , 000 Other renewables plant ( concentrated solar power , geothermal , marine ) 4 , 000 Other non - renewables plant ( heavy fuel oil , other fuels ) 600 62 B Descriptive results concerning capacity additions Figure S1 : Capacity additions by technology type and utility ownership at a country level . All qualitative results described with respect to investment volumes ( Figure 1 in the main text ) also hold with respect to capacity additions ( this ﬁgure ) . Lithuania Belgium 0 % Greece 1’823 Bulgaria 19 % 0 % 56 % 31 % Austria Italy 35 % 13 % 0 % Croatia 22 % Portugal Finland 0 % 3 % Cyprus Malta 95 % Poland Germany Czech Republic Slovakia 779 5 % 0 % Luxembourg 100 % Denmark 3 % Estonia 0 % 15 % France 10 % 3 % 1 % 0 % 0 % Hungary 20 % 0 % Ireland 1 % 12 % United Kingdom 0 % Latvia 86 17 % 0 % 29 % Netherlands 0 % 99 % 573 Romania 0 % 20 % 0 % 0 % 0 % Slovenia Spain 61 % Sweden 21 % 28 % 27 % Total 9 % 2’38213 645 123 673 131 45 820 385 573152 3’479962 4’8117’288 2’170 951 50 597 6’43610’065 144 479 149 2’4633’426 46 1’165 1252’535 433 318 10’5181’40618 5’408 31’79643’653 202 1 % 603 State - owned utilities Private utilities Capacity added ( MW ) Share of non - hydro renewables Country 63 Figure S2 : Capacity addition shares over time . All qualitative results described with respect to invest - ment shares ( Figure 2 in the main text ) also hold with respect to capacity additions ( this ﬁgure ) . MIT CEEPR Working Paper Series is published by the MIT Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research from submissions by affiliated researchers . Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research 77 Massachusetts Avenue , E19 - 411 Cambridge , MA 02139 USA Website : ceepr . mit . edu For inquiries and / or for permission to reproduce material in this working paper , please contact : Email ceepr @ mit . edu Phone ( 617 ) 253 - 3551 Fax ( 617 ) 253 - 9845 Since 1977 , the Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research ( CEEPR ) has been a focal point for research on energy and environmental policy at MIT . CEEPR promotes rigorous , objective research for improved decision making in government and the private sector , and secures the relevance of its work through close cooperation with industry partners from around the globe . Drawing on the unparalleled resources available at MIT , affiliated faculty and research staff as well as international research associates contribute to the empirical study of a wide range of policy issues related to energy supply , energy demand , and the environment . An important dissemination channel for these research efforts is the MIT CEEPR Working Paper series . CEEPR releases Working Papers written by researchers from MIT and other academic institutions in order to enable timely consideration and reaction to energy and environmental policy research , but does not conduct a selection process or peer review prior to posting . CEEPR’s posting of a Working Paper , therefore , does not constitute an endorsement of the accuracy or merit of the Working Paper . If you have questions about a particular Working Paper , please contact the authors or their home institutions .