W242 – W245 Nucleic Acids Research , 2018 , Vol . 46 , Web Server issue Published online 14 May 2018 doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gky354 CRISPOR : intuitive guide selection for CRISPR / Cas9 genome editing experiments and screens Jean - Paul Concordet 1 and Maximilian Haeussler 2 , * 1 Mus´eum national d’Histoire naturelle , INSERM U1154 , CNRS UMR 7196 , Sorbonne Universit´es , 43 rue Cuvier , Paris F - 75231 , France and 2 Genomics Institute , University of California at Santa Cruz , 1156 High Street , MS CBSE , Santa Cruz , CA 95060 , USA Received March 04 , 2018 ; Revised April 13 , 2018 ; Editorial Decision April 21 , 2018 ; Accepted April 23 , 2018 ABSTRACT CRISPOR . org is a web tool for genome editing ex - periments with the CRISPR – Cas9 system . It ﬁnds guide RNAs in an input sequence and ranks them according to different scores that evaluate potential off - targets in the genome of interest and predict on - target activity . The list of genomes is continuously expanded , with more 150 genomes added in the last two years . CRISPOR tries to provide a comprehen - sive solution from selection , cloning and expression of guide RNA as well as providing primers needed for testing guide activity and potential off - targets . Re - cent developments include batch design for genome - wide CRISPR and saturation screens , creating cus - tom oligonucleotides for guide cloning and the de - sign of next generation sequencing primers to test for off - target mutations . CRISPOR is available from http : / / crispor . org , including the full source code of the website and a stand - alone , command - line ver - sion . INTRODUCTION Genome editing with the CRISPR – Cas system is impact - ing all fields of life sciences . While the technique is com - paratively simple , cleavage specificity and efficiency depend primarily on the choice of the CRISPR guide sequence . To help with this step , various web tools find potential guide RNAs in an input sequence and rank them accord - ing to off - target and on - target predictions ( 1 – 3 ) . We ini - tially developed CRISPOR to help with guide RNA selec - tion in genomes from non - conventional model organisms for which no tools were available yet . While we were devel - oping the website , many design criteria were published , so we compared them , published the comparison ( 4 ) and de - signed CRISPOR such that it recommends scores that are most accurate for a particular assay . Since then , CRISPOR has gained thousands of users and we have added genomes and new features based on their feedback . Apart from supporting many genomes and predic - tive scoring models , another distinguishing feature of CRISPOR is that it tries to help with cloning , expressing and validating of guide sequences . Overlapping oligonu - cleotides , primers for target validation and relevant restric - tion enzymes are displayed , can be downloaded as tables and in a few cases we link to the respective wet - lab protocols . In the following , we give a quick overview of the software and then describe changes made last year in more detail . The typical CRISPOR workflow On the input page , the user enters an optional name , pastes a sequence of interest – – typically an exon – – into the se - quence box and chooses a genome and the type of CRISPR nuclease that will be used . Genomes can be searched with the organism’s common or scientific name . To keep track of certain sequence locations , the user can mark parts of an input sequence with uppercase and lowercase letters . Af - ter a short computation , the website shows a graphical view of the input sequence ( Figure 1 ) , with possible guide tar - gets below . This results page is available indefinitely at the moment , and will be for at least one year in the future . Only the PAMs ( protospacer adjacent motif ) of the tar - gets are highlighted . The strand of the guide is indicated with ‘ – – ’ , which corresponds to the location of most short indels induced by SpCas9 . Like the original MIT website ( http : / / crispr . mit . edu ) , guides are colored green , yellow and red , depending on their specificity score ( red = avoid , green = recommended ) . The PAMs can be clicked and link to their respective rows in the table below , which shows the de - tails of a target . This table contains one row per guide . Initially , rows are sorted by specificity , but can be sorted by any other numeric column by clicking on its title . The first column indicates the position and strand of the PAM , an identifier for this tar - get that is used later to name primers . The second column shows the target sequence , possible restriction enzymes that can be used to screen for successful cleavage and possibly one of three warnings : for very high and very low GC con - tent and whether TTTT is part of the sequence . Guides can * To whom correspondence should be addressed . Tel : + 1 831 295 0653 ; Fax : + 1 831 459 1809 ; Email : max @ soe . ucsc . edu C (cid:2) The Author ( s ) 2018 . Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) , which permits unrestricted reuse , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . Nucleic Acids Research , 2018 , Vol . 46 , Web Server issue W243 Figure 1 . Main output of CRISPOR . At the top , a graphical representation of the input sequence with variants and CRISPR target sequences . Below , a table with guide targets , one per row , annotated with predictive scores , off - target numers and locations and a link the PCR primer designer . be filtered by their first nucleotides ( G - , GG - , A - ) which is useful with some expression promoters ( U6 , T7 , U3 respec - tively ) and if researchers do not want to add additional , mis - matching nucleotides to the 5 (cid:3) end of the guide sequence . The next three columns show the predictive scores , speci - ficity first , followed by efficiency and out - of - frame scores . These scores are independent : a guide can be predicted to be very specific , but not very efficient or vice versa . Their relative importance of these depends on the context , some projects require specificity first and foremost ( e . g . mouse models , clinical applications ) others require high efficiency ( some cell culture assays ) or a high likelihood of out - of - frame mutations ( single - guide knock - outs ) . Users should be aware that at the moment , especially for efficiency , the pre - dictive value of the scores is not very high and will make a visible difference usually when testing more than a few guides . We recommend that users at least try to avoid guides with very low scores . Potential off - targets with up to four mismatches are identified in the selected genome and shown in the last column . Potential off - targets can be filtered to show only ones in exons , which may be more critical in func - tional studies . In addition , off - targets on chromosomes dif - ferent from the target chromosome can be hidden , as in an - imal studies these will not cosegregate with the mutation of interest and will be diluted out . To select a guide , clicking onto ‘Cloning / PCR primers’ will design overlapping oligonucleotides for guide expres - sion , flanking primers in the genome for validation , and possibly add restriction sites to these , depending on the tar - get AddGene plasmid . The page should be self - explanatory and lists primers organized by the expression method . NEW FEATURES UCSC Genome Browser tracks The UCSC Genome Browser provides interactive visual - ization of genome sequences and extensive annotations in - cluding gene exon - intron structures that is essential to de - sign of genome editing experiments . As described in this year’s NAR database issue ( 5 ) , the UCSC Genome Browser now contains a track ‘CRISPR’ that shows pre - computed CRISPOR results for various model organisms and the sp - Cas9 nuclease . The guides are coloured by efficiency score by default , details pages show the predicted off - targets and other scores . A guide can be sent directly to CRISPOR to show more annotations and primers . For computational reasons , the CRISPR guides are only available for exons and ± 200 bp around them . Mouse is currently the only ex - ception , the guides cover ± 10 kb around exons , so most of the genome . Additional genomes or longer regions can be added by requesting them from the UCSC Genome W244 Nucleic Acids Research , 2018 , Vol . 46 , Web Server issue Browser group . The data files can be downloaded from the UCSC Table Browser or the Genome Browser’s download server for processing , e . g . for customized library design . For genomes that do not have a CRISPR track already , or re - gions that are not yet available on the CRISPR track , any genome sequence can be submitted directly to CRISPOR from the UCSC Genome Browser via the menu ‘View – – in external tools – – CRISPOR’ . Batch primer design for off - targets In general , off - targets predicted by CRISPOR or any other tool are fortunately mostly false positives and only very few will be actually cleaved ( 4 ) . To find these off - targets , the most sensitive assay is PCR followed by high - throughput amplicon sequencing . But designing dozens of primers can be cumbersome and the analysis of the results is not straightforward . To simplify primer design , we added a fea - ture ‘Off - target primers’ from the ‘Cloning / PCR primers page’ that allow designing one pair of primers flanking ev - ery off - target with a single click . For the analysis , we part - nered with CRISPResso ( 6 ) , and output a table in its input format . After PCR and sequencing , the user can upload this table and the FASTQ sequencing file into CRISPResso and obtain histograms with the modification frequency for all off - targets . Batch oligonucleotide design for gene knock - out screens and non - coding saturating mutagenesis screens The most common application of CRISPOR are single guide experiments but increasingly , laboratories are con - ducting screens in cells using tens of thousands of guides . To make ordering of a library for a subset of several hundreds to thousands of genes easier , a new tool , CRISPOR Batch , accepts a list of genes and outputs a table with oligonu - cleotides ready to order from oligonucleotide pool suppli - ers , including subpool barcodes . It uses a list of existing , validated guide sequence libraries collected from the litera - ture , e . g . from ( 7 ) , which are only available for human and mouse at the moment . CRISPOR Batch is available via a link from the front page . Less experienced users can rapidly obtain guide sequences for a knockout of a specific gene of interest with CRISPOR batch . A saturating mutagenesis screen can introduce hundreds of mutations in a DNA sequence of typically 1 – 2 kb using a library of guides ( 8 ) , but CRISPOR Batch allows only gene identifiers . Therefore , we added the new feature ‘Saturat - ing mutagenesis’ on the guide output page of CRISPOR . The new tool can output all guides fulfilling some mini - mal criteria ( specificity , efficiency ) in the current input se - quence to a table , adding subpool barcodes and input files for CRISPresso . The assistant is available via a link from the sequence output page . Both CRISPOR Batch and the saturating mutagenesis assistant are described in detail in an accompanying pro - tocol by Matt Canver et al . ( 9 ) . It includes details about the CRISPOR guide design , wet - lab protocols for cloning and expression methods for screening and subsequent analysis with CRISPResso . Efficiency scores for non - spCas9 nucleases Thanks to the help by the respective authors , we were able to add the SaCas9 efficiency score by Najm et al . ( 10 ) and the Seq - DeepCpf1 score by Hwang et al . ( 11 ) . Genomic variants For organisms with well - known variant databases , like 1000 Genomes in humans or the Sanger Mouse Strain variants , genome nucleotide variants are shown above the sequence . Variants below a given frequency can be removed with an input box . If a genome does not have a variant database , users can still mark SNPs with N characters in the input sequence which will remove guides that overlap N s from the table . This information helps to exclude guide RNAs that may be inactive , when the variant affects the PAM , or less efficient , when variants lead to mismatches with the target sequence ( 9 ) . Increased flexibility of basic CRISPOR features The current version of CRISPOR includes several modi - fications that have been implemented in response to feed - back from users and advances in the predictions of guide activity that are fully listed on the website . Notably , Cpf1 has been added to the nuclease list . Cpf1 differs from Cas9 by producing cohesive rather than blunt DNA ends after DNA cleavage ( 12 ) and has recently been shown to fa - vor programmable sequence editing in zebrafish with sin - gle stranded DNA donors ( 13 ) . Cutting frequency determi - nation ( CFD ) score is now displayed along potential off - targets because it was shown to more reliably predict off - targets ( 7 ) . Only Doench 2016 and Moreno - Mateos scores are now shown by default since we previously showed that these give the most reliable on - target activity prediction . The Doench 2016 score is recommended when guides are expressed inside cells from exogenous promoters such as U6 whereas the Moreno - Mateos score should be taken into account when using guides transcribed in vitro from the T7 RNA polymerase promoter . CRISPOR results can be dowloaded in different spreadsheet file formats ( . tsv or . xls ) . To facilitate further analysis , results can now also be down - loaded in eight different Genbank - like formats for various third party sequence editors . The respective files are adapted to the sequence editor , e . g . by adding colors or special fea - ture types , in order to make the display in the third party tool as convenient as possible . Finally , the PCR primer de - signer allows users to choose the T m and amplicon length optimal for their sequencing method and assay . The CRISPOR manual CRISPOR has been designed to facilitate intuitive utiliza - tion in the design and execution of genome editing experi - ments . Many mouse over descriptions are available on the different screens and links in orange points to specific infor - mation or relevant downstream data . Nevertheless , to pro - vide a full overview of the CRISPOR tool , we have added a manual which can be consulted online or downloaded as a PDF file . Nucleic Acids Research , 2018 , Vol . 46 , Web Server issue W245 PLANS FOR THE FUTURE We are planning to add support for base editors . Base edi - tors consist of fusion of Cas9 nickase to cytidine or adenine deaminase that can convert C : G to T : A or A : T to G : C base pairs , respectively . Base editors can only convert bases that are within a small 5 (cid:3) window of a suitable guide RNA target sequence and appear to possess different specifity rules than Cas9 . In order to further streamline the design of genome experiments , we also plan to include tools to assist with de - sign of DNA donors for programmable sequence modifica - tions . Recent studies have demonstrated the improved effi - ciency of asymmetric single stranded DNA oligonucleotide donors for introducing inserts smaller than 100 nt as well as the great potential of longer single stranded DNA . We are considering better support for CRISPRi / a , notably integra - tion of the efficiency scores by Horlbeck et al . ( 14 ) . We will also continue to rely on feedback from users , CRISPOR has evolved thanks to the feedback from authors of predictive algorithms that helped us integrate their methods and > 100 wet - lab scientists who provided feedback . DATA AVAILABILITY The complete source code of the CRISPOR website and a stand - alone command line version is available from GitHub ( https : / / github . com / maximilianh / crisporWebsite / ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Mark Diekhans for improving the performance , and Jean - Michel Heslan , Saulius Zuklys , Yueh - Chiang Hu , Peter Rogowsky , Pelin ¨Ozfiliz , Jitka ˇSpaˇckov´a and Alberto Stolfi for bug reports and feature requests . FUNDING California Institute of Regenerative Medicine [ GC1R - 06673 - C to M . H . ] ; National Institutes of Health [ 5U54HG007990 - 04 ] ; National Human Genome Re - search Institute [ 2U41HG002371 - 18 ] . Funding for open access charge : Chan - Zuckerberg Initiative grant 182809 . Conflict of interest statement . None declared . REFERENCES 1 . Montague , T . G . , Cruz , J . M . , Gagnon , J . A . , Church , G . M . and Valen , E . ( 2014 ) CHOPCHOP : a CRISPR / Cas9 and TALEN web tool for genome editing . Nucleic Acids Res . , 42 , W401 – W407 . 2 . Stemmer , M . , Thumberger , T . , Del Sol Keyer , M . , Wittbrodt , J . and Mateo , J . L . ( 2015 ) CCTop : an intuitive , flexible and reliable CRISPR / Cas9 target prediction tool . PloS One , 10 , e0124633 . 3 . Bae , S . , Park , J . and Kim , J . - S . ( 2014 ) Cas - OFFinder : a fast and versatile algorithm that searches for potential off - target sites of Cas9 RNA - guided endonucleases . Bioinforma . Oxf . Engl . , 30 , 1473 – 1475 . 4 . Haeussler , M . , Sch¨onig , K . , Eckert , H . , Eschstruth , A . , Miann´e , J . , Renaud , J . - B . , Schneider - Maunoury , S . , Shkumatava , A . , Teboul , L . , Kent , J . et al . ( 2016 ) Evaluation of off - target and on - target scoring algorithms and integration into the guide RNA selection tool CRISPOR . Genome Biol . , 17 , 148 . 5 . Casper , J . , Zweig , A . S . , Villarreal , C . , Tyner , C . , Speir , M . L . , Rosenbloom , K . R . , Raney , B . J . , Lee , C . M . , Lee , B . T . , Karolchik , D . et al . ( 2018 ) The UCSC Genome Browser database : 2018 update . Nucleic Acids Res . , 46 , D762 – D769 . 6 . Pinello , L . , Canver , M . C . , Hoban , M . D . , Orkin , S . H . , Kohn , D . B . , Bauer , D . E . and Yuan , G . - C . ( 2016 ) Analyzing CRISPR genome - editing experiments with CRISPResso . Nat . Biotechnol . , 34 , 695 – 697 . 7 . Doench , J . G . , Fusi , N . , Sullender , M . , Hegde , M . , Vaimberg , E . W . , Donovan , K . F . , Smith , I . , Tothova , Z . , Wilen , C . , Orchard , R . et al . ( 2016 ) Optimized sgRNA design to maximize activity and minimize off - target effects of CRISPR – Cas9 . Nat . Biotechnol . , 34 , 184 – 191 . 8 . Montalbano , A . , Canver , M . C . and Sanjana , N . E . ( 2017 ) High - throughput approaches to pinpoint function within the noncoding genome . Mol . Cell , 68 , 44 – 59 . 9 . Canver , M . C . , Haeussler , M . , Bauer , D . E . , Orkin , S . H . , Sanjana , N . E . , Shalem , O . , Yuan , G . - C . , Zhang , F . , Concordet , J . - P . and Pinello , L . ( 2018 ) Integrated design , execution , and analysis of arrayed and pooled CRISPR genome - editing experiments . Nat . Protoc . , 13 , 946 – 986 . 10 . Najm , F . J . , Strand , C . , Donovan , K . F . , Hegde , M . , Sanson , K . R . , Vaimberg , E . W . , Sullender , M . E . , Hartenian , E . , Kalani , Z . , Fusi , N . et al . ( 2018 ) Orthologous CRISPR – Cas9 enzymes for combinatorial genetic screens . Nat . Biotechnol . , 36 , 179 – 189 . 11 . Kim , H . K . , Min , S . , Song , M . , Jung , S . , Choi , J . W . , Kim , Y . , Lee , S . , Yoon , S . and Kim , H . H . ( 2018 ) Deep learning improves prediction of CRISPR - Cpf1 guide RNA activity . Nat . Biotechnol . , 36 , 239 – 241 . 12 . Zetsche , B . , Gootenberg , J . S . , Abudayyeh , O . O . , Slaymaker , I . M . , Makarova , K . S . , Essletzbichler , P . , Volz , S . E . , Joung , J . , van der Oost , J . , Regev , A . et al . ( 2015 ) Cpf1 is a single RNA - guided endonuclease of a class 2 CRISPR – Cas system . Cell , 163 , 759 – 771 . 13 . Moreno - Mateos , M . A . , Fernandez , J . P . , Rouet , R . , Vejnar , C . E . , Lane , M . A . , Mis , E . , Khokha , M . K . , Doudna , J . A . and Giraldez , A . J . ( 2017 ) CRISPR - Cpf1 mediates efficient homology - directed repair and temperature - controlled genome editing . Nat . Commun . , 8 , 2024 . 14 . Horlbeck , M . A . , Gilbert , L . A . , Villalta , J . E . , Adamson , B . , Pak , R . A . , Chen , Y . , Fields , A . P . , Park , C . Y . , Corn , J . E . , Kampmann , M . et al . ( 2016 ) Compact and highly active next - generation libraries for CRISPR - mediated gene repression and activation . eLife , 5 , e19760 .