1 Cryo - electron tomography of eel sperm flagella reveals a molecular “minimum system” for motile cilia Authors Jason R . Schrad 1 , Gang Fu 1 , 2 , # , Whitney E . Hable 3 , Alexandra M . Tayar 4 , # , Kenneth Oliveira 3 , Daniela Nicastro 1 Affiliations : 1 Department of Cell Biology , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Texas 75235 , USA 2 Multiscale Research Institute of Complex Systems , Fudan University , Shanghai 200433 , China 3 Department of Biology , University of Massachusetts Dartmouth , MA 02747 , USA 4 Department of Physics , University of California , Santa Barbara , CA 93106 , USA # Current addresses : G . F . : Cryo - EM Core Facility , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA 01655 , USA ; A . M . T . : Department of Chemical and Biological Physics , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 76100 , Israel . Contact Information : Corresponding Author : Daniela Nicastro , Department of Cell Biology , UT Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 75390 , USA ; Phone : ( + + 1 ) 214 648 3925 ; E - mail : daniela . nicastro @ utsouthwestern . edu 2 Abstract Cilia and flagella play a crucial role in the development and function of most eukaryotic organisms . The structural core of the flagellum , the axoneme , is conserved in most eukaryotes and careful regulation of dynein motors within the axoneme is required for proper ciliary beating . The sperm flagellum from the American eel ( Anguilla rostrata ) has been shown to lack many of the canonical axonemal proteins , including the radial spokes , the central pair complex , and possibly even the outer row of dynein arms , presenting a “minimal” flagellar system . Here , we present cryo - electron tomography analysis of the eel sperm flagellum . We identified two states for the eel sperm flagellum within our tomograms , narrow and wide , and found that the flagellum started narrow near the sperm head and widened distally . Subtomogram averages revealed that the eel sperm flagellum has retained remnants of the missing regulatory complexes , including a short radial spoke 3 complex , basal components of radial spokes 1 and 2 , and an outer dynein arm docking complex . We also describe unique structural features of the A . rostrata sperm flagellum , such as a unique pattern of holes at the inner junction and an accessory complex located at the “outer” junction . Finally , we discuss the consequences of losing key regulatory factors for the eel sperm flagellum and hypothesize several evolutionary factors that may have led to their loss . Together , our results shed light onto the structure and function of the eel sperm axoneme and provide insight into the minimum requirements for proper ciliary beating . 3 Introduction Cilia ( flagella ) are hair - like appendages that extend from the surface of many eukaryotic cells ( Satir and Christensen , 2007 ; Takahashi , 1984 ) . These organelles are conserved amongst eukaryotes , including most protists ( e . g . , the green algae Chlamydomonas and Tetrahymena ) and metazoa ( e . g . , Drosophila , mice , and humans ) ( Satir and Christensen , 2007 ; Takahashi , 1984 ) . Cilia are responsible for a wide range of biological functions , including cellular locomotion , signal transduction , developmental regulation , and fluid clearance ( May - Simera et al . , 2017 ; Moran et al . , 1977 ; Pan and Snell , 2007 ; Satir and Christensen , 2007 ; Viswanadha et al . , 2017 ) . These organelles are generally split into two categories : primary cilia and motile cilia ( Satir and Christensen , 2007 ) . Primary cilia , also known as immotile cilia , largely function in a regulatory and / or signal transduction manner within cells and organisms ( May - Simera et al . , 2017 ; Moran et al . , 1977 ; Pan and Snell , 2007 ) . For example , primary cilia within C . elegans sensory neurons are responsible for mechanosensation ( Doroquez et al . , 2014 ; Nechipurenko et al . , 2017 ) . Motile cilia , on the other hand , are cilia that are capable of movement . These cilia are primarily used to propel locomotion in many single celled organisms or to move fluids across tissues in multicellular organisms ( Satir and Christensen , 2007 ; Takahashi , 1984 ) . Motile cilia also play a role in several stages of vertebrate development , including the development of the heart and the left - right body axis ( Djenoune et al . , 2022 ; Nonaka et al . , 1998 ; Willaredt et al . , 2012 ) . Defects in either primary or motile cilia can lead to severe defects in cells and organisms . Mutations in just one of the over 600 proteins in a motile cilium can result in severe motility defects or paralysis ( Bower et al . , 2018 ; Urbanska et al . , 2018 ; Urbanska et al . , 2015 ) . In humans , ciliary defects can lead to numerous 4 diseases - called ciliopathies - including primary ciliary dyskinesia ( Hjeij et al . , 2014 ; Wirschell et al . , 2011 ; Yamamoto et al . , 2013 ) , situs inversus ( Cannarella et al . , 2020 ; Matwijiw et al . , 1987 ) , male infertility ( Coutton et al . , 2018 ) , and polycystic kidney disease ( Huang and Lipschutz , 2014 ) . Although ciliary beating plays a critical role in eukaryotic life cycles , the structures and molecular mechanisms that control beating are not yet fully understood . Cilia are comprised of a highly periodic structural backbone , known as the axoneme , which usually consists of a circular array of nine doublet microtubules ( DMTs ) ( Fig . 1A ) ( Sale and Satir , 1977 ; Witman et al . , 1978 ) . Most motile cilia have a [ 9 + 2 ] microtubule arrangement , meaning nine DMTs surrounding a pair of interconnected singlet microtubules , called the central pair complex ( CPC ) . In contrast , most primary cilia contain [ 9 + 0 ] axonemes , lacking a CPC ( Hoey et al . , 2012 ; Satir and Christensen , 2007 ) . Although most motile cilia contain [ 9 + 2 ] axonemes , there are some notable exceptions , including the [ 6 + 0 ] motile cilium of the protist Lecudina tuzetae ( Schrevel and Besse , 1975 ) , [ 9 + 0 ] motile nodal cilia ( Sulik et al . , 1994 ) , and [ 10 + 0 ] , [ 16 + 0 ] , or [ 20 + 0 ] motile sperm flagella found in some insect species ( Dallai et al . , 2006 ) . Despite the variations in the number of microtubules and biological functions , the periodic axoneme structure itself is highly conserved ( Linck et al . , 2014 ; Nicastro et al . , 2011 ) . The base structural subunit of the axoneme is a cassette of structural features that can be found every 96 nm along the length of each DMT ( Fig . 1A ) ( Nicastro et al . , 2011 ; Nicastro et al . , 2006 ) . This repeating subunit consists of the DMT and numerous proteins that stabilize the DMT ( e . g . , microtubule inner proteins or MIPs ) , drive flagellar beating ( dynein motors ) , or transduce signals to control beating ( e . g . , the nexin - dynein regulatory complex or the radial spokes ) . In a [ 9 + 2 ] axoneme , each DMT 5 is connected to the CPC via two or three radial spoke complexes ( RSs ) per 96 - nm repeat unit ( Fig . 1A ) . Several connections link neighboring DMTs , including dynein arms and the nexin - dynein regulatory complex ( N - DRC ) ( Heuser et al . , 2009 ) . DMTs are decorated with two rows of dyneins , the inner and outer dynein arms ( IDAs and ODAs , respectively ) , that are attached to the A tubule of one DMT and reach towards the B tubule of the adjacent DMT . Activation of the dynein motor domains drives sliding between neighboring DMTs . Inter - DMT linkers , e . g . , such as the N - DRC , restrict this sliding movement , causing the cilia to bend ( Heuser et al . , 2009 ; Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . For motile cilia to function effectively , their cilia must beat properly , with tight control of beat frequency , bend direction and amplitude , and beat propagation . To achieve proper ciliary beating , organisms must carefully regulate dynein activation through axonemal signal transduction pathways ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ; Viswanadha et al . , 2017 ; Wirschell et al . , 2011 ) . Signals begin at the CPC , propagate up the RSs to the IDAs , and then on to the ODAs via a specialized ODA - IDA linker region ( Gui et al . , 2019 ; Oda et al . , 2013 ) . This signal transduction pathway is critical for proper flagellar beating . Loss of , or defects in , components of the axoneme can result in cilia that are paralyzed or have impaired motility . For example , the RS - less pf14 mutant ( Diener et al . , 1993 ) and the CPC - less pf18 mutant in Chlamydomonas ( Adams et al . , 1981 ) have paralyzed flagella or flagella with impaired motility , respectively . Previous studies have shown , however , that there are naturally occurring motile cilia that lack critical components of the CPC - RS - dynein pathway . For example , Chlamydomonas flagella have a short third radial spoke ( Barber et al . , 2012 ; Heuser et al . , 2012 ) . Also , motile nodal cilia , which are thought to play a role in determining the left - right body axis during development , ( Buceta et al . , 2005 ; Nonaka et al . , 1998 ; Sulik et al . , 6 1994 ) , and sperm cells from the Asian horseshoe crab ( Ishijima et al . , 1988 ) both utilize [ 9 + 0 ] axonemes within their motile cilia . It is not clear how motile [ 9 + 0 ] flagella regulate their dynein activity , and thus their ciliary beating , without the canonical CPC - RS - dynein signaling pathways . In this study , we used the [ 9 + 0 ] sperm flagellum from the American eel ( Anguilla rostrata ) as a model system to investigate ciliary motility . Similar to the horseshoe crab , classical TEM studies have shown that sperm cells from Anguillid eels ( Anguilla spp . ) lack RSs and a CPC ( Woolley , 1997 ; Woolley , 1998b ) . Unlike the horseshoe crab ( Ishijima et al . , 1988 ) , the eel flagellum lacks ODAs , leaving only the N - DRC and IDAs as inter - DMT connections . Without ODAs , the A . rostrata flagellum represents the simplest known motile cilium , providing a potential “minimum ensemble” of axonemal structures that is sufficient for motility . To investigate this ensemble , we analyzed the 3D structure of the eel sperm axoneme using cryo - electron tomography ( cryo - ET ) and subtomogram averaging . We characterized the 96 - nm repeating subunit of the eel sperm axoneme and compared it to the ciliated choanoflagellate Salpingoeca rosetta . Through this comparison , we discovered that the structure of the eel sperm axoneme has retained the overall architecture of the canonical axoneme but also has several inconsistencies . We also investigated the eel sperm flagellum proteome and the genome of the closely related European eel ( Anguilla anguilla ) to identify known axonemal genes / proteins in the eel flagellum . From these combined analyses , we generated evolutionary hypotheses on the simplicity of the eel flagellum and provide an insight into the structures required for ciliary beating in its purest form . 7 Results The eel sperm flagellum has a variable width Although the ultrastructure of the eel sperm axoneme has been described previously ( Woolley , 1997 ) , the molecular composition and organization within the flagellum remains unstudied . To generate structural information on the eel sperm tail , we carried out cryo - ET on intact , vitrified sperm cells . Sperm cells were collected from mature male eels and were rapidly frozen for cryo - ET imaging . Initial tomographic reconstructions support Woolley’s conclusions that the eel sperm flagellum lacks RSs and the CPC ( Fig . 1D - G ) ( Woolley , 1997 ) . We then compared tomograms of the eel sperm flagellum with a representative tomogram of the [ 9 + 2 ] flagellum of the choanoflagellate Salpingoeca rosetta ( Fig . 1B - C ) ( Pinskey et al . , 2022 ) . S . rosetta is a ciliated , single - celled organism that is among the closest unicellular relatives of animals . Similar to sperm cells , the choanoflagellate cells are equipped with a single flagellum , but unlike sperm , the S . rosetta flagellum has been modified to aid in predation . These modifications include a “collar” of microvilli surrounding the proximal region of the flagellum ( Fig . 1A ) as well as a matrix of vane filaments extending from the flagellar membrane ( Hibberd , 1975 ) . Despite these external differences , the S . rosetta axoneme adopts a [ 9 + 2 ] architecture and the axoneme repeat unit resembles that of other eukaryotic flagella ( Pinskey et al . , 2022 ) . On average , the eel flagellum was smaller in diameter ( 187 nm ) than that of S . rosetta ( 265 nm ) . At an average diameter of 187 nm , the eel flagellum is wider than may be expected by simply removing the CPC and RSs from the axoneme of another species . When taken together , the CPC ( ~ 70 nm wide ) and RSs ( ~ 40 nm long , x2 ) occupy the innermost 150 nm of the choanoflagellate flagellum ( Pinskey et al . , 2022 ) . Simply removing this 150 nm , one might expect to be left with a 8 flagellum that is ~ 100 nm wide , although the inter - DMT spacing in this hypothetical axoneme would be incredibly small . It is possible that the smaller eel flagella represent the minimum inter - DMT spacing required for ciliary beating . The flagella depicted in our tomograms varied in diameter ( Fig . 1D - G ) , ranging from 166 - 225 nm . For traditional [ 9 + 2 ] flagella , an increased diameter typically corresponds to structural disturbances in the axoneme ( i . e . , axoneme compression during freezing ) . Some of the wider eel flagella were compressed , but many retained a circular axoneme ( Fig . 1D - E , Fig . 2 ) . Severely compressed flagella were not included in subsequent subtomogram averaging or analysis . Flagella were separated into “narrow” and “wide” categories based on their diameter . Representative wide and narrow flagella can be seen in Fig . 1D - E and 1F - G , respectively . DMTs in the narrow flagella were regularly spaced around the flagellar cross - section ( Fig . 1F ) whereas wide flagella had variable inter - DMT spacings ( Fig . 1D ) . The spacing between DMTs in the narrow flagella ( and those in well - ordered sections of the wide flagella ) is smaller than the spacing seen in other organisms ( see Discussion ) . Differences in the axoneme structure within spatially regulated regions of the flagellum ( i . e . , proximal - distal differences ) have been demonstrated previously ( Lin et al . , 2012 ) and some of these differences are thought to play a role in the regulation of ciliary beating ( Lin and Nicastro , 2014 ; Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . To investigate the potential proximal - distal relationship of the width of the eel sperm flagellum , we first determined the location of each tilt series along the flagellum . Using grid square - level maps ( Fig . 2A ) , we identified the point along the flagellum where each tilt series was collected and measured the distance along the flagellum from these 9 points to the sperm head . We then measured the width of each flagellum at three points throughout the tomogram ( Fig . 2B - C ) . We compared the average flagellar width to the distance along the flagellum and found that flagella that we classified as “narrow” tended to be more proximal ( average distance of 6 . 5 µm from the head ) than “wide” flagella ( 18 µm from the head ) ( Fig . 2D ) . Differences in axoneme diameter can also be seen within a single flagellum ( Fig . 2E - H ) . For example , along the basal and proximal regions of one eel sperm flagellum ( Fig . 2E ) , the axoneme begins at the basal body , transitions to a small axoneme ( Fig . 2G ) , and widens at the distal end of the visible region ( Fig . 2H ) . This tomogram also includes information on both the basal body and transition zone of the eel flagellum ( Fig . 2E - F ) . While the basal body does consist of the traditional triple microtubules , the eel sperm flagellum appears to lack many of the traditional accessory structures associated with the basal body and transition zone , including the ciliary necklace and the Y - fibers ( Awata et al . , 2014 ; Gilula and Satir , 1972 ) . This tomogram also contains a “striated rootlet” structure ( “R” in Fig . 2 E ) previously observed in both Atlantic and Pacific eel species ( Okamura et al . , 2000 ; Todd , 1976 ) . To determine if there were structural differences between the narrow and wide flagella , we averaged 96 - nm repeat units from each flagella category separately ( Fig . 3A - D ) . Density corresponding to the neighboring DMT ( DMT n + 1 ) is much weaker in the wide average ( Fig . 3A ) but obviously visible in the cross section of the narrow average ( Fig . 3C ) . The relatively strong density in the narrow flagella suggests that the inter - DMT spacing in these flagella is more regular than in the wide flagella . This spacing disparity can be directly observed by comparing Fig . 1D and Fig . 1F . Within the DMT of interest ( DMT n ) , there appear to be no structural differences 10 between the wide and narrow flagella averages ( Fig . 3A - D ) , therefore , we combined 96 - nm repeating subunits from all flagella in future experiments ( Fig . 3E - H ) . The eel sperm flagellum has retained remnants of canonical regulators of flagellar motility As demonstrated through traditional thin section electron microscopy ( Woolley , 1997 ) and supported by our tomograms , the eel sperm flagellum lacks many of the structures thought to regulate flagellar beating . Among these missing structures are the CPC , the RSs , and the ODAs . Through subtomogram averaging and proteomic analyses , we have found remnants of the RSs and ODAs within the eel axoneme . CPC remnants were not identified through either of these analyses . The eel flagellum does not utilize the traditional sinusoidal ciliary beating pattern employed by many [ 9 + 2 ] flagella ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ; Woolley , 1998a ; Woolley , 1998b ) . Instead , the eel flagellum has a helical beating pattern ( Movie S1 ) ( Woolley , 1998a ; Woolley , 1998b ) . It is likely that the lack of canonical regulation structures ( e . g . , CPC or RSs ) leads to this atypical beating pattern . Consistent with previous conventional EM studies ( Woolley , 1997 ) , our tomograms demonstrated that the eel flagellum lacks full - length RSs ( Figs . 1 - 3 ) . Subtomogram averaging of the eel 96 - nm axoneme repeat revealed a 14 - nm long structure that connects to the A - tubule and hangs below the IDAs ( Fig . 3H , Fig . 4C , E , G ) . This structure is located distally from the N - DRC , between IDA d and IDA g ( Fig . 4C ) , matching the location of RS3 in organisms that utilize three full - length RSs ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . The shape of this structure is reminiscent of the RS3 short ( RS3S ) structure found in Chlamydomonas ( Barber et al . , 2012 ; Heuser et al . , 2012 ) . Chlamydomonas utilizes two full - length RSs ( RS1 & RS2 ) and a third , truncated RS in lieu of a full - length RS3 . 11 Much of the previous work towards identifying RS proteins has been carried out in Chlamydomonas , and the component proteins of RS1 / 2 are known ( Barber et al . , 2012 ; Gui et al . , 2021b ; Huang et al . , 1981 ; Yang et al . , 2006 ) . Identification of the protein components of RS3 has proven more elusive . In Chlamydomonas , however , the RS3S complex has been shown to associate with several proteins , including those in the calmodulin and spoke - associated complex ( CSC ) ( Dymek et al . , 2011 ; Heuser et al . , 2012 ; Urbanska et al . , 2015 ) . To investigate the presence of RS - and CSC - associated proteins in the eel flagellum , we performed mass spectroscopy on isolated eel sperm flagella . This proteomic investigation produced hits for several RS / CSC proteins , including calmodulin , the RS chaperone DnaJ ( HSP40 ) , as well as two proteins ( FAP206 and MORN3 ) that are involved in RS2 docking onto the microtubule ( Table 1 ) . While there are not RS3S - sized structures at the locations of RS1 or RS2 , there appear to be remnants of each of these other RSs present in the eel axoneme and / or proteome ( Fig . 4C - D ) . In RS - containing organisms , several of the IDAs dock to the microtubule through interactions with RS proteins . IDA c binds to the front spoke ( FAP206 ) of RS2 in Tetrahymena ( Vasudevan et al . , 2015 ) and IDA b is thought to interact with FAP253 in Chlamydomonas ( Gui et al . , 2021b ) . FAP206 was present in the eel mass spectrometry results ( Table 1 ) . Structural remnants of several RS1 - and RS2 - associated proteins are present in the eel axoneme ( Fig . 4I - J , M - N ) . Electron density like the front spoke - IDA c region in the S . rosetta axoneme ( Fig . 4N ) can be seen where IDA c docks to the A - tubule of the eel DMT . The axonemal ruler ( a complex of Ccdc39 / Ccdc40 ) runs along the length of the axoneme repeat unit between protofilaments A2 and A3 ( white arrowhead in Fig . 5A ) . Finally , where the IDA a tail interacts with the DMT in the eel axoneme , a density 12 spans the A2 - A3 space and hangs down from the eel microtubule ( Fig . 4I - J ) . This structure is reminiscent of the density occupied by FAP207 ( MORN repeat containing protein 3 , MORN3 ) in the Chlamydomonas RS1 ( Gui et al . , 2021b ) . It remains unclear if these supposed remnants play a role in the function of the eel axoneme , but their presence in an RS - less organism suggests that they could be critical for IDA docking ( below ) . The eel flagellum lacks ODAs but has retained an ODA docking complex ( ODA - DC ) Previous conventional EM experiments suggested that the eel sperm flagellum lacked the outer row of dynein arms ( Woolley , 1997 ; Woolley , 1998b ) . Cross sections of eel sperm flagella cryo - tomograms corroborate the lack of ODAs ( Fig . 1D / F ) . Subtomogram averaging of the eel 96 - nm axoneme repeat unit revealed a structure docked to the A - tubule between protofilaments A7 and A8 ( Fig . 4E , Fig . 5A ) . In eel , this structure consists of two lobes connected to the DMT by a thicker proximal connection and thinner distal connection ( Fig . 5B ) . The lobes of this structure reach out towards , and potentially contact , the B - tubule of DMT n + 1 . Like ODAs , this double - lobed structure maintains a 24 - nm periodicity within the eel axoneme repeat unit ( Fig . 5B ) In organisms that contain ODAs , the individual dynein motor domains are connected to the DMT through an ODA docking complex ( ODA DC ) ( Gui et al . , 2021a ; Owa et al . , 2014 ; Takada et al . , 2002 ; Walton et al . , 2021 ) . These complexes bind to the DMT between the A7 and A8 protofilaments and each complex has at least two connection points . Single celled eukaryotes , such as Chlamydomonas and Tetrahymena , have a single - lobed ODA DC with one DMT contact directly below the lobe and another connection tailing away from the lobe towards the next most proximal ODA ( Bazan et al . , 2021 ; Gui et al . , 2021a ; Song et al . , 2020 ) . Multicellular animals , 13 such as cows and sea urchins , tend to have double - lobed ODA DC structures and connections to the DMT are on either end of the lobes ( Gui et al . , 2021a ; Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . In fact , the structure of the bovine ODA DC ( Gui et al . , 2021a ) resembles the density decorating the eel 96 - nm repeat unit ( Fig . 3G ) . Based on the location and periodicity of this structure , as well as its structural similarity to the bovine ODA DC , we predicted that the eel sperm flagellum contains an animal - like ODA DC complex . The bovine ODA DC is made up of five proteins . The proximal attachment is a heterodimeric complex of CCDC151 and CCDC114 . Calaxin ( Efcab1 ) and ARMC4 constitute the proximal and distal lobes , respectively . TTC25 is the distal attachment between the ODA DC and the DMT ( Gui et al . , 2021a ) . Proteomic analysis of extracted eel flagella revealed three of these ODA DC - associated proteins , TTC25 , ARMC4 , and CCDC151 ( Table 1 ) . Calaxin and CCDC114 were not identified in the mass spectroscopy data , but the corresponding structures appear to be present in the eel ODA DC . It is currently unknown if these proteins are present but were not identified in the proteomic analysis or if these proteins have been replaced in the eel flagellum . The closely related European eel ( Anguilla anguilla ) encodes for predicted Ccdc114 and Efcab1 ( calaxin ) genes ( GenBank ) . To gauge the similarity of the eel and cow ODA DCs , we fit the cryo - EM structure of the bovine ODA DC ( Gui et al . , 2021a ) into our eel sperm subtomogram average . The ARMC4 , TTC25 , and CCDC114 / CCDC151 segments of the map fit within the cryo - ET density . The calaxin structure , on the other hand , does not fit into the map . In vertebrates , the calaxin subunit is situated between ARMC4 and the ODAs , facilitating ODA docking ( Fig . 5E , ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2023 ) ) . While there 14 does not appear to be density in the eel sperm average corresponding to calaxin , there is an as - yet unaccounted for density on the opposite side of the ARMC4 density . It is possible that in the eel axoneme , calaxin binds to the opposite side of the ARMC4 structure . Recently , it has been shown that calaxin is critical for ODA binding in zebrafish sperm flagella ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2023 ) . In calaxin - / - mutants , the ODAs , and the ODA - DC , are absent in ~ 30 % of selected particles . As calaxin is important for ODA docking , it is possible that an ancestral calaxin / ARMC4 mutation that forced calaxin to switch sides may be responsible for the loss of ODAs in the eel sperm flagellum . The inner dynein arms ( IDAs ) are not well - regulated in the eel sperm flagellum As the eel sperm flagellum lacks ODAs , the IDAs are the only known protein motors within the axoneme that can drive ciliary beating . The 96 - nm repeat average of the eel flagellum revealed a full complement of IDAs , including the six single - headed dyneins and the double - headed I1 / f dynein ( Fig . 4A ) . Like in other species , the eel IDAs sit below the DMT ( towards the center of the axoneme ) and reach out towards the neighboring DMT ( Fig . 3E ) . Unlike other species ( e . g . , sea urchin or S . rosetta ) , the eel IDAs are situated below the IJ of the neighboring DMT as opposed to behind the neighboring DMT ( Fig . 3 E , see Discussion ) . IDAs utilize a stalk domain to reach out towards DMT n + 1 ( Lin et al . , 2014 ) . We searched for IDA stalks in both active and EHNA immobilized ( Fig . 3 ) averages , but we did not find any corresponding density . Given the proximity of neighboring DMTs , one might expect features from the previous DMT ( DMT n - 1 ) to be present in the subtomogram average . While there is some weak density underneath the A - tubule , we were unable to determine if these were flexible / uncommon structures attached to the bottom of the A - tubule or if they were structures from the neighboring DMT . 15 In [ 9 + 2 ] flagella , several of the IDAs dock to the DMT through interactions with the RSs . To investigate how the eel IDAs dock onto the DMT , we compared eel sperm and S . rosetta 96 - nm repeat averages at each of the IDA tails ( Fig . 4E - T ) . The IDAs that do not normally interact with the RSs ( IDAs b , e , and g ) demonstrated a similar docking pattern between the two species . The docking of the remaining IDAs ( a , c , d ) is perhaps more interesting . Without the RSs , it would be expected that the docking would be radically different between the two species . Instead , it appears that the docking of IDAs a , c , and d is consistent between eel and S . rosetta ( Fig . 4 ) . IDA d typically docks to the DMT through an interaction with RS3 , and this interaction appears to be retained using the eel RS3S complex . IDAs a and c dock via interactions with RS1 and RS2 , respectively . As described above , there is density underneath the eel A - tubule that may correspond to FAP207 and FAP253 . It is possible that these remnants of RS1 and RS2 are retained in the eel axoneme to facilitate docking of IDA a and IDA c . In many axonemes of motile flagella , there is a set spacing of DMTs and a solid interaction between neighboring DMTs . For example , both the ODA and IDA binding sites are known for the sea urchin axoneme and neighboring DMTs interact in a defined manner , creating a regular register ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . To examine the inter - DMT register along the eel axoneme , we placed an isosurface rendering of the 96 - nm repeat subunit back into the eel tomograms at the calculated positions using the “clonevolume” function in IMOD ( Kremer et al . , 1996 ) . From these cloned volumes , we searched for a pattern of inter - DMT connections , focusing on the most prominent feature , the N - DRC . Analysis of these interactions revealed that not only does the inter - DMT register vary between flagella , but it can also vary between DMTs within the same flagellum . The 16 lack of a specific inter - DMT register suggests that the ciliary beating of the eel flagellum may not be as well - regulated as that of other species , which may , in turn , lead to the helical beating pattern . The N - DRC is conserved in the eel flagellum Although the eel flagellum lacks many of the canonical structural elements of the axoneme , a subset of these structures has been retained . One of the retained structures is the nexin - dynein regulatory complex ( N - DRC ) . This complex binds to the bottom of the A - tubule and extends out to interact with the neighboring B - tubule ( Fig . 6A ) . Many of the components of the N - DRC complex are visible in the subtomogram average of the eel axoneme repeat unit ( Fig . 6 B ) . When viewed from underneath the DMT , the prongs of the baseplate scaffold ( Fig . 6B ) and both the proximal and distal lobes are visible ( yellow arrowheads in Fig . 6 ) . Proteomic analysis of extracted eel flagella revealed the presence of several N - DRC related proteins ( Table 1 ) . These proteins include DRC4 ( baseplate / proximal lobe ) , DRC5 ( L2 protrusion of the linker ) and DRC11 ( proximal lobe ) ( Gui et al . , 2019 ) . Electron density corresponding to the proximal and distal lobes of the N - DRC was weaker than the surrounding structures in the eel axoneme subtomogram average ( Fig . 6A - B ) . Weaker or blurred density in subtomogram averages can be caused by averaging flexible structures or by averaging together particles with and without the structure of interest . To investigate the cause of the blurred N - DRC densities , we performed classification on the N - DRC lobes . The classification revealed three different classes , with the main difference being the position of the N - DRC lobes ( Fig . 6D - F ) . The most abundant class ( 73 . 0 % ) had the N - DRC extending from the A - tubule at a 20° angle ( relative to protofilament A4 ) . The other two classes , representing 15 . 7 % and 11 . 3 % of 17 the particles , had A4 - N - DRC angles of 10° and 2° , respectively ( Fig . 6 E - F ) . Consequently , the N - DRC lobes were lower or higher , depending on the class , relative to DMT n . Class 1 ( 73 . 0 % ) had the lowest lobes and class 3 ( 11 . 3 % ) had the highest . The strength of the signal corresponding to DMT n + 1 was also the strongest in class 1 , suggesting that the interaction between neighboring DMTs may be stronger in this class . The inner junction of the eel flagellum demonstrates a unique protein pattern The axonemal DMT is made up of a complete ( 13 protofilaments ) A - tubule and an incomplete ( 10 protofilaments ) B - tubule ( Nicastro et al . , 2011 ) . There are two locations within the DMT where the A - and B - tubules interact . At the outer junction ( the side of the DMT that faces the membrane ) , there is a unique series of interactions between two A - tubule protofilaments ( A10 / A11 ) and a B - tubule protofilament . On the opposite side of the DMT , the inter - tubule connections at the inner junction ( IJ ) are mediated by a series of non - tubulin proteins ( Dymek et al . , 2019 ; Khalifa et al . , 2020 ; Khan et al . , 2021 ) . In most organisms , the IJ consists of a pair of peripheral proteins ( in line with the tubulin protofilaments ) and a series of MIPs located within the lumen of the B - tubule . The two peripheral IJ proteins are FAP20 and parkin co - regulated protein ( PACRG ) ( Dymek et al . , 2019 ) . In animals , a third protein , meiosis expressed gene 1 product ( MEIG1 ) , is thought to bind to PACRG and the B - tubule protofilament along the outside of the microtubule ( Khan et al . , 2021 ; Li et al . , 2015 ) . Within the lumen of the B - tubule , there are a series of connections between tubules and between connecting proteins . Proteins involved in these connections include PACRG , MIP3a ( FAP52 ) , FAP276 , FAP106 , FAP126 , and FAP252 ( Dymek et al . , 2019 ; Khalifa et al . , 2020 ; Khan et al . , 2021 ; Li et al . , 2015 ) . Some of these proteins , including FAP20 , and PACRG , 18 were found in the proteomic analysis ( Table 1 ) , and several others , including MEIG1 , are encoded for in the Anguilla anguilla genome . The periphery of the IJ consists of repeating subunits of FAP20 and PACRG ( Dymek et al . , 2019 ; Khan et al . , 2021 ) . In most organisms , this repetition is broken once every 96 nm at the N - DRC baseplate ( Gui et al . , 2019 ) . In eel , however , there are multiple IJ holes present throughout the 96 nm repeat unit ( Fig . 6C , H ) . These holes repeat at 16 nm intervals ( Fig . 6C ) , suggesting that every other copy of either PACRG or FAP20 is missing from the structure . In Chlamydomonas , the IJ hole at the N - DRC is caused by a missing PACRG subunit ( Gui et al . , 2019 ) . In the eel flagellum , there is a homologous hole at the base of the N - DRC and this hole fits into the periodicity of the other IJ holes ( Fig . 6H ) . In contrast , the S . rosetta axoneme contains both PACRG subunits surrounding the main N - DRC IJ hole ( Fig . 6I ) . Based on this continuity , we predict that the eel flagellum lacks every other copy of the PACRG protein . The periodicity of the IJ hole , along with the periodicity of the entire 96 - nm repeat subunit , is controlled by the Ccdc39 / Ccdc40 complex , also called the axonemal ruler ( Oda et al . , 2014 ) . This complex is present in the eel flagellum , and there are no apparent structural differences between this complex in the eel flagellum and in other organisms . Thus , it is unlikely that the axonemal ruler is responsible for the eel’s unique IJ pattern . Most organisms encode for a single isoform of PACRG . One notable exception is Trypanosoma brucei , that encodes for two PACRG proteins , called Tb PACRG A and Tb PACRG B ( Dawe et al . , 2005 ) . As the eel flagellum has lost many of the structural elements of the axoneme , we wanted to determine if the eel had also lost a second isoform of PACRG . Using NCBI’s BLAST algorithm ( Altschul et al . , 1990 ) , we searched for PACRG proteins across bony fish ( Actinopterygii ) . We did 19 not find any instances of multiple PACRG proteins , suggesting that the ancestral eel did not have a second copy that was lost over the course of its evolution . Even zebrafish ( Danio rerio ) , recently shown to have a similar pattern of IJ holes as eel ( Fig . S1E ) ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2023 ) , does not encode for two PACRG copies , suggesting that PACRG alone is not responsible for the unique IJ holes . The canonical IJ hole at the N - DRC is caused by the baseplate inserting into the IJ , resulting in the loss of a PACRG subunit . To investigate the potential of another structure inserting into the IJ , we searched the eel flagellum for structures close to the IJ with a similar periodicity to the IJ hole . Several of the MIP structures displayed a similar periodicity as the IJ holes , including the MIP3 proteins that interact with the IJ itself . Each IJ hole sits at the position along the repeat unit where the MIP3a and MIP3b subunits connect ( Fig . S1B ) . MIP3a is a relatively large MIP formed by the FAP52 protein , and MIP3b is the tether loop structure formed by FAP106 that both tethers FAP52 to the IJ and connects the A - and B - tubules ( Khalifa et al . , 2020 ; Song et al . , 2020 ) . The MIP3b structure spans ~ 8 nm along the length of the DMT ( Fig . S1 ) , a distance that covers two FAP20 and one PACRG subunits . The IJ holes appear at the proximal end of the MIP3b structure and density from MIP3b protrudes slightly into the hole . Published DMT averages from other organisms , including mice , Chlamydomonas ( Fig . S1F ) , Tetrahymena , and cows ( Gui et al . , 2021a ; Lin et al . , 2019 ; Song et al . , 2020 ) , display MIP3b density in this region interacting with the PACRG subunit . The only other organisms that have been reported to have additional IJ holes include S . rosetta ( there is a DMT - specific loss of another PACRG subunit , ( Pinskey et al . , 2022 ) ) and zebrafish ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2023 ) with a similar pattern as eel . At the canonical IJ holes ( at the N - DRC ) , the MIP3b of these organisms also protrude slightly into the IJ hole . These 20 protrusions make it unlikely that there is extra density in the eel FAP52 protein that causes the loss of a PACRG subunit . The eel flagellum contains a rail - like microtubule inner protein ( MIP ) and a unique outer junction complex . Subtomogram averaging of the eel sperm flagellum revealed that there is a rail - like structure within the lumen of the A - tubule ( Fig . 7A , G - I ) . This structure is similar to the rail - MIP seen in S . rosetta ( Pinskey et al . , 2022 ) or the mouse MIP4 ( Gui et al . , 2021a ) and is not present in the axonemes of most species studied to date . The rail - MIP runs the length of the 96 - nm repeat unit and spans between protofilaments A12 and A1 ( Fig . 7G ) . There are apparent connections between the rail - MIP and protofilaments A1 and A12 , but not A13 between the two ( Fig . 7H - I ) . The function of these Rail - MIPs remains unknown , but we hypothesize that they could play a similar role as tektins do in several mammalian axonemes ( Gui et al . , 2021a ; Song et al . , 2020 ) . Much like the N - DRC lobes , the electron density of the rail - MIP in the full subtomogram average was weaker than the surrounding protofilament density ( Fig . 2E ) . To determine the cause of the blurred density , we performed classification on the rail - MIP structure . The classification yielded two classes , one with the rail - MIP ( 51 . 8 % of particles ) and one without the rail - MIP ( 44 . 3 % of particles ) . Many species have DMT - specific ( e . g . , the 5 - 6 bridge in Strongylocentrotus ) or proximal - distal specific ( e . g . , the 1 - 2 bridge in Chlamydomonas ) structures within their axonemes ( Lin et al . , 2012 ) . To investigate possible proximal - distal relationship or DMT - specificity , we mapped the classed particles back onto the individual flagella . The presence or absence of the rail - MIP appeared to be sporadic throughout the flagella . It does appear , however , that compressed 21 flagella tended to have more particles that did not contain the rail - MIP . It is currently unknown if the relative absence of the rail - MIP is a symptom or a cause of the increased flagellar compression . Alongside the rail - MIP , the structure of the eel 96 - nm axoneme repeat unit contains several unique structural features . The first of these features is an apparent microtubule accessory protein ( MAP ) that connects protofilaments A9 and A10 ( Fig . 7K - M ) . MAPs are proteins that attach to the exterior of the microtubule doublets , and they are thought to play roles in DMT stability and flagellar signaling ( Linck et al . , 2014 ; Ma et al . , 2019 ; Nicastro et al . , 2011 ) . A similar , albeit smaller , bridging structure has been identified spanning A9 - A10 in Chlamydomonas ( Ma et al . , 2019 ) , but the protein identity of this structure is unknown . Discussion The eel flagellum employs a unique inter - DMT connection strategy to propel ciliary beating In traditional axonemes , binding of the ODAs , IDAs , and the N - DRC is largely conserved ( Gui et al . , 2019 ; Lin and Nicastro , 2014 ; Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . These structures dock to the A - tubule of DMT n and interact with the B - tubule of DMT n + 1 . The eel axoneme , on the other hand , does not adhere to these canonical inter - DMT interactions ( Fig . 1 , Fig . 3 ) . For example , the distance between neighboring DMTs in the eel sperm flagella ( ~ 40 nm on average ) is smaller than that seen in [ 9 + 2 ] flagella ( e . g . , ~ 70 nm in sea urchin ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) ) . To better illustrate the differences in inter - DMT interactions between [ 9 + 2 ] flagella and the [ 9 + 0 ] eel flagella , we modeled the protofilaments and inter - DMT connections from the eel subtomogram average and from the S . rosetta axoneme repeat unit ( Fig . 8 ) . The protofilaments of DMT n were manually annotated and then were copied for estimation of DMT n + 1 . Alignment and protofilament 22 assignment for DMT n + 1 was estimated by matching the B - tubule - to - A - tubule angle of the neighboring DMT with special care taken to align protofilaments A10 - A1 and B1 / B10 . In the S . rosetta axoneme , the ODAs , IDAs , and the N - DRC all bind to the B - tubule of the neighboring DMT ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . The ODA stalks bind to DMT n + 1 in the grooves between protofilaments B6 , B7 , and B8 ( Fig . 8 ) . The IDA stalks dock into the groove between B9 and B10 in the neighboring DMT , and the N - DRC interacts with B9 . The eel flagellum lacks ODAs , so it necessarily lacks any interactions between ODA stalk subunits and the neighboring DMT . The lack of ODAs does not mean that the eel flagellum lacks any outer connections with the neighboring DMT ; the eel ODA DC extends out towards DMT n + 1 and appears to connect to the B - tubule ( Fig . 5B & D , Fig . 7A ) . Based on the location of the protofilaments of DMT n + 1 , we predict that the eel ODA DC contacts the neighboring doublet around B7 , the middle protofilament involved in true ODA binding . The interactions between the IDA stalk domains and the neighboring DMT are not directly visible in the current subtomogram averages . The IDA dynein heads themselves , however , sit below the inner junction region of the neighboring doublet ( Fig . 3 E , Fig . 4 ) . Based on this positioning , it unlikely that the eel IDAs interact with the neighboring B - tubule . If the IDA stalks were to bind between B9 - B10 , they would have to be positioned vertically with respect to the dynein motor , if not slightly further back towards DMT n . Although it is not impossible , this orientation goes against much of what is known about the structure and function of dynein motors ( King , 2016 ; Lin and Nicastro , 2014 ; Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . More likely , the IDA stalks of the eel flagellum bind to the A - tubule of the neighboring DMT . 23 The N - DRC of the eel flagellum presents another interesting puzzle . The N - DRC appears to reach past the neighboring B - tubule and , much like the IDAs , is positioned around the inner junction of the neighboring doublet ( Fig . 6A ) . In the two most abundant classes from the N - DRC classification ( Fig . 6D - E ) , the N - DRC lobes do not appear to be pointing towards the neighboring protofilaments . In fact , it appears that the N - DRC is pointing towards a structure that is hanging off the bottom of the A - tubule . Initially , we hypothesized that the N - DRC was interacting with the RS3S structure , the only structure that hangs below the eel A - tubule . To investigate the inter - doublet register in the eel flagellum , we placed an isosurface rendering of the subtomogram average back into model points used for particle alignment ( clonevolume feature in PEET ) . Using this model , we searched for a pattern in the inter - DMT connections along the flagellum . Unfortunately , the register appeared to be random , and we were unable to identify a specific binding pattern . Without ODAs , the eel flagellum lacks 12 ( or 8 ) inter - DMT connections per axoneme repeat . Even though the ODAs are not permanently attached to the neighboring doublet ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) , it may be that these additional connections assist in creating the proper inter - DMT register in [ 9 + 2 ] flagella . The helical beating pattern of the eel flagellum is likely caused by the lack of signal transduction machinery . Motile cilia beating is controlled through coordinated regulation of dynein motor activity ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . Although the precise mechanism ( s ) of signal transduction remain ( s ) elusive , the CPC , RSs , and both rows of dynein arms are known to play a role ( Adams et al . , 1981 ; Diener et al . , 1993 ; Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ; Viswanadha et al . , 2017 ; Wirschell et al . , 2011 ) . When these 24 structures are missing or defective , flagellar beating is abnormal or paralyzed . For example , the CPC - less pf18 mutant in Chlamydomonas has completely immotile flagella ( Adams et al . , 1981 ) and the RS - less pf14 mutant has paralyzed flagella ( Diener et al . , 1993 ) . Loss of individual proteins or complexes can also lead to atypical flagellar beating patterns . For example , when CPC1 , an adenylate kinase protein in the CPC , is knocked out , the flagella have an altered beating frequency ( Zhang and Mitchell , 2004 ) . Similarly , the pf17 Chlamydomonas mutant lacks radial spoke heads , but retains the stalks , and has altered flagellar beating that causes the cells to wiggle instead of swim ( Huang et al . , 1981 ) . Chlamydomonas mutants that lack ODAs and IDAs display slowed flagellar beating ( Kamiya et al . , 1991 ; Perrone et al . , 1998 ; Rupp et al . , 1996 ; Sakakibara et al . , 1991 ) . The eel sperm flagellum does , in fact , beat , albeit with a helical pattern ( Movie S1 ) ( Woolley , 1998b ) . While the eel flagellum doesn’t beat in the quasi - planar manner of [ 9 + 2 ] flagella , it does appear to have a regular beating pattern ( Movie S1 ) ( Woolley , 1997 ; Woolley , 1998b ) . In Movie S1 , there are many cells that appear to be immotile , but there are also several cells that are actively swimming . Whereas the beat pattern and frequency qualitatively differ from cell to cell , they all exhibit a beating pattern , suggesting some form of dynein regulation must be taking place . Without regulation , all the dyneins would fire at the same time , generating a net zero force on the flagellum and not initiating bending ( Lin and Nicastro , 2014 ) . The mechanism behind the regulation of eel flagellum dynein motors remains unknown . As the eel flagellum lacks the CPC and RSs , key pieces of signal transduction in other organisms , the regulation of dynein activity must come from either the IDAs themselves or from an as - yet undetermined signaling factor . 25 Evolutionary pressures may have led to the “minimum ensemble” required for flagellar beating The canonical [ 9 + 2 ] axoneme is nearly universal amongst sperm flagella ( Satir and Christensen , 2007 ) . The eel sperm flagellum , on the other hand , has lost many of the structures that are known to drive and regulate ciliary beating . Although it lacks these critical structures , the eel flagellum still beats ( Movie S1 , ( Woolley , 1997 ) ) and this beating is sufficient to facilitate reproduction ( van Ginneken and Maes , 2005 ) . As the eel flagellum still beats and is sufficient for reproduction , the eel flagellum appears to contain a minimum ensemble of axonemal proteins required for life . The question then arises , what evolutionary factors lead to the structural cassette of the eel axoneme ? Organisms as far apart evolutionarily as Chlamydomonas , choanoflagellates , cows , and humans share a common set of flagellar components ( Coutton et al . , 2018 ; Gui et al . , 2021a ; Nicastro et al . , 2011 ; Pinskey et al . , 2022 ) . The eel flagellum likely diverged from a common ciliated ancestor and lost structural features over time . For example , the presence of an ODA - DC , but not full ODAs , suggests that the full feature was present in the axoneme at some evolutionary timepoint . Similarly , the RS3S structure and remnants of RS1 and RS2 in the eel flagellum suggests that some ancestral eel sperm flagellum may have contained full RSs . If the American eel did lose its axonemal components over time , there must have been an evolutionary advantage , or at least no evolutionary penalty , for doing so . Atlantic Anguillid eels travel to a small region in the Sargasso Sea to spawn ( Jacobsen et al . , 2014b ; Munk et al . , 2010 ; Pujolar et al . , 2014 ) . These migrations can cover thousands of kilometers ; ~ 4 , 000 km on average for the American eel and 5 , 000 - 10 , 000 km for the European eel ( Beguer - Pon et al . , 2015 ; Mccleave and Kleckner , 1982 ) . Pacific eels ( Anguilla japonica ) endure similarly long migrations in the hopes 26 of passing along their genetic material ( Tsukamoto et al . , 2011 ) . The eels are thought to swim constantly throughout these migrations and are not thought to feed during the entire journey ( van Ginneken et al . , 2005a ; van Ginneken and Maes , 2005 ) . Much like migratory salmon ( von Schalburg et al . , 2018 ) , these eels undergo significant morphological changes during their migration . Although spawning American or European eels have not been caught in the wild , Japanese eels have been ( Tsukamoto et al . , 2011 ; van Ginneken and Maes , 2005 ) . Once the eels reach the open sea during their migration , digestive tract begins to atrophy and the gut is lost ( Tsukamoto et al . , 2011 ) . Without feeding , the eels must rely on their energy stores to not only travel thousands of kilometers , but also develop gonads and produce gametes ( e . g . , sperm cells ) . The traditional [ 9 + 2 ] axoneme consists of over 600 unique proteins ( Nicastro et al . , 2006 ) . With an average length of ~ 35 µm ( Woolley , 1997 ) , there are ~ 3300 96 - nm repeat units along the length of the eel flagellum . Dynein heavy chains are approximately 4000 amino acids ( Uniprot ) , so by simply removing the ODAs from the axoneme , the eel no longer needs to synthesize and assemble 5 . 26 x 10 7 amino acids per flagellum . Coupling in the lack of full RSs and the CPC , the eel axoneme represents a significant energy savings compared to traditional [ 9 + 2 ] axonemes . By spending less energy per sperm cell , male eels could either devote more energy to migration ( increasing the likelihood they survive to reproduce ) or generate more sperm cells ( increasing their likelihood of passing along their genetic material during mating events ) . In captivity , Anguilla can release > 10 x 10 9 sperm cells per mL . This is a higher sperm density than most terrestrial animals , including bulls ( ~ 1 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) , boars ( ~ 3 x 10 8 sperm / mL ) , rams ( ~ 3 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) , and humans ( ~ 4 x 10 7 sperm / mL ) ( Sengupta et al . , 2018 ; Setchell , 27 1997 ) . This concentration is in line with other aquatic species , including rainbow trout ( ~ 12 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) , yellow perch ( ~ 41 . 5 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) , and whitefish ( ~ 8 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) ( Ciereszko and Dabrowski , 1993 ) . This is also similar to other marine fish species such as turbot ( ~ 2 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) , tuna ( ~ 40 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) , sea bass ( ~ 30 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) , and cod ( ~ 6 . 5 x 10 9 sperm / mL ) ( Cosson et al . , 2008 ) that have retained the [ 9 + 2 ] axoneme . Salmon , another group of catadromous fish , also undergo dramatic physiological changes during their breeding migrations ( von Schalburg et al . , 2018 ) . Unlike eels , however , salmon still utilize a [ 9 + 2 ] axoneme in their sperm flagella . This retention within another energy starved fish species suggests energetics alone may not account for the [ 9 + 0 ] nature of the eel axoneme . Although the exact mating behaviors of eels remain a mystery , there is some information available about their breeding habits ( Beguer - Pon et al . , 2015 ; Guarniero et al . , 2020 ; Jacobsen et al . , 2014a ; van Ginneken and Maes , 2005 ) . Eels , like many fishes , release both their eggs and sperm into the ocean for fertilization ( Guarniero et al . , 2020 ; van Ginneken and Maes , 2005 ) . Unlike salmon , that form mating pairs and deposit their sperm onto already placed eggs ( von Schalburg et al . , 2018 ) , eels are thought to engage in mass spawning events . Captive eels have been shown to engage in “mass spawning” events when multiple males spawn in response to hormonal triggers ( Okamura et al . , 2014 ; van Ginneken et al . , 2005b ) . In fact , male eels have been observed swarming around released eggs and releasing their milt ( Okamura et al . , 2014 ) . Through a combination of communal breeding and “mass spawning , ” it is likely that individual eel sperm cells do not need to migrate long distances to fertilize the egg . The relatively short ( 1 - 10 minute ) beating time of the activated eel sperm flagellum ( Movie S1 , ( van Ginneken et al . , 2005b ; Woolley , 1998a ; Woolley , 1998b ) ) provides evidence in support of this hypothesis . If this hypothesis holds true , it is likely that the 28 loss of prolonged and coordinated flagellar beating would pose little to no evolutionary disadvantage for the eel . Indeed , even a minimal competitive disadvantage from the flagellar beating would likely be outweighed by energetic advantages . Thus , we hypothesize that the eel was able to lose its ODAs , RSs , an CPC due to the evolutionary advantage conferred by the energy saved from making a minimal axoneme . An alternative explanation for the loss of numerous structures from the eel sperm axoneme lies in the composition of the eel oocyte . As described above , the eel sperm does not need to travel large distances to reach a suitable oocyte . Over long distances , the regulated , sinusoidal beating of the traditional [ 9 + 2 ] axoneme is more energy efficient and generates more forward thrust than the eel’s helical beating pattern ( Woolley , 1998a ) . The helical beating pattern does , however , generate more torque at the tip of the sperm head than traditional planar beating ( Woolley , 1998b ) . This torque may be beneficial as the sperm cell attempts to penetrate the egg . Mammals , including humans , alter the beating of their sperm flagella during the final stage of fertilization ( Austin , 1951 ; Chang , 1951 ; Zhao et al . , 2022 ) . This process , called capacitation , results in increased beat frequency at the cost of beat accuracy ( inconsistent beat amplitudes ) . It is possible that during mass spawning the “pre - capacitated” eel sperm cell is at an advantage compared to a sperm cell with a traditional , planar beat pattern . Regardless of the evolutionary rationale , the tail of the eel sperm cell contains one of the few known examples of a non - [ 9 + 2 ] motile cilium ( Buceta et al . , 2005 ; Schrevel and Besse , 1975 ; Woolley , 1997 ) . As shown previously ( Woolley , 1997 ) and characterized in this manuscript , the eel axoneme lacks many of the structures that are known to drive and regulate ciliary beating . Even 29 without these structures , the eel flagellum still beats ( Movie S1 , ( Woolley , 1997 ) ) , suggesting that the structures present in the eel axoneme are sufficient for ciliary beating . The ODAs , RSs , and the CPC , all structures known to be essential for ciliary beating in other organisms , are missing from the eel flagellum . The structures present in the eel sperm flagellum represent a “minimum ensemble” of proteins required for ciliary beating . Investigations of the signaling pathways and structural changes that facilitate eel sperm flagellar beating will provide information about the basic phenomena that drive ciliary beating . Materials and Methods Eel Maturation , Sperm Isolation , and Motility Movies Sexual maturity was artificially triggered in captive wild - caught eels through hormone injections as described in ( Oliveira and Hable , 2010 ) . Briefly , eels were injected with Human Chorionic Gonadotropin ( HCG ) hormone weekly . Spermatogenesis was checked by hand stripping . Spermatozoa were extracted from mature male eels through strip - spawning ( Koumpiadis et al . , 2021 ) . Approximately two mL of sperm sample was collected from each of four mature male eels . For immobilized samples , extracted sperm cells were treated with a final concentration of 2 mM EHNA ( erythron - 9 - ( 2 - hydroxy - 3 - nonyl ) adenine , Sigma ) and incubated for five minutes at room temperature . For live cell fluorescence imaging , cells were treated with a final concentration of 50 µg / mL of FM1 - 43 dye and incubated in the dark for one minute at room temperature . Sperm cell motility was activated by diluting the sample 1 : 1000 in artificial sea water ( 360 mM NaCl , 50 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM KCl , and 30 mM HEPES , pH 8 . 0 ) . The eel sperm began to lose activity within minutes of activation , so movies were collected , or the samples were plunge frozen , within 30 seconds of dilution in sea water . Movies of actively swimming sperm cells were 30 collected at the University of California , Santa Barbara using a Nikon Ti - 2 microscope and an Andor - Zyla camera running Micro - Manager 1 . 4 . 23 . Grid Preparation and Cryo - Electron Tomography Cryogenic samples were prepared as described previously ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . Briefly , holey carbon grids ( Quantifoil R2 / 2 ) were glow discharged for 30 seconds in a Pelco EasyGlow glow discharge unit . Eel sperm samples were activated with sea water ( see above ) and quickly mixed with BSA - coated colloidal gold nanoparticles to be used as fiducial markers . The grids were loaded onto a homemade manual plunge freezing device and loaded with 3 - 5 µL of sample . Excess sample was blotted away by gently applying filter paper ( Whatman # 1 ) to the back side of the EM grid . The grids were then immediately plunged into liquid ethane , maintained at - 175 °C . Frozen grids were stored in liquid nitrogen until they were examined by TEM . Vitrified grids were transferred into a grid clipping station ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) and clipped into Autogrid rings . The clipped autogrids were then transferred into a Titan Krios TEM ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for tilt series collection . Tilt series were collected from - 60° to + 60° , with images collected every 2° using a dose - symmetric collection scheme ( Hagen et al . , 2017 ) controlled by SerialEM ( Mastronarde , 2005 ) . Images were recorded using a 5k x 4k K3 Summit direct electron detector ( Gatan ) in counting mode ( 20 frames per second , 0 . 75 second exposures , 1 . 6 electrons / Å 2 per second ) . A nominal magnification of 26 , 000x was used for data collection with an effective pixel size of 3 . 15 Å . Images were collected using a Volta - Phase - Plate ( Danev et al . , 2014 ) , operated at - 0 . 5 µm defocus , and a post - column energy filter ( Gatan ) , operated in zero - loss mode with a 20 - eV slit width . The total electron dose per tilt series was limited to < 110 e - / Å 2 . 31 Image Processing and Subtomogram Averaging Movie frames were dose - weighted and motion corrected using MotionCor2 ( Zheng et al . , 2017 ) . Tilt series preprocessing and tomogram reconstruction was performed using the IMOD software package ( Kremer et al . , 1996 ) . The 10 - nm gold nanoparticles added to the sample prior to vitrification were used as fiducial markers . 3D reconstructions were calculated using weighted back - projection . Tomograms with compressed axonemes or evidence of crystalline ( non - vitreous ) ice were excluded from subsequent analyses . Subtomogram averaging was performed using the PEET package ( Nicastro et al . , 2006 ) . Individual 96 - nm axoneme repeats were picked from each of the nine DMTs within the eel flagella . The traditional axoneme subtomogram averaging workflow in the Nicastro lab places the initial model points for particle picking between RS1 and RS2 ( Lin and Nicastro , 2018 ) . The eel flagellum lacks RSs , and the only prominent features decorating the DMTs are the I1 ICLC and the N - DRC , but these structures were not readily visible in the raw tomograms . To ensure the particles along each DMT were in the same register , we first performed individual PEET runs for each DMT by itself . The I1 ICLC was visible in the individual DMT averages , and we centered each particle at the bottom of the A - tubule below the base of the ICLC . Model points were moved into the proper register using an in - house Matlab - based special feature retrieval program . Properly centered points were then aligned and averaged using PEET . Classification was performed using the unsupervised classification protocol built into the PEET program ( Heumann et al . , 2011 ) . Soft - edge masks were used to select regions of interest for classification ( i . e . , the rail - MIP or the N - DRC lobes ) . Isosurface renderings of the subtomogram averages were generated using UCSF Chimera 32 ( Pettersen et al . , 2004 ) or ChimeraX ( Pettersen et al . , 2021 ) . Tomographic slices were denoised using a weighted median filter ( the smoothing filter in IMOD ) to improve the contrast for presentation . Subtomogram averages were calculated from raw tomograms . Additional denoising of tomograms collected from thicker regions of ice was conducted using cryoCARE ( Buchholz et al . , 2019 ) . Briefly , even - and odd - numbered frames were reconstructed separately . 1200 subvolumes ( 64 voxels ) were extracted and used to train the neuronal network ( batch size 16 , learning rate 0 . 0004 , 200 epochs , 75 training steps per epoch ) and the trained network was then applied to the full ( odd and even frames ) reconstruction for denoising . Prior to training , a mask was applied around the flagellum to focus the denoising . Proteomic Analysis Eel sperm flagella were separated from the sperm heads as described previously ( Woolley , 1997 ) with minor modifications . Briefly , isolation buffer ( 250 mM NaCl , 1 mM MgSO 4 , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , 2 mM KCl , 10 mM Tris - HCl ( pH = 8 . 8 ) , 20 mM glucose ) was added to suspended sperm cells and the reaction was mixed on a rotary mixer for 10 minutes at 4 °C . Cells were then transferred to ice - cold microcentrifuge tubes and vortexed for 10 - 15 seconds ( ~ 3000 revolutions / minute ) to separate flagella from sperm heads . Flagella detachment was monitored via light microscopy . Detached sperm heads were separated via centrifugation ( 5 min . at 1500 rpm , 4 °C ) and the flagella - containing supernatant was pelleted using 10 , 000 x g for 10 min . Isolated flagella were resuspended and stored in HMEEK buffer ( 30 mM HEPES , 25 mM KCl , 5 mM MgSO 4 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , pH 7 . 2 ) and stored at - 20 °C . 33 Flagellar proteins were separated via SDS - PAGE using a 4 - 12 % gradient SDS - polyacrylamide gel . The gel was stained via Coomassie brilliant blue and then destained to minimize background signal . Sample - containing gel lanes were excised from the gel and were cut into ~ 1 mm 3 pieces . In - gel trypsinization and MS peptide identification were performed by the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center Proteomics Core Facility . Identified peptide fragments were compared against the Anguilla rostrata ( American eel ) , Anguilla anguilla ( European eel ) , Danio rerio ( zebrafish ) , Mus musculus ( mouse ) , and human proteomes using the CPFC ( Trudgian et al . , 2010 ) or Proteomics Discoverer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) programs . Known axonemal proteins are reported in Table 1 , although proteins with < 5 % coverage and fewer than 3 peptide spectral matches ( PSMs ) were excluded . Dynein proteins were labeled according to the unified dynein nomenclature laid out in ( Braschi et al . , 2022 ) . Acknowledgements The authors would also like to thank Dr . Daniel Stoddard for providing management and training at the UT Southwestern Cryo - Electron Microscopy Facility . Computational resources were provided , in part , by the UT Southwestern Medical Center BioHPC computing cluster located in the Lydia Hill Department of Bioinformatics . Mass spectroscopy was carried out in the UT Southwestern Proteomics Core Facility . Cryo - ET data were collected in the UT Southwestern Medical Center Cryo - EM Facility , which is supported in part by the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas ( CPRIT ) Core Facility Support Award RP170644 . These experiments were funded by the following grants : R01GM083122 ( to D . N . ) and a CPRIT grant ( RR140082 ) to D . N . J . R . S . is a Simons Foundation awardee of the Life Sciences Research Foundation . 34 Figures / Figure Legends Figure 1 : Cryo - ET provides a comparison of [ 9 + 2 ] and [ 9 + 0 ] motile flagella structures . A ) Schematic representation of the flagellar organization and 96 - nm axonemal repeat unit ( A ) of the [ 9 + 2 ] motile flagellum of the choanoflagellate Salpingoeca rosetta . S . rosetta cells utilize a specialized “collar” structure that surrounds the distal region of the flagellum . B - C ) Cross sectional ( B ) and longitudinal ( C ) tomographic slices of a representative S . rosetta flagellum . D - G ) Cross sectional ( D , F ) and longitudinal ( E , G ) tomographic slices of American eel ( Anguilla rostrata ) flagella . Two structural classes of eel flagella were observed , “wide” ( D - E ) or “narrow” ( F - G ) . Labels at the right of panels C , E , and G highlight the membrane ( M ) , DMTs ( D ) , radial spokes ( R ) , and CPC ( C ) . The scale bar in G represents 50 nm and is valid for panels B - G . For all longitudinal slices and isosurface renderings , the proximal end of the repeat is on the left , unless otherwise noted . For all cross - sectional slices and renderings , the proximal end of the repeat faces the viewer , unless otherwise noted . 35 Figure 2 : The eel flagellum widens distally along the flagellum but the axoneme structure is retained . A ) Cryo - EM map of a vitrified eel sperm cell with a visible sperm head ( blue star ) and tail ( blue arrowheads ) . Note that the flagella from other sperm cells are also visible ( white arrowheads ) . B ) Tomographic slice of an eel sperm flagellum . White lines correspond to the three locations along the flagellum where width measurements were taken . Cross sectional slices at each location are shown in the corresponding inset image . C ) Cross sectional tomographic slice depicting an uncompressed ( round ) flagellum . White lines provide examples of width measurements . D ) Scatter plot depicting the width of the flagella used in these averages compared to the distance along the sperm tail that the tilt series were collected at . Note the cluster of narrow flagella measured within the first few microns of the flagellum . E ) Longitudinal tomographic slice of the base and proximal region of an eel sperm flagellum . Note the “striated rootlet” ( R ) extending from the sperm head , visible in the top - left portion of this panel . F ) Cross sectional tomographic 36 slice of the basal region of an eel flagellum . Note the triplet microtubules corresponding to the basal body . G - H ) Cross sectional tomographic slices of two proximal regions of an eel flagellum . Note the increased width of the flagellum and the increased disorder of the DMT arrangement in the more distal segment ( H ) . Scale bar in panel A represents 100 nm . Scale bar in panel B represents 50 nm and is valid for panels B - C . White lines represent the locations of views represented in subsequent panels . G - H ) Isosurface renderings of the eel 96 - nm repeat unit average in cross sectional ( G ) or longitudinal ( H ) orientation . A key describing the correlation between colors and axonemal features can be found below the isosurface rendering . Scale bars represent 2 µm in panel A , 250 nm in B ( 50 nm in insets ) , 100 nm in panel E , and 25 nm in panels C and F ( valid for F - H ) . 37 Figure 3 : Small and wide regions of the eel sperm flagellum are structurally similar . A - D ) Cross sectional ( A , C ) and longitudinal ( B , D ) slices of subtomogram averages generated from the wide ( A - B ) or narrow ( C - D ) eel sperm flagella . Note the structural similarity between the two averages . Key structural features , including the IDAs , the ICLC complex , and the neighboring DMT are highlighted ( black labels ) . There were no major structural differences between the narrow and wide averages , so the particles were combined and averaged . E - F ) Cross sectional ( E ) and longitudinal ( F ) slices of the combined subtomogram average . Note the decrease in the density of the neighboring DMT and the MIP4 region ( blue arrowhead ) in the combined averaged compared to the narrow average . G - H ) Isosurface renderings of the eel 96 - nm repeat unit average in cross sectional ( G ) or longitudinal ( H ) orientation . To aid in visualizing the ODA - DC structure , density for the neighboring DMT was computationally removed using Chimera’s Volume Eraser functionality . A key describing the correlation between colors and axonemal features can be found below the isosurface rendering . The scale bar in panel F represents 10 nm and is valid for panels A - F . White lines represent the locations of views represented in subsequent panels . 38 Figure 4 : The eel sperm flagellum demonstrates conserved IDA docking and retains radial spoke remnants . A - D ) Longitudinal slices of the averaged 96 - nm repeat units from the eel sperm flagellum ( A , C ) and the S . rosetta flagellum ( B , D ) . Slices in panels A & B are focused on the IDA dynein heads ( black labels ) and on the RSs in panels C & D . Tomographic slices are outlined corresponding to the source organism : eel – magenta , S . rosetta – black . E - H ) Cross sectional tomographic slices ( E - F ) and isosurface renderings ( G - H ) of the eel ( E , G ) and S . rosetta ( F , H ) axonemal repeat units , centered on the location of RS3 ( S ) . The eel sperm flagellum contains an 39 RS3S structure , similar to that seen in Chlamydomonas . Note the similarity in the eel RS3S structure ( orange ) and the basal region of the S . rosetta RS3 . Colors in the isosurface renderings highlight conserved structural features and can be identified using the legend . I - T ) Cross sectional tomographic slices depicting the indicated IDA tail and / or RS . Structures resembling components of RS1 and RS2 are also present along the eel sperm flagellum ( cyan and green arrowheads , respectively ) . Scale bars represent 10 nm . The scale bar in panel D is valid for A - D , in panel F for E - F , and in panel T for I - T . 40 Figure 5 : The eel sperm flagellum has retained an ODA docking complex ( ODA - DC ) . A ) Cross - sectional slice of the eel sperm flagellum 96 - nm repeat unit . Note the relative proximity of the flagellar membrane ( M ) and the neighboring DMT in the average . A structure is present between protofilaments A7 and A8 ( cyan arrowhead ) . This structure is reminiscent of an ODA docking complex ( ODA - DC ) . The white line in A depicts the location and orientation of the slice in B . The white arrowhead highlights the axonemal ruler . B - C ) Longitudinal slices of the eel sperm ( B ) and S . rosetta ( Choanoflagellate , C ) ODA - DCs . Panels B and C are oriented with the distal region to the left and proximal to the right . The eel ODA - DC appears structurally similar to that of Choanoflagellates ( Opisthokonta ) . D - D ) Isosurface renderings of the eel sperm ( D ) and S . rosetta ( E ) ODA - DCs . The metazoan ( Choanoflagellate ) ODA - DC consists of ARMC4 ( red ) , calaxin ( blue ) , TTC25 ( yellow ) , and the CCDC114 / CCDC151 complex ( light pink / magenta ) . The cryo - EM structure of the bovine ODA - DC ( PDB 7RRO ) docks into the eel ODA - DC density , with the exception of calaxin . There is a protrusion on the opposite side of the eel ARMC4 density ( towards the viewer ) that may be the location of the eel calaxin subunit . The scale bar in C represents 10 nm and is valid for A - C . 41 Figure 6 : The eel sperm flagellum contains a flexible N - DRC and a unique inner junction ( IJ ) spacing . A - C ) Cross sectional ( A ) , bottom ( B ) , and longitudinal ( C ) slices of the eel sperm 96 - nm repeat average . The eel N - DRC ( yellow arrowheads in A - B ) extends from the bottom of the A - tubule towards the A - tubule of the neighboring DMT ( A ) . There is strong density for the N - DRC baseplate ( B ) , but the density is weaker for the proximal lobe and even weaker for the distal lobe , suggesting that the eel sperm N - DRC is flexible . Unlike most other known motile flagella , the eel sperm flagellum contains multiple holes along the inner junction ( IJ ) . The black - outlined arrowhead points to the N - DRC - associated IJ hole and the red - outlined arrowhead points towards an additional hole . D - F ) Class averages reveal structural flexibility in the eel sperm N - DRC . Cross sectional ( D , E , F ) and longitudinal ( D’ , E’ , F’ ) slices of the eel average show the N - DRC in a low ( class 1 , D / D’ ) , middle ( class 2 , E / E’ ) , or high ( class 3 , F / F’ ) conformation . G - I ) Isosurface renderings of the eel ( G , I ) and S . rosetta N - DRCs . In most organisms there is a single hole at the IJ located at the N - DRC ( black - outlined arrowheads ) . The eel sperm flagellum has multiple holes along the length of the flagellum ( red - outlined arrow ) , apparently due to a missing PACRG subunit ( red arrowheads ) . Scale bars represent 10 nm . 42 Figure S1 : MIP3 ( FAP52 ) does not extend into the IJ holes along the eel sperm flagellum . A ) Cross - sectional slice of the eel 96 - nm repeat average displaying an IJ hole and a MIP3b subunit . The white line indicates the position and orientation of the slice in C . B ) Isosurface rendering of MIP3 and the IJ . Note the absence of any protein density extending into or near the hole , suggesting that it is not allosteric blockage that leads to the missing PACRG subunits . Structures in B are represented by the colors depicted in the key below B . C - E ) Tomographic slices of the eel ( C ) , zebrafish ( D , EMD 34791 ) , S . rosetta ( E ) , and Chlamydomonas ( F ) MIP3 - IJ regions , depicted in the same orientation as B . The distal lobe of MIP3A lies adjacent to the IJ hole but does not appear to extend into the hole . The main IJ hole ( black outlined arrowheads ) is aligned in each slice and is the only hole present in the Chlamydomonas average . The S . rosetta contains weaker density at a second PACRG site ( black arrowhead ) that depicts a second , DMT - specific IJ hole . The zebrafish sperm axoneme appears to share a secondary PACRG hole ( red outlined arrowhead ) with the eel sperm flagellum . Scale bars represent 10 nm in A and 5 nm in C ( valid for C - F ) . 43 Figure 7 : The eel flagellum contains both conserved and unique microtubule - associated proteins . A - L ) Cross - sectional ( A , D , G , L ) and longitudinal ( B , E , H , K ) slices of the eel sperm average and the corresponding isosurface renderings ( C , F , I , L ) . MIPs appear to be conserved in the eel sperm flagellum ( MIP1 , MIP2 , MIP3 , MIP4 , MIP6 ) . Colored arrowheads highlight specific MIPs and are colored according to the key . The eel MIP4 is similar to the so - called Rail - MIP seen in S . rosetta and the mouse MIP4 but appears to have discrete connections with the A - tubule ( purple ) . The “outer junction” of the eel sperm DMT contains a unique microtubule accessory protein ( MAP , green ) that spans the gap between protofilaments A10 and B1 . White lines in the cross sections represent the location of the subsequent images . M ) Isosurface rendering of the eel sperm 96 - nm repeat average . Individual microtubule - associated proteins ( MIPs , ODA - DC , etc . ) are colored according to the key . N ) Cartoon representation of the eel sperm MIP - decorated eel sperm DMT . The scale bar in K represents 10 nm and is valid for all tomographic slices . 44 Figure 8 : Comparison of the inter - DMT connections of the [ 9 + 0 ] ( eel ) and [ 9 + 2 ] ( S . rosetta ) axonemes . A - B ) Cartoon representations of the inter - DMT connections ( IDAs , I1 ICLC , N - DRC , ODA - DC ) present along the eel flagellum . IDA stalks were not visible in the eel sperm tomograms or averages , so the typical metazoan IDA orientation is displayed for reference . The eel sperm inter - DMT spacing is variable between and within flagella . The “loose” conformation ( A ) positions the IDA near the neighboring DMT , but it is unclear where , or if , the IDA binds in the “tight” conformation ( B ) . C ) Cartoon representation of the inter - DMT interaction present in the choanoflagellate axoneme . The choanoflagellate RS3 extends further towards the CPC and has been truncated in this representation . D ) Overlay of the three inter - DMT connections ( tight eel , loose eel , choanoflagellate ) . Note the spatial difference between the two eel states and the similarity of the loose eel conformation to the typical metazoan spacing . For all cartoons , the DMT - to - DMT spacing was established by manual assignment of protofilaments in DMT n and estimation of the A - tubule B - tubule angle in DMT n + 1 . 45 Table 1 : Axonemal proteins identified through mass spectrometry of eel sperm flagella . Proteins with less than 5 % coverage and fewer than three peptide spectral matches ( PSMs ) were excluded from this list . Dynein proteins are labeled according to the unified nomenclature laid out in ( Braschi et al . , 2022 ) . Protein Accession No . Function MW ( kDa ) Coverage ( % ) No . PSMs DNAH1 A0A0R4IY79 IDA d heavy chain 427 . 6 12 166 DNAH2 E7EZB9 I1 α heavy chain 514 . 6 9 213 DNAH3 F1QB07 IDA a , b , c , e heavy chain 440 . 1 8 213 DNAH6 F1Q6J7 IDA d heavy chain 474 . 6 11 206 DNAH7 F1Q8L1 IDA c heavy chain 456 . 1 14 307 DNAH7B L7N1Y0 IDA c heavy chain 466 . 4 11 268 DNAH7C A0A087WR13 IDA c heavy chain 461 . 8 11 269 DNAH10 D3YYQ8 I1 β heavy chain 529 . 2 8 167 DNAH12 E9QBH9 IDA a heavy chain 451 . 5 15 289 DNALI1 A0A0R4IP43 IDA light intermediate chain 32 . 2 10 17 Dynll1 Q6PBH4 Light chain , I1 , LC - 8 type 10 . 4 64 14 Dynlrb1 A0A0E9XF21 I1 light chain , leucine rich 5 . 4 83 6 Dynlrb2 Q9DAJ5 I1 light chain , leucine rich 10 . 9 39 7 Centrin - 2 B1P0R9 Light chain , IDAs b , e , g 19 . 4 36 12 Centrin - 1 A0A0E9WQL6 Light chain , IDAs b , e , g 19 . 4 69 26 Protein Accession No . Function MW ( kDa ) Coverage ( % ) No . PSMs Calmodulin A0A0E9WSY4 RS signal transduction 16 . 8 77 58 DNAJ ( HSP40 ) Q7ZW85 RS structural chaperone 22 . 3 8 3 MORN3 A0A0E9TYT2 Basal RS2 protein 6 . 8 15 2 CFAP206 Q6PE87 Basal RS2 protein 70 . 9 4 5 Protein Accession No . Function MW ( kDa ) Coverage ( % ) No . PSMs DRC4 Q60779 N - DRC scaffold 56 . 2 8 13 DRC11 A0A0E9P940 Proximal lobe 9 . 3 44 16 Protein Accession No . Function MW ( kDa ) Coverage ( % ) No . PSMs ARMC4 E7FB07 ODA - DC lobe ( ODAD2 ) 115 . 9 6 15 CCDC151 F1QFD6 ODA - DC tail ( ODAD3 ) 63 . 9 2 4 TTC25 F1RBQ8 ODA - DC connector ( ODAD4 ) 55 . 5 7 17 Protein Accession No . Function MW ( kDa ) Coverage ( % ) No . PSMs FAP20 A0A0E9WMY2 Inner junction 22 . 7 88 121 PACRG Q9DAK2 Inner junction 27 . 7 23 44 Voltage - dependent anion channel 2 A0A0E9XBK5 Outer dense fiber component 30 . 2 53 20 Voltage - dependent anion channel 3 B0R197 Outer dense fiber component 33 . 9 11 3 Tubulin beta chain Q6IQJ2 Beta tubulin 49 . 8 80 4303 Tubulin alpha chain A0A286YA31 Alpha tubulin 50 67 1993 Dyneins and Dynein - Associated Proteins CSC - and RS - Associated Proteins N - DRC Proteins ODA DC Proteins Other Flagellar Proteins 46 References Adams , G . M . , B . Huang , G . Piperno , and D . J . Luck . 1981 . Central - pair microtubular complex of Chlamydomonas flagella : polypeptide composition as revealed by analysis of mutants . J Cell Biol . 91 : 69 - 76 . Altschul , S . F . , W . Gish , W . Miller , E . W . Myers , and D . J . Lipman . 1990 . Basic local alignment search tool . J Mol Biol . 215 : 403 - 410 . Austin , C . R . 1951 . Observations on the penetration of the sperm in the mammalian egg . Aust J Sci Res B . 4 : 581 - 596 . Awata , J . , S . Takada , C . Standley , K . F . Lechtreck , K . D . Bellve , G . J . Pazour , K . E . Fogarty , and G . B . Witman . 2014 . NPHP4 controls ciliary trafficking of membrane proteins and large soluble proteins at the transition zone . Journal of Cell Science . 127 : 4714 - 4727 . Barber , C . F . , T . Heuser , B . I . Carbajal - Gonzalez , V . V . Botchkarev , and D . Nicastro . 2012 . Three - dimensional structure of the radial spokes reveals heterogeneity and interactions with dyneins in Chlamydomonas flagella . Mol Biol Cell . 23 : 111 - 120 . Bazan , R . , A . Schrofel , E . Joachimiak , M . Poprzeczko , G . Pigino , and D . Wloga . 2021 . Ccdc113 / Ccdc96 complex , a novel regulator of ciliary beating that connects radial spoke 3 to dynein g and the nexin link . Plos Genet . 17 . Beguer - Pon , M . , M . Castonguay , S . Shan , J . Benchetrit , and J . J . Dodson . 2015 . Direct observations of American eels migrating across the continental shelf to the Sargasso Sea . Nat Commun . 6 : 8705 . Bower , R . , D . Tritschler , K . V . Mills , T . Heuser , D . Nicastro , and M . E . Porter . 2018 . DRC2 / CCDC65 is a central hub for assembly of the nexin - dynein regulatory complex and other regulators of ciliary and flagellar motility . Mol Biol Cell . 29 : 137 - 153 . Braschi , B . , H . Omran , G . B . Witman , G . J . Pazour , K . K . Pfister , E . A . Bruford , and S . M . King . 2022 . Consensus nomenclature for dyneins and associated assembly factors . J Cell Biol . 221 . Buceta , J . , M . Ibanes , D . Rasskin - Gutman , Y . Okada , N . Hirokawa , and J . C . Izpisua - Belmonte . 2005 . Nodal cilia dynamics and the specification of the left / right axis in early vertebrate embryo development . Biophysical Journal . 89 : 2199 - 2209 . Buchholz , T . O . , A . Krull , R . Shahidi , G . Pigino , G . Jekely , and F . Jug . 2019 . Content - aware image restoration for electron microscopy . Methods Cell Biol . 152 : 277 - 289 . Cannarella , R . , E . T . Maniscalchi , R . A . Condorelli , M . Scalia , G . Guerri , S . La Vignera , M . Bertelli , and A . E . Calogero . 2020 . Ultrastructural Sperm Flagellum Defects in a Patient WithCCDC39Compound Heterozygous Mutations and Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia / Situs Viscerum Inversus . Front Genet . 11 . Chang , M . C . 1951 . Fertilizing capacity of spermatozoa deposited into the fallopian tubes . Nature . 168 : 697 - 698 . Ciereszko , A . , and K . Dabrowski . 1993 . Estimation of Sperm Concentration of Rainbow - Trout , Whitefish and Yellow Perch Using a Spectrophotometric Technique . Aquaculture . 109 : 367 - 373 . Cosson , J . , A . L . Groison , M . Suquet , C . Fauvel , C . Dreanno , and R . Billard . 2008 . Marine fish spermatozoa : racing ephemeral swimmers . Reproduction . 136 : 277 - 294 . Coutton , C . , A . S . Vargas , A . Amiri - Yekta , Z . E . Kherraf , S . F . Ben Mustapha , P . Le Tanno , C . Wambergue - Legrand , T . Karaouzene , G . Martinez , S . Crouzy , A . Daneshipour , S . H . Hosseini , V . Mitchell , L . Halouani , O . Marrakchi , M . Makni , H . Latrous , M . Kharouf , J . F . 47 Deleuze , A . Boland , S . Hennebicq , V . Satre , P . S . Jouk , N . Thierry - Mieg , B . Conne , D . Dacheux , N . Landrein , A . Schmitt , L . Stouvenel , P . Lores , E . El Khouri , S . P . Bottari , J . Faure , J . P . Wolf , K . Pernet - Gallay , J . Escoffier , H . Gourabi , D . R . Robinson , S . Nef , E . Dulioust , R . Zouari , M . Bonhivers , A . Toure , C . Arnoult , and P . F . Ray . 2018 . Mutations in CFAP43 and CFAP44 cause male infertility and flagellum defects in Trypanosoma and human . Nature Communications . 9 . Dallai , R . , P . Lupetti , and C . Mencarelli . 2006 . Unusual axonemes of hexapod spermatozoa . Int Rev Cytol . 254 : 45 - 99 . Danev , R . , B . Buijsse , M . Khoshouei , J . M . Plitzko , and W . Baumeister . 2014 . Volta potential phase plate for in - focus phase contrast transmission electron microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 111 : 15635 - 15640 . Dawe , H . R . , H . Farr , N . Portman , M . K . Shaw , and K . Gull . 2005 . The Parkin co - regulated gene product , PACRG , is an evolutionarily conserved axonemal protein that functions in outer - doublet microtubule morphogenesis . J Cell Sci . 118 : 5421 - 5430 . Diener , D . R . , L . H . Ang , and J . L . Rosenbaum . 1993 . Assembly of flagellar radial spoke proteins in Chlamydomonas : identification of the axoneme binding domain of radial spoke protein 3 . J Cell Biol . 123 : 183 - 190 . Djenoune , L . , K . Berg , M . Brueckner , and S . L . Yuan . 2022 . A change of heart : new roles for cilia in cardiac development and disease . Nat Rev Cardiol . 19 : 211 - 227 . Doroquez , D . B . , C . Berciu , J . R . Anderson , P . Sengupta , and D . Nicastro . 2014 . A high - resolution morphological and ultrastructural map of anterior sensory cilia and glia in Caenorhabditis elegans . Elife . 3 : e01948 . Dymek , E . E . , T . Heuser , D . Nicastro , and E . F . Smith . 2011 . The CSC is required for complete radial spoke assembly and wild - type ciliary motility . Mol Biol Cell . 22 : 2520 - 2531 . Dymek , E . E . , J . Lin , G . Fu , M . E . Porter , D . Nicastro , and E . F . Smith . 2019 . PACRG and FAP20 form the inner junction of axonemal doublet microtubules and regulate ciliary motility . Mol Biol Cell . 30 : 1805 - 1816 . Gilula , N . B . , and P . Satir . 1972 . Ciliary Necklace - Ciliary Membrane Specialization . Journal of Cell Biology . 53 : 494 - & . Guarniero , I . , A . Cariani , A . Ferrari , V . Sulliotti , P . Emmanuele , A . Casalini , F . Tinti , and O . Mordenti . 2020 . Sexual behaviour and reproductive performance of the endangered European eel Anguilla anguilla ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) based on direct observations and paternity assignment in semi - natural conditions . Aquacult Rep . 16 . Gui , L . , K . Song , D . Tritschler , R . Bower , S . Yan , A . Dai , K . Augspurger , J . Sakizadeh , M . Grzemska , T . Ni , M . E . Porter , and D . Nicastro . 2019 . Scaffold subunits support associated subunit assembly in the Chlamydomonas ciliary nexin - dynein regulatory complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 116 : 23152 - 23162 . Gui , M . , H . Farley , P . Anujan , J . R . Anderson , D . W . Maxwell , J . B . Whitchurch , J . J . Botsch , T . Qiu , S . Meleppattu , S . K . Singh , Q . Zhang , J . Thompson , J . S . Lucas , C . D . Bingle , D . P . Norris , S . Roy , and A . Brown . 2021a . De novo identification of mammalian ciliary motility proteins using cryo - EM . Cell . 184 : 5791 - + . Gui , M . , M . S . Ma , E . Sze - Tu , X . L . Wang , F . Koh , E . D . Zhong , B . Berger , J . H . Davis , S . K . Dutcher , R . Zhang , and A . Brown . 2021b . Structures of radial spokes and associated complexes important for ciliary motility . Nat Struct Mol Biol . 28 . 48 Hagen , W . J . H . , W . Wan , and J . A . G . Briggs . 2017 . Implementation of a cryo - electron tomography tilt - scheme optimized for high resolution subtomogram averaging . J Struct Biol . 197 : 191 - 198 . Heumann , J . M . , A . Hoenger , and D . N . Mastronarde . 2011 . Clustering and variance maps for cryo - electron tomography using wedge - masked differences . J Struct Biol . 175 : 288 - 299 . Heuser , T . , E . E . Dymek , J . F . Lin , E . F . Smith , and D . Nicastro . 2012 . The CSC connects three major axonemal complexes involved in dynein regulation . Mol Biol Cell . 23 : 3143 - 3155 . Heuser , T . , M . Raytchev , J . Krell , M . E . Porter , and D . Nicastro . 2009 . The dynein regulatory complex is the nexin link and a major regulatory node in cilia and flagella . Journal of Cell Biology . 187 : 921 - 933 . Hibberd , D . J . 1975 . Observations on the ultrastructure of the choanoflagellate Codosiga botrytis ( Ehr . ) Saville - Kent with special reference to the flagellar apparatus . J Cell Sci . 17 : 191 - 219 . Hjeij , R . , A . Onoufriadis , C . M . Watson , C . E . Slagle , N . T . Klena , G . W . Dougherty , M . Kurkowiak , N . T . Loges , C . P . Diggle , N . F . C . Morante , G . C . Gabrie , K . L . Lemke , Y . Li , P . Pennekamp , T . Menchen , F . Konert , J . K . Marthin , D . A . Mans , S . J . F . Letteboer , C . Werner , T . Burgoyne , C . Westermann , A . Rutman , I . M . Carr , C . O ' Callaghan , E . Moya , E . M . K . Chung , E . Sheridan , K . G . Nielsen , R . Roepman , K . Bartscherer , R . D . Burdine , C . W . Lo , H . Omran , H . M . Mitchison , and U . K . Consortium . 2014 . CCDC151 Mutations Cause Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia by Disruption of the Outer Dynein Arm Docking Complex Formation . Am J Hum Genet . 95 : 257 - 274 . Hoey , D . A . , M . E . Downs , and C . R . Jacobs . 2012 . The mechanics of the primary cilium : an intricate structure with complex function . J Biomech . 45 : 17 - 26 . Huang , B . , G . Piperno , Z . Ramanis , and D . J . Luck . 1981 . Radial spokes of Chlamydomonas flagella : genetic analysis of assembly and function . J Cell Biol . 88 : 80 - 88 . Huang , L . W . , and J . H . Lipschutz . 2014 . Cilia and Polycystic Kidney Disease , Kith and Kin . Birth Defects Res C . 102 : 174 - 185 . Ishijima , S . , K . Sekiguchi , and Y . Hiramoto . 1988 . Comparative - Study of the Beat Patterns of American and Asian Horseshoe - Crab Sperm - Evidence for a Role of the Central Pair Complex in Forming Planar Waveforms in Flagella . Cell Motil Cytoskel . 9 : 264 - 270 . Jacobsen , M . W . , J . M . Pujolar , L . Bernatchez , K . Munch , J . B . Jian , Y . C . Niu , and M . M . Hansen . 2014a . Genomic footprints of speciation in Atlantic eels ( Anguilla anguilla and A . rostrata ) . Mol Ecol . 23 : 4785 - 4798 . Jacobsen , M . W . , J . M . Pujolar , M . T . P . Gilbert , J . V . Moreno - Mayar , L . Bernatchez , T . D . Als , J . Lobon - Cervia , and M . M . Hansen . 2014b . Speciation and demographic history of Atlantic eels ( Anguilla anguilla and A . rostrata ) revealed by mitogenome sequencing . Heredity . 113 : 432 - 442 . Kamiya , R . , E . Kurimoto , and E . Muto . 1991 . Two types of Chlamydomonas flagellar mutants missing different components of inner - arm dynein . J Cell Biol . 112 : 441 - 447 . Khalifa , A . A . Z . , M . Ichikawa , D . Dai , S . Kubo , C . S . Black , K . Peri , T . S . McAlear , S . Veyron , S . K . Yang , J . Vargas , S . Bechstedt , J . F . Trempe , and K . H . Bui . 2020 . The inner junction complex of the cilia is an interaction hub that involves tubulin post - translational modifications . Elife . 9 . Khan , N . , D . Pelletier , T . S . McAlear , N . Croteau , S . Veyron , A . N . Bayne , C . Black , M . Ichikawa , A . A . Z . Khalifa , S . Chaaban , I . Kurinov , G . Brouhard , S . Bechstedt , K . H . Bui , and J . F . Trempe . 2021 . Crystal structure of human PACRG in complex with MEIG1 reveals roles in axoneme formation and tubulin binding . Structure . 29 : 572 - 586 e576 . 49 King , S . M . 2016 . Axonemal Dynein Arms . Csh Perspect Biol . 8 . Koumpiadis , P . , D . E . Sganga , S . N . Politis , V . Gallego , I . A . E . Butts , J . F . Asturiano , I . E . Batjakas , and J . Tomkiewicz . 2021 . Sperm production and quality in European eel ( Anguilla anguilla ) in relation to hormonal treatment . Reprod Domest Anim . 56 : 1497 - 1505 . Kremer , J . R . , D . N . Mastronarde , and J . R . McIntosh . 1996 . Computer visualization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J Struct Biol . 116 : 71 - 76 . Li , W . , W . Tang , M . E . Teves , Z . Zhang , L . Zhang , H . Li , K . J . Archer , D . L . Peterson , D . C . Williams , Jr . , J . F . Strauss , 3rd , and Z . Zhang . 2015 . A MEIG1 / PACRG complex in the manchette is essential for building the sperm flagella . Development . 142 : 921 - 930 . Lin , J . , T . Heuser , K . Song , X . Fu , and D . Nicastro . 2012 . One of the nine doublet microtubules of eukaryotic flagella exhibits unique and partially conserved structures . PLoS One . 7 : e46494 . Lin , J . , and D . Nicastro . 2014 . Structural insights into the motility generation and regulation of cilia and flagella by cryo - electron tomography . Mol Biol Cell . 25 . Lin , J . , and D . Nicastro . 2018 . Asymmetric distribution and spatial switching of dynein activity generates ciliary motility . Science . 360 . Lin , J . , K . Okada , M . Raytchev , M . C . Smith , and D . Nicastro . 2014 . Structural mechanism of the dynein power stroke . Nat Cell Biol . 16 : 479 - 485 . Lin , J . F . , T . V . Le , K . Augspurger , D . Tritschler , R . Bower , G . Fu , C . Perrone , E . T . O ' Toole , K . V . Mills , E . Dymek , E . Smith , D . Nicastro , and M . E . Porter . 2019 . FAP57 / WDR65 targets assembly of a subset of inner arm dyneins and connects to regulatory hubs in cilia . Mol Biol Cell . 30 : 2659 - 2680 . Linck , R . , X . F . Fu , J . F . Lin , C . Ouch , A . Schefter , W . Steffen , P . Warren , and D . Nicastro . 2014 . Insights into the Structure and Function of Ciliary and Flagellar Doublet Microtubules TEKTINS , Ca2 + - BINDING PROTEINS , AND STABLE PROTOFILAMENTS . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 289 : 17427 - 17444 . Ma , M . , M . Stoyanova , G . Rademacher , S . K . Dutcher , A . Brown , and R . Zhang . 2019 . Structure of the Decorated Ciliary Doublet Microtubule . Cell . 179 : 909 - 922 e912 . Mastronarde , D . N . 2005 . Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements . J Struct Biol . 152 : 36 - 51 . Matwijiw , I . , J . A . Thliveris , and C . Faiman . 1987 . Aplasia of Nasal Cilia with Situs - Inversus , Azoospermia and Normal Sperm Flagella - a Unique Variant of the Immotile Cilia Syndrome . J Urology . 137 : 522 - 524 . May - Simera , H . , K . Nagel - Wolfrum , and U . Wolfrum . 2017 . Cilia - The sensory antennae in the eye . Prog Retin Eye Res . 60 : 144 - 180 . Mccleave , J . D . , and R . C . Kleckner . 1982 . Selective Tidal Stream Transport in the Estuarine Migration of Glass Eels of the American Eel ( Anguilla - Rostrata ) . J Conseil . 40 : 262 - 271 . Moran , D . T . , F . J . Varela , and J . C . Rowley . 1977 . Evidence for Active - Role of Cilia in Sensory Transduction . P Natl Acad Sci USA . 74 : 793 - 797 . Munk , P . , M . M . Hansen , G . E . Maes , T . G . Nielsen , M . Castonguay , L . Riemann , H . Sparholt , T . D . Als , K . Aarestrup , N . G . Andersen , and M . Bachler . 2010 . Oceanic fronts in the Sargasso Sea control the early life and drift of Atlantic eels . P Roy Soc B - Biol Sci . 277 : 3593 - 3599 . Nechipurenko , I . V . , C . Berciu , P . Sengupta , and D . Nicastro . 2017 . Centriolar remodeling underlies basal body maturation during ciliogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans . Elife . 6 . 50 Nicastro , D . , X . F . Fu , T . Heuser , A . Tso , M . E . Porter , and R . W . Linck . 2011 . Cryo - electron tomography reveals conserved features of doublet microtubules in flagella . P Natl Acad Sci USA . 108 : E845 - E853 . Nicastro , D . , C . Schwartz , J . Pierson , R . Gaudette , M . E . Porter , and J . R . McIntosh . 2006 . The molecular architecture of axonemes revealed by cryoelectron tomography . Science . 313 : 944 - 948 . Nonaka , S . , Y . Tanaka , Y . Okada , S . Takeda , A . Harada , Y . Kanai , M . Kido , and N . Hirokawa . 1998 . Randomization of left - right asymmetry due to loss of nodal cilia generating leftward flow of extraembryonic fluid in mice lacking KIF3B motor protein . Cell . 95 : 829 - 837 . Oda , T . , T . Yagi , H . Yanagisawa , and M . Kikkawa . 2013 . Identification of the Outer - Inner Dynein Linker as a Hub Controller for Axonemal Dynein Activities . Curr Biol . 23 : 656 - 664 . Oda , T . , H . Yanagisawa , R . Kamiya , and M . Kikkawa . 2014 . A molecular ruler determines the repeat length in eukaryotic cilia and flagella . Science . 346 : 857 - 860 . Okamura , A . , N . Horie , N . Mikawa , Y . Yamada , and K . Tsukamoto . 2014 . Recent advances in artificial production of glass eels for conservation of anguillid eel populations . Ecol Freshw Fish . 23 : 95 - 110 . Okamura , A . , H . Zhang , Y . Yamada , S . Tanaka , N . Horie , N . Mikawa , T . Utoh , and H . P . Oka . 2000 . Re - examination of the spermatozoal ultrastructure of eels : observations of the external morphology of spermatozoa in three species . J Fish Biol . 57 : 161 - 169 . Oliveira , K . , and W . E . Hable . 2010 . Artificial maturation , fertilization , and early development of the American eel ( Anguilla rostrata ) . Can J Zool . 88 : 1121 - 1128 . Owa , M . , A . Furuta , J . Usukura , F . Arisaka , S . M . King , G . B . Witman , R . Kamiya , and K . Wakabayashi . 2014 . Cooperative binding of the outer arm - docking complex underlies the regular arrangement of outer arm dynein in the axoneme . P Natl Acad Sci USA . 111 : 9461 - 9466 . Pan , J . M . , and W . Snell . 2007 . The primary cilium : Keeper of the key to cell division . Cell . 129 : 1255 - 1257 . Perrone , C . A . , P . Yang , E . O ' Toole , W . S . Sale , and M . E . Porter . 1998 . The Chlamydomonas IDA7 locus encodes a 140 - kDa dynein intermediate chain required to assemble the I1 inner arm complex . Mol Biol Cell . 9 : 3351 - 3365 . Pettersen , E . F . , T . D . Goddard , C . C . Huang , G . S . Couch , D . M . Greenblatt , E . C . Meng , and T . E . Ferrin . 2004 . UCSF Chimera - - a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J Comput Chem . 25 : 1605 - 1612 . Pettersen , E . F . , T . D . Goddard , C . C . Huang , E . C . Meng , G . S . Couch , T . I . Croll , J . H . Morris , and T . E . Ferrin . 2021 . UCSF ChimeraX : Structure visualization for researchers , educators , and developers . Protein Sci . 30 : 70 - 82 . Pinskey , J . M . , A . Lagisetty , L . Gui , N . Phan , E . Reetz , G . Fu , and D . Nicastro . 2022 . Three - dimensional cilia structures from animals’ closest unicellular relatives , the Choanoflagellates . bioRxiv : 2022 . 2002 . 2024 . 481817 . Pujolar , J . M . , M . W . Jacobsen , T . D . Als , J . Frydenberg , E . Magnussen , B . Jonsson , X . Jiang , L . Cheng , D . Bekkevold , G . E . Maes , L . Bernatchez , and M . M . Hansen . 2014 . Assessing patterns of hybridization between North Atlantic eels using diagnostic single - nucleotide polymorphisms . Heredity . 112 : 627 - 637 . 51 Rupp , G . , E . O ' Toole , L . C . Gardner , B . F . Mitchell , and M . E . Porter . 1996 . The sup - pf - 2 mutations of Chlamydomonas alter the activity of the outer dynein arms by modification of the gamma - dynein heavy chain . J Cell Biol . 135 : 1853 - 1865 . Sakakibara , H . , D . R . Mitchell , and R . Kamiya . 1991 . A Chlamydomonas outer arm dynein mutant missing the alpha heavy chain . J Cell Biol . 113 : 615 - 622 . Sale , W . S . , and P . Satir . 1977 . Direction of active sliding of microtubules in Tetrahymena cilia . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 74 : 2045 - 2049 . Satir , P . , and S . T . Christensen . 2007 . Overview of structure and function of mammalian cilia . Annu Rev Physiol . 69 : 377 - 400 . Schrevel , J . , and C . Besse . 1975 . Functional Flagellar 6 + 0 Pattern . Journal of Cell Biology . 66 : 492 - 507 . Sengupta , P . , E . Borges , Jr . , S . Dutta , and E . Krajewska - Kulak . 2018 . Decline in sperm count in European men during the past 50 years . Hum Exp Toxicol . 37 : 247 - 255 . Setchell , B . P . 1997 . Sperm counts in semen of farm animals 1932 - 1995 . Int J Androl . 20 : 209 - 214 . Song , K . K . , Z . G . Shang , X . F . Fu , X . C . Lou , N . Grigorieff , and D . Nicastro . 2020 . In situ structure determination at nanometer resolution using TYGRESS . Nature Methods . 17 : 201 - + . Sulik , K . , D . B . Dehart , T . Iangaki , J . L . Carson , T . Vrablic , K . Gesteland , and G . C . Schoenwolf . 1994 . Morphogenesis of the murine node and notochordal plate . Dev Dyn . 201 : 260 - 278 . Takada , S . , C . G . Wilkerson , K . Wakabayashi , R . Kamiya , and G . B . Witman . 2002 . The outer dynein arm - docking complex : Composition and characterization of a subunit ( Oda1 ) necessary for outer arm assembly . Mol Biol Cell . 13 : 1015 - 1029 . Takahashi , K . 1984 . Cilia and flagella . Cell Struct Funct . 9 Suppl : s87 - 90 . Todd , P . R . 1976 . Ultrastructure of the spermatozoa and spermiogenesis in New Zealand freshwater eels ( Anguillidae ) . Cell Tissue Res . 171 : 221 - 232 . Trudgian , D . C . , B . Thomas , S . J . McGowan , B . M . Kessler , M . Salek , and O . Acuto . 2010 . CPFP : a central proteomics facilities pipeline . Bioinformatics . 26 : 1131 - 1132 . Tsukamoto , K . , S . Chow , T . Otake , H . Kurogi , N . Mochioka , M . J . Miller , J . Aoyama , S . Kimura , S . Watanabe , T . Yoshinaga , A . Shinoda , M . Kuroki , M . Oya , T . Watanabe , K . Hata , S . Ijiri , Y . Kazeto , K . Nomura , and H . Tanaka . 2011 . Oceanic spawning ecology of freshwater eels in the western North Pacific . Nat Commun . 2 : 179 . Urbanska , P . , E . Joachimiak , R . Bazan , G . Fu , M . Poprzeczko , H . Fabczak , D . Nicastro , and D . Wloga . 2018 . Ciliary proteins Fap43 and Fap44 interact with each other and are essential for proper cilia and flagella beating . Cell Mol Life Sci . 75 : 4479 - 4493 . Urbanska , P . , K . K . Song , E . Joachimiak , L . Krzemien - Ojak , P . Koprowski , T . Hennessey , M . Jerka - Dziadosz , H . Fabczak , J . Gaertig , D . Nicastro , and D . Wloga . 2015 . The CSC proteins FAP61 and FAP251 build the basal substructures of radial spoke 3 in cilia . Mol Biol Cell . 26 : 1463 - 1475 . van Ginneken , V . , E . Antonissen , U . K . Muller , R . Booms , E . Eding , J . Verreth , and G . van den Thillart . 2005a . Eel migration to the Sargasso : remarkably high swimming efficiency and low energy costs . J Exp Biol . 208 : 1329 - 1335 . van Ginneken , V . , G . Vianen , B . Muusze , A . Palstra , L . Verschoor , O . Lugten , M . Onderwater , S . van Schie , P . Niemantsverdriet , R . van Heeswijk , E . Eding , and G . van deb Thillart . 2005b . Gonad development and spawning behaviour of artificially - matured European eel ( Anguilla anguilla L . ) . Anim Biol . 55 : 203 - 218 . 52 van Ginneken , V . J . T . , and G . E . Maes . 2005 . The european eel ( Anguilla anguilla , Linnaeus ) , its lifecycle , evolution and reproduction : a literature review . Rev Fish Biol Fisher . 15 : 367 - 398 . Vasudevan , K . K . , K . Song , L . M . Alford , W . S . Sale , E . E . Dymek , E . F . Smith , T . Hennessey , E . Joachimiak , P . Urbanska , D . Wloga , W . Dentler , D . Nicastro , and J . Gaertig . 2015 . FAP206 is a microtubule - docking adapter for ciliary radial spoke 2 and dynein c . Mol Biol Cell . 26 : 696 - 710 . Viswanadha , R . , W . S . Sale , and M . E . Porter . 2017 . Ciliary Motility : Regulation of Axonemal Dynein Motors . Csh Perspect Biol . 9 . von Schalburg , K . R . , B . E . Gowen , J . S . Leong , E . B . Rondeau , W . S . Davidson , and B . F . Koop . 2018 . Subcellular localization and characterization of estrogenic pathway regulators and mediators in Atlantic salmon spermatozoal cells . Histochem Cell Biol . 149 : 75 - 96 . Walton , T . , H . Wu , and A . Brown . 2021 . Structure of a microtubule - bound axonemal dynein . Nature Communications . 12 . Willaredt , M . A . , K . Gorgas , H . A . Gardner , and K . L . Tucker . 2012 . Multiple essential roles for primary cilia in heart development . Cilia . 1 : 23 . Wirschell , M . , R . Yamamoto , L . Alford , A . Gokhale , A . Gaillard , and W . S . Sale . 2011 . Regulation of ciliary motility : Conserved protein kinases and phosphatases are targeted and anchored in the ciliary axoneme . Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics . 510 : 93 - 100 . Witman , G . B . , J . Plummer , and G . Sander . 1978 . Chlamydomonas flagellar mutants lacking radial spokes and central tubules . Structure , composition , and function of specific axonemal components . J Cell Biol . 76 : 729 - 747 . Woolley , D . M . 1997 . Studies on the eel sperm flagellum . I . The structure of the inner dynein arm complex . J Cell Sci . 110 ( Pt 1 ) : 85 - 94 . Woolley , D . M . 1998a . Studies on the eel sperm flagellum . 2 . The kinematics of normal motility . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton . 39 : 233 - 245 . Woolley , D . M . 1998b . Studies on the eel sperm flagellum . 3 . Vibratile motility and rotatory bending . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton . 39 : 246 - 255 . Yamaguchi , H . , M . Morikawa , and M . Kikkawa . 2023 . Calaxin stabilizes the docking of outer arm dyneins onto ciliary doublet microtubule in vertebrates . Elife . 12 . Yamamoto , R . , K . K . Song , H . Yanagisawa , L . Fox , T . Yagi , M . Wirschell , M . Hirono , R . Kamiya , D . Nicastro , and W . S . Sale . 2013 . The MIA complex is a conserved and novel dynein regulator essential for normal ciliary motility . Journal of Cell Biology . 201 : 263 - 278 . Yang , P . F . , D . R . Diener , C . Yang , T . Kohno , G . J . Pazour , J . M . Dienes , N . S . Agrin , S . M . King , W . S . Sale , R . Kamiya , J . L . Rosenbaum , and G . B . Witman . 2006 . Radial spoke proteins of Chlamydomonas flagella . Journal of Cell Science . 119 : 1165 - 1174 . Zhang , H . , and D . R . Mitchell . 2004 . Cpc1 , a Chlamydomonas central pair protein with an adenylate kinase domain . J Cell Sci . 117 : 4179 - 4188 . Zhao , Y . , H . Wang , C . Wiesehoefer , N . B . Shah , E . Reetz , J . Y . Hwang , X . Huang , T . E . Wang , P . V . Lishko , K . M . Davies , G . Wennemuth , D . Nicastro , and J . J . Chung . 2022 . 3D structure and in situ arrangements of CatSper channel in the sperm flagellum . Nat Commun . 13 : 3439 . Zheng , S . Q . , E . Palovcak , J . P . Armache , K . A . Verba , Y . Cheng , and D . A . Agard . 2017 . MotionCor2 : anisotropic correction of beam - induced motion for improved cryo - electron microscopy . Nat Methods . 14 : 331 - 332 .