PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com ALEX LEAVITT , Annenberg School for Communication & Journalism , University of Southern California JOHN J . ROBINSON , Human Centered Design & Engineering , University of Washington Citizen participation in crisis communication increasingly occurs in social media contexts . As some platforms – e . g . , social news sites – evolve around collaborative voting , filtering , and information sharing , the aggregation of breaking news information during crisis situations appears more often as an emergent practice in these online communities . Drawing from 53 interviews and descriptive quantitative analysis of reddit posts and comments , this paper presents a qualitative case study examining reddit . com members aggregate information during crisis events within the context of reddit ' s post / comment structure , crowd voting , and ranking algorithms . Using the lens of network gatekeeping , the paper shows how participants evaluate sources , organize information , and verify details to demonstrate how different affordances and limitations of information production allow or restrict particular types of network gatekeeping . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Collaborative and social computing → Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing KEYWORDS : Network gatekeeping ; crisis communication ; aggregation ; breaking news ; reddit ; news sources ; verification ; trace ethnography ACM Reference format : Alex Leavitt and John J Robinson . 2017 . Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com . PACMHCI , 1 , CSCW , Article 65 ( November 2017 ) , 21 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134700 1 INTRODUCTION Increasingly on the internet , participants adapt social platforms for collaborative efforts . In applications of news , these practices have resulted in a fast – though not too reliable – alternative for some news consumers’ information habits . Early discourses around “citizen journalism” [ 6 , 17 ] have focused on information production practices and the rhetoric of potential replacement of professional journalism . This paper shifts these debates slightly to focus on the intersection of citizen journalism and mainstream journalism , where distributed social media participants collect , synthesize , and vet information from of citizen and professional news sources during the progression of an ongoing news event . We dub these practices “peer information aggregation . ” Little research has been conducted on aggregation participants in particular [ 4 , 24 ] , so this paper contributes a novel and robust qualitative data analysis of peer information aggregation in relation to breaking news , focusing on participants motivations and practices . Building upon prior work , we introduce empirical evidence of the values and decision - making processes of citizen participants when aggregating information in crisis contexts . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . ACM 2017 2573 - 0142 / 2017 / November – Art65… $ 15 . 00 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134700 1 2 3 4 65 146 10 65 : 2 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . As practices like peer information become more commonplace on popular networked platforms , scholars and designers can learn from these emergent practices and build or improve systems to accommodate them . These emergent practices also point to evolving behaviors in networked social ecosystems , such as collaborative information gathering and correction in the face of misinformation [ 37 , 38 ] . Peer information aggregation may happen on any sociotechnical system with affordances for networked participants to curate and broadcast collected information . For example , Wikipedia has been shown to embody similar practices , where users collect information during breaking news situations and update and debate contributions to the encyclopedic articles [ 20 , 21 ] . To study peer information aggregation in a more - general - use social media platform , we look to the case study of reddit . com . Reddit represents a novel and unique case study , because breaking news peer information aggregation has emerged as practice in competition for attention amongst other non - breaking - news contributions ( or , depending on the attention to the ongoing event , other breaking - news contributions too ) . The competition for visibility significantly shapes the ways in which peer information aggregators do their work [ 22 – 24 ] . These complicated relationships between participants and platform affordances rework the expectations of who controls information in sociotechnical systems and how they do so . This paper therefore also contributes to the growing literature on reddit , expanding the work on the “gatekeeping” practices of information control in social news platforms . Using a trace ethnographic study with 53 interviews with reddit users and computationally - driven descriptive analysis of almost 200 aggregated posts and comments , this paper examines the behaviors and practices of information aggregation during breaking news events on a social news site . We use the lens of “networked gatekeeping” to examine the actors and decisions that control the course of news aggregation from information production to consumption , framing this theory with the literature on crisis communication and design affordances . We ask the primary research question , “What are the practices of peer information aggregation in response to ongoing events ? ” along with the sub - questions : RQ1 : How do aggregation participants find and evaluate reliable news sources ? RQ2 : How do aggregation participants choose what to include in aggregation updates ? RQ3 : How do aggregation participants verify and broadcast information to their audiences ? To focus the direction of this study , we only focus on individual contributions . Of course , peer information aggregation draws from networked participation and collaborations ( for more detail on collaborations in these cases , see [ 22 ] ) , and so we focus on the behaviors and decisions of individual contributors to examine the details that underlie the research questions outlined above . LITERATURE REVIEW In order to understand the context of peer information aggregation in response to breaking news events , we first look at theories of network gatekeeping , situating it alongside citizen journalism and news aggregation . Then we look at the literature on crisis communication to analyze peer information aggregation’s place amongst breaking news practices . Finally , we briefly discuss the role of platform affordances and emergent practices . Network Gatekeeping The concept of gatekeeping describes how information might be controlled in various systems , whether traditional media like newspapers or online sociotechnical platforms . Put simply , it encompasses “the process by which the billions of messages that are available in the world get cut down and transformed into the hundreds of messages that reach a given person on a given day” [ 35 ] , where people open or close “gates” through which information passes from producers to consumers . As digital systems increased in prominence , social theorists identified the increasing presence and salience of multiple gatekeepers as more and more information was passing through more and more gates [ 25 , 36 ] . Aggregation is one set of practices that extends gatekeeping into a networked , distributed setting of information control . Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com 65 : 3 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . More recently , Barzilai - Nahon [ 1 ] developed the concept of “network gatekeeping , ” which shifting from a unidirectional and top - down form of information control ( hierarchies ) to one that involves evolving network structures of actors and complex structural forms of governance ( networks ) . Importantly , in network gatekeeping , participants in these systems can be gatekeepers , participating in information control and providing feedback , as well as be the “gated . ” Barzilai - Nahon focuses on four primary factors of gatekeeping that emphasize the role of fluid gatekeeping - gatekept participants : 1 ) political power ( who has control over information and over how it changes in a network structure ) , 2 ) the relationships between gatekeepers and gated , 3 ) alternatives , ( other options for the gated besides operating under the absolute power of gatekeepers ) , and – most important for this study – 4 ) information production . Information in particular highlights how both gatekeepers and gated produce types of information within network structures and the factors that affect how this information is produced . Information Aggregation & Crisis Communication Aggregation involves the collection of hyperlinks to websites containing authoritative information , for access and attribution , in a shared space [ 7 ] . However , aggregation involves more than collection : it is “taking information from multiple published sources and displaying it in an abbreviated form within a single place” [ 7 ] . In other words , aggregation reworks already available information into concise formats . These practices are driven by individuals but can be mediated by additional human ( personal decision - making , group collaboration , voting , etc . ) or technological ( filters , algorithms , calculations , etc . ) actors . The literature around aggregation had also described the same processes in terms of “curation , ” which more often focuses on manual aggregation ( a practice which is not present in all systems ) [ 42 ] ; “gatewatching , ” which emphasizes aggregation from the perspective of the information producers [ 5 ] ; and “curated flows , ” which illustrates emphasizes aggregation from the perspective of the information consumers , where online software platforms that both filter information algorithmically as well as based on explicit personal connections with other individuals [ 3 ] . Aggregation is an important facet of contemporary crisis communication because participants occupy a gatekeeper role in increasingly - used social spaces . Peer information aggregation draws on the affordances of particular social media platforms that allow individuals and groups to collect and broadcast information from many sources in digestible formats . In this paper , we examine three processes of aggregation : evaluating sources , choosing content , and verifying information . People participate in a range of information seeking and sharing behaviors during crisis events . They provide situational awareness to emergency officials and other locals [ 10 , 23 , 46 ] , recruit or organize volunteers [ 19 , 47 ] and request donations [ 27 ] . They also provide support [ 27 , 40 ] ; share news and conduct sense - making [ 10 , 23 ] ; and provide emotional support [ 27 , 34 ] to victims and viewers . Evaluating and verifying information is a challenging task . Both professional and citizen journalists struggle to find proper sources from social media platforms [ 12 ] and may rely on known sources over independent ones [ 43 ] . Volunteers can help to verify information , but it requires participants who are skillful at evaluating information [ 37 ] , and these volunteers rely more on interpersonal trust and visual evidence [ 45 ] . Still , participants usually attempt to be journalist ic in their information processing behaviors . Research has found that people producing content around news events adapt toward the styles and systems of professional journalists [ 16 ] , and adopt journalistic ideals into their practice , like conducting proper sourcing and verification , when they perceive their work as closer to journalism [ 15 ] . However , some individuals do not follow this trend . Research has shown that some bloggers , for instance , tend to shift from exact journalistic practices like verification and instead guide their work by interpretation [ 44 ] . Those who do citizen journalism work may “care less about their role in the process” where they don’t view their “guiding principles as being related to traditional journalism” [ 18 ] . In crisis contexts , promoting information remains a key concern for participants , as they wish for their intended or imagined audiences [ 26 ] to stay informed about developments [ 24 ] . People go to networked social platforms to seek and share information during emergencies , natural disasters , and other immediate 65 : 4 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . developing events [ 28 , 30 , 31 ] . However , every crisis is unique and may require improvisation depending on the particular situation [ 27 ] . The information needs of participants change , within events , across events , and per type of participant ( from emergency workers to volunteers and civilians ) [ 9 , 10 , 39 , 46 ] . METHOD AND DATA This paper draws primarily from a trace ethnography [ 14 ] of reddit contributors during ongoing breaking news events , consisting of content analysis of traces and interviews for contextual behavioral details . We used a historical reddit dataset collected and compiled by Stuck _ In _ the _ Matrix via reddit’s public API , consisting of 197 , 517 , 928 posts and 1 , 830 , 807 , 828 comments from January , 24 , 2006 through August , 31 , 2015 1 . Through a combination of participant observation ( watching breaking news events over the course of a few years ) , SQL queries ( specific keywords to find news events ) , and unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms ( allowing us to find spikes in activity around global or local news topics ) , we identified over 350 posts , comments , and live threads as developing news aggregations . We used these specific traces as the basis of interview recruitment to identify relevant posters , commenters , and moderators . Private messages on reddit were sent to potential interviewees ( the total number who did not respond or declined was not tracked ) ; interviews were scheduled based on opt - in responses . To better understand the individual traces , the first author conducted 53 interviews based on trace participation during breaking news events . Interviews were conducted remotely through video calls between November 2015 and December 2015 , lasting about 45 minutes on average ( ranging from 35 minutes to 2 . 5 hours ) . Referring to the specific posts and comments authored by participants , retrospective questions were asked about what participants wrote , what their thought processes were like , how they found information , how they collaborated , etc . As participants reflected on their participation , the interviewer followed up with questions about specific behaviors or information traces contained in the contributions , as well as aspects of participants’ participation not captured in the trace data ( e . g . , collaborations with other users , communication channels , and especially the role of this participation in the participants’ day - to - day lives ) . In cases were collaborators had worked and interviews were conducted with both participants , interviews were triangulated to examine traces in greater depth from multiple perspectives . Interviews were transcribed and coded using a grounded approach [ 8 , 41 ] . These interviews were situated in case studies from over four years of participant observation of reddit . com between 2012 and 2016 . The final sample included ordinary reddit users , moderators ( volunteer community leaders ) , and administrators ( reddit employees ) . A small amount were also professional journalists that had used reddit for reporting or experimentation ( or as an ordinary participant ) . In total , out of 53 participants , the first author spoke with 2 admins , 9 moderators ( and 5 additional users who moderated subreddits not about news that could still speak to moderating behaviors ) , and 4 users who were professional journalists in some capacity . Additionally , 26 participants ( 49 . 1 % ) lived outside of the United States , including South America , Europe , Asia , and Oceania . In the US , 22 ( 81 . 5 % ) identified as white or Caucasian ( ethnicity was not asked for non - US countries ) . 5 ( 9 . 62 % ) of the interviewees were women . The sample’s ages ranged from 18 to 44 ( with an approximate average of 26 years old ) . The interview participants were highly educated : of those in the sample , 48 ( 90 . 57 % ) had ( or were in the process of getting ) a bachelor’s degree . Their experience on reddit ranged from 1 to 10 years ( with an approximate average of 4 years of experience ) . In addition to these interviews , we focused an additional smaller content analysis ( see Figure 1 ) on aggregations in posts or comments during disaster situations to summarize users’ practices . We began with a holistic list of aggregations and first removed live threads . We then coded the types of events and removed any which were not a man - made or natural disaster . Natural disasters included situations such as flooding and earthquakes ; man - made disasters included events like terrorist attacks , shootings , military actions , and 1 https : / / www . reddit . com / r / datasets / comments / 3bxlg7 / i _ have _ every _ publicly _ available _ reddit _ comment / Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com 65 : 5 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . plane crashes . Breaking news events such as celebrity deaths were removed . We additionally removed any since - deleted posts , leaving a total of 193 aggregation examples . We then conducted a content analysis , based on important factors derived from the grounded interview data . The coding occurred in two passes , to confirm the assumed grounded categories from the content of the aggregations themselves . We coded each of the posts or comments to better understand the practice of aggregation via these traces related to aspects of the posts or comments that were relevant to the choices made by aggregating participants . Five of these posts have since been deleted , and were excluded from analysis . These aggregations were coded for features they contained , including the presence of summaries , timestamps , explicit corrections , expressed uncertainty , emergency information , and links to social media , news organizations , and “official” information . These categories were created after the interviews and used to inform a post - hoc analysis of aggregation behaviors . The codes shown in Figure 1 indicate the frequency of aggregations where a specific feature was present ( yes ) or absent ( no ) . The codes were not mutually exclusive , so some aggregations contained multiple features . A correction included any specific indication or update to a post with information that was changed or outdated , including noting some information was false . Summary and Emergency Info were both applied for the presence of a summary or some sort of emergency contact info . If links to specific sources or a text credit was given , these aggregations were coded as social media , news organization , and / or government / official . These sometimes overlapped when aggregations included social media links to news organizations or government official posts . When the author explicitly mentioned they were local , this was coded as local author . Lastly , we coded any aggregation with uncertainty when the author explicitly questioned the veracity of some piece of information . Reddit’s Affordances for Information Production As a genre of social news site , reddit allows users to contribute links , text posts , and comments , which the community votes up or down . Reddit’s affordances for visibility are driven by ranking algorithms , which display the most - upvoted contributions at the top of the platform’s front page ( and hide the most - downvoted ones ) [ 23 ] . Reddit represents a network of community platforms ( or subreddits ) , connected within reddit’s platform but possessing distinct memberships , rules , content , and social norms . Some subreddits are “default , ” meaning that all new user accounts will see information posted to these ( such as the / r / news subreddit , or the / r / Europe subreddit for accounts created with a European IP address ) . RESULTS Drawing from data taken from interviews and participant observation , the results are organized according to three stages of peer information aggregation , which relate to the three research sub - questions identified in the introduction : evaluating sources of information , choosing what information to aggregate , and verifying information for broadcast . Each stage involves some interaction between reddit’s platform affordances and individual experience and decision - making . Relying on Sources In the first stage of breaking news aggregation , contributors collected information from various sources , whether professional media entities or ordinary citizens . However , the sources varied by person and type of event . Some relied on single sources , like a police scanner , while others drew from as many sources as possible . Source Linking & Convenience One controversial distinction was whether participants merely collected information or actually linked to their sources . It was uncommon that people did not include any links ( see frequency of links from social media and news orgs ; Figure 1 , D & E ) . In some of these cases , it seemed to be that contributors would cite 65 : 6 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . one source that they were transcribing information from , like a video feed , police scanner , or their on - the - ground updates . Even though a majority of posts in our sample included many links , these were not always to news organization sources , but included links to tweets and even uncited image and video files . Of course , when choosing sources , some of the most important factors were convenience and access . If a contributor quickly found a source that appeared trustworthy and seemed to be providing reliable information , that source would be included in the updates . For example , P21 who was helping to aggregate information after the Boston Marathon bombing listed a number of sources comprising both mainstream media organizations and social media platforms , from TV news channels like CNN to the Reuters online stream and Twitter feeds , and even local friends close to the event . In cases where the contributor searched through many different sources , the task became much more difficult . It was not unusual for aggregators to explain how they looked through dozens of websites , trying to keep track of information coming from Twitter , news organization live video feeds , multiple mainstream news websites , and various other sources , including word of mouth from family and friends . Participants frequently mentioned of sorting through many browser tabs ( from “6 or 8” to “dozens” ) trying to stay on top of the story . While live video streams from news organizations were common ways to keep tabs on the overall narrative , platforms like Twitter became important for up - to - date information from people on the ground . Twitter’s search function became useful by allowing participants to filter by key phrases , locations , and trending phrases . Source Trustworthiness Some participants identified a tension between trustworthy sources and their own speed of providing updates . For example , P41 , a moderator from / r / Europe who helped aggregate information during the late 2015 Paris attacks , mentioned that at first the aggregation team fell back to the sources they knew and trusted : “In the first instance , we would go to places which we already trusted . Reuters , BBC News , these sorts of places which we know are going to provide substantive information . ” Once he established the core sources to set the context for the crisis , he continued to explore other sources to find where the quickest updates came from : “ [ F ] rom there , you can branch out and say go to a journalist who works at BBC News… When you go to the journalist – that departure from BBC News to Twitter – that ' s when you start getting the latest information as well . ” However , he noted that picking these individuals often fell back to trustworthiness : “You go for the journalists who worked for the reputable organizations , who were there on the scene or thereabouts , and it became quite clear , quite early on , who those were . ” After identifying these people , he then would be able to remove less trustworthy sources : “We would then start discarding the unnamed people on Twitter and try to opt where possible for those journalists who had a track record not just prior to the event but during the event as it was unfolding , to see what other news organizations would pick up… As time moved on , especially in the first couple of hours you could see what people were saying was true . It was quite… self - selecting…” In general , though , he described the process as emergent and subjective : “Collectively it was all of us sort of spitballing to work out what was the best but mainly BBC News , Sky News , Reuters . ” Local & Social Media News Sources Contributors were infrequently local to the event ( Figure 1 , G ) , but sometimes participants relied on local news , and the explanations of their process seemed to operate in the same way . As someone local to the 2015 Paris attacks , where French media were updating faster than other mainstream organizations , P5 explained that he relied on “mainly mainstream” media , but because it was a local event , he could easily rely on the brand name alone : “Since I’m French , I pretty much know what is the proper news source and what isn’t . I just looked at the name of the news like it was BFM , Reversion , Extra . These are pretty much known for being okay , I’d say . Like BFM has the biggest live coverage in such events most of the time . ” Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com 65 : 7 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . On the other hand , if someone is reporting on foreign events , the use of local professional news organizations – or even individuals sharing news that they were experiencing – was more difficult . When aggregating information about a political uprising in Thailand , P39 explained that he tried to find people reporting locally : “I was checking out the links and just using judgment on what was going to be a good source or not… I was trying to look at people who were supposedly on the ground and also people that were in Thailand and saying what they were reporting . ” However , he eventually reverted to looking at mainstream reporters’ coverage because they were credentialed , and he trusted the other sources they pointed to . When using non - mainstream media sources , including local residents , contributors used subjective judgments about trustworthiness . P24 found Twitter was the best source when contributing to the November 2015 Paris attacks posts , because he was able to find diverse , quick , and accurate sources in one location “if you know how to pick sources . ” When choosing sources , he focused on news organization’s accounts first , but he investigated the Twitter accounts that seemed to be local to the event . However , in the end , he relied much more on the information that mainstream media reported , because they incorporated the perspectives of individuals at the scene into their reporting ( thus eliminating the need for him to take the time to investigate ) : “Because most of them , you ' d already have it reported with the news , so I ' ll just go to the news because you have lower risk basically . ” Also reporting on the Paris attacks , P38 in Switzerland described a similar Twitter experience ; the best sources were “reporters from mainstream media” or “people on the spot… if they ' re constantly updating Twitter and tweeting what ' s happened , and they post pictures to prove that they ' re actually there . ” P18 , who updated during a neighborhood shooting in Los Angeles , also found Twitter timely and diverse : “I went to Twitter and started doing a little bit of searching like hashtag searching like # westla , # shooting , whatever . I just started following users on Twitter and being like , “This person is in the building where the shooter is , ” and here are some pictures… linking it back to reddit . … [ Twitter ] was the only other source that I used , and then I just didn ' t even bother Googling because I think I ' m getting better information [ on Twitter ] . ” Across many of the cases , it was clear that mainstream media presented a much more favorable type of source , because of its traditional perception of reliability and everyday sense of trustworthiness . Information aggregation contributors relied heavily on traditional , professional journalists and media organizations instead of collecting original bits of information from distributed citizens . Sources frequently were ones that participants had immediate and convenient access to . Choosing What and How to Aggregate The second stage is focused around the decisions of what to include in an aggregation , which varies based on individual’s perceptions of relevance and penchants for formatting and style . Relevance Across all cases , one of the most important factors in choosing a piece of information or continual updates from a specific source was whether or not the source provided relevant and / or reputable information . Although subjective and inherently arbitrary , participants relied on their perceptions of relevance and importance for including content . During the riots in Ferguson , Missouri , P17 explained how most information posted related only to individual judgment , saying , “It was pretty much a free for all . If we saw something first that we thought was important and verifiable , we would go ahead and post it . ” P3 was also aware of his personal judgment when compiling information about some North Korea political statements : 65 : 8 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . “I chose to include was things that I thought were important and relevant , and because that is the opinion of one person that of course can be subject to certain underlying biases that I ' m not aware of , despite the fact that I may try and downplay or push those away as much as possible . ” Sometimes participants would discover a reliable source and merely replicate the information so that people could easily browse through it . For instance , P11 transcribed police scanner audio , with special focus on updates she felt were important both to her and her audience . Figure 1 . Comparisons of features within aggregated posts and comments ( n = 188 ) . Each chart shows the presence ( yes ) or absence ( no ) of each of the named features . In other cases , contributors described momentary changes in the event that prompted particular information to be shared . P30 , who helped with updates during the Boston Marathon bombing suspect hunt , remembered the judgment of relevant information that he posted changed depending on how long after a new development emerged : “ [ Relevant means if the information ] was about the situation at hand . At first it was just this MIT officer was shot , so any links that started off at the beginning were information about that officer and what went down . I know after a while there was a donation fund set up for the officer and his family , so links like that . … It ' s putting out what I thought was relevant information and then affixing anything that ended up not being relevant . ” Content , Formatting , & Styles In Figure 1 , we show comparisons of the 188 post and comment updates , illustrating the various differences for formatting , content included in updates , and other ways of aggregating that resulted from contributors’ emergent and mimicking practices . With no official or standardized format , contributors of peer information aggregation generally posted in an arbitrary manner . However , some formal techniques became more prevalent than others , and two general trends emerged from these contributions : 1 ) including information and links in a sequential , bullet point format , with short items listed one after the other usually in chronological order , and 2 ) providing information via a summarized format , with longer , narrative - style explanations of information ( Figure 1 , B ) . Not everyone followed a set standard , resulting in a varied sense of quality , particularly in earlier years . One of the more common formats were “bullet point” styled lists , reflective of evolving situations leading to Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com 65 : 9 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . sequential updates and the posts becoming information hubs . Even the list formatting varied , with some containing just multiple paragraphs , some prefixed each update with “EDIT” and some incased , and others used timestamps . The latter was commonly used for longer events , such as the Boston Marathon bombings posts . Readability was a common concern for participants who utilized the “bullet point” style updates . For example , when aggregating information about the MH370 airplane crisis , P13 noted readability as one of his primary concerns : “Honestly , there were only two concerns . It was accessibility – I want it in a readable fashion – and then I wanted it to be transparent , so that you could see everything as it was going on , including edits . ” He saw these as journalistic principles which he adopted because people were relying on his updates for information . Interestingly , a large number of comment and post update threads contained no timestamps ( ~ 70 % ) . While it might seem that it would be easy for readers to understand when information appeared in the moment , occasionally contributors realized that timestamps were helpful for certain situations , especially ones that were prolonged over the course of many hours or days . In the middle of compiling information after the Boston Marathon bombings , P14 realized he needed to include timestamps . “You ' ll notice that the first 29 updates don ' t have time stamps . I didn ' t realize that that was going to be a problem . ” After so much time updating , including timestamps would help people to reference the information and provide more context to any future reader looking back at the thread : “This was the first one I had ever done . I didn ' t realize how big the thread was going to get . I would just update , “Here ' s a live feed of the finish line . Here ' s some pictures . The bomb squad is in route to Massachusetts Avenue and Newberry , etc . ” Then , I realized that people would actually want to look back on some of this stuff and figure out what the timeline was actually like . On the 30th update I did , I started posting timestamps , and it helped me keep track of when I heard something , when something was posted , when something was reported . ” However , some participants preferred summary updates over sequential lists . One participant described how updating in a sequential format became too cumbersome , so he ended up only creating summaries of the information : “I know a lot of people tend to use ‘Edit 1’ or ‘Edit 2’ every time they edit ; they want to make sure what ' s being edited [ is clear ] . I tried doing that initially , but it just took too much time . So I decided that a summary… was easier to use and was more natural to use . ” Another participant also preferred summaries because they helped him take a step back to understand the full extent of what he was doing and what was going on around him : “ [ An overview ] is also more practical for me , because I get news one thing at a time , [ so ] it helps to write this overview of what ' s going on . It helps me get a grip on what ' s actually going on , because with all these tiny [ bits of ] news coming in from left and right , it ' s hard to get a better appreciation of what ' s really happening . You tend to forget , like , “Oh yeah that ' s right , this happened , and then this happened , and then this happened and then…” … Because you get so many news [ updates ] , you can forget what has happened before . ” For our analysis , posts with summaries had at least one block of text summarizing many pieces of information related to the event , rather than providing a quote , link , or other basic piece of information . 50 % of the contributions we analyzed contained summaries . Formatting : Extra Contextual Information In addition to informational updates , many participants also expressed the obligation to address specific information needs of particular audiences . These additional decisions frequently come down to personal perception and awareness of potential audiences : 65 : 10 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . “I think basically the same things that I would want to see on reading a post . More than a fire somewhere . What happened ? How many people were involved , what ' s being done to fix it and is there an investigation going on ? ” One of those moments of audience awareness came during natural disasters and emergency situations , and people will post information like “a registry of people that could put themselves up to be searched” or “free cell phone calls” ( P19 ) . Only 21 % contained emergency information ( Figure 1 , C ) . Contributors also included additional contextual information through the use of text formatting . For instance , strikethroughs were employed commonly to convey edits or corrections , which enabled readers to understand the evolving information space and improve transparency . In describing his rationale , P38 said : “I can tell you that if someone has posted something and it hasn ' t been confirmed , and then it ' s confirmed to be false , I ' ll usually go back and cross it out if it turned out to be false . I think it ' s better than deleting it , because people can ' t see that it ' s false if it ' s deleted . It gives people a chance to see that it was actually . ” We found that 18 % of updates contained explicitly corrected information ( Figure 1 , A ) . We defined this category as any clear sign of an edit / update where information was noted as being updated or corrected . This correction was generally done through the use of strikethrough text on outdated or incorrect information or via explicit notes mentioned in the text . All in all , these practices demonstrate that – because no standardization exists across reddit’s community members’ responses to breaking news – participants generally improvised their aggregation work , finding ways that fulfill certain personal goals ( e . g . , making it easy to read ) while going from a gut feeling of what they thought should be done [ 33 ] . As P22 from Boston who helped during the Boston Marathon aggregation explained : “I kind of just wung it , I guess . I guess I ' ve been on reddit for a long time , and that ' s just the way that a lot of people write posts , is that they just have a bunch of edits where they list them a lot of the time . For events like this , they include time tamps , sometimes they put it where the newest information is at the top , I don ' t know . ” Verifying Information for Broadcast Finally , the third stage of aggregated information production is verifying information while broadcasting throughout the ongoing event . Because breaking news situations frequently contain uncertain information , information aggregation contributors must actively evaluate and correct information as they synthesize it from various sources . Primarily , participants used triangulation – connecting the dots across multiple reports – as a method of personal verification , though this proved difficult in the face of rumors . They were comfortable editing information during the developing event , though ultimately they put the responsibility of evaluation on the reader . Participants described three main trends in evaluating and verifying information : triangulating between multiple sources , issuing edits or actions on published information ( such as corrections , strikethroughs , warnings , and deletions ) , and relying on the wider network of people to help with evaluating and verifying information . Verification Through Triangulation Most of the early work for reddit aggregation volunteers consisted of finding and evaluating sources . When dealing with multiple and especially with many sources , triangulation – a term we use to describe the process of using multiple bits of information from various sources for veracity evaluations – was identified as an important consideration before posting particular pieces of information . P35 in Mexico liked to aggregate information in reaction to earthquakes ( frequently alongside P16 ) . He described the need for multiple sources because sometimes the information posted is not correct : “I like to have several sources , not just one , because there are times that they can have errors or something like that . ” The convenience of many readily available sources was enticing to some participants . After the Aurora , Colorado shootings , P4 took on the task of updating information related to victims and developments at hospitals . He found variability in which reliable sources released information first , making accurate victim numbers especially difficult to find : Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com 65 : 11 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . “I actually was accountable for doing a lot of the hospital work , like checking out how many people went to what hospital , and what their situation was . … So I just followed the hospital Twitter feeds , hospital Facebook groups , the websites of the hospitals , because I knew that those were reliable . ” When participants were unsure about particular pieces of information , finding corroborating reports was preferred . For example , P34 in Pakistan told me that when finding information after a major local earthquake , “I was verifying in the sense that I was at least looking for two different sources that were telling the same thing . ” With experience aggregating across many events , P23 ’s approach involved using trusted sources – when available , or trying to transparently adopt the two - source rule of journalism : “Generally , I try to tell people if you ' re using Twitter or any kind of not accredited news organization as a source , you wait until two people , two separate sources talk about it , to mention it , then you say it ' s unconfirmed . And then , if like a ridiculous amount of Twitter sources are reporting something like that , then you can basically treat it like it ' s confirmed . Especially if a lot of people say , ‘I saw it with my own eyes . ’” In some cases , multi - source verification would delay the information being posted on reddit . For example , P8 said : “Every time a piece of news came in , I kind of wait five [ to ] ten minutes , and then you ' d get confirmation through all these news sites . I think that really helped me filter out what ' s accurate , what ' s just sensationalism , what ' s important , what ' s not important and so forth . ” Also , contributors found triangulation via multiple sources difficult to maintain . P48 had aggregated information during the Charlie Hebdo hostage situation in Paris in January 2015 . He wanted to use multiple sources , but updating from a live stream was too time - consuming : “When you ' re posting news on any website , when you are posting news yourself , you always try to verify it by reading at least two and preferably three or more sources about the same thing but with live feeds that ' s harder to do because you ' re very busy all of the time . ” Rumors , Uncertainty , and Problems in Triangulation Misinformation sometimes posed a problem for participants who relied on triangulation to confirm information before posting . After the disappearance of MH370 , it was difficult to report on new developments , because so many pieces of speculation were floating around . P8 explained that his process of triangulation was key to cracking down on rumors and uncertain information . For him , situations like this are full of uncertainty , and his process involved following multiple live reports from organizations : “What I looked for [ in mainstream news reporting ] was a pattern of consistency , meaning I ' d have all these live blogs open from all these major news providers . And if there was a big piece of news that started popping up in every single one of these guys’ blogs , I ' d be like , “All right . This seems like it ' s a pretty important development or a good detail for people to know , ” and I would post it . ” Occasionally , mainstream sources disagreed on particular pieces of emerging information , which made the process of triangulation difficult for aggregation contributors . In the case of a hostage situation in Paris , P5 explained how many sources were reporting the details differently : “ [ I ] t happens often that you don’t get the same reports if you look at different sources… like maybe it wasn’t clear whether he had grenade launcher or something like this . Some sources said he had . Some sources said he had only a handgun . It was a bit confusing . … At some point like this , nobody said the same thing in multiple sources . ” In fact , there were some situations in which contributors did not bother to do any kind of confirmatory process on the information they had gathered . For example , P18 ( who was looking into a local crime ) 65 : 12 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . explained that by not “fact checking , ” the potential for misinformation to spread around was particularly potent . Not fact - checking her information lead to speculation and confusion : “Because I think that it might have added to some of the confusion in terms of where it actually was . People were trying to figure out where which street corner it was or what intersection it was at . There was a lot of speculation like if you look through the thread , people were like , ‘Oh , it ' s at [ Street Intersection 1 ] . No , it ' s actually at [ Street 2 ] . No , it ' s actually on [ Street 3 ] , ’ or whatever . There was a little bit of confusion . ” Some contributors trusted in mainstream media to verify information . For example , P10 described feeling confident in some information because mainstream media was made up of groups of people that would check it , which he used as a baseline for other information coming from different channels like social media platforms : “Pretty much anything that I heard them say two or three times , or they said it on TV and someone else said it on Twitter , I posted . ” He also said he could rely on the assumed professional routines of organizations in immediately posting some types of info : “If they put something on the banner on the bottom , and it stayed there for a while , I posted that , because it ' s gone through at least a few people to get that on the screen . If they were confident enough to report it , that ' s more than enough for me to post it . ” Triangulation generally relied on mainstream media sources too , because organizations conducted verification in their own reporting , which participants perceived as reliable . Verification Through Feedback In other cases , contributors relied on the wider network of reddit users to provide feedback during breaking news events . This aspect of reddit’s network was a particular draw for contributors , because other users would act as additional suppliers of information or help correct particular details . Once a contributor began posting information , the actual audience of a particular breaking news update thread could turn into a crowd - driven method for fact - checking and verification . In most cases , members of the audience added comments to the thread or , in an attempt to make their suggestion more visible , sent private messages to the contributing user or group . For example , during the Boston Marathon bombings , the crowd helped P30 with his aggregation by filling in the gaps with an unreliable police scanner website . He described the initial difficulty of tracking all the information , saying : “It got to the point where I had two Reddit thread tabs open . One was just my inbox and just scanning as people were sending me stuff . Then another one was the thread itself , so I could keep doing updates… [ O ] nce it started getting bigger , anytime something happened , my inbox would just fill up with hundreds of people being like , ‘Did you hear them ? They said this . ’” Although it meant he had to parse more information , he said it generally aided in his efforts by allowing him to verify “with 50 other comments saying the same thing . ” The benefit of these additional comments manifested in the ability of others to help promote content that was correct , using the affordances of the upvote system . P13 explained how – in opposition to Twitter , where comments like that would simply be lost in the waves of updates – reddit’s platform helped the crowd sort out the good from the bad information : “If one guy just tweets , ‘This is false , ’ not a lot of people are going to see it . If someone comments on Reddit , ‘This is false , ’ and is upvoted to the top , practically everyone is going to see it , and it gets a much bigger voice in that sense . ” In some cases , it became more difficult : in reaction to the San Bernardino shooting in December 2015 , many people sent P50 comments and links , but this additional influx of information meant that he felt he had to confirm even more things . He said it was helpful in the end , but he did not post any of it until he could confirm it with other , more - reliable sources : Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com 65 : 13 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . “I kind of just evaluated everything how they came to me . I tried to make sure that things were credible before I put them on . I definitely got people telling me that they a source here or a contact there , and they had this information , but until I could confirm it from multiple people , or a news source , or over the police scanner , I decided not to . ” Uses of feedback from local users also contributed to additional difficulty , in having to evaluate their information as well as confirming their local expertise . Highlighting Uncertainty It was common to see unconfirmed information reported by mainstream media organizations , especially at the start of a developing event . Sometimes the unconfirmed content originated from a verified journalist or organization , and contributors still wanted to include that information . P6 said he was wary of misinformation but included a marker of what was confirmed or not : “In situations like these , a lot of wrong information also gets spread . Even from the mainstream sources I think , if the information is unconfirmed , I ' ve added in the comment that it is unconfirmed . ” P23 similarly explained that he will add markers to denote information that might not be entirely confirmed : “If something ' s unconfirmed , I ' ll write unconfirmed in all caps and then what the news is… I try to give an idea of how reliable the source is instead of just not including something… if that makes any sense . ” Placing the Responsibility on the Reader Most peer information aggregation volunteers wanted to include as much information as possible , and allowing readers to construct their own news narrative and evaluate the sources . In other words , volunteers on reddit put their faith in the audiences to be responsible for critical work , as critical audiences , rather than placing this responsibility on the reporters and editors of mainstream media organizations who were publishing most of the information they relied on . For instance , when P18 was in the U . S . searching for news about the late 2015 Paris attacks , she explained , “ [ Using reddit compared to the BBC ] was more attractive because I had more control over the information that I was doing . ” In England , P46 explained that while reddit isn’t necessarily the best news source , it provides the reader a starting point containing information from multiple sources , allowing them to explore that information on their own : “I would hesitate to rely on [ reddit ] in an important situation like that . It ' s certainly useful . In fact , I would say that assuming that you don ' t have to run , I ' m fine getting most of my information from there . Also , going and fact - checking . Google something , or Google little bits of it and see . ” In the end , he argued , readers might form a better picture of the event unfolding : “If a little bit turns out to be wrong , then that ' ll put everything else in question . You can start to get a much more accurate situation . ” Of course , in some cases , a contributor posted information that turned out to be incorrect and there appeared to be no consequences . In these situations , some contributions encountered no particular types of enforcement , and participants themselves didn’t seemed to be phased . On the contrary , including corrections – and in some cases appending a “strikethrough” formatting on the inaccurate text – was enough to offset the perception of negative consequences for including the information to begin with . P21 explained that appending corrections was a fast and simple solution , saying that adding in strikethroughs and warnings about corrections also helped people be aware and judge for themselves of how the information had evolved over time . His explanation for why he wrote “Ignore above info . It is out of date” was : “I think originally I commented something , and at the time a lot of information was coming in very quickly . And I was watching TV reading all these different posts , and it was very unclear what was going on . As I was progressing , going through writing these updates , I realized , “You know what ? I don ' t know if this information is right . ” I just stopped . I was 65 : 14 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . just like “Okay , I ' ll leave it there . ” So it ' s not like you ' re deleting information : I can say this is wrong or I think it ' s wrong , crossing it out . It ' s like editing a paper I guess . People can see what I had written before , but if they read through they ' ll see that some things are true , some things aren ' t . ” In general , the values present in aggregation revolved around the idea that more information from more sources was better to contextualize the event as well as keep track of changes over time . Aggregation provides readers with a foundation on which to build their own judgment and decide on the veracity of information on their own . Discussion Breaking news events , such as crises , present unique information challenges to participants of social media systems . Many events are high - tempo events and may include some level of uncertainty . Peer information aggregators face challenges in finding and evaluating sources , choosing what to aggregate , and verifying information . Previous research has detailed similar challenges for finding and evaluating information among journalists [ 12 ] as well as during collaborations between journalists and volunteers [ 11 ] . The contribution of this work is an extension of previous work with empirical evidence about the values and decision - making processes of oft - called “citizen journalists” during breaking news events . Because little research has been conducted on participants that engage in information aggregation , this paper introduces empirical evidence on these processes of citizen participants from which scholars and designers can learn from these emergent practices and build or improve systems to accommodate them . Although peer information aggregators face challenges similar to professional journalists [ 12 ] when evaluating sources and verifying information , the lack of journalistic training can lead to a messy series of processes and improvised decisions based on prior familiarity with sources and particular types of expertise . Previous research has noted how professional journalists may rely on known sources over independent sources because of the effort required to verify [ 43 ] , and this work suggests peer information aggregators may also behave similarly . Aggregators also noted the value of including sources and links with their aggregations . Putting responsibility on the reader is likely a result of the combination of uncertainty and the inability to verify during the high - tempo events , thus shifting the burden onto others while aggregators’ main focus remains on collection and organization for these audiences . To answer RQ1 , we saw that aggregation participants drew from sources based on familiarity , based on their everyday experience with particular news organizations and social media platforms . They also evaluated information based on personal ideas of trustworthiness . We also illustrated a strong reliance on mainstream media compared to original “citizen journalism” updates from on the ground ( though these were not rare either ) . For RQ2 , we showed that participants aggregated information based on perceived relevance for imagined audiences [ 26 ] , and they formatted them based on personal intuition about what might be valuable . Formats especially related to providing people enough information to understand the context of the aggregated event , such as providing links to sources and making transparent timelines and corrections . Similar practices emerged in other platforms with volunteer moderators overseeing information collection [ 19 ] . Finally , our results for R3 suggested that aggregation participants had a difficult time verifying information . When they tried , they verified primarily through triangulation of multiple sources and also by relying on the network of redditors to provide immediate feedback to posted information . These attempts were constrained by speed and robustness of the verification across multiple sources ( also encountered by journalists working in similar settings [ 43 ] ) . In general , our paper shows that aggregation is a valuable tool to synthesize multiple reports about breaking news events , though the people who architect aggregation updates possess a lot of power with the very particular decisions they get to make . In cases of developing crisis events , people must adapt their behaviors to respond to ongoing changes as new information emerges . In Dourish’s definition [ 13 ] , following a “situated action” framework of responsive behaviors , people’s actions manifest as “a moment - Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com 65 : 15 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . by - moment improvised affair , emerging in response to the circumstances of its production” ( 2 ) . In aggregation information production , contributors must work within the constraints of reddit and the range of available information sources on - and offline , constraints that significantly impact the work that peer information aggregators do in crisis contexts [ 24 ] . Aggregation & Network Gatekeeping Our interviews show that aggregators act as gatekeepers for particular audiences , but they themselves remain gated by major contemporary information producers ( i . e . , mainstream media sources ) , search algorithms , and the reddit platform [ 2 , 24 ] . While there have been successful experiments in citizen journalism like reddit’s / r / UkrainianCrisis or / r / SyrianCivilWar , those who aggregate breaking news information in posts and comments opt for convenient sources that they trust from their everyday experiences . This can lead to tensions of quality and timeliness , if the author isn’t familiar with local sources or larger events are reported across a multitude of sources . Further , because the effort of doing aggregation work remains so taxing , they must rely on other participants for information ( e . g . , locals ) and verification ( e . g . , people who can monitor additional sources ) , each of which can act as a gatekeeping agent and ultimately affect the information available to the potential audience . The aggregators’ imagined audiences [ 26 ] can also become factors in gatekeeping , restricting which information is included in the aggregation based on participants’ assumed needs for these audiences . The work - demand of aggregating is also at odds with any local users who come to aggregated threads searching for information , who may potentially have more context than remote peer aggregators and require more information than aggregators might assume ( resulting in variable quality of the final aggregated product ) . In the spectrum of crisis communication practices , aggregation is probably unique compared to distributed individual posting ( e . g . , tweets sent by hundreds of people ) , because it synthesizes information from multiple places into a centralized location for audiences to consume ( substantially different from prior crisis communication noted in the literature review ) . We saw in our participant observation that people certainly relied on reddit for newsgathering , particularly when they found it helpful for surfacing information . However , this research demonstrates that network gatekeeping practices do provide new alternatives for breaking news information consumption [ 29 , 30 , 32 ] . And further , peer information aggregation provides additional insights into how people choose information in high - tempo , ad - hoc situations , expanding on prior work on crisis communication behaviors [ 9 ] . Design Implications Live Threads as Design Intervention After the widespread acknowledgement of the post and comment update threads from the Aurora , Colorado shootings and the Boston Marathon bombing , reddit administrators decided to create a new feature for the platform , the “live thread” format . This feature , separate from the ordinary URL or text submissions described in this paper , allows a group of contributors to add short snippets of information to a collaborative page that presents the information in reverse chronological order in near - real time . Live threads have become a dominant force in response to crisis and other ongoing events in the past year on reddit , representing a strong set of design decisions by reddit’s team . However , there are still limitations . Namely , participants continue to struggle with evaluating sources , information choice , and vetting material . In fact , it may be more difficult for some of these factors , such as verification , because other users cannot immediately respond to the updated post or comment . Further , bringing attention to live threads remains a complicated task [ 24 ] , and contributors usually link the thread in initial updated comments until a team of coordinated participants bring attention to the live thread page . Verification & Reputation Because aggregation contributors relied on readers to ultimately evaluate information shared in aggregation updates , platforms may provide more tools to aggregation participants to help mark specific pieces of 65 : 16 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . information . Highlighting confirmed information or providing markers for reputation of journalists , organizations , and trusted community members may help direct the attention of readers toward the best information in crisis contexts ( especially when finding the right information remains a difficult task for audience members ) . However , as the evidence presented suggests , the quality of these sources could vary by topic and location . Providing visibility to important information also highlights the difficulties that emerge from reddit’s technical structure of visibility [ 24 ] . The research presented in this paper suggests that one easy way of surfacing information for peer aggregators could be incorporating local content in a more visible way . Designers could provide potentially higher - quality information with little effort by connecting remote aggregation participants with a variety of news sources that are local to an event . Our participants noted that they found the quality of local news to be higher than those further away ( due to either familiarity or on - the - ground reporting ) , and thus they noted a higher amount of trust in them for up - to - date information . However , remote participants may not rely on such sources due to lack of familiarity . Future research could focus on how the rise in and ultimate popularity of aggregation contributions might affect behaviors over time [ 23 ] , helping designers in this space to consider different tools for different moments of visibility [ 24 ] . Limitations We recognize some limitations of this research . First , although we supplemented our sampling with computational techniques , the ethnographic nature of our analysis remains a limitation in creating a comprehensive listing of all breaking news events that have occurred on reddit . Second , some of the events within our sample were exceptional , containing multiple posts and comments , aggregated by dozens of coordinated participants . For instance , the Boston Marathon Bombing resulted in dozens of posted updates . We collapsed these in our illustrative analysis , though we attempted to explore a broad range of events through the interview process . And third , generalizability remains a concern . Reddit is merely one of many platforms with particular affordances that shape the work of aggregation contributors . Future work should consider cross - platform comparative analyses . Conclusion Crises are social experiences , where people seek and share information . On reddit , users collaborate to bring multiple perspectives , including first - hand accounts and mainstream media reports into one coherent picture . Using reddit affordances like voting , users aggregate content , create narratives , and ultimately create news . In this paper , we explored the process peer information aggregation during crises , with a special focus on uncertainty and verification . With significant qualitative research , we have detailed the individual decision - making and collaborative processes involved in seeking , evaluating , verifying , and broadcasting to other users . We have also detailed a surprising value of the reddit community : a trust in their readers to think critically and construct their own narratives . Future work may use this understanding to better support the underlying processes and help limit the spread of misinformation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by an Endowed Fellowship from the University of Southern California . We would like to thank Dmitri Williams , Henry Jenkins , Dennis Wixon , Mike Ananny , Patrick Davison , and Kate Starbird for their comments on early versions . We would also like to thank Jason Baumgartner for providing the reddit historical dataset , and the anonymous reviewers for providing helpful feedback . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Karine Barzilai - Nahon . 2008 . Toward a theory of network gatekeeping : A framework for exploring information control . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 59 , 9 : 1493 – 1512 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 20857 [ 2 ] Karine Barzilai - Nahon . 2009 . Gatekeeping : A critical review . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 43 , 1 : 1 – 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / aris . 2009 . 1440430117 Upvote My News : The Practices of Peer Information Aggregation for Breaking News on reddit . com 65 : 17 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . [ 3 ] W . Lance Bennett , Alexandra Segerberg , and Shawn Walker . 2014 . Organization in the crowd : peer production in large - scale networked protests . Information , Communication & Society 17 , 2 : 232 – 260 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2013 . 870379 [ 4 ] Jesse M . Blum , Genovefa Kefalidou , Robert J . Houghton , Martin Flintham , Unna Arunachalam , and Murray Goulden . 2014 . Majority report : Citizen empowerment through collaborative sensemaking . In ISCRAM . Retrieved July 11 , 2017 from http : / / help . iscram . org / legacy / ISCRAM2014 / papers / p163 . pdf [ 5 ] Axel Bruns . 2003 . Gatewatching , not gatekeeping : Collaborative online news . Media International Australia Incorporating Culture and Policy : quarterly journal of media research and resources 107 : 31 – 44 . [ 6 ] D . Jasun Carr , Matthew Barnidge , Byung Gu Lee , and Stephanie Jean Tsang . 2014 . Cynics and Skeptics Evaluating the Credibility of Mainstream and Citizen Journalism . Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 91 , 3 : 452 – 470 . [ 7 ] Mark Coddington . 2015 . Telling Secondhand Stories : News Aggregation and the Production of Journalistic Knowledge . The University of Texas at Austin . [ 8 ] Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss . 2008 . Basics of Qualitative Research : Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory . SAGE Publications , Inc . , Thousand Oaks , CA . [ 9 ] Dharma Dailey , John Robinson , and Kate Starbird . 2016 . Sharing Food , Gathering Information : The Context and Visibility of Community Information Work in a Crisis Event . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9776 / 16217 [ 10 ] Dharma Dailey and Kate Starbird . 2014 . Journalists as Crowdsourcerers : Responding to Crisis by Reporting with a Crowd . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 23 , 4 - 6 : 445 – 481 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 014 - 9208 - z [ 11 ] Dharma Dailey and Kate Starbird . 2014 . Journalists as Crowdsourcerers : Responding to Crisis by Reporting with a Crowd . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 23 , 4 - 6 : 445 – 481 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 014 - 9208 - z [ 12 ] Nicholas Diakopoulos , Munmun De Choudhury , and Mor Naaman . 2012 . Finding and assessing social media information sources in the context of journalism . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2451 – 2460 . Retrieved December 1 , 2015 from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2208409 [ 13 ] Paul Dourish . 2003 . The appropriation of interactive technologies : Some lessons from placeless documents . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 12 , 4 : 465 – 490 . [ 14 ] R . Stuart Geiger and David Ribes . 2011 . Trace ethnography : Following coordination through documentary practices . In System Sciences ( HICSS ) , 2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on , 1 – 10 . Retrieved October 9 , 2015 from http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / xpls / abs _ all . jsp ? arnumber = 5718606 [ 15 ] H . Gil de Zuniga , S . C . Lewis , A . Willard , S . Valenzuela , Jae Kook Lee , and B . Baresch . 2011 . Blogging as a journalistic practice : A model linking perception , motivation , and behavior . Journalism 12 , 5 : 586 – 606 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1464884910388230 [ 16 ] Maximillian T . Hänska - Ahy and Roxanna Shapour . 2013 . WHO’S REPORTING THE PROTESTS ? : Converging practices of citizen journalists and two BBC World Service newsrooms , from Iran’s election protests to the Arab uprisings . Journalism Studies 14 , 1 : 29 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1461670X . 2012 . 657908 [ 17 ] Avery E . Holton , Mark Coddington , and Homero Gil de Zúñiga . 2013 . Whose News ? Whose Values ? : Citizen journalism and journalistic values through the lens of content creators and consumers . Journalism Practice 7 , 6 : 720 – 737 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17512786 . 2013 . 766062 [ 18 ] Avery E . Holton , Mark Coddington , and Homero Gil de Zúñiga . 2013 . Whose News ? Whose Values ? : Citizen journalism and journalistic values through the lens of content creators and consumers . Journalism Practice 7 , 6 : 720 – 737 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17512786 . 2013 . 766062 [ 19 ] Marc - André Kaufhold and Christian Reuter . 2016 . The Self - Organization of Digital Volunteers across Social Media : The Case of the 2013 European Floods in Germany . Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management 13 , 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jhsem - 2015 - 0063 [ 20 ] Brian Keegan . 2012 . High Tempo Knowledge Collaboration in Wikipedia’s Coverage of Breaking News Events . Northwestern University . Retrieved October 3 , 2015 from http : / / www . brianckeegan . com / papers / Dissertation . pdf [ 21 ] Brian Keegan , Darren Gergle , and Nosh Contractor . 2013 . Hot Off the Wiki : Structures and Dynamics of Wikipedia’s Coverage of Breaking News Events . American Behavioral Scientist 57 , 5 : 595 – 622 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0002764212469367 [ 22 ] Alex Leavitt . 2016 . Upvoting the News : Breaking News Aggregation , Crowd Collaboration , and Algorithm - Driven Attention on reddit . com . University of Southern California , Los Angeles , CA . [ 23 ] Alex Leavitt and Joshua A . Clark . 2014 . Upvoting Hurricane Sandy : Event - based news production processes on a social news site . 1495 – 1504 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557140 [ 24 ] Alex Leavitt and John Robinson . 2017 . The Role of Information Visibility in Network Gatekeeping : Information Aggregation on Reddit during Crisis Events . Proceedings of CSCW . [ 25 ] Kurt Lewin . 1943 . Forces behind food habits and methods of change . Bulletin of the National Research Council 108 : 35 – 65 . [ 26 ] Eden Litt . 2012 . Knock , Knock . Who’s There ? The Imagined Audience . Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 56 , 3 : 330 – 345 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 08838151 . 2012 . 705195 [ 27 ] Alexandra Olteanu , Sarah Vieweg , and Carlos Castillo . 2015 . What to Expect When the Unexpected Happens : Social Media Communications Across Crises . 994 – 1009 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675242 [ 28 ] Leysia Palen and Sophia B . Liu . 2007 . Citizen communications in crisis : anticipating a future of ICT - supported public participation . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 727 – 736 . Retrieved January 28 , 2016 from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1240736 [ 29 ] Leysia Palen and Sophia B . Liu . 2007 . Citizen communications in crisis : anticipating a future of ICT - supported public participation . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 727 – 736 . Retrieved January 28 , 2016 from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1240736 65 : 18 A . Leavitt & J . J . Robinson PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 1 , No . CSCW , Article 65 . Publication date : November 2017 . [ 30 ] Leysia Palen , Sarah Vieweg , Jeannette Sutton , Sophia B . Liu , and Amanda L . Hughes . 2007 . Crisis informatics : Studying crisis in a networked world . ” . Proceedings of the Third International Conference on E - Social Science . Retrieved July 22 , 2015 from http : / / works . bepress . com / cgi / viewcontent . cgi ? article = 1023 & context = vieweg [ 31 ] L . Palen , S . Vieweg , S . B . Liu , and A . L . Hughes . 2009 . Crisis in a Networked World : Features of Computer - Mediated Communication in the April 16 , 2007 , Virginia Tech Event . Social Science Computer Review 27 , 4 : 467 – 480 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0894439309332302 [ 32 ] L . Palen , S . Vieweg , S . B . Liu , and A . L . Hughes . 2009 . Crisis in a Networked World : Features of Computer - Mediated Communication in the April 16 , 2007 , Virginia Tech Event . Social Science Computer Review 27 , 4 : 467 – 480 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0894439309332302 [ 33 ] Ida Schultz . 2007 . THE JOURNALISTIC GUT FEELING : Journalistic doxa , news habitus and orthodox news values . Journalism Practice 1 , 2 : 190 – 207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17512780701275507 [ 34 ] Frances Shaw , Jean Burgess , Kate Crawford , and Axel Bruns . 2013 . Sharing news , making sense , saying thanks . Australian Journal of Communication 40 , 1 : 23 . [ 35 ] Pamela Shoemaker . 1991 . Gatekeeping . Sage , Newbury Park , CA . [ 36 ] Pamela Shoemaker and Timothy Vos . 2009 . Gatekeeping Theory . Routledge , New York , NY . [ 37 ] Kate Starbird . 2017 . A Closer Look at the Self - Correcting Crowd : Examining Corrections in Online Rumors . Proceedings of CSCW . [ 38 ] Kate Starbird , Jim Maddock , Mania Orand , Peg Achterman , and Robert Mason . 2014 . Rumors , False Flags , and Digital Vigilantes : Misinformation on Twitter after the 2013 Boston Marathon Bombing . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9776 / 14308 [ 39 ] Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen . 2011 . “Voluntweeters” : Self - organizing by Digital Volunteers in Times of Crisis . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) , 1071 – 1080 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979102 [ 40 ] Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen . 2012 . ( How ) Will the Revolution Be Retweeted ? : Information Diffusion and the 2011 Egyptian Uprising . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) , 7 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145212 [ 41 ] Steven Taylor and Robert Bogdan . 1998 . Introduction to qualitative research methods : A guidebook and resource . Wiley , New York , NY . [ 42 ] Kjerstin Thorson and Chris Wells . 2015 . Curated Flows : A Framework for Mapping Media Exposure in the Digital Age : Curated Flows . Communication Theory : n / a – n / a . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / comt . 12087 [ 43 ] Peter Tolmie , Rob Procter , David William Randall , Mark Rouncefield , Christian Burger , Geraldine Wong Sak Hoi , Arkaitz Zubiaga , and Maria Liakata . 2017 . Supporting the Use of User Generated Content in Journalistic Practice . 3632 – 3644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025892 [ 44 ] Mark Tremayne . 2007 . Harnessing the Active Audience : Synthesizing Blog Research and Lessons for the Future of Media . In Blogging , Citizenship , and the Future of Media , Mark Tremayne ( ed . ) . Routledge , New York , NY , 261 – 272 . [ 45 ] Aaron S . Veenstra , Narayanan Iyer , Chang Sup Park , and Fawaz Alajmi . 2014 . Twitter as “a journalistic substitute” ? Examining # wiunion tweeters’ behavior and self - perception . Journalism : 1464884914521580 . [ 46 ] Sarah Vieweg , Amanda L . Hughes , Kate Starbird , and Leysia Palen . 2010 . Microblogging During Two Natural Hazards Events : What Twitter May Contribute to Situational Awareness . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) , 1079 – 1088 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753486 [ 47 ] Joanne I . White and Leysia Palen . 2015 . Expertise in the Wired Wild West . 662 – 675 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675167 Received April 2017 ; revised July 2017 ; accepted November 2017 .