From Participatory Design and Ontological Ethics , Towards an Approach to Constructive Ethics Sandra Burri Gram - Hansen Aalborg University Rendsburggade 14 9000 Aalborg , Denmark + 45 99407405 burri @ hum . aau . dk Thomas Ryberg Aalborg University Rendsburggade 14 9000 Aalborg , Denmark + 45 99407400 ryberg @ hum . aau . dk ABSTRACT This paper explores , analyses and discusses the potential of applying Danish theologian and philosopher K . E . Løgstrup’s ontological approach to ethics , when planning and conducting participatory design activities . By doing so , ethical considerations , will transform from being a summative evaluation perspective typically included at the end of a design process , to becoming a more formative and constructive perspective which influences the entire process . The approach presented in this paper will support on - going research within the field of Value Sensitive Design with theoretically based principles . These are principles that practitioners may consider when planning e . g . workshops in order to ensure that the activities facilitate both the design process and establish an ethical foundation for the design process . In addition to the theoretical contribution of the paper , the notion of constructive ethics is exemplified in practice by on - going research in the cross field between persuasive design and learning , carried out in collaboration with the Danish Military . Previous research has suggested that both participatory design and ethics may be essential to persuasive design in theory and in practice . However , considering the impact interactive technologies have on users in general , the principles exemplified through this case are relevant in a much broader perspective and to many other design traditions . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 5 . 3 [ Group and organizational interfaces ] : Computer supported cooperative work , Evaluation / methodology General Terms Des ign , Human Factors , Theory . Keywords Kairos , Løgstrup , Constructive Ethics , Participatory Design 1 . INTRODUCTION This paper explores and exemplifies how ethics may potentially be considered a constructive perspective in a design process , by including the ethical demand by K . E . Løgstrup when planning and executing participatory design activities . It is commonly acknowledged that ethics is an important perspective to consider in relation to technology design , even more so in areas where technologies are strategically used to influence the users’ behaviour . However , ethical reflections are often included as a deconstructive evaluation process at the end of an otherwise dynamic and iterative design process . Whilst the arguments and exemplifications presented in this paper are primarily related to a particular human centred approach to persuasive design , the overall perspective , that ethics can and should be considered constructive to the design process , is both valid and applicable within all areas of HCI design . This paper provides an introduction to the fundamental aspects of Løgstrup’s ontological approach to ethics , and exemplifies how this perspective can be taken into consideration in user centred design processes . Several researchers have addressed the ethical challenges related to persuasive technologies , and exemplified how ethics may be taken into consideration in relation to intentional behaviour change [ 1 - 3 ] In 2009 Davis argued that Value Sensitive Design and Participatory Design might hold particular potential with regards to an ethical approach to persuasive design . In continuation of Davis’ work , this paper argues that participatory design should perhaps be considered a requisite for persuasive design , and that by including the ethical reflections of Danish philosopher K . E . Løgstrup , the ethical perspective may be constructive for the design process . The aim of the paper is to provide a practical example as to how ethics may serve , as a constructive foundation for a design process , rather than be included only as an evaluative measure once major decisions regarding the design have already been made and potentially effectuated . As research within the field of Persuasive Technology ( PT ) has progressed and developed , important perspectives relating to persuasion , PT and the potential of this particular approach to technology design , has been explored , exemplified and discussed . The notion of persuasive computers is most often explained with reference to Fogg’s original framework , and particular interest has been directed towards the design principles introduced in the Functional Triad ( FT ) [ 4 ] . In continuation of Fogg’s research , the term Persuasive Design ( PD ) has been widely applied in a variety of contexts , but without a common definition , making it challenging for researchers to clearly pinpoint the unique claim of PD when it is applied to more established research areas [ 3 ] . The design principles do not constitute novel approaches to technology design , but are the result of extensive research in understanding the persuasive potential of interactive computer technologies . As a result , the principles are already applied within many established SIGCAS Computers & Society | Sept 2015 | Vol . 45 | No . 3 147 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage , and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . design traditions , and research shows that within fields such as Information Architecture , Digital Dissemination of Cultural Heritage and Technology enhanced Learning , they do not lead to new design insights [ 2 , 5 ] . As a result , previous research has suggested that a clear distinction between PT and PD is necessary in order to establish the claim of PD , when applying the concept and principles to other more established research areas . PT is generally understood as technologies that are designed with the intent to change attitudes and / or behaviours . Often given examples of areas where PT are applied include exercise motivation , healthcare , environment preservation and energy saving . However , this definition is also subject to some discussion as all design can be seen as inherently persuasive and designed with the intent to motivate particular user behaviour [ 4 ] . In our approach , PT is understood as a technological focus , with emphasis on usability , system design and user feedback . PD on the other hand , may be more easily understood if it is seen as a wider and more nuanced approach to design , where understanding and incorporating contextual reflections in the design process , is considered key to ensuring the persuasiveness of the design [ 2 , 6 ] . The understanding of context and appropriate situation is primarily understood in relation to the rhetorical notion of Kairos . Through this approach Persuasive Design can be considered a meta - perspective which may be applied to more established design traditions and which emphasises ethical reflections in the design process and a particular focus on the intended use context . Furthermore it is argued that the claim of PD may not be constituted by the specific technology alone but on the adaptation between the persuasive technology and the intended use context . As such , this approach to PD acknowledges the theoretical and methodological perspectives within the PT field ( e . g . Fogg’s argument that technologies hold a particular persuasive potential ) , but distinguishes between PD and PT in order to clarify how PD may be a benefit to more established fields of technology design . Whilst the design principles discussed and applied in PT are also seen used in other research fields , the context oriented PD perspective justifies how the principles become persuasive when applied in the intended use context . In continuation , learning has been argued to constitute a foundation for persuasive design , based on the understanding that a distinction between nudging and persuasion , may be found in the persuasive aim to achieve sustainable attitude and behaviour change . In order for the behaviour change to be sustainable , it must be based on an attitude change , and in order for a person to change attitude towards a topic , he or she must acquire and process new knowledge . – Or in other words learn [ 7 ] 2 . KAIROS – A MATTER OF APPROPRIATENESS AND CONTEXT ADAPTATION The mentioned distinction between PD and PT is primarily based on reflections regarding the rhetorical notion of Kairos . The link between PT and classical rhetoric was brought to attention by Fogg , and as the theoretical foundation of PT has been explored and further developed , some researchers approach the challenges of this novel field from a foundation in classical humanistic traditions that include rhetoric , logic and ethics [ 8 ] . Kairos is often referred to as an essential in relation to persuasion , and is most often described as the opportune moment to act or trigger a persuadee into changing attitudes or behaviour [ 9 ] . The concept sums up the principle that any rhetorical approach is based upon the specific situation , and that comprehension of the context as such is one of the most vital resources when deciding upon rhetorical means to apply to a given argument [ 10 , 11 ] . Hansen specifies that the definitions of Kairos vary from narrow translations such as “particular point in time” and “specific circumstance” , to wider concepts such as “situation” , “occasion” , and “opportunity” . The narrow and wider definitions of Kairos are inseparable and must be considered in relation to each other . Kairos is three - dimensional and comprises the appropriate time , place , and manner to address the persuadee . As was the case with Hansen’s distinction between a narrow and a wider definition of Kairos , the three dimensions of Kairos are also inseparable and must all be equally taken into consideration if the opportune moment is to be defined . Nonetheless , Kairos is most often referred to in relation to timing , or in continuation , the ability to act at the right time and in the right place . Reflections regarding the appropriate manner are seldom given the same considerations . Nevertheless , when acknowledging all three dimensions of the concept , Kairos constitutes not only an opportune moment , but also an understanding of what is appropriate within a given situation . With the term appropriate , Kairos emphasises the importance of the performed action being both effective and also ethical . Although ethical debates often discuss the difference between right and wrong in a given situation , ethics per definition may just as well focus on the appropriateness within a given situation [ 14 ] . The perception that persuasion must take place in an appropriate manner , does not only refer specifically to the design of a system , but also to a general understanding of the context in which the technology is to be applied and it is this wider contextual understanding of Kairos which may be directly linked to ethical considerations . In light of the challenges related to defining the claim of PD in relation to more established fields , Gram - Hansen et . al . argue that the strong demand for ethical reflections in relation to PD , may in fact be one of the aspects which specifies the relevance and claim of PD when applied in well established areas of application such as learning , information architecture and digital mediation of cultural heritage . While persuasion in other design traditions is acknowledged as an integral part of a design process , PD enriches the design process with a communicative determination and a demand for a recurring ethical evaluation process [ 2 ] . Besides from defining ethics as a key concept in PD , the multi - layered definition of Kairos and in particular their inseparability , also gives reason to consider the relationship between PT and PD as multi - layered and inseparable . PD may be considered a particular type of context adaptation , which focuses on establishing the appropriate balance between the technology and the intended use context . Many of the technologies , which dominate the current landscape of technologies , in particular context - aware devices such as smartphones and tablet computers , can be argued to hold the potential to meet both the temporal and location - based dimension of Kairos . However the persuasiveness of each technology is dependent on the device also being applied in the appropriate manner within the given context . This third and final dimension calls for a different and more nuanced evaluation of the intended use context , it may not be formalized , and it may be argued to point towards the necessity of not only designing the appropriate technology , but also design the appropriate balance between the technology and the intended use context [ 6 ] . In practice , this approach to PD distinguishes itself from PT , in a way that acknowledges the theoretical and practical steps taken so far within the PT research community , and facilitates the SIGCAS Computers & Society | Sept 2015 | Vol . 45 | No . 3 148 persuasive potential of the technologies by adding a wider and more context oriented layer . System - oriented methods such as the PSD model [ 12 ] , address the challenges related to the specific technology design , whereas PD is considered a wider concept which focuses on the establishment of an appropriate balance between technology and context , and which may serve as a meta - perspective to more established research fields . Most importantly however , the notion of a multi - layered approach to design is brought into consideration due to the interdependency between PT and PD . 3 . PARTICIPATORY DESIGN AND AN APPROACH TO CONSTRUCTIVE ETHICS As mentioned in the previous section , the notion of Kairos is already widely acknowledged as an important perspective to consider in relation to persuasion . It has previously been argued that value sensitive design and participatory design may hold the potential to incorporate ethics in the design process when developing PT [ 1 ] . When considering Gram - Hansen’s perspectives on Kairos and CA , it may be argued that Participatory Design is not merely something that can be considered but something that must be considered if a persuasive design is to incorporate all three dimensions of Kairos . There are numerous methods for exploring intended use contexts and gaining a better understanding of the activities , which commonly take place . However , Participatory Design distinguishes itself by designing technologies with user participation , and by focusing on the users’ understanding of that context and in continuation the users’ understanding of what may and may not be appropriate . As such , if PD is to incorporate all three dimensions of Kairos , Participatory design becomes a prerequisite to the overall design process . Besides from providing important user insight , participatory design is also argued to hold the potential to overcome some of the ethical problems related to persuasive technology [ 1 ] . As mentioned , researchers have argued that a participatory design approach may be a way to address this challenge . However , it is important to acknowledge that simply involving the users in the design process is insufficient to ensure that the practical and ethical results of a participatory design activity is carried through to the subsequent steps of the design process . Participatory design offers a range of methods and reflections regarding user involvement , and workshops that include games , role - playing , or inspiration cards are being widely applied in a variety of design fields . However , the challenge remains that many of the results that are reached through participatory design may be difficult to conceptualize and fully implement in the final design of a technology . This challenge relates to both the practical design input and suggestions made by the user participants , but also the ethical aspects , which may have been touched upon . In order to address this challenge we argue that ethics should be incorporated as a constructive foundation for the participatory design process , and that this may be done by considering the reflections of Danish philosopher K . E . Løgstrup ( 1905 - 1981 ) . 4 . LØGSTRUPS ETHICAL DEMAND Løgstrup was a Danish philosopher and theologian who has manifested himself as one of the great Danish thinkers . He presented his approach to ethics as based on the so - called ontological tradition . According to this tradition , humans are influenced by basic conditions that are inalterable . For instance , the life of a human is inevitably entangled with other humans from the very moment we are born , and any type of human interaction results in a relation of ethical significance . Thereby , Løgstrup’s approach to ethics distances itself from the both the utilitarian and the deontological tradition , by rejecting the possibility of evaluating ethics objectively ( based on either actions or the consequences of such ) , and emphasising that ethics must be considered intuitive and open to be influenced by all humans . Løgstrup argues that humans are born with several characteristic referred to as the sovereign expressions of life which include features such as benevolence , compassion , trust , love and open speech , and that these qualities are essential for the interaction between human beings . Caring for other humans is simply part of human nature , or as he calls it , the ethical demand . The spontaneous manifestations of life can as such be considered the features within human nature which are generally viewed as ethical , contrary to characteristics such as jealousy , hate , mistrust and injustice . “The demand , precisely because it is unspoken , is radical . This is true even though the thing to be done in any particular situation may be very insignificant . Why is this ? Because the person confronted by the unspoken demand must him or herself determine how he or she is to take care of the other person’s life . ” ( Løgstrup 1997 , 44 ) The ethical demand in itself is silent ; in the way that Løgstrup does not attempt to set up rules concerning ethical and unethical actions . Contrarily , Løgstrup argues that the individual performing the action , in accordance with the reality perception of that individual must make the assessment of the ethicality of actions taken in a given situation . Humans must be conscious that any type of human interaction results in a situation where one human becomes responsible for the life of another human being and in accordance with such acknowledgement ; humans must strive towards doing to others as they trust others to do to them [ 13 ] . By defining ethics as an intuitive result of human nature , rather than moral rule based on reason , Løgstrup opposes one of the most recognized philosophers of deontological ethics ; Immanuel Kant , who is known especially for introducing the categorical imperative , which promotes the idea that ethics is a matter of acting rationally . Løgstrup makes the argument that ethics based on the human ability to think freely is problematic , as this ability also enables the human mind to justify an action that at first hand does not appear ethical at all . Løgstrup states that humans in general have a clear sense of what is right and what is wrong , but that they also tend to end up in situations where conflict arises between the ethical choice and obligations bound in for instance legislation or profession . Police officers may find themselves arresting citizens who are breaking the law , but who may be doing so for reasons that could be considered ethical e . g . stealing in order to feed a starving family . In that case , the police officers may find themselves acting against their ethical demand and justifying it by referring to the requirements of their job . In such situations , humans tend to excuse acting against their ethical duty to an extent where the excuses themselves end up appearing as committing as the original ethical duty . The result is a balance between the ethical and the obligated action , which allows the human to choose freely between the two , and thus acting against the ethical duty [ 14 ] The intuitive nature of Løgstrup’s ethical perspective and the silent claim of the ethical demand make it difficult to apply when ethically evaluating a situation or a technology . However , Løgstrup’s reflections regarding human interaction and the sovereign expressions of life can be considered when planning SIGCAS Computers & Society | Sept 2015 | Vol . 45 | No . 3 149 and preparing participatory design activities . Løgstrup’s ethical reflections may direct the facilitator of a participatory design activity to strongly consider ways to ensure a mutual power balance between the participants of for instance a workshop , in order to ensure that all participants feel that they are free to speak their mind , and to ensure that a mutual responsibility is established between the participants . By reference to Løgstrup , we will argue that if a mutual understanding is established between the participants , they will be more motivated to consider the results of a workshop in later work , and they will intuitively aim towards meeting the ethical requirements of the other participants . As such , the ethical perspective may become constructive for the design process , rather than be included , as a an evaluative measure that is applied either during or after the design process has been finalized . 5 . FROM WARRIORS TO CLIMATE WARRIORS – PROJECT GREEN BARRACKS In the following section , the approach to participatory design and constructive ethics is exemplified by a workshop held with participants from the Danish Military Defence in September 2013 . The workshop exemplifies specific areas in which Løgstrup’s ethical perspective may facilitate the planning and execution of a workshop . Naturally however similar reflections and adjustments are required in other steps of the design process . The energy and environment related challenges that the world is facing are well known to most . The Danish Military Defence is one of the largest organisations in Denmark and as a result the Danish Ministry of Defence has presented an ambitious climate and energy strategy , which addresses ways in which the Danish Military Defence actively wishes to lower the energy consumption level and minimize their influence on the climate . An extensive deal of the collective energy consumption in the Danish Military Defence is related to the use and maintenance of buildings and military establishments . This has led to the large scale Project Green Barracks in which the Danish Military Defence in collaboration with industrial partners , educational institutions and other innovative partners , are working towards innovative and rational solutions that will reduce the energy consumption . Two existing military establishments have been selected for pilot studies , namely Aalborg Kaserne in Northern Jutland and Almegårds Kaserne on Bornholm . Amongst the challenges related to the project is the attitude of the employees who work in the Danish Military defence . Although most will agree that climate and energy consumption are challenges that must be considered , also by the military defence , many find it hard to relate the solutions to their current work processes . For the soldiers who train for missions abroad it makes little sense to worry about switching of the light when leaving a barrack to rush out on a dangerous mission , and most find that while the focus of their work is on military duties , the aim of saving energy and the solutions for reaching that goal must be dealt with by the establishment administration office . This particular attitude collides with the overall strategy of moving towards “Green Establishments” where energy saving is a fully integrated element in the work procedures of the organisation . As such , the project aims not only to physically develop Green establishments for the future , it also focuses on a change of both attitude and work practice of the employees . One of the initiatives taken within Project Green Barracks is a competition for architects to deliver the best solution for future military defence establishments . The competing architects were to present solutions , which are not only sustainable and innovative , but also consider the work practices and the work environment for the organisation employees and collaborators . In order to provide the competitors with sufficient and suitable information about the work practice a series of workshops were held by the establishment administration office , enabling employees from all areas of the organisation and different ranks to contribute with knowledge and suggestions . In the following one specific workshop is described as an exemplification of how participatory design activities may be based on a constructive approach to ethics . 6 . DESIGNING FOR THE FUTURE In September 2013 , 18 representatives from the Danish Military Defence met to engage in defining requirements for the future green establishments . The participants included representatives from the Danish Ministry of Defence , The Danish Defence Installation Command and different level 3 authorities ( high authority members of the practical and educational staff ) from the two pilot establishment included in Project Green Barracks . The group of participants were all sufficiently experienced within the military defence to be able to share insightful knowledge about current practices . Most of them had also served on missions abroad , and most of them will still be active within the military defence in 20 years and will as such be part of the transition that the organisation is expected to go through . The specific aim of the workshop was to collectively define visions and requirements for the future military establishments , but without suggesting solutions . For instance , it was accepted for the participants to state that it is a requirement that the military employees can train all year round regardless of weather conditions , but it was up to the architects to decide how that requirement can be met . Whilst the workshop was being planned and prepared , Løgstrup’s ontological approach to ethics was taken into consideration as a constructive framework , leading the designer of the workshop ( first authour ) to reflect carefully on ways in which the physical location and the different activities might influence the power balance between the participants . The overall goal was to establish a workshop that would motivate the participants to engage and discuss possibilities for the future , and also to establish a mutual understanding between the participants . The Danish Military Defence considers itself a particular type of educational institution with a specific educational profile and with a history of a strong hierarchical structure amongst the different employees . The strong sense of hierarchy is common within military defences world wide , and can be argued to be vitally important when those serving are posted in critical areas abroad . However , when planning a workshop where everyone’s opinion is considered equally important , this natural power balance may be a challenge . As a result , Løgstrup’s perspective on interaction , power balances and the sovereign expressions of life were carefully considered in relation to both the location and the different workshop activities . Løgstrup opposes deontological philosophers such as Immanuel Kant , by arguing that ethics , rather than being based on reason , is based on the human ability to think freely and act on intuition [ 15 ] . Furthermore , ethics is argued to spring from interaction , as humans are inevitably entangled and influence each other through the way we interact . “Through the trust which a person shows or asks of another person , he or she surrenders something of his or her life to that person . Therefore , our existence demands of us that we protect the life of the person who has placed his or her trust in us . How much SIGCAS Computers & Society | Sept 2015 | Vol . 45 | No . 3 150 or how little is at stake for the person who has thus placed his or her trus in another person obviously varies greatly” ( Løgstrup , 1997 : 17 ) [ 13 ] 6 . 1 Workshop Location Considerations regarding ways in which the physical location might influence the interaction and communication during the workshop , lead to the decision to host the workshop at Aalborg university’s E - Learning Lab . Originally the workshop had been scheduled to take place at a military establishment in central Denmark , but this would potentially have allowed some participants to be on their “home turf” , and as such feel more secure and potentially be more dominating . By moving the location of the workshop to the facilities at Aalborg University , all participants found themselves on uncommon but neutral ground and in that sense equally vulnerable . It did however also constitute a context , which motivated new reflections . It was emphasised that the workshop was to be considered a “safe area” in which everyone was encouraged to speak freely . The rationale of the designer was , that if the workshop had been held at a military establishment , the participants could potentially be influenced more by the context and find themselves less able to rise above their well known behavioural patterns . 6 . 2 Workshop Activities In practice the workshop was facilitated as a full day schedule starting at 9am and ending at 3 . 30pm . The overall structure of the workshop was inspired by Jungk and Müllers approach to future workshops in which participants engage in a critique phase , and an utopian phase and a solution phase [ 16 ] . In consideration of the mentioned requirements for this particular workshop the method was however adjusted and consisted of only two phases ; • The Critique phase • The Future phase . The solution phase was not included in workshop , as the aim was to provide the competing architects with visions and inspiration regarding future green army barracks , rather than providing them with solutions or specific requirements . During the critique phase , participants were presented with reflection exercises that would motivate them to reflect upon their own work practices and the challenges that they come by in their daily work . Even though the participants share educational backgrounds and general work tasks , there are important distinctions between their daily work practices . Not all military establishments are identical in Denmark and depending on the primary tasks which a carried out at a given establishments , the maintenance of the buildings may have been directed towards different areas . In order for the participants to collectively discuss visions for the future , they first had to establish a mutual understanding of current challenges and in some ways a mutual language to discuss these challenges . In practice , the critique phase consisted of three different assignments which all aimed at motivating the participants to reflect on current challenges , and to explain these challenges to the rest of the group . In consideration of the aforementioned hierarchical structures and the existing power balances , the first two assignments were individual and aimed for very specific exemplifications of current challenges . The individual tasks were planned to ensure that all participants were provided with an opportunity to air opinions , prior to engaging in group work . The third assignment was solved in small groups of six participants and aimed for a shared understanding of the general challenges of the current military establishments . The critique phase was concluded by a group discussion of the aspects , which were perceived as particularly challenging . In terms of ethical considerations , the critique phase served as an icebreaker for the collaboration in general , as well as a gentle initiation of establishing mutual understanding and trust . The practical assignments required very little effort from the participants ( they were given the option between drawing and writing and asked to do whatever made them most comfortable ) , and they were asked to simply consider their own everyday work practice and explain challenges . By addressing different work related frustrations through a specific workshop task , the participants were provided with a safe space to express their opinions freely – contrary to what might be appropriate in their normal work environment . In continuation , the task uncovered mutual frustrations amongst the participants , which helped establish a sense of community in spite of different work locations and everyday responsibilities . Whilst the critique phase uncovered mutual understandings of the current challenges , the subsequent Future phase focused on defining the participants’ requirements , needs and visions for the future military establishments . All assignments in the future phase were solved by the previously established groups , and the results of the critique phase were brought into consideration as a common starting point for this second phase of the workshop . Furthermore , the participants were asked to also consider a list of trigger words defined by the Project group behind Project Green Barracks . Image 1 - The future phase began with production of red and yellow concept cards In order to maintain the collaboration and discussions of the previous phase , the first assignment was development of concept cards . The participants were provided with red and yellow cardboard pieces and asked to create as many cards as possible by letting red cards represent actions which should take place in the future establishments and yellow cards represent facilities which would be required to do the actions . The goal of the activity was to motivate the participants to consider the requirements of their everyday work activities and to break these requirements into specific concepts , which might serve as an inspiration to the other groups . Also , the cards were used as a tool to spark conversations amongst the participants about what activities really need to take place in the army barracks , and to provide the designs with rich explanations as to why certain practices take place . For instance , outsiders may consider the old - fashioned bunk beds and small closets out - dated , but through the card activities it was explained SIGCAS Computers & Society | Sept 2015 | Vol . 45 | No . 3 151 that they actually serve an educational purpose . If the soldiers are unable to adjust to having no privacy and very little space when they are safe and at home in Denmark , they will most certainly not be able to work and live under similar conditions when dispatched to war zones around the world . All cards were placed on pin boards and all participants were encouraged to read them and use them as inspiration as they went on to prototyping . Image 2 - Solutions were discussed as prototypes of the future Danish army barracks were developed with Crayons , Lego and Play dough The primary assignment of the future phase was the development of prototypes of the future green military establishments . Each group was provided with a large green surface , crayons , play dough , and Lego , and told to create the facilities , which they found essential to the work practices within the military defence . The groups were given completely free hands with their prototypes ; however they were required to specifically explain what the intent was behind each facility in the prototype and explain its overall relevance for the future green military establishments . The artefacts applied in this face , were carefully chosen partly to ensure that the produced prototypes remained conceptual and not too specific , and partly to maintain the mutual understanding and balanced hierarchical structure , which had been established through the previous activities and facilitated by the location . Very often , workshops include asking the participants to draw something . It is considered an easy task , as most people have been used to drawing since childhood . However , far from everyone feels confident drawing and sharing their creations with others , and as a result , some participants may be reluctant to share what they produce and explain its meaning . Contrary , Lego and Play dough are artefacts that leave little or no room for detail , and they hold the benefit that most people are equally skilled in using them for production . Often , only the participants involved in building something with these artefacts , will know specifically what the result represents ( a building , a vehicle etc . ) . As a result , Lego and Play dough constitutes artefacts that not only ensure that prototypes remain conceptual , they also help to ensure that participants do not back out of the design phase due to feeling incompetent . The future phase was concluded by each group presenting their prototype to the remaining participants , and finally a round discussion about the overall outcome of the day . 7 . CONCLUDING REFLECTIONS In this paper it has been argued that ethical reflections may be a key element in explaining the unique claim of PD , and furthermore that the multi - layered notion of Kairos gives reason to consider PD a particular type of context adaptation . PD may be considered a meta - perspective , which focuses on establishing the appropriate balance between the PT and the intended use context , thus enabling the technology to reach its full persuasive potential . In order to do so , participatory design also becomes a requisite for PD , as only the intended users have the insight to express what may or may not be considered appropriate within a given context . Participatory design is already an established and often applied approach to technology design , and it is becoming generally acknowledged that in order to develop technologies that will be accepted and applied by the users , we must include the users in the design process . The particular distinction with the described example of participatory design in the Danish Military defense lies in the foundation of the workshop , which is based on a constructive approach to ethics . By considering Løgstrup’s ontological approach to ethics during the preparation of the workshop , the workshop served not only as a way to involve the users in the design process , it also helped establish a potential ethical foundation for the future development process . In particular , Løgstrup’s ethical perspective lead to reflections regarding : • The power structure between workshop participants ( How could the design process influence the existing power structure in a way with allowed all participants to feel empowered and safe to express their opinions ) • The Location ( How would the location influence the workshop activities and the previously mentioned power balance ) • The workshop room ( How did the room influence the interaction between the users , and how could the physical surroundings help adjust the power balance between participants ) • The workshop activities ( Which activities would enable and motivate balanced interaction between the workshop participants , and still lead to the required end results ) As the overall aim of the workshop was to generate user insight for the architects to take into consideration as they progress with their competition bids , the actual prototypes developed in the workshop were not the primary outcome of the day . The presentations and discussions that took place on the other hand provided much valuable insight to the participants understanding of their work context . As the participants were asked to present their reflections after every single assignment throughout the workshop they were constantly required to reflect and explain their position in detail . The prototypes served the important purpose of specific exemplification , and did as such motivate the participants to be very precise in their descriptions . Through the interactions that have taken place during the workshop , and with the establishment of a mutual understanding amongst the workshop participants , an ethical foundation may have been constituted . Løgstrup argues that humans are ontologically bound to each other , and as a result , the ethical foundation established through the workshop holds the potential to also become an influencing factor in the following development process as well as in other initiatives taken within the Project Green Barracks . SIGCAS Computers & Society | Sept 2015 | Vol . 45 | No . 3 152 Løgstrup furthermore argues that once we engage in interaction and influence each other’s lives , our experiences shape us and affect the way we subsequently interact with others . When we understand the challenges our users are facing we are more likely to give them the consideration they demand . The establishment of an ethical relation between workshop participants is vital to the success of the Green Establishments , as the participants represent the military employees who will responsible for carrying out green initiatives in practice . Empowering the participants and providing them with a safe context for sharing ideas and reflections , is expected to constitute a motivating factor once the participants return to their normal work areas and share their newly gained experience with their colleagues who did not participate in the workshop . As such , the workshop not only provides insight regarding the participants understanding of appropriateness within their work context , it also serves as an initiator of the ontological framework which forms the basis of Løgstrup’s approach to ethics . The overall benefit of applying Løgstrup’s ethical reflections when planning a design process , does not only apply to the case described in this paper , it can be considered generally applicable . By allowing ethics to form a constructive perspective in the design process , and for instance include reflections regarding ways in which physical surroundings and different activities influence the power balance between those partaking in the design process , ethics becomes fully integrated throughout the design process . Different activities whether they be traditional meetings , interviews or participatory design oriented , provide different insights to the requirements of a design , but the understanding of the requirements and the motivation to meet them are to some extent dependent on a mutual understanding which can only be created through interaction between participants who are equally empowered . Due to the intuitive nature of Løgstrup’s approach to ethics , it must be emphasised that the approach presented in this paper should not replace other traditional approaches to ethical evaluations but rather be seen as a supplement . When considering intentionality as well as the nature of persuasion as being focused on attitude and behaviour change , both the deontological and utilitarian approach to ethics still constitutes essential perspectives . We do however find that by considering Løgstrup’s approach to ethics in relation to participatory design , we are able to argue towards a constructive approach to ethics in the design process , which facilitates the requirements of ethical reflections in PD , and at the same time enables designers to fully reflect upon all three dimensions of Kairos in the development process 8 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The workshop presented in this paper was arranged in collaboration with Boie Skov Frederiksen , Thomas Troels Klingemann and Thilde Møller Larsen from The Defence Installation Management Command , and with the support and collaboration of Claus Uttrup , Brigadier general , Chief of Staff , Installation Management Command . 9 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Davis , J . , Design methods for ethical persuasive computing , in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology . 2009 , ACM : Claremont , California . [ 2 ] Gram - Hansen , S . B . a . L . B . G . - H . , On the role of ethics in Persuasive Design , in Ethicomp 2013 . 2013 , Syddansk Universitetsforlag : Kolding . p . 8 . [ 3 ] Redström , J . , Persuasive Design : Fringes and Foundations , in Persuasive Technology 2006 . 2006 , Springer : Eindhoven . [ 4 ] Fogg , B . , Persuasive Technology , Using Computers to change what we Think and Do . 2003 : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers . [ 5 ] Lykke , M . , Persuasive design strategies : means to improve the use of information organisation and search features in web site information architechture ? , in ASIST Special Interest Group on Classification Research 20th Workshop . 2009 : Vancouver . [ 6 ] Gram - Hansen , S . B . and T . Ryberg , Persuasion , Learning and Context Adaptation . Special Issue of the International Journal on Conceptual Structures and Smart Applications , 2013 . [ 7 ] Gram - Hansen , S . and T . Ryberg , Acttention – Influencing Communities of Practice with Persuasive Learning Designs , in 10th International Conference , PERSUASIVE 2015 , T . Mactavish and S . Basapur , Editors . 2015 , Springer : Chicago . p . 184 - 195 . [ 8 ] Hasle , p . a . A . - K . K . C . Classical Rhetoric and a Limit to Persuasion . in Persuasive Technology . 2007 . Palo Alto : Springer . [ 9 ] Aagaard , M . a . P . , Øhrstrøm and Lars , Moltsen . It might be Kairos . in Persuasive 08 . 2008 . Oulu Finland : Springer . [ 10 ] 10 . Hansen , J . B . , Den rette tale på det rette tidspunkt . RetorikMagasinet , 2009 . 74 . [ 11 ] Kinneavy , J . L . , Kairos in Classical and Modern Rhetorical Theory , in Rhetoric and Kairos , Essays in History , Theory and Practice , P . Sipiora and J . S . Baumlin , Editors . 2002 , State University of New York Press . [ 12 ] Oinas - Kukkonen , H . a . M . H . A systematic Framework for Designing and Evaluating Persuasive Systems . in Persuasive 2008 . 2008 . Finland : Springer . [ 13 ] Løgstrup , K . E . , The Ethical Demand . 1997 : University of Notre Dame Press . [ 14 ] Muckadell , C . S . d . , Løgstrups Etik . En moralfilosofisk blindgyde . 1997 : Gyldendal . [ 15 ] Gram - Hansen , S . B . Towards an Approach to Ethics and HCI Development , based on Løgstrup ' s Ideas . in Interact . 2009 . Uppsala : Springer . [ 16 ] Jungk , R . a . N . M . , Future Workshops : How to Create Desirable Futures . 1987 , London : Institute for Social Interventions . SIGCAS Computers & Society | Sept 2015 | Vol . 45 | No . 3 153