Explaining Field Differences in Openness and Sharing in Scientiﬁc Communities Theresa Velden Department of Information Science , Cornell University 301 College Avenue , Ithaca , NY 14850 , USA tav6 @ cornell . edu ABSTRACT This paper explores ﬁeld differences in openness and shar - ing of scientiﬁc knowledge based on a comparative ethno - graphic ﬁeld study of research groups in two research spe - cialties . Tensions between cooperation and openness on the one hand and competition for priority and secrecy on the other hand are common in science . However , ﬁelds differ in how these tensions play out , inﬂuencing what information is ex - changed when and how among research groups in a ﬁeld . This paper develops an explanatory framework that identiﬁes assumptions made in the generic model of the collective pro - duction process in the sciences and speciﬁes epistemic and material ﬁeld characteristics that affect to what extent those assumptions hold for a speciﬁc ﬁeld , explaining ﬁeld differ - ences in openness and secrecy behaviors . I suggest that these ﬁeld - inherent sources for differences in openness and shar - ing behaviors need to be accounted for in research policies and in the design of information and communication systems that aim to support and advance the collective production of knowledge in science . Author Keywords ethnography , scientiﬁc communication , scientiﬁc collaboration , ﬁeld differences , openness , sharing , secrecy . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 3 . Group and Organization Interfaces : [ Computer - supported cooperative work ] INTRODUCTION The emergence of the World Wide Web provides opportuni - ties to increase the extent to which scientiﬁc knowledge is publicly shared within a scientiﬁc community , overcoming existing technical and social barriers [ 13 , 6 , 12 , 17 ] . How - ever , disciplines and ﬁelds differ in the extent to which they use these new opportunities . This is demonstrated e . g . by the Accepted for CSCW 2013 . This is the author’s version of the work . It is posted here by permission of ACM for your personal use . Not for redistri - bution . The deﬁnitive version will be published in the CSCW Proceedings and made available in the ACM Digital Library . contrast of the popularity of preprint servers 1 in some areas in physics , and the failure of preprint servers in the life sciences and chemistry [ 27 , 26 ] . Social and cultural arrangements of research ﬁelds play a major role in the shaping and use of new information and communication technologies [ 19 , 8 , 32 , 5 , 25 , 39 ] . This suggests that the design of new technologies to support scientiﬁc communication and collaboration needs to take account of the speciﬁc arrangements and needs in a ﬁeld 2 . How to best support scientiﬁc collaboration and the sharing of scientiﬁc information and data within and across scientiﬁc ﬁelds has been an area of recent interest within CSCW and its related literature , motivated by the opportunities provided by the world wide web to better support knowledge sharing and remote collaborations , and by recent investments made into the development of cyberinfrastructures . Empirical and the - oretical works on scientiﬁc collaboration have revealed chal - lenges such as the costs of research team integration [ 2 ] , the difﬁculty of alignment of temporal rhythms in scientiﬁc col - laboration [ 24 ] , and of incentive structures in scientiﬁc soft - ware production that discourage collaboration [ 22 ] . An im - portant focus of attention have been data sharing practices in science . It is acknowledged that improvements e . g . of collaborative data generation and reuse require ”a deeper un - derstanding of the social and technical circumstances” [ 33 ] . Ethnographic observations and interviews provide evidence that data - sharing practices not only vary across ﬁelds [ 3 ] , but that they need to be understood as part of a “data economy” : data derive their value not just from their context of use or ex - change , but also from the speciﬁc context of their production , integral to the research process [ 38 ] . The present paper focuses on openness and sharing behav - iors 3 versus behaviors of withholding and secrecy within sci - entiﬁc communities . It investigates how work and commu - nication practices in the basic sciences are affected by com - 1 A web server where scientiﬁc authors can publish research manuscripts without ﬁrst undergoing peer - review . 2 An insight highlighted already in the early 1970’s when the spread of the academic Internet triggered visions of the potential for com - puter based enhancements to scientiﬁc communication ( [ 9 ] cited in : [ 8 ] ) . 3 By ‘openness’ I understand in this context an act of disclosure that is undirected with regard to who exactly will partake of a certain piece of information or knowledge , whereas ’sharing’ assumes a conscious interaction between two or more parties , possibly involv - ing expectations of some form of reward or reciprocating behavior . 1 petition dynamics and aims to inform initiatives that set out to develop cyberinfrastructures and open science policies to enable new forms of collaborative science . To support a sys - tematic understanding of ﬁeld differences it builds on a socio - logical model of the collective production of scientiﬁc knowl - edge and proposes a theoretical framework that describes the inherent tension between openness and secrecy in scientiﬁc communities . Based on an ethnographic study it identiﬁes generic assumptions made in the framework that are suscep - tible to ﬁeld speciﬁc variation and identiﬁes three important ﬁeld characteristics that affect to what extent those assump - tions hold for a speciﬁc ﬁeld . The analytic framework re - sulting from this study can provide a valuable theoretical tool to the CSCW community engaged in the development of cy - berinfrastructures to support the assessment and understand - ing of the social dynamics of knowledge sharing in scientiﬁc ﬁelds that are targeted . THEORETICAL BACKGROUND The analysis presented in this study builds on a sociological model of the collective production of scientiﬁc knowledge in - troduced by Gl ¨ aser [ 13 ] . This model explains and puts into context a number of observations that have been reported in the social studies of science literature since the 1960’s about the uneasy balance of cooperation and openness versus com - petition and secrecy in ﬁelds of basic research . For basic science , secrecy cannot be attributed to outside fac - tors such as the commercial value of the information cre - ated for commercial applications . Instead , secrecy arises from competition for priority of research discoveries [ 21 , 10 ] . However , as scientiﬁc knowledge creation is a collective process that requires communication , a balance needs to be struck between competitive and cooperative behaviors . Fig - ure 1 I propose a theoretical framework that explains the con - tradiction between openness and secrecy in science as a sys - temic tension inherent to the collective production of scien - tiﬁc knowledge and points to sources for ﬁeld speciﬁc varia - tions . This framework , and its underlying sociological model , is described in more detail below . The Collective Production of Scientiﬁc Knowledge Gl¨aser’s sociological model of the collective production of scientiﬁc knowledge seeks to explain how reliable scientiﬁc knowledge can be produced under the condition of producers that are “autonomous , and incompletely informed about one another” and that face the challenge that the deﬁnition of re - search tasks and how to approach them are imbued with great insecurity 4 [ 13 ] ( p . 362 ) . The model assumes that members of the scientiﬁc community in a research specialty decide autonomously 5 about the deﬁ - nition of research tasks and how to approach them . However , these decisions are guided by the researchers’ local interpre - tation of the shared knowledge base of a scientiﬁc commu - nity . Researchers orient their actions towards creating knowl - edge that they can offer as novel contributions to the shared 4 in contrast to e . g . the routinized work tasks in manufacturing . 5 although inﬂuenced by power relations and access to resources ( ibid , p . 81 ) , such as research funding . knowledge base . Hence the shared knowledge base ensures coordination of a collective of autonomous producers . This coordination is decentralized , and not enforced by institutions or direct coordinating actions . The social order 6 of a scientiﬁc production community is an emergent property ( ibid , p . 261 ) . Sociologically , the coordination of collective production in a community is distinct from other well - known production sys - tems , namely organizations , networks and markets [ 14 ] . The knowledge base of a scientiﬁc community consists of various types and forms of scientiﬁc knowledge . There is the published archive of scientiﬁc knowledge whose public ac - cessibility is a crucial precondition for the coordinating role of the shared knowledge base [ 13 ] ( p . 163 ) . Knowledge also exists in unpublished formats such as preprints , technical re - ports , procedures , or materials that are typically exchanged between researchers on request . Further , there is knowledge that is orally communicated , and then there is local , tacit knowledge [ 4 ] or implicit knowledge that can be acquired only through actual visits , through presence and learning by imitation in the local work environments [ 13 ] ( p . 114 ) . The orientation of research activities towards the shared knowledge base of a scientiﬁc community serves to increase the chances of eventual integration of locally produced results into the shared knowledge base [ 13 ] . This integration pro - ceeds in several stages during which various forms of scien - tiﬁc communication are important . Initially , as research tasks are being derived and deﬁned locally the knowledge base is referred to to establish open questions and new approaches , to support decisions on methods to use , and to assess the competitive situation , chances of success , potential collabo - ration partners , and results that others have produced ( ibid , p . 83 / 84 ) . During the execution of research tasks researchers make use of the knowledge base of a scientiﬁc community to solve unanticipated problems as they arise . Further , the moving re - search front is monitored and task deﬁnitions and approaches may have to be adapted to retain chances for later integration of the locally produced knowledge into the shared knowledge base ( ibid , p . 115 ) . As locally produced results get ready to be published , the next step of coordination with the common knowledge base of the scientiﬁc community begins . Through authoring and peer - review the local contribution is adapted to the community mainstream to increase its utility , e . g . by incorporating a peer reviewer’s interpretation of the common knowledge base into the presentation and interpretation of research results 7 ( ibid , p . 130 ) . Eventually , research results offered in the form of publica - tions may get integrated into the shared knowledge base of a scientiﬁc community . Integration happens through the uptake of results , repeated re - use and eventual convergence over time 6 Deﬁned by Gl ¨ aser as “coordinating the individual actions of actors to achieve a stable , beneﬁcial state for the collective” ( ibid , p . 52 ) 7 In this integrative process Gl ¨ aser sees the main function of peer - review , not in quality control , as peer - review had been proven insuf - ﬁcient for quality control . 2 requires openness : shared public knowledge archive and informal knowledge exchange redundancy inevitable for autonomous actors defining their research tasks relative to a shared knowledge base novelty rewarded ( recognition , funding , career ) + competition for priority ubiquitous secrecy as a strategy to protect sphere of inquiry coordinated indirectly through shared knowledge base cooperation & openness competition & secrecy [ Gläser 2006 ] step - wise integration of locally produced offers for contribution into shared knowledge base How important is openness for achieving integration ? How inevitable is redundancy ? How feasible and effective is secrecy as a strategy ? 2 1 3 TENSION collective production of knowledge in a scientiﬁc community Figure 1 . Theoretical framework that explains the contradiction between openness and secrecy in scientiﬁc ﬁelds as a systemic tension inherent to the collective production of scientiﬁc knowledge . Questions ( 1 ) - ( 3 ) point to sources of ﬁeld speciﬁc variation . of how users interpret those results ( ibid , p . 139 ) . The robust - ness of a knowledge base is achieved by re - use and testing in various local contexts providing variation in perception of re - sults through the diversity of individual researchers’ research biographies and local work contexts ( ibid , p . 148 / 49 ) . What makes Gl ¨ aser’s model fruitful for an investigation of ﬁeld differences in openness and sharing behaviors is that it does not set apart scientiﬁc communication as a detached do - main of activity . Instead it emphasizes how various forms of scientiﬁc communication and exchange are an integral and necessary part of the research process . It is crucial for the decentralized coordination of research activities within a sci - entiﬁc community and for the integration of research results into the shared knowledge base as part of a collective produc - tion process [ 12 ] . Systemic Tension Between Openness and Secrecy Based on Gl¨aser’s model of the collective production of sci - entiﬁc knowledge and observations in the science studies lit - erature he builds on , I suggest the theoretical framework de - picted in ﬁgure 1 for the analysis of openness and sharing behaviors in scientiﬁc communities . Gl¨aser emphasizes how cooperation and communication between researchers or re - search groups are required at various stages of the research process . Given that researchers and research groups au - tonomously deﬁne their research tasks while orienting their activities toward contributing to a shared knowledge base , overlap of research tasks and redundancy of results is to be expected [ 13 , 16 ] . Since the goal of scientiﬁc activity is to advance knowledge by contributing new knowledge , novelty is an important criterion for the attribution of recognition and reward . Success in publishing prominently and recognition for the originality of work are essential preconditions for suc - cess in mobilizing research funding and building a scientiﬁc career . Consequently , competition around who can claim pri - ority of a research ﬁnding is ubiquitous [ 13 , 16 ] . The results is an enduring , systemic tension between cooperativeness and competitiveness in science [ 15 , 1 , 23 , 11 , 16 ] . Different strategies might be used to cope with competition for priority . Given sufﬁcient connectivity , i . e . a small size of the ﬁeld and open communication channels , researchers can cooperate to divide up the ﬁeld and pro - actively avoid that their spheres of inquiry collide [ 13 , 7 , 11 ] . Or they may embrace competition both as a motivating force and for its epistemic value , as redundancy and replication allow them to calibrate , cross - validate and hence to fortify results . At other times , researchers employ secrecy to protect their sphere of inquiry 8 from intruders to avoid getting anticipated , 8 A sphere of inquiry is a set of research problems that a scientist or group of scientists can pursue based on the speciﬁc ensemble of research technologies that they can mobilize [ 15 , 21 ] . An ensemble of research technologies is deﬁned by Hackett as an ”arrangement of materials , techniques , instruments , ideas , and enabling theories” . Ensembles of research technologies both enable and constraint the research questions that can be pursued by an individual researcher or a research group [ 15 , 34 ] . Hence ’sphere of inquiry’ refers to the range of research questions a researcher or a collective of re - searchers ( knowingly or unknowingly ) has the capability to address in order to produce novel contributions to a shared knowledge base . 3 or ’scooped’ [ 16 ] . The balance between competition and secrecy versus cooperation and openness can be rather dy - namic , requiring a careful management of information ex - changed [ 18 , 1 ] . Sources of Field Speciﬁc Variation Differences in research culture among research ﬁelds are likely to inﬂuence competition dynamics and the balance struck between openness and secrecy . Kohler suggests ﬁelds develop ’moral conventions’ to achieve a ﬁeld - speciﬁc bal - ance between cooperation and competition , referring to this balance as the ’moral economy’ of a scientiﬁc commu - nity [ 29 ] ( p . 12 ) . This paper aims to help develop a systematic understanding of the origins of ﬁeld speciﬁc variations in openness and se - crecy behaviors . Certain elements in the theoretical frame - work in ﬁgure 1 are susceptible to ﬁeld - speciﬁc variations as they make idealized assumptions that do not hold to the same degree in every ﬁeld . The questions to ask when trying to as - sess a ﬁeld’s sources for openness or secrecy in interactions between research groups , are ( 1 ) ”How inevitable is redun - dancy ? ” - to what extent is redundancy of research efforts in a ﬁeld indeed inevitable or are there mechanisms in place that reduce redundancy e . g . by limiting the autonomy of actors ; ( 2 ) ”How feasible and effective is secrecy as a strategy ? ” to protect a sphere of inquiry and to avoid getting anticipated or scooped ; and ( 3 ) ”How important is openness to achieve integration of knowledge the ﬁeld ? ” - to what extent are co - operation and openness between research groups needed to produce relevant research ﬁndings ? I will argue below that answers to these questions can be found by examining three characteristics of the epistemic and material culture of a re - search ﬁeld . METHODS Field Study Design This study of communication behaviors compares two re - search specialties in the chemical and physical sciences 9 The ﬁrst one is a research specialty within synthetic chemistry Unknowingly , because not all exact research questions within that sphere have necessarily been clearly articulated ( yet ) . Unknowingly also refers to surprise ﬁndings - situations where one stumbles in ones research across an answer to a question that one was not ask - ing . Capability refers to being in possession of and skilled in the use of research technologies such as instruments , methodologies , mate - rial , data , and theories . Obviously , a sphere of inquiry is dynamic and its evolution may progress through gradual as well as abrupt extensions of those capabilities . 9 In the following I will use the labels ’ﬁeld1’ and ’ﬁeld 2’ for these research specialties . Groups within these specialties come from different ( sub ) disciplinary backgrounds , hence I will identify the groups in this study by those ( sub ) disciplinary afﬁliations such as ’organic chemistry’ or ’experimental physics’ . This does not imply that the observed behaviors are representative for the entire disci - plinary culture of those ( sub ) disciplines . Therefore I will take care in the discussion section to refer to the research specialties ( ﬁeld1 , ﬁeld2 ) that provide the immediate context of my observations rather than suggesting a generalization to entire ( sub ) disciplines . ( ﬁeld 1 ) and was intended to represent a mainstream chem - istry ﬁeld 10 , to see whether it would shed light on a disci - plinary context that seems reluctant to embrace new , web - based communication models that increase openness and sharing of scientiﬁc knowledge [ 37 ] . The second research specialty ( ﬁeld 2 ) is situated between chemistry and physics and was selected to include a perspective from a setting with an additional disciplinary inﬂuence , namely physics , where new web - based communication models had been successfully introduced already in the 1990’s . Between 2007 and 2009 , I visited ﬁve research groups , each for a minimum of four to six weeks . Two groups were active in ﬁeld 1 and three active in ﬁeld 2 . The ethnographic analysis reported in this paper focuses on two of the research groups , one in each ﬁeld to investigate and compare in an exemplary way how communication behavior and research culture are intertwined . Those two groups were chosen from a very sim - ilar organizational environment ( the same University ) to re - duce conﬂating external factors ( such as academic institution , national research system ) . Occasionally , I will also include statements from researchers in the other groups when they contain insights about the ﬁeld or community as a whole . Observational Approach During the ﬁeld visit with a group , I would typically have a desk either in a visitor ofﬁce by myself , or share an ofﬁce with other group members , tag along for coffee breaks and lunches , and attend group meetings , seminars or other aca - demic events . During the period of my ﬁeld visit various op - portunities would arise to observe research activities and ex - periments , and to attend meetings where new data were dis - cussed , experiments planned and logistic or technical prob - lems tackled , or publications in an advanced stage of prepa - ration discussed . This would allow me to get an insight into various stages in the life cycle of research projects , and to de - velop a basic understanding of the research conducted by the group , and the social organization of the group . All three groups that I studied in ﬁeld 2 are involved in ex - periments conducted at shared radiation facilities , such as synchrotrons . They take advantage of what once was seen merely as a side - product of high energy experiments , namely the highly energetic radiation emitted by accelerated charged particles such as electrons and protons . Today , synchrotrons , and the most recent innovation , x - ray free electron lasers ( XFELs ) , are run to serve a diverse user community with re - search groups from a large variety of scientiﬁc ﬁelds such as physics , chemistry , structural biology , and archaeology . To familiarize myself with these experimental research practices , I came along to one such experimental run , a so called ’beam - time’ , that makes use of the high radiation beam provided at a radiation facility to investigate the structure and dynamics of small matter particles or clusters of molecules . To familiarize myself with research practices in ﬁeld 1 , I used shadowing 10 Two thirds of the 900 , 000 chemical papers published in 2001 re - ported on the chemical synthesis ( the creation of new chemical sub - stances through chemical reactions ) and the analysis of new chemi - cal substances ( to determine their molecular structure and chemical properties ) [ 36 ] . 4 ( following a group member around for an entire work day ) to get a sense of the daily research routine in a synthetic chem - istry laboratory . In addition to observing the groups in their immediate research environments , I participated in a work - shop in ﬁeld 2 and attended national society meetings in both ﬁelds . Interview Analysis I also conducted semi - structured interviews with most of the research group members at each site . I followed an infor - mal outline of topics , such as : research practices and goals of research ; research biography ; everyday research activities ; communication and collaboration with colleagues in and out - side group ; role of scientiﬁc community ; scientiﬁc commu - nication and the opportunities opened up by the World Wide Web . Interviews took between half an hour and up to two hours . In total I audio recorded more than 60 hrs of inter - views with members of all ﬁve research groups . The interviews were transcribed and analyzed using a set of tags developed and reﬁned over the course of this study . The initial tag set reﬂected the major topics covered in the inter - views and was reﬁned and extended bottom - up during analy - sis of the interviews to capture themes emerging from the in - terviews as certain topics got repeatedly mentioned or offered themselves for comparison between interviewees and groups . The TAMS software 11 was used for tagging and extraction of combinations of subsets of tagged passages . RESULTS Based on ethnographic ﬁeld observations and interviews , this section compares the social organization of the two research groups , their research practices and the experiences of group members with regard to openness and secrecy when commu - nicating with other researchers in their research specialty . Research Technologies and Epistemic Culture In both groups the research efforts of the group members are united by the overarching research program of the professor who is leading the group ( called in the following PI for prin - cipal investigator ) . The person and research interests of the PI lend continuity to the research group over decades , and his or her accumulation of knowledge and research experiences serves to guide the research group’s activities . In both groups the majority of group members are PhD students . They form the backbone of the group for the execution of research tasks - whether conducting the day to day activities needed to cre - ate chemical substances and develop syntheses routes or to build instruments and capture data of physics experiments that the group sets up at shared radiation facilities . The in - formal knowledge and the tacit knowledge required for ac - complishing these tasks is generally recognized as a critical resource and maintained by the group as long as there is no interruption of personnel continuity and training . Beyond these commonalities , however , the social organiza - tion of the two research groups is quite distinct , emphasizing different values . What emerges from my observations is that 11 by Matthew Weinstein , released under the GPL v2 license at http : / / tamsys . sourceforge . net / the synthetic chemistry group represents a research culture that is invested in individual skill and personal reputation . By contrast , in the experimental physics group joint leadership , team effort and a valuation of collective achievements prevail . My ethnographic observations further suggest differences in research culture between the two groups that have implica - tions for the way critical knowledge is learned and how the groups organize to achieve their research goals 12 . These ob - servations put into context the differences in valuation of in - dividual achievement versus team spirit 13 . In the synthetic chemistry group the day - to - day practice of research fore - grounds personal skill in doing syntheses and the value of knowledge that an individual accumulates and internalizes over his or her lifetime as a researcher . In the experimental physics group on the other hand , the material culture fore - grounds communal efforts . The knowledge generating power of the group is externalized in the experimental apparatus that it builds and that can be applied to generate data from beam - time experiments on a range of different research objects . Research practice in the synthetic chemistry group is char - acterized by the continuous , day - to - day effort of conducting chemical syntheses at the lab bench . Known or new chemi - cal substances are produced , isolated and characterized , new syntheses routes developed , and catalysts tested . The focus in synthetic chemistry is on the creation of substances [ 20 ] . The majority of those newly created substances are of interest not for their direct technical or practical use in industrial applica - tions , but for the advances they bring to synthetic chemistry itself by improving its synthetic capability [ 36 , 35 ] . Individu - als identify strongly with the ’chemistry’ they are experienced in and that they have expertise in doing . A common phrase is to talk about ‘my’ chemistry , or ‘his’ or ‘her’ chemistry - referring to chemical reactions that one is most familiar with , as exempliﬁed by this quote : I mean , in the ﬂuid phase you are so well rehearsed , that you know what you have to do . There are sometimes days , where I feel like a laboratory technician , because I don’t have to think at all , I just do my chemistry . I do a column , I produce a spectrum , and so on and so forth . [ ﬁeld 1 : PhD Student , organic chemistry ] 12 For a much more comprehensive account and comparison of epistemic cultures , in high energy physics and molecular biology , see [ 28 ] 13 Balancing tensions is one of the core requirements for conduct - ing research and leading research teams [ 15 ] . Hence , the contrasts emphasized here rarely represent exclusive alternatives , but rather a relative emphasis when negotiating between one set of values or be - haviors and another . For example , the habilitants in the experimental physics group are required to prove themselves as team players . At the same time , to position themselves for an academic career they also need to acquire individual distinction . One strategy involves the signiﬁcance given within a community to the order of authors on a paper . As one of the habilitants in the group explained to me , he would see to it that the ﬁrst publication opening up a new stream of research would list him as a ﬁrst author , the students’ names in the middle , and the PI of the group in last position . After that , having signaled his ownership of the topic by ﬁrst authorship , he would then give up the lead position on subsequent publications to whichever of the students did the analysis and interpretation of data that the re - spective publication is based on . 5 Doing one’s chemistry successfully is not only a matter of manual skill and practical intuition . Also important is the chemical knowledge a chemist accumulates and internalizes over his or her career . It serves as a personal toolbox for developing synthesis ideas and intuitions , as described in the following quote : I like organic chemistry , because it is like solving riddles . Also when you do a retrosynthesis , and then you have such a problem in front of you , then you have to puzzle . The more knowledge you have , the more easy it becomes . And it also . . . the feeling I have is that , ev - erything I learn I can apply . [ . . . ] So in the end , I always say , we are learning a toolbox with which you can build houses . Therefore it is worth learning each and every reaction . A human being col - lects more and more knowledge such that it can do ever more , solve problems . And that’s so fascinating to me , I don’t see this in any other chemical area . . . that’s organic chemistry for me , this know - ing more and more , and solving riddles , and so on , that has always excited me . [ ﬁeld 1 : PhD Student , organic chemistry ] Although typically several students work alongside in a lab space , direct collaboration between group members , beyond occasional consultations and discussions on how to solve a synthetic problem , is limited . One occasional scenario is that a student is charged with ( re ) producing a certain substance that he and others need for their syntheses . Aside from meet - ing a practical need , the person fulﬁlling such a task beneﬁts by learning and getting familiar with a certain ‘chemistry’ - hence typically a new member of the group is charged with it or someone who moves into a new topical area . The majority of research projects in the experimental physics group is organized around beamtimes at shared national or international radiation facilities . The group has to apply for beamtime and beamtime is typically granted for a one to two week period at a time , several times a year . Beamtime exper - iments are complex apparatuses consisting of different parts such as vacuum chambers , particle sources and detectors , and are planned and built locally in the group’s lab at the Univer - sity . They undergo several years’ of construction and evolve through optimization , extensions or adaptations to new tasks . The different components are transported to the synchrotron facility and assembled there for the beamtime . From these experimental runs the team brings along measurements ( data ) that are analyzed and interpreted back at the groups’s home base at the University . A typical range of research activities of a PhD student in this group includes desk work , ordering of parts , the com - puter aided design of custom made instruments and testing of those instruments in the lab . It culminates in assembling the instrument at a radiation facility and using the high energy beam provided during the beamtime to run the experiment the instrument was designed for . All students need to collab - orate closely when building and running the experiment , as explained by one of the subgroup leaders : We use this apparatus for all our experiments . It is so complex that it cannot be run by a single person . That means in the working group are eight to ten people . Everyone has their own topic but we all work with the same apparatus . That is required for the measurement runs or beamtimes , since we have 24 hours operation , and we work in shifts of two people . You cannot get this done any other way . In principle everyone works together on each project , but for the interpretation and analysis of the data , this is divided up again . [ ﬁeld 2 : subgroup leader , experimental physics ] The pressure of making optimal use of the beamtime allotted , the stress of setting up the experiment in limited time , dealing with occasional failures , enduring the continuous noise of the vacuum pumps , and working night shifts , make these periods exceptionally intense and exhausting . But they also provide for gratifying experiences of team success . This whole project that I work on has virtually been a ‘Napoleon - conquers - Russia - thing’ . Really . Virtually from the beginning it was too big for us , and we did it in spite of that , and I believe we did really extremely well . The experiment that we have now standing there is a totally ﬁne experiment . But it always was - this is also where the mountain of data comes from - the experiment has always been larger than we are and always precision landing after precision landing after precision landing . [ ﬁeld 2 : PhD student , experimental physics ] The data generated at beamtimes is assigned to individual group members for analysis and interpretation . Students in the group own tasks that contribute to the building of the com - mon experimental capability of the group , and they are re - warded by subsets of data to analyze and to write their thesis about . Hence the projects in the experimental physics group are highly interdependent . Only the completion of a complex experimental set - up that all group members contribute to en - ables them to take measurements and to collect data to answer the scientiﬁc questions they are asking . Information Resources Chemical databases that specify the molecular structures of chemical substances , that document known chemical reac - tions and provide links into the chemical literature play a cen - tral role for doing synthetic work in organic chemistry . This is reﬂected by the following statement of one of the PhD stu - dent who describes the use of this databases when planning the chemical synthesis of a new substance that may need to make use of already know steps or might be achieved by vary - ing already know steps : Whenever you want to do something , somehow you envision a reac - tion , then most of the time you go to the computer , enter the type of reaction it should search for , or your molecule , and then it eventually retrieves reactions that have been done before , perhaps with similar molecules , or just generally and then you can select things that ﬁt best to what you have in mind , and then you try it out . If these things have been done before , you do not have to think for yourself and sit in front of it for three years to ﬁnd out something someone else has already done . So this is the main source to explore publications . [ ﬁeld 1 : PhD Student , organic chemistry ] To help deﬁne a research task , to double - check the novelty of a chemical reaction or substance , to develop a synthesis plan 6 or to solve synthesis problems , the students and postdocs fre - quently turn to chemical databases 14 , as well as the synthesis protocols published in the method sections of journal articles or included in the PhD theses of former group members . The value of group members as a resource to discuss and help solve problems is highlighted by comments the students make on the utility of online fora or blogs . Whereas one member of the group reports a positive experience of using an online forum to solve a practical problem to purify a substance , most group members reject the idea of discussing synthesis details ‘in public’ . They argue that their co - workers are the most valuable resource for discussing and getting advise on prob - lems since they provide the right mix of expertise : some of them are not too close so that they can provide a new per - spective on a problem while other co - workers are highly spe - cialized in the particular chemistry that one is working on . To stay up to date with the research front in their ﬁeld the chemists in the synthetic chemistry group fall back on the ofﬁcially published literature . Many of them regularly and systematically scan between a handful of core journals up to lists of 15 - 20 journals relevant to their research . They forward to one another articles they deem relevant and tell their col - leagues about them at the weekly group seminar . As will be discussed in the next section , getting scooped is a relatively common experience , and typically the only way of learning about it is through the published literature . By contrast to the chemists for whom the chemical databases play a central role when planning their syntheses , members of the experimental physics group primarily mention dis - cussions with co - workers and subgroup leaders in the early phases of planning an experiment and instrument design , as exempliﬁed by the following quote : During experiments and during the planning of the set up and so , I actually fall back constantly on what ( the sub group leader ) knows , simply his experience and the many experiments that he has already seen , and build , such that he just knows , “it is obvious to me , at this point there is this problem” and he knows how to solve it . That’s simply the conversation with him . And by now also with other peo - ple , for example - I love chatting with ( a fellow PhD student ) if I am confused about something speciﬁc . [ ﬁeld 2 : PhD student , experimental physics ] The students of the group further emphasize the value of knowledge that they gain in informal discussions from re - searchers outside the group , e . g . at community workshops , during beamtimes or user meetings at radiation facilities . They seem to have signiﬁcantly more access to informal and tacit knowledge about approaches other groups are taking than students in the synthetic chemistry group : It is different than when you read a publication , where everything is nicely trimmed and all the problems are not listed that are actually decisive when you carry through such an experiment . Naturally you are interested in the results , but when you want to reproduce such a set up or do something similar , then you are interested in the prob - lems , you want to know why did it almost fail . And there you can 14 The databases used by the group are SciFinder ( CAS ) and Beilstein . simply see it . You squat down with the groups . . . for example there was a group that also did pump probe experiments , also using in - frared lasers , and that is new for our group . I asked them , whether I could join and observe them for a day , that timing , how they do it , and I just set down with them and asked stupid questions and wrote everything down . That what I wanted , these problems , I could directly see them . [ ﬁeld 2 : PhD student , experimental physics ] Students in the experimental physics group refer more often than students in the synthetic chemistry group to alternative information resources on the internet , beyond online journals and databases , that help to solve problems . Websites of other groups with photographs of their experimental set up may provide useful details , as well as theses offered for download . The physicists in the experimental physics group would ex - pect to hear early about a relevant experiment that may du - plicate their own results . New developments in the ﬁeld are tracked through several channels : before publication one may already learn about an unpublished result at a conference , re - ceive a preprint from a colleague , or learn via the beamtime application process about a planned experiment . The main conclusion that emerges from these observations on how information needs get addressed is that in the syn - thetic chemistry group the published body of chemical knowl - edge , reported in journal articles and made accessible through chemical databases is the most crucial knowledge resource . By contrast , in the experimental physics group more infor - mal and unpublished knowledge is available through vari - ous channels for group members , in addition to the published journal literature that remains important . Observations on Openness and Sharing In the interviews I ﬁnd a number of striking differences be - tween the synthetic chemistry group and the experimental physics group with regard to the risk of getting scooped and the latitude with which group members communicate infor - mation about their work and ﬁndings to researchers outside of the group . In the synthetic chemistry group people repeatedly talk about experiences of scooping . Getting scooped , and sometimes scooping another group is a relatively common experience . The [ Miller ] research group in [ US American city ] works with , you know , different ligands but they are not far from ours . So it is well possible that they are already working on the same ligands , and are developing the same catalysts , you cannot prevent that from happen - ing , that’s usually the case , and it happens over an over again , that other working groups are faster , or that we are faster than others , that’s not uncommon . [ ﬁeld 1 : PhD student , organic chemistry ] Some group members also talk about suspicions about peo - ple who steal ideas from other groups . One incident con - cerns a professor who met the PI of the group at a conference , and allegedly got information that she used to her advantage , thereby scooping the group . 7 [ . . . ] what I think has happened , is that she saw at a conference how ( our group does ) a natural product with [ a speciﬁc type of reaction the group is expert in ] and she has combined the two methods , and produced a very similar natural product , of the same family . And I believe she very often does that . [ ﬁeld 1 : PhD student , organic chemistry ] The PI conﬁrms that by talking about details of the work of his group to outsiders before the work was published , he has enabled others to scoop his group . He says he has learned from this experience to be cautious : I simply had to make the experience . . . in early years I was more relaxed with those things , and it has happened that I reported in talks but did not follow up by publications fast enough , that I waited too long . That then meant that quite unexpectedly works appeared that clearly were derived from information I had given . Obviously , this implies that in future you will exercise restraint . [ ﬁeld 1 : PI , organic chemistry ] The PI has instructed the group members not to talk about details of their work with outsiders , and the group members respect and accept this precaution . Secrecy is not only used in informal communications . The PI sees information withhold - ing also as a legitimate strategy when publishing results that have promise to open up a new sphere of inquiry or expand the existing sphere of inquiry of the group . One strategy is to delay publication and inhibit the dissemination of PhD theses that can be mined and expanded on in future work : There are always aspects that are leading further . Because things build on one another and if this is a promising story where I want to avoid that others join in too early , then I try to prevent that by con - trolling the information . [ . . . ] An obvious example are PhD theses . A PhD has to be published , made publicly available . [ . . . ] You can , and that is the most simple method for co - workers the cheapest simplest method , to put the work online . This implies though that the whole world has immediate access to it . There is also the option to say , ok , let’s not put that online right away , only after a year’s time . . . A third option is , not to put it online , but that there will be printed copies of this work that get disseminate to libraries , and again , there is the option to not publish the printed copy immediately , but only a year later . . . if a thesis is particularly rich in content , and you can - not work on and follow up all aspects that are included , and you want to avoid that that provides too much inspiration for others , then there will only be a printed copy . Then the likelihood that many people will make us of it is much , much smaller . [ ﬁeld 1 : PI , organic chemistry ] Adding to this picture of strategic information withholding is the notion that synthesis protocols published in the litera - ture in organic chemistry are not reliable . My interview part - ners suggest that authors deliberately leave out some decisive detail to hold competition at bay , leading to frustrations and disillusionment among students as they try to make use of published synthesis procedures in their work . To cite just one example : That’s really done quite often , when they publish a procedure , they leave away something small , a detail , so no one can reproduce it . Because this is an art in itself : ‘we can do it , we can do it with so many systems , but no one else can . ’ So we can look forward to a lot of nice publications , and every one else is left behind . [ ﬁeld 1 : PhD student , organic chemistry ] In contrast to the synthetic chemistry group , members of the experimental physics group report only very rare incidents of scooping . This is in spite of the fact that beamline experi - ments happen in the public space of a shared radiation facil - ity makes it much more difﬁcult to maintain secrecy than it would be for an experiment conducted in a group’s private lab . However , the atmosphere is described as very collegial and open : [ . . . ] you do an experiment in such a huge hall , where concurrently other experiments are running , and where you see all the other peo - ple that do similar things , and meet and make arrangements , where it is already public , your experiment is public . That is very spe - cial , since that is really rather unusual within physics . This way you are forced to cooperate , other people come by an ask ‘what are you doing ? ’ It happens spontaneously that you get to know everybody . I was along for only one beamtime , a few weeks in March , April , and I already know almost everybody we are cooperating with , just because within a month everybody has come by and we have been eating out or had coffee or we have been at the experiment . [ ﬁeld 2 : PhD student , experimental physics ] Since building an instrument takes several student years and its optimization generations of students , the experimental ca - pability to reproduce someone else’s results is not instantly available . Hence , as group members explain to me , chances that another group develops the same experimental capabili - ties without them hearing about it are low . The following quotes acknowledge the existence of competi - tion in the ﬁeld , but also describe how in spite of it informa - tion ﬂow is relatively open and the attitude between groups is cooperative : There is competition at times , but people still talk , I would say , a lot with one another , especially ( in a sub area of ﬁeld 2 ) , that is an area , that is comparably strongly contested , since many groups do that . [ . . . ] there are quite a number of people , and still people talk with one another and exchange information on where they are , talk about interpretations and so on . I would say . . . that this is not an idealized picture , I would say that is truly so . [ ﬁeld 2 : subgroup leader , experimental physics ] The things you are currently working on are being communicated very freely , sometimes without boundaries that it seems strange , but you still do it . For example there is this [ some PI name ] , a Japanese scientist , who is the lead at this [ name of a free electron laser project ] , with whom we cooperate , but where you know , this Japanese FEL this still is a direct competition . And nevertheless he was standing at my experiment , and I explained everything to him and ( my group leader ) signaled to me through eye contact , yes , tell him , and I was always like , ‘shall I really , yes shall I really ? ’ and I showed him as well where I adjust the skimmer slit , that’s an ad - justable slit that determines how many clusters are in the interaction zone , where did I buy it , what do you have to look out for , and what 8 is the idea here with the protection against scattering light , this is information for which we needed two beamtimes to ﬁgure that out , that this is the decisive problem , and that without that we do not get a signal on which to adjust . That’s not what generates data that you publish , but this is what needs to happen ﬁrst , what takes a lot of time , and still , this is being communicated . [ ﬁeld 2 : PhD student , experimental physics ] The view of of group members on competition in their ﬁeld is shaped by recent experimental successes they have had , the recognition of having excellent access to synchrotron facili - ties ( one being in the same city ) and beamtimes , and a per - ception that one is , at least temporarily , leading the ﬁeld . I would say in ( our research specialty ) this all is , at least it was like that so far , very friendly . That’s partly due to , the things we do here no one else can do , so we can be generous . There are groups that want to catch up , but you know those groups [ . . . ] how far advanced everyone is , and at meetings , regularly , you provide tips to those people . Interviewer : One does not deliberately withhold information ? No , because that does not make any sense . One shares the desire to generate knowledge , and also . . . . I am rather at the forefront of a ﬁeld and have a tail of people behind with the same experiment , because then everyone acknowledges that one is in front . But if I am at the top and would stamp everyone else to the ground then a ) that’s no fun , and b ) it does not help one . I ﬁnd that what we are doing momentarily is an area where it would be good if it did grow , we can’t do it all by ourselves anyway , and then it is good for us , purely egoistically , that our predominance is recognized , does not do harm if you would like to have a job later sometime . [ ﬁeld 2 : subgroup leader , experimental physics ] Hence a successful competitive strategy for this group is to focus efforts to gain leadership in the ﬁeld . Since for more complex research tasks collaborators from the same or other ﬁelds are required , a cooperative attitude prevails . In com - parison to the synthetic chemistry group , members of the ex - perimental physics group do not see their own position com - promised by providing practical help to other groups within the ﬁeld , and convey a stronger interest in seeing the entire community advance . In conclusion , the picture that emerges is multifaceted . Com - petition with groups working in the same ﬁeld is experienced by the synthetic chemistry group as well as by the experi - mental physics group . However , there are distinct policy dif - ferences between the two groups that reﬂect the fact that the synthetic chemists rely on a competition strategy that main - tains secrecy around practical and conceptual details of syn - theses , whereas the experimental physicists pursues a coop - erative competition strategy that invests into the advancement and strength of the community as a whole . DISCUSSION The ethnographic observations made above suggest that dif - ferences in openness and sharing behavior are linked to the different research cultures of the two ﬁelds . I suggest that these differences can be understood at a theoretical level by considering three epistemic and material characteristics of the two scientiﬁc ﬁelds , namely the ordering power of their re - spective knowledge bases , the autonomy of research groups to control the research technologies they are using , and the vulnerability of spheres of inquiry . These ﬁeld characteristics affect to what extent the generic assumptions in the functional model in ﬁgure 1 hold , and act as sources of ﬁeld - speciﬁc variation of the balance between openness and secrecy among research groups within a scientiﬁc community . A . The Ordering Power of Knowledge Bases Gl¨aser suggests the concept of “ordering power of a scien - tiﬁc knowledge base” to capture an important aspect of how scientiﬁc knowledge bases differ between ﬁelds , and he hy - pothesizes that the strength of ordering power of a scientiﬁc knowledge base inﬂuences the social order with a scientiﬁc community . He deﬁnes ordering power as the speciﬁcity of the criteria to assess the chances for a locally produced knowledge contribution to get eventually integrated into the shared knowledge base of a scientiﬁc community . Such deci - sion criteria support in particular the identiﬁcation of relevant research tasks and of legitimate methods for producing contri - butions [ 13 ] ( p . 248 , 259 ) . A scientiﬁc knowledge base with a high ordering power imposes tighter constraints on what counts as legitimate and valuable results . However , if the or - dering power of a knowledge base is low , it requires greater cooperative and communicative efforts among researchers in the ﬁeld to co - construct results in a way that they have a high chance for getting integrated into the shared knowledge base . From my ﬁeld study observations I conclude that the ordering power of the knowledge base in ﬁeld 1 is stronger than in ﬁeld 2 . This difference is alluded to in the following quote of a senior researcher whom I interviewed in ﬁeld 2 , who had been working most of his career in a research group in physical chemistry : ”In chemistry you must put something on the table at the end , a sub - stance or so . This means you have to somehow produce gold . And in physics you can talk well about gold , and then this is enough . ” [ ﬁeld 2 : senior researcher , physical chemistry ] The suggestion that physicists can get away with talk may seem counterintuitive at ﬁrst , given that in common rankings of scientiﬁc rigor physics is placed above chemistry . How - ever , the notion that chemists have to produce ( ’create’ ) rather than talk ( ’understand’ ) emphasizes the material craft aspect of synthetic chemistry . Knowledge contributions in synthetic chemistry are new molecules or synthesis routes , and it has been suggested that the growth of knowledge in synthetic chemistry can be measured by the growth in the number of known chemical substances [ 35 ] . All known chemical sub - stances and many of the known reactions are captured in chemical databases , and can be effectively searched , facili - tating the assessment of the novelty of a knowledge contribu - tion . The centrality of these databases in the research practice of synthetic chemists indicates a high level of order and stan - dardization of chemical knowledge . Further evidence for a strong ordering power of the knowl - edge base in organic chemistry is that group members repeat - 9 edly refer to speciﬁc performance properties of their results that can be measured and translate into an assessment of the quality of the results ; for example the efﬁciency of a natural product synthesis that can be measured by the number of syn - thesis steps , the overall yield and the selectivity of the prod - uct , or the assessment of the longevity of a catalysts by turn - over numbers . Finally , the use of off - the - shelf instruments to support speciﬁc synthesis steps and to measure properties of chemical substances produced , indicates a high standardiza - tion of methods and measurements , which reduces the need to explain and justify the methods used to obtain a result . This contrasts with the focus on ’understanding’ as a research result in ﬁeld 2 . A new knowledge contribution is not as easily assessed in its meaning and relevance nor straight - forwardly localized in a standardized whole . No physics database comparable to the respective chemistry databases that comprehensively capture what is known in the ﬁeld of synthetic chemistry exist 15 . The instruments used to gener - ate data are custom made , locally designed and built , and not standardized , off - the - shelf products . This means that in ﬁeld 2 more translation work is needed to explain the workings of an instrument and of an experimental set up to a community member , and to argue the validity of results obtained . In this context a positive attitude toward the reproduction of a result by other groups can be found . Instead of inducing feelings of threat for fear of competition , such duplication of efforts is oftentimes valued to help solidify a result and develop a joint interpretation , as expressed by the following remark : Here , if someone does something similar , this is rather good , be - cause then you can calibrate and see , is that correct what one has obtained , or is there another interpretation . That’s why this is an area I quite like working in . Tough use of elbows , that’s something I am not interested in . [ ﬁeld 2 : junior researcher , experimental physics ] Researchers in this ﬁeld compensate for the lack of ordering power of their knowledge base through increased engagement with colleagues and potential referees in discussions and mu - tual education about the methods used to obtain data and their interpretation . Informal interactions within a community of experts is valued and enjoyed as part of the research process , as exempliﬁed by the following quote about the experience at the initial workshop of what has become a regular bi - annual workshop series : And then all people could meet one another face to face . . . and then discussions started , and they are still going on , so that’s very , very important , right ? [ . . . ] in the coffee breaks , they are deliber - ately long - right ? And then you go ‘You said something earlier , that I do not believe that you can even measure that’ - and then ‘what , really ? ? ? ’ and then it get’s going , then you can talk about such things , and the learning is unbelievably effective . . . . This is accord - ing to my . . . . perspective the most productive , productive working atmosphere at all , the small specialized meeting of a circle of adepts who do similar things , and who sit together p . . . ] that you show the 15 The factual databases that exist would not be considered represent - ing the core knowledge produced in the ﬁeld , but represent only very speciﬁc , limited data sets . other colleagues ‘this is what we will try to publish soon’ . The ref - erees are there as well . . . . They referee each other , without knowing who it is in each and every case - who , who else should be it ? I mean , when I send a paper to a European physics journal on [ ﬁeld 2 ] , then one of those people who are sitting there . . . is the referee . With certainty . Or . . . . With very great probability , you know ? [ ﬁeld 2 : junior researcher , physical chemistry ] These differences in the ordering power of knowledge bases affect how new contributions get integrated into it . This pro - cess requires a tighter network of communication in ﬁeld 2 than in ﬁeld 1 and ’openness’ e . g . by communicating re - sults early , pre - publication , and discussing methodological approaches in detail , have greater value in ﬁeld 2 than in ﬁeld 1 . Hence the ordering power of the knowledge base in a ﬁeld affects the degree to which assumption ( 3 ) in the theoretical model in ﬁgure 1 holds , namely that openness and cooper - ation are important to integrate knowledge and advance the ﬁeld . B . Control Over Research Tools The two ﬁelds contrast with regard to the control research groups have over the research tools for producing research re - sults . The synthetic chemistry group routinely uses tools ( lab bench , chemical glassware , measurement instruments , chem - icals etc . ) that are commonly available at moderate costs . They are owned by the group or used as part of the shared infrastructure of the university . The large majority of experi - ments conducted in the experimental physics group however require access to several weeks of beamtime at radiation fa - cilities every year . The control over access to beamtime at a facility is in the hands of a ’beamtime allocation commitee’ , a group of researchers from a wide range of disciplines who have been appointed to review the experiments proposed in beamtime applications . Also , the research groups work with different affordances of laboratory spaces . The ‘privacy’ of lab - based research in syn - thetic chemistry facilitates a strategy of secrecy about the technical details of the research work , whereas the ’public - ness’ of the facility where the beamtime experiments take place would make such secrecy much more difﬁcult to attain : . . . Well , inevitably you are open , because there are more than enough people running around , peeking over your shoulder . . . you cannot really prevent that from happening , that someone peeks over your shoulder . I mean , if someone asked , hey can I copy your data , then we presumably would not do that [ laughs ] , ahm , but when someone asks may I see that spectrum , or what is it what you are doing right now , then that is somehow . . . Yes , and most of all , I be - lieve , it is very evident in this community who has done what , just because there is only this one laser , and anything that has been mea - sured has been measured there , and there are perhaps ten working groups or so , hence that means , nobody can come and say ‘oh , by the way , yesterday in my cellar I did’ - I think that is more problem - atic ( in other ﬁelds ) where practically anybody can do the same at home , where everybody knows how it works - in our case it is quite , I mean no one will come forward and say ‘we will do the exact same thing you are doing’ that likely would not work , if only because you would get no beamtime . 10 [ ﬁeld 2 : PhD student , experimental physics ] As indicated by the quote above the control of the beam - time allocation committee has two relevant effects : the review of proposals by beamtime committees is seeking to reduce duplication of efforts in order to increase the diversity and novelty of science enabled by a certain facility . This means there oftentimes is an explicit policy to reduce redundancy and avoid granting beamtime to directly competing proposals thereby reducing competitive pressure and reducing the dan - ger of unwarranted duplication . Second , the beamtime appli - cation process introduces a degree of publicness of a proposal that makes secretive moves impossible : [ . . . ] since you know the others dont really have a chance to overtake you in secret , we play with very open cards . Very early on ideas are put on the table , it is communicated and presented what one plans to do and so on . Which , in case every body had their own laboratory experiment at home , people would likely not do in this way . [ ﬁeld 2 : subgroup leader , experimental physics ] Hence , the control over research tools and the affordances of lab spaces in a ﬁeld of research affect the degree to which assumptions ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) in the functional model depicted in ﬁgure 1 hold for that ﬁeld : the degree to which actors are au - tonomous in selecting and deﬁning research tasks and redun - dancy is indeed ’inevitable’ , and the degree to which secrecy is a feasible and effective strategy to avoid competition and protect one’s sphere of inquiry . C . Vulnerability of Sphere of Inquiry The speciﬁc research technologies of a group deﬁne a group’s sphere of inquiry . How openly groups in a ﬁeld communicate with each other is inﬂuenced by how easily this sphere is in - truded on by other groups , and the risk of a scooping event ensuing from such an intrusion . The synthetic chemistry group in ﬁeld 1 protects its sphere of inquiry against intrusion of other groups by being secretive about research ideas as well as technical details and know how . Given the ubiquitous availability of the necessary tools , the relatively standardized methods and the short amount of time it takes to reproduce a result ( days , weeks or months rather than years ) , sharing a small piece of information can enable one group to jump ahead of another group . Compe - tition is direct , and due to the rather secretive behavior few communication channels are open that would provide speciﬁc information about the chances of getting anticipated . Usually a direct competition is only recognized after the fact , when the scooped results have been published . Since the group’s sphere of inquiry is relatively vulnerable , the PI considers le - gitimate to withhold PhD thesis from circulation when they contain results that allow the extension of a group’s sphere of inquiry . Not acknowledged but pointed out in other’s behav - ior is e . g . the stealing of ideas , in explicit the deliberate intru - sion into another group’s sphere of inquiry through informa - tion gleaned e . g . at a conference ; or the seemingly deliberate omission of details from synthesis protocol - another tactical move to retain the exclusivity of one’s research technologies and hence protect the sphere of inquiry of the group . By contrast , in ﬁeld 2 the controlled allocation of beamtime and the necessity of getting beamtime granted , as discussed in the previous section , work as a buffer against intrusion by another group into a research group’s sphere of inquiry . In addition to those factors that relate to the control over re - search tools , the vulnerability of the group’s sphere of inquiry is further determined by other material and epistemic proper - ties of the research in this ﬁeld . The complex , custom - made instruments developed in the lab to conduct the beamtime experiments require several student or postdoc years of de - velopment , and sometimes collaboration with another group or expert from another group to optimize a speciﬁc compo - nent . The time and resources needed to realize an experi - mental strategy means that any advance that another group might make when learning a speciﬁc piece of information is unlikely to propel them ahead in a way that would allow them to anticipate results the original group was aiming for . There - fore groups can afford openness with regard to technical de - tails and know - how , as well as the interpretation of results . However , the group’s sphere of inquiry is vulnerable to leaked information at other points in the research process . When it comes to ideas for beamtime proposals , or to the actual data measured , the experimental physics group in ﬁeld 2 be - comes much more protective and reluctant to share . In spite of the professed openness regarding the discussion of ’early ideas’ within the community , those ideas that support actual research or beamtime proposals in the pipeline are kept close to the chest . What is not shared are the ideas for upcoming experiments . What is written in a proposal , is , we for example have a folder that contains all proposals of the last few years , so that we get an insight what ex - periments are planned , money for what has been applied for . Jenny [ a PhD student in the group ] had this folder along [ during a beam - time at a radiation facility ] because she was reading up on it [ . . . ] but she always kept it under lock , because there are people running around , who could write the same kind of proposal , and these are ideas that we want to keep for ourselves . [ ﬁeld 2 : PhD student , experimental physics ] So the fact that redundancy is controlled for by the beam - time committee , leads to increased competition for getting a unique beamtime proposal in . In a way , the competition for priority in this ﬁeld is moved from the later stage of sub - mitting an article for publication to the much earlier stage of submitting an original beamtime proposal . Further , the exclusivity of a group’s sphere of inquiry would also be compromised when the measured data was publicly shared before the group has had a chance to analyze it and publish their results . I observed the PI joking to his group how this curious and potentially damaging idea , of making the data measured during a beamtime publicly available , had been brought up at a recent workshop that he attended . He re - ported that someone suggested to require groups to publicly release their measurement data from beamtimes within a cer - tain number of months . The reactions of the group members to his account showed that it was understood that such a pol - icy would be damaging to their group since they had been 11 tremendously successful in the last few years in acquiring beamtime and was currently struggling with a large backlog of analysis of these data . The large investments the group had made in terms of person months and PhD years into assem - bling their speciﬁc and productive ensemble of research tech - nologies granted the group relative exclusivity of their sphere of inquiry . This would be undermined by sharing that data . Hence the ﬁeld - speciﬁc vulnerability of the sphere of inquiry affects to what extent assumption ( 2 ) of the functional model depicted in ﬁgure 1 holds , namely whether secrecy is a feasi - ble and effective strategy to protect a sphere of inquiry . From this discussion we take along in particular , that secrecy and openness are not a monolithic concepts , but that the speciﬁc acts of sharing speciﬁc types of knowledge at speciﬁc points in the research process are affected differently by the epis - temic and material characteristics of a ﬁeld , and that neither a group nor a ﬁeld are all - open or all - secretive . Whether a groups is open to sharing certain information depends on whether sharing this type of information at that point in the re - search process presents a threat to the exclusivity of a group’s sphere of inquiry . CONCLUSION The ﬂows of scientiﬁc knowledge in a scientiﬁc community reﬂect how research groups balance cooperation and compe - tition for priority of discoveries . The trade - offs between se - cretive behavior to further a group’s competitive position and openness and sharing to strengthen and accelerate the collec - tive process of knowledge production are ﬁeld speciﬁc , aris - ing from the epistemic culture in a ﬁeld and the ensemble of research technologies used . Based on empirical observations from a comparative ethno - graphic ﬁeld study of two research specialties , this study de - velops a theoretical framework for analyzing ﬁeld differences and how they affect openness and sharing behaviors in sci - entiﬁc communities . It highlights the assumptions made in the generic model of the collective production of scientiﬁc knowledge that are susceptible to ﬁeld - speciﬁc variation and discusses three ﬁeld speciﬁc epistemic characteristics that ac - count for ﬁeld differences . I argue that the ordering power of a knowledge base affects the importance of openness to pro - duce valid results and advance the ﬁeld , that the control the research technologies affects the assumption of redundancy being inevitable by compromising the autonomy of actors and the assumption of secrecy being a feasible and effective strat - egy to protect a group’s sphere of inquiry , and that the vulner - ability of the sphere of inquiry also affects the assumption of secrecy being a feasible and effective strategy . Notably , the ﬁeld study observations suggest a relatively more individualistic research culture in synthetic chemistry versus a team - oriented research culture in experimental physics that would seem to extrapolate in a straightforward way to secre - tive versus open communication cultures . However , as shown in the discussions above , openness and secrecy behaviors of research groups are not monolithic but nuanced and context dependent , and careful consideration of the speciﬁc factors inﬂuencing competition dynamics in basic research and the value of either secrecy or openness as a strategy is warranted . Implications for Design Even though it has been argued that greater openness and sharing will facilitate and speed - up problem solving [ 31 ] this study suggests that a one - size - ﬁts - all approach to policy and technology design with regard to openness and sharing of re - search information is problematic . The analysis reﬁnes our understanding of how some scientiﬁc ﬁelds’ inertia to em - brace data and knowledge sharing initiatives is rooted in their speciﬁc collaborative and competitive dynamics . It under - lines that the design of infrastructures that support the broad sharing of scientiﬁc data and knowledge represent a signiﬁ - cant socio - technical challenge [ 30 ] and that ﬁeld speciﬁc dy - namics around information sharing need to be considered in policy development and system design . This result comple - ments the observation of the importance of the context of pro - duction to understand scientiﬁc data sharing [ 38 ] . The data also suggest that neither of these communities is all open or all secretive . Therefore opportunities exist that could be iden - tiﬁed and expanded on given a more systematic understand - ing of the differences in the social dynamics at play in differ - ent scientiﬁc settings . The analytic framework developed in this paper that links the generic model of collective production in the sciences and its inherent tension between cooperation and competition to speciﬁc ﬁeld characteristics can be used to guide future evalu - ations of these dynamics in speciﬁc ﬁelds that designers turn their attention to . It protects the analyst from drawing sim - plistic intuitive conclusions ( obviously they need to share as they need to collaborate , or obviously they are secretive be - cause they work independently ) and cautions against binary attributions of openness or secrecy to actors or entire ﬁelds . Instead it supports the comprehensive evaluation of ﬁeld char - acteristics to explain the more subtle dynamics at play . To re - ﬁne our theoretical understanding of these issues for the de - sign of systems that support ’open science’ , further research is needed that breaks down and analyses in greater detail how the sharing or withholding of speciﬁc types of information at speciﬁc points within the research process can be explained by ﬁeld characteristics . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I gratefully acknowledge the participants in my ﬁeld studies . Without their support and their consent to participate in the study this work could not have been accomplished . This ma - terial is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation through a Doctoral Thesis Improvement Grant No . 0924445 and under Grant No OCI - 1025679 . REFERENCES 1 . Atkinson , P . , Batchelor , C . , and Parsons , E . Trajectories of collaboration and competition in a medical discovery . Science , Technology & Human Values 23 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 259 – 284 . 2 . Balakrishnan , A . , Kiesler , S . , Cummings , J . , and Zadeh , R . Research team integration : What it is and why it matters . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2011 ) , 523 – 532 . 3 . Birnholtz , J . P . , and Bietz , M . J . Data at work : supporting sharing in science and engineering . In GROUP ’03 : Proceedings of the 2003 international ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work , ACM Press ( New York , NY , USA , 2003 ) , 339 – 348 . 12 4 . Collins , H . The TEA Set : Tacit Knowledge and Scientiﬁc Networks . Science Studies 4 , 2 ( 1974 ) , 165 – 185 . 5 . Cronin , B . Scholarly communication and epistemic cultures . In Scholarly Tribes and Tribulations : How Tradition and Technology Are Driving Disciplinary Change . ARL , Washington , DC , October 17 , 2003 ( 2003 ) . 6 . de Sompel , H . V . , Payette , S . , Erickson , J . , Lagoze , C . , and Warner , S . Rethinking scholarly communication — building the system that scholars deserve . D - Lib Magazine 10 , 9 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Edge , D . Competition in modern science . In Solomons House Revisited . Science History Publications . Canton MA . 1990 , 208 – 232 . 8 . Fry , J . , and Talja , S . The intellectual and social organization of academic ﬁelds and the shaping of digital resources . Journal of Information Science 33 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 115 . 9 . Garvey , W . D . Communication : the Essence of Science . Pergamon Press , 1979 . 10 . Gaston , J . Secretiveness and competition for priority of discovery in physics . Minerva 9 ( 1971 ) , 472 – 492 . 10 . 1007 / BF01558020 . 11 . Gilbert , G . Competition , differentiation and careers in science . Social Science Information 16 , 1 ( 1977 ) , 103 – 123 . 12 . Gl¨aser , J . What Internet use does and does not change in scientiﬁc communities . Science studies 16 , 1 ( 2003 ) , 38 – 51 . 13 . Gl¨aser , J . Wissenschaftliche Produktionsgemeinschaften - die soziale Ordnung der Forschung , vol . 906 of Campus Forschung . Campus Verlag , Frankfurt / New York , 2006 . 14 . Gl¨aser , J . , and Laudel , G . The social construction of bibliometric evaluations . In The Changing Governance of the Sciences , R . Whitley and J . Gl¨aser , Eds . Springer , 2007 , 101 – 123 . 15 . Hackett , E . Essential tensions . Social Studies of Science 35 , 5 ( 2005 ) , 787 – 826 . 16 . Hagstrom , W . Competition in Science . American Sociological Review 39 , 1 ( 1974 ) , 1 – 18 . 17 . Hilgartner , S . Biomolecular databases : New communication regimes for biology ? Science Communication 17 , 2 ( Dec . 1995 ) , 240 – 263 . 18 . Hilgartner , S . Selective ﬂows of knowledge in technoscientiﬁc interaction : information control in genome research . The British Journal for the History of Science FirstView ( 2012 ) , 1 – 14 . 19 . Hine , C . Systematics as Cyberscience : Computers , Change , and Continuity in Science . MIT , 2008 . 20 . Hoffmann , R . What might philosophy of science look like if chemists built it ? Synthese 155 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 321 – 336 . 21 . Hong , W . , and Walsh , J . For money or glory ? commercialization , competition , and secrecy in the entrepreneurial university . Sociological Quarterly 50 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 145 – 171 . 22 . Howison , J . , and Herbsleb , J . Scientiﬁc software production : incentives and collaboration . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2011 ) , 513 – 522 . 23 . Hull , D . A mechanism and its metaphysics : An evolutionary account of the social and conceptual development of science . Biology and Philosophy 3 , 2 ( 1988 ) , 123 – 155 . 24 . Jackson , S . , Ribes , D . , Buyuktur , A . , and Bowker , G . Collaborative rhythm : temporal dissonance and alignment in collaborative scientiﬁc work . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2011 ) , 245 – 254 . 25 . Kling , R . , and McKim , G . Not just a matter of time : Field differences and the shaping of electronic media in supporting scientiﬁc communication . Journal of the American Society for Information Science 51 , 14 ( 2000 ) , 1306 – 1320 . 26 . Kling , R . , McKim , G . , and King , A . A bit more of it : Scholarly communication forums as socio - technical interaction networks . Journal of the American Society of Information Science and Technology 54 ( 2003 ) , 47 – 67 . 27 . Kling , R . , Spector , L . B . , and Fortuna , J . The real stakes of virtual publishing : The transformation of E - Biomed into PubMed central . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 55 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 127 – 148 . 28 . Knorr Cetina , K . Epistemic Cultures - How the Sciences Make Knowledge . Havard University Press , 1999 . 29 . Kohler , R . Lords of the ﬂy : Drosophila genetics and the experimental life . University of Chicago Press , 1994 . 30 . Lagoze , C . , and Patzke , K . A Research Agenda for Data Curation Cyberinfrastructure . In Proceeding JCDL ’11 ( 2011 ) , 373 – 382 . 31 . Lakhani , K . R . , Jeppesen , L . B . , Lohse , P . A . , and Panetta , J . A . ”the value of openness in scientiﬁc problem solving . ” . Working Paper No . 07 - 050 , 2007 , Harvard Business School , 2007 . 32 . Nentwich , M . Cyberscience : modelling ICT - induced changes of the scholarly communication system . Information , Communication & Society 8 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 542 – 560 . 33 . Oleksik , G . , Milic - Frayling , N . , and Jones , R . Beyond data sharing : artifact ecology of a collaborative nanophotonics research centre . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM ( 2012 ) , 1165 – 1174 . 34 . Rheinberger , H . Experimental complexity in biology : Some epistemological and historical remarks . Philosophy of Science ( 1997 ) , 245 – 254 . 35 . Schummer , J . Scientometric studies on chemistry II : Aims and methods of producing new chemical substances . Scientometrics 39 , 1 ( 1997 ) , 125 – 140 . 36 . Schummer , J . Why do chemists perform experiments ? In Chemistry in the Philosophical Meldting Pot , Frankfurt am Main , Peter Lang . 2004 , 395 – 410 . 37 . Velden , T . , and Lagoze , C . Communicating chemistry . Nature Chemistry 1 , 9 ( 2009 ) , 673 – 678 . 38 . Vertesi , J . , and Dourish , P . The value of data : considering the context of production in data economies . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2011 ) , 533 – 542 . 39 . Walsh , J . P . , and Bayma , T . Computer networks and scientiﬁc work . Social Studies of Science 26 , 3 ( 1996 ) , 661 – 703 . 13