1536 - 1268 / 05 / $ 20 . 00 © 2005 IEEE ■ Published by the IEEE CS and IEEE ComSoc PERVASIVE computing 91 Editor : Scott F . Midkiff ■ Virginia Tech ■ midkiff @ vt . edu Education & Training I n my introductory interaction design courses at Carnegie Mellon Univer - sity , I ask students to explore pervasive computing product concepts , focusing on how people might engage new tech - nology . Essentially , I want them to learn about interaction away from desktop computers . In the exploratory phase of the product development process , stu - dents employ traditional design tech - niques such as sketching product con - cepts and creating scenarios and story - boards . A challenge for me was to move them beyond these methods . However , simple prototyping tools—such as Direc - tor and Flash , which allow for rapid pro - totyping of screen - based interactions— don’t yet exist for pervasive computing . Some industry designers have used video scenarios ( see the related sidebar ) — short movies that show how users might actually interact with a product . How - ever , cost and production issues under - mine this method’s usefulness . To address this challenge , I’ve been working with my students to develop a new method called video sketches . Although similar to video scenarios , video sketches significantly lower the production threshold by replac - ing video footage with photos . COURSE OVERVIEW I teach my introductory interaction design course both in the School of Design in the College of Fine Arts and in the Human - Computer Interaction Insti - tute in the School of Computer Science . Students range from third - year under - graduates to PhD candidates and have backgrounds in design , computer science , social science , psychology , business , and HCI ; however , most are working on a master’s degree in either interaction design or HCI . In the design version of the course , students all have strong visual skills and strong backgrounds in indus - trial design , communication design , or a related discipline . In the HCI version , the students have all taken a prerequisite stu - dio course covering communication design fundamentals . I teach both courses as traditional design studios where stu - dents continually present and critique work in progress , letting the students learn from their classmates’ successes and failures . This format is often challenging for students who have never had their work in progress criticized in front of their classmates . For that last two years , which cover four semesters and a total of four classes , I asked students to create video sketches of product concepts to both advance and document their designs . Students worked in teams of two , three , or four , and each team produced one video sketch . I thought that if inexperienced students could produce a quality video sketch on their first try , the method could benefit a wider community of design teams . CREATING VIDEO SKETCHES Unlike traditional video , video sketches require tools that most design students have on hand . Students in my courses Video Sketches : Exploring Pervasive Computing Interaction Designs John Zimmerman This issue’s column focuses on integrating research and teaching . John Zimmerman ( Carnegie Mellon University ) used a group project in introductory interaction design courses to develop and refine video sketches as a prototyping method for pervasive com - puting . Your comments and suggestions for this column are welcome . Please contact me at midkiff @ vt . edu . — Scott Midkiff EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION Courses : 51 - 421 / 725 Interaction and Visual Interface Design ; 05 - 650 Interface and Interaction Design Units : School of Design , College of Fine Arts ; Human - Computer Interaction Insti - tute , School of Computer Science Institution : Carnegie Mellon University Instructor : John Zimmerman Level : Junior , senior , and master’s level stu - dents with a strong design background ; HCI master’s and PhD students with back - grounds in computer science , psychology , social science , and design QUICK FACTS used consumer - level digital still cameras and laptops as their main tools . They composited the images using standard graphic design software and constructed the linear story using low - end video - editing software . Audio production pre - sented the most difficult challenge . In addition to lacking experience working with audio , most students didn’t have easy access to high - quality microphones . Students produced their video sketches following the traditional three - phase ( preproduction , production , and postproduction ) process ( see figure 1 ) . Traditional cinematography issues also apply to making video sketches . In general , once students selected the concept they wished to prototype , they could produce a video sketch in three workdays . They needed one day to develop a script and a storyboard . Much of the time spent on the script actually involved the team coming to agreement on the concept and refining how it met user needs . On day two , once the story - board was complete , students would record the dialogue , shoot the photos , and edit a rough cut . By the end of the first round of sketches , it was clear that laying down the dialogue track first and then editing images made the construc - tion of the rough cut much faster than editing the audio to the images . The third day involved producing and compositing graphics , adding music and ambient sound , and animating the still photos . During this step , students would also refine the editing . In at least half the cases , students needed to reshoot after viewing their rough cut ; however , this generally involved shooting only one or two new images or recording a few more lines of dialogue . In general , reshooting never took more than two hours . Storytelling In the course of four semesters , I gained new insights into how students could successfully structure a story and connect emotionally with the audience . In the first round , students tried too hard to force all the user needs their designs addressed into a single narra - tive . What proved more successful was chopping the story into vignettes , each demonstrating how the product met one or two needs in a specific context . The vignettes worked best when tied to - gether not by plot but by a single char - acter appearing throughout . By the third semester , I was encouraging the teams to label each vignette with titles that helped the audience more quickly understand the concept’s role and the user needs it met . This structural change helped students focus on their concept , making the sketches function better as design documentation instead of mar - keting tools . In trying to create an emotional con - nection with the audience , teams tended to make their stories melodramatic . For the later rounds , I addressed this issue by encouraging the use of vignettes over a single plot and encouraging students to focus on more routine situations . Instead of telling a story about how their EDUCATION & TRAINING E D U C A T I O N & T R A I N I N G 92 PERVASIVE computing www . computer . org / pervasive Using video scenarios offers four main design advantages : • Video scenarios force the design team to quickly agree on how a concept works at a much lower level of detail than a storyboard requires . 1 – 2 • The design team’s early focus on interaction - design details frees it to generate concepts that can drive technology development , instead of reacting to what’s already available . 1 • Making a video forces the design team to explore the product’s physical context of use and exposes them to usability issues that a storyboard wouldn’t reveal . • The video scenario makes for a wonderful communicative artifact , helping to create a shared vision of the product within a larger development team and , by making the concept seem possible , persuade managers or clients to provide development funding . 3 For a well - known example , you might look at Apple’s Knowledge Navigator video , 4 but it’s more polished than most video scenarios . Although video scenarios can significantly help to develop pervasive computing concepts , designers often don’t use this technique because of the expense , time , and specialized skills required . To produce a video scenario , design teams must often hire contractors . The associ - ated costs of introducing change diminishes opportunities for further concept development during production , making the video less exploratory and ( overly ) committed to a specific idea . Additionally , many video scenarios look too polished—too much like a real product instead of a concept—which leads to clients and managers focusing on small design details instead of discussing the concept itself . Considering all these issues , this method seemed impractical for use in an introductory interaction design course . REFERENCES 1 . T . Erickson , “Notes on Design Practice : Stories and Prototypes as Catalysts for Communication , ” Envi - sioning Technology : The Scenario as a Framework for the System Development Lifecycle , J . Carroll , ed . , Addison - Wesley , 1995 , pp . 37 – 57 . 2 . W . E . Mackay , A . V . Ratzer , and P . Janecek , “Video Artifacts for Design : Bridging the Gap between Abstrac - tion and Detail , ” Proc . Conf . Designing Interactive Systems , ACM Press , 2000 , pp . 72 – 82 . 3 . J . Löwgren , “Animated Use Sketches as Design Representations , ” Interactions , vol . 11 , no . 6 , 2004 , pp . 22 – 27 . 4 . H . Dubberly and D . Mitsch , “Knowledge Navigator , ” CHI ‘92 Special Video Program : Conf . Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems , B . A . Myers , ed . , 1992 . VIDEO SCENARIOS design worked under extreme condi - tions , they focused on scenarios that most audience members could regularly imagine themselves encountering . Shooting scenes From the course’s beginning , it was clear that none of the students had an instinctive notion of cinematography . Their design training gave them a good sense of composition , but they needed clearer instructions on the use of estab - lishing shots to help communicate the context and on the 180 - degree rule of screen direction . This rule dictates that cinematographers always shoot an actor from one side for an entire scene , simi - lar to an audience’s view of a play on a proscenium stage . Over the four courses , I have continually refined a lecture on cinematography basics based on the per - formance of the previous class , and this has largely addressed the visual story - telling problems . All student teams demonstrated an ability to shoot photos , produce con - vincing 2D graphics , and composite the two together . They also easily built on their communication design skills as they learned to edit their images and dialogue together . Their main production prob - lems appeared when they started work - ing with audio . Recording audio Unlike digital cameras and still images , most students had never worked with audio . They also didn’t have easy access to audio recording and editing software or a quality microphone . Many used the low - quality microphones that came with their laptops , while some more success - fully used microphones built into video cameras . While digital still cameras have become ubiquitous , quality microphones have not . Because of this , the dialogue tracks students produced often had actors recorded at different audio levels , making some too loud and some too soft , and in general had dialogue that sounded tinny . After the first two rounds , I encouraged the students to use the audio recording studio on campus in the Col - lege of Fine Arts . However , even with this access to professional - level equipment , the lack of experience made the audio quality less than I had hoped for . The visual skills the students brought to the class didn’t help them , and students con - sistently underestimated the time needed to produce quality audio tracks . PRODUCTION SAVINGS Video sketches significantly reduce production effort and cost by eliminat - ing synchronous sound and reducing many visual continuity issues . Conse - quently , this positively impacted several factors . Traditional video production begins with a master shot covering an entire scene , which then determines the actors’ movement in relation to the dialogue . Insert shots follow , in which you must pay careful attention to continuity , so they’ll match the movement in the mas - ter shot , letting the editor cut between the two . To get a good master shot , actors must deliver memorized lines without faltering and hit all their block - ing cues so they’re in the right place each time . Video sketches eliminate this metic - ulous attention to visual continuity because each image represents a larger step forward in time . Additionally , with EDUCATION & TRAINING OCTOBER – DECEMBER 2005 PERVASIVE computing 93 Preproduction (cid:127) Script . Write a script that demonstrates how the concept meets users ' functional and emotional needs and how the user interacts with the product in different contexts , including social and cultural forces . The script should use scenarios that the intended audience can identify strongly with and that demonstrate issues from common product use . (cid:127) Storyboard . Sketch a storyboard that communicates the shot selection ( for example , establishing , wide , medium , close - up , or point - of - view shots ) , composition , and the 180 - degree rule of screen direction . The storyboard also details where to include graphics , such as titles or inserted device screens . (cid:127) Cast . Cast actors for both image and voice capture . They don’t need to be the same people because there’s no synchronous dialogue . (cid:127) Location . Scout locations for image capture that best demonstrate how the concept works in the context of use . Production (cid:127) Audio . Capture audio of the actors and narrator reading lines . (cid:127) Images . Capture still images of the actors using the design concept in context . Be sure to capture some cutaway ( B roll ) images to help manage the flow of time and to cover long passages of dialogue or narration . Postproduction (cid:127) Edit . Lay down the dialogue track and edit in still images and ambient sounds . Produce a rough cut that effectively communicates the story . (cid:127) Graphics . Add graphic elements and composite them with the photographic images . Composite the product details , including the glow of an illuminated screen or the movement of a trembler on a mobile device into the scene . Adding composited graphics to the still images makes the product come to life in the sketch . (cid:127) Music . Use music to communicate the product’s intended emotional impact on the user . Music helps smooth transitions and gives the artifact more polish . (cid:127) Audio effects . Add any sounds that the product ( or interaction with the product ) makes , such as alerts or other feedback . (cid:127) Animate . Add motion to create a sense of space and movement of people and to add focus to important interactive elements . Figure 1 . The video sketches production process . video sketches , actors never blow a shot by forgetting a line , fumbling a word , or missing their mark . Instead , the actors and photographer can arrive at a loca - tion with a list of shots and can get all the images they need in a matter of minutes . In one case , while shooting in a coffee shop , students spent more time getting their coffee than acquiring the images . Additionally , traditional video produc - tion is an invasive process , making many locations difficult or expensive to use . With synchronous audio , you must care - fully control an environment’s sounds . Also , capturing actors in motion requires controlling lighting across a large area . Generally , at locations such as coffee shops , owners will ask for compensation because they can’t serve real customers with a director asking for quiet and a large crew of gaffers , grips , and audio techni - cians moving equipment around . Video sketches , however , appear more like friends taking a few pictures of each other . This minimal invasion can open up a wide array of locations . Finally , video sketches make reshoot - ing much easier . When viewing a rough cut , if you need a new piece of dialogue or a new image , you can capture it quickly . With traditional video , reshoot - ing generally takes as much time as the original shoot . I n follow - up discussions , students offered several insights into how the sketches affected their design process . All classes agreed that making the sketch forced them to more clearly define their concept and the value it adds to the user’s life than by simply producing their design concepts as sto - ryboards . Students also found the act of shooting scenes helped them detail and resolve design issues about inter - action in context . They had to address how users carry , access , store , and inter - act with a product in much more detail than they would using traditional sto - ryboards ( see the sidebar “Student Pro - jects” ) . Finally , many students found that making the video sketches helped them better understand users . In writing the scripts , they had more opportunity to experience the user from the inside than during traditional user research and requirements gathering . I passed the lessons learned from each round to the next class , refining the technique and gaining insight into the production skills students need to make a successful artifact . The previous semester’s results greatly influenced my instructions for making a successful sketch . In effect , the students iterated the video sketch method , identifying new challenges and refining the method with each round . By the third round , I was happy enough with the process to require this method for all students working with me on their interaction design master’s thesis . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS My development of video sketches was strongly influenced by both John Carroll’s and Tom Erick - son’s work on using scenarios to further the design process . Also beneficial was Wendy MacKay’s work on using video as a design tool design , particularly to get a design team to more quickly realize a con - cept . Jonas Löwgren’s “animated use sketches” also influenced me , including his use of animated still images for rapid development and his insights on making artifacts that look like sketches and not completed products . EDUCATION & TRAINING E D U C A T I O N & T R A I N I N G 94 PERVASIVE computing www . computer . org / pervasive • Case 1 : A team designed a smart apartment agent that helped roommates get along bet - ter by assisting with managing costs . The agent could estimate the cost consequences of increasing or decreasing thermostat settings . In addition , it kept track of the money dif - ferent roommates spent on food . When the team gave the actors groceries and moved into a kitchen to shoot the sketch , it noticed an opportunity for the agent to scan the receipts . The team needed to be in the same space as the users’ available resources to see this . See - ing it so early in the design process sent the design in a new direction . • Case 2 : A team designed a smart watch that kept track of all the groceries people selected , warning them when they selected something unhealthy or something they were allergic to . The design worked well as a paper storyboard , but in shooting the video sketch , the team realized that the user would have to select all of his or her groceries using the hand wear - ing the watch . Again , discovering this early in the design process helped the team see the value of the concept and search for new ways to implement it . STUDENT PROJECTS John Zimmerman is an assistant professor with a joint appointment at the Human - Computer Interac - tion Institute and the School of Design at Carnegie Mel - lon University . He has a background in filmmak - ing and interactive product development . Con - tact him at johnz @ cs . cmu . edu . Get access to individual IEEE Computer Society documents online . More than 100 , 000 articles and conference papers available ! $ 9US per article for members $ 19US for nonmembers www . computer . org / publications / dlib