International Journal of Social Robotics https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12369 - 018 - 0479 - 2 A Pilot Study of the KIBO Robot in Children with Severe ASD Jordi Albo - Canals 1 · Alexandre Barco Martelo 3 · Emily Relkin 2 · Daniel Hannon 1 · Marcel Heerink 4 · Martina Heinemann 4 · Kaitlyn Leidl 2 · Marina Umaschi Bers 2 Accepted : 12 April 2018 © Springer Science + Business Media B . V . , part of Springer Nature 2018 Abstract This pilot study explores the feasibility of using the KIBO Robot as an engaging platform to positively impact social and emotional development in children with ASD . KIBO is a programmable toy robot originally designed to teach coding and sequencing to neuro - typical children between 4 and 7years of age . To assess its use in children with severe ASD , twelve participants were introduced to KIBO and engaged in a variety of activities with the robot over four consecutive days . Their interactions were observed on site by raters and simultaneously videotaped for later analysis . We performed a detailed quantitative and qualitative analysis in two subjects who completed six or more of the eight planned KIBO play sessions . We observed that most of the participants showed sustained interest in the KIBO robot and increased the frequency of their interactions with adults across play sessions . Although the participants demonstrated only a limited understanding of programming principles during the study , they managed to manipulate the KIBO appropriately , engaged socially with the adults in the room and interacted positively with the robot during individual play . The ﬁndings suggest that the KIBO robot warrants further study as an engaging educational platform for children with ASD . Keywords Education · Robots · Social activities · KIBO · Learning · Social skills · Autism spectrum disorder · Programming 1 Introduction Autism spectrum disorders ( ASD ) is a set of neurodevel - opmental disorders associated with decreased social inter - actions , reduced communication and repetitive behaviors or obsessive interests [ 1 ] . The low quality of social interactions , social relationships and imaginative thought [ 2 ] can increase theaffectedindividual’sisolationandcreateabarriertolearn - ing through collaboration and interactive teamwork [ 3 ] . ProjectslikeIROMEC , AURORA , etc . [ 4 ] foundimprove - ments in the social and communication skills of children with ASD associated with use of robotics technology . Robots like the NAO robot are human - like and can help children learn important social skills [ 5 ] . One outcome of such projects has B Jordi Albo - Canals Jordi . Albo _ Canals @ tufts . edu 1 Center for Engineering Education and Outreach , Tufts University , Boston , USA 2 DevTech Research Group , Tufts University , Boston , USA 3 Amsterdam School of Communication Research ( ASCoR ) , University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , The Netherlands 4 Robotics Lab , Windesheim Flevoland , Almere , The Netherlands been the addition of full - time psychologists to some schools’ staffs to assist teachers and researchers with the implemen - tation of robots to support children with ASD . Children with ASD seem to take well to the repetitive and predictable nature of robots . Furthermore , robots are versa - tile and can contribute to collaboration in the classroom by helping to adapt the level of the intervention to students’ abilities [ 6 ] . It has been suggested that combining social play scenarios and engaging activities can stimulate children to collaborate while working in groups [ 7 ] . A social robot can be a use - ful tool in social play scenarios , serving to stimulate social competence acquisition [ 8 ] . Speciﬁcally , the use of LEGO Robotics in children with ASD has been shown to signiﬁ - cantly increase the frequency of positive social interactions with a correlation between enjoyment and cooperation [ 3 , 9 – 13 ] . Combining the above - mentioned factors , it is possible to create robot - based activities that enhance education through play , exploration , discovery , social interaction , collabora - tion , and competition . By observation of these activities , researchers can gain insight into the learning challenges of children with ASD [ 11 ] . 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Children with ASD may have a range of cognitive and motor disabilities . Robotic platforms like LEGO are recom - mended for neuro - typical children older than seven and are difﬁcult for young children with ASD to physically manipu - late , assemble , and program [ 14 ] . Most of these educational robotic platforms require use of a separate computer to pro - gram the robot , which in itself poses challenges for some children with ASD . In previous studies , researchers used LEGO Robotics in play - based sessions with pre - built models . Students pro - grammed these models through a special web - based interface that was customized for them . Teachers were able to use the robots and tablets with the assistance of a technician [ 15 , 16 ] . Even with these pre - built models , customized interfaces , and technical assistance , the LEGO robotic kit was still imprac - tical for use by many children with ASD . In this study , we explore the feasibility of using of a differ - ent robotic platform called KIBO to engage young children with severe ASD . The KIBO robot was created with fund - ing from the National Science Foundation by the DevTech Research Group at Tufts University , led by Dr . Marina Umaschi Bers . The kit was commercialized by KinderLab Robotics [ 17 ] . KIBO was designed based on the ﬁndings from more than 5years of research with hundreds of chil - dren and early childhood educators [ 18 – 23 ] . This robotics kit is speciﬁcally designed for neuro - typical children ages four to seven , allowing them to engage in a developmen - tally appropriate way with computer science concepts such as sequencing , cause - and - effect , and debugging [ 21 , 24 – 28 ] . The KIBO robotic kit was chosen for this study for sev - eral reasons . First , KIBO is designed speciﬁcally for a target population of children ages 4 – 7year old . The kit there - fore innately reduces both the complexities of manipulation and coding comprehension . In addition , the KIBO kit uses wooden blocks to program the robot that are easily recog - nized and manipulated . Finally , KIBO is a screen - free robotic platform with an easy visual interface that can potentially promote face - to - face interactions with teachers and peers . KIBO is different from other available robotic kits in that it does not require screen time on a separate computer . Pro - gramming is accomplished by connecting tangible wooden blocks that children assemble in a sequence to provide a set of instructions to the KIBO robot . Each block is color - coded and labeled with an action or instruction that tells the robot what to do . After a sequence is built , starting with a “Begin” block and ending with an “End” block , children can program the robot by scanning the set of blocks in sequence using the KIBO’s built - in barcode scanner . Children then simply push a button to see the robot perform the program they created [ 27 ] . The robot has slots for up to four sensors that can be assembled and dissembled to add or subtract functionality . The robots can be provided to children with these sensors pre - assembled or the assembly can be done by the children themselves . Previous studies by the DevTech Research Group shows that when children as young as 4years old are provided the needed scaffolding , they can successfully program a KIBO robot [ 23 , 29 ] . Additional robotics research by DevTech shows that with proper resources and support , early child - hood educators can effectively teach traditional educational subjects as well as collaboration and social skills by inte - grating the robotics kit and its block programming approach [ 19 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 28 – 31 ] . In this study , we explore whether the KIBO robot engages , promotes social interaction , and fosters the acquisition of basic programming principles in students with severe ASD . Based on previous studies [ 14 ] , we hypothesized that KIBO robotics could achieve these outcomes by creating a context in which social and coding skills are practiced and used by children with ASD . The main question this study was designed to address is : 1 . Are children with ASD engaged with the KIBO robot ( asking questions , sharing their work , or appearing inter - ested ) ? Inaddition , weobtainedinformationrelevanttothefollowing related questions : 2 . Do children with ASD comprehend the purpose of KIBO ? Do they understand that programming blocks are not simply wooden building blocks ? 3 . Can the children with ASD learn to code with KIBO ? 4 . Does KIBO help children in the study to understand the cause - effect order ? 5 . Does KIBO help to stimulate children to use their social skills with peers and adults ? 6 . How does the KIBO robot affect social and emotional behavior among children with ASD ? 2 Methods 2 . 1 Overview This pilot study was conducted over 1week at the CASPAN center in Panama between 4 / 4 / 16 and 4 / 7 / 16 in a regular classroom setting . Approval was obtained from Tufts Uni - versity IRB ofﬁce with the project number : 1412018 . The protocol called for a total of eight sessions per participant in which the children were shown how to program the KIBO as an agent that danced , cleaned itself , travelled from one point to another , etc . To participate in this study , children were required to be between 6 and 14years of age and diagnosed with severe ASD and cognitive impairments ( Fig . 1 ) . 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Fig . 1 KIBO Robot and the programing blocks This was an exploratory study that used an unmodiﬁed KIBO robot and the same basic procedures that have been applied with neuro - typical children . We performed a qual - itative assessment of engagement and disengagement in all participants . In addition , we conducted a more detailed qual - itative and quantitative analysis in two participants who completed six or more of the planned play sessions with the KIBO robot , as per protocol . 2 . 2 Setting Centro Alan Sullivan de Panama ( CASPAN ) is a non - proﬁt public governmental center that provides resources , ser - vices , and support in the public interest . CASPAN was founded with the mission to facilitate education and pro - vide needed attention to the population with autism and other cognitive disabilities , as well as their families and commu - nities . Through this task , CASPAN hopes developmentally impaired Panamanians acquire autonomy , better quality of life , and become productive people fully integrated into their society . Tufts University from the US , and La Salle—Ramon Llull University from Spain , are promoting the use of new technologies to enhance and support the inclusion of children with ASD into society . The groups’ goals include fostering autonomy and improved quality of life through the cultiva - tion of social skills and problem - solving capabilities . 2 . 3 Participants A total of 12 students classiﬁed as having Severe ASD with cognitive impairments were recruited from one grade level at CASPAN . All the students had previous contact with LEGO Robots in the classroom , but no previous contact with KIBO . The robotic sessions took place in addition to their every - day classroom activities . The study ran for a total of 4days , with two robotics sessions each day ( Table 1 ) . Between sessions students had a break where they had a snack and clean up activity ( tolearnaboutcaringforthemselvesbywashingtheir hands and cleaning the table ) . We coded each participant with a letter and a number to protect their conﬁdentiality ( Figs . 2 , 3 ) . 2 . 4 The KIBO Robotic Activities Based on what we learned in previous studies [ 16 ] , we pre - pared the study environment as follows : we placed three working stations in the classroom , each consisting of a white table with the KIBO robot and additional materials needed for the session . Two students sat next to one another at each station . A video camera at each working station faced the students and was used to record each session . From a curricular perspective , the sessions were divided in two parts . The ﬁrst part included teacher - guided activities that introduced novel elements and tasks for children to com - Table 1 Study curriculum covered during the study Activity KIBO actions “Social Actor” scenario Study curriculum part one “Car” robot horn Begin , beep , forward , end The robotic car does not want to run over the pedestrian Puddle Begin , forward , shake , end The robotic pet jumps into a puddle and cleans itself Dancing robot ( triggered by clap ) Begin , wait for clap , shake , end The robotic dancer starts to dance when it hears that people areclap - ping “Car” stop station 1 , 2 , 3 Begin , forward , forward , end The robotic car is transporting peo - ple to different stations Activity Description Study curriculum part two Free play with a pre - built robot Children get KIBO built with sensors / actuators to program Free play with unassembled robot Children get unassembled KIBO with sensors available 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Fig . 2 Two children working with KIBO during one of the sessions Fig . 3 Simulation of the room with KIBO experts ( plus signs ) , teachers ( squares ) , observers taking notes , and ﬁlling out modiﬁed PTD check - list around the room ( circles , and stars ) and students ( triangles ) . Three cameras were placed around the room plete . In each of these activities the robot served as a “social actor” that carried out deﬁned task ( see Table 1 below ) . The tasks were sorted from simpler to more complex , adding new elements in each successive session . In the sec - ond part , we used pre - built robots with speciﬁc sensors added to engage children in coding and robotics free play activities . We then observed if children were applying their learning to new situations of their own choice . One curricular goal of these activities was to reinforce the concepts of cause and effect . In most children’s play , inten - tion happens simultaneous to action . However , programming by virtue of introducing a time delay as well as an ability to control the outcome , helps foster real life cause and effect learning . Another curricular goal was for the KIBO robot to play a role as a social agent through interactive play - based sessions related to real life situations . The curriculum that we chose is designed to encourage children to work together to program KIBO to act in realistic situations . At the end of the activity session , we conducted an adapted Solve - It Assessment . Solve - it Assessments are tasks or activ - ities that involve problem solving and serve to assess the mastery of coding and sequencing skills [ 23 ] . 2 . 5 Data Collection and Analysis A KIBO expert on the research team led each session , explaining each activity and the schedule of events . The expert collaborated with the regular teachers and other researchers to conduct the sessions each day . Two observers were taking notes about what was happening during the sessions , and two others ﬁlled in modiﬁed PTD ( Positive Technology Development ) Observational checklists . At the end of each session the research team had a debrieﬁng meet - ing to review what had happened . We collected information using the following methods : ( 1 ) video recordings of all the sessions ; ( 2 ) PTD observa - tional checklists [ 32 ] , and ( 3 ) notes that were taken by the observers during the sessions . For the qualitative analysis , two researchers took notes about each child participant dur - ing every session . The events in these notes were classiﬁed by a single independent rater as engagement or disengage - ment occurrences using established protocols [ 33 ] . For the detailed analysis , video data was coded and analyzed using the BORIS PC application with ratings by an independent observer [ 34 ] . In order to obtain a sufﬁcient within - subject data , we restricted the detailed analysis to subjects who met the criterion of having participated in 80 % or more ( > 5 ) KIBO play sessions throughout the week . 2 . 6 Video Coding The interactions of the participants with their teachers , peers and the KIBO robot were recorded on videos made of each session over four consecutive days . An independent rater , aware of the study design and familiar with both ASD and the KIBO robot scored the videos . We analyzed the frequencies and durations of the 23 predetermined micro - behaviors ( see “Appendix 1” ) . These micro - behaviors were selected based on typical behavior of children with severe ASD , and are further connected to the typical interaction of children with the KIBO robot , with peers and with adults . The video data obtained from two children who completed at least six sessions , hereafter referred to as subjects B1 and E1 , were further analyzed using the video analysis software BORIS . The purpose of the detailed analysis was to explore the frequencies of micro - behaviors and their correlation with the robotic technology and speciﬁc situations that arose dur - ing the activity [ 33 ] . 2 . 7 Positive Technological Development Checklist In Dr . Bers’ book , Designing Digital Experiences for Positive Youth Development : From Playpen to Playground ( 2012 ) , a theoretical framework called Positive Technological Devel - opment ( PTD ) is presented for incorporating the use of technology in educational settings to foster a myriad of posi - 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Table 2 Participant attendance at each session Day Session Attending participants Missing participants Total participants Day 1 1 A1 , A2 , B1 , B2 , C1 , C2 , D1 , D2 , E1 , E2 , F1 F2 11 participants 2 B1 , C1 , D1 , D2 , E1 , E2 A1 , A2 , B2 , C2 , F1 , F2 6 participants Day 2 3 A1 , A2 , B1 , B2 , C1 , C2 , D1 , D2 , E1 , F1 , F2 E2 11 participants 4 A1 , A2 , B1 , B2 , C1 , D1 , D2 , E1 , F1 , F2 C2 , E2 10 participants Day 3 5 A2 , B2 , C2 , D1 , D2 , E1 , E2 , F1 , F2 A1 , B1 , C1 9 participants 6 A1 , A2 , B1 , B2 , C1 , C2 , D1 , D2 , E1 , E2 , F1 , F2 – 12 participants Day 4 7 A1 , A2 , B1 , B2 , C1 C2 , D1 , D2 , E1 , E2 5 participants 8 A1 , A2 , B1 , C1 , D2 , E1 , E2 , F2 B2 , C2 , D1 , F1 8 participants tive developments and behaviors . The PTD framework serves to guide the implementation of new technologies , such as the KIBO robotics kit , in educational settings . The PTD frame - work identiﬁes six positive behaviors that engagement with technologies in the classroom can promote : communication , collaboration , community building , content creation , creativ - ity , and choices of conduct . To make these behaviors measurable , the DevTech Research Group developed a tool for evaluation called the PTD Engagement Checklist that allows the observation and coding of behaviors of children who are engaging with a technology in an educational setting [ 31 ] . The PTD check - list is divided into six sections , each one representing one of the different behaviors identiﬁed by the PTD framework . Each section includes various descriptions of behaviors that may be observed when a child or group of children is using a given technology . For example , to measure a child’s level of collaboration fostered by the technology , an observable behavior on the checklist is “Students are helping each other to understand materials . ” The tool is meant to measure how often students demonstrate the given behaviors using a 5 - point Likert scale . This scale ranges from 0 “Never” up to 5 “Always” . It can be used as often ( i . e . after every lesson that includes technology ) or as infrequently ( i . e . once per unit ) as the evaluator deems necessary . The goal of the PTD Engagement checklist is to help quan - tify the observable behavior . In using the checklist to evaluate the same children over time , adults can create a quantiﬁable view of behavioral trajectories as they pertain to engage - ment with a particular technology . Previous pilot research in preschool classrooms in Singapore used this evaluation tool to measure the six behaviors of communication , collabora - tion , community building , content creation , creativity , and choices of conduct throughout a 7 - week curriculum called Dances from Around the World [ 31 ] . The educators ﬁlled out checklists at the end of each session , and the average scores were calculated at the end of the 7 - week robotics program . Based on the score calculations , the PTD checklist demon - strated that the curriculum was most successful at fostering content creation , communication , and collaboration [ 31 ] . For this study at the CASPAN School in Panama , we modiﬁed the PTD Engagement Checklist to better reﬂect the potential behaviors of the ASD study population ( “Appendix 2” ) . For example , since several of the students with ASD in this study were non - verbal , the behaviors used to measure communication were condensed in terms that could apply to both verbal and nonverbal students , such as “Student takes directionfromteacher ( e . g . sitswhentold ) . ”Furthermore , the Likert Scale to score the students’ behaviors was condensed from 0 “Never” through 5 “Always” , to 0 “Task not com - pleted / Particular behavior not observed” through 3 “Needed almost no or no support , ” since many of the behaviors were either present or absent . The checklists were ﬁlled out by researchers observing the children’s sessions with KIBO at the end of the second day , and at the end of the fourth day ( see “Appendix 2” ) . 3 Results 3 . 1 Cohort and Protocol Compliance The students participating in the study ranging from 6 to 14years old ( mean = 9 . 83 ) including 11 boys and 1 girl . All students showed enthusiasm about participating in the robotic sessions . However , most students missed one or more days of school attendance during the week of the study ( see Table 2 ) . Children diagnosed with severe ASD commonly exhibit mood ﬂuctuations and behavioral disturbances [ 35 ] . This study was conducted everyday for the time span of 4days . Due to the day - to - day ﬂuctuations in our partici - pants’ mindset and behavior , not every child was capable of participating in all sessions . Therefore , perhaps four consec - utive days of research is a more suitable research design for typically developing children and future should allot more ﬂexible time arrangements for children with severe ASD . 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Table 3 Number of occurrences of engagement and disengagement S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 E > D AVG Normal A1 2 X 1 0 X 2 1 4 1 X 2 1 X 1 2 0 1 X - 1 - 1 X 1 - 1 4 0 . 50 0 . 03 A2 0 X 1 2 0 0 0 0 1 X 2 0 3 4 5 3 - 1 X - 1 2 - 3 - 4 - 5 - 3 - 2 . 14 0 . 07 B1 4 11 4 0 X 4 2 12 1 0 0 0 X 0 0 0 3 11 4 0 X 4 2 12 5 . 14 0 . 18 B2 2 X 0 0 0 0 0 X 2 X 1 1 5 2 8 X 0 X - 1 - 1 - 5 - 2 - 8 X - 2 . 83 0 . 19 C1 1 2 0 2 X 2 0 3 0 2 1 0 X 1 1 2 1 0 - 1 2 X 1 - 1 1 0 . 43 0 . 19 C2 0 X 1 X 4 0 X X 0 X 0 X 0 3 X X 0 X 1 X 4 - 3 X X 0 . 50 0 . 19 D1 5 4 0 0 0 0 X X 1 1 0 0 0 0 X X 4 3 0 0 0 0 X X 1 . 17 0 . 19 D2 3 3 1 1 0 0 X 3 1 1 2 0 3 0 X 0 2 2 - 1 1 - 3 0 X 3 0 . 57 0 . 19 E1 7 6 3 2 4 3 X 5 0 0 3 0 0 1 X 0 7 6 0 2 4 2 X 5 3 . 71 0 . 19 E2 2 5 X X 1 0 X 2 1 3 X X 2 1 X 0 1 2 X X - 1 - 1 X 2 0 . 60 0 . 17 F1 5 X 3 1 0 2 X X 2 X 1 1 0 1 X X 3 X 2 0 0 1 X X 1 . 20 0 . 12 F2 X X 2 2 1 4 X 1 X X 0 1 0 1 X 0 X X 2 1 1 3 X 1 1 . 60 0 . 03 ENGAGEMENT OCC DISENGAGEMENT OCC ENG - DISENG Only two subjects ( B1 , E1 ) completed 80 % or more of the sessions , meeting criteria for detailed video analysis . The characteristics of these two participants were as fol - lows : Participant B1 is a boy with severe ASD with some verbal communication ability . He can engage in some activities , and tends to be somewhat preoccupied with sharing his work with classmates . Participant E1 is a boy with severe ASD who is non - verbal and can communicate with others only through gestures and sounds . E1 generally dislikes sharing and cooperating with his peers . 1 . Are children with ASD engaged with the KIBO robot ? We found that most of the participants showed interest in the KIBO robot . Children with severe ASD typically experi - ence strong difﬁculties engaging , communicating , focusing on tasks and sharing with peers . However , there is evidence in this study that they engaged positively with the KIBO robot . The following lists include examples of engagement occurrences and disengagement occurrences . These obser - vations are taken verbatim from researchers’ observational notes during the study : • Engagement occurrences : • Holds KIBO from the beginning . Teacher helps him scan , the KIBO goes , He grins , high - ﬁves teacher . • Touching robot a lot , eyes looking at it . • Smiles at the box containing the robot parts and blocks . • Seems interested , wants to play with the pieces • Puts blocks away back in box when time to clean up ! • Asks questions actually pertaining to the activity • Disengagement occurrences : • Looking all over throughout , and at the observer . • Getting up and walking around . • Participant is putting blocks into the mouth , running around and grinning . • Disinterested even when teacher tries to engage him . • Not playing at all , sitting with head against the art platform in his hands . • Soon throwing things again . • Allovertheplace . Huggingtheobserver , notrespond - ing to teachers . Table 3 lists the frequency of engagement / disengagement events across all subjects and sessions . The table is divided into four sections . The ﬁrst section represents the num - ber engagement occurrences per session , the second section shows the disengagement occurrences , the third one , the calculated difference between engagements and disengage - ments and the fourth section lists the average number of occurrences per session and the normal distribution per child . With the information from the table we have plotted the distribution of engagement / disengagement events for the study population in Fig . 4 Modeled as a normal distribution , the maximum value is 5 , the minimum is − 3 , the average 0 . 92 , and the standard deviation 2 . 065 . On the basis of these results , we can observe that KIBO sessions tend to engage children with severe ASD and cogni - tive impairment slightly more than disengage them because the peak of the normal distribution is located at 1 . Although this result is not dramatic , it excludes strong disengagement which might be the expected outcome in light of the baseline proclivity towards disengagement that children in this popu - lation tend to demonstrate [ 1 , 2 ] . The latter was the case for only two subjects , A2 and B2 , who did not engage in any ses - 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Fig . 4 Normal Distribution of Engagement vs Disengagement with KIBO Robot sion . In addition , we can see that the two children analyzed in detail , B1 and E1 , show a predominance of engagement events across most sessions . 2 . Do children with severe ASD comprehend the purpose of KIBO ? Do children with ASD understand that program - ming blocks are not simply wooden building blocks ? Observations made on individual participants suggest that most participants recognized that the KIBO is an interactive toy and showed some appreciation of the role of the pro - gramming blocks . However , the level of understanding and retention of information was variable across subjects and ses - sions . For example : • Subject B1 appeared to understand how to put on and remove parts of the KIBO in sessions one and two . When successful , B1 became excited and “high ﬁves” others often . He appeared to enjoy experimenting and explor - ing with different parts and seeing where they ﬁt . He manipulated the robot often . On the following sessions , B1 was able to assemble a program with the blocks , but needs help scanning . However , by the last sessions it is unclear whether B1 actually understands what KIBO does—he likes playing with the blocks and stacking them on KIBO , manipulat - ing the parts , but does not know when a program requires him to clap , and still needs help scanning ( doesn’t wait for beep—keeps running the scanner left to right but KIBO isn’t capturing the code ) . 3 . Can children with severe ASD learn to code with KIBO ? Some but not all of the participants demonstrated coding abilities in the course of the week - long study , including more advanced capacities such as debugging . For example : • E1 is excited by KIBO and non - verbally expresses his excitement when the KIBO moves . E1 tried scanning from different heights on Day 2 . By Day 3 , E1 appears to truly understand the programming steps for KIBO . He puts together correct sequences of blocks ( although he tends to order them upside down / backwards—but still syntactically correct ) . He scans , rearranges blocks , and attempts to debug if something goes wrong . By Session 2 on Day 3 , E1 put together the KIBO body and its parts before anyone else . He is further engaging in imaginative play with KIBO , pretending it is on water , pretending it was ﬂying , sleeping when it shuts off , or that it is carrying bananas . 4 . Does KIBO help children in the study to understand the cause - effect order ? KIBO can be manipulated by children who have motor impairments . However to create a sequence to program KIBO , children have to interlock the wooden programming blocks by inserting a peg from one block into the hole of the next block in the sequence ( for reference see Image 1 ) . There was one child that understood that blocks should con - nect one next to the other one , but was unable to ﬁgure out that he should connect the blocks by placing the peg inside the next block’s hole . All children understood that pressing the green blinking button starts the KIBO , leading us to conclude that KIBO is very useful in helping them understand concepts like cause and effect . 5 . Does KIBO help to stimulate children to use their social skills with peers and adults ? Past research suggests children with ASD are more inclined to communicate with adults rather than peers [ 36 ] . The behavior of participants in this study were generally con - sistent with that observation . For example , PTD data indicates that E1 was always eager to share his work with the teacher or other adults in the room , but not as much with his peers . This could in part be due to his peers not being as engaged with KIBO as he was or because the communication with his peers was more difﬁcult than with adults . From the PTD checklist data , B1 received “0”’s for each session in every “cooperative behavior” category , indicating that he did not collaborate with classmates or share work with peers at all during the sessions . E1 was able to remain focused on the task at hand with KIBO throughout the week . However , E1 exhibited no improvement in social behavior when it came to collabo - rating with peers , helping to clean up , being respectful to 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Table 4 Lists the behavior correlations Gaze KIBO Gaze Human Affect Sharing KIBO manipulation Gaze Human 0 . 894 * * 1 0 . 541 − 0 . 045 Pointing Person 0 . 931 * 0 . 952 * 0 . 920 * − 0 . 075 Initiates conversation 0 . 690 0 . 894 * 0 . 553 0 . 740 Affect Sharing 0 . 569 0 . 541 1 0 . 188 Proximity 0 . 884 * * 0 . 763 * 0 . 304 0 . 224 Collaboration 0 . 669 * 0 . 552 0 . 611 − 0 . 007 Disengagement 0 . 705 * * 0 . 759 0 . 393 0 . 590 * * Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0 . 01 level ( 2 - tailed ) , * correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level ( 2 - tailed ) others , and using materials responsibly . E1 might have ben - eﬁted from the introduction of more collaborative activities when being taught to program KIBO ( i . e . one puts the blocks together , the other scans ) . Based on observational notes by researchers , E1 was pos - sessive of the KIBO and often did not want to share with his table - mate . He preferred to put pieces together on his own . Lack of sharing could have been due to the fact that each child was given their own KIBO kit rather than sharing kits , which perhaps would have made collaborating more of a requirement . In summary , the current study provided evidence of increased interaction with adults in attendance while playing with the KIBO , but did not provide evidence of increased peer interactions . 6 . How does the KIBO robot affect social and emotional behavior among children with ASD ? To help address this question , we performed quantitative analysis of the micro - behaviors of subjects B1 and E1 with the intention of explaining and validating the observed out - comes and also helping to direct further studies with this population . Since we are looking for linear relationships we chose to use Pearson r correlation . Correlation analysis suggests there was engagement on an individual level with the KIBO robot in these participants and that this had a relationship with social behaviors and social skills involved in related to adults more than peers . For example , Gaze KIBO was correlated with Gaze Human ( 0 . 894 ∗∗ ) , Pointing Person ( 0 . 931 ∗ ) , Affect Shar - ing ( 0 . 569 ) , Collaboration ( 0 . 669 ∗ ) and Disengagement ( 0 . 705 ∗∗ ) . While not all of these correlations were signif - icant at the 0 . 05 level , they all trended toward this “ p ” value . The Gaze KIBO variable was not correlated with the majority of the other variables examined . Speciﬁcally , Gaze KIBO was not correlated with mutual attention , group atten - tion , pointing KIBO , meaningful conversation , tangential , echolalia / scripting , initiates conversation , interrupts , turn taking , collaborative point , distractive behavior , ask for help , or independence . Gaze Human was positively correlated with Pointing Per - son ( 0 . 952 ∗ ) , Initiates Conversation ( 0 . 894 ∗ ) , and Proximity ( 0 . 763 ∗ ) . This indicates some baseline propensity towards interaction with others but is not necessarily reﬂective of an effect of the KIBO robot ( see Table 4 ) . 4 Discussion This study was inspired by previous work [ 3 , 7 , 8 ] suggest - ing that educational robotic platforms could create a context to stimulate children to use their social skills . Based on the qualitativeandquantitativeanalysesweperformed , itappears that children with severe ASD do engage with the KIBO in individual play . Participants did not appear to engage in col - laboration with their peers around KIBO . This could be due to various factors such as the physical set up of our play stations ( i . e . children facing each other rather than straight ahead ) [ 14 ] . Also , the activities were not designed to create a context of sharing the material , as we wanted to validate the usefulness of KIBO by itself . Designing activities for the spe - ciﬁc sharing purpose should increase sharing the materials [ 3 ] . From observations it is clear that that verbal participants performed better compared to non - verbal participants , per - haps because they were able to ask questions . This hypothesis is validated in studies such as [ 37 ] , in which authors observed that functional play was correlated signiﬁcantly with expres - sive language . After each session we talked to the teachers , and 100 % of them agreed that children performed better during the robotics sessions than in their regular classroom sessions . In fact , the robotics sessions were so highly regarded , that the teachers used robotics as a reward for motivating the children to perform better in the regular activities . This motivational effect can be considered a positive incidental ﬁnding of this study . KIBO is a platform conceived for introducing coding to children between 4 and 7years old inspired by the theories of constructionism and exploration . For these children with ASD , behavioral - basedactivitieswouldbemorecorrelatedto 123 International Journal of Social Robotics what they are accustomed to doing in the classroom because of the model that the CASPAN school follows , and in the regular every - day sessions in which the children are heavily instructed by teachers and follow a strict routine . We observed that ten of the 12 children ( 83 . 3 % ) engaged with KIBO in a variety of different set of activities ( free play , speciﬁc topic , guided ) , which is a good indicator of the poten - tial utility of this robotic platform . This is also supported by the quantitative analyses done with video - coding , which show that the children pointed at KIBO , gazed at KIBO , and manipulated KIBO relatively frequently . We observed saw a range of KIBO programming abili - ties in the participants . For example , participant B1 was able to learn programming concepts : putting sequences together with the wooden KIBO programming blocks and scanning them , while E1 was able to manipulate KIBO but did not demonstrate clear understanding of what he was doing and why . In general , the children appeared to thoroughly enjoy manipulating the KIBO parts and stacking the different blocks . This manipulation of parts is a very useful activity to engage the children and may help increase their ﬁne - motor skills . Children with ASD may beneﬁt from a different type of connecting system , perhaps a system that can complete the connection for them , such as magnets . When successful at programming correct sequences , chil - dren demonstrated happiness and excitement through ges - tures ( i . e . high ﬁves ) and exclamations ( i . e . “Mira ! Mira ! ” ) . Furthermore , the children appeared satisﬁed in instances when pressing KIBO “start” button led to the robot acting out a program they had scanned . From the qualitative and quantitative data , we can con - clude that participants tended to get excited about showing work and sharing accomplishments with adult teachers and researchers more than their peers . According to [ 36 ] , which focused on the interaction of children with ASD with adults and peers , children with ASD are more likely to initiate con - versations with adults rather than peers , and that is supported by what we have observed . Also , the cognitive and social skills of the peers affect the interaction , so placing a verbal child with a non - verbal child at the same table or workspace may decrease sharing and collaboration with the KIBO kit . Children with a very low cognitive level may not be able to engage in robotics activity . Also the lack of consistency between some correlations from session to session is an indi - cator of how inﬂuential a mood or mental state can be during a particular session . 5 Limitations and Lessons Learned Based on data from this pilot case study we can conclude that KIBO can be a suitable tool for children with ASD because it engages the children and can exert a motivating inﬂuence . We can further conclude that KIBO creates a context that triggers curiosity . Notably , we did not observe these behaviors with children with severe ASD activities using the LEGO Mind - storms robotics kit . Unlike other programming tools , KIBO is a robot speciﬁcally designed for young children and does not require a computer . Therefore , this study deserves more in - depth research with ASD population . Thereareseverallimitationstothecurrentstudy . Thenum - ber of participants in this pilot study is small and it is not a representative sample of children with ASD . In particular , the study did not include children with milder forms of ASD or sample the full range of abilities associated with ASD . Some children with ASD have special talents in mathematics , art and other areas that make them truly unique . In a rare form of ASD , the so - called “savant syndrome” people surpass nor - mal expectations in their abilities and may be geniuses in speciﬁc areas [ 38 ] . Instead , this study focused on the more commonly observed range of aptitudes seen in community centers and schools such as the one in Panama where the data was collected . The quality of the video data obtained was sufﬁcient for the purpose of this study . However , only one camera angle was collected for each pair of students and the children that were the subject of each session were not always in the cam - era’s focus . This video documentation is adequate but not ideal for video analysis . In addition , there were limitations in video data collected due to participant absences that resulted in our being able to quantitatively analyze only two of our participants . This study does not have a control group . Perhaps future studies will compare the KIBO interaction sessions with these neuro - diverse children to video available from neuro - typical children interacting with the KIBO robot . However , there is currently no available video where participants are under exactly the same conditions as the present study . We ran two robotics sessions per day for four consecu - tive days . However , children with ASD are very inﬂuenced by other variables in their lives ( i . e . how they slept , what happened in the school just before the activity , etc . ) . These variables can have a profound effect on their performance in school and social activities . Therefore , when children were absent for one full day , we did not have their data for 25 % of the duration of the study . In the future , it may be bene - ﬁcial to have a longer duration as seen in [ 14 ] . Regarding the analysis of the socials skills of each child , and taking into account [ 36 ] , we should consider multiple sessions matching every child with children with different socials and cognitive levels . In the future , it may be worth giving children clearly deﬁned roles when trying to get them to collaborate and work together ( i . e . participant A will put together the blocks in a sequence , and participant B will scan and press the button ) . 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Although further adaptations and study will be needed before the KIBO robot can be recommended for use in this population , these results are promising and encourage fur - ther investigation . A future study may include a longer - term period of observation , comparing different types of activities , and introducing small add - ons or changes to the platform to facilitate more successful manipulation and understanding . Acknowledgements This research project is funded by NSF Grant No . DRL - 1118897 and the Government of Panama , as well as a Tufts Uni - versity FRAC Grant . Compliance with ethical standards Conﬂict of interest The authors declared that they have no conﬂict of interest . Appendix 1 See Table 5 . Table 5 Micro - behaviors for video coding Micro - behavior Description Category Gaze KIBO Participant maintains gaze on KIBO > 1 s Non - verbal communication Gaze human Participant maintains gaze on face / eye > 1 s , not reciprocated Mutual attention Mutual eye contact between participant and another person Group attention Groupmates jointly look at same object Pointing KIBO Hand / ﬁnger / arms directed to KIBO Pointing Person Hand / ﬁnger / arms directed to person Meaningfulconversation Meaningful , in relation to activity Verbal communication Tangentialconversation Non - meaningful relative to activity Echolalia / scripting Repetitive phrases Initiatesconversation Participant begins talking to another person Responds Participant responds to conversation started by others Table 5 continued Micro - behavior Description Category Interrupts Participantverbally / non - verbally interrupts another person Turn taking Participants takes turns in activity with one or more other persons Construction / Dynamics Collaboration Participant takes part in negotiation , sharing , asking for opinion of others Affect Sharing Participant shares positive affect with at least one other person Proximity Participant is within 100 cm of another person Distractivebehavior Participant disrupts activities of group mates ( not conversation ) Askhelp / permission from Adult Participants seeks out adult input Collaboration Participant puts KIBO together with another student Independence Participant puts KIBO together alone Disengagement Participant is not focused on KIBO KIBOmanipulation Participant is actively attempting to manipulate KIBO KIBO access Participant has access to KIBO Appendix 2 See Table 6 . Table 6 Modiﬁed PTD engagement checklist for ASD Scoring criteria 0 : Particular behavior not observed . Task not complete 1 : Needed almost complete or complete support 2 : Needed moderate support , but partially independent 3 : Needed almost no or no support Tasks / behaviors Score Category Students take directions from teacher ( e . g . sits when told ) 0 1 2 3 Communication 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Table 6 continued Tasks / behaviors Score Category Students responds back to the teacher ( answering questions… ) 0 1 2 3 Student initiates relevant communication with teacher 0 1 2 3 Student shares their work with teachers 0 1 2 3 Cooperative behavior Student shares their work with classmates 0 1 2 3 Student helps to clean up at the end of the session 0 1 2 3 Student can create a functional program for their robot 0 1 2 3 Content creation Student is enthusiastic / interested about their project / creation 0 1 2 3 Student persists in spite of obstacles or setbacks 0 1 2 3 Student can put KIBO blocks together 0 1 2 3 Student can scan the code 0 1 2 3 Student is playing / exploring different KIBO parts , blocks 0 1 2 3 Creativity Student is exploring in unexpected ways 0 1 2 3 Student is having fun as they work on their projects 0 1 2 3 Student is focused on the activity chooses to engage with it 0 1 2 3 Choice of conduct Student is able to focus on the task 0 1 2 3 Student is respectful to peers and teachers 0 1 2 3 Student are using materials and resources responsibly 0 1 2 3 References 1 . AmericanPsychiatricAssociation ( 1987 ) Diagnosticandstatistical manual of the mental disorders . DSM - III - R , 107 – 109 2 . Sicile - Kira C ( 2004 ) Autism spectrum disorders : a complete guide to understanding autism , asperger syndrome , pervasive develop - mental disorder and other ASDs . The Berkley Publishing Group , New York 3 . Wainer J , Ferrari E , Dautenhahn K , Robins B ( 2010 ) The effective - ness of using a robotics class to foster collaboration among groups of children with autism in an exploratory study . Pers Ubiquitous Comput 14 : 45 – 455 4 . http : / / www . autistec . com 5 . Ben R , Dautenhahn K , Te Boekhorst R , Billard A ( 2005 ) Robotic assistants in therapy and education of children with autism : can a small humanoid robot help encourage social interaction skills ? Univ Access Inf Soc 4 ( 2 ) : 105 – 120 6 . Werry I , Dautenhahn K , Harwin W ( 2001 ) Investigating a robot as a therapy partner for children with autism . Procs AAATE 7 . Reichow B , Volkmar FR ( 2009 ) Social skills interventions for indi - viduals with autism : evaluation for evidence - based practiceswithin a best evidence synthesis frameworkD . J Autism Dev Disord 40 ( 2 ) : 149 – 166 8 . Dautenhahn K , Werry I , Rae J , Dickerson P , Stribling P , Ogden B ( 2002 ) Robotic playmates : analysing interactive competencies of children with autism playing with a mobile robot . In : Dautenhahn K , Bond A , Canamero L , Edmonds B ( eds ) Socially intelligent agents – creating relationships with computers and robots . Multia - gent systems , artiﬁcial societies , and simulated organizations , vol 3 . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Kluwer , pp 117 – 124 9 . LeGoff DB ( 2004 ) Use of LEGO as a therapeutic medium for improving social competence . J Autism Dev Disord 5 : 557 – 571 10 . LeGoff DB , Sherman M ( 2006 ) Long - term outcome of social skills intervention based on interactive LEGO play . Autism 10 : 317 – 329 11 . Owens G , Granader Y , Humphrey A ( 2008 ) LEGO therapy and the socialuse of language programme : an evaluation of two social skills interventions for children with high functioning autism and Asperger syndrome . J Autism Dev Disord 38 : 1944 – 1957 12 . Albo - Canals J , Heerink M , Diaz M , Padillo V , Maristany M , Barco A , Angulo C , Riccio A , Brodsky L , Dufresne S , Heilbron S ( 2013 ) ComparingtwoLEGOrobotics - basedinterventionsforsocialskills training with children with ASD . InRO - MAN , 2013 IEEE 2013 Aug 26 . IEEE , pp 638 – 643 13 . Ferrari E , Ben R , Dautenhahn K ( 2009 ) Therapeutic and educa - tional objectives in robot assisted play for children with autism . In : The 18th IEEE international symposium on robot and human inter - active communication , 2009 , RO - MAN 2009 . IEEE , pp 108 – 114 14 . DautenhahnK , WerryI ( 2004 ) Towardsinteractiverobotsinautism therapy : background , motivation and challenges . Pragmat Cognit 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 35 15 . Sanson F , Aguirre G , Mejia M , Lopez V , Albo - Canals J ( 2016 ) LEGOroboticsactivitiesfeederforsocialroboticsthroughacloud - based architecture . In : Proceedings of international conference on social robotics in therapy and education - new friends , 2016 , Barcelona , Spain 16 . Albo - Canals J , Feerst D , de Cordoba D , Rogers C ( 2015 ) A cloud roboticsystembasedonrobotcompanionsforchildrenwithautismspectrumdisorderstoperformevaluationsduringLEGOengineer - ing workshops . In : Proceedings of the tenth annual ACM / IEEE international conference on human – robot interaction extended abstracts 2015 Mar 2 . ACM , pp 173 – 174 17 . Bers MU ( 2017 ) Coding as a playground : programming and com - putational thinking in the early childhood classroom , vol 39 . Routledge Press , London 18 . Bers MU , Flannery LP , Kazakoff ER , Sullivan A ( 2014 ) Compu - tational thinking and tinkering : exploration of an early childhood robotics curriculum . Comput Educ 72 : 145 – 157 19 . Bers MU , Seddighin S , Sullivan A ( 2013 ) Ready for robotics : bringing together the T and E of STEM in early childhood teacher education . J Technol Teach Educ 21 ( 3 ) : 355 – 377 20 . ElkinM , SullivanA , BersMU ( 2014 ) Implementingaroboticscur - riculum in an early childhood Montessori classroom . J Inf Technol Educ Innov Pract 13 : 153 – 169 21 . Flannery LP , Bers MU ( 2013 ) Let’s dance the " Robot Hokey - Pokey ! " : children’s programming approaches and achievement throughout early cognitive development . J Res Technol Educ 46 ( 1 ) : 81 – 101 22 . SullivanA , BersMU ( 2013 ) Genderdifferencesinkindergarteners’ robotics and programming achievement . Int J Technol Des Educ 23 ( 3 ) : 691 – 702 23 . Sullivan A , Bers MU ( 2015 ) Robotics in the early childhood class - room : Learning outcomes from an 8 - week robotics curriculum in pre - kindergarten through second grade . Int J Technol Des Educ ( online ﬁrst ) 24 . Bers MU ( 2014 ) Tangible kindergarten : learning how to program robots in early childhood . In : Sneider CI ( ed ) The go - to guide for engineering curricula PreK - 5 : choosing and using the best instruc - 123 International Journal of Social Robotics tional materials for your students . Corwin , Thousand Oaks , pp 133 – 145 25 . KazakoffE , SullivanA , BersMU ( 2013 ) Theeffectofaclassroom - based intensive robotics and programming workshop on sequenc - ing ability in early childhood . Early Child Educ J 41 ( 4 ) : 245 – 255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10643 - 012 - 0554 - 5 26 . Kazakoff ER , Bers MU ( 2014 ) Put your robot in , put your robot out : sequencing through programming robots in early childhood . J Educ Comput Res 50 ( 4 ) : 553 – 573 27 . Sullivan A , Elkin M , Bers MU ( 2015 ) KIBO robot demo : engaging young children in programming and engineering . In : Proceedings of the 14th international conference on interaction design and chil - dren ( IDC ’15 ) . ACM , Boston , MA , USA 28 . Strawhacker AL , Bers MU ( 2014 ) " I want my robot to look for food " : comparing children’s programming comprehension using tangible , graphical , and hybrid user interfaces . Int J Technol Des Educ . ( advance online publication ) 29 . ElkinM , SullivanA , BersMU ( 2016 ) ProgrammingwiththeKIBO robotics kit in Preschool Classrooms . Comput Sch 33 ( 3 ) : 169 – 186 30 . Lee K , Sullivan A , Bers MU ( 2013 ) Collaboration by design : using robotics to foster social interaction in Kindergarten . Comput Sch 30 ( 3 ) : 271 – 281 31 . SullivanA , BersMU ( 2017 ) Dancingrobots : integratingart , music , and robotics in Singapore’s early childhood centers . Int J Technol Des Educ . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10798 - 017 - 9397 - 0 32 . Bers MU ( 2012 ) Designing digital experiences for positive youth development : from playpen to playground . Oxford , Cary 33 . Heerink M , Díaz M , Albo - Canals J , Angulo C , Barco A , Casacu - bertaJ , GarrigaC ( 2012 ) Aﬁeldstudywithprimaryschoolchildren on perception of social presence and interactive behavior with a pet robot . In : RO - MAN , 2012 IEEE . IEEE , pp 1045 – 1050 34 . Friard O , Gamba M ( 2016 ) BORIS : a free , versatile open - source event - logging software for video / audio coding and live obser - vations . Methods Ecol Evol 7 ( 11 ) : 1324 – 1330 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 2041 - 210X . 12584 35 . Mazzone L , Vitiello B ( 2016 ) Psychiatric symptoms and comor - bidities in autism spectrum disorder . Springer , Switzerland 36 . Hauck M , Fein D , Waterhouse L , Feinstein C ( 1995 ) Social Initi - ations by autistic children to adults and other children . J Autism Dev Disord 25 : 579 – 95 37 . Lewis JB , Lupton L , Watson VS ( 2000 ) Relationships between symbolic play , functional play , verbal and non - verbal ability in young children . Int J Lang Commun Disord 35 ( 1 ) : 117 – 127 38 . Happé F , Vital P ( 2009 ) What aspects of autism predispose to tal - ent ? Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 364 ( 1522 ) : 1369 – 1375 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2008 . 0332 39 . Valenzuela E , Barco A , Albo - Canals J ( 2015 ) Learning social skills through LEGO - based social robots for children with autism spectrum disorder at CASPAN center in Panama . In : Proceed - ings of international conference on social robotics in therapy and education—new friends 2015 , Almere , The Neatherlands 40 . Dautenhahn K , Werry I ( 2002 ) A quantitative technique for analysing robot - human interactions . In : IEEE / RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems , vol 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / IRDS . 2002 . 1043883 41 . Sullivan A , Kazakoff ER , Bers MU ( 2013 ) The wheels on the bot go round and round : robotics curriculum in pre - kindergarten . J Inf Technol Educ Innov Pract 12 : 203 – 219 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris - dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations . Jordi Albo - Canals received the M . Sc . degree in Electrical Engineer from La Salle—Ramon Llull University , Spain in 2003 , and the Ph . D . in Mechatronics , Robotics , and Automation Engineering from La Salle—Ramon Llull University , Barcelona , Spain in 2012 . From 2003 to 2017 he has been an Associate Professor at La Salle BCN— Ramon Llull University , Spain . From 2012 to 2016 He has been the Robotics Director at La Salle Almere , Netherlands . From 2014 to 2015 AlboCanals was a visiting professor at Tufts University , Boston , US , and since 2015 he is an afﬁliate researcher at Tufts University— CEEO lab . Since 2016 he is co - leading the Robotics Initiative at everis - NTT DATA , Spain . Since 2017 he is the CSO of the Boston Exponen - tial Hub in Boston at NTT DATA Corp and An Afﬁliate Researcher at Personal Robots Group at MIT Media Lab , Boston , US . He is inter - ested about promoting the enhancement of learning through robotics and the potential beneﬁts of having personal robots to improve the quality of life of people . Alexandre Barco Martelo ( Ph . D . , 2017 , La Salle—Universitat Ramon Llull ) is a postdoctoral researcher at the Amsterdam School of Com - munication Research ( ASCoR ) at the University of Amsterdam . He is studying the potential effects of the interaction between children and social robots . Within the Center for research on Children , Adoles - cents , and the Media ( CcaM ) at ASCoR , Alexandre Barco Martelo is involved in the project “CHILDROBOT : Children and social robots : Toward an integrative framework” , which is funded by the European Research Council . Prior to joining the Amsterdam School of Com - munication Research , Alexandre Barco Martelo worked as a Research and Teaching Associate in the Electronics Department at the La Salle— Universitat Ramon Llull . where he participated in interdisciplinary research on social robots for children with disabilities . Emily Relkin is doctoral candidate in the Department of Child Study and Human Development at Tufts University and a member of the DevTech Research Group . Her research involves the assessment of computational thinking abilities in young children using the KIBO robotics platform . Daniel Hannon received an Sc . M . degree in Psychology from Brown University , Providence , RI , USA , in 1988 and later a Ph . D . in 1991 . He also has earned an M . S . degree in Counseling from the Southern New Hampshire University in 2008 . He has worked in Engineering Psychology for over 25 years , with one of his focus areas being edu - cational technology and applications to the treatment of children with special needs . In 1996 he became the Director of Educational Tech - nology in Woburn , MA , USA , and from 2000—present has been a Professor of the Practice in the ﬁeld of Engineering Psychology and Human Factors in the Mechanical Engineering Department at Tufts University . He presently creates technology - based programs for devel - oping social skills in children with autism spectrum disorders ( ASDs ) . Marcel Heerink his M . Sc . degree at Groningen University , the Nether - lands , specializing in psycholinguistics and his Ph . D . in Interactive Systems at the University of Amsterdam , specializing in human – robot interaction . Since 2012 he is an associate professor at Windesheim Flevoland University of Applied Sciences in Almere , The Netherlands . He leads a research group that specializes on social robots in care and education , mostly directed towards individuals with special needs , like people with dementia , children with autism and long term hospitalized children . His research focusses on the therapeutic and educational per - spectives of human – robot relationships and the associated ethical and philosophical issues . 123 International Journal of Social Robotics Martina Heinemann received her M . Sc . in experimental physics from the University of Paderborn , Germany , in 1987 and her Ph . D . in com - putational physics from the Technical University Berlin , Germany , in 1991 for her work in Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics performed at the Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society , Berlin , Ger - many . After having held varied positions in research and teaching she became lecturer in Engineering at the Windesheim University of Applied Sciences at Almere , The Netherlands , in 2010 and joined their Robotics Research group in 2014 . Her main interests lie in machine learning , social robotics with an emphasis on the application of robots in care and education , and the ethical implications of robotics . Kaitlyn Leidl is a Human Factors Engineer with experience in educa - tion , user experience design , and product development . She received her M . S . degree in Human Factors Engineering from Tufts University , where she also worked as the Program Coordinator and Lab Man - ager for the DevTech Research Group in the Eliot - Pearson Department of Child Study and Human Development . In this role , Kaitlyn coor - dinated outreach and research to explore how children interact with various forms of technology , and how these interactions can enhance their educational experience . In her research endeavors , Kaitlyn strives to better understand the perspective of the user to inform the design of intuitive and innovative tools . MarinaUmaschiBers , Ph . D . is a professor at the Eliot - Pearson Depart - ment of Child Study and Human Development and the Computer Sci - ence Department at Tufts University . She heads the interdisciplinary DevTech research group . Her research involves the design and study of innovative learning technologies to promote positive youth devel - opment . Over the past decade and a half , Dr . Bers has conceived , designed and evaluated diverse educational technologies ranging from robotics to virtual worlds . Most recently Dr . Bers has focused her research on technological environments for young children , 4 – 7year old . Dr . Bers has received several grants that allowed her to develop and research such technologies . Both of those , the KIBO robotic kit and the ScratchJr programming language , have left the academy and are available to the wide public . ScratchJr is a free programmming app and KIBO is being commercialized by KinderLab Robotics , Inc , a company she co - founded in 2013 . Dr . Bers received a Master’s degree in Educational Media from Boston University and a Master of Science and Ph . D . from the MIT Media Laboratory working with Seymour Papert . 123