September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 International Journal of Innovation Management Vol . 12 , No . 3 ( Sept . 2008 ) pp . 295 – 325 © Imperial College Press INTERMEDIARIES , USERS AND SOCIAL LEARNING IN TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION JAMES STEWART Institute for the Study of Science Technology and Innovation , University of Edinburgh Edinburgh , EH1 1LZ , UK j . k . stewart @ ed . ac . uk SAMPSA HYYSALO Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies University of Helsinki , Helsinki , Finland sampsa . hyysalo @ helsinki . ﬁ This paper explores the role of intermediaries in the development and appropriation of new technologies . We focus on intermediaries that facilitate user innovation , and the linking of user innovation into supply side activities . We review ﬁndings on intermediaries in some of our studies and other available literature to build a framework to explore of how intermediaries work in making innovation happen . We make sense of these processes by taking a long - term view of the dynamics of technology and market development using the social learning in technological innovation ( SLTI ) framework . Our primary concern is with innovation intermediaries and their core roles of conﬁguring , facilitating and brokering technologies , uses and relationships in uncertain and emerging markets . We show the range of positions and inﬂuence they have along the supply - use axis in a number of different innovation contexts , and how they are able to bridge the user - developer innovation domains . Equipped with these insights , we explore in more depth how intermediaries affect the shape of new information and communication technologies and the importance of identifying and nurturing the user - side intermediaries that are crucial to innovation success . Keywords : Intermediaries ; social learning ; innovation ; users . Introduction Innovation around the Internet in the last few years has stimulated considerable interest in the role of users and user - communities in innovation processes . These currents have resonated with ideas such as “open innovation” among networks of innovating ﬁrms . As the research community is trying to come to terms with these 295 September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 296 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo emerging trends , we argue that it can very usefully learn from earlier work on ICT - innovation , the role of users in innovation and the activities of intermediaries in linking of users into supply - side innovation . There is a huge range of intermediate actors working in between the develop - ers of technologies and their eventual users who do not ﬁt in to conventionally opposed categories such as “producer” and “consumer” or “developer” and “user” . These intermediaries include retailers , media companies , telecom platform opera - tors , advertising agencies , market research agencies , distributors and management consultancies . 1 ( Bessant and Rush , 1995 ; Howells , 2006 ) . These actors are key players in what new sociology of markets ( Callon , 1998 ; MacKenzie , 2006 ) calls an “economy of qualities” by which the needs and desires of consumers are shaped and products adjusted ( Callon et al . , 2002 ) . This shaping — say between the early demos of pop - music artist and the song in the stereos of his eventual audience — in many ways constitutes technology through packaging , distributing , assembling , quality assurance and testing and branding . Likewise , the “consumer” is shaped by intermediary actors involved in segmenting , persuading , selling , advising , study - ing and regulating the consumption and in doing so , creating attachment to con - sumed items , for instance to a branded juice bottle coming from particular orange grove . Instead of an “invisible hand” , it is these very tangible networks that are recently raised to the fore as being able to shape , respond to and maintain seem - ingly abstract characteristics such as styles and tastes ( Hennion , 1989 ; Callon et al . , 2002 ) . However , innovation studies are particularly interested in new types of products and novel uses , and not just rather stabilised markets and products such as orange juice and pop - music . The complexity of intermediation in innovation networks tends to be underestimated by both practitioners and socio - economic research alike ( Stewart , 2007 ) . A major problem with knitting together these networks is that the players involved often have very little previous contact with and understanding of the situations of other players in a nascent market . This can be especially acute between technology developers and the eventual customers and users of the systems . In such uncertain markets , intermediaries play a crucial role , but the mechanisms and contexts of their mediation can be fragile and difﬁcult to predict ( Russell and Williams , 2002 ; Hyysalo , 2004 ; Williams et al . , 2005 ) . In this paper , we focus on these types of settings and actors we term innova - tion intermediaries : actors who create spaces and opportunities for appropriation and generation of emerging technical or cultural products by others who might be 1 And equally venture capitalists , lawyers , trade associations , promotional agencies , export agencies , standards agencies , regulatory agencies and so on . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 297 described as developers and users . The aim of this paper is to give a framework for addressing the question on how new markets and networks are formed between suppliers and users in the development and implementation of new technologies , at times when existing intermediary institutions may not have relevant expertise or interest . We do this by reviewing the literature on intermediaries and an illustrative review of some of our case studies . We proceed by ﬁrst giving some background on how innovation intermediaries are currently understood , and then outline our social learning in technological inno - vation ( SLTI ) approach that highlights the importance of use and innovation by users in multi - cycle , multi - level innovation processes . We then map some of the typical intermediaries operating between supply and use , discuss the roles inter - mediaries play in the shaping of new technology and how they are in turn shaped . In the ﬁnal sections of the paper , we use SLTI insights on the crucial differences that are in user - involvement in a range of innovation contexts and discuss what this entails for the role and identiﬁcation of intermediaries . We emphasise how the emergence of appropriate intermediaries is in itself a key part of the overall socio - technical innovation process and user involvement . We equally stress how some of the crucial intermediaries tend to occupy a fragile position that requires nurturing and protection . Innovation Intermediaries Innovation intermediaries can be identiﬁed by their engagement in activities in which they gather , develop , control and disseminate knowledge , collect and dissem - inate ﬁnancial , technical and institutional resources such as the support of users and sponsors , and attempt to regulate uses , developments , participation and the actions of others in the innovation networks . The extent to which they do this depends on their own access to resources and their connections in the “constellation” of actors associated with a particular project or emerging market . These intermediaries can be organisations , or individuals grounded in an institutional , technical and often physical context that facilitates their activities . They attempt to conﬁgure the users , the context , the technology and the “content” , but they do not , and cannot deﬁne and control use or the technology . Two crucial features of the environment that innovation intermediaries engage with are : ( 1 ) the unpredictability of technological change , market organisation and user uptake and ( 2 ) an absence of existing linkages between potential users and suppliers that need to be created in order or innovation to occur and be sustained . Research on intermediary organisations in innovation such as consultants and other technology brokers has been developed since the early 1990s ( Bessant and September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 298 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo Rush , 1995 ; Hargadon and Sutton , 1997 ) . 2 During this period , models of innovation were rapidly changing from fairly linear ones to ones emphasising uncertainty , shifts and the complex interactions between multiple actors that comprised the iterative series of developments jointly resulting in innovation ( Freeman , 1979 ; Kline and Rosenberg , 1986 ; Williams and Edge , 1996 ; Van de Ven et al . , 1999 ) . The changes in the models were spurred by the growing body of ﬁndings about user initiated innovation ( e . g . , Pavitt , 1984 ; von Hippel , 1988 ) and the continued innovation in use ( e . g . , Rosenberg , 1982 ; Gardiner and Rothwell , 1985 ) . Analyses of the then relatively new and rapidly evolving ﬁelds of robotics and computerised manufacturing technology showed that the talk of diffusion of generic systems matched poorly with the extensive adaptations and further developments done by adopter organisations ( Fleck , 1988 ; 1994 ; Bessant and Rush , 1995 ) . In short , when the producer company lost its position as the privileged source of innovation , it became urgent to understand how the knowledge from a range of actors ﬂowed into the innovation process . Consequently , the activities and roles of various intermediary organisations such as consultancies , state development agencies etc . , have received attention in various literatures , including innovation management ( e . g . , Hargadon and Sutton , 1997 ; McEvily and Zaheer , 1999 ) , literature on innovation systems ( e . g . , Stankiewicz , 1995 ) and science and technology studies ( Procter and Williams , 1996 ; Van der Meulen and Rip , 1998 ; Callon et al . , 2002 ) . This interest has also been spurred by the development and growth of knowledge intensive business services ( KIBS ) that play important intermediary roles ( Howells , 2006 ) . Diffusion studies have stressed the importance of change agents and opinion leaders in the diffusion of innovations ( Attewell , 1992 ; Rogers , 2003 ) , and emphasise the work these actors do in tailoring and adjusting the innovation to different audiences and promoting re - inventions that make it more appealing for each particular audience ( Rogers , 2003 ) . From a more generic perspective , social network studies have also begun to show the importance of network “bridgers” in not only transferring knowledge across structural holes in networks , but as an important source of innovation themselves ( Burt , 2004 ) . 2 We chose to use the concept of intermediary as it has become an established term in the literatures on innovation and organisational studies ( e . g . , Bessant and Rush , 1995 ; Howells , 2006 ) and deployed also in science and technology studies ( e . g . , Hennion , 1989 ) . Throughout our discussion , we empha - size how these intermediaries change intent , meaning and form of technology through their acts of mediating it between various actors . In this capacity , they are mediators in a sense described by Latour ( 2005 ) , who uses the term intermediary to denote actors who do not change knowledge or object that simply ﬂows through it . This discrepancy in usage between certain actor network literature and most other literature is unfortunate but there is not much that can be done about it anymore . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 299 However , to our knowledge there are few studies and frameworks that address in detail the whole range of intermediaries and intermediation that transform tech - nologies , uses and qualities in both use and development domains , and explicate the bridges and gaps that exist in different ecologies of intermediation between design and uses . National innovation systems literature aims at this ( Lundvall and Johans - son , 1994 ; Stankiewitz , 1995 ) , but only at a fairly coarse granularity , and without analysis of the detailed processes of the learning economy and the substance of this learning ( Miettinen , 2002 ; Stewart and Williams , 2005 ) . We thus turn to the SLTI framework that allows us to explore in more detailed fashion the dynamics through which intermediaries affect ICT innovation in differ - ent socio - economic contexts and constellations of actors with different capabilities , commitments , cultures and contexts ( Williams et al . , 2005 ) . The framework directly addresses situations of high uncertainties and information asymmetries involved in “choosing” or “creating” the right intermediaries for inventive technologies or new groups of users . There is simply more at stake than enabling or preventing the technology from diffusing from suppliers to users . Social Learning in Technological Innovation SLTI is a relatively recent approach developed out of the tradition of “social shap - ing of technology” approach ( Williams and Edge , 1996 ; MacKenzie and Wajcman , 1999 ) by combining it with insights from other research ﬁelds . 3 The development of new technology is characterised as an uncertain process , characterised by complex - ity , contingency and choice ( Williams and Edge , 1996 ) . It places particular design episodes within multiple , overlapping cycles of development and implementation ( Rip et al . , 1995 ) , focusing on understanding the coupling between technological and social change , and the difﬁcult and contested processes of learning that are integral to innovation . This analytical framework is socio - technical , and accounts for both technologi - cal innovation , and the processes of negotiation and interaction that occur between diverse networks of players attempting to make technologies work — “ﬁtting them into the pre - existing heterogenous network of machines , systems , routines and cul - ture” ( Sørensen , 1996 ) . 3 SLTI draws on a range of research ﬁelds : cultural studies of artefacts and marketing , engaging with the consumption of goods and services ; innovation studies stressing non - linear and heterogeneous innovation processes ; and work on organisational learning and the reﬂexive activities of players in the innovation process . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 300 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo Many contemporary technologies , particularly ICTs , are not discrete self - contained systems , but “conﬁgurations” , consisting of layers of components , systems , applications and content , bringing with them partially formed routines , concepts of users and uses , rules for use and other non - technical features . Fitting the existing and the new together involves often long and drawn out relationship building and stop - start processes of institutional learning and forgetting that occur across a constantly changing network of actors . To understand these processes , the SLTI approach draws together a range of generic mechanisms in which we see learning - though - innovating occurring : learning - by - doing and using in the often trial - and - error processes of appropri - ating new technologies ( Arrow , 1962 ; Rosenberg , 1982 ) ; learning - by - interacting ( Lundvall , 1988 ; Cornish , 1997 ) , as new technologies bring diverse networks of players together ; and learning - by - regulating ( Sørensen , 1996 ) , as particular players attempt to assert their power though non - technical rules and regulations shaping the “rules of the game” from everyday use to state policy . These processes — and more detailed learning dynamics within them — not only shape technology , but can have a dramatic effect on the structure of the innovating network , the consti - tution of the organisations involved , and the identities of the actors ( Hasu , 2001 ; Russell and Williams , 2002 ; Hyysalo , 2006 ) . Many of these actors and institutions are end and intermediate users , and other societal actors such as governmental and non - commercial institutions . SLTI stresses the importance of giving more detailed accounts of how these actors play key roles in innovation in the long term . The SLTI approach is thus not a narrowly cognitive , social or modelling pro - cess , and the term “social learning” is used in a very different way to its usage in education and social psychology such as that of Bandura ( 1977 ) . In the socio - technical usage , social learning denotes the reﬂexive yet often negotiated , complex and “political” processes in transforming environment , instrumentation and work , that reach beyond single groups of actors . This usage also differs from more generic conceptions of social learning in evolutionary economics ( e . g . , Wolfe and Gertler , 2002 ) , where learning tends to be taken as an explanatory term for growth in learn - ing economy ( Lundvall and Johansson , 1994 ) without its micro - scale mechanisms and social dynamics being examined ( von Hippel and Tyre , 1995 ; Miettinen , 2002 ) . Central to the innovation processes identiﬁed in SLTI are the creation and evo - lution of representations of users and uses , and their translation into technological designs and social actions . These processes are fundamental in shaping design and relationships in the constellation of actors . Far from being solely an up - front “user needs and requirements capture” process conducted by designers , creation of these representations continues throughout multiple generations of product development . The “user” is a complex idea : on the one hand , it is a category used by engineers and developers to refer to those who may eventually use their systems , and on the other September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 301 hand , it can refer to a range of other individuals and institutions , imagined and real , some of which begin to develop various kinds of engagement with a technology over time . There are many different “users” : intermediate users , end users and proxy users , all of whom can play more or less active roles in articulating their own requirements , and in the creative process . The ability and willingness of developers to engage with these users , and for users to engage creatively with developers is thus central to success , but often extraordinarily difﬁcult . We use the term intermediate users to refer to a particular sort of intermediary organisations that adopts a technology for their customers or employees ( but generally involving a relatively few individuals within that organisation ) . Examples are mobile phone operators , banks , retailers who sell a service based on a technological system to end users , and any ﬁrm adopting a system to be used by their employees . A subset of these are innovative “content developers” or content service providers , for example , a service provider such as a broadcaster or publisher offers both a delivery platform and added content for end users . These organisations can be seen as supply - side or demand side within an evolving market according to the particular case and particular point in the innovation and implementation process . Studies of innovation clearly show that there is a whole range of innovation activ - ities that take part on the user side , particular in early moments of technological change and adoption . Even with comparatively stable technologies and use situa - tions , there can still be innovation by users . Thus , the SLTI approach highlights that many activities and situations that are not conventionally included in the deﬁnition Design / Development Use Final use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Supply Use in development Design in use Fig . 1 . To account for the users in innovation we need to clarify how they are positioned between primary supply organisations and primary user organisations of a given technology as well as in regards to developing and using ( adapted from Williams et al . , 2005 ) . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 302 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo of innovation , are in fact important moments in innovation cycles . This conceptu - alisation of the role of users in the innovation processes involves moving the focus of innovation studies from the supply - side towards the demand - side . In particular , we need to examine how constellations of players , intermediaries and intermediate and ﬁnal users , constitute the demand side in the early stages of innovation . This includes examining how they develop uses for technologies and their role in feed - ing back their experience , practice and innovation to the supply side over multiple long - term innovation cycles . Mapping Intermediaries Between Supply and Use Howells ( 2006 ) describes the range of different players that mediate various aspects of innovation . Bessant and Rush ( 1995 ) go further by elaborating how the range of consultants between suppliers and users of automated manufacturing technology ( AMT ) each had somewhat different competencies , motives , pricing , clientele and the niche that they occupied in this innovation context . None covered the range and depth of functions that met the needs in emerging areas of innovation . In a similar fashion , Hargadon and Sutton ( 1997 ) show how the knowledge - brokering role and industry position of design consultancy IDEO changed as it accumulated more know - how about different industries . Before moving deeper into the intricacies in the positioning of various inter - mediaries , let us tentatively sketch some typical intermediaries and their position between supply and use . Figure 2 illustrates the differences in proﬁles and in consequent mediating capac - ity of intermediaries . Some intermediaries , such as maintenance organisations and Design / Development Use Final use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Supply Fig . 2 . The niches of some common types of intermediaries between supply and ﬁnal use . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 303 technicians , have long “reach” between supply and use but may be fairly limited in terms of content they cover . ( in the ﬁgure marked by A ) . As we found in our study of a health monitoring technology for the elderly ( Hyysalo , 2004 ) , technicians can have direct contacts with developers , intermediate users , other supplier representa - tives as well as end users , but their mandate , interest and expertise remains limited to reporting and ﬁxing technical shortcomings and technical assembly , thus leav - ing aside questions of marketing , instructing , learning , new uses etc . The “width” of their mediation thus tends to remain narrow , unless their task description gets expanded to include other tasks such as user - training , as happened at one point in the case studied ( Hyysalo , 2006 ) . An example of a broad width but substantially shorter reach into both use and supply side would be retailers ( in the ﬁgure marked by D ) and Telecoms operators ( in the ﬁgure marked by B ) . Such actors exercise competence and power over multiple technologies and several key aspects of technology such as pricing , distribution channels , marketing , branding , feedback from other intermediaries and end users etc . Yet another sort of intermediaries are market research and usability consultants ( in the ﬁgure marked by C ) , that accumulate , reﬁne and transfer ( second order ) information both about products as well as of their usages . The most studied type of intermediaries are various supply - side industry consultants ( in the ﬁgure marked by E ) , who may play central roles in augmenting innovation at supply end and passing inter - industry insight . These include engineering and business consultancies , public research agencies , industry contractors , accreditation agencies etc . ( e . g . , Bessant and Rush , 1995 ; Van der Maulen and Rip , 1998 ; Howells , 2006 ) . Intermediaries at the supply - side business to business environment tend to be more numerous , visible and formal than those close to the end - users of consumer goods . Amongst the use - side intermediaries ( marked by F in the ﬁgure ) those involved in buying and the paying for new technology are relatively more visi - ble than those that help people use , ﬁx , maintain and update their technologies . The latter are often less formal and may perform their work as peer favours or sidejobs to their formal work . As a consequence , it is these intermediaries that are particu - larly systematically neglected or underestimated . It is indicative that discussions of such peoples as “local experts” ( Stewart , 2007 ) , “technology mediators” ( Okamura et al . , 1994 ) or “tailors” ( Trigg and Bodger , 1994 ) remain absent from technology management volumes that abound with literature on product champions , business angels etc . , at the supply end . 4 4 Although they have attracted more attention in marketing around opinion leaders , word of mouth and viral marketing ( Stewart , 2007 ) . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 304 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo The asymmetric distribution of knowledge amongst actors has the result that peo - ple and organisations that hold intermediary positions tend to accumulate increas - ing amounts of the kind of knowledge that ﬂows in from their various clients and projects , whereas other actors do not . The net result is that less central actors ( such as new supplier entrants , end users ) face difﬁculty in assessing the landscape , posi - tion of different actors within it as well as the means at the disposal of those actors to hinder or enable the prospering of new technology . In fact , such structural holes and knowledge asymmetries are crucial in the existence of the very niche of many actors , and we return to discuss this theme in more depth below ( Burt , 2004 ) . What our diagrams let us articulate is that there is a range of “short and fat” intermediaries whose high breath but short reach allows linking fairly homoge - neous actors that are already quite close to each other in the supply network , or in user communities . There are also “long and thin” intermediaries that have high reach in linking users and suppliers through specialising in a particular service , but consequently only limited breath of mediation . However , it appears to be quite hard to be a “long and fat intermediary” with both broad scope and long reach . Cer - tain large - scale retail organisations ( such as Wall - Mart ) show that this is possible in mediating incremental innovation , but in more uncertain and evolving markets examples known to us are few and debatable . The reason may be simple . Interme - diaries are boundary spanners conveying delicate , sticky knowledge , conducting negotiations that need trust , setting rules of use that require legitimacy and conﬁg - uring technologies and so on all of which requires specialist knowledge . It may be hard to scale up these capabilities up in both breadth and range given that real - life intermediation is a ﬂuid and delicate phenomenon . 5 In general , what the early innovation studies accounts of intermediaries largely failed to address was that established intermediaries can also be roadblocks , and expensive and intransigent gatekeepers , with services , repertoires of knowledge and activities , that can fail the innovation process in a range of ways . 6 Let us illustrate this with an example in the area of video games for girls and women . The established industry of games publishers and events , magazines aimed at existing market for these products is almost wholly devoted to promoting particular range of game genres to a young male market . For a ﬁrm which identiﬁed a market for “girl games” and is able to engage with potential users in the design of attractive products , these intermediaries are not a resource but a hindrance , and necessitate re - casting 5 Thanks to Robin Williams for this formulation . 6 In contrast , other work from evolutionary economics and related perspectives has discussed the way in which innovation systems may operate as a selection environment , weeding out challengers that do not ﬁt with the established technology regime ( e . g . , Nelson and Winter , 1977 ; Dosi , 1982 ; Rip and Kemp , 1998 ) . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 305 the products and making new connections to non - traditional intermediaries — such as general retailers , museums and TV broadcasters . And also in real life such a shift proved necessary for success ( Stewart , 2004 ) . What Do Intermediaries Do in Social Learning ? Perhaps the clearest way to approach the range of activities in which intermediaries are involved is to ﬁrst look at some taxonomies that exist in the literature ( Bessant and Rush , 1995 ; Hargadon and Sutton , 1997 ; Howells , 2006 ) . Howells suggested 10 functions for innovation intermediaries , even though he admits that individual intermediaries seldom play separate functional roles , but contribute and develop a range of different activities important in innovation . In a similar vein , Bessant and Rush ( 1995 ) list six bridging activities through which consultants bridge suppliers and their customers . These activities develop not just through working on one - off projects , but by developing long - term capabilities of the individual ﬁrms , and of the market as a whole . These consultants tend not to work only on a triad basis but are generally involved in several relationships . These typologies of functions and activities of intermediaries approximate the generic terrain of intermediaries . However , as Bessant and Rush point out , there is work to be done in charting the roles that intermediaries play within these functions and activities . 7 All these intermediary roles involve knowledge creation , translation Table 1 . Functions and activities of intermediaries . Intermediary functions ( Howells , 2006 ) Bridging activities ( Bessant and Rush , 1995 ) 1 . Foresight and diagnostics 1 . Articulation of needs , selection of options 2 . Scanning and information processing 2 . Identiﬁcation of needs , selection training 3 . Knowledge processing and ( re ) combination 3 . Creation of business cases 4 . Gatekeeping and brokering 4 . Communications , development 5 . Testing and validation 5 . Education , links to external info 6 . Accreditation 6 . Project management , managing external 7 . Validation and regulation resources , organisational development 8 . Protecting the results 9 . Commercialisation 10 . Evaluation of outcomes 7 Bessant and Rush ( 1995 ) identify four generic roles , those of transfer of knowledge , sharing knowl - edge across user community , acting as brokering to a range of suppliers and diagnostic / innovation role in trying to identify what end users actually want . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 306 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo and dissemination . They are all also about making a connection between mem - ory / experience and future visions , and instantiating these two in current actions of the people whose actions are mediated by them . When we try to differentiate fun - damentally different facets in the actions of intermediaries , three distinct roles in social learning become salient : facilitating , conﬁguring and brokering . These more generic roles are better applicable to the range of intermediaries in social learning processes between supply and use . We anchor our discussion at the intermediary roles that cybercafés played in the mid - 1990s when the Internet was relatively new — characteristically user - end intermediation ( Stewart , 2000 ) . 8 Facilitating Facilitating can be described as providing opportunities to others , by educating , gathering and distributing resources , inﬂuencing regulations and setting local rules . Facilitation involves “creating spaces” of various types : social ( communities , net - works ) , knowledge ( skills and know - how resources ) , cultural ( positive images ) , physical ( a place or equipment ) , economic ( providing funds ) , and regulatory ( cre - ating rules to guide activities and reduce uncertainty ) . In the case of cybercafes , the role of cybercafés and their managers as facilitators is clear ( Stewart , 2004 ) . The cafe is a convenient and open , friendly physical space , conveniently located , with an informal atmosphere , in which the managers had developed based on their initial concept of users and uses . They provide the computers and software , and the training and advice that is needed to use it . The expertise and knowledge that they supply to the users is as important as the actual technology . They take the headache out of computer use , and create a ﬂexible environment where people can work , play or learn at their own discretion . Training and informal support and the creation of an atmosphere that encourages interchange between users are important facilitation devices . Another important facilitation role is running trials that generate new inter - actions between users and suppliers , and importantly , make the activities and results visible in wider to outside actors . Of course , the cybercafe is a literal space , but we have seen a huge growth in industry - user fora , user and industry networking groups , conferences and seminar series , various government and private funds for experi - mentation and interaction , and creation of regulatory spaces providing temporary protection from regulations and rules usually applied in a particular environment . 8 Cybercafe and Internet centre innovators took computers and the Internet out of ofﬁces and homes , andputthemintoanewcontext , introducing themto new users and providing anewsetting forexisting users . What was considered at the time a ﬂeeting and unimportant conﬁguration of the technology involved considerable local service innovation , and has since become an extremely popular and successful service model . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 307 Conﬁguring The creation of the space that facilitates appropriation by others and inﬂuencing the perceptions and goals of sponsors and users involves active processes of conﬁgu - ration . This includes conﬁguring technology , often in a minor way ; creating and conﬁguring content ; setting rules and regulations on use and usage , prioritising uses , the goals and form of projects , and the goals and expectations of other members of a network . Conﬁguration is not only technical but also symbolic : intermediaries provide an interpretation of the product , the meanings that people give to a technol - ogy , but they also listen to users , sponsors and suppliers and attempt to modify the project to reﬂect their interpretations . The managers and owners of the cybercafes in the cases did not invent the cybercafe — computers in cafes were not a new idea at the time of this study . However , they had to make decisions about what a cybercafe was , what was relevant to them and their business , and to their customers . This business model led to the conﬁguration of the space , rules of use , conﬁguration of computers , and policy on what users to encourage or discourage . This included the appropriate types of uses : games , the Internet , ofﬁce service etc . , for their café and clientele ( Laegran and Stewart , 2003 ) . However , this was not necessarily a one - off conﬁguration : it changed rapidly as customers introduced their own ideas of what a cybercafe should be , bring practices in from outside , and evolving them from within . Some cafe managers really took on board the need for constant re - conﬁguration and experimentation while others evolved a much more stable model , with little space for user - led change . The cafes also attempted to conﬁgure their customers’ usage of the cafe through information , training , and informal learning , and introduce new users , for example by running classes for women or older people . By encouraging new uses and new users , they are , of course , encouraging people to spend more time in the cafe , but also making sure that they can appeal to more people , and help customers diversify their use . Of course , in order to do these types of activities intermediaries such as cybercafés and their managers have to gain legitimacy , but this can be self - fulﬁlling if their conﬁguration activities are successful . Brokering The third activity of intermediaries in social learning processes is brokering . For example , intermediaries act to raise support for the appropriation process from spon - sors and suppliers . They set themselves up to represent appropriating individuals and institutions , and negotiate on their behalf . Intermediaries need to broker entry of new sponsors or suppliers into their project in order to defend the space they have helped to create , and make sure that they increase their access to resources and knowledge and can maintain inﬂuence over rules and practices . Some of the September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 308 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo brokering activities can be around the features and functionalities of new technolo - gies , directly communicating needs and requirements of users and the possibilities and conditions of change of the suppliers . In the cybercafes case , the manager of one community cybercafe had a strong role as a broker . The cafe came about as a result of his relationship with the funding council , the local community groups , sponsoring companies and local and national politicians . The project was rather outside the mainstream community project , and certainly not a business for which he could get a bank loan for , so his negotiation with sponsors , as suppliers of equipment , money , prestige was the only way to make it happen . Brokering is certainly one of the most direct ways that intermediaries can bring users and suppliers together , but as this example shows it is equally important in bringing other important actors into the local innovation network , and maintaining their commitment and interest , while at the same time communicating the impor - tance of the particular innovative process to their interests . One of the key balancing acts they have to manage is maintaining the openness of their facilitation activities in the face of the brokering activities : after all brokering is rather a heterogeneous bridging position than representing a particular interest . In the case of the cybercafes , one set of intermediaries — the managers — were involved in all three processes , and similar functions , such as training , all played a role in them . While many intermediaries may focus on type of activity , particularly in stable environments , the dynamic and unpredictable nature of innovation can lead them to conduct all three . Intermediaries that are likely to be most successful can enter into and balance different activities without constraining the innovative activities of their clients , be they adopters or suppliers . The afﬁnities between the intermediation by cybercafés and their managers in early 1990s and present day bounded socio - technical experiments such as living labs are noteworthy . Pre - Domestication , Power Games and Fragile Intermediaries There is a range of ways which intermediaries inﬂuence the evolving shape of tech - nology . First , when “local experts” and “tailors” do work of brokering , facilitating and conﬁguring , they prefer certain options and suppress others in their effort to cater a system that is practically useful and usable for the particular user or organisa - tion as was evident in both cybercafé and health - monitoring cases . In turn , this work tends to rely on other intermediaries , such as the products of service and technol - ogy suppliers , specialist magazines , web - pages etc . , and eventually translates into supplier offerings . By doing so , intermediaries are engaged in pre - domestication — inﬂuencing what would be an appropriate target for the ongoing development of technology , what could be the appropriate goals and motives for using it , and making September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 309 technology appropriable in their practice . This ordering of a potential development arena can grant them a position for informal learning by regulating ( cf . Sørensen , 1996 ) . While ﬂagging the importance of enriching and shaping of the technological offer , power and inﬂuence issues need to be recognised . Enrolling other players means selling the technology to them . Distributors , operators etc . , have their own perception of user needs , and have different interests and incentives than the supplier or end users in promoting some products and not others , in pricing , branding and in aligning products . The technology thus gets framed for intermediary audiences in addition to its assumed ﬁnal consumers . The product , especially widely distributed content products like games or books , has to be ﬁrst sold to intermediaries such as a distributor to ever reach the ﬁnal consumer . Making technological products or services appeal to intermediary audiences affects it beyond sales arguments or other “wrapping” and tends to cut into features , functionalities and look of the product . For instance , in games development small companies view the publishers as their primary customers , and anticipate their selection processes alongside ( or even instead of ) that of end - gamers . The assumed norms and extrapolations over previous behaviour of key institutionalised intermediaries thus channel design already before it ever reaches them directly ( Kalhama , 2003 ; Eskelinen , 2005 ) . Intermediaries often work hard to make themselves obligatory points of passage ( Latour , 1987 ) . Commercial ﬁrms may do this as the basis of their business model ( Burt , 2004 ) , but other intermediaries , such as trade associations or user groups may also do this in an attempt to established a strong bargaining position for their members . In the domain of IT for example , the Gartner Group has established a key role in setting up expectations for the future of a software application sector , becoming guardians of community knowledge and thus a key mediator in shaping the behaviour of suppliers and users ( Pollock and Williams , 2008 ) . However , it is a delicate balance — they must remain accountable to those they service and represent . The above dynamics get more complex through the uncertainty regarding mar - kets and users’ preferences for new technology prior to its actual usage ( Hyysalo , 2003 ; Williams et al . , 2005 ) . The need for or effects of different framings of technology are not readily visible at the outset to any of the parties . Images of users and customers become “currency” that is proffered and sold to establish and contest business cases ( Nicoll , 2000 ) . Indeed , the ability of intermediaries to cut the cake is dependent on how convincingly they can argue their impor - tance and hence , their vision of the user and the buyer . This is not unlike the way intermediaries offer assembly and maintenance services that convince the users of images of a technology that is too cumbersome or impossible for users to handle themselves . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 310 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo It is common to use a range of more - or - less publicly available ( often grey lit - erature ) sources such as newspaper headings and consultancy reports as “external” legitimizing devices for arguing the case for one’s own technology and vision about the own and user domain development , as well as doing one’s best to inﬂuence them . However , because these images circle and contest one another , “real user data” such as that from usability studies tends to be “hard currency” ( Nicoll , 2000 ) in comparison to market studies and other inferred proxies . Various trials , pilots and demonstrations become instrumental for different parties arguing their case and relevance . By the same token , it needs to be underlined that some potentially very useful intermediaries operate under rather adverse conditions , as their intermediator roles hinge upon corporate policies and reward structures that have a bearing upon what roles people can take on . Research on two formal roles , sales teams and technical support staff is illustrative . Williams and Proctor ( 1998 ) found that IT support staff had the closest ongoing relationship with users , and clearest awareness of problems , and knowledge of on - the - ground innovations in use . However , these were also the people most distant from the future product designers within the supply sector . In the same token , the sales people were seen as bridges to developers , but mostly talked with purchase people , and not with end users . Also the incentives for conveying information to product development tend to be lacking : sales teams are rewarded on the basis of the deals they close , not on the potentially helpful R & D information they may gleam from customers . Reward structures that would encourage side bets relevant to social learning may also prove rather difﬁcult to set in place without undermining the effectiveness of sales - based structures . This tangle gets more tricky when the sales are handled by different organisa - tions : getting such sales staff to sell a conceptually new product is one thing , getting them to do this in a desired manner is another . In the health - monitoring case , the supplier continuously struggled to ensure that the various sales peoples had adequate understanding of their product , targeted preferred customer segments , did not make inadequate sales promises and transferred more needy customers to supplier’s sales people who had sufﬁcient expertise . Even more formidable problems persisted in getting them to glean and pass on information about customers ( Hyysalo , 2004 ) . In the words of the company president : “ Since [ our new customer support and maintenance person ] started , it has turned out that our retailers , partners , and assem - blers haven’t really provided us with information about how the device works in actual use . Neither do they always know how the device should function . . . Here is the one employment that has most effectively paid for itself ” ( Interview with the company president 17 . 9 . 2001 ) . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 311 This quote also introduces another issue : intermediary roles are often carried by individuals . While established intermediary organisations can institutionalise inter - mediary actions , in new areas these are likely to be vested in individuals who have expertise and bridging links into other areas of activity , gathered by earlier career moves , or though some other personal contacts and experience . The per - son talked about in the quote above had held a range of similar roles in mainte - nance , training and marketing in several other companies in safety - phone business for over 10 years . Our further interviews revealed that over a two decades there had been ( just ) three people who had remained in the safety phone technology business by circulating between different suppliers in sales , assembly and main - tenance and management posts . These three had become the living repositories of the accumulated learning on how to best deploy and hold in operation over 50 , 000 systems and various new kinds of entrants to this clientele . ( Hyysalo et al . , 2003 ) . 9 One of the reasons to emphasise social and learning in technological innova - tion lies in the need for actors to participate in the ongoing circulation between development and use . Intermediaries are continuously forced to learn about , ﬁlter , translate and reﬂect on information , products and practices of other actors to remain relevant and thus in existence . An important part of this learning is about how to relate and manipulate as well as how to dominate and control other actors around them . But how this ecology is set up can differ dramatically depending on the inno - vation context in question ; this sets the relationships between development , use and user - involvement in innovation . Innovation Contexts , Social Learning and Intermediary Roles Attending to the variations in innovation spaces is one of the key features of SLTI framework ( Williams et al . , 2005 ) . There are remarkable differences in the degree of freedom for innovative actors , particularly users , to try out new things , exercise choice , or act reﬂexively ( Bessant , 1991 ) . At one extreme , users remain relatively “passive” with little choice over adoption . This is the much criticised “linear” innovation model , where users appear as consumers of pre - formed tech - nologies , where their only choice is between use and non - use of a technology . Each member of a supply chain can thus be regarded as an intermediary between the preceding and following player , and end users only have contact with the 9 We note anecdotally from years of observing speciﬁc domains of innovation that such circulation within limited space is common , as individuals move between ﬁrms and projects acquiring increasing expertise and knowledge about the domain speciﬁc roles inside a supplier organisation , promotional agency , sales of other company , and procurers in a user - side organisation . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 312 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo Design / Development Use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Market Fig . 3 . Pipeline linear development and diffusion ( adapted from Williams et al . , 2005 ) . ﬁnal player in the chain . Suppliers and end users are separated and user pref - erences and innovations are signalled at arms length through a market back to suppliers . We can display this graphically ( Fig . 3 , adapted from Williams et al . , 2005 ) , which also clariﬁes that such market signals may not be very clear , and cer - tainly not to the whole market , and invisible to ﬁrms deep in the supply network ( Fleck , 1988 ) . The early years of the health - monitoring project 1993 – 1999 illustrate well the kinds of intermediaries that tend to be involved in mediating between development and use in linear context . Literature on the users’ domain , two market research stud - ies , a design and usability study , pilot - trials and a branding company fed representa - tions of “the user” and appropriate design decisions to the developer company . After the launch of the product , intermediate users such as assembly people from vendors and managers of rest - homes for the elderly became key user - side intermediaries that helped to conﬁgure the system and re - conﬁgure the associated work practices , facilitated the everyday uses and problems and brokered contacts and informa - tion between the everyday usages and suppliers’ ongoing development efforts . The component and platform providers were seemingly bracketed off “behind” the com - pany building the health - monitoring application , but in reality the conﬁguration of the system brought issues around platform and integration with other technologies back in , giving rise to intermediary activities by assemblers and local small vendors ( Hyysalo , 2003 , 2004 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . Through a range of case studies done as part of the European Social learn - ing in Multimedia project in the late 1990s , Williams et al . ( 2005 ) distinguish four other modes of user involvement in innovation : the evolutionary “pick and September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 313 Design / Development Use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Market Fig . 4 . Intermediaries in linear development and diffusion ; the knowledge of the user is mediated signiﬁcantly by various intermediaries to application developers and user - end intermediaries tend to be involved in conﬁguring and facilitating the usages . mix” model ; user - centred design ; the innofusion and appropriation model and a technology experiment . Evolutionary pick and mix context The “pick and mix” model is closest to the market model , where intermediate and end users are able to pick from a huge range of available generic technologies , and conﬁgure them together . This model is characteristic of the current ICT market , where intense competition , ﬂexible standard platforms such as common operating systems and internet protocols , and open programming interfaces and tools make it relatively easy , and very cheap to conﬁgure . Here , we see the emergence of a range of intermediaries that conﬁgure technolo - gies and uses , attempting to bridge the “market gap” from suppliers to user and vice versa . The cybercafés illustrate how well in many cases the user - side intermediaries play crucial roles in conﬁguring , brokering and facilitating users , even establishing wholly novel intermediate - design / intermediate - use locations . The tentative depic - tion of various kinds of intermediaries given in Fig . 1 matches closest the situation in a pick ‘n’ mix context ( Fig . 6 ) ; the ecology of intermediaries is comprised of multiple types of actors and is likely to vary from one product to another so that different sets of intermediaries are involved in mediating the various platforms , components , content and applications . In this environment , intermediaries can be very sensitive to end users and often have to respond rapidly to their demands and innovations , but equally , end users can be confused and particular reliant on the work of intermediaries . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 314 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo Design / Development Use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Pick and mix off the shelf Supply of generic tools andcomponents Fig . 5 . Pick and mix model where there are large clusters of generic offers at the supply end and the conﬁguration of off - the - shelf components at local user sites . ( adapted from Williams et al . , 2005 ) . Design / Development Use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Pick and mix off the shelf Supply of generic tools and components Fig . 6 . The niches of some common types of intermediaries illustrated in pick and mix constellation . User - centred design There are a number of design and development processes that involve users in more active ways . The ﬁrst of these is user - centred design processes in which end - users — or more correctly “proxy users” who represent eventual users — are put at the centre of design . Detailed studies of users , along with negotiations with proxy or intermediate users of their “needs and requirements” help those creating new technologies or integrating systems to create products and services that closely September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 315 Design / Development Use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Adaptation Fig . 7 . User - centred design . A more dedicated application is built with the help of proxy users ( adapted from Williams et al . , 2005 ) . match the existing culture and activities of speciﬁc users ( e . g . , Norman and Draper , 1986 ) . However , the majority of user - centred design projects focuses on design work prior to market launch and neglects the activities of a range of users in actually getting the “ﬁnished” product to work ( Stewart and Williams , 2005 ) . It also neglects the processes of “generiﬁcation” that usually follow speciﬁc design , as developers actually try to remove all speciﬁc user features to create a generic product suitable for larger markets or adjust it to suit nearby market niches ( Pollock et al . , 2007 ) . Depicted graphically in Fig . 7 , the key issue here is that proxy - user involvement is limited to initial design stages of the innovation and the cross - over between developers and users does not continue as strong after the product has been launched . An example of user - centred design activities occupying a short periods in a rel - atively linear innovation process can be found in the health monitoring case in 1995 and again in 2000 when the developers and industrial designers visited user sites , took social scientists onboard to mediate information from users and consulted some users over their design ideas . The presence of these kinds of professional interme - diaries for mediating use to design is typical to user - centred design , as is organising it in projects ( e . g . , in concept design ) both in terms of company practice and more academic literature ( Preese et al . , 2002 ; Dix et al . , 2004 ; Benyon et al . , 2005 ) . In the Fig . 7 , this is portrayed by the actor below the design project contributing to it . The Technology Experiment / Evolving Co - Design The Technology Experiment ( Fig . 8 ) is a mode of collaborative innovation that involves a range of players , such as government agencies , intermediate September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 316 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo Design / Development Use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Fig . 8 . Technology experiment / evolving co - design project ( adapted from Williams et al . , 2005 ) . users , developers and suppliers ( Jaeger et al . , 2000 ; Brown et al . , 2003 ) , often delib - erately constructed into a constituency by certain key players to provide a framework of ideas and resources to shape innovation ( Molina , 1995 ) . Here , development of the technology and building the market go hand in hand : these are continuing activ - ities and there is no clear boundary between technology development and diffusion . There can be progressive broadening of the socio - technical constituency of involved players as barriers between technology developers and users are eroded , and the boundaries of the project expanded ( Williams et al . , 2005 ) . Such a process can be based on co - design between designers and users , comprise an open - source type development or at least temporally involve users fruitfully ( Hyysalo and Lehenkari , 2003 ) . The success stories coming from this mode have recently sparked enthusi - asm about the potential of user innovation communities , particularly in software , pro - amateurs in sports and user - designers of the gear of some professions such as surgical equipment . ( von Hippel , 2005 ; Leadbeater , 2006 ) . There is also a long his - tory of participatory design initiatives ( Greenbaum and Kyng , 1991 ) . However , a technology experiment can also merely verify the chosen technology model negoti - ated early on in the process . This partly depends on the degree to which core players are open to innovation by users , and the points at which conﬁgurations are locked into place ( van Leishout et al . , 2001 ; Hoogma et al . , 2002 ) . In the evolving co - design , intermediaries and intermediation between devel - opment and use can differ dramatically from the previously discussed innovation contexts . Let us illustrate with a user - initiated design project to build electronic - health record for diabetes professionals where a group of lead - users enrolled an IT company to join their effort . Their collaboration lasted intensively from 1996 to September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 317 2002 and through three development rounds ( Hyysalo and Lehenkari , 2003 ) . What is striking for us here was the lack of and irrelevance of intermediaries one encoun - ters in other innovation contexts such as market research and probing , marketing and advertisement agencies , usability consultants etc . In effect , the co - located design between users and developers bridged over the ecological niches of these actors between development and use . In addition to design knowledge , the users conveyed very exact understanding of the markets , buying dynamics and so and were active in marketing the application . The user - designer community also held great depth and width also in terms of addressing typical user - end intermediary activities : for instance , people in neighbouring hospitals conveyed their expertise to newcomers to the use of the program . Indeed , in evolutionary co - design , informal intermediaries and local experts can be the key intermediaries . Innofusion and domestication The ﬁnal SLTI model draws on two concepts : domestication and innofusion . The “domestication” concept ( Silverstone et al . , 1992 ; Lie and Sørensen , 1997 ) captures the practical , symbolic and cognitive dimensions in the selection , deployment and adaptation of new technologies . The innofusion concept ( Fleck , 1988 ) highlights the technological innovation done in these processes , emphasising that key innovation moments occur in and are controlled by the user environment . The interactions between networks of users and designers are not continuous or controlled , but are constantly changing , as different sets of actors in the constellation of interested parties are temporarily linked . This innovation context differs from user - centred design in that it is in users’ sites , not in prior design where key user involvement occurs and that their innovative inputs can last for years . Innofusion differs from evolutionary co - design in that the relations between producers and users may not be collaborative , purposefully co - ordinated or co - located ( Fig . 9 ) . Examples of innofusion and domestication context can be found in various types of technologies . A recent well - documented case comes from enterprise resource planning systems ( ERP ) in educational sector ( Pollock and Cornford , 2004 ; Pol - lock and Williams , 2008 ) . The developer companies made initial customisations to systems built for other sectors . The early customers were involved in further spec - iﬁcation of the modules , contents and functionality of the system . Their IT - staff worked further on the system including conﬁguring the package in - site within its myriad of built - in parameters , more extensive customization through re - writing of code , selective appropriation of the package as well as integrating add - on , bolt - on and extension software . Some of these modiﬁcations became later incorporated as parts of supplier’s generic package , while some became discarded and kept up only locally . In contrast to this drawn - out innofusion interchange between the supplier September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 318 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo Design / Development Use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Domestication Innofusion Fig . 9 . Innofusion and domestication model ( adapted from Williams et al . , 2005 ) . Design / Development Use Component suppliers Platformproviders Applicationdesigners Intermediate users / Intermediate designers Proxyusers Finalusers Domestication Innofusion Fig . 10 . Intermediaries in Innofusion - domestication context . A range of supplier - dedicated , more independent formal consultants and informal intermediaries tend to be involved . and early users , many later adopters were effectively conﬁned to more limited domestication in - site having little chance to shape the evolution of the generic sys - tem more to their liking ( Pollock et al . , 2007 ) . Also in this innovation context , a range of intermediaries can be observed ( Fig . 10 ) . There are highly inﬂuential industry analysts such as the Gartner Group that actively shape the expectations of the market place , criteria used to select ERP providers , criteria to measure supplier performance etc . ( Pollock and Williams , 2008 ) . Closer to the user clients’ IT - staff and implementation consultants act as intermediate users that conﬁgure the systems , facilitate its usages and broker September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 319 information between different groups of people . Local expert users tend to act as user - end intermediaries making the system work , not least through helping to work around the often clunky ERP . Empirical studies show further that over time a particular project , technology or constituency can move between different innovation contexts , for example , when a technology moves from an exploratory phase to generiﬁcation for a mass market ( Hasu , 2001 ; Hoogma et al . , 2002 ; Hyysalo and Lehenkari , 2003 ; Williams et al . , 2005 ; Osterloh and Rota , 2007 ) . For instance , in the diabetes case outlined above , the IT - company withdrew from evolutionary user - involvement in 2001 – 2002 , but later had to engage in innofusion - domestication type further development ( Hyysalo , 2006 ; Miettinen et al . , 2008 ) . As these kinds of shifts occur , particular intermedi - aries can switch between formal and informal roles or some intermediaries can be sidelined in favour of others . Conclusion : Recognising Key Intermediaries and Nurturing Fragile Ones Within the context of the user - designer relationship analysis in the design literature , and the supply - side – demand - side approach in innovation studies , we highlight the importance of new intermediaries . These actors emerge to bridge gaps in newly forming networks , facilitate contacts and experimentation by passing knowledge , they act as a store for collective memory , and shape technologies , visions , knowledge and relationships . These activities are central to the social learning that occurs in innovation : the processes of creating new relationships and knowledge that accom - panies the creation of new technologies . The SLTI approach allows bridging research on intermediaries at the appropria - tion end with the more plentiful literature on supply end intermediaries in innovation and organisation studies . Applying this framework to the study of intermediaries underscores ﬁve issues that cut across extant literature as well as our case studies over the years : ( 1 ) There is an ecology of intermediaries in and between supply and use . The highly visible supply - side intermediaries such as foresight agencies and man - agement consultants , and the easily identiﬁable middle - ground agencies such as marketing research and usability consultants tend to overshadow the often more informal yet just as crucial intermediaries at the user - end of the supply - use relation . Intermediate users , local experts and “tailors” facilitate , conﬁgure and broker sys - tems , usages and knowledge about systems and their deployments , helping users to domesticate them and suppliers to respond to actual , realised uses . ( 2 ) Pivotal importance of uncertainty and learning . When it comes to inno - vative new products no established line - up , or a smoothly functioning chain of September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 320 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo intermediaries can be assumed , in contrast to stable products such as orange juice or pop - music . One cannot assume that extant intermediaries will be the relevant ones for successful innovation . Gradual adjustment and learning about the appro - priate form of the technology , actors to be involved , expectations concerning its use practices , complementary services , delivery models and other support tends to be more important than the effectiveness in carrying out these activities that established intermediaries may have . ( 3 ) Important differences are due to innovation contexts . The knowledge and actions needed to bridge supply and use depends greatly upon the nature of the technology in question , but also on the innovation context where the technology develops . Sustained co - design between developers and users can render obsolete the need for in - between niche players such as market researchers and usability spe - cialists that are more likely to hold pivotal importance in the success of innovations developed within linear context . ( 4 ) Identifying and nurturing best suited intermediaries is the challenge . Charting the intermediaries related to a particular innovative project is a recognised part of what technology managers do . Where they lack analytical clarity is in charting the ecology of intermediaries to gain a sense of how each key aspect of a given technology and key user segment — the market — becomes mediated . Identifying and ﬁnding means to sustain people who perform important mediating roles — inside or outside their formal organisation — tends thus fall by the wayside and , according to our ﬁndings , if the beneﬁts or appeal of intermediating some line of technology or in some organisation wane , these people are quite likely to shift location . ( 5 ) User involvement in innovation has a wide range as does its relationship to and dependency on intermediaries . Ranging between everyday domestication and massive evolutionary opensource development projects , user involvement in inno - vation has myriad of forms and outcomes . Some of the practices that get discussed in the literature as user innovation may be better understood as user - end interme - diary activities in performing the key intermediary roles we identify : conﬁguring , facilitating and brokering new technology . Moreover , in some innovation contexts hardly anything about users’ innovative solutions and practices in using technology is conveyed to technology supply without intermediaries . Yet , in others , direct user - involvement can bridge over the niches typically occupied by for instance market research and usability consultants . These cross - cutting themes are highly relevant for the presently emerging meth - ods such as Living Labs and various experiments in co - creation as these create new forms of user - involvement and intermediary positions made possible with the cur - rent ICT infrastructures and standard platforms . Here too , existing intermediaries September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 321 cannot always provide the necessary links to engage potential users in innovation , and new intermediaries need to be found , nurtured or created . One of the challenges remains to avoid making the mistakes of conﬁguring spaces that are dominated by technological considerations and do not allow space for the participation of existing and new intermediaries . There is still considerable work to be done in understanding how intermediaries can be managed at a policy or corporate level , and how they can be prevented from failing . References Arrow , K ( 1962 ) . The economic implications of learning by doing . Review of Economic Studies , 29 , 155 – 173 . Attewell , P ( 1992 ) . Technology diffusion and organizational learning : the case of business computing . Organization Science , 3 ( 1 ) , 1 – 19 . Bandura , A ( 1977 ) . Social Learning Theory . Englewood Cliffs , N . J : Prentice - Hall . Benyon , D , P Turner and S Turner ( 2005 ) . Designing Interactive Systems — People , Activ - ities , Contexts , Technologies . London , UK : Addison - Wesley . Bessant , J ( 1991 ) . Managing Advanced Manufacturing Technology : The Challenge of the Fifth Wave . Oxford : Blackwell . Bessant , J and H Rush ( 1995 ) . Building bridges for innovation : the role of consultants in technology transfer . Research Policy , 24 , 97 – 114 . Brown , HS , P Vergragt , K Green and L Berchicci ( 2003 ) . Learning for sustainability tran - sition through bounded socio - technical experiments in personal mobility . Technology Analysis & Strategic Management , 15 ( 3 ) , 291 – 315 . Burt , R ( 2004 ) . Structural holes and good ideas . American Journal of Sociology , 110 , 349 – 399 . Callon , M ( 1998 ) . The Laws of the Markets . London : Blackwell Publishers . Callon , M , C Méadel and V Rabeharisoa ( 2002 ) . The economy of qualities . Economy and Society , 31 ( 2 ) , 194 – 217 . Cornish , S ( 1997 ) . Product innovation and the spatial dynamics of market intelligence : does proximity to markets matter ? Economic Geography , 73 ( 2 ) , 143 – 165 ( April 1997 ) . Dix , A , J Finlay , GD Abowd and R Beale ( 2004 ) . Human - Computer Interaction . 3rd Ed . Harlow , UK : Pearson Prentice Hall . Dosi , G ( 1982 ) . Technological paradigms and technological trajectories — a suggested interpretation of the determinants and directions of technical change . Research Policy , 11 , 147 – 162 . Eskelinen , M ( 2005 ) . Pelit ja pelitutkimus luovassa taloudessa ( Games and Game Research in Creative Economy ) . Helsinki : Sitra . Fleck , J ( 1994 ) . Learning by trying : the implementation of conﬁgurational technology . Research Policy , 23 , 637 – 652 . Fleck , J ( 1988 ) . Innofusion or diffusation ? The nature of technological development in robotics , Edinburgh PICT Working Paper No . 7 , Edinburgh University . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 322 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo Freeman , C ( 1979 ) . The determinants of innovation — market demand , technology , and the response to social problems . Futures , ( June ) , 206 – 215 . Gardiner , P and R Rothwell ( 1985 ) . Tough customers : good designs . Design Studies , 6 ( 1 ) , 7 – 17 . Gertler , MS and DA Wolfe ( 2002 ) . InnovationandSocial Learning : Institutional Adaptation in an Era of Technological Change . New York , NY : Palgrave MacMillan . Greenbaum , J and M Kyng ( eds . ) ( 1991 ) . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Hargadon , A and R Sutton ( 1997 ) . Technology brokering and innovation in a product development ﬁrm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 , 716 – 749 . Hasu , M ( 2001 ) . Critical Transition from Developers to Users . Academic Dissertation . Helsinki : University of Helsinki , Department of Education . Hennion , A ( 1989 ) . An intermediary between production and consumption : the producer of popular music . Science , Technology , & Human Values , 14 ( 4 ) , 400 – 424 . Hoogma , R , R Kemp , J Schot and B Truffer ( 2002 ) . Experimenting for Sustainable Trans - port — The Approach of Strategic Niche Management , Vol . 10 . London : Spon Press . Howells , J ( 2006 ) . Intermediation and the role of intermediaries in innovation . Research Policy , 35 ( 5 ) , 715 – 728 . Hyysalo , S ( 2003 ) . Some problems in the traditional approaches of predicting the use of a technology - driven invention . Innovation , 16 ( 2 ) , 118 – 137 . Hyysalo , S ( 2004 ) . Uses of Innovation . Wristcare in the Practices of Engineers and Elderly . Helsinki : Helsinki University Press . Hyysalo , S ( 2006 ) . The role of learning - by - using in the design of healthcare technologies : a case study . The Information Society , 22 ( 2 ) , 89 – 100 . Hyysalo , S and J Lehenkari ( 2003 ) . An activity - theoretical method for studying user - participation in is design . Methods of Information in Medicine , 42 ( 4 ) , 398 – 405 . Hyysalo , S , J Lehenkari and R Miettinen ( 2003 ) . Informaatiokumous , tuottaja - käyttäjäsuhteet ja sosiaaliset innovaatiot ( Information revolution , user - producer rela - tionsandsocialinnovations ) . In Innovaatiopolitiikka , TLemolaandPHonkanen ( eds . ) , pp . 215 – 226 . Helsinki : Gaudeamus . Jaeger , B , R Slack and R Williams ( 2000 ) . Europe experiments with multimedia : an overview of social experiments and trials . The Information Society , 16 ( 4 ) , 277 – 302 . Kalhama , M ( 2003 ) . Suomalaisen Peliteollisuuden Kartoitustutkimuksen Loppuraportti . ( Charting Finnish Gaming Industry , Final Report ) . Helsinki : University of Art and Design Helsinki . Kline , SJ and N Rosenberg ( 1986 ) . An overview of innovation . In The Positive Sum Strategy : Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth , R Landau and N Rosenberg ( eds . ) , pp . 275 – 305 . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Laegran , AS and J Stewart ( 2003 ) . Nerdy , trendy or healthy ? Conﬁguring the internet café . New Media and Society , 5 , 357 – 377 . Latour , B ( 1987 ) . Science in Action : How to Follow Scientists and Engineers Through Society . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Latour , B ( 2005 ) . Reassembling the Social . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 323 Leadbeater , C ( 2006 ) . The User Innovation Revolution . London , UK : Report by the National Consumer Council . Lie , M and KH Sørensen ( 1997 ) . Making technology our own ? : domesticating technology into everyday life . In Making Technology Our Own ? : Domesticating Technology into Everyday Life , M Lie and KH Sorensen ( eds . ) , pp . 1 – 31 . Oslo : ScandinavianUniversity Press . Lie , M and K Sørensen ( eds . ) ( 1996 ) . Making Technology Our Own ? Domesticating Tech - nology into Everyday Life . Oslo : Scandinavian University Press . Lundvall , B - Å ( 1988 ) . Innovation as an interactive process : from user - producer interaction to the national system of innovation . In Technical Change and Economic Theory , G Dosi , C Freeman , RR Nelson , G Silverberg and L Soete ( eds . ) , pp . 349 – 369 . London : Pinter Publishers Ltd . Lundvall , B - Å and B Johanson ( 1994 ) . The learning economy . Journal of Industry Studies , 1 ( 2 ) , 23 – 42 . MacKenzie , D and J Wajcman ( eds . ) ( 1999 ) . The Social Shaping of Technology , 2nd Ed . Buckingham : Open University Press . MacKenzie , D ( 2006 ) . Is economics performative ? Option theory and the construction of derivatives markets . Journal of the History of Economic Thought , 28 , 29 – 55 . McEvily , B and A Zaheer ( 1999 ) . Bridgingties : a source of ﬁrm heterogeneityin conpetitive capabilities . Strategic Management Journal , 20 , 1133 – 1156 . Miettinen , R ( 2002 ) . National Innovation System : Scientiﬁc Concept or Political Rhetoric . Helsinki : Edita . Miettinen , R , S Freeman , J Lehenkari , J Leminen , J Siltala , K Toikka and J Tuunainen ( 2008 ) . Informaatiotekninen kumous , innovaatioverkostot ja luottamus ( Information Revolution , Innovation Networks and Trust ) . Helsinki : Tekes . Molina , A ( 1995 ) . Sociotechnical constituencies as processes of alignment : the rise of a large - scale European information technology initiative . Technology and Society , 17 ( 4 ) . Nelson , R and S Winter ( 1977 ) . In search of useful theory of innovation . Research Policy , 6 , 36 – 76 . Nicoll , DW ( 2000 ) . Users as currency : technology and marketing trials as naturalistic envi - ronments . The Information Society , 16 ( 4 ) , 303 – 310 . Norman , D and S Draper ( 1986 ) . User Centered System Design : New Perspectives on Human - Computer Interaction . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Earlbaum . Okamura , K , M Fujimoto , W Orlikowski and J Yates ( 1994 ) . Helping CSCW applications succeed : the role of mediators in the context of use . In Proc . of Computer Supported Collaborative Work Conference . New York : ACM press , NC . Osterloh , M and S Rota ( 2007 ) . Open source software development — just another case of collective invention ? Research Policy , 36 ( 2 ) , 157 – 171 . Pavitt , K ( 1984 ) . Sectoral patterns of technical change : towards a taxonomy and a theory . Research Policy , 13 , 343 – 373 . Pollock , N ( 2004 ) . Universtiy or universality — on the establishment of the “organiza - tionally generic” . In Proc . of the Paper Presented at “Understanding Sociotechnical Action” — Conference . Edinburgh : Napier University ( UK 3 - 4 . 7 . 2004 ) . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 324 J . Stewart & S . Hyysalo Pollock , N and J Cornford ( 2004 ) . ERP systems and the university as a “unique” organisa - tion . Information Technology and People , 17 , 31 – 52 . Pollock , N and R Williams ( 2008 ) . Software and Organizations : The Biography of the Packaged Enterprise System . London : Routledge . Pollock , N , R Williams and L D’Adderio ( 2007 ) . Global software and its provenance : gener - iﬁcation work in the production of organisational software packages . Social Studies of Science , 37 ( 2 ) , 254 – 280 . Preece , J , Y Rogers and H Sharp ( 2002 ) . Interaction Design — Beyond Human Computer Interaction . Hoboken , NJ : John Wiley & Sons . Procter , R and R Williams ( 1996 ) . Beyond design : social learning and computer - supported cooperative work : some lessons from innovation studies . In The Design of Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Groupware Systems , D Shapiro , M Tauber and R Traunmueller ( eds . ) , Chap . 26 , pp . 445 – 464 ( 1996 ) . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : North Holland . Rip , A , TJ Misa and J Schot ( eds . ) ( 1995 ) . Managing Technology in Society : The Approach of Constructive Technology Assessment . London , NY : Pinter . Rip , A and R Kemp ( 1998 ) . Technological change . In Human Choice and Climate Change . Rayner , S and E Malone ( eds . ) , pp . 327 – 399 . Washington , D . C . : Battelle Press . Rogers , EM ( 2003 ) . Diffusion of Innovations . New York : The Free Press . Rosenberg , N ( 1982 ) . Inside the Black Box : Technology and Economics . Cambridge : Cam - bridge University Press . Russell , S and R Williams ( 2002 ) . Concepts , spaces and tools for action ? Exploring the policy potential of the social shaping perspective . In Shaping Technology , Guiding Policy : Concepts , Spaces and Tools , K Sørensen and R Williams ( eds . ) , pp . 133 – 154 . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Silverstone , R and E Hirsch ( 1992 ) . Consuming Technologies : Media and Information in Domestic Spaces . London : Routledge . Sørensen , KH ( 1996 ) . Learning technology , constructing culture . Socio - technical change as social learning . STS Working Paper no . 18 / 96 , University of Trondheim : Centre for Technology and Society . Stankiewicz , R ( 1995 ) . The role of the science and technologyinfrastructure in the develop - ment and diffusion of industrial automation in Sweden . In Technological Systems and Economic Performance : The Case of Factory Automation , B Carlsson ( ed . ) , pp . 165 – 210 . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Stewart , J ( 2004 ) . Boys and girls stay in to play : creating computer entertainment for children , In Private Sector Efforts to Include Women in ICTs , C MacKeogh , P Preson ( eds . ) , pp . 259 – 282 . Trondheim : NTNU Working Paper Series . Stewart , J ( 2007 ) . Local experts in the domestication of ICTs . Information Communication and Society , 10 ( 4 ) , 547 – 569 . Stewart , J and R Williams ( 2005 ) . The wrong trousers ? Beyond the design fallacy : social learning and the user . In User Involvement in Innovation Processes . Strategies and LimitationsfromaSocio - TechnicalPerspective , HRohracher ( ed . ) , pp . 39 – 71 . Munich : Proﬁl - Verlag . September 15 , 2008 17 : 9 WSPC / 150 - IJIM 00203 Intermediaries , Users and Social Learning 325 Stewart , J ( 2000 ) . Cafematics : the cybercafeand the community . In CommunityInformatics . M Gurstein ( ed . ) , pp . 320 – 338 . Toronto : Idea Group . Trigg , R and S Bodger ( 1994 ) . From implementation to design : tailoring and the emer - gence of systematization in cscw . In Proc . of Computer Supported Collaborative Work Conference , pp . 45 – 54 . New York : ACM press . Van de Ven , AH , DE Polley , R Garud and S Venkataraman ( 1999 ) . The Innovation Journey . Oxford : Oxford University Press . von Hippel , E ( 1988 ) . The Sources of Innovation . New York : Oxford University Press . von Hippel , E ( 2005 ) . Democratizing Innovation . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . von Hippel , E and M Tyre ( 1995 ) . How learning by doing is done : problem identiﬁcation in novel process equipment . Research Policy , 24 ( 1 ) , 1 – 12 . van Lieshout , M , T Egyedi and WE Bijker ( eds . ) ( 2001 ) . Social Learning Technologies : The Introduction of Multimedia in Education . Aldershot : Ashgate . Van der Meulen , B and A Arie Rip ( 1998 ) . Mediation in the Dutch science system . Research Policy , 27 , 757 – 769 . Williams , R and D Edge ( 1996 ) . The social shaping of technology . Research Policy , 25 , 856 – 899 . Williams , R and R Procter ( 1998 ) . Trading places : a case study of the formation and deploy - ment of computing expertise . In Exploring Expertise , R Williams et al . ( eds . ) , pp . 197 – 222 , Basingstoke : Macmillan . Williams , R , R Slack and J Stewart ( 2005 ) . Social Learning in Technological Innova - tion — Experimenting with Information and Communication Technologies . Chel - tenham : Edgar Elgar Publishing . Wolfe and Gertler ( eds . ) ( 2002 ) . Innovation and Social Learning : Institutional Adaptation in an Era of Technological Change ( pp . 260 ) . Basingstoke , UK : Macmillan / Palgrave .