Usability , aesthetics and emotions in human – technology interaction Manfred Thu¨ring and Sascha Mahlke Berlin University of Technology , Berlin , Germany I n the past , research on human – technology interaction has almost exclusively concentrated on aspects of usefulness and usability . Despite the success of this line of research , its narrow perspective has recently become a target for criticism . To explain why people prefer some systems over others , factors such as aesthetic qualities and emotional experiences play an important role in addition to instrumental aspects . In the following , we report three experiments that illustrate the importance of such factors . In the first experiment , we study the role of emotions in human – technology interaction by using Scherer’s ( 1984 ) component theory of emotions as a theoretical foundation . A combination of methods is derived from that theory and employed to measure subjective feelings , motor expressions , physiological reactions , cognitive appraisals , and behaviour . The results demonstrate that the manipulation of selected system properties may lead to differences in usability that affect emotional user reactions . The second experiment investigates the interplay of instrumental and non - instrumental system qualities . The results show that users’ overall appraisal of a technical device is influenced by both groups of qualities . In the third experiment , we join the approaches of the first two studies to analyse the influence of usability and aesthetics within a common design . The results indicate that systems differing in these aspects affect the perception of instrumental and non - instrumental qualities as well as the users’ emotional experience and their overall appraisal of the system . Summarizing our results , we present a model specifying three central c omponents of u ser e xperience and their interrelations ( CUE - Model ) . The model integrates the most important aspects of human – technology interaction and hints at a number of interesting issues for future research . D ans le passe´ , la recherche sur l’interaction entre l’humain et la technologie s’est presque exclusivement concentre´e sur les aspects d’emploi et d’utilite´ . Malgre´ son succe ` s , ce champ de recherche pre´sente une perspective e´troite qui est devenue re´cemment l’objet de critique . En plus des aspects instrumentaux , des facteurs comme les qualite´s esthe´tiques et les expe´riences e´motives jouent un roˆle important pour expliquer pourquoi les gens pre´fe ` rent certains syste ` mes mieux que d’autres . Dans ce qui suit , nous rapportons trois expe´rimentations qui illustrent l’importance de ces facteurs . Dans la premie ` re expe´rimentation , nous e´tudions le roˆle des e´motions dans l’interaction entre l’humain et la technologie en utilisant le mode ` le composant des e´motions de Scherer ( 1984 ) comme cadre the´orique . Une combinaison de me´thodes est de´rive´e de ce mode ` le the´orique et utilise´e pour mesurer les sentiments subjectifs , les expressions motrices , les re´actions physiologiques , les e´valuations cognitives , et le comportement . Les re´sultats de´montrent que la manipulation des proprie´te´s du syste ` me qui ont e´te´ choisies peut causer des diffe´rences dans l’emploi qui affecte les re´actions e´motives de l’usager . La deuxie ` me expe´rimentation examine l’interaction entre les qualite´s instrumentales et non instrumentales du syste ` me . Les re´sultats indiquent que l’e´valuation globale des usagers d’un appareil technique est influence´e a ` la fois par les deux groupes de qualite´s . Dans la troisie ` me expe´rimentation , nous combinons les approches des deux premie ` res e´tudes afin d’analyser l’influence de l’utilite´ et de l’esthe´tique au sein d’un design commun . Les re´sultats indiquent que les syste ` mes qui diffe ` rent par ces aspects affectent la perception des qualite´s instrumentales et non instrumentales ainsi que l’expe´rience e´motive des usagers et leur e´valuation globale du syste ` me . Pour re´sumer nos re´sultats , nous pre´sentons un mode ` le qui spe´cifie trois composantes centrales de l’ e xpe´rience de l’ u sager et leurs interrelations ( Le mode ` le CEU ou CUE - Model en anglais ) . Le mode ` le inte ` gre les aspects les plus importants de l’interaction entre l’humain et la technologie et sugge ` re quelques sujets inte´ressants pour la recherche future . Correspondence should be addressed to Manfred Thu¨ring , Berlin University of Technology , Institute of Psychology and Ergonomics , Franklinstr . 28 - 29 ( FR 2 - 6 ) , 10587 Berlin , Germany ( thuering @ gp . tu - berlin . de ) . This research was supported by the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) as part of the Research Training Group ‘‘Prospective Engineering of Human – Technology Interaction’’ ( no . 1013 ) . We would like to thank Michael Minge and Andreas Wand for their work on the studies and two anonymous reviewers for many clarifying and helpful comments . # 2007 International Union of Psychological Science http : / / www . psypress . com / ijp DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00207590701396674 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGY , 2007 , 42 ( 4 ) , 253 – 264 E n el pasado , los estudios de la interaccio´n humano – tecnologı´a se centraban casi exclusivamente en el aspecto de utilidad y usabilidad . A pesar de los logros de esta lı´nea de investigacio´n u´ltimamente se ha criticado su estrecha perspectiva . Para explicar el por que´ las personas prefieren unos sistemas sobre otros hay que tener en cuenta factores como cualidades este´ticas y la experiencia emocional , la cual juega un rol importante a parte de los aspectos instrumentales . En este estudio se presenta tres experimentos , los cuales reflejan la importancia de estos factores . En el primero de ellos se estudia el rol de las emociones en la interaccio´n humano – tecnologı´a utilizando como base la teorı´a de componentes de las emociones de Scherer ( 1984 ) . De esta teorı´a se deriva una combinacio´n de me´todos empleados para medir los sentimientos subjetivos , expresiones motoras , reacciones fisiolo´gicas , valoraciones cognitivas y comportamiento . Los resultados demuestran que la manipulacio´n de unas propiedades selectivas del sistema puede conducir a diferencias en usabilidad , lo cual afecta las reacciones emocionales del usuario . El segundo experimento estudia la interaccio´n entre las cualidades instrumentales y no instrumentales del sistema . Los resultados demuestran que las valoraciones totales de los dispositivos te´cnicos son influidas por ambos grupos de cualidades . En el tercer experimento hemos juntado las aproximaciones de los dos primeros estudios para analizar la influencia de la usabilidad y este´tica dentro de un disen˜o comu´n . Los resultados indican que los sistemas que difieren en estos aspectos afectan la percepcio´n de las cualidades instrumentales y no instrumentales junto con la experiencia emocional del usuario y la valoracio´n total del sistema . Resumiendo nuestros resultados , presentamos un modelo especificando tres componentes centrales de la experiencia del usuario y sus interrelaciones ( el modelo CUE ) . El modelo integra los aspectos ma´s importantes de la interaccio´n humano – tecnologı´a y sen˜ala numerosas e interesantes investigaciones para el futuro . ‘‘Computing is not about computers anymore . It is about living . ’’ This claim by Nicholas Negroponte 1 ( 1995 , p . 6 ) was made more than 10 years ago , and illustrates how vigorously technol - ogy impacts on all aspects of modern life . The usage of computers and other technical devices has become both a necessity and a matter of course for almost everyone in today’s industrial societies . Hence , it comes as no surprise that a growing amount of research in engineering , computer science , and the humanities has engaged in investigating human – technology interaction . From the beginning , pragmatic issues such as the utility and usability of technical systems have dominated this research ( Nielsen , 1993 ) . Usability , in particular , has served as a key concept for capturing the ‘‘quality of use’’ of interactive systems ( Bevan , 1995 ) , inspiring many investiga - tions on the effectiveness and efficiency of system employment . Mostly , performance - based methods were chosen to assess these two usability components . Effectiveness was studied in experi - ments in which the accuracy and completeness of reaching the goals of a predefined task were measured . Efficiency , on the other hand , was captured by relating the effectiveness of system usage to its costs in terms of effort or time . The third component of the usability concept is user satisfaction ( International Organization for Standardization , 1998 ) , and most approaches to capture it used subjective judgments , which again were mostly based on the efficiency and effectiveness of system usage ( Lindgaard & Dudek , 2003 ) . But is usability all that matters in human – technology interaction ? For instance , Dillon ( 2001 ) proposed that user satisfaction is likely to be influenced by factors such as personal experi - ence with technology , preferred working style , and the aesthetics of system design . Such quality aspects seem to be important for users but are not connected to their performance with the system . Besides , it is important to know how people feel during system usage . Are they empow - ered , annoyed , frustrated , confident , unsure , or wary ? This issue refers to the emotional side of user experience , a side that has been neglected by research on human – technology interaction . To summarize , while effectiveness , efficiency , and satisfaction are definitely important determi - nants of human – technology interaction , other aspects , such as the aesthetics of system design and emotional experiences during system usage , certainly impact on the perceived quality of use as well ( Hassenzahl , 2006 ) . Like others ( e . g . , Hassenzahl & Tractinsky , 2006 ) , we therefore argue for a broader perspective that regards user experiences as a compound of three basic elements : 1 . the perception of instrumental qualities , such as the controllability or the effectiveness of a system , 2 . the perception of non - instrumental qualities , such as visual aesthetics or haptic quality , and 3 . the user’s emotional responses to system behaviour . 1 Nicholas Negroponte is founder and former chairman of the Media Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 254 THU¨RING AND MAHLKE In the following , we report three experiments investigating these components , their interrela - tions , and their dependency on system features and interaction characteristics . The first experi - ment is concerned with the relation between usability and emotions during system usage . The second experiment addresses the influence of both usability features and aesthetics on the perception of instrumental and non - instrumental qualities . The third experiment integrates the approaches of the first two studies and aims at providing a comprehensive view on usability , aesthetics , and emotional user reactions . STUDY 1 : USABILITY AND EMOTIONS Do systems of different usability influence emo - tional experiences during human – technology inter - action ? A variety of methods can be employed to answer this question ( Picard , 1997 ) . They range from physiological measures , such as heart rate and electrodermal activity ( EDA ) , electromyogra - phy ( EMG ) , or pupil responses , to various kinds of survey methods , like questionnaires and inter - view techniques . In order to choose adequate methods for capturing emotional responses during human – technology interaction , a sound theoreti - cal foundation is required . A number of psychological theories emphasize the multifaceted character of emotions . Scherer ( 1984 ) defines emotions as consisting of five aspects or components ( see Figure 1 ) . The ‘‘emo - tion triad’’ proposed by Izard ( 1977 ) is central to his model . It comprises subjective feelings , physiological activation , and motor expressions , and is connected to two other components , i . e . , cognitive appraisals and behavioural tendencies . Since all components of Scherer’s model might play a role in human – technology interaction , Study 1 investigates to which extent each of them is influenced when systems of different usability are employed . Method Participants . Thirty individuals ( half of them women ) participated in the study . They were between 20 and 41 years old ( M 5 25 . 9 , SD 5 3 . 9 ) . Stimuli . Two versions of a computer - based simulation of a mobile phone were designed to induce two different degrees of perceived usability . While the well - designed version was highly usable , the ill - designed one had several usability flaws hampering the solution of particular tasks . The menu options were structured in a confusing way and the buttons were arranged in an unusual order . The difference in usability was secured by comparing usability ratings and performance indicators of both versions in a pre - test with eight participants . In all other respects , both versions were identical . Design . The independent variable of the experi - ment was the factor usability , consisting of two treatments ( well - designed vs . ill - designed ) . It was assumed that the system with usability flaws would lead to negative emotional experiences while the other one would be experienced as positive or neutral . Hence , the two versions should lead to differences with respect to the five emotional components under investigation . Dependent variables . Several methods were used to gain information on the components . To measure subjective feelings , participants filled in the Self - Assessment Manikin ( SAM ) by Lang Figure 1 . The component model of emotions according to Scherer ( 1984 ) . USABILITY , AESTHETICS , AND EMOTIONS 255 ( 1980 ) , which is based on the dimensions of valence and arousal ( Russell , 1980 ) . SAM consists of a 9 - point graphical item ranging from 1 to 9 for each dimension valence and arousal . Heart rate and EDA served as indicators for physiological reactions ( Ward & Marsden , 2003 ) . To measure facial expressions , EMG responses were recorded from the zygomaticus major and corrugator supercilii muscle sites , which control smiling and frowning , respectively ( Partala & Surakka , 2004 ) . With respect to behavioural tendencies , the time required for input operations was recorded as an indicator for the effectiveness of system usage . To collect data on cognitive appraisals , participants filled in a short form based on the Geneva appraisal questionnaire by Scherer ( 2001 ) , which addresses five dimensions : intrinsic pleasantness , novelty , goal / need condu - civeness , coping potential , and norm / self compat - ibility . One item that was applicable in the domain of interactive systems was taken from the appraisal questionnaire for each dimension . The 5 - point items ranged from 1 to 5 ( not at all to extremely ) . Procedure . The experiment took 75 minutes on average . At the beginning , electrodes for measuring physiological reactions and facial expressions were attached , and baseline values were recorded for 2 minutes . The participants started with one system and completed a first group of tasks . Then they switched to the other version to solve five remaining tasks . The pre - sentation order of versions and tasks was balanced . Heart rate , EDA , and EMG were measured during task completion . The interaction with the system was recorded to analyse users’ behaviour . After each task , participants assessed their affective state with the SAM scales . After finishing all the tasks of a set , everyone answered the Geneva appraisal questionnaire . To ensure a realistic emotional involvement , participants were paid depending on their performance , and immedi - ate feedback on their achievements was provided after each task . Results The results of the experiment are summarized in Table 1 . For analysing our data , we always applied t - tests with usability as the independent variable . Significant differences were found between the two versions on the valence and arousal dimensions of the SAM questionnaire , t ( 29 ) 5 2 4 . 51 , p , . 001 and t ( 29 ) 5 7 . 90 , p , . 001 . The well - designed system was rated with positive valence and as less arousing , while the ill - designed system got higher scores on the arousal dimension and lower valence scores . EDA measures were higher for the ill - designed system , t ( 29 ) 5 2 . 64 , p , . 05 , while the heart rate values did not differ , t ( 29 ) 5 2 0 . 41 , p 5 . 68 . The EMG showed heterogeneous results . As expected , the activity of the corrugator supercilii was significantly higher for the ill - designed version , t ( 29 ) 5 2 2 . 19 , p , . 05 but , contrary to our assumptions , the activity of the zygomaticus major was significantly higher as well , t ( 29 ) 5 2 2 . 96 , p , . 01 . Regarding cognitive appraisals , significant dif - ferences between the versions were found on all five dimensions . The well - designed system was experienced as more pleasant , goal conducive , capable , and norm / self compatible as well as less novel than the ill - designed version . The average time required per input was significantly higher for the ill - designed system , t ( 26 ) 5 2 6 . 16 , p , . 001 , indicating that single operations performed with this version took longer than a single operation conducted with the well - designed one . Discussion Different emotional patterns were found for the well - designed and the ill - designed system . The well - designed version led to more positive and less arousing subjective feelings . Physiological TABLE 1 Mean scores and standard deviations on all dependent variables for levels of usability Component & Dependent variable Well - designed version Ill - designed version M SD M SD Subjective feelings SAM—valence ( 1 – 9 ) 6 . 6 1 . 2 3 . 8 1 . 7 SAM—arousal ( 1 – 9 ) 4 . 1 1 . 5 5 . 4 1 . 5 Physiological reactions EDA [ m S ] 2 . 1 1 . 9 2 . 5 2 . 0 Heart rate [ bpm ] 1 . 9 5 . 2 2 . 2 5 . 9 Motor expressions EMG—corrugator supercilii 49 . 0 4 . 4 52 . 0 3 . 5 EMG—zygomaticus major 47 . 6 3 . 6 51 . 6 4 . 1 Cognitive appraisals Pleasantness ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 8 0 . 8 2 . 1 0 . 7 Novelty ( 1 – 5 ) 1 . 6 0 . 7 2 . 7 1 . 1 Goal relevance ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 6 1 . 1 1 . 8 0 . 7 Coping potential ( 1 – 5 ) 3 . 9 0 . 8 2 . 2 0 . 7 Norm / self compatibility ( 1 – 5 ) 4 . 0 0 . 8 2 . 5 0 . 9 Behaviour intention Time per input [ s ] 1 . 7 0 . 4 3 . 1 1 . 2 256 THU¨RING AND MAHLKE measures showed lower EDA values and less activity of the corrugator supercilii when usability was high . A complementary constellation was found for the ill - designed system . Our results regarding the activity of the zygo - maticus major differ from other studies , which found higher activity in relation to positive emotions ( Partala & Surakka , 2004 ) . Instead , our data point in the same direction as experiments that detected high activity of the zygomaticus major for negative emotions ( Lang , Greenwald , Bradley , & Hamm , 1993 ) . Hence , it seems that the activity of the zygomaticus major is not well suited to discriminate between positive and negative feelings , although it might be a strong indicator for emotional responses in general . Similarly , the difference between the two versions regarding heart rate was not significant . For durations of system usage as long as in our experiment , EDA seems to be more sensitive to arousal than heart rate . Appraisal processes of emotions in interactive contexts have scarcely been investigated in other experiments . In our study , the well - designed system was experienced as more positive on all appraisal dimensions than the ill - designed version . Goal conduciveness and coping potential in particular can be attributed directly to high usability . Interestingly , a low degree of novelty was associated with more positive experiences . This relationship may contribute to users’ reluc - tance when new systems are introduced . With respect to behavioural tendencies , our study indicates a noteworthy aspect concerning the efficiency of system usage . Since the average time required per input was significantly higher for the system with usability flaws , negative emotions may contribute to slowing down the user . Of course , further research is required to strengthen this assumption . STUDY 2 : USABILITY AND AESTHETICS In Study 1 , we found an influence of usability on users’ emotional reactions . But which other types of system qualities may determine the way users experience the interaction with a system and which interaction characteristics may shape their overall judgment ? Rafaeli and Vilnai - Yavetz ( 2004 ) pre - sented a model suggesting that the appreciation of any artifact—and hence of any technical system as well—is related to three conceptually distinct aspects : instrumentality , symbolism , and aesthe - tics . While instrumentality corresponds to prag - matic features , such as usefulness and usability , symbolism and aesthetics represent two categories that are independent from instrumental values . Symbolism refers to the meanings and associa - tions a product elicits in the minds of its users . Aesthetics , on the other hand , refer to the sensual experience a product entails , and to the extent to which this experience fits individual goals and preferences . Tractinsky , Katz , and Ikar ( 2000 ) address another important issue with respect to aesthetics . In their study , they investigated the relationship between perceived usability and visual attractive - ness and found that the two were related . Their results suggest that the perception of usability is influenced by the aesthetics of an interactive product . Lindgaard and Dudek ( 2003 ) also inves - tigated this relationship , but failed to find a clear connection between these two system features . Taking theses approaches as a starting point , Study 2 investigates if variations in usability and visual aesthetics influence the perception of instrumental and non - instrumental qualities inde - pendently and analyses their contribution to the overall appraisal of interactive products . Method Participants . Fifty - six individuals ( half of them women ) participated in the study . They were between 20 and 38 years old ( M 5 27 . 0 , SD 5 3 . 7 ) . Stimuli . Portable digital audio players were chosen as the domain of study and simulated on a computer . To produce two versions with different impact on the perceived instrumental qualities , three system features were varied : the number of simultaneously discernible menu lines ( five or two ) , a cue hinting at available but hidden menu items ( present or not ) , and an indicator of the actual position in the menu hierarchy ( given or not ) . The resulting displays are shown in Figure 2 . In a pre - test with 10 participants , it was assured that interaction characteristics were generated which affected the usability of the systems differently , i . e . , the first version was of higher usability in terms of performance and subjective ratings than the second one . In another pre - test , participants ranked seven different - looking players with respect to their attractiveness . The body designs were randomly taken from existing products . The two versions that received extreme rankings ( looking best vs looking worst ) were chosen for the experiment ( see Figure 3 ) . USABILITY , AESTHETICS , AND EMOTIONS 257 The combination of usability and aesthetics features yielded four distinct versions , which were presented on a hand - held 7’’ TFT - display equipped with touch screen functionality for receiving input . Design . A 2 6 2 factorial design was applied in the experiment with the independent variables usability and visual aesthetics . Since each had two treatments ( high and low ) , four combinations could be tested : 1 . high usability and high aesthetics , 2 . high usability and low aesthetics , 3 . low usability and high aesthetics , 4 . low usability and low aesthetics . All participants used and rated two versions of the system , either ( 1 ) and ( 4 ) or ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) , according to a Latin Square plan for repeated measures ( Winer , 1971 ) . We assumed that the factor usabi - lity would effect the perception of instrumental qualities , while the factor visual aesthetics would influence the perception of non - instrumental qualities . Both factors should impact on overall judgments . Dependent variables . Task completion rates and time on task were recorded to ensure that versions of assumed high or low usability differed as planned . Questionnaires were employed to assess the users’ perception of instrumental and non - instrumental qualities . Selected subdimensions of the Subjective Usability Measurement Inventory ( SUMI ; Kirakowski & Corbett , 1993 ) served to rate instrumental qualities ( controllability , effec - tiveness , helpfulness , learnability ) . Each dimension consisted of four items . The answering format had three options : disagree , undecided , agree ( 0 to 2 ) . Scale values were computed for each dimension ( Cronbach’s alpha . 79 for controllability , . 75 for effectiveness , . 67 for helpfulness , . 70 for learn - ability ) . Scale values of the four dimensions were added to receive an overall usability rating ( range from 0 to 8 ) . One dimension of a questionnaire developed by Lavie and Tractinsky ( 2004 ) was used to measure visual aesthetics . The dimension consisted of five 7 - point items ranging form 0 to 6 ( disagree to agree ) . A scale value was obtained by averaging over the five items ( Cronbach’s alpha . 86 ) . The global dimension of the SUMI served for the overall ratings . The four items had the same answering format as the other SUMI items . Scale values were obtained by averaging over the four items ( Cronbach’s alpha . 82 ) . Procedure . The experiment took about 45 min - utes . Presentation order of the players was counterbalanced . For each system , participants rated the visual aesthetics of the player after it was introduced . Then they had 10 minutes to complete the tasks of a first set before the systems were changed , and the tasks of a second set had to be accomplished in another 10 minutes . The interaction with the system was recorded to analyse user performance . Afterwards , partici - pants filled in the questionnaire on perceived usability and gave an overall rating . Results To analyze the data of our Latin Square design for repeated measures , we used mixed linear models Figure 2 . Variation of usability used in Study 2 ( high usability on the left , low usability on the right ) . Figure 3 . Variation of visual aesthetics used in Study 2 ( high aesthetics on the left , low aesthetics on the right ) . 258 THU¨RING AND MAHLKE according to Winer ( 1971 ) . Analyses with the independent variables usability and visual aes - thetics were conducted for testing the effects on all dependent variables ( see Table 2 ) . The behavioural data confirmed the result of the pre - test by showing that the performance with the well - designed systems was better than the performance with the ill - designed systems . We found a sig - nificant effect for usability in the predicted direction for the number of accomplished tasks , F ( 1 , 106 ) 5 9 . 6 , p , . 001 , as well as for the average time on task , F ( 1 , 105 ) 5 10 . 5 , p , . 01 . An analysis of the ratings of perceived usability showed a highly significant main effect for the factor usability , F ( 1 , 104 ) 5 23 . 6 , p , . 001 . For the effect of the factor visual aesthetics on perceived usability , we found a trend , F ( 1 , 104 ) 5 3 . 7 , p , . 10 . With respect to perceived visual aesthetics , the ratings for the aesthetically well - designed version were higher than those for the ill - designed ver - sion , F ( 1 , 106 ) 5 14 . 2 , p , . 001 . The factor usabi - lity had no effect on perceived visual aesthetics . An analysis of the overall judgments showed a highly significant main effect for both factors , usability , F ( 1 , 105 ) 5 9 . 6 , p , . 01 , and visual aesthetics , F ( 1 , 105 ) 5 15 . 8 , p , . 001 , but no interaction . A regression analysis revealed that the variables perceived usability and perceived visual aesthetics predicted 60 % of the variance of the overall judgments , with a greater impact of perceived usability ( beta weight . 68 for perceived usability versus . 24 for perceived visual aesthetics ) . Discussion The behavioural data indicate that the variation of the three selected system features produced differ - ent interaction characteristics and substantially influenced the actual usability of the audio players . Although the usability flaws were rather minor , users perceived the difference and rated the versions accordingly . Similarly , the variation of the body design of the players apparently influ - enced the appeal of the players , leading to less favourable ratings for the less attractive version . The data revealed a trend for an influence of the factor aesthetics on the perceived usability rating , but showed no influence of the factor usability on attractiveness ratings . This result points in the same direction as the study by Tractinsky et al . ( 2000 ) , but more data are required to clarify the connection between perceived usability and aes - thetics definitively . Together , the ratings of usability and aesthetics show that the perception of instrumental and non - instrumental qualities are affected by corre - sponding system features . Moreover , we found an influence of both instrumental and non - instrumental quality perceptions on the overall appraisal of the system . The result of our regression analysis is compatible with the results of other studies ( Hassenzahl , 2003 ; Lindgaard & Dudek , 2003 ) , and demonstrates that a user’s judgment of a system relies on both pragmatic and aesthetic features . The influence of per - ceived usability on the overall appraisal was found to be higher than that of aesthetics . Hassenzahl ( 2003 ) argued that the weight of instrumental and non - instrumental quality per - ceptions depend on situational factors . The fact that our participants were paid according to their performance might be the reason for the higher influence of perceived usability on their overall appraisal . The results of Study 1 and Study 2 indicate that emotions as well as the perception of two types of qualities are influenced by particular system features and contribute to the overall user experience . If all three components are indeed TABLE 2 Mean scores and standard deviations on all dependent variables for levels of usability and aesthetics Component & Dependent variable Low usability High usability Low aesthetics High aesthetics Low aesthetics High aesthetics M SD M SD M SD M SD Performance measures No . of accomplished tasks 4 . 1 1 . 1 3 . 9 1 . 2 4 . 4 1 . 2 4 . 8 1 . 0 Average time on task ( s ) 47 . 2 19 . 2 49 . 4 22 . 1 38 . 3 22 . 1 31 . 6 19 . 1 Quality perceptions Perceived usability ( 0 – 8 ) 2 . 5 1 . 8 2 . 8 1 . 9 4 . 0 2 . 2 5 . 2 2 . 7 Perceived visual aesthetics ( 0 – 6 ) 2 . 9 1 . 1 4 . 6 0 . 7 3 . 5 1 . 1 4 . 8 0 . 8 Overall judgments Global rating ( 0 – 2 ) 0 . 7 0 . 7 1 . 1 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 7 1 . 7 0 . 7 USABILITY , AESTHETICS , AND EMOTIONS 259 central for this experience , it should be possible to influence them together . Our third study was designed to test this assumption . STUDY 3 : USABILITY , AESTHETICS , AND EMOTIONS Do differences in usability and aesthetics influ - ence the perception of instrumental and non - instrumental qualities in a way that is consistent with users’ emotional experience and their overall appraisal of a technical device ? This issue is investigated in Study 3 by varying usability and design features of an interactive system and by analysing their impact on quality perceptions , emotions , and overall appraisals . Method Participants . Forty - eight individuals ( half of them women ) participated in the study . They were between 20 and 34 years old ( M 5 25 . 5 , SD 5 3 . 6 ) . Stimuli . Again , portable digital audio players were chosen as the application domain , and the same tasks and variations of usability were used as in Study 2 . With respect to system features capable of influencing the perception of non - instrumental qualities , we manipulated the visual aesthetics by focusing on design dimensions derived from Leder and Carbon ( 2005 ) as well as Han , Kim , Yun , Hong , and Kim ( 2004 ) : symmetry ( high or low ) , colour combination ( high or low colour differ - ences ) , and shape ( rounded or angular ) . A pre - test secured the distinctiveness of the two versions resulting from the combination of these features ( see Figure 4 ) . Design . The experimental design was the same Latin Square plan for repeated measures as in Study 2 . We assumed that the versions of higher usability and more appealing design would influ - ence the perceptions of attractiveness and usability and result in more positive emotional reactions and more favourable overall judgments . Dependent variables . We used the same beha - vioural measures and questionnaires to assess the user’s perception of usability ( Cronbach’s alpha . 83 for controllability , . 82 for effectiveness , . 70 for helpfulness , . 70 for learnability ) and visual aes - thetics ( Cronbach’s alpha . 76 ) as in Study 2 . As in Study 1 , subjective data regarding emotional user reactions was measured with the Self - Assessment Manikin ( SAM ) . EDA and heart rate were selected as physiological measures . EMG data of the zygomaticus major and the corrugator supercilii were recorded . Two techniques served to measure overall judgments : the global dimension of the SUMI ( Cronbach’s alpha . 84 ) and a ranking of the player versions . Procedure . The experiment lasted 60 minutes on average . At the beginning , baseline values for heart rate , EDA and EMG were recorded for 2 minutes . The participants started with one player version and completed a first set of tasks . Then they switched to the other version to accomplish the tasks of a second set . Before working on the tasks , subjects rated the visual aesthetics of the version . Behavioural data , heart rate , EDA , and EMG were measured during task completion . After finishing a task , participants filled in the SAM scales . When all tasks of a set were solved , the usability of the system was rated , and at the end of the experiment participants ranked the two versions they had used . Results As in Study 2 , mixed linear models analyses ( Winer , 1971 ) with the independent variables usability and visual aesthetics served to test our hypotheses for all dependent variables . All results are summarized in Table 3 . With respect to the behavioural data , the findings of Study 2 were replicated . The two versions of different usability yielded differences in central interaction character - istics . We found a significant main effect of usability for both the number of accomplished Figure 4 . Variations of visual aesthetics used in Study 3 ( high aesthetics on the left , low aesthetics on the right ) . 260 THU¨RING AND MAHLKE tasks , F ( 1 , 92 ) 5 92 . 2 , p , . 001 , as well as for the average time on task , F ( 1 , 83 ) 5 44 . 5 , p , . 001 . Compared to the system of lower usability , the highly usable system led to a greater percentage of correct solutions and to a faster performance . The analyses of usability and aesthetics ratings showed that our variations of system properties entailed the predicted differences in users’ quality perceptions . With respect to perceived instru - mental qualities , a significant difference was found for the factor usability in the mean ratings based on the SUMI questionnaire , F ( 1 , 92 ) 5 62 . 7 , p , . 001 . With respect to the perception of non - instrumental qualities , there was a significant effect of the factor visual aesthetics , F ( 1 , 85 ) 5 55 . 2 , p , . 001 . No other significant differences were found . The analyses of subjective emotional data revealed significant main effects for the factors usability and visual aesthetics on the dimensions valence and arousal : usability : valence , F ( 1 , 90 ) 5 38 . 7 , p , . 001 ; arousal , F ( 1 , 78 ) 5 19 . 2 , p , . 001 ; aesthetics : valence , F ( 1 , 90 ) 5 4 . 7 , p , . 05 ; arousal , F ( 1 , 78 ) 5 5 . 5 , p , . 05 . Lower usability and visual aesthetics led to less positive valence and to higher arousal . No interaction effects were found . The physiological data partially underlined these results . We found a significant effect of the factor usability on EDA , F ( 1 , 89 ) 5 17 . 8 , p , . 001 , but no effect on the heart rate . EDA was higher in the case of low usability . With respect to users’ facial expressions , we found a statistical trend for the factor usability concerning the activity of the corrugator supercilii , F ( 1 , 89 ) 5 2 . 8 , p , . 10 . Activity tended to be higher in the low usability conditions . No significant differences were found for the activity of the zygomaticus major . The ratings on the global dimension of the SUMI showed a significant main effect of the factor usability , F ( 1 , 89 ) 5 69 . 5 , p , . 001 , and a trend for the factor visual aesthetics , F ( 1 , 89 ) 5 3 . 2 , p , . 10 . All participants preferred the highly usable and attractive version to the version of lowest usability and attractiveness . For mixed combinations , 71 % of the participants preferred the system of high usability and low aesthetics to the system of low usability and high aesthetics , while 29 % favoured the reverse combination . Discussion The rationale underlying the experiment was to vary selected system features in order to produce distinctive interaction characteristics leading to different perceptions of instrumental and non - instrumental qualities , which in turn should cause different emotional reactions and corresponding overall judgments . If the perception of instrumen - tal and non - instrumental together with emotional reactions constitute the major components of user experience , an experiment following this rationale should produce patterns of behavioural data , ratings , and physiological measures that are internally consistent but also distinct for systems of different usability and aesthetics . TABLE 3 Mean scores and standard deviations on all dependent variables for levels of usability and aesthetics Component & Dependent variable Low usability High usability Low aesthetics High aesthetics Low aesthetics High aesthetics M SD M SD M SD M SD Performance measures No . of accomplished tasks 3 . 8 1 . 3 3 . 8 1 . 2 4 . 9 0 . 5 4 . 9 0 . 3 Average time on task ( s ) 47 . 0 24 . 3 46 . 6 20 . 1 25 . 0 13 . 2 22 . 7 11 . 4 Quality perceptions Perceived usability ( 0 – 8 ) 3 . 1 2 . 0 4 . 0 2 . 3 6 . 6 1 . 0 6 . 6 1 . 5 Perceived visual aesthetics ( 0 – 6 ) 2 . 2 1 . 2 4 . 1 1 . 2 2 . 7 1 . 5 3 . 9 1 . 0 ) Subjective feelings SAM—valence ( 1 – 9 ) 4 . 3 1 . 8 4 . 7 1 . 9 6 . 2 1 . 2 7 . 1 1 . 5 SAM—arousal ( 1 – 9 ) 5 . 8 1 . 4 5 . 2 1 . 7 4 . 4 1 . 4 3 . 8 1 . 5 Physiological reactions EDA [ m S ] 14 . 9 15 . 4 9 . 1 16 . 2 0 . 6 8 . 1 0 . 9 8 . 2 Heart rate [ bpm ] 0 . 7 7 . 4 2 6 . 8 13 . 8 2 1 . 4 11 . 3 2 . 9 16 . 1 Motor expressions EMG—corrugator supercilii 7 . 4 15 . 1 7 . 4 15 . 9 2 . 4 15 . 8 2 . 2 15 . 2 EMG—zygomaticus major 1 . 0 11 . 8 0 . 7 11 . 1 4 . 5 15 . 1 2 . 9 13 . 9 Overall judgments Global rating ( 0 – 2 ) 0 . 5 0 . 5 0 . 8 0 . 7 1 . 4 0 . 4 1 . 6 0 . 5 USABILITY , AESTHETICS , AND EMOTIONS 261 Did we find such patterns ? First of all , varia - tions of system properties with respect to usability as well as to aesthetics had the predicted impact on the perception of both types of qualities . Systems with features leading to a high degree of usability and attractiveness received better ratings than their impaired counterparts . The results of the SAM questionnaire were consistent with these findings and showed corresponding differences for the subjective feelings of our participants . They also revealed that the effect of usability was greater than the one of visual aesthetics for both valence and arousal . Consequently , the system of high usability and appealing design was experienced as most satisfying , while the system of low usability and least attractiveness was regarded as most annoying . The EMG data and other physiological measures support this interpretation . It must be noted , though , that we did not find the expected differences in all measured variables . The overall judgments pointed in the same direction as the ratings of perceived qualities and emotions , and again revealed a greater impact of usability on the overall appraisal of the systems . In summary , it can be concluded that our experimental variations produced the desired effects in terms of distinct patterns of behavioural data , physiological responses , and ratings . GENERAL DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH Our studies support the notion of user experience as a compound of emotions and perceptions of instrumental as well as non - instrumental qualities . To summarize our results , we propose a model that integrates these components into a common framework . We call this framework CUE - Model , where CUE stand for c omponents of u ser e xperi - ence ( see Figure 5 ) . User experience is gained in the course of interacting with a technical device . Usually , this interaction aims at solving a particular task , takes place in a certain context , and extends over a limited period time . Attributes of the user—such as knowledge or skills—as well as features of the system—such as functionality and interface design—affect the interaction and determine its major characteristics . Since these characteristics Figure 5 . The CUE - Model ( c omponents of u ser e xperience ) . 262 THU¨RING AND MAHLKE are frequently encountered throughout system usage , we assume that they are perceived as inherent qualities of the system . The CUE - Model distinguishes two types of such qualities . Instrumental qualities concern the experienced support the system provides and the ease of its use . Features such as the controllability of the system and the effectiveness of its function - ality fall into this category . Non - instrumental qualities , on the other hand , concern the look and feel of the system . Features such as visual aesthetics or haptic quality belong to this class . Hence , while instrumental qualities are closely related to the usability and usefulness of a system , non - instrumental qualities result from its appeal and attractiveness . The perception of both types of qualities is likely to influence the third component of user experi - ence , i . e . , the emotions that accompany the interaction process . For example , sluggish system responses may affect perceived effectiveness and lead to impatience or even to frustration and anger . In contrast , a futuristic and innovative design may impact on perceived visual aesthetics and cause surprise , curiosity , or pleasure . In accordance with Scherer ( 1984 ) , the CUE - Model characterizes emotions as episodes of subjective feelings accompanied by specific physiological reactions and expressive behaviour . Such episodes may occur repeatedly and shape the user’s emo - tional experience with a technical device . Finally , all three components of user experience should impact on the overall appraisal of the system and thus influence the user’s future decisions and behaviour . For reasons of simplicity , the CUE - Model only specifies relations that can be justified on the basis of our experiments . Therefore , it assumes that the relationships between the components are one - directional ( e . g . , there is no mutual influence of the two types of quality perceptions ) . Of course , these assumptions are preliminary since mutual influ - ences as well as feedback loops may exist . We will address these possibilities in our future research to increase the specificity of the CUE - Model . Further research topics concern the temporal characteristics of human – technology interaction as proposed by Hassenzahl and Sandweg ( 2004 ) , as well as user characteristics , parameters of the situation , and further dimensions of non - instrumental qualities as discussed by Mahlke ( 2006 ) . Together , all these topics offer demanding opportunities to reach beyond ‘classical’ usability approaches in order to gain a more comprehensive view on human – technology interaction than we have today . REFERENCES Bevan , N . ( 1995 ) . Measuring usability as quality of use . Software Quality Journal , 4 , 115 – 130 . Dillon , A . ( 2001 ) . Beyond usability : Process , outcome and affect in human – computer interactions . Canadian Journal of Library and Information Science , 26 , 57 – 69 . Han , S . H . , Kim , K . J . , Yun , M . H . , Hong , S . , & Kim , J . ( 2004 ) . Identifying mobile phone design features critical to user satisfaction . Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing , 14 , 15 – 29 . Hassenzahl , M . ( 2003 ) . The thing and I : Understanding the relationship between user and product . In M . Blythe , C . Overbeeke , A . F . Monk , & P . C . Wright ( Eds . ) , Funology : From usability to enjoyment . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Hassenzahl , M . ( 2006 ) . Hedonic , emotional , and experi - ential perspectives on product quality . In C . Ghaoui ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of human computer interaction ( pp . 266 – 272 ) . London : Idea Group . Hassenzahl , M . , & Sandweg , N . ( 2004 ) . From mental effort to perceived usability : Transforming experi - ences into summary assessments . In CHI ’04 proceedings on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 1283 – 1286 ) . New York : ACM Press . Hassenzahl , M . , & Tractinsky , N . ( 2006 ) . User experi - ence—a research agenda . Behaviour & Information Technology , 25 , 91 – 97 . International Organization for Standardization . ( 1998 ) . ISO 9241—Ergonomic requirements for office work with visual display terminals ( VDTs ) . Part 11 : Guidance on usability . ( available from www . iso . org / iso / en / CatalogueListPage . CatalogueList ) . Geneva , Switzerland ; ISO . Izard , C . E . ( 1977 ) . Human emotions . New York : Plenum Press . Kirakowski , J . , & Corbett , M . ( 1993 ) . SUMI : The Software Usability Measurement Inventory . British Journal of Educational Technology , 24 , 210 – 212 . Lang , P . J . ( 1980 ) . Behavioral treatment and bio - behavioral assessment : Computer applications . In J . B . Sidowski , H . Johnson , & T . A . Williams ( Eds . ) , Technology in mental health care delivery systems ( pp . 119 – 137 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Lang , P . J . , Greenwald , M . K . , Bradley , M . M . , & Hamm , A . O . ( 1993 ) . Looking at pictures : Affective , facial , visceral , and behavioral reactions . Psychophysiology , 30 , 261 – 273 . Lavie , T . , & Tractinsky , N . ( 2004 ) . Assessing dimensions of perceived visual aesthetics of web sites . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 60 , 269 – 298 . Leder , H . , & Carbon , C . C . ( 2005 ) . Dimensions in appreciation of car interior design . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 19 , 603 – 618 . Lindgaard , G . , & Dudek , C . ( 2003 ) . What is the evasive beast we call user satisfaction ? Interacting with Computers , 15 , 429 – 452 . Mahlke , S . ( 2006 ) . Aesthetic and symbolic qualities as antecedents of overall judgments of interactive products . In N . Bryan - Kinns , A . Blanford , P . Cruzon , & L . Nigay ( Eds . ) , People and computers XX—Engage ( pp . 57 – 64 ) . London : Springer . Negroponte , N . ( 1995 ) . Being digital . New York : Alfred A . Knopf . USABILITY , AESTHETICS , AND EMOTIONS 263 Nielsen , J . ( 1993 ) . Usability engineering . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Partala , T . , & Surakka , V . ( 2004 ) . The effects of affective interventions in human – computer interac - tion . Interacting with Computers , 16 , 295 – 309 . Picard , R . ( 1997 ) . Affective computing . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Rafaeli , A . , & Vilnai - Yavetz , I . ( 2004 ) . Instrumentality , aesthetics and symbolism of physical artifacts as triggers of emotion . Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science , 5 , 91 – 112 . Russell , J . A . ( 1980 ) . A circumplex model of affect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 39 , 1281 – 1288 . Scherer , K . R . ( 1984 ) . On the nature and function of emotion : A component process approach . In K . R . Scherer & P . Ekman ( Eds . ) , Approaches to emotion ( pp . 293 – 317 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . Scherer , K . R . ( 2001 ) . Appraisal considered as a process of multi - level sequential checking . In K . R . Scherer , A . Schorr , & T . Johnstone ( Eds . ) , Appraisal processes in emotion : Theory , methods , research ( pp . 92 – 120 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Tractinsky , N . , Katz , A . S . , & Ikar , D . ( 2000 ) . What is beautiful is usable . Interacting with Computers , 13 , 127 – 145 . Ward , R . D . , & Marsden , P . H . ( 2003 ) . Physiological responses to different WEB page designs . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 59 , 199 – 212 . Winer , B . J . ( 1971 ) . Statistical principles in experimental design . New York : McGraw - Hill . 264 THU¨RING AND MAHLKE