1 3 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00401 - 015 - 1479 - z ORIGINAL PAPER PDCD10 ( CCM3 ) regulates brain endothelial barrier integrity in cerebral cavernous malformation type 3 : role of CCM3‑ERK1 / 2‑cortactin cross‑talk Svetlana M . Stamatovic 1 · Nikola Sladojevic 1 · Richard F . Keep 2 , 3 · Anuska V . Andjelkovic 1 , 2 Received : 21 April 2015 / Revised : 9 September 2015 / Accepted : 10 September 2015 / Published online : 18 September 2015 © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 TJ complex stability and consequently barrier integrity , with constant hyperpermeability to inulin . A potential link between CCM3 depletion and altered cortactin was tonic activation of MAP kinase ERK1 / 2 . ERK1 / 2 inhibition increased cortactin expression and incorporation into the TJ complex and improved barrier integrity . This study high - lights the potential role of CCM3 in regulating TJ complex organization and brain endothelial barrier permeability . Keywords CCM3 · Tight junction · Cortactin · Brain endothelial barrier · Permeability Introduction Cerebral cavernous malformations ( CCM ) are the most common type of brain vascular malformation . They are characterized by multiple or isolated vascular dilations / lesions located in any region within the CNS [ 16 , 31 ] . Based on magnetic resonance imaging , CCM prevalence is 0 . 4 – 0 . 9 % , which represents 5 – 13 % of all vascular mal - formations . They occur equally in males and females , with a mean age at clinical presentation of 10 – 40 years [ 8 , 49 ] . Nearly , 50 – 80 % of patients with CCM have the sporadic form ( solitary lesion ) with a negative family history , while 8 – 19 % are inherited ( multiple lesions ) [ 3 ] . Patients with CCM are subject to hemorrhagic stroke , seizures , epilepsy , migraine - like headaches and other neurological sequelae [ 1 , 2 , 13 , 31 , 49 ] . In both inherited ( CCM1 , CCM2 and CCM3 ) and spontaneous CCM ( sCCM ) , lesions are grossly defined as enlarged and thin - walled vascular sinusoids lined by a thin endothelium without intervening brain parenchyma . These sinusoidal structures can be thrombosed as well as surrounded by hemosiderin deposits and gliosis resulting Abstract Impairment of brain endothelial barrier integ - rity is critical for cerebral cavernous malformation ( CCM ) lesion development . The current study investigates changes in tight junction ( TJ ) complex organization when PDCD10 ( CCM3 ) is mutated / depleted in human brain endothelial cells . Analysis of lesions with CCM3 mutation and brain endothelial cells transfected with CCM3 siRNA ( CCM3 - knockdown ) showed little or no increase in TJ transmem - brane and scaffolding proteins mRNA expression , but pro - teins levels were generally decreased . CCM3 - knockdown cells had a redistribution of claudin - 5 and occludin from the membrane to the cytosol with no alterations in protein turnover but with diminished protein – protein interactions with ZO - 1 and ZO - 1 interaction with the actin cytoskel - eton . The most profound effect of CCM3 mutation / deple - tion was on an actin - binding protein , cortactin . CCM3 depletion caused cortactin Ser - phosphorylation , dissocia - tion from ZO - 1 and actin , redistribution to the cytosol and degradation . This affected cortical actin ring organization , Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s00401 - 015 - 1479 - z ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . * Anuska V . Andjelkovic anuskaa @ med . umich . edu 1 Department of Pathology , University of Michigan , Medical School , 7520A MSRB I , 1150 W Medical Center Dr , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 - 5602 , USA 2 Department of Neurosurgery , University of Michigan , Medical School , R5018 BSRB , 109 Zina Pitcher Place , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 - 2200 , USA 3 Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology , University of Michigan , Medical School , R5018 BSRB , 109 Zina Pitcher Place , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 - 2200 , USA 732 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 from prior hemorrhage [ 6 , 14 , 16 , 72 ] . Histologically , CCM have poorly formed tight junctions ( TJs ) between adjacent endothelial cells , with gaps often noted between individual cells [ 5 , 6 , 50 ] . Pericytes are scant and no astrocytic foot processes and no normal nervous tissues are present within the lesions [ 34 , 52 , 61 , 63 ] . A common finding of all CCM lesions is increased vascular permeability due to disor - ganization of the TJ complex , a critical structure regulating brain endothelial barrier tightness [ 6 , 23 , 39 , 73 ] . In recent years , significant progress has been made in understanding CCM pathogenesis . Deletion or functional mutations in three separate genes have been identified in association with familial CCM : Krit1 ( CCM1 ) , MGC4607 ( CCM2 ) and PDCD10 ( CCM3 ) . These proteins appear to interact with cytoskeletal and interendothelial cell junc - tion proteins , generating a typical pathological substrate in CCM : altered microvascular and blood – brain barrier ( BBB ) permeability [ 5 , 32 , 41 , 45 , 56 ] . In CCM1 mutations , vas - cular hyperpermeability results from a dysfunctional Krit / Rap1 pathway leading to inadequate TJ assembly . CCM2 mutations cause overactive RhoA / ROCK signaling , a path - way responsible for cytoskeletal remodeling and endothe - lial permeability [ 4 , 17 , 33 , 59 ] . CCM3 ( PDCD10 ) is a pleiotropic molecule involved in a variety of signaling events associated with angiogenesis , barrier permeability , apoptosis , oxidative metabolism and Golgi complex polari - zation [ 9 , 19 , 27 , 74 ] . Although CCM3 mutations cause early and severe brain vascular lesions , the target of the mutation is still uncertain [ 12 ] . CCM3 resides within two complexes , which define its cell function , with CCM1 / CCM2 ( 20 % ) and as part of STRIPAK complex ( 80 % ) [ 21 , 22 , 27 ] . Based on experi - mental and clinical data , CCM1 - 3 proteins are physically associated in order of CCM1 – CCM2 and CCM2 – CCM3 , and the complex is required for correct protein localization at endothelial cell – cell junctions , vascular tubular and net - work stability as well as cell survival and proliferation [ 10 , 21 , 22 ] . In particular , CCM2 – CCM3 interaction is indi - cated as maintaining stability of CCM3 and CCM2 proteins and protection from proteasomal degradation and normal endothelial cell network formation [ 10 ] . A recent prot - eomic study found that CCM3 in the STRIPAK complex established mutually exclusive interactions with PIP2A , germinal center kinases III ( Stk24 , Stk25 , Mst4 ) and corti - cal actin - binding protein 2 ( CTTNBP2 ) . It may participate in regulating VEGFR2 receptor stability , PIP2A enzyme association with membrane phospholipids like PIP2 and PIP3 , apoptosis and endothelial cell growth [ 9 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 27 , 60 ] . CCM3 localization and molecular interaction in both complexes are considered critical for understand - ing CCM3 function , potential overlap between CCM2 and CCM3 pathology ( due to CCM2 and CCM3 direct inter - action ) and differences from CCM1 and CCM2 pathways ( RhoA , Cdc42 signaling and actin rearrangement ) [ 10 , 21 , 66 , 74 ] . How CCM3 regulate the TJ complex assembly and permeability , which target and signaling pathways are criti - cal for development of CCM3 lesion is still awaits clarifi - cation . The present study addresses the role of CCM3 in regulating BBB integrity and defines potential targets of CCM3 action at the TJ complex . Materials and methods Brain tissue Human brain CCM tissue samples were obtained from the Angioma Alliance Biobank ( http : / / www . angiomaalliance . org , Norfolk , VA , USA ) . The study includes five clinically and genotypically analyzed CCM lesions and 4 normal brain controls . Cases included patients with CCM3 muta - tion ( CCM3 c . 474 + 1G > A ) and the sporadic form of CCM without CCM1 , CCM2 and CCM3 mutations . According to medical records , brain tissue was collected from patients with single and multiple CCM lesions after surgical resec - tion , with clinical symptoms , which included headache , seizures , poor vision , behavioral changes , history of hem - orrhagic stroke and no history of gamma knife radio - surgery . Control brain slides were obtained from ProSci Incorporated ( Poway , CA , USA ) and had no cerebrovas - cular malformations . Details of the brain samples utilized in this study are included in Supplemental Table 1 . Ethical approval for these studies was obtained from the Institution Review Board , University of Michigan Medical School . Fresh frozen tissue was fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde and cryoprotected with 30 % of sucrose and cut at 10 μ m while formalin fixed . Paraffin - embedded brain tissue was cut at 4 μ m . CCM lesions and human brain tissue were used for immunohistochemistry , PCR array and Western blot analysis . Laser capture microdissection ( LCM ) Tissue sections from CCM3 lesions and control brain sec - tions were mounted on pen slides for LCM . Sections were deparaffinized by incubations in xylene for 2 . 5 and 1 . 5 min and rehydrated by consecutive incubations in 100 % etha - nol , 70 % ethanol and water , each for 1 min . Samples were stained with Mayer’s hematoxylin and briefly washed with diethyl pyrocarbonate - treated tap water , air - dried and stored at 4 °C . Endothelial cells from lesion and small caliber brain blood vessels ( diameter ~ 10 μ m ) were dis - sected using a Veritas LCM system ( Arcturus Engineering Inc ) . Microdissected material ( ~ 500 brain endothelial cells ) was collected directly , taking care to avoid contamination with surrounding glial cell components , by placing specific 733 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 polymer film mounted on optically transparent caps ( Cap - Sure , Arcturus Engineering ) on the section . The caps with captured endothelial cells were mixed with RNA extraction buffer ( Arcturus Engineering ) and samples were prepared following the manufacturer’s instructions . For Western blot analyses , dissected tissue / brain endothelial cells was pre - pared by a two - step digestion protocol using 0 . 1 M Tris – HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 1 M DTT , 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) polyethylene gly - col 20 , 000 , 4 % SDS and 8 M in 0 . 1 M Tris – HCl pH 8 . 5 , described by Wisniewski and Mann [ 71 ] . Cell culture Human brain endothelial cells ( HBMEC ) were obtained from ScienCell ( Carlsbad , CA , USA ) . Cells were plated on fibronectin - coated flasks and grown in endothelial cell medium , 5 % fetal bovine serum , 1 % endothelial cells growth supplement and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin solu - tion in 5 % CO 2 / 95 % air at 37 °C . In all experiments , cells were used at 1st or 2nd passage . Cell transfection Optimal inhibition of CCM3 was achieved after transfec - tion with a cocktail of three siRNA oligonucleotides tar - geting three different regions of the CCM3 ( PDCD10 ) gene ( siRNA ID 22175 , 22176 and 22177 ; Life Technol - ogy ) . Control ( mock ) cells were transfected with Silencer Select Negative control siRNA ( sicontrol # 1 ) . Inhibition of cortactin ( CTTN ) was achieved after transfection with either human CTTNshRNA or a cocktail of three unique CTTN 27mer siRNA duplexes ( OriGene Technologies , Inc ) . For rescue experiments , human CCM3 ( PDCD10 ) and cortactin cDNA were purchased from OriGene Tech - nologies , Inc . In general , HBMEC were transfected with either annealed siRNAs , shRNA or cDNA using Lipo - fectamine 2000 ( Applied Biosystems ) transfection agent and were subcultured 24 h later . Cells were used 24 h later for experiments . The efficiency of the transient deple - tion was tested 1 – 7 days after transfection by Western blot analysis ( Supplemental Fig . 1 ) . Cell viability was measured after transfection ( 0 – 72 h ) and after retransfec - tion 3 days later using a CellTiter 96 ® Non - Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay ( Promega ) . Proliferative ability and apoptosis were examined in CCM3 - knockdown cells ( CCM3 - KD ) by BrdU Cell Proliferation Assay ( Cell sign - aling Technology ) and Caspase - 3 Activity Assays ( Life Technology ) , respectively . Cell treatment Cells were exposed to inhibitors for 0 – 24 h . Control cells were exposed to assay media ( DMEM ) alone . The following inhibitors ( all from Sigma - Aldrich ) were used : 5 µg / ml cycloheximide , 10 μ M PD98059 , 25 μ g / ml Leu - peptin , 10 μ M MG - 132 and 50 μ M E3 ubiquitin ligase inhibitor ( SMER3 ) . Cell viability assays were performed to exclude possible toxic effects and only cells with 98 % of viability were used in experiments . The effects of treatment and inhibitors were evaluated by Western blot . Immunofluorescence and quantification of fluorescence intensity Paraffin - embedded brain tissue was dewaxed and rehy - drated through xylene and a series of alcohols ( 100 , 95 , 70 and 50 % ) . Antigen retrieval was performed by boil - ing slides in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer ( pH 6 . 0 ) for 10 min , followed by cooling and washing in PBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) . Cell samples washed in PBS and fixed in 4 % paraform - aldehyde . For immunofluorescence staining , brain and cell samples were preincubated in blocking solution containing 5 % normal goat serum and 0 . 05 % Triton 100X ( Sigma Aldrich ) in PBS . Samples were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with the following primary antibodies : anti - CD31 , Ve - cadherin and β - catenin ( BD Bioscience ) JAM - A ( R & D System ) , claudin - 5 - Alexa - Fluor 488 conjugated , occludin - Texas Red , ZO - 1 - Alexa Fluor 594 , claudin - 1 - Alexa Flour 488 , claudin - 3 , claudin - 1 ( Life Science Technology ) . Reac - tions were visualized by fluorescein - or Texas Red - conju - gated anti - mouse and / or anti - rabbit antibodies . All sam - ples were viewed on a confocal laser - scanning microscope ( LSM 510 , Zeiss ) . The actin cytoskeleton in cell cultures was visualized with phalloidin - Alexa 568 ( Life Science Technology ) . To measure the fluorescent intensity by tissue array , three sections per CCM case and control slides were cho - sen and on each histological slide ten spots were randomly selected [ 24 ] . Images ( 30 images per each staining ) for quantitative florescence analysis were acquired using a Zeiss LSM META 510 laser - scanning microscope with sequential mode to avoid interference between channels and saturation . Contrast , brightness and the pinhole were held constant . Analysis was done in ImageJ software by outlining the endothelial cells ( CD31 + ve staining ) in the lesion or blood vessels in controls in each image and the fluorescence intensity in the enclosed area was measured . Background intensity was subtracted from the fluorescence intensity [ 24 ] . Co‑immunoprecipitation and Western blotting For co - immunoprecipitation , cells were washed with PBS and lysed in 1 ml RIPA buffer ( 50 mM Tris – HCl , pH8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 5 % Na - deoxycho - late , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 10 μ g / ml 734 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 aprotinin , 10 μ g / ml leupeptin , and phosphatase inhibi - tor cocktail ; Sigma Aldrich ) . Lysates were centrifuged at 10 , 000 rpm and exposed to anti - ZO - 1 , - cortactin or - β - actin antibody for 1 h . RIPA buffer equilibrated EZviewRed pro - tein G affinity Gel beads ( Sigma Aldrich ) was then added to the lysate – antibody mixture and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C . The beads were then extensively washed with RIPA buffer and bound protein eluted by adding 2 × sample buffer and boiling at 100 °C . Samples were examined by Western blot using anti - claudin - 5 , - occludin or - JAM - A antibodies . For Western blots , formalin - fixed and paraffin - embed - ded CCM3 and control brain tissue samples were prepared by a two - step digestion protocol [ 71 ] . Western blotting was performed using : anti - JAM - A ( R & D Systems ) , anti - clau - din - 1 , - 3 and - 5 , and - occludin ( Life Science Technology ) , anti - ZO - 1 , ubiquitin , - cortactin , β - actin ( Cell Signaling Technology ) , anti - CD31 , Ve - cadherin and β - catenin ( BD Bioscience ) antibodies . Immunoblots were exposed to sec - ondary antibodies either anti - mouse or anti - rabbit IgG Fc - HRP ( Abcam ) or mouse anti - rabbit light chain HRP anti - body ( Millipore ) and visualized with a chemiluminescent HRP substrate kit and analyzed using Image J software . Cell fractionation analysis of tight junctions The cellular distribution of TJ proteins was analyzed using a ProteoExtract Subcellular Proteome Extraction kit ( Cal - biochem ) . Membrane , cytosolic , cytoskeletal and nuclear fractions were separated . Specificity of fractions was con - firmed using anti - cytochrome P450 reductase ( membrane fraction ) , anti - calpain ( cytosolic fraction ) and anti - vimen - tin ( actin cytoskeletal fraction ) antibodies [ 58 ] . For “total cell lysate” samples , cells were washed in PBS , scraped and rinsed in 1 ml of the lysis buffer ( 25 mM Tris – HCl pH 7 . 4 with 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 % Triton X - 100 , and 1 % deoxycholate ) . Isolated fractions were analyzed by Western blotting . In some experiments , the actin cytoskeletal fraction was further fractionated into a high - density Triton - insoluble fraction , for separation of the cytoplasmic actin cytoskel - eton , and a low - density Triton - insoluble fraction , for sepa - ration of the membrane - associated cytoskeleton . Briefly , cells were washed with ice - cold PBS and incubated with lysis buffer ( 25 mM Tris – HCl pH 7 . 4 with 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 10 μ g aprotinin , 10 μ g pepstatin - A , 1 mM vanadate and 1 mM PMSF ) . Samples were then centrifuged at 15 , 600 g for 5 min at 4 °C and the sediment ( high - density actin cytoskeleton ) was collected while the supernatant was further centrifuged at 100 , 000 g for 4 h at 4 °C with the resulting sediment representing the low - den - sity membrane cytoskeleton [ 43 ] . Both collected sediments were resuspended in 300 μ l of lysis buffer ; protein content was determined by Bradford protein assay ( Thermo Scien - tific ) and mixed with Pierce LDS Sample Buffer ( Thermo Scientific ) . Real‑time RT‑PCR Microvessels from CCM3 lesions and control brain tissue were collected using LCM . Total RNA from the microves - sels and hBMEC was prepared using TRIZOL ( Life Tech - nologies ) . Single - strand cDNA was synthesized using RT 2 first strand kit ( QIAGEN ) . Real - Time PCR was performed for cortactin proteins using SABioscience primers ( QIA - GEN ) . Analysis of junction protein mRNA expression in CCM3 , sCCM lesion and control brain tissue was done using Cell Junction PCR array ( QIAGEN ) . The expression pattern of junction protein mRNA was evaluated using soft - ware provided by the manufacturer . Brain endothelial cell monolayer permeability The permeability of brain endothelial cell monolayers to FITC - inulin ( 5 kDa , Sigma Aldrich ) , Dextran Cascade Blue ( 20 kDa ) and Dextran Texas Red ( 40 kDa , Life Sci - ence Technology ) were measured as described previously [ 26 , 58 ] . Briefly , hBMEC were plated on a Transwell Dual chamber system at a density of 1 × 10 5 and transfected with CCM3 or cortactin siRNA and corresponding control ( nonsense siRNA ) . Monolayer permeability was measured daily from 1 – 7 days . Permeability experiments were ini - tiated by adding a cocktail of both tracers ( 10 μ g / ml ) , in phenol red free DMEM ( Life Science Technology ) in the donor ( apical ) chamber . Media were sampled after 30 min from the receiving chamber . Fluorescence intensity was determined by fluorescent reader ( Tecam ) and concentra - tion determined from a standard curve . The permeability ( P ; cm / min ) of the monolayer for each time points ( days ) ( T ) was calculated using the following equation : where C ( B ) and C ( B ) T are , respectively , the concentrations of tracer in the basal chamber at the start and at the end of the time interval of 30 min ( in μ g / ml ) , and V ( B ) is the volume of the basal chamber ( in ml ) . C ( A ) and C ( A ) T are , respectively , the tracer concentrations in the apical ( donor ) chamber at the start and at the end of the time interval of 30 min ( in μ g / ml ) and A is the area of the filter ( cm 2 ) [ 26 , 58 ] . Cell density was evaluated after tracer permeability measurement by MTS assay ( Promega ) . The number of cells was determined from an established standard curve of cell concentration vs . formazan absorbance . The examined monolayers had approximately 1 . 5 × 10 5 cells / well . P = ( C ( B ) T − C ( B ) ) × V ( B ) × 2 ( C ( A ) + C ( A ) T ) × A 735 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 Kinase activation assay The functional assay for ERK1 / 2 ( Life Technology ) , RhoA ( Cytoskeleton ) , and ROCK ( Cell Biolabs , Inc . ) activity was performed in total cell lysates , according to the manufac - turer’s instruction . Statistical analysis Unpaired Student’s t test and one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) were used to test group level differences . For post hoc comparisons , Bonferroni’s tests were applied . A probability value < 0 . 05 was regarded as statistically signifi - cant . For assessment of junction protein level after normali - zation over the time period after addition of cycloheximide was analyzed by nonlinear regression with GraphPad Prism assuming one - phase exponential decay . Results Tight junction and brain endothelial barrier properties in CCM3 lesions Since CCM lesions have different pathological substrata for their development , we classified the CCM cases based on confirmed presence CCM gene mutations . The analy - sis focused on junction protein expression in two types of lesion : ( a ) CCM3 lesions , which had a confirmed CCM3 mutation ( CCM3 c . 474 + 1G > A ) and no CCM3 protein pre - sent in endothelial cells along the lesion , and ( b ) sporadic CCM ( sCCM ) lesions that had a characteristic mulberry - like structure , no CCM3 , CCM1 or CCM2 gene mutations and CCM3 protein present in endothelial cells ( Supplemen - tal Fig . 1a ) . Junction protein mRNA expression was analyzed in brain endothelial cells in CCM3 , sCCM lesion and control brain tissue by laser capture microdissection . There were increases in the mRNA expression of transmembrane ( clau - din - 5 , occludin , JAM - A , JAM - B and JAM - C ) , scaffold - ing [ ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 , Afadin - 6 ( Af - 6 ) , nectin ] , actin - binding ( VASP , cortactin ) and adherens junction ( Ve - cadherin , α , β - cateinin and p120 ) proteins in both CCM3 and sCCM lesions compared to control . In particular , there were six - tenfold increases in the transmembrane TJ proteins clau - din - 1 and claudin - 3 in both CCM3 and sCCM lesions , due to very low mRNA expression of claudin - 1 and - 3 in con - trol microvessels ( Fig . 1a ) . The upregulation in tight and adherens junction ( AdJ ) protein mRNA expression was not , however , associated with increased protein expression as assessed by three techniques . Analyses of brain endothelial cells in con - trol , CCM3 and sCCM by tissue array showed significant down - regulation in two transmembrane TJ proteins , clau - din - 5 and occludin , the scaffolding protein ZO - 1 , as well as two actin - binding proteins and components of the cor - tical actin ring , cortactin and VASP ( p < 0 . 001 ) . In par - ticular , there was a very marked reduction in cortactin in CCM3 lesions compared with controls and sCCM lesions ( Fig . 1b ) . The AdJ proteins , Ve - cadherin , β - catenin and α - catenin showed a slight but not significant down - regula - tion in both CCM3 and sCCM lesions ( Fig . 1b ) . The pattern of junction protein expression and localiza - tion was further analyzed in tissue by immunofluorescence and by LCM with Western blot . Initial immunostaining with an endothelial cell marker , CD31 , showed that all cystic formations in both CCM3 and sCCM lesions were layered with CD31 + ve endothelial cells while there was very low or absent expression of CD31 in the surrounding tissue ( Fig . 2a ) . The CD31 + endothelial cells in the lesions had noticeable alterations in the pattern of immunostaining for the transmembrane TJ proteins , claudin - 5 and occludin . Claudin - 5 had a fragmented pattern of staining with areas of complete loss in CCM3 lesions and , to a lesser degree , in sCCM lesions compared with control ( continuous stain - ing around the vessel lumen ) . A similar pattern was also found for occludin immunostaining in both lesion types and there was notable expression in “surrounding” tissue ( Fig . 2a ) . By Western blot , both claudin - 5 and occludin had marked decreases in protein expression , particularly in CCM3 lesions . In contrast , staining of JAM - A , another transmembrane TJ protein , was similar in control , CCM3 and sCCM vessels with continuous staining along the lumen and a slight alteration ( increase ) in protein expres - sion in sCCM lesions ( Fig . 2a , b ) . Immunostaining for ZO - 1 in the endothelial cells of CCM3 lesions was mostly decreased and punctate . There were less pronounced changes in sCCM lesions ( Fig . 2a , b ) . Regarding AdJ pro - teins , Ve - cadherin expression and localization in CCM3 lesions varied from a fragmented pattern to absence of any staining in some cystic formations , while β - catenin did not show any specific changes in presence or localization in CCM lesions . However , total Ve - cadherin and β - catenin protein expression was not significantly changed in CCM3 lesions , while there was a slightly higher expression in sCCM lesions ( Ve - cadherin ; p < 0 . 05 ; Fig . 2b ) , although such a difference was not found by tissue array ( Fig . 1b ) . Analysis of cortactin distribution showed significant loss of endothelial staining along cystic formations , particularly in CCM3 lesions and to a lesser degree with sCCM . Sporadic cortactin + ve cells were found in surrounding tissue . Taken together , the above results indicate that CCM3 and sCCM lesions have significant alterations in junction protein expression and localization at the brain endothe - lial barrier . Three techniques for examining protein expression all found that there are decreased levels of key 736 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 transmembrane TJ proteins , claudin - 5 and occludin , dimin - ished ZO - 1 expression and most profoundly reductions in actin - binding proteins . In particular , cortactin expression is down - regulated in CCM3 lesions . Tight junction and brain endothelial barrier properties with CCM3 knockdown To analyze the role of CCM3 in regulating endothelial bar - rier integrity , we generated CCM3 - depleted cells by trans - fecting hBMEC with CCM3 siRNA . Transient transfection and knockdown of CCM3 were optimized to induce pro - longed ( 7 days ) depletion of CCM3 mRNA ( > 80 % ) and protein ( > 65 % ) by re - transfecting after 3 days with min - imal toxic effects ( Supplement Fig . 1b , c and d ) . Loss of CCM3 did not significantly alter the proliferative capacity of the hBMEC ( Supplement Fig . 1d ) . Prolonged deple - tion of CCM3 was important as , in vitro , brain endothelial barrier integrity manifested by barrier impermeability and complete TJ complex formation occurred on day 5 – 7 after initial plating . Thus , the generated CCM3 knockdown cells ( CCM3 - KD ) represent a good system to define whether , when and how CCM3 affects the brain endothelial TJ complex . Brain endothelial barrier integrity in control and CCM3 - KD cells was assessed by in vitro permeability assay using different sized tracers , sodium fluorescein ( 376 Da ) , FITC - labeled inulin ( 5 kDa ) , dextran - Texas red ( 20 and 40 kDa ) between 1 and 7 days after initial plating . In control cells , the permeabilities of each tracer decreased progressively with time , reaching very low levels by ~ day 5 ( Fig . 3a ) . In CCM3 - KD cells , there was a decline in the permeability to 40 and 20 kDa dextran with time , but this was slower than in control cells and incomplete by 7 days . Thus , compared to control monolayers , CCM3 - KD cell monolayers were significantly hyperpermeable at days 3 – 7 for 40 kDa dex - tran and days 2 – 7 for 20 kDa dextran ( Fig . 3a ) . In addi - tion , for the small molecular weight tracer inulin ( 5 kDa ) , the permeability of the CCM3 - KD monolayers did not decrease with time and were hyperpermeable compared to Fig . 1 a mRNA microarray and b tissue array for junctional proteins present in brain tissue of control ( age and gender matched ) , CCM3 lesion ( case with CCM3 c . 474 + 1G > A mutation ) and sCCM ( cases with sporadic form of CCM ) . For the mRNA microarray array ( a ) , data represent relative mRNA expression , while the tissue array ( b ) is total florescence intensity of 30 analyzed spots on CCM lesions or blood vessels in controls ( see “Materials and methods” section ) . Values are mean ± SD , n = 3 control brain , n = 2 CCM3 cases , n = 3 sporadic CCM cases ( sCCM ) . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 and * * * p < 0 . 001 compared to control samples 737 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 control cells from day 2 to 7 ( all p < 0 . 001 ; Fig . 3a ) . A sim - ilar difference in barrier permeability between CCM3 - KD and control cells was found for another small molecular tracer , sodium fluorescein ( 376 Da ; data not shown ) . The differences in barrier permeability with CCM3 - KD were not due to differences in endothelial cell density , which were not significantly different from controls from day 1 to 7 ( Fig . 3a ) . Thus , CCM3 depletion in brain endothelial cells caused increased barrier permeability for a variety of molecular weight tracers , with particularly marked effects on inulin . We further analyzed the TJ complex as a potential rea - son for the increased barrier permeability with CCM3 - KD . The expression pattern of TJ protein was examined at the mRNA and protein levels . CCM3 knockdown did not sig - nificantly affect claudin - 5 , occludin , JAM - A and ZO - 1 mRNA expression ( Fig . 3b ) . However , there was reduced protein expression of the transmembrane TJ proteins , claudin - 5 and occludin ( but not JAM - A ) and the scaffold - ing protein ZO - 1 at the time when the persistent barrier permeability to the tracer 20 kDa dextran was established , 5 days after initial plating ( Fig . 3b ) . Due to these alterations in TJ protein content in CCM3 - KD cells , we examined whether CCM3 decreases the half - life of TJ proteins using the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide ( CXD ) . Brain endothelial cells were trans - fected with CCM3 or control nonsense siRNA and then treated with CXD for an additional 3 – 24 h and TJ protein levels analyzed by Western blot . At each time interval , the effect of CXD on TJ protein levels did not differ between control and CCM3 - KD cells ( Fig . 3c ) . Because total protein expression is not a sufficient indi - cator of TJ complex organization , further analysis focused on the localization and interactions of transmembrane and scaffolding TJ proteins with CCM3 loss . Cell fractiona - tion indicated that transmembrane TJ proteins , claudin - 5 , Fig . 2 a Representative immunofluorescent images of junctional protein expression in CCM3 and sCCM brain lesions . Mag . × 10 and × 20 ( H & E control , CCM3 and sCCM ) . Scale bar 20 μ m . b Representative images of Western blot analysis of TJ proteins ( clau - din - 5 , occludin , ZO - 1 and JAM - A ) , AdJ proteins ( Ve - cadherin and β - catenin ) and an actin - binding protein , cortactin in all CCM3 and sCCM laser capture microdissection samples . Relative protein expression in control , CCM3 and sCCM samples was determined by semi - quantitative analysis . Values are mean ± SD , n = 3 con - trol brain , n = 2 CCM3 cases , n = 3 sporadic CCM cases ( sCCM ) . * p < 0 . 05 and * * p < 0 . 01 compared to control samples 738 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 occludin and JAM - A , were predominantly localized in the membrane fraction in control cells while in CCM3 - KD cells claudin - 5 and occludin redistributed to the cytosol fraction . The scaffolding protein ZO - 1 showed slight displacement in CCM3 - KD cells with loss from the actin cytoskeleton fraction ( ACF ; Fig . 3d ) . However , analysis of TJ protein interactions , which are key for functionally active TJ com - plexes , indicated TJ disorganization . Co - immunoprecipi - tation with Western blotting indicated a loss of interaction / colocalization between the scaffolding protein ZO - 1 and the transmembrane TJ proteins claudin - 5 , occludin and JAM - A in CCM3 - KD cells compared to control cells ( Fig . 3e ) . In 739 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 addition , there was diminished interaction between ZO - 1 and actin filaments in CCM3 - KD cells ( Fig . 3e ) , which is supported by a detectible alteration in the distribution of ZO - 1 in the actin cytoskeleton fraction ( Fig . 3e ) . These data indicate that reducing CCM3 in brain endothelial cells affects TJ complex organization by chang - ing transmembrane protein : scaffolding protein and scaf - folding protein : actin cytoskeleton interactions . This , in turn , may affect brain endothelial barrier properties ( e . g . , hyperpermeability to small molecular weight tracers ) and may represent a solid substrate for developing CCM3 - type lesions . CCM3 targets cortactin expression and function at the tight junction complex Cortactin was the most affected protein in the CCM3 brain tissue analysis ( Figs . 1 , 2 ) . Thus , we further analyzed cortactin protein and mRNA expression in CCM3 - KD brain endothelial cells . CCM3 depletion increased cortac - tin mRNA expression ( p < 0 . 05 ) but cortactin protein was significantly down - regulated ( p < 0 . 001 ; Fig . 4a , b ) . These results are similar to those from the patients with CCM3 lesions . In controls , cortactin was present in the cell cyto - sol and on the border of brain endothelial cells and colocal - ized with ZO - 1 ( Fig . 4c ) . However , CCM3 knockdown led to the disappearance of cortactin from the brain endothe - lial cell border while the cytosolic portion was still present ( Fig . 4c ) . Altered cortactin localization was further examined by cell fractionation . In control cells , cortactin was mostly present in the membrane and actin cytoskeletal frac - tions , resembling the finding from immunofluorescence . In CCM3 - KD cells , cortactin was mostly redistributed between the cytosol and actin cytoskeleton fractions ( Fig . 4d ) . Due to the close association of cortactin with the actin cytoskeleton fraction in cell cytosol and mem - brane ( cortical actin ring ) , we isolated two Triton - insoluble fractions : high density ( HD ) , which has high accumula - tion of cytosolic actin filaments , and low density ( LD ) , which predominantly contains membrane - associated actin filaments . In control cells , cortactin was predominantly found in the membrane actin fraction ( low - density Triton - insoluble fraction ) and the cytosol actin cytoskeleton frac - tion ( high - density Triton - insoluble fraction ) ( Fig . 4d ) . However , in CCM3 - KD cells , there was a shift of cortac - tin from the low - and high - density Triton - insoluble frac - tions to the cytosol fraction ( Triton - soluble fraction ) , with complete absence from membrane actin cytoskeleton frac - tion and decreased presence in the actin cytoskeleton frac - tion ( Fig . 4d ) . This redistribution of cortactin was further associated with a loss of colocalization / interaction between cortactin and ZO - 1 , as well as cortactin with actin filaments ( Fig . 4e ) . A potential role of cortactin in the barrier hyperpermea - bility with CCM3 - KD cells was confirmed in rescue exper - iments where CCM3 cDNA was added to CCM3 - KD cell ( with efficiency of expression of 50 % for mRNA or 41 % for CCM3 protein ) . Adding CCM3 to CCM3 - KD cells par - tially reestablished cortactin protein expression in CCM3 - KD cells ( Fig . 4f ) and reduced the CCM3 - KD monolayer permeability to 5 kDa inulin ( day 5 of initial platting : PC CCM3 - KD = 5 . 43 ± 0 . 78 × 10 − 4 cm / min compared to PC CCM3 - KD + CCM3 = 3 . 43 ± 0 . 31 × 10 − 4 cm / min , p < 0 . 01 ; Fig . 4g ) . Thus , CCM3 could be involved in regulating TJ complex stability and barrier permeability by regulating Fig . 3 a Permeability coefficient of brain endothelial monolayers for FITC - inulin ( 5 kDa ) , Cascade Blue - dextran ( 20 kDa ) and Texas red - dextran ( 40 kDa ) in control ( scrambled siRNA ) and CCM3 - KD ( CCM3 siRNA ) transfected cells measured daily from 1 to 7 days after initial plating . Data represent mean ± SD for n = 5 independ - ent , experiments . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 and * * * p < 0 . 001 comparing control and CCM3 - KD cells . The total cell density in all experimental groups was assessed after each permeability measurement by MTT assay and is presented as the measured OD value for formazan . Note that there are no significant changes in density of cells ( 1 – 1 . 5 × 10 5 cells / well ) over the time period of 1 – 7 days or between control and CCM3 - KD groups . b Real - time RT - PCR and Western blot analysis of claudin - 5 , occludin , JAM - A and ZO - 1 expression in control and CCM3 - KD ( siRNA ) cells 7 days after initial plating . Data represent mean ± SD , n = 3 ; * * p < 0 . 01 and * * * p < 0 . 001 comparing control and CCM3 - KD cells . Western blot image is one of three independent experiments . GAPDH is an internal control . c TJ protein ( claudin - 5 , occludin , JAM - A and ZO - 1 ) turnover rate was analyzed following treatment with cycloheximide in CCM3 - KD and control cells . Semi - quantitative densitometry for TJ protein was performed and normal - ized to β - tubulin as an internal control in three independent experi - ments . Cycloheximide ( CXD ) was added for 0 – 24 h in concentration of 5 μ g / ml . Time point 0 is start for CXD treatment and for control and CCM3 - KD cells was taken as 100 % of certain protein expres - sion . The half - life of the proteins was : claudin - 5 , control cells = 6 . 4 h ( R 2 = 0 . 902 ) , CCM3 - KD cells = 6 . 7 h ( R 2 = 0 . 929 ) . Occludin , control = 5 . 5 h ( R 2 = 0 . 968 ) and CCM3 - KD = 4 . 0 h ( R 2 = 0 . 960 ) . ZO - 1 , control = 8 . 8 h ( R 2 = 0 . 883 ) and CCM3 - KD = 7 . 4 h ( R 2 = 0 . 845 ) . JAM - A , control = 5 . 6 h ( R 2 = 0 . 923 ) and CCM3 - KD = 4 . 6 h ( R 2 = 0 . 889 ) , n = 3 independent experiments . There were no significant differences in TJ protein turnover between control and CCM3 - KD cells . d Cell fractionation and Western blot analysis of claudin - 5 , occludin , JAM - A and ZO - 1 distribution in CCM3 - KD and control cells showed an increased accumulation of claudin - 5 and occludin in the cytosol fraction ( CF , TritonX - 100 soluble fraction ) in CCM3 - KD cells compared to control cells where almost all of those proteins was in the membrane fraction ( MF , TritonX - 100 insolu - ble ) . ZO - 1 was distributed in the cytosol fraction ( CF , TritonX - 100 soluble ) and actin cytoskeleton fraction ( ACF , TritonX - 100 insolu - ble ) in control cells , while in CCM3 - KD cells was predominantly present in the CF . Blots represent one of three successful experi - ments . Cytochrome P450 reductase , calpain and vimentin represent the markers for membrane , cytosol and actin cytoskeleton fractions . e Co - immunoprecipitation ( IP ) of ZO - 1 with either claudin - 5 , occlu - din , JAM - A or β - actin showed close association of claudin - 5 , occlu - din , JAM - A and β - actin with ZO - 1 in control cells and diminished or completely lost interaction in CCM3 - KD cells . Western blotting image is one of three independent experiments . Input represents the 50 % of total cell extract used for immunoprecipitation ◂ 740 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 cortactin expression in brain endothelial cells , suggesting cortactin is a major target for the dysfunctional of TJ com - plex in CCM3 lesions . CCM3 KD‑induced cortactin depletion is mediated by proteasome degradation The difference between the effects of CCM3 - KD on cortac - tin mRNA ( increased ) and protein ( decreased ) expression suggested a potential effect on cortactin protein turnover . This was examined by comparing cortactin protein expres - sion in control and CCM3 - KD cells in the presence of cycloheximide ( CXD ) for 3 – 24 h to inhibit de novo cort - actin synthesis . Cortactin in CCM3 - KD cells had acceler - ated degradation , with a half - life of 3 h compared to 6 h in control cells ( Fig . 5a ) . In addition , treating CCM3 - KD and control cells with the transcription inhibitor actinomycin D did not alter cortactin expression ( data not shown ) indicat - ing that CCM3 is directly involved in regulating cortactin protein expression at the post - transcriptional level ( Fig . 5a ) . To examine the mechanism of cortactin degradation , CCM3 - KD and control cells were treated with CXD for 3 – 24 h in the presence either a proteasome ( MG - 132 ) or a lysosomal ( leupeptin ) inhibitor . MG - 132 , but not leupeptin , 741 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 blocked cortactin degradation in both control and CCM3 - KD cells pinpointing that proteasome pathway as the one involved in cortactin turnover and the degradation induced by CCM3 - KD ( Fig . 5b ) . Furthermore , prior to degrada - tion , cortactin underwent ubiquitination and inhibiting that process with SMER3 also reduced cortactin depletion in CCM3 - KD cells ( Fig . 5c ) . Thus , treating CCM3 - KD cells with MG - 132 or SMER3 increased cortactin protein levels up to twofold ( Fig . 5d ) . MG - 132 also reduced the perme - ability of CCM3 - KD monolayers to inulin - FITC ( Fig . 5e ) . These results indicate that reduced CCM3 accelerates cort - actin degradation via the proteasomal – ubiquitination path - way , which in turn affects TJ stability . Cortactin modification in condition of CCM3 depletion Cortactin appearance in the cytosolic fraction of CCM3 KD cells and consequent degradation indicate that it might be in a dysfunctional form , which could trigger ultimate degradation . Thus , further analysis focused on the “status” of cytosolic cortactin in CCM3 - KD cells . We first ana - lyzed the kinetics of cytosolic cortactin accumulation dur - ing CCM3 depletion . The progressive loss of CCM3 from 1 to 5 days after siRNA transfection was associated with increased cortactin accumulation in the cytosolic frac - tion ( Supplemental Fig . 1 ; Fig . 6a ) . Due to the importance of phosphorylation in cortactin function , phosphoryla - tion status was examined in all isolated cell fractions in CCM3 - KD and control cells by immunoprecipitation with cortactin antibody and blotting with pan phospho - serine , - threonine or - tyrosine antibodies . Cortactin accumulation in the cytosolic fraction with CCM3 - KD was predomi - nantly associated with increased cortactin phosphorylation on Ser residues ( Fig . 6a ) but not Tyr or Thr residues ( data not shown ) . Cortactin phosphorylation on Tyr residues was mostly associated with the actin cytoskeleton ( high - density Triton fraction ) and membrane ( low density ) fraction of cortactin in control cells , while CCM3 - KD decreased Tyr - phosphorylated cortactin in both those fractions ( Fig . 6a ) . Control cells contained very low levels of pS405 phos - pho - cortactin in the cell cytosol while in CCM3 - KD cells at day 5 after transfection and retransfection there was increased accumulation pS405 - cortactin evaluated by both Western blot and immunofluorescence ( Fig . 6b ) . Rescuing CCM3 in CCM3 - KD cells decreased the accumulation of pS405 phospho - cortactin in cell cytosol ( Fig . 6b ) . The pS405 - cortactin was not associated with either ZO - 1 or β - actin suggesting that pS405 - cortactin has an afunctional role in sealing or stabilizing the brain endothelial cell TJ complex ( data not shown ) . There was no phospho - Tyr421 cortactin in the cell cytosol fraction ( data not shown ) in CCM3 - KD cells . Overexpressing cortactin in CCM3 - KD cells increased total cortactin protein levels and slightly increased cortactin association ZO - 1 and β - actin ( Fig . 6b ) . Importantly , overexpressing cortactin in these cells improved brain endothelial barrier integrity as meas - ured as with inulin ( PC CCM3 - KD = 6 . 06 ± 0 . 75 × 10 − 4 vs . PC overCCM3 - KD - CTTN = 3 . 48 ± 0 . 86 × 10 − 4 cm / min ; p < 0 . 01 ; Fig . 6d ) . This suggests that cortactin is one target for CCM3 and its loss could be marker of barrier instability in CCM3 lesions . The phosphorylation on Ser residues pinpointed that loss of CCM3 might trigger the activity of some Ser kinases . Based on prior studies [ 28 , 29 , 76 ] , Erk1 / 2 is linked to phos - phorylation of cortactin serine residues . On the other hand , CCM molecules , and particularly CCM2 , are involved in regulating RhoA and ROCK activity in endothelial cells and Rho kinase is overactive with mutated / dysfunctional CCM2 . Therefore , ERK1 / 2 , RhoA and ROCK activ - ity was analyzed in CCM3 - KD cells . CCM3 - KD caused long - lasting activation of ERK1 / 2 ( Fig . 7a ) but very low activity of RhoA and ROCK I ( Supplemental Fig . 2a and b ) . The direct involvement of ERK1 / 2 in altering cortactin Fig . 4 a , b Real - time RT - PCR and Western blot analysis of cortac - tin ( CTTN ) expression in control and CCM3 - KD cells showed higher cortactin mRNA expression in CCM3 - KD cells but significantly decreased protein levels . mRNA and protein levels are presented as expression relative to GAPDH , an internal control . Data represent mean ± SD , n = 3 ; * p < 0 . 05 , * * * p < 0 . 001 between control and CCM3 - KD cells . Western blot image is one of three independent experiments . c Cortactin expression was examined by double label immunofluorescence with ZO - 1 in control and CCM3 - KD cells . Cortactin staining was present in control cells in cell cytosol and as continuous staining at cell borders associated with ZO - 1 . In CCM3 - KD cells , cortactin staining completely disappeared from the cell border . Scale bar 20 μ m . d The initial cell fractionation and West - ern blot analysis of cortactin distribution showed cortactin present in the membrane ( MF ) and actin cytoskeleton fraction ( ACF ) in con - trol cells , while CCM3 - KD cells had a redistribution of cortactin to the cytosol ( CF ) and actin cytoskeleton fraction ( ACF ) . Additional analysis of the actin cytoskeleton fraction by fractionation into high - density Triton100X insoluble ( HD - Triton insol ) and low - density Tri - ton100X insoluble ( LD - Triton insol ) fractions . Cortactin presence in the membrane actin cytoskeleton ( LD - Triton insol ) and cytoplas - mic actin ( HD - Triton insol ) fractions was diminished in CCM3 - KD cells compared to control cells . Western blot image is one of three independent experiments . e Co - immunoprecipitation of either ZO - 1 or β - actin with cortactin showed close association of cortactin with ZO - 1 and β - actin in control cells and diminished or completely lost interaction in CCM3 - KD cells . Western blot image is one of three independent experiments . Input represents the 50 % of total cell extract used for immunoprecipitation . f Rescuing of CCM3 - KD cells with CCM3 cDNA restored both CCM3 and cortactin protein expression . Western blot image is one of three independent experi - ments . Semi - quantitative densitometry for cortactin and CCM3 pro - tein expression was performed and normalized to β - tubulin as an internal control in five independent experiments . Graph represents mean ± SD , n = 5 ; * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 comparing control and CCM3 - KD cells and CCM3 - KD and CCM3 - KD + CCM3 cells , respectively . g It also improved brain endothelial barrier integrity in CCM3 - KD cells with decreased permeability to FITC - Inulin . Graph represents mean ± SD , n = 3 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ◂ 742 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 Fig . 5 a Cortactin ( CTTN ) protein turnover rate was analyzed fol - lowing treatment with cycloheximide ( CXD ) in CCM3 - KD and con - trol cells . Semi - quantitative densitometry for cortactin was performed using β - tubulin as internal control . Cycloheximide ( 5 μ g / ml ) was added for 0 – 24 h . Time point 0 is start for CXD treatment and for control and CCM3 - KD cells was taken as 100 % cortactin expression . The half - life of cortactin was in 5 . 0 h in controls ( R 2 = 0 . 916 ) and 2 . 3 h in CCM3 - KD cells ( R 2 = 0 . 972 ) . Cortactin in CCM3 - KD cells had a decreased half - life compared with control cells . b Cortactin degradation in control and CCM3 - KD cells was also examined in the presence of leupeptin ( 25 μ M ) , an inhibitor of lysosomal enzymes , or MG - 132 ( 10 μ M ) , an inhibitor of proteasome activity , during treatment with CXD . Representative Western blot images and semi - quantitative densitometry ( graph ) showed that inhibition of protea - some activity by MG132 prevented cortactin degradation in both con - trol and CCM3 - KD cells and abolished the difference in degradation between the two types of cells . In contrast , leupeptin did not affect cortactin degradation in either cell type . Graphs show mean ± SD , n = 3 independent experiments . c The ubiquitination of cortactin ( CTTN ) in control and CCM3 - KD cells was detected by Western blot using anti - ubiquitin antibody . d Cortactin protein expression in CCM3 - KD cells was rescued by inhibiting proteasome activity with MG132 or by treatment with the ubiquitin E3 ligase inhibitor SMER3 ( 50 μ M ) . Western blot image is one of three independent experi - ments . e Permeability coefficient ( PC ) for FITC - inulin in CCM3 - KD and control cells after treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 . Data represent means ± SD for n = 3 independent experi - ments , * * * p < 0 . 001 743 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 expression and cortactin S405 phosphorylation was fur - ther confirmed using an inhibitor , PD098059 , or ERK1 / 2 siRNA . In both conditions , pS405 cortactin levels were attenuated and cortactin presence in the cytosol ( Triton - soluble fraction ) was reduced in CCM3 - KD brain endothe - lial cells ( Fig . 7b ) . On the other hand , cortactin expression was increased and shifted towards the membrane ( low - density Triton - insoluble ) and actin cytoskeletal ( high - den - sity Triton - insoluble ) fractions . Inhibiting ERK1 / 2 activity in CCM3 - KD cells with PD098059 or ERK1 siRNA also improved barrier integrity with decreased permeability to inulin ( Fig . 7c ) . These results indicate that loss of CCM3 , Fig . 6 a Phosphorylation status of cortactin in control and CCM3 - KD cells . Western blot analysis of the cytosol ( triton - soluble frac - tion ) and both actin cytoskeleton fractions , low - density TritonX - 100 insoluble ( membrane ) and high - density TritonX - 100 insoluble actin cytoskeleton ( cytosol ) fractions , showed increased serine phospho - rylation ( p - Ser ) of cortactin in the cytosol fraction in CCM3 - KD cells while tyrosine phosphorylation ( p - Tyr ) was depleted in both actin cytoskeleton fractions . Western blot image is one of three independ - ent experiments for 1 – 5 days after CCM3 siRNA transfection . b Rep - resentative images of immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis of cortactin in CCM3 - KD and control cells showed accumulation of p - Serine405 ( pS405 ) phosphorylated cortactin in CCM3 - KD cells in cytosol fraction ( calpain + fraction ) . Rescuing CCM3 in CCM3 - KD cells decreased the p - Serine405 ( pS405 ) cortactin . Western blot image is one of three independent experiments . c Cortactin overex - pression in CCM3 - KD cells ( CTTN over ) rescued the expression of cortactin . Western blot analysis indicated the cortactin presence in CCM3 - KD cells at day 1 after transfection . The overexpression of cortactin also lead to establish the cortactin - ZO - 1 and cortactin - β - actin interaction in CCM3 - KD cells indicating that rescuing cortac - tin may improve the cortactin availability for “physiological” func - tion . Western blot image is one of three independent experiments . d Overexpression of cortactin in CCM3 - KD cells also improved brain endothelial barrier integrity with decreased permeability to FITC - inulin . Graph represents means ± SD , n = 3 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 compar - ing to control and * * p < 0 . 01 comparing CCM3 - KD and CCM3 - KD CTTN over cells 744 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 by modifying ERK1 / 2 activity , regulates cortactin function at the TJ complex and , thereby , TJ complex stability and brain endothelial barrier integrity . Cortactin plays an important role in regulating brain endothelial barrier integrity Cortactin loss in brain endothelial cells was a com - mon major finding with CCM3 lesions and CCM3 - KD cells . Thus , we further investigated how cortactin affects TJ complex organization in brain endothelial cells . We knocked down cortactin using either shRNA to produce a stable cell line or by transient transfection with cortac - tin shRNA . Both types of knockdown depleted cortactin between 65 – 95 % ( Fig . 8a ) . Loss of cortactin significantly affected brain endothelial barrier integrity , with increased permeability for inulin ( 5 kDa ) and dextran ( 20 and 40 kDa ) . As shown in Fig . 8a , cortactin - KD cells did not establish complete endothelial barrier integrity after initial plating , showing a steady increased permeability compared to control ( mock ) transfected cells for the small molecular tracer , inulin 5 kDa ( day 7 PC CTTNKD = 6 . 5 ± 0 . 14 × 10 − 4 ; control PC control = 0 . 04 ± 0 . 03 × 10 − 4 cm / min , p < 0 . 001 ) . There was also a slower establishment of impermeability to 20 kDa dextran with cortactin - KD ( e . g . , at day 7 : PC CTTNKD = 0 . 63 ± 0 . 13 × 10 − 4 vs . PC con - trol = 0 . 07 ± 0 . 03 × 10 − 4 cm / min ; p < 0 . 05 ; Fig . 8a ) . Cort - actin - KD and control cells did not show significant differ - ences in permeability to 40 kDa dextran ( data not shown ) . Analysis of TJ complex organization in cortactin - KD cells compared to control cells indicated that claudin - 5 and occludin staining on the lateral membrane was dis - continuous with both proteins also appearing in the cyto - sol ( Fig . 8b ) . Furthermore , ZO - 1 showed more frequent zigzag structure with cortactin depletion and increased punctate staining not seen in control cells ( Fig . 8b ) . There were marked actin cytoskeleton alterations with cortactin - KD . The cortical actin ring structure was lost and there was formation of short stress fibers ( Fig . 8b ) . Analysis of the TJ protein interaction indicated that cortactin - KD cells had decreased to complete loss of claudin - 5 : ZO - 1 , occludin : ZO - 1 as well as ZO - 1 : actin filament interactions . These results pinpoint that cortactin plays a role in TJ com - plex organization and the establishment of essential pro - tein – protein interactions ( Fig . 8c ) . Taking into consideration results from CCM3 - KD and cortactin - KD cells and the similar alterations at the TJ com - plex , CCM3 may regulate brain endothelial barrier integrity by altering the functional status and presence of cortactin at the TJ complex . Diminished cortactin expression , muta - tion or loss of CCM3 may affect TJ complex stability and alter essential TJ protein interactions . This could represent a solid substrate for developing the CCM3 lesion . Discussion The present study aimed to establish the role of CCM3 in regulating brain endothelial barrier integrity and potential targets of CCM3 action at the TJ complex . We found that : ( a ) CCM3 regulates brain endothelial barrier integrity and TJ complex organization . ( b ) One target of CCM3 is the actin - binding protein cortactin , a part of the cortical actin Fig . 7 a CCM3 - KD cells showed a steady increased activity of ERK1 / 2 compared to control cells . ERK1 / 2 activity was measured by Western blot analysis of phospho - ERK1 / 2 ( Western blot ) as well as ERK1 / 2 activation assay ( graph ) . The positive control for ERK1 / 2 activation was epidermal growth factor ( EGF ; 10 ng / ml ) . Data repre - sent an average ± SD for n = 3 independent experiments , * p < 0 . 05 , * * * p < 0 . 001 vs . control cells . b Inhibition of ERK1 / 2 activity either via PD098059 or transient transfection with ERK1 siRNA showed depleted pS405 cortactin in cell cytosol and increased total cortactin expression in CCM3 - KD cells . Western blot image is one of three independent experiments . c ERK1 / 2 inhibition either with PD098059 or ERK1 / 2 siRNA was also associated with stabilization of brain endothelial barrier and decreased permeability to FITC - Inulin . Data represent an average ± SD for n = 4 independent experiments . * p < 0 . 05 vs . no PD098059 treatment , * * * p < 0 . 001 vs . no ERK1 / 2 siRNA transfection 745 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 ring , which provides support for essential interactions inside the TJ complex . ( c ) Loss of CCM3 causes steady activation of MAP kinase ERK1 / 2 responsible for cortactin phosphorylation and increased degradation . ( d ) Blocking ERK1 / 2 in brain endothelial cells prevented TJ complex disassembly and brain endothelial barrier hyperpermeabil - ity with CCM3 depletion . Before discussing the implications of these findings , a potential technical concern needs to be addressed : using an in vitro model to study the effect of CCM3 mutations in brain endothelial cells . We are aware of the limitations of in vitro studies due to the absence of important perivascular interactions , which could , according to current hypotheses , have significant impact on lesion development . However , CCM3 mutation / absence in brain endothelial cells repre - sents one component important for lesion development and presumably all CCM genes , including CCM3 , have effects on brain endothelial cell phenotype . In addition , there are limitations in CCM3 in vivo models . Both CCM3 knock - out and conditional CCM3 knockout mice do not fully recapitulate human CCM3 [ 19 , 34 , 37 , 41 ] . Thus , taking these limitations into consideration , the proposed in vitro model of CCM3 depletion by siRNA in HBMEC may still resemble the ongoing molecular mechanisms altering the brain endothelial barrier and endothelial phenotype in CCM3 pathogenesis . Cerebral cavernous malformation lesions are lined by brain endothelial cells characterized by poorly formed TJs with gaps often noted between individual cells [ 5 , 6 , 23 , 50 ] . Although this represents a developed lesion , the cur - rent hypothesis is that microvascular hyperpermeability is a solid base for the development of all CCMs [ 3 , 8 , 16 , 39 , 73 ] . It results in a common pathological substrate , accu - mulation of blood - borne compounds in brain parenchyma , inflammatory responses , and further endothelial injury which can lead to lesion progression [ 6 , 14 , 16 , 53 ] . The brain microvasculature has unique organization properties due to the development of a highly restrictive and selective barrier that controls exchange between blood and brain , the BBB . The unique restrictive feature of the Fig . 8 a Stable transfection with cortactin shRNA ( CTTN - KD ) in hBMEC depleted cortactin ( Western blot ) and increased endothelial barrier permeability ( a similar effect as CCM3 - KD ) . The perme - ability of FITC - inulin ( 5 kDa ) and dextran ( 20 kDa ) was measured 1 – 10 days after initial plating in CTTN - KD and control transfected brain endothelial monolayers and a permeability coefficient ( PC ) determined . In control cells , the permeability of FITC - inulin and dex - tran progressively declined with time . In contrast , with CTTN - KD cells , the reduction in dextran permeability was delayed and incom - plete over 10 days , while for inulin the permeability did not decrease with time . Data are means SD ; n = 5 independent experiments . b CTTN - KD cells had altered TJ protein immunofluorescence mani - fested as fragmented staining for claudin - 5 , occludin and ZO - 1 and robust short stress fiber formation visualized by phalloidin staining . c Co - immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis showed loss of interaction between ZO - 1 with claudin - 5 or occludin and β - actin with ZO - 1 . Western blot image is one of three independent . Input repre - sents the 50 % of total cell extract used for immunoprecipitation 746 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 BBB results from a well - developed junctional complex , particularly the TJs , that completely occlude the brain endothelial paracellular space [ 57 ] . TJ complex is built on intricate interactions between transmembrane TJ proteins ( claudin - 5 , occludin , JAM - A ) , scaffolding proteins ( ZO - 1 , - 2 , - 3 , Af - 6 , VASP , Par3 , Par6 ) and the actin cytoskeleton [ 40 , 42 , 64 ] . Of the transmembrane proteins , claudin - 5 forms the primary TJ seal , while occludin and JAM - A regulate paracellular permeability and leukocyte migra - tion , respectively [ 11 , 42 , 64 ] . The TJ accessory proteins are multidomain cytoplasmic molecules , which structur - ally support the TJ ( ZO - 1 , - 2 , - 3 ) as well as being involved in signal transduction ( cingulin , 7H6 and atypical protein kinase C ) [ 38 , 47 ] . In addition , actin filaments extend into the TJs ( linked to ZO - 1 and occludin ) , coupling the struc - tural and dynamic properties of the paracellular barrier . To obtain a tightly sealed TJ , trans - interactions between trans - membrane TJ proteins ( particularly claudin - 5 ) are essential as well as stable support / interaction with adaptor proteins ( ZO - 1 , - 2 ) and actin filaments [ 15 , 65 ] . In this way , the TJ junction complex acts as a dynamic structure and altera - tions in the function of any of these components may lead to paracellular gap formation and barrier hyperpermeability [ 57 , 65 ] . A major pathological sign of increased BBB perme - ability is altered transmembrane TJ protein expression ( i . e . , claudin - 5 and occludin ) demonstrated as lost or frag - mented staining along blood vessels or the lateral border of cultured brain endothelial cells [ 54 , 58 ] . For CCM lesions , known for high permeability , pathological findings regard - ing altered TJ protein expression are very controversial , with results varying from increased expression of some TJ proteins , decreased expression of others ( i . e . , claudin - 5 , occludin ) and very limited alterations in yet others [ 5 , 6 , 23 , 50 , 61 ] . These mixed results could be due to analysis of lesions of different maturity and size but also differences in the origin of analyzed lesions ( e . g . , CCM1 , CCM2 CCM3 or sCCM ) . This study focused on the expression profile of TJ and AdJ proteins in two types of CCM lesion : CCM3 and sCCM . Both TJ and AdJ mRNA and protein showed a similar expression pattern in CCM3 and sCCM with upregulation of mRNA expression and down - regulation in protein expression while decreased TJ protein expression was more profound in CCM3 lesions , particularly for trans - membrane TJ protein which may be linked to the CCM3 mutation . However , the tendency for both lesion types to have reduced junction protein expression indicates that besides a direct link between CCM3 and junction proteins there could be parallel effects in endothelial cells and from the perivascular microenvironment , which could support lesion formation . Taking into consideration that CCM3 is a more severe form of CCM , with higher frequency of hemorrhage at earlier ages , the profound effect CCM3 mutation on TJ complex organization could represent the underlying cel - lular mechanism of microvascular damage seen in CCM3 [ 12 , 46 ] . The mechanism underlying the loss of claudin - 5 , occludin and ZO - 1 with CCM3 depletion / loss is still uncer - tain and future studies need to examine the effect of CCM3 on the translation and post - translational modification of these TJ proteins . Regarding the potential targets and overlap with CCM1 and CCM2 pathology , in our current study CCM3 lesion and CCM3 - KD cells did not have the significant alterations in the AdJ proteins , β - catenin and Ve - cadherin found in CCM1 or alterations in RhoA / Rho kinase activity specific for CCM2 pathology [ 17 , 33 , 49 , 59 ] . This indicates that CCM1 , CCM2 and CCM3 probably do not share a similar target at the junctional complex . However , we have still to directly address whether CCM3 in the CCM1 - 3 complex or in the STRIPAK complex is responsible for altered barrier function [ 10 , 21 , 74 ] . An intriguing finding from this study is that CCM3 mutation / depletion had a profound effect on cortactin protein expression . Cortactin is a 550 amino acid F - actin - binding protein , primarily localized on the circumference of endothelial cells [ 7 , 15 , 44 ] . In recent years , a grow - ing body of evidence has implicated cortactin in multiple aspects of cytoskeletal organization such as lamellipodia , membrane ruffles , endocytosis , actin - based structures in the cell periphery ( so - called “cortical actin bundles” ) and cell – cell junction contact [ 20 , 44 , 48 , 51 ] . While the role of cortactin in actin polymerization and maintaining actin cytoskeletal structure has mostly been elucidated , the role at cell – cell junction complexes is still unclear . Cortactin is indicated as having an important role in E - cadherin recruit - ment and stabilization at the cell membrane , playing a role in establishing initial cell – cell contacts and AdJ formation [ 18 , 20 , 55 ] . Regarding the TJ complex , cortactin function is still uncertain . Cortactin is identified as having a bind - ing site for ZO - 1 ( SH3 region of cortactin and proline - rich domain of ZO - 1 ) [ 25 , 30 , 70 ] . This provides a structural link between TJ complex proteins ( ZO - 1 ) and the actin cytoskeleton that is important for anchoring and reinforcing junctions in endothelial cells [ 15 , 18 ] . Combining our findings from CCM3 - and cortactin - KD cells indicates that loss of cortactin reduces ZO - 1 interaction with the actin cytoskeleton , which could cause less anchoring of the TJ to the cytoskeleton . Loss of cort - actin was also associated with profound changes in the cytoskeleton itself with dissolution of the cortical actin ring and increased polymerization of the actin cytoskel - eton . Loss of ZO - 1 anchoring could affect the TJ interac - tions between ZO - 1 and the transmembrane proteins clau - din - 5 and occludin [ 11 ] . This could weaken the adhesive properties between claudin - 5 on neighboring endothelial 747 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 cells and probably , consequently , claudin - 5 redistribu - tion towards to cytosol . Our finding regarding claudin - 5 , ZO - 1 and occludin redistribution to the cytosol and loss of interaction when cortactin is depleted / absent favors this scenario . However , we do not exclude the possibility that during TJ disassembly , cortactin loss and cortical actin ring dissolution could trigger dysregulation of signaling mol - ecules associated with cortactin ( like Rac and RacGEF ) by which cortactin may act as a stabilizing factor for the actin cytoskeleton and cell – cell junctions [ 68 , 75 ] . An arising question is the potential link between CCM3 absence / mutation and the cortactin depletion found in brain endothelial cells . Cortactin function is highly dependent on post - translation modification and particularly phos - phorylation . For example , cortactin phosphorylation on Tyr residues ( Tyr 421 , Tyr 466 , Tyr 482 ) is essential for several actin - based processes including podosomal formation , lamellipodial protrusion , cell spreading , cell motility , inter - cellular adhesion ( E - cadherin and β - catenin ) and also in adhesion molecule clustering during leukocyte transmigra - tion [ 29 , 62 , 67 , 69 ] . Cortactin Ser - phosphorylation facili - tates cortactin binding to N - WASP and actin polymeriza - tion [ 28 , 29 , 76 ] . On the other hand , a cytosolic cortactin pool is unphosphorylated and can , when stimulated , trans - locate to cortical actin and take part in cell processes . Our analysis of CCM3 - KD cells indicated that CCM3 depletion caused an accumulation of cortactin in the cell cytosol , not in the unphosphorylated form but rather as Ser - phospho - rylated ( p - S405 ) cortactin , dissociated from ZO - 1 and the actin cytoskeleton [ 28 , 36 ] . The increased accumulation of p - S405 cortactin in the cytosol is further subjected to pro - teasomal degradation , indicating that CCM3 by regulating cortactin phosphorylation regulates cortactin function and stability in brain endothelial cells . This was closely asso - ciated with the increased of ERK1 / 2 activity in CCM3 - KD cells , one of the serine / threonine kinases involved in regulating cortactin function via serine phosphorylation [ 70 , 76 ] . CCM3 depletion caused steady moderate ERK1 / 2 activity , which may directly phosphorylate cortactin on Ser405 residues leading to the enhanced brain endothelial barrier permeability seen in CCM3 - KD cells , as found in an epithelial barrier after treatment with LPS , where ERK1 / 2 phosphorylation increased cortactin phosphorylation and degradation via ubiquitination , the potential pathway also present in CCM3 - KD cells [ 76 ] . At this point , we cannot conclude whether pS405 - cortactin is a unique marker for altered CCM3 expression / function in brain endothelial cells and exclude that other cortactin Ser - phosphorylation sites are involved in CCM3 . The pS405 - cortactin in CCM3 - KD cells could be one of consequence of steady ERK / 12 activ - ity and further analysis of phosphorylation status of cortac - tin as well as the role of specific phosphorylated residues of cortactin in CCM3 lesion should clarify this issue . Further analysis should include whether the cytosol - accumulated phosphorylated form of cortactin is the one important for ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation [ 76 ] . Taken together , the results presented here suggest a potential scenario triggering CCM3 lesion formation ( Fig . 9 ) . Loss of CCM3 triggers or chronically maintains ERK1 / 2 activation . This in turn alters actin cytoskeleton organization by targeting , among others , the cortical actin ring protein cortactin by inducing Ser - phosphorylation . This changes both cortactin location and degradation . Increased cortactin degradation is closely associated with loss of the cortical actin ring and ZO - 1 : actin interaction , two essential components providing physical support and anchoring for TJ proteins . The reduced anchoring of ZO - 1 to the actin cytoskeleton may then impact critical inter - actions between this important scaffolding protein and transmembrane proteins in the TJ complex , altering their function . In addition , increased polymerization of actin filaments due to loss of cortactin may increase intracellular forces causing TJ instability . These events could represent the mechanism underlying increased BBB permeability in CCM3 lesions . It is important to highlight that during CCM3 lesion formation , the described process would lead to parenchymal entry of blood - borne components further fueling barrier disruption . Fig . 9 Possible scenario of the signaling events induced by CCM3 mutation / depletion in brain endothelial cells that result in tight junction complex instability and brain endothelial barrier hyperpermeability 748 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 Besides describing the potential cellular mechanism underlying the hyperpermeability in CCM3 lesions , our results also reveal that a signaling pathway other than RhoA / ROCKI may be involved in CCM lesions : MAP kinase ERK1 / 2 . Due to the pivotal role of this pathway in cell homeostasis , it is impossible to exclude that steady - active ERK1 / 2 activation does not regulate other brain endothelial phenotype changes found in CCM3 , including the process of endothelial to mesenchymal transformation recently indicated as one mechanism underlying CCM3 lesion progression [ 35 ] . Our results also provide a solid basis for further investigation of the potential link between CCM3 and ERK1 / 2 activation to develop an efficient therapeutic strategy for targeting the hyperpermeability in CCM3 lesions . Acknowledgments We thank Adrienne Chiu for excellent technical assistance in tissue array analysis . Tissue for this study was provided by Angioma Alliance , St Joseph’s Hospital and Medical Center’s Human Specimen Procurement Service . The confocal microscopy and Laser Capture Microdissection System work was performed in the Microscopy and Image - analysis Laboratory ( MIL ) at the University of Michigan , Department of Cell & Developmental Biology . Fluores - cence microscopy and histology slide scanning was done at Depart - ment of pathology Core Flow Cytometry Laboratory and Slide Scan - ning Services . This work was supported by Public Health Service Grant NS075757 from the National Institute of Neurological Disor - ders ( A . V . A ) . References 1 . Afridi S , Goadsby PJ ( 2003 ) New onset migraine with a brain stem cavernous angioma . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 74 : 680 – 682 2 . Al - Shahi Salman R ( 2012 ) The outlook for adults with epilep - tic seizure ( s ) associated with cerebral cavernous malformations or arteriovenous malformations . Epilepsia 53 ( Suppl 4 ) : 34 – 42 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1528 - 1167 . 2012 . 03611 . x 3 . Awad IA ( 2012 ) Cavernous malformations . J Neurosurg 116 : 119 – 120 . doi : 10 . 3171 / 2011 . 6 . JNS111052 ( discussion 121 ) 4 . Borikova AL , Dibble CF , Sciaky N , Welch CM , Abell AN , Ben - charit S , Johnson GL ( 2010 ) Rho kinase inhibition rescues the endothelial cell cerebral cavernous malformation phenotype . J Biol Chem 285 : 11760 – 11764 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . C109 . 097220 5 . Burkhardt JK , Schmidt D , Schoenauer R , Brokopp C , Agarkova I , Bozinov O , Bertalanffy H , Hoerstrup SP ( 2010 ) Upregulation of transmembrane endothelial junction proteins in human cer - ebral cavernous malformations . Neurosurg Focus 29 : E3 . doi : 10 . 3171 / 2010 . 6 . FOCUS10125 6 . Clatterbuck RE , Eberhart CG , Crain BJ , Rigamonti D ( 2001 ) Ultrastructural and immunocytochemical evidence that an incompetent blood - brain barrier is related to the pathophysiol - ogy of cavernous malformations . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 71 : 188 – 192 7 . Cosen - Binker LI , Kapus A ( 2006 ) Cortactin : the gray emi - nence of the cytoskeleton . Physiology 21 : 352 – 361 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physiol . 00012 . 2006 8 . de Champfleur NM , Langlois C , Ankenbrandt WJ , Le Bars E , Leroy MA , Duffau H , Bonafe A , Jaffe J , Awad IA , Labauge P ( 2011 ) Magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of cerebral cavernous malformations with susceptibility - weighted imaging . Neurosurgery 68 : 641 – 647 . doi : 10 . 1227 / NEU . 0b013e31820773cf ( discussion 647 – 648 ) 9 . Dibble CF , Horst JA , Malone MH , Park K , Temple B , Cheese - man H , Barbaro JR , Johnson GL , Bencharit S ( 2010 ) Defining the functional domain of programmed cell death 10 through its interactions with phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate . PLoS One 5 : e11740 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0011740 10 . Draheim KM , Li X , Zhang R , Fisher OS , Villari G , Boggon TJ , Calderwood DA ( 2015 ) CCM2 - CCM3 interaction stabilizes their protein expression and permits endothelial network formation . J Cell Biol 208 : 987 – 1001 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201407129 11 . Fanning AS , Anderson JM ( 2009 ) Zonula occludens - 1 and - 2 are cytosolic scaffolds that regulate the assem - bly of cellular junctions . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1165 : 113 – 120 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1749 - 6632 . 2009 . 04440 . x 12 . Fauth C , Rostasy K , Rath M , Gizewski E , Lederer AG , Sure U , Zschocke J , Felbor U ( 2015 ) Highly variable intrafamilial mani - festations of a CCM3 mutation ranging from acute childhood cerebral haemorrhage to late - onset meningiomas . Clin Neurol Neurosurg 128 : 41 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . clineuro . 2014 . 10 . 023 13 . Flemming KD , Brown RD , Link MJ ( 2015 ) Seasonal varia - tion in hemorrhage and focal neurologic deficit due to intracer - ebral cavernous malformations . J Clin Neurosci . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jocn . 2015 . 01 . 007 14 . Frischer JM , Pipp I , Stavrou I , Trattnig S , Hainfellner JA , Knosp E ( 2008 ) Cerebral cavernous malformations : congruency of histopathological features with the current clinical defini - tion . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 79 : 783 – 788 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jnnp . 2007 . 132316 15 . Garcia - Ponce A , Citalan - Madrid AF , Velazquez - Avila M , Vargas - Robles H , Schnoor M ( 2015 ) The role of actin - binding proteins in the control of endothelial barrier integrity . Thromb Haemost 113 : 20 – 36 . doi : 10 . 1160 / TH14 - 04 - 0298 16 . Gault J , Sarin H , Awadallah NA , Shenkar R , Awad IA ( 2004 ) Pathobiology of human cerebrovascular malformations : basic mechanisms and clinical relevance . Neurosurgery 55 : 1 – 16 ( dis‑ cussion 16 – 17 ) 17 . Glading A , Han J , Stockton RA , Ginsberg MH ( 2007 ) KRIT - 1 / CCM1 is a Rap1 effector that regulates endothelial cell cell junc - tions . J Cell Biol 179 : 247 – 254 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200705175 18 . Han SP , Gambin Y , Gomez GA , Verma S , Giles N , Michael M , Wu SK , Guo Z , Johnston W , Sierecki E et al ( 2014 ) Cortactin scaffolds Arp2 / 3 and WAVE2 at the epithelial zonula adherens . J Biol Chem 289 : 7764 – 7775 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 544478 19 . He Y , Zhang H , Yu L , Gunel M , Boggon TJ , Chen H , Min W ( 2010 ) Stabilization of VEGFR2 signaling by cerebral cavernous malformation 3 is critical for vascular development . Sci Signal 3 : ra26 doi : 10 . 1126 / scisignal . 2000722 20 . Helwani FM , Kovacs EM , Paterson AD , Verma S , Ali RG , Fan - ning AS , Weed SA , Yap AS ( 2004 ) Cortactin is necessary for E - cadherin - mediated contact formation and actin reorganization . J Cell Biol 164 : 899 – 910 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200309034 21 . Hilder TL , Malone MH , Bencharit S , Colicelli J , Haystead TA , Johnson GL , Wu CC ( 2007 ) Proteomic identification of the cere - bral cavernous malformation signaling complex . J Proteome Res 6 : 4343 – 4355 . doi : 10 . 1021 / pr0704276 22 . Hwang J , Pallas DC ( 2014 ) STRIPAK complexes : structure , bio - logical function , and involvement in human diseases . Int J Bio - chem Cell Biol 47 : 118 – 148 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2013 . 11 . 021 23 . Jakimovski D , Schneider H , Frei K , Kennes LN , Bertalanffy H ( 2014 ) Bleeding propensity of cavernous malformations : impact of tight junction alterations on the occurrence of overt hematoma . J Neurosurg 121 : 613 – 620 . doi : 10 . 3171 / 2014 . 6 . JNS132775 749 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 24 . Jensen EC ( 2013 ) Quantitative analysis of histological stain - ing and fluorescence using ImageJ . Anat Rec 296 : 378 – 381 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ar . 22641 25 . Katsube T , Takahisa M , Ueda R , Hashimoto N , Kobayashi M , Togashi S ( 1998 ) Cortactin associates with the cell - cell junc - tion protein ZO - 1 in both Drosophila and mouse . J Biol Chem 273 : 29672 – 29677 26 . Kazakoff PW , McGuire TR , Hoie EB , Cano M , Iversen PL ( 1995 ) An in vitro model for endothelial permeability : assess - ment of monolayer integrity . In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 31 : 846 – 852 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02634568 27 . Kean MJ , Ceccarelli DF , Goudreault M , Sanches M , Tate S , Larsen B , Gibson LC , Derry WB , Scott IC , Pelletier L et al ( 2011 ) Structure - function analysis of core STRIPAK Proteins : a signaling complex implicated in Golgi polarization . J Biol Chem 286 : 25065 – 25075 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 214486 28 . Kelley LC , Hayes KE , Ammer AG , Martin KH , Weed SA ( 2010 ) Cortactin phosphorylated by ERK1 / 2 localizes to sites of dynamic actin regulation and is required for carcinoma lamel - lipodia persistence . PLoS One 5 : e13847 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0013847 29 . Kelley LC , Hayes KE , Ammer AG , Martin KH , Weed SA ( 2011 ) Revisiting the ERK / Src cortactin switch . Commun Integr Biol 4 : 205 – 207 . doi : 10 . 4161 / cib . 4 . 2 . 14420 30 . Kremerskothen J , Stolting M , Wiesner C , Korb - Pap A , van Vliet V , Linder S , Huber TB , Rottiers P , Reuzeau E , Genot E et al ( 2011 ) Zona occludens proteins modulate podosome formation and function . FASEB J 25 : 505 – 514 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 10 - 155598 31 . Krisht KM , Whitehead KJ , Niazi T , Couldwell WT ( 2010 ) The pathogenetic features of cerebral cavernous malformations : a comprehensive review with therapeutic implications . Neurosurg Focus 29 : E2 . doi : 10 . 3171 / 2010 . 6 . FOCUS10135 32 . Labauge P , Denier C , Bergametti F , Tournier - Lasserve E ( 2007 ) Genetics of cavernous angiomas . Lancet Neurol 6 : 237 – 244 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1474 - 4422 ( 07 ) 70053 - 4 33 . Lampugnani MG , Orsenigo F , Rudini N , Maddaluno L , Boul - day G , Chapon F , Dejana E ( 2010 ) CCM1 regulates vascular - lumen organization by inducing endothelial polarity . J Cell Sci 123 : 1073 – 1080 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 059329 34 . Louvi A , Chen L , Two AM , Zhang H , Min W , Gunel M ( 2011 ) Loss of cerebral cavernous malformation 3 ( Ccm3 ) in neuro - glia leads to CCM and vascular pathology . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : 3737 – 3742 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1012617108 35 . Maddaluno L , Rudini N , Cuttano R , Bravi L , Giampietro C , Corada M , Ferrarini L , Orsenigo F , Papa E , Boulday G et al ( 2013 ) EndMT contributes to the onset and progression of cerebral cavernous malformations . Nature 498 : 492 – 496 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature12207 36 . Martinez - Quiles N , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Ramesh N , Geha RS ( 2004 ) Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 5269 – 5280 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 24 . 12 . 5269 - 5280 . 2004 37 . McDonald DA , Shenkar R , Shi C , Stockton RA , Akers AL , Kucherlapati MH , Kucherlapati R , Brainer J , Ginsberg MH , Awad IA et al ( 2011 ) A novel mouse model of cerebral cavern - ous malformations based on the two - hit mutation hypothesis recapitulates the human disease . Hum Mol Genet 20 : 211 – 222 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddq433 38 . McNeil E , Capaldo CT , Macara IG ( 2006 ) Zonula occludens - 1 function in the assembly of tight junctions in Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 1922 – 1932 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 - 07 - 0650 39 . Mikati AG , Tan H , Shenkar R , Li L , Zhang L , Guo X , Larsson HB , Shi C , Liu T , Wang Y et al ( 2014 ) Dynamic permeability and quantitative susceptibility : related imaging biomarkers in cerebral cavernous malformations . Stroke 45 : 598 – 601 . doi : 10 . 1161 / STROKEAHA . 113 . 003548 40 . Mitic LL , Anderson JM ( 1998 ) Molecular architecture of tight junctions . Annu Rev Physiol 60 : 121 – 142 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . physiol . 60 . 1 . 121 41 . Pagenstecher A , Stahl S , Sure U , Felbor U ( 2009 ) A two - hit mechanism causes cerebral cavernous malformations : complete inactivation of CCM1 , CCM2 or CCM3 in affected endothelial cells . Hum Mol Genet 18 : 911 – 918 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddn420 42 . Paris L , Tonutti L , Vannini C , Bazzoni G ( 2008 ) Structural organization of the tight junctions . Biochim Biophys Acta 1778 : 646 – 659 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbamem . 2007 . 08 . 004 43 . Rao RK , Basuroy S , Rao VU , Karnaky KJ Jr , Gupta A ( 2002 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation and dissociation of occludin - ZO - 1 and E - cadherin - beta - catenin complexes from the cytoskel - eton by oxidative stress . Biochem J 368 : 471 – 481 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20011804 44 . Ren G , Crampton MS , Yap AS ( 2009 ) Cortactin : coordinating adhesion and the actin cytoskeleton at cellular protrusions . Cell Motil Cytoskelet 66 : 865 – 873 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20380 45 . Riant F , Bergametti F , Ayrignac X , Boulday G , Tournier - Lasserve E ( 2010 ) Recent insights into cerebral cavernous mal - formations : the molecular genetics of CCM . FEBS J 277 : 1070 – 1075 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2009 . 07535 . x 46 . Riant F , Bergametti F , Fournier HD , Chapon F , Michalak - Prov - ost S , Cecillon M , Lejeune P , Hosseini H , Choe C , Orth M et al ( 2013 ) CCM3 mutations are associated with early - onset cerebral hemorrhage and multiple meningiomas . Mol Syndromol 4 : 165 – 172 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000350042 47 . Satoh H , Zhong Y , Isomura H , Saitoh M , Enomoto K , Sawada N , Mori M ( 1996 ) Localization of 7H6 tight junction - associated antigen along the cell border of vascular endothelial cells corre - lates with paracellular barrier function against ions , large mole - cules , and cancer cells . Exp Cell Res 222 : 269 – 274 . doi : 10 . 1006 / excr . 1996 . 0034 48 . Schafer DA ( 2002 ) Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dynamics during endocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 14 : 76 – 81 49 . Schneble HM , Soumare A , Herve D , Bresson D , Guichard JP , Riant F , Tournier - Lasserve E , Tzourio C , Chabriat H , Stapf C ( 2012 ) Antithrombotic therapy and bleeding risk in a prospective cohort study of patients with cerebral cavernous malformations . Stroke 43 : 3196 – 3199 . doi : 10 . 1161 / STROKEAHA . 112 . 668533 50 . Schneider H , Errede M , Ulrich NH , Virgintino D , Frei K , Ber - talanffy H ( 2011 ) Impairment of tight junctions and glucose transport in endothelial cells of human cerebral cavernous mal - formations . J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 70 : 417 – 429 . doi : 10 . 1097 / NEN . 0b013e31821bc40e 51 . Schnoor M , Lai FP , Zarbock A , Klaver R , Polaschegg C , Schulte D , Weich HA , Oelkers JM , Rottner K , Vestweber D ( 2011 ) Cort - actin deficiency is associated with reduced neutrophil recruit - ment but increased vascular permeability in vivo . J Exp Med 208 : 1721 – 1735 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20101920 52 . Schulz GB , Wieland E , Wustehube - Lausch J , Boulday G , Moll I , Tournier - Lasserve E , Fischer A ( 2015 ) Cerebral cavern - ous malformation - 1 protein controls DLL4 - Notch3 signaling between the endothelium and pericytes . Stroke . doi : 10 . 1161 / STROKEAHA . 114 . 007512 53 . Shenkar R , Venkatasubramanian PN , Zhao JC , Batjer HH , Wyrwicz AM , Awad IA ( 2008 ) Advanced magnetic resonance imaging of cerebral cavernous malformations : part I . High - field imaging of excised human lesions . Neurosurgery 63 : 782 – 789 . doi : 10 . 1227 / 01 . NEU . 0000325490 . 80694 . A2 ( discussion 789 ) 54 . Sladojevic N , Stamatovic SM , Keep RF , Grailer JJ , Sarma JV , Ward PA , Andjelkovic AV ( 2014 ) Inhibition of junctional adhe - sion molecule - A / LFA interaction attenuates leukocyte trafficking 750 Acta Neuropathol ( 2015 ) 130 : 731 – 750 1 3 and inflammation in brain ischemia / reperfusion injury . Neuro - biol Dis 67 : 57 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . nbd . 2014 . 03 . 010 55 . Sousa S , Cabanes D , Bougneres L , Lecuit M , Sansonetti P , Tran - Van - Nhieu G , Cossart P ( 2007 ) Src , cortactin and Arp2 / 3 complex are required for E - cadherin - mediated inter - nalization of Listeria into cells . Cell Microbiol 9 : 2629 – 2643 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2007 . 00984 . x 56 . Stahl S , Gaetzner S , Voss K , Brackertz B , Schleider E , Surucu O , Kunze E , Netzer C , Korenke C , Finckh U et al ( 2008 ) Novel CCM1 , CCM2 , and CCM3 mutations in patients with cerebral cavernous malformations : in - frame deletion in CCM2 prevents formation of a CCM1 / CCM2 / CCM3 protein complex . Hum Mutat 29 : 709 – 717 . doi : 10 . 1002 / humu . 20712 57 . Stamatovic SM , Keep RF , Andjelkovic AV ( 2008 ) Brain endothe - lial cell - cell junctions : how to “open” the blood brain barrier . Curr Neuropharmacol 6 : 179 – 192 . doi : 10 . 2174 / 157015908785777210 58 . Stamatovic SM , Keep RF , Wang MM , Jankovic I , Andjelko - vic AV ( 2009 ) Caveolae - mediated internalization of occludin and claudin - 5 during CCL2 - induced tight junction remode - ling in brain endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 284 : 19053 – 19066 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 000521 59 . Stockton RA , Shenkar R , Awad IA , Ginsberg MH ( 2010 ) Cere - bral cavernous malformations proteins inhibit Rho kinase to sta - bilize vascular integrity . J Exp Med 207 : 881 – 896 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20091258 60 . Sugden PH , McGuffin LJ , Clerk A ( 2013 ) SOcK , MiSTs , MASK and STicKs : the GCKIII ( germinal centre kinase III ) kinases and their heterologous protein - protein interactions . Biochem J 454 : 13 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20130219 61 . Tanriover G , Sozen B , Seker A , Kilic T , Gunel M , Demir N ( 2013 ) Ultrastructural analysis of vascular features in cerebral cavernous malformations . Clin Neurol Neurosurg 115 : 438 – 444 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . clineuro . 2012 . 06 . 023 62 . Tehrani S , Tomasevic N , Weed S , Sakowicz R , Cooper JA ( 2007 ) Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci 104 : 11933 – 11938 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0701077104 63 . Tu J , Stoodley MA , Morgan MK , Storer KP ( 2005 ) Ultras - tructural characteristics of hemorrhagic , nonhemorrhagic , and recurrent cavernous malformations . J Neurosurg 103 : 903 – 909 . doi : 10 . 3171 / jns . 2005 . 103 . 5 . 0903 64 . Van Itallie CM , Anderson JM ( 2014 ) Architecture of tight junc - tions and principles of molecular composition . Semin Cell Dev Biol 36 : 157 – 165 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2014 . 08 . 011 65 . Vandenbroucke E , Mehta D , Minshall R , Malik AB ( 2008 ) Reg - ulation of endothelial junctional permeability . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1123 : 134 – 145 . doi : 10 . 1196 / annals . 1420 . 016 66 . Voss K , Stahl S , Schleider E , Ullrich S , Nickel J , Mueller TD , Felbor U ( 2007 ) CCM3 interacts with CCM2 indicating common pathogenesis for cerebral cavernous malformations . Neurogenet - ics 8 : 249 – 256 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10048 - 007 - 0098 - 9 67 . Wang W , Liu Y , Liao K ( 2011 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation of cort - actin by the FAK - Src complex at focal adhesions regulates cell motility . BMC Cell Biol 12 : 49 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2121 - 12 - 49 68 . Waschke J , Burger S , Curry FR , Drenckhahn D , Adamson RH ( 2006 ) Activation of Rac - 1 and Cdc42 stabilizes the microvas - cular endothelial barrier . Histochem Cell Biol 125 : 397 – 406 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 005 - 0080 - 2 69 . Webb BA , Jia L , Eves R , Mak AS ( 2007 ) Dissecting the func - tional domain requirements of cortactin in invadopodia forma - tion . Eur J Cell Biol 86 : 189 – 206 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2007 . 01 . 003 70 . Weed SA , Karginov AV , Schafer DA , Weaver AM , Kinley AW , Cooper JA , Parsons JT ( 2000 ) Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 151 : 29 – 40 71 . Wisniewski JR , Mann M ( 2012 ) Consecutive proteolytic diges - tion in an enzyme reactor increases depth of proteomic and phos - phoproteomic analysis . Anal Chem 84 : 2631 – 2637 . doi : 10 . 1021 / ac300006b 72 . Wong JH , Awad IA , Kim JH ( 2000 ) Ultrastructural pathological features of cerebrovascular malformations : a preliminary report . Neurosurgery 46 : 1454 – 1459 73 . Yadla S , Jabbour PM , Shenkar R , Shi C , Campbell PG , Awad IA ( 2010 ) Cerebral cavernous malformations as a disease of vascu - lar permeability : from bench to bedside with caution . Neurosurg Focus 29 : E4 . doi : 10 . 3171 / 2010 . 5 . FOCUS10121 74 . Yoruk B , Gillers BS , Chi NC , Scott IC ( 2012 ) Ccm3 functions in a manner distinct from Ccm1 and Ccm2 in a zebrafish model of CCM vascular disease . Dev Biol 362 : 121 – 131 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2011 . 12 . 006 75 . Zebda N , Tian Y , Tian X , Gawlak G , Higginbotham K , Reynolds AB , Birukova AA , Birukov KG ( 2013 ) Interaction of p190RhoGAP with C - terminal domain of p120 - catenin modulates endothelial cytoskeleton and permeability . J Biol Chem 288 : 18290 – 18299 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 432757 76 . Zhao J , Wei J , Mialki R , Zou C , Mallampalli RK , Zhao Y ( 2012 ) Extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) regulates cortactin ubiquitination and degradation in lung epithelial cells . J Biol Chem 287 : 19105 – 19114 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 339507