2588 | C . N . Antonescu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate regulates clathrin - coated pit initiation , stabilization , and size Costin N . Antonescu a , François Aguet b , Gaudenz Danuser b , and Sandra L . Schmid a a Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA 92037 ; b Department of Cell Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 04 - 0362 ) on May 25 , 2011 . Address correspondence to : Sandra L . Schmid ( slschmid @ scripps . edu ) . Abbreviations used : AP - 2 , Adaptor Protein 2 ; CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; CCV , clath - rin - coated vesicle ; CHC , clathrin heavy chain ; CME , clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis ; EAP , endocytic accessory protein ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; eGFP - CLC , enhanced green fluorescent protein fused to clathrin light chain ; KD , kinase - dead ; OCRL , Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome of Lowe ; PD , 5’ - inositol phosphatase - dead ; PH , Pleckstrin Homology ; PIP 2 , phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ; PIP5K , phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate - 5 - kinase ; PM , plasma membrane ; SHIP2 , SH2 - domain - containing inositol 5’ - phosphatase ; Sjn , synaptojanin ; SV , synaptic vesicle ; tet , tetracycline ; TfR , Tfn receptor ; TIRF , total internal reflection fluores - cence ; Tfn , transferrin ; WT , wild - type . © 2011 Antonescu et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , “ “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society of Cell Biology . ABSTRACT Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is the major mechanism for internalization in mammalian cells . CME initiates by recruitment of adaptors and clathrin to form clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) . Nearly half of nascent CCPs abort , whereas others are stabilized by unknown mech - anisms and undergo further maturation before pinching off to form clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) . Phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) , the main lipid binding partner of endo - cytic proteins , is required for CCP assembly , but little is currently known about its contribution ( s ) to later events in CCV formation . Using small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) knockdown and overex - pression , we have analyzed the effects of manipulating PIP 2 synthesis and turnover on CME by quantitative total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy and computational analysis . Phos - phatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate - 5 - kinase cannot be detected within CCPs but functions in initia - tion and controls the rate and extent of CCP growth . In contrast , the 5’ - inositol phosphatase synaptojanin 1 localizes to CCPs and controls early stabilization and maturation efficiency . To - gether these results suggest that the balance of PIP 2 synthesis in the bulk plasma membrane and its local turnover within CCPs control multiple stages of CCV formation . INTRODUCTION Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is the major pathway for inter - nalization of receptor - bound macromolecules ( i . e . , cargo ) from the surface of mammalian cells . In a multistep process , clathrin , cargo - binding adaptors ( e . g . , Adaptor Protein 2 [ AP - 2 ] ) , and numerous endocytic accessory proteins ( EAPs ) assemble at the plasma mem - brane ( PM ) into invaginating clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) ( Slepnev and De Camilli , 2000 ; Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Traub , 2003 ) . Nearly half of nascent CCPs quickly turn over ( so - called abortive events ) , whereas others are stabilized , undergo a maturation pro - cess , and pinch off to form clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Recently we proposed that CCP maturation is gated by an endo - cytic checkpoint ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 , 2010 ) . According to this hypothesis , nascent CCPs must be stabilized by recruitment of adaptors , cargo , and other EAPs to prevent coat dis - assembly and abortive turnover . Nascent CCPs with sufficient stabil - ity progress to a maturation stage leading to eventual closing of CCPs and scission of CCVs . Using small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) - mediated knockdown and dual - label total internal reflection fluores - cence ( TIRF ) microscopy , we and others have begun to establish a temporal hierarchy of functional requirements of EAPs in CCP initia - tion , stabilization , and maturation ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Rappoport et al . , 2006 ; Saffarian and Kirchhausen , 2008 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 ; Loerke et al . , 2011 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Many proteins are recruited to CCPs in part via low - affinity interaction ( s ) with phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) , in - cluding the AP - 2 subunits α , β 2 , and μ2 ( Gaidarov and Keen , 1999 ; Jackson et al . , 2010 ) , SNX9 ( Yarar et al . , 2007 , 2008 ) , epsin ( Itoh et al . , 2001 ) , CALM / AP180 ( Ford et al . , 2001 ) , Dab2 ( Yun et al . , 2003 ) , HIP1 / HIP1R ( Itoh et al . , 2001 ) , and dynamin ( Vallis et al . , Monitoring Editor Jean E . Gruenberg University of Geneva Received : Apr 26 , 2011 Revised : May 10 , 2011 Accepted : May 17 , 2011 MBoC | ARTICLE Volume 22 July 15 , 2011 PIP 2 regulates CCV formation | 2589 ( Loerke et al . , 2011 ) to systematically and automatically measure the recruitment of lipid kinases and phosphatases to CCPs . Using these assays in conjunction with siRNA - mediated knockdown and protein overexpression of PIP5Ks and 5’ - inositol phosphatases , we have ex - amined the spatial regulation of PIP 2 synthesis and turnover and defined the spatiotemporal requirements for PIP 2 dynamics in CCP initiation , stabilization , growth , and maturation . RESULTS PIP 2 can be readily detected in the PM by the use of fluorescent probes such as the Pleckstrin Homology ( PH ) domain of phospho - lipase C δ fused to mCherry ( mCherry - PH ) . This approach has been used to reveal PIP 2 enrichment in larger structures such as sites of phagocytosis ( Botelho et al . , 2000 ) and the cleavage furrows of dividing Drosophila spermatocytes ( Wong et al . , 2005 ) . We were unable , however , to detect enrichment within CCPs of either mCherry - PH or of a similar probe with tandem PH domains and hence increased PIP 2 affinity ( unpublished data ) . We also did not detect enrichment of an mCherry fusion of the PIP 2 - binding ANTH domain of CALM in CCPs ( unpublished data ) , although in yeast a similar fusion with the ANTH domain of Sla2p was enriched in CCPs ( Sun et al . , 2007 ) . PIP 2 within or near CCPs , however , may be se - questered by its numerous endogenous binding proteins recruited to these sites and hence unavailable for detection ( McLaughlin et al . , 2002 ; Catimel et al . , 2008 ) . Therefore , instead of directly visualizing PIP 2 , we manipulated the expression of the enzymes that mediate phosphoinositide phosphorylation / dephosphoryla - tion ( referred to here as PIP 2 synthesis and turnover , respectively ) to indirectly probe the role of PIP 2 dynamics in CCP initiation , sta - bilization , and maturation . PIP5K isoforms cannot be detected in CCPs We first examined the dynamic distribution of mCherry - PIP5Ks ( PIP5K α , β , and γ ) relative to CCPs by dual - color , time - lapse TIRF microscopy imaging of BSC - 1 cells expressing eGFP - CLC ( see Sup - plemental Movies 1 – 4 and representative single frames in Figure 1A ) . PIP5K γ exhibits several splice variants ; we used the 661 isoform that harbors all known possible AP - 2 binding sites ( Nakano - Kobayashi et al . , 2007 ; Thieman et al . , 2009 ; Kahlfeldt et al . , 2010 ) . All three isoforms of PIP5K were enriched in the PM relative to cytosol as ob - served by fluorescence microscopy ( unpublished data ) . Notably , PIP5K γ , but not PIP5K α or β , was readily seen in focal adhesions ( Figure 1A ) , as previously described ( Di Paolo et al . , 2002 ) . Quantifi - cation of the fluorescence intensity of mCherry - PIP5K isoforms within CCP tracks ( n > 30 , 000 ) revealed no enrichment of any of these lipid kinases in either short - lived or longer - lived CCPs , from 20 s before clathrin detection to 20 s following its disappearance from the TIRF field ( Figure 1B ) . The lack of PIP5K recruitment to CCPs suggests that their binding interactions with CCP components are of low affinity and / or that their binding is prevented or rapidly displaced by com - petitive binding of other EAPs to AP - 2 . As PIP5Ks are not enriched within CCPs , PIP 2 synthesis must occur largely in the bulk PM . Increased PIP 2 synthesis differentially affects the rates of CME and CCP assembly We next used an adenovirus strategy for efficient tetracycline ( tet ) - regulated expression of exogenous proteins in BSC - 1 cells ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Liu et al . , 2010 ; Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) to express eGFP - PIP5K α ( wild - type [ WT ] or kinase - dead [ KD ] ) in BSC - 1 cells ( Figure 2A ) and examined its effects on CME . We found that , even at low levels of overexpression , PIP5K α WT ( but not KD ) resulted in a small but significant decrease in Tfn internalization that was more pronounced 1999 ) . These interactions contribute to a coincidence detection mechanism of PM and cargo proteins ( Carlton and Cullen , 2005 ; Schmid and McMahon , 2007 ) . The specific role , however , of PIP 2 during CCV formation has not been systematically addressed . Se - vere perturbation of PIP 2 by sequestration ( Jost et al . , 1998 ) or re - cruitment of a 5’ - inositol phosphatase to the PM ( Malecz et al . , 2000 ; Zoncu et al . , 2007 ) ablated CCPs , establishing that PIP 2 is re - quired for CCP initiation . A subsequent study , however , suggested that AP - 2 recruitment might be more sensitive to PIP 2 levels than the recruitment of other adaptors and clathrin ( Abe et al . , 2008 ) . Although these studies have collectively established that PIP 2 is re - quired for CME , because of the potent effects on CCP initiation , they were unable to address potential contributions of PIP 2 to na - scent CCP stabilization and maturation . Understanding the role of PIP 2 in subsequent stages of CCV formation will require more subtle perturbations of PIP 2 levels and quantitative analyses of their effects on CCP dynamic behavior . Three isoforms of type I phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate - 5 - ki - nase ( PIP5K α , β , and γ ) phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phos - phate and are largely responsible for PIP 2 synthesis in mammalian cells ( Doughman et al . , 2003 ) . siRNA - mediated knockdown of PIP5K β decreased PIP 2 levels and reduced internalization of trans - ferrin ( Tfn ) , a well - studied cargo of CME ( Padron et al . , 2003 ) . Over - expression of PIP5K α ( Barbieri et al . , 2001 ) or PIP5K β ( Padron et al . , 2003 ) increased internalization of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) or Tfn , respectively . As PIP5Ks can bind to AP - 2 ( Bairstow et al . , 2006 ; Krauss et al . , 2006 ; Thieman et al . , 2009 ) , it has been suggested that these interactions create a positive feedback mechanism for local synthesis of PIP 2 within assembling CCPs ( Haucke , 2005 ) . Despite the biochemical evidence of PIP5K interaction with endocytic pro - teins , however , specific recruitment of PIP5Ks to CCPs has not been demonstrated . Paradoxically , although PIP 2 is important for CME , its turnover by 5’ - dephosphorylation may occur locally within CCPs and also contribute to CCV formation . Several 5’ - inositol phosphatases bind to CCP protein components , including SH2 - domain - contain - ing inositol 5’ - phosphatase ( SHIP2 ) , which binds to intersectin ( Nakatsu et al . , 2010 ) , OCRLa ( Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome of Lowe ) , which binds to clathrin and AP - 2 and localizes to a subset of CCPs ( Choudhury et al . , 2009 ; Mao et al . , 2009 ) , and synaptojanin ( Sjn ) 1 , which binds to clathrin , AP - 2 , and endophilin ( Perera et al . , 2006 ) and localizes to CCPs throughout their lifetime ( Perera et al . , 2006 ) . Knockdown of the related Sjn2 impacts multiple stages of CCV formation ( Rusk et al . , 2003 ) , although its localization relative to CCPs has not been examined . Together these studies suggest that the temporal and spatial regulation of PIP 2 synthesis and turn - over may function at multiple stages in CCV formation . To further address the role ( s ) of PIP 2 synthesis and turnover in CCV formation , we have studied CME by tracking the dynamics of individual CCPs in live cells . This method couples time - lapse TIRF microscopy in cells expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein fused to clathrin light chain ( eGFP - CLC ) to computational tracking of CCPs and analysis of their lifetimes ( Jaqaman et al . , 2008 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . With this approach , we have previously shown that CCPs exist in three dynamically distinct subpopulations : two short - lived subpopulations ( τ < 20 – 30 s ) , hypothesized to be abortive , and a longer - lived productive ( τ = 30 – 120 s ) subpopulation leading to CCV formation ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 , 2010 ) . The ratio of the abortive to productive pits reflects the stabilization of nascent CCPs and the efficiency of their maturation , whereas the lifetimes of productive CCPs reflect their rate of maturation leading to CCV scission . We have also used recently developed methods 2590 | C . N . Antonescu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell at higher levels of PIP5K α overexpression ( Figure 2B ) . To understand how increased PIP 2 syn - thesis impacts CCV formation , we examined the effect of low levels of overexpression of PIP5K α on CCP dynamics ( i . e . , under condi - tions that minimally perturb CME shown in Figure 2B ) . Under these conditions ( at 15 ng / ml tet ) , overexpression of mCherry - PIP5K α , but not KD , resulted in an increase in CCP initiation ( Figure 2C ) , without affect - ing the lifetime of abortive ( Figure 2D ) or productive ( Figure 2E ) CCPs . Furthermore , there was no effect of PIP5K overexpression on the proportion of productive CCPs ( Figure 2F ) . Similar results were obtained when we transiently transfected BSC - 1 cells stably expressing eGFP - CLC with cDNA en - coding mCherry - tagged PIP5K α , β , or γ and measured CCP dynamics in cells expressing the lowest detectable levels of mCherry - PIP5K ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) . Although small , the increase in CCP ini - tiation density observed upon PIP5K over - expression in the absence of other changes in CCP dynamics would be expected to in - crease ( rather than decrease ) rates of Tfn uptake . These findings suggest that an in - crease in PIP 2 levels may uncouple CCP for - mation and maturation from regulation by cargo ( such as Tfn receptor [ TfR ] ) . As such , increased PIP 2 levels may result in formation of CCPs that have fewer cargo molecules , resulting in decreased internalization of cargo proteins , such as Tfn . Increased PIP 2 synthesis regulates CCP size We have previously shown that CCP size is , in part , regulated by incorporation of spe - cific adaptors ( Liu et al . , 2010 ; Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) . We measured the intensity of clathrin in short - and longer - lived cohorts of diffrac - tion - limited CCPs over their lifetime in con - trol cells and cells overexpressing controlled , low levels of PIP5K α WT ( Figure 3 ) or tran - siently transfected with cDNAs encoding PIPK5 α , β , or γ ( Supplemental Figure 2 , A – D ) . With regard to clathrin fluorescence , CCPs exhibit an initial growth phase , followed by a plateau phase during which they reach max - imum clathrin intensity , before undergoing a FIGURE 1 : PIP5K isoforms cannot be detected in CCPs . BSC - 1 cells stably expressing eGFP - CLC were transfected with cDNA encoding mCherry - PIP5K α , mCherry - PIP5K β , mCherry - PIP5K γ , or mCherry alone . Their dynamic localization to CCPs was detected by time - lapse TIRF microscopy . ( A ) Shown are representative single - frame fluorescence micrographs ( also see Supplemental Movies 1 – 4 ) . Scale bar , 5 μm . ( B ) Shown is the mean fluorescence intensity corresponding to mCherry - PIP5K α , - PIP5K β , or - PIP5K γ throughout CCP lifetimes within CCP tracks ( alongside that of mCherry alone ) grouped into 10 – 20 s ( left panel ) or 60 – 80 s ( right panel ) lifetime cohorts . Also shown is the mean fluorescence intensity of eGFP - CLC within these CCP tracks ( note different scale ) . Error bars reflect cell - to - cell variation . The number of CCP trajectories ( n ) and cells ( k ) for each condition are control mCherry : n = 63 , 603 , k = 50 ; mCherry - PIP5K α : n = 74 , 685 , k = 37 ; mCherry - PIP5K β : n = 62 , 130 , k = 38 ; and mCherry - PIP5K γ : n = 60 , 853 , k = 33 . Volume 22 July 15 , 2011 PIP 2 regulates CCV formation | 2591 Figure 2 , A – D ) . That increases in clathrin fluorescence within CCP tracks do indeed reflect increased CCP size has previously been con - firmed by electron microscopy ( Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) . Hence in - creased PIP 2 synthesis within the bulk PM enhances early stages of CCP initiation and growth . PIP 2 synthesis is required for CCP assembly and stabilization To determine the effect of reduced PIP 2 synthesis on CCP dynamics and size , we reduced the expression levels of each PIP5K isoform by rapid decay as the CCP moves away from the PM , resulting from scission and / or clathrin uncoating ( Figure 3A ; Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . Adenovirus - mediated controlled expression of PIP5K α increased the maximum eGFP - CLC fluorescence within CCPs of all lifetime cohorts ( Figure 3B ) , as a result of increasing the initial rate of clathrin assem - bly , without changing the duration of the growth phase ( Figure 3A ) . Overexpression by cDNA transfection of each of the three active PIP5K isoforms , but not the KD mutant of PIP5K α , resulted in similar , yet more pronounced effects on these parameters ( Supplemental FIGURE 2 : Controlled PIP5K α overexpression reduces Tfn internalization yet increases CCP initiation . BSC - 1 cells stably expressing mCherry - CLC were infected with adenoviruses encoding tet - regulated WT or KD eGFP - PIP5K α or eGFP alone , and were cultured in the presence of various concentrations of tet . ( A ) Shown are representative immunoblots with anti - PIP5K α . ( B ) Tfn uptake was determined in BSC - 1 cells expressing either WT or KD PIP5K α or GFP alone ( control ) at either 15 ng / ml ( low overexpression ) or 2 . 5 ng / ml ( high overexpression ) tet . Shown are the means of at least three independent experiments . ( C – F ) The results of TIRF microscopy imaging and CCP lifetime decomposition in cells infected with adenoviruses as indicated at 15 ng / ml tet are shown : ( C ) CCP initiation rate , lifetimes of abortive ( D ) and productive ( E ) CCP subpopulations , and ( F ) relative contributions of CCP subpopulations . Error bars , cell - to - cell variation ; the length of the lifetime bars in ( D ) and ( E ) denotes the t 50 spread of the distribution . The number of CCP trajectories ( n ) and cells ( k ) for each condition are control eGFP : n = 185 , 683 , k = 73 ; eGFP - PIP5K α WT : n = 177 , 504 , k = 57 ; and eGFP - PI5K1 α KD : n = 87 , 597 , k = 38 . ( B and C ) * p < 0 . 05 . ( D – F ) * p < 10 −8 . 2592 | C . N . Antonescu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 5’ - inositol phosphatases are detected in CCPs In contrast to the PIP5Ks , we could detect the mCherry - tagged 5’ - inositol phosphatases Sjn1 ( 170 kDa isoform , henceforth termed Sjn1 – 170 ) , OCRLa , and Sjn2 at CCPs by dual - channel , time - lapse TIRF microscopy ; however , there was considerable heterogeneity in the extent and the dynamic behavior of their recruitment ( see Sup - plemental Movies 5 – 7 and representative single frames in Figure 5A ) . To better characterize the nature of their CCP association , we developed algorithms that can identify the presence of fluorescently tagged proteins within tracks of individual CCPs . mCherry - OCRLa and - Sjn2 were detected in only a small subset of CCPs ( 26 . 6 ± 3 . 2 % and 25 . 6 ± 2 . 1 % , respectively ; Figure 5B ) . Moreover , both exhibited highly heterogeneous temporal recruitment to these pits : OCRLa was detected either throughout or only near the end of the lifetime of CCPs , and Sjn2 recruitment peaked either before significant clathrin accumulation or near the end of the lifetime of CCPs ( see Supplemental Movies 5 and 6 and Supplemental Figures 4 and 5 for time - lapse montages of individual representative CCPs ) . mCherry - Sjn2 puncta not corresponding to CCPs , as well as Sjn2 - labeled dy - namic motile tubules , were also observed ( Supplemental Movie 6 ) . The nature and function of the Sjn2 - labeled tubules remain to be determined . Given that mCherry - OCRLa and - Sjn2 exhibited re - cruitment to only a small subset of CCPs for only a small portion of their total lifetime , these phosphatases were rarely detected in CCPs at any single time ( Figure 5A ) . In contrast , mCherry - Sjn1 – 170 could be readily observed to co - localize with CCPs when examining single fluorescence micrographs ( Figure 5A ) or time - lapse movies ( Supplemental Movie 7 ) ; corre - spondingly , Sjn1 – 170 was detected in a larger proportion ( 45 . 8 ± 3 . 2 % ) of CCPs ( Figure 5B ) . Note that this is likely an underestimate of the percentage of CCPs containing Sjn1 – 170 , given the strin - gency of our automatic detection of Sjn1 – 170 within CCPs ( see Ma - terials and Methods ) . Also in contrast to OCRLa and Sjn2 , the dy - namics of Sjn1 – 170 association with CCPs was largely homogenous ( see Supplemental Figure 6 for time - lapse montages of individual representative CCPs ) . Averaging of mCherry - Sjn1 – 170 fluorescence intensity within CCP tracks for both short - lived ( Figure 5C , top ) and longer - lived ( Figure 5C , bottom ) CCPs ( n > 30 , 000 ) revealed a tem - poral recruitment profile similar to that of eGFP - CLC . The presence of 5’ - inositol phosphatases in CCPs suggests that localized PIP 2 turnover occurs during CCV formation and , of those examined , Sjn1 – 170 appears to be the principal 5’ - inositol phosphatase spe - cifically recruited to CCPs in BSC - 1 cells . Activity - dependent and - independent effects of 5’ - inositol phosphatase overexpression on CCP assembly and maturation To better understand the role of Sjn1 – 170 within CCPs , we examined the effect of its controlled overexpression on Tfn uptake and CCP dynamics . Using the same tet - regulated adenovirus strategy as for PIP5K α , we expressed eGFP - Sjn1 – 170 ( WT or 5’ - inositol phosphatase - dead [ PD ] ) in BSC - 1 cells ( Figure 6A ) . Overexpression of Sjn1 – 170 WT at low levels did not measurably impact Tfn uptake ( Figure 6B ) . At higher levels of overexpression , however , Tfn uptake was reduced , but this effect was also observed upon overexpression of Sjn1 – 170 PD ( Figure 6B ) . This reduction in Tfn uptake could reflect activity - in - dependent sequestration of other endocytic proteins and / or the dis - placement of phosphatase active , endogenous Sjn1 from CCPs . To define which stage ( s ) of CCP assembly and maturation might be affected by Sjn1 , we examined CCP dynamics in cells overex - pressing WT and PD mCherry - Sjn1 – 170 under conditions that mini - mally perturb CME . Low levels of Sjn1 WT overexpression did not siRNA . Although PIP5K β and γ could not be detected at the protein level , we were able to detect knockdown of their respective mRNAs ( Supplemental Figure 3 , B and C ) . These two treatments , however , also resulted in a robust , presumably compensatory , reduction of Sjn2 levels ( Supplemental Figure 3F ) , and it was therefore not pos - sible to unambiguously measure their role in CME . In contrast , PIP5K α was readily detected by immunoblot , and siRNA knockdown resulted in a 60 . 0 ± 5 . 2 % ( n = 3 ) reduction in its mRNA and a corre - sponding reduction in protein levels ( Figure 4A and inset , respec - tively ) without affecting the levels of any other lipid kinase or phos - phatase examined ( Supplemental Figure 3 , A – F ) . Knockdown of PIP5K α did not affect the lifetime of abortive or productive CCPs ( Figure 4 , C and D ) but reduced CCP initiation density ( Figure 4B ) and decreased the proportion of productive CCPs ( Figure 4E ) . The rate of Tfn internalization was not signifi - cantly affected ( Supplemental Figure 3G ) . Knockdown of PIP5K α also decreased the maximum fluorescence intensity of eGFP - CLC in CCPs ( Figure 4F ) by decreasing the initial rate of CCP assembly without altering the duration of the eGFP - CLC growth phase ( Sup - plemental Figure 2E ) . The effect of simultaneous knockdown of all three PIP5K isoforms was indistinguishable from knockdown of PIP5K α alone ( unpublished data ) , and thus we conclude that PIP5K α is the major isoform regulating CME in BSC - 1 cells . To - gether with the results of PIP5K overexpression , these findings suggest that PIP 2 synthesis is limiting for the initial rate and extent of clathrin assembly at steady state , and , when PIP5K α levels are reduced , PIP 2 synthesis also becomes limiting for CCP maturation efficiency . FIGURE 3 : PIP5K α overexpression increases CCP size . BSC - 1 cells stably expressing mCherry - CLC were infected with adenoviruses encoding tet - regulated WT eGFP - PIP5K α or eGFP alone , and were cultured in the presence of 15 ng / ml tet ( low PIP5K α overexpression ) . Shown is the mean mCherry - CLC ( clathrin ) fluorescence intensity throughout CCP lifetimes ( A ) or maximal mCherry - CLC in each CCP track ( B ) , grouped into lifetime cohorts . Error bars reflect cell - to - cell variation . The number of CCP trajectories ( n ) and cells ( k ) for each condition are control eGFP : n = 185 , 683 , k = 73 ; eGFP - PIP5K α WT : n = 177 , 504 , k = 57 ; and eGFP - PI5K1 α KD : n = 87 , 597 , k = 38 . ( B and C ) * p < 0 . 05 . ( C , E , and F ) * p < 10 −8 . Volume 22 July 15 , 2011 PIP 2 regulates CCV formation | 2593 pression of phosphatase - active Sjn1 sug - gests that localized PIP 2 - phosphatase activ - ity might control the dynamics of protein interactions during CCP assembly and mat - uration . We also overexpressed mCherry - OCRLa or – Sjn2 constructs but found no dif - ferences in the effects of WT versus their PD mutants on CCP dynamics ( unpublished data ) , making the interpretation of a role for the activities of these lipid phosphatases in CCV formation difficult . Together these findings suggest multiple distinct roles for PIP 2 degradation by Sjn1 during CCV formation . To further probe whether the phos - phatase - dependent effects of Sjn1 – 170 overexpression on CME and CCV formation were indeed due to its localization to CCPs , we transfected BSC - 1 cells stably expressing eGFP - CLC with mCherry - Sjn1 145 ( 145 kDa isoform ) . This shorter isoform of Sjn1 lacks the NPF sequence and the binding motifs for AP - 2 and clathrin and is recruited less ef - ficiently to CCPs in COS cells ( Perera et al . , 2006 ) . Indeed mCherry - Sjn1 – 145 is ob - served to localize to CCPs far less efficiently than Sjn1 – 170 in BSC - 1 cells ( Supplemental Figure 8A , compare to Figure 5A ) . The ef - fects of overexpression of Sjn1 – 145 WT on CCP lifetimes ( Supplemental Figure 8 , B and C ) and maturation efficiency ( Supplemental Figure 8D ) were much smaller than those of Sjn1 – 170 WT and were not dependent on phosphatase activity as similar effects were seen upon overexpression of mCherry - Sjn1 – 145 PD ( Supplemental Figure 8 , B – D ) . These results suggest that any effects of overexpression of mCherry - Sjn1 – 145 were likely due to sequestration of other CCP components and not the result of localized PIP 2 hydrolysis within CCPs . Hence the phosphatase - dependent effects of Sjn1 – 170 on CCP dynamics were indeed likely due to its localization to CCPs . siRNA knockdown of Sjn1 affects early and late stages of CCP maturation To complement the findings obtained from overexpression studies , we also examined the effect of siRNA knockdown of Sjn1 , which reduced its mRNA levels by 53 . 8 ± 6 . 7 % ( n = 7 ) ( Figure 7A ) , and did not affect expression of other lipid kinases and phosphatases exam - ined ( Supplemental Figure 3 ) . Sjn1 knockdown had no effect on CCP initiation ( Figure 7B ) , consistent with the lack of effect of Sjn1 overexpression on this parameter . Knockdown of Sjn1 resulted in an increase in the proportion of productive CCPs ( Figure 7E ) and in - creased the lifetime of abortive CCPs ( Figure 7C ) , producing the expected opposite effect of Sjn1 – 170 WT overexpression on these parameters . These findings suggest that the stability of nascent CCPs is controlled by localized , Sjn1 - dependent PIP 2 turnover . Knockdown of Sjn1 also resulted in a longer lifetime of productive CCPs ( Figure 7D ) , consistent with the effect of overexpression of Sjn1 – 170 PD ( Figure 3F ) . Hence dephosphorylation of PIP 2 by Sjn1 also contributes to late stages of CCP maturation / uncoating . Knock - down of Sjn1 did not impact the size of CCPs ( Figure 7F ) , consistent impact CCP initiation ( Figure 6C ) or alter the lifetime of productive CCPs ( Figure 6E ) . Instead , Sjn1 – 170 WT overexpression reduced the lifetime of abortive CCPs ( Figure 6D ) and the proportion of pro - ductive CCPs ( Figure 6F ) . These effects , which were more pro - nounced in transiently transfected cells that presumably express higher levels of mCherry - Sjn1 – 170 WT ( Supplemental Figure 7 ) , were not observed in cells overexpressing Sjn1 – 170 - PD ( Figure 6 , D – F , Supplemental Figure 7 ) . Thus , the effects of Sjn1 on early stages of CCP stabilization and maturation were dependent on phosphatase activity and hence changes in the rates or extents of PIP 2 turnover . Finally , unlike PIP5K overexpression , Sjn1 – 170 overex - pression did not alter either the rate of incorporation of eGFP - CLC or CCP size ( unpublished data ) . Overexpression of Sjn1 – 170 PD , even at controlled levels , re - sulted in dominant - negative effects that were distinct from those resulting from Sjn1 – 170 WT overexpression . These effects included a slight reduction in the initiation density of CCPs ( Figure 6C ) and an increased lifetime of productive CCPs ( Figure 6E , Supplemental Figure 7 ) . Sjn1 – 170 contains a proline - rich domain , an NPF se - quence that binds Eps15 , as well as binding sites for AP - 2 and clath - rin ( Perera et al . , 2006 ) ; therefore these effects likely reflect displace - ment of endogenous EAPs , including active Sjn1 , from their CCP binding partners . That these effects differ from the effects of overex - FIGURE 4 : siRNA knockdown of PIP5K α reduces CCP maturation efficiency and CCP size . BSC - 1 cells stably expressing eGFP - CLC were treated with PIP5K α - specific or nontargeting ( control ) siRNA . ( A ) Shown are the means of at least three independent experiments for detection of PIP5K α mRNA levels and a representative immunoblot with PIP5K α - specific or CHC - specific ( loading control ) antibodies . The results of TIRF microscopy imaging and CCP lifetime decomposition in cells treated with siRNAs as indicated are shown : ( B ) CCP initiation rate lifetimes of ( C ) abortive and ( D ) productive CCP subpopulations and ( E ) relative contributions of CCP subpopulations . The length of the lifetime bars in ( C ) and ( D ) denotes the t 50 spread of the distribution . ( F ) Mean maximal eGFP - CLC intensity within CCP tracks grouped into lifetime cohorts was determined in cells treated as indicated . Error bars reflect cell - to - cell variation . The number of CCP trajectories ( n ) and cells ( k ) for each condition are control siRNA : n = 102 , 059 , k = 81 ; and PIP5K α siRNA : n = 30 , 828 , k = 34 . ( A , B , and F ) * p < 0 . 05 . ( C – E ) * p < 10 −8 . 2594 | C . N . Antonescu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell pholipids in this process . Here , we have used overexpression and siRNA - mediated knockdown of PIP5K and Sjn1 to show that PIP 2 synthesis and turnover contribute to multiple , yet only partly over - lapping stages of CCV formation . Moreover , we find that PIP 2 syn - thesis and turnover are spatially segregated events as we were un - able to detect colocalization of any of the three PIP5K isoforms within CCPs at any point during their lifetime , whereas all three 5’ - inositol phosphatases we studied ( OCRLa , Sjn2 , and Sjn1 ) associ - ated dynamically with at least a subset of CCPs . Thus , as previously suggested for the synapse ( Wenk et al . , 2001 ) , bulk PIP 2 levels ap - pear to regulate CCP assembly , whereas localized turnover of PIP 2 controls multiple stages in CCV formation . Knockout of PIP5K γ , the major PIP5K isoform in neurons , inhibits early stages of clathrin - mediated recycling of synaptic vesicles ( SVs ) ( Wenk et al . , 2001 ) . Knockout of Sjn1 in mice ( Cremona et al . , 1999 ) or of the only Sjn homologue in Caenorhabditis elegans ( Harris et al . , 2000 ) similarly inhibits clathrin - mediated recycling of SVs and leads to the accumulation of multiple distinct intermediates in the with the lack of effect of Sjn1 overexpression on this parameter . Fur - thermore , knockdown of Sjn1 did not measurably alter the rate of Tfn uptake ( Supplemental Figure 3H ) , consistent with these condi - tions representing a subtle perturbation of PIP 2 dynamics and / or the fact that Sjn1 exhibits both positive ( productive CCP lifetimes ) and negative ( maturation efficiency ) regulation of CCV formation . Collectively these results suggest that the assembly and matura - tion efficiency of nascent CCPs are controlled in part by the oppos - ing actions of PIP 2 synthesis and turnover . Moreover , there appears to be a temporal hierarchy in that initial rates of clathrin assembly are selectively dependent on the activity of PIP5K α , whereas the turnover of nascent CCPs appears to be selectively dependent on Sjn1 activity , which also selectively contributes to the late stages of productive CCP maturation . DISCUSSION Much has been learned in recent years about the function of EAPs in CCV formation , but less is known about the role of specific phos - FIGURE 5 : Sjn1 is the major 5’ - inositol phosphatase within CCPs . BSC - 1 cells stably expressing eGFP - CLC were transfected with cDNA encoding mCherry - Sjn1 , mCherry - OCRL , mCherry - Sjn2 , or mCherry alone . ( A ) Representative single - frame fluorescence micrographs acquired by TIRF microscopy are shown ( also see Supplemental Movies 5 – 7 ) . Scale bar , 5 μm . ( B ) CCP tracks with detectable mCherry - tagged phosphatases were computationally identified as described in Materials and Methods . Shown is the mean percentage of CCPs positive for each mCherry - tagged phosphatase . ( C ) Shown is the mean normalized fluorescence corresponding to eGFP - CLC or mCherry - Sjn1 in distinct CCP lifetime cohorts . Error bars represent cell - to - cell variation . The number of CCP trajectories ( n ) and cells ( k ) for each condition are control mCherry : n = 209 , 738 , k = 78 ; mCherry - Sjn1 170 : n = 80 , 709 , k = 45 ; mCherry - OCRLa : n = 137 , 307 , k = 29 ; mCherry - Sjn2 : n = 73 , 871 , k = 31 . Volume 22 July 15 , 2011 PIP 2 regulates CCV formation | 2595 β in CV - 1 cells ( Padron et al . , 2003 ) increases Tfn or EGF internaliza - tion , respectively . These differences may reflect the different ex - perimental conditions and assays used . For example , Stahl and colleagues measured EGF uptake at 100 ng / ml ( Barbieri et al . , 2001 ) , conditions under which the EGF receptor was subsequently shown to internalize primarily via clathrin - independent mechanisms ( Sigismund et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , we have recently shown dif - ferential lipid dependence for EGF versus Tfn uptake via CME ( Antonescu et al . , 2010 ) . We also note that the previous study by Roth and colleagues did not measure Tfn internalization relative to surface TfR ( Padron et al . , 2003 ) . As the surface expression of TfR would increase under conditions that inhibit endocytosis , the abso - lute extent of Tfn accumulation under these conditions may not reflect the rate of Tfn internalization . Both the present ( Figure 3 , Supplemental Figure 2 ) and previous studies ( Padron et al . , 2003 ) , SV recycling pathways . In non - neuronal cells , CME is potently inhib - ited by acute recruitment of an overexpressed 5’ - inositol phos - phatase to the bulk PM ( Zoncu et al . , 2007 ; Abe et al . , 2008 ) . By controlling levels of overexpression of Sjn1 – 170 using a tet - regu - lated adenoviral expression system , we also observe inhibition of CME at high levels of expression , but not at lower levels . As Sjn1 is targeted to CCPs , this observation suggests that the spatial and temporal regulation of PIP 2 turnover can buffer the effects of mod - erate levels of overexpression . We used these mildly perturbing conditions to probe the role of PIP 2 turnover in CCP maturation . At similarly low levels of overexpression of active , but not KD , PIP5K α , we observed a small but significant decrease in the rate of Tfn endocytosis , which was more pronounced at higher levels of overexpression . These results differ from a previous report showing that overexpression of PIP5K α in NR6 cells ( Barbieri et al . , 2001 ) or FIGURE 6 : Controlled overexpression of Sjn1 – 170 impacts CCP stabilization , abortive turnover , and maturation . BSC - 1 cells stably expressing mCherry - CLC were infected with adenoviruses encoding tet - regulated WT or PD eGFP - Sjn1 or eGFP alone and cultured in the presence of various concentrations of tet . ( A ) Shown is a representative immunoblot with anti - GFP antibodies to detect GFP - Sjn1 expression . ( B ) Tfn uptake was determined in BSC - 1 cells expressing either WT or PD Sjn1 – 170 or GFP alone ( control ) at either 15 ng / ml ( low overexpression ) or 5 ng / ml ( high overexpression ) tet . Shown are the means of at least three independent experiments . ( C – F ) The results of TIRF microscopy imaging and CCP lifetime decomposition in cells infected with adenoviruses at 15 ng / ml tet as indicated are shown : ( C ) CCP initiation rate , lifetimes of ( D ) abortive and ( E ) productive CCP subpopulations , and ( F ) relative contributions of CCP subpopulations . Error bars reflect cell - to - cell variation ; the length of the lifetime bars in ( D ) and ( E ) denotes the t 50 spread of the distribution . The number of CCP trajectories ( n ) and cells ( k ) for each condition are control GFP : n = 185 , 683 , k = 73 ; eGFP - Sjn1 170 WT : n = 85 , 212 , k = 34 ; eGFP - Sjn1 170 PD : n = 44 , 651 , k = 26 . ( B and C ) * p < 0 . 05 . ( D – F ) * p < 10 −8 . 2596 | C . N . Antonescu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell however , reported an increase in CCP den - sity upon PIP5K overexpression . Together these studies have defined a critical role for PIP 2 in CME and suggest that examination of CCP dynamics in addition to cargo inter - nalization is required to understand the function of endocytic factors in CME . By quantitative live - cell imaging of CCPs we have previously identified discrete stages of CCV formation ( Figure 8 ) ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 , 2010 ; Antonescu et al . , 2010 ; Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . CCP initia - tion occurs as a result of a rapid burst of clathrin recruitment ( ∼ 2 s ) and is followed by a period ( ∼ 20 – 30 s ) of CCP assembly / growth ( Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . A large fraction of CCPs rapidly disassemble ( so - called abortive CCPs ; Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) , which led us to propose that stabili - zation of nascent CCPs corresponds to crossing an endocytosis “checkpoint” that monitors the fidelity of CCP assembly ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Although still poorly defined , factors that determine progression beyond this checkpoint , which include the rate and nature of coat assembly , cargo loading , and curvature generation , affect the efficiency of CCP maturation and hence the ratio of abortive versus productive CCPs ( Loerke et al . , 2009 , 2011 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 , 2010 ; Lui et al . , 2010 ) . Stabilized CCPs then proceed through a maturation phase of variable length during which the total amount of clathrin is largely constant ( Met - tlen et al . , 2010 ; Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . Finally , CCPs undergo inward movement , followed by rapid scission and uncoating ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Saffarian and Kirchhausen , 2008 ; Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . Using these quan - titative live - cell assays to independently measure CCP initiation rates , intensity changes ( i . e . , growth ) , maturation efficiency , and the lifetimes of both abortive and productive CCPs , we detect multiple , differenti - ated roles of PIP 2 synthesis and turnover during CCV formation . Regulation of CCP initiation and growth by PIP 2 PIP 2 synthesis by PIP5K , but not its turnover by Sjn1 , regulates CCP initiation ( Figure 8 ) . This difference may be a consequence of the dif - ferent localization of these two enzymes relative to CCPs . We infer that global PIP 2 synthesis is the major determinant of PIP 2 availability for CCP initiation . CCP initiation must precede the significant local - ized accumulation of 5’ - inositol phosphatases such as Sjn1 as they are recruited through interactions with coat proteins . Because AP - 2 is also limiting for CCP initiation ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) , the requirement for bulk PIP 2 at this earliest stage may reflect the need for a PIP 2 - stabilized conformational change in AP - 2 upon cargo binding ( Jackson et al . , 2010 ) . Alternatively , or in addition , PIP 2 may be required for the mem - brane targeting of the FCHo / intersectin / Eps15 protein complex , re - cently shown to be critical in CCP nucleation ( Henne et al . , 2010 ) . Levels of PIP5K α activity , but not those of Sjn1 , influence the rate and extent of CCP growth ( Figure 8 ) . We have previously determined that the size of CCPs is regulated by their content of adaptor - bound FIGURE 7 : siRNA knockdown of Sjn1 enhances CCP maturation efficiency , delays the turnover of abortive CCPs , and increases the lifetime of productive CCPs . BSC - 1 cells stably expressing eGFP - CLC were treated with either Sjn1 - specific or nontargeting siRNA . ( A ) Shown are the means of at least five independent experiments for detection of Sjn1 mRNA levels . The results of TIRF microscopy imaging and CCP lifetime decomposition in cells treated with siRNAs as indicated are shown : ( B ) CCP initiation rate , lifetimes of ( C ) abortive and ( D ) productive CCP subpopulations , and ( E ) relative contributions of CCP subpopulations . ( F ) Mean maximal eGFP - CLC ( clathrin ) fluorescence intensity within CCP tracks grouped into lifetime cohorts was determined in cells treated as indicated . Error bars reflect cell - to - cell variation ; the length of the lifetime bars in ( C ) and ( D ) denotes the t 50 spread of the distribution . The number of CCP trajectories ( n ) and cells ( k ) for each condition are control siRNA : n = 10 , 259 , k = 81 ; and Sjn1 siRNA : n = 42 , 649 , k = 33 . ( A ) * p < 0 . 05 . ( C – E ) * p < 10 −8 . FIGURE 8 : Diagram depicting temporal regulation of CCP formation by PIP5K and Sjn1 . Stages of CCP formation ( initiation , assembly / growth , which leads to stabilization , maturation , and scission / uncoating ) . Dotted line indicates the proposed endocytic checkpoint that gates progression toward CCV formation . Positive ( green ) and negative ( red ) regulation by PI5K and Sjn1 at each stage is also shown . See Discussion for details . Volume 22 July 15 , 2011 PIP 2 regulates CCV formation | 2597 BSC - 1 cells . By quantifying the fluorescence intensity correspond - ing to TfR within CCPs in a manner similar to that done here for PIP5K ( Figure 1 ) and Sjn1 ( Figure 5 ) , maximal cargo loading was shown to occur early ( within ∼ 5 s ) in the lifetime of CCPs ( Liu et al . , 2010 ) , even though the AP - 2 content continues to increase beyond this stage ( ∼ 20 – 30 s ) . ( Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . This finding suggests that although AP - 2 is initially recruited to the PM in part by binding cargo proteins , subsequent AP - 2 recruitment into CCPs occurs predominantly by other interactions , such as that with PIP 2 , con - tributing to stabilization of nascent CCPs . Together these studies suggest that increasing PIP 2 levels by overexpression of PIP5K in - creases the initiation of CCPs that contain few cargo molecules , as adaptor proteins are recruited to and become stabilized on the PM predominantly by PIP 2 . This reduced dependence on cargo could , in turn , lead to internalization of CCPs that contain adaptor pro - teins that are relatively devoid of TfR , thus effectively abrogating the control of CCP maturation by their cargo content , which occurs under conditions of unperturbed PIP 2 synthesis ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) . As such , overproduction of PIP 2 may repre - sent a bypass of the endocytic checkpoint that normally ensures that only CCPs effectively loaded with cargo become stabilized . Conversely , silencing of PIP5K α did not detectably reduce Tfn uptake while CCP initiation and stabilization were reduced , suggest - ing that under this condition of mild reduction of PIP 2 synthesis , the stabilization of nascent CCPs becomes more dependent on cargo proteins . In other words , the increase in abortive CCPs seen upon PIP5K α knockdown likely reflects turnover of those CCPs containing the fewest cargo molecules and hence that are most susceptible to destabilization by reductions in global PIP 2 levels . The remaining , cargo - rich CCPs mature and internalize normally , resulting in only small changes in cargo internalization that are difficult to detect by measurement of Tfn uptake . Hence , due to the regulation of CCV formation by PIP 2 , cargo internalization by CME may be inherently buffered against modest reductions in PIP 2 levels , such as following activation of PLC γ by growth factor stimulation . More robust reduc - tions in PIP 2 levels lead to loss of AP - 2 ( Abe et al . , 2008 ) or clathrin ( Malecz et al . , 2000 ; Zoncu et al . , 2007 ) from the PM , and com - pletely abrogate cargo internalization . Regulation of late stages of CCV formation by PIP 2 A maturation period of variable length follows progression beyond the checkpoint , ultimately culminating in CCV scission and uncoat - ing ( Figure 8 ) . Perturbations of endocytic proteins that alter the life - time of productive CCPs imply a role for these factors in CCP matu - ration , scission , and / or uncoating . We have previously shown that knockdown of epsin , Eps15 , Hip1R , intersectin , and dynamin in - creases the lifetime of productive CCPs ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) , suggesting their requirement for late stages of CCV formation . Interestingly , the lifetime of productive CCPs was unaf - fected either by partial knockdown of PIP5K α or overexpression of Sjn1 . These results suggest that , after progression beyond the check - point , PIP 2 synthesis is no longer limiting for CCP maturation and CCV formation . Based on competitive binding of clathrin and EAPs to the β - ear of AP - 2 , it has been proposed that , during the process of accumulation of clathrin within CCPs , the interaction hub for EAP recruitment “switches” from the AP - 2 ear to the clathrin N - terminal domain ( Schmid et al . , 2006 ) . During the assembly stage of CCP formation , AP - 2 recruitment reaches its maximum whereas clathrin continues to accumulate before also reaching a plateau ( Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . Hence , after crossing a stability threshold during CCP assembly , there may no longer be a significant requirement for PIP 2 as a membrane ligand for recruitment of AP - 2 and other EAPs . cargo molecules , such as TfR / AP - 2 ( Liu et al . , 2010 ) and low - density lipoprotein receptor bound to Dab2 / ARH ( Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) . Here we show that PIP5K - mediated PIP 2 synthesis works in concert with cargo / adaptor complexes to regulate the rate of incorporation of clathrin during the initiation and growth phases of CCPs , which in turn determines their size . Clathrin assembly occurs at the boundary of CCPs and bulk PM ; thus , it is under the influence of globally syn - thesized PIP 2 and not of CCP - localized lipid phosphatases . Indeed , labeling of freeze - fractured membranes with a gold - conjugated PH - domain probe revealed that PIP 2 is depleted from the center of a coated pit relative to its periphery ( Fujita et al . , 2009 ) . Interestingly , although neither knockdown nor overexpression of Sjn1 affected the rate of CCP assembly or CCP size , a recent study found that the phosphatase SHIP2 negatively regulates the rate of CCP growth ( Nakatsu et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , during early stages of CCP assembly , PIP 2 synthesis by PIP5Ks in the bulk PM may be negatively regulated and / or counterbalanced locally by SHIP2 . Regulation of CCP stabilization by PIP 2 The contributions of PIP 2 to the rate of incorporation of clathrin into the growing coat versus its role in CCP stabilization appear to be at least partly independent . PIP5K overexpression increased CCP size without affecting the rate of turnover of abortive CCPs , whereas in - creasing or decreasing Sjn1 levels decreased or increased the rate of turnover of abortive CCPs , respectively , without affecting CCP size . We have recently shown that the initial rate of clathrin incorporation is similar between CCPs of different lifetimes ; whereas short - lived ( i . e . , unstable ) , abortive CCPs exhibit a reduced initial rate of AP - 2 incorporation compared with longer - lived ( i . e . , stabilized ) , productive CCPs ( Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . Together these data argue that stabiliza - tion of CCPs during the assembly / growth stage does not depend on clathrin self - assembly but instead depends on the rate of incorpora - tion of AP - 2 and PIP 2 , which together can serve as ligands for the web of low - affinity protein interactions that occur early in CCP forma - tion ( Schmid and McMahon , 2007 ) . Our data further suggest that the local hydrolysis of PIP 2 contributes to the destabilization and disas - sembly of abortive CCPs . Sjn1 is recruited to CCPs via interactions with the α - ear domain of AP - 2 and the N - terminal domain of clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ; Praefcke et al . , 2004 ; Schmid and McMahon , 2007 ) . Hence Sjn1 recruitment might be expected to occur predom - inantly within early - stage CCPs that are deficient in recruitment of other EAPs to the ear domains of AP - 2 and to the N - terminal domain of CHC . Sjn1 may thus facilitate destabilization and turnover of na - scent CCPs harboring defects in EAP recruitment , thereby freeing coat components for reassembly into new CCPs . The inhibition of PIP 2 synthesis and turnover by siRNA knock - down of PIP5K α and Sjn1 , respectively , had reciprocal effects on CCP maturation efficiency : Knockdown of PIP5K α reduced the pro - portion of productive CCPs , whereas knockdown of Sjn1 enhanced this parameter . Consistent with this finding , overexpression of Sjn1 , but not PD Sjn1 , resulted in a large decrease in the proportion of productive CCPs . In contrast , overexpression of PIP5K did not affect this parameter . The presence of 5’ - inositol phosphatases such as Sjn1 within CCPs may explain this observation in that localized de - phosphorylation could mitigate the PIP5K - dependent increases in bulk PIP 2 on CCP dynamics . Together these findings indicate that local concentrations of PIP 2 contribute to progression beyond the endocytosis checkpoint and stabilization of nascent CCPs . Regulation of cargo loading by PIP 2 Interestingly , increased global PIP 2 production resulting from over - expression of PIP5K α reduces the rate of Tfn internalization in 2598 | C . N . Antonescu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell To achieve efficient expression of eGFP - PIP5K1 α , eGFP - Sjn1 ( 170 ) , or eGFP alone ( control ) in BSC - 1 cells , adenoviruses coding for these proteins under the control of a tet - regulated promoter were created . Following seeding , BSC - 1 cells were infected with ap - propriate virus together with adenoviruses encoding a tet - repressi - ble transcription activator . After overnight incubation in various amounts of tet ( to allow various levels of eGFP - tagged protein ex - pression ; see Figures 2 and 6 ) , cells were processed for TIRF micros - copy , Tfn internalization , or immunoblotting . Cell lysates and immunoblotting were done as previously de - scribed ( Antonescu et al . , 2010 ) , using the following antibodies : goat polyclonal anti - PIP5K α ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) , rabbit polyclonal anti - GFP ( The Schmid Lab at The Scripps Re - search Institute , La Jolla , CA ) and TD - 1 , a mouse monoclonal anti - clathrin , which was a gift from Frances Brodsky ( University of Califor - nia , San Francisco , CA ) . siRNA knockdown of PIP5K and Sjn1 Transfection of BSC - 1 cells with siRNA duplexes was performed us - ing HiPerFect ( Qiagen , Chatsworth , CA ) as per the manufacturer’s instructions , and as previously described ( Antonescu et al . , 2010 ) . siRNA duplexes used were as follows : control siRNA was ON - TARGETplus nontargeting siRNA # 1 ( Dharmacon , Lafayette , CO ) , PIP5K α ( AAC TGC CGC GCT TCA AGA TAA ; Qiagen ) , and Sjn1 ( AAT GAC AAA GCT CGA GCA CTT ; Qiagen ) . Transfection of cells with cDNAs was performed using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , as per the manufacturer’s instructions , as previously described ( Antonescu et al . , 2010 ) . For dual - color , time - lapse TIRF microscopy experiments , cells expressing the lowest detectable lev - els of each mCherry - tagged PIP5K and 5’ - inositol phosphatase were selected for imaging . To detect mRNA levels following siRNA - mediated knockdown , real - time quantitative PCR experiments were performed using a Chromo4 DNA Engine ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) as previously de - scribed ( Antonescu et al . , 2010 ) . Specific primers for each of PIP5K α ( forward : CTG TTG CCT TCC GCT ACT TC ; reverse : AAA GTC GGG TTC TGG TT ) and Sjn1 ( forward : GAG GCC ATT GAT GTT TTG CT ; reverse : CTT CCC ACC ATT CAC ATT CC ) were designed using Primer3 software ( Rozen and Skaletsky , 2000 ) . For determination of the relative amounts of mRNA in each sample , all conditions are expressed as a percentage of mRNA detected in control siRNA - treated cells . Live - cell TIRF microscopy and CCP lifetime analysis TIRF mictroscopy was performed using a 100 × 1 . 49 NA CFI Apo TIRF objective ( Nikon ) mounted on a Ti - Eclipse inverted microscope with Perfect Focus System option ( Nikon ) . Imaging was performed on cells incubated in DMEM lacking phenol red and supplemented with 3 % fetal calf serum . Time - lapse image sequences from different cells were acquired at either a 400 ms or 2 s frame rate using a CoolSNAP HQ2 monochrome CCD camera ( Photometrics , Tuscon , AZ ) . Dual - channel , time - lapse image series were acquired by sequential , nearly simultaneous acquisition of individual channels , using 100 - to 150 - ms exposures for each at an overall frame rate of 2 s . Fluorescent particle detection , lifetime tracking , and lifetime analysis of CCPs in BSC - 1 cells stably expressing eGFP - CLC were performed as previously de - scribed and validated ( Jaqaman et al . , 2008 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Met - tlen et al . , 2009 ) . Intensity profile analysis on CCP lifetime cohorts was performed as previously described ( Mettlen et al . , 2010 ; Loerke et al . , 2011 ) following normalization to background fluorescence . In dual - channel movies , to distinguish between CCPs containing 5’ - phosphatases and those without ( see Supplemental Movie 8 ) , we In contrast to the effects of reducing PIP 2 availability by PIP5K α knockdown or Sjn1 overexpression , knockdown of Sjn1 increased the lifetime of productive CCPs . This finding suggests that PIP 2 turn - over within CCPs might be required during the late stages of CCV formation ( Figure 8 ) . Indeed , PIP 2 asymmetry at the neck of invagi - nated CCPs has been proposed to be a contributing force for mem - brane fission ( Liu et al . , 2009 ) , and a recent study showed that the phosphatase activity of Sjn1 facilitates scission of highly curved membrane tubules ( Chang - Ileto et al . , 2011 ) . Sjn1 knockout mice exhibit an increase in the number of CCVs , implying that these 5’ - inositol phosphatases might also be required for clathrin uncoat - ing following CCV formation ( Cremona et al . , 1999 ; Kim et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , the prolonged lifetime of CCPs upon Sjn1 knockdown may reflect events occurring after vesicle formation rather than during the maturation stage as uncoated CCVs could remain at the cell periphery within the TIRF field ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Further studies are necessary to determine the role of lipid phosphatases in these late - stage events . Although methods are not available to directly follow local PIP 2 production and turnover at CCPs , our results imply spatially and temporally distinct roles for the dynamic regulation of PIP 2 at differ - ent stages of CCV formation . At each stage , PIP 2 might function as a ligand , regulator , and / or structural component . Using similar methods , we have recently shown that phosphatidic acid regulates both early ( CCP initiation ) and late stages ( lifetime of productive CCPs ) of CCV formation without impacting CCV maturation effi - ciency ( i . e . , CCP stability ) ( Antonescu et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , phospha - tidic acid and PIP 2 have distinct contributions to CCV formation . Together these studies begin to reveal the complexity and unravel the spatiotemporal impact of lipid dynamics on CCV formation in mammalian cells . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and Tfn uptake Epithelial BSC - 1 monkey kidney cells stably expressing eGFP - CLC were provided by T . Kirchhausen ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) . BSC - 1 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 20 mM HEPES , 10 μg / ml streptomycin , 66 μg / ml penicillin , 10 % ( vol / vol ) fetal calf serum ( Hyclone , Logan , UT ) , supplemented with 0 . 5 mg / ml G418 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , under 5 % CO 2 at 37°C . CME of Tfn was analyzed as previously described by measuring the uptake of biotinylated Tfn as a function of time and expressed as a fraction of total initial cell surface Tfn binding ( Antonescu et al . , 2010 ) . cDNAs , transfection , and adenovirus - mediated expression All PIP5K isoform designations herein refer to the human nomencla - ture . cDNAs encoding full - length mouse PIP5K α , β , and γ ( 661 amino acid isoform ) were subcloned in - frame downstream of mCherry to create the respective N - terminal mCherry - PIP5K fusion proteins . cDNA encoding GFP - Sjn1 ( 170 kDa isoform ) and GFP - Sjn2 ( Sjn2B ; Malecz et al . , 2000 ) were gifts from Pietro De Camili ( Yale University , New Haven , CT ) and Mark Symons ( Feinstein Institute for Medical Research , Manhasset , NY ) , respectively , and were used to create mCherry - tagged versions of each phosphatase . cDNA en - coding mCherry - OCRLa was a gift of Martin Lowe ( University of Manchester , UK ) . cDNA encoding kinase - inactive PIP5K α mutant ( D268A ; here termed KD ) was made by site - directed mutagenesis , as described previously ( Tolias et al . , 1998 ) . cDNA encoding 5’ - inos - itol phosphatase – inactive Sjn1 was made by site - directed mutagen - esis ( here termed PD ) corresponding to R796A and R803A within Sjn2 ( Rusk et al . , 2003 ) . Volume 22 July 15 , 2011 PIP 2 regulates CCV formation | 2599 tracked CCPs based on the eGFP - CLC signal in the “master” chan - nel and classified CCPs based on the statistical significance of the fluorescence signal of the mCherry - tagged phosphatase in the “slave” channel at these sites . To establish the significance of the signal in the slave channel , we first determined , at each time point , whether the intensity value was above background level with confi - dence α = 0 . 95 . The intensity value was estimated by fitting a Gauss - ian approximation of the point - spread function to the slave channel signal at the CCP site . For the purpose of the statistical test , mean and variance of the background were estimated in a ring - shaped mask around the CCP , excluding all pixels with a significant signal at the CCP . Next we counted the number k of time points with a sig - nificant signal in a CCP track and tested whether k > k t , where the threshold k t is derived from the binomial cumulative distribution function B ( k t ; n , p ) ≥ 0 . 95 , where n is the total number of time points covered by the CCP track , and p is the probability for a signal to be significant by chance . The value of p was determined by computing the fraction of pixels in a Gaussian - filtered image of the endocyti - cally active zones that are above background with a confidence level α = 0 . 95 . Endocytically active zones were defined expanding the is - lands of pixels belonging to the detected CCPs by five pixels in all directions , using a morphological dilution operator . Statistical analyses Differences in CCP subpopulation lifetimes and percent contribu - tion among various treatments were determined following a jack - knife analysis of parameter uncertainty described previously ( Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) . Statistical analyses of differences among initia - tion density measurements were performed with the Mann – Whitney rank sum test , with p < 0 . 05 as a threshold for significant difference among conditions . Measurements of Tfn uptake were subjected to analysis of variance with Neumann – Keuls posttest , with p < 0 . 05 as a threshold for significant difference among conditions . Measure - ments of maximum eGFP - CLC fluorescence intensity within CCP tracks and mRNA and protein levels were subjected to Student’s t test , with p < 0 . 05 as a threshold for significant difference among conditions . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Marcel Mettlen , Allen Liu , and Sylvia Neumann for critical reading of this manuscript and helpful discussions and Don Hilgemann for helpful discussions . We also thank Vasyl Lukiyanchuk for technical assistance and Daniel Nuñez and Dinah Loerke for early quantification of CCP intensity and initiation . This work was sup - ported by National Institutes of Health grants GM73165 ( to G . D . and S . L . S . ) and MH61345 ( to S . L . S . ) and by a Swiss National Science Foundation fellowship ( to F . A . ) . This is TSRI Ms . No : 21104 . REFERENCES Abe N , Inoue T , Galvez T , Klein L , Meyer T ( 2008 ) . Dissecting the role of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in endocytosis and recycling of the transferrin receptor . J Cell Sci 121 , 1488 – 1494 . Antonescu CN , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2010 ) . Phosphatidic acid plays a regulatory role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 21 , 2944 – 2952 . Bairstow SF , Ling K , Su X , Firestone AJ , Carbonara C , Anderson RA ( 2006 ) . Type I γ 661 phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase directly interacts with AP2 and regulates endocytosis . J Biol Chem 281 , 20632 – 20642 . Barbieri MA , Heath CM , Peters EM , Wells A , Davis JN , Stahl PD ( 2001 ) . Phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase - 1beta is essential for epi - dermal growth factor receptor - mediated endocytosis . J Biol Chem 276 , 47212 – 47216 . Botelho RJ , Teruel M , Dierckman R , Anderson R , Wells A , York JD , Meyer T , Grinstein S ( 2000 ) . Localized biphasic changes in phosphati - dylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate at sites of phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 151 , 1353 – 1368 . Carlton JG , Cullen PJ ( 2005 ) . Coincidence detection in phosphoinositide signaling . Trends Cell Biol 15 , 540 – 547 . Catimel B , Schieber C , Condron M , Patsiouras H , Connolly L , Catimel J , Nice EC , Burgess AW , Holmes AB ( 2008 ) . The PI ( 3 , 5 ) P2 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 interactomes . J Proteome Res 7 , 5295 – 5313 . Chang - Ileto B , Frere SG , Chan RB , Voronov SV , Roux A , Di Paolo G ( 2011 ) . Synaptojanin 1 - mediated PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 hydrolysis is modulated by membrane curvature and facilitates membrane fission . Dev Cell 20 , 206 – 218 . Choudhury R , Noakes CJ , McKenzie E , Kox C , Lowe M ( 2009 ) . Differential clathrin binding and subcellular localization of OCRL1 splice isoforms . J Biol Chem 284 , 9965 – 9973 . Conner SD , Schmid SL ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . Cremona O et al . ( 1999 ) . Essential role of phosphoinositide metabolism in synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 99 , 179 – 188 . Di Paolo G , Pellegrini L , Letinic K , Cestra G , Zoncu R , Voronov S , Chang S , Guo J , Wenk MR , De Camilli P ( 2002 ) . Recruitment and regulation of phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type 1 gamma by the FERM domain of talin . Nature 420 , 85 – 89 . Doughman RL , Firestone AJ , Anderson RA ( 2003 ) . Phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases put PI4 , 5P ( 2 ) in its place . J Membr Biol 194 , 77 – 89 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 . Ford MG , Pearse BM , Higgins MK , Vallis Y , Owen DJ , Gibson A , Hopkins CR , Evans PR , McMahon HT ( 2001 ) . Simultaneous binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and clathrin by AP180 in the nucleation of clathrin lattices on mem - branes . Science 291 , 1051 – 1055 . Fujita A , Cheng J , Tauchi - Sato K , Takenawa T , Fujimoto T ( 2009 ) . A distinct pool of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in caveolae revealed by a nanoscale labeling technique . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 , 9256 – 9261 . Gaidarov I , Keen JH ( 1999 ) . Phosphoinositide - AP - 2 interactions required for targeting to plasma membrane clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Biol 146 , 755 – 764 . Harris TW , Hartwieg E , Horvitz HR , Jorgensen EM ( 2000 ) . Mutations in syn - aptojanin disrupt synaptic vesicle recycling . J Cell Biol 150 , 589 – 600 . Haucke V ( 2005 ) . Phosphoinositide regulation of clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis . Biochem Soc Trans 33 , 1285 – 1289 . Henne WM , Boucrot E , Meinecke M , Evergren E , Vallis Y , Mittal R , Mc - Mahon HT ( 2010 ) . FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 , 1281 – 1284 . Itoh T , Koshiba S , Kigawa T , Kikuchi A , Yokoyama S , Takenawa T ( 2001 ) . Role of the ENTH domain in phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate binding and endocytosis . Science 291 , 1047 – 1051 . Jackson LP , Kelly BT , McCoy AJ , Gaffry T , James LC , Collins BM , Höning S , Evans PR , Owen DJ ( 2010 ) . A large - scale conformational change couples membrane recruitment to cargo binding in the AP2 clathrin adaptor complex . Cell 141 , 1220 – 1229 . Jaqaman K , Loerke D , Mettlen M , Kuwata H , Grinstein S , Schmid SL , Danuser G ( 2008 ) . Robust single - particle tracking in live - cell time - lapse sequences . Nat Methods 5 , 695 – 702 . Jost M , Simpson F , Kavran JM , Lemmon MA , Schmid SL ( 1998 ) . Phosphati - dylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate is required for endocytic coated vesicle formation . Curr Biol 8 , 1399 – 1402 . Kahlfeldt N , Vahedi - Faridi A , Koo SJ , Schäfer JG , Krainer G , Keller S , Saenger W , Krauss M , Haucke V ( 2010 ) . Molecular basis for association of PIPKI γ - p90 with clathrin adaptor AP - 2 . J Biol Chem 285 , 2734 – 2749 . Kim WT , Chang S , Daniell L , Cremona O , Di Paolo G , De Camilli P ( 2002 ) . Delayed reentry of recycling vesicles into the fusion - competent synaptic vesicle pool in synaptojanin 1 knockout mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 , 17143 – 17148 . Krauss M , Kukhtina V , Pechstein A , Haucke V ( 2006 ) . Stimulation of phos - phatidylinositol kinase type I - mediated phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bis - phosphate synthesis by AP - 2mu - cargo complexes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 11934 – 11939 . Liu AP , Aguet F , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2010 ) . Local clustering of transfer - rin receptors promotes clathrin - coated pit initiation . J Cell Biol 191 , 1381 – 1393 . Liu J , Sun Y , Drubin DG , Oster GF ( 2009 ) . The mechanochemistry of endo - cytosis . PLoS Biol 7 , e1000204 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Schmid SL , Danuser G ( 2011 ) . Measuring the hierarchy of molecular events during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 12 , 815 – 825 . 2600 | C . N . Antonescu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Saffarian S , Kirchhausen T ( 2008 ) . Differential evanescence nanometry : live - cell fluorescence measurements with 10 - nm axial resolution on the plasma membrane . Biophys J 94 , 2333 – 2342 . Schmid EM , Ford MGJ , Burtey A , Praefcke GJK , Peak - Chew SY , Mills IG , Benmerah A , McMahon HT ( 2006 ) . Role of the AP2 beta - appendage hub in recruiting partners for clathrin - coated vesicle assembly . PLoS Biol 4 , e262 . Schmid EM , McMahon HT ( 2007 ) . Integrating molecular and network biol - ogy to decode endocytosis . Nature 448 , 883 – 888 . Sigismund S , Argenzio E , Tosoni D , Cavallaro E , Polo S , Di Fiore PP ( 2008 ) . Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev Cell 15 , 209 – 219 . Slepnev VI , De Camilli P ( 2000 ) . Accessory factors in clathrin - dependent synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat Rev Neurosci 1 , 161 – 172 . Sun Y , Carroll S , Kaksonen M , Toshima JY , Drubin DG ( 2007 ) . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 turnover is required for multiple stages during clathrin - and actin - depen - dent endocytic internalization . J Cell Biol 177 , 355 – 367 . Taylor MJ , Perrais D , Merrifield CJ ( 2011 ) . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of Mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 9 , e1000604 . Thieman JR , Mishra SK , Ling K , Doray B , Anderson RA , Traub LM ( 2009 ) . Clathrin regulates the association of PIPKIgamma661 with the AP - 2 adaptor beta2 appendage . J Biol Chem 284 , 13924 – 13939 . Traub LM ( 2003 ) . Sorting it out : AP - 2 and alternate clathrin adaptors in endocytic cargo selection . J Cell Biol 163 , 203 – 208 . Vallis Y , Wigge P , Marks B , Evans PR , McMahon HT ( 1999 ) . Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis . Curr Biol 9 , 257 – 260 . Wenk MR , Pellegrini L , Klenchin VA , Di Paolo G , Chang S , Daniell L , Arioka Mm , Martin TF , De Camilli P ( 2001 ) . PIP kinase Igamma is the major PI ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) synthesizing enzyme at the synapse . Neuron 32 , 79 – 88 . Wong R , Hadjiyanni I , Wei H - C , Polevoy G , McBride R , Sem KP , Brill JA ( 2005 ) . PIP2 hydrolysis and calcium release are required for cytokinesis in Drosophila spermatocytes . Curr Biol 15 , 1401 – 1406 . Yarar D , Surka MC , Leonard MC , Schmid SL ( 2008 ) . SNX9 activities are regu - lated by multiple phosphoinositides through both PX and BAR domains . Traffic 9 , 133 – 46 . Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL ( 2007 ) . SNX9 couples actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane remodeling during endocytosis . Dev Cell 13 , 43 – 56 . Yun M , Keshvara L , Park CG , Zhang YM , Dickerson JB , Zheng J , Rock CO , Curran T , Park HW ( 2003 ) . Crystal structures of the Dab homology do - mains of mouse disabled 1 and 2 . J Biol Chem 278 , 36572 – 36581 . Zoncu R , Perera RM , Sebastian R , Nakatsu F , Chen H , Balla T , Ayala G , Toomre D , De Camilli PV ( 2007 ) . Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 , 3793 – 3798 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Yarar D , Jaqaman K , Jaqaman H , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2009 ) . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol 7 , 3e57 . Malecz N , McCabe PC , Spaargaren C , Qiu R , Chuang Y , Symons M ( 2000 ) . Synaptojanin 2 , a novel Rac1 effector that regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr Biol 10 , 1383 – 1386 . Mao Y , Balkin DM , Zoncu R , Erdmann KS , Tomasini L , Hu F , Jin MM , Hodsdon ME , De Camilli P ( 2009 ) . A PH domain within OCRL bridges clathrin - mediated membrane trafficking to phosphoinositide metabo - lism . EMBO J 28 , 1831 – 1842 . McLaughlin S , Wang J , Gambhir A , Murray D ( 2002 ) . PIP ( 2 ) and proteins : in - teractions , organization , and information flow . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 31 , 151 – 175 . Merrifield CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . Mettlen M , Loerke D , Yarar D , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2010 ) . Cargo - and adaptor - specific mechanisms regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 188 , 919 – 933 . Mettlen M , Stoeber M , Loerke D , Antonescu CN , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2009 ) . Endocytic accessory proteins are functionally distinguished by their differential effects on the maturation of clathrin - coated pits . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 3251 – 3260 . Nakano - Kobayashi A , Yamazaki M , Unoki T , Hongu T , Murata C , Taguchi R , Katada T , Frohman MA , Yokozeki T , Kabaho Y ( 2007 ) . Role of activation of PIP5Kgamma661 by AP - 2 complex in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . EMBO J 26 , 1105 – 1116 . Nakatsu F , Perera RM , Lucast L , Zoncu R , Domin J , Gertler FB , Toomre D , De Camilli P ( 2010 ) . The inositol 5 - phosphatase SHIP2 regulates endo - cytic clathrin - coated pit dynamics . J Cell Biol 190 , 307 – 315 . Padron D , Wang YJ , Yamamoto M , Yin H , Roth MG ( 2003 ) . Phosphatidylinos - itol phosphate 5 - kinase Ibeta recruits AP - 2 to the plasma membrane and regulates rates of constitutive endocytosis . J Cell Biol 162 , 693 – 701 . Perera RM , Zoncu R , Lucast L , De Camilli P , Toomre D ( 2006 ) . Two synapto - janin 1 isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 19332 – 19337 . Praefcke GJK , Ford MGJ , Schmid E M , Olesen LE , Gallop JL , Peak - Chew S - Y , Vallis Y , Babu MM , Mills IG , McMahon HT ( 2004 ) . Evolving nature of the AP2 alpha - appendage hub during clathrin - coated vesicle endocyto - sis . EMBO J 23 , 4371 – 4383 . Rappoport JZ , Kemal S , Benmerah A , Simon SM ( 2006 ) . Dynamics of clathrin and adaptor proteins during endocytosis . Am J Physiol Cell Phys 291 , C1072 – C1081 . Rozen S , Skaletsky H ( 2000 ) . Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for biologist programmers . Methods Mol Biol 132 , 365 – 386 . Rusk N , Le PU , Mariggio S , Guay G , Lurisci C , Nabi IR , Corda D , Symons M . ( 2003 ) . Synaptojanin 2 functions at an early step of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr Biol 13 , 659 – 663 .