Smart Face : Enhancing Creativity During Video Conferences using Real - time Facial Deformation Naoto Nakazato Graduate School of Information Science and Technology , The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , 113 - 8656 Japan nakazato @ cyber . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp 81 - 3 - 5841 - 6369 Shigeo Yoshida Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies , The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , 113 - 8656 Japan shigeodayo @ cyber . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp 81 - 3 - 5841 - 6369 Sho Sakurai Graduate School of Engineering , The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , 113 - 8656 Japan sho @ cyber . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp 81 - 3 - 5841 - 6369 Takuji Narumi Graduate School of Information Science and Technology , The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , 113 - 8656 Japan narumi @ cyber . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp 81 - 3 - 5841 - 6369 Tomohiro Tanikawa Graduate School of Information Science and Technology , The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , 113 - 8656 Japan tani @ cyber . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp 81 - 3 - 5841 - 6369 Michitaka Hirose Graduate School of Information Science and Technology , The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo , 113 - 8656 Japan hirose @ cyber . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp 81 - 3 - 5841 - 6369 ABSTRACT This study develops a method for improving creativity by changing the facial appearance of people during video conferences . We focus on enhancing creativity during human interactions , especially cooperative work situations such as video conferences . Psychological studies have revealed that the facial appearance of people can affect creativity , i . e . , “emotion can affect creativity” and “the appearance of others can affect the emotions . ” Based on the knowledge , we hypothesized that the media technology which modifies the facial appearance of people appropriately can enhance our creativity during cooperative work . Therefore , we develop a method to affect creativity by changing the facial appearance in real - time , such as facial expressions and facial resemblance . We test the effectiveness of this method by building a system for collaborative video conferences . The user study show that the proposed method could enhance creativity . Author Keywords Creativity ; Cooperative Work ; Emotion ; Facial Expression ; INTRODUCTION The main objective of this study is to establish a method that enhances the ability to perform cooperative work without any concerted effort . In particular , this study aimed to improve video conference outcomes by applying real - time facial deformation to the faces of users during video conference calls . Previous studies of video conferences have focused on improving the quality of the video images and voice sounds , as well as introducing other interaction techniques to reproduce the atmosphere of a remote place . These studies aimed to reproduce a realistic atmosphere because the sensation of reality is enhanced if the users share the same location . Figure 1 . Enhancing creativity by changing the facial appearance in real - time . However , a realistic atmosphere is not always beneficial for conference call outcomes . Different atmospheres can have huge effects on creativity and other behaviors [ 1 ] . For example , we do not perform to the best of our ability if we Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CSCW ’14 , February 15 – 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , Maryland , USA . Copyright 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2540 - 0 / 14 / 02 . . . $ 15 . 00 . CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 75 are in a nervous situation such as an interview . Thus , video conference systems that reproduce a realistic atmosphere may not improve the quality of the outcomes in all cases . In other words , this type of system cannot replace face - to - face conferences in terms of efficiency . However , an appropriate atmosphere can enhance our performance in some areas . Thus , we hypothesized that our collaborative creativity could be enhanced by modifying the atmosphere during a video conference in an appropriate manner . This enhanced creativity will improve the outcomes of conference calls . Therefore , we aimed to improve the outcomes of conference calls by modifying the atmosphere in streaming video conference data , such as video images . This type of modulated video conference may be more efficient than face - to - face conference calls . Many researchers have investigated the enhancement of an individual person’s creativity [ 2 ] . Poor communication when working in a group represses the creativity of the team , even if each person has a high level of personal creativity . Many studies have also investigated the provision of cooperative working support using a computer to address this problem . However , the application of these techniques to the cooperative work in a group can disrupt communication , thereby preventing any improvement in the collective creativity of the team . Meanwhile , positive affect has been shown to improve the quality of communication [ 1 , 3 , 4 ] , i . e . , the quality of work can be improved by removing feelings of tension and displeasure that may arise from communication when performing cooperative work with several people . Therefore , it may be possible to develop a technique to improve the level of creativity during cooperative work by evoking a positive affect without any actual effort . In previous studies , the stimuli used to evoke positive affect were not appropriate for the cooperative working context . However , it is known that the smiles of other people evoke a positive affect during conversations [ 5 ] , while a facial resemblance enhances trust [ 6 ] . Facial expressions can reflect the atmosphere during conversations . Thus , we hypothesized that it may be possible to allow the user to evoke a positive affect unconsciously by changing the facial appearance of partners during cooperative work , instead of using stimuli that do not consider the context of the work . This method may enhance creativity during cooperative work . In this study , we developed a system to enhance creativity during cooperative work by slightly modifying the facial appearance of others so they has sad or smiling faces , as well as making the other person’s face resemble the user’s face . The basic concept of this system is shown in Figure 1 . We evaluate the validity of this system in exploratory studies . RELATED WORK ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF CREATIVITY Creativity According to Amabile [ 7 ] , creativity is the ability to discover a new and useful solution to a given problem , which is a very important ability . Therefore , many studies have investigated the improvement of creativity . Richard et al . [ 2 ] developed and evaluated various training methods for improving creativity . However , these training methods required that the participants expend considerable effort and time because these methods were intended for the education of children . Each of these training methods was also directed mainly at improving the creativity of a single person . However , creativity is not limited solely to the work of an individual . Thus , it is necessary to develop techniques that improve creativity during collaborative work involving multiple people , where the collective creativity of the team is not simply the sum of the creativity of each individual in the team . This is because communication among team members is an important factor that promotes creativity during collaborative work . Furthermore , avoiding the disruption of communication with others is also an important issue when improving creativity during collaborations . In the area of computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) , many studies have aimed to enhance communication and creativity during collaborations . For example , one study aimed to generate an artificial third - party opinion to stimulate conversations and brainstorming [ 8 ] . Another study developed a system that suggested a new direction to move the conversation to a given topic [ 9 ] . A method of facilitating communication using an avatar has also been proposed , where the computer graphics characters moved in response to the speaker’s voice during video chat [ 10 ] . Thus , the users could communicate with each other using words and bodily expressions via the avatars [ 11 ] . However , cooperative work support using a computer may inhibit direct communication between users or degrade the outputs because the computer is too involved with interactions . There is also the problem that the information in the database might lack creativity . Creativity and Emotion Many studies have tried to improve creativity based on emotional aspects . For example , Amabile et al . showed that there is a linear correlation between emotions and creativity [ 1 ] . Isen et al . also showed that the positive affect evoked by a short comedy film or a bag of candies improved performance in tasks that required creativity [ 3 ] . In addition , Lewis et al . conducted experiments to make participants think about new uses for a “Brick” or a “25 cent coin , ” and drew an image associated with a given circle to represent the images CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 76 that evoked various emotions [ 4 ] . The experiments showed that images that evoked positive emotions improved the creativity of the answers . Thus , many studies have improved creativity based on the positive feelings evoked by external stimuli . However , stimulation with external images such as pictures is not appropriate for tasks that require creativity . Thus , the use of this type of stimulation is unnatural in an actual work setting because it may disrupt communication with others . The stimulus used to improve creativity during collaborative work should consider the context of communication in the work . Therefore , we believe that a useful approach should increase creativity by evoking positive emotions with an unconscious stimulus that can be presented without inhibiting the work context . Facial Appearance and Emotions There are various methods of changing emotions such as watching a comedy movie or showing an image of a laughing baby . These techniques provide explicit stimuli from the outside that affect the user’s emotional state . By contrast , Yoshida et al . proposed a method for unconsciously evoking pleasant / unpleasant feelings where visual feedback was used to display a deformed facial expression in real time [ 12 ] . Furthermore , DeBruine showed that if the face of another participant is similar to the user’s faces , the creativity is increased compared with cases that lack any resemblance [ 6 ] . Most of these types of studies use still images , but some systems can change the user’s face and transform them into another person’s face interactively in real - time . The use of stimuli such as images or movies to evoke positive emotions , as mentioned earlier , could not be considered in this study , which actually required the enhancement of creativity . However , the methods developed by Yoshida et al . and the effect explored by DeBruine evoked a positive affect without requiring the user’s awareness . It is also known that changes in one’s facial expression can affect the expressions of other participants in the same conversation [ 5 ] . Thus , we developed a method to enhance creativity during conversations with others , which evoked positive emotion by modifying the appearance of others during face - to - face work interactions . FACE CHANGING TECHNIQUE FOR IMPROVING CREATIVITY Thus , we developed two methods to enhance creativity during collaborative work by changing the facial appearance of others in real - time . : a method that modifies the user’s facial expression and another that blends another person’s facial features with those of the user’s face . Changing Facial Expressions We developed a method for virtually deforming a user’s facial expressions and transforming the user’s facial expression in real - time using image deformation techniques . To obtain accurate eye , nose , mouth , etc . features from an image of the user’s face , we used the FaceTracker library developed by Saragih et al . [ 13 ] . Next , we deformed the face image using a rigid moving least squares ( MLS ) method [ 14 ] . This algorithm allowed us to deform the appearance of a user’s face easily and naturally based on over three control points . The rigid MLS method seldom generates artifacts . This algorithm deforms the whole image , so there is a possibility of deforming the background as well as the face , and this deformed background might be considered to be an artifact . Using these techniques , we generated two facial expressions , i . e . , “smiling face” and “sad face , ” which represented the positive - negative affect dimension based on the knowledge of previous studies on facial expression and emotion [ 15 ] ( Figure 2 ) ( see the video figure ) . We Figure 2 . Deformation of two types of facial expressions : “smiling face” and “sad face . ” Figure 3 . Deformation using a rigid MLS method ( smiling face ) . CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 77 deformed the face image to create a “smiling face” by raising the corners of the mouth and the cheek while lifting the lower eyelids . For the “sad face , ” we deformed the face image by lowering the corner of the mouth while lifting the inside of the upper eyelid and the inside of the eyebrow . We determined the parameters used to produce these facial expressions based on a previous study [ 12 ] . Figure 3 shows an example of the modified facial expression . According to a previous study [ 15 ] , the change applied to the user’s facial expression was fixed , regardless of the user’s attributes . Blending Different People’s Facial Features We constructed a method for blending the facial image of the user with that of a different person . This method required that images of the users were provided in advance as the material images . The FaceTracker library described above was used to obtain features from the camera image captured in real - time and the material image . Next , these images were scaled by the affine transformation , depending on the distance between the eyes . Then the material image was deformed to fit the feature points of the face in the camera image using a rigid MLS method . After performing the transformation and deformation process , the material image was blended semi - transparently Camera Image Material Image Figure 4 . Blending two people’s faces . with the camera image . We used the alpha blending to ensure translucent blending . Instead of blending the image uniformly , we used an alpha value ( opacity ) of 0 . 0 in the contour of the face , 1 . 0 at the center of gravity , and a linear interpolation of the mean . Figure 4 shows an example obtained after combining with the face of another person . This method blends the faces naturally although the facial expressions and poses in these images differ owing to the transformation and deformation process ( see the video figure ) . We refer to this blended face as “facial resemblance . ” According to the DeBruine [ 6 ] , a face where the material’s texture is blended and deformed to meet the material’s outline is more trustful and attractive . However , in this study , the material was a still image whereas the real face was a moving image . Thus , it was unnatural to deform the camera image using the material image in the same way as that used in DeBruine’s study because it caused background distortion . Therefore , the real face’s outline was used as the material’s outline in this system . If a crucial matching error occurred during face tracking , the face was blended at an inappropriate position . This type of crucial matching error might occur if the user moved quickly or violently , but the users don’t move quickly or violently in tele - conference settings . Therefore , artifacts were unlikely to occur due to this type of error . USER STUDY OF CREATIVITY IMPROVEMENT DURING VIDEO CONFERENCES We examined the effects of modifying the other user’s facial appearance with our system on creativity during cooperative work . We selected brainstorming as the cooperative work that required creativity and we applied our method to the video conference system . Experimental Overview We used brainstorming to measure creativity . Brainstorming is one of the best - known techniques for creative problem solving [ 16 ] . In general , brainstorming is used during a face - to - face meeting in a meeting room . However , we constructed a remote brainstorming environment via a video conference to test our image processing techniques with the users . In this experiment , we investigated the changes in the number of brainstorming responses to validate how this system affected the level of creativity by reference to previous studies on brainstorming because of high correlations between quantity and quality [ 17 ] . Hypotheses We hypothesized that if the expressions of the conversation partners appeared to be smiling at each other , their positive emotions would be enhanced , thereby improving creativity , and the number of brainstorming responses would increase . CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 78 By contrast , we hypothesized that if the faces of the partners appeared sad , their negative emotions would be increased , thereby reducing creativity , and the number of responses would decrease . We also hypothesized that if the face of the conversation partner resembled that of the user , positive emotions would be evoked and the number of responses would increase . Experiment System Configuration Figure 5 . System configuration . We configured a video conference environment without the internet using two web cameras with microphones and two computers ( Figure 5 ) . A camera connected to computer C1 was placed on the top of computer C2 and another camera on top of computer C1 was connected to computer C2 . Thus , it was possible to perform the video conference without using the internet . This was because the use of the internet can cause displacements in the movements of the face and voice due to the communication lag over the internet , which might have affected factors other than facial expressions during a conversation . The experiment was performed in one room but a video conference situation was required , so we placed both computers in booths that were sufficiently distant to prevent the two users from hearing their conversation partner . The participants entered white booths and there was nothing in the booths except the computers . In addition , the background behind the participants was white to reduce the tracking noise . To prevent the voice of the conversation partner from entering the ear directly , we used noise - canceling earphones . Thus , the participants could not hear each other across the room . The user’s own camera image was not displayed like a normal video conference , so there was a possibility that the face was outside the camera’s field of view during the experiment . Therefore , we fixed the positional relationship between the computer and the chair , and we confirmed that participants were sitting correctly in front of the camera at the beginning of the experiment . Procedures In this experiment , we asked the two participants to engage in brainstorming . First , we asked them to test the communication capacity of each computer . We captured their facial images to blend their features with each other . Next , we explained brainstorming and its subjects . We prepared four subjects , i . e . , “hunger , ” “broom , ” “pot , ” and “rubber band , ” and the users were asked to think of new uses for them based on Guilford’s Alternative Uses Task and the AC test of creative ability [ 18 ] . We chose these four subjects because the participants recognized them intermediately but had never considered their new uses . Brainstorming was conducted for 5 min on each subject . The brainstorming sessions in this experiment were conducted four times . The repetition of these tasks could exhaust the participants and reduce their performance over time if the duration of the brainstorming is long , so the overall time of the experiment was preferable less than 30 min to avoid the effects of weariness . This is why we decided to set the time limit at 5 min . Each participant performed four sets of brainstorming task sessions and evaluation sessions . During each brainstorming task session , the participants were presented with one of four facial expression : “normal face” ( no deformation ) , “smiling face , ” “sad face , ” and “facial resemblance . ” “Facial resemblance” blended the faces of both participants . Figure 6 . Brainstorming during a video conference . CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 79 To eliminate any effects on the presentation order of the facial expressions and the brainstorming subjects , the presentation order was assigned randomly and counterbalanced between participants using a Latin - square design . Given the fixed deformation of the facial expressions , some differences were apparent within the facial expressions that depended on the size of the participant’s face . Thus , we adjusted the distance between the display and the participant to make the size of each participant’s face uniform before the experiment . In addition , we considered that the results of the experiment might depend on the emotional state of the participants , so we conducted a questionnaire before starting the experiment to determine whether the participants felt “very pleased” or “very displeased” a few days before this experiment . The experiments were only carried out with participants who were in a normal emotional state . Participants The study had 20 participants ( 20 males ; mean age = 22 . 3 years , range = 22 – 25 ) . To ensure that the conversations passed smoothly , the two participants in each pair were already acquainted with each other . The participants were not informed of the actual purpose of the study . The experimental setting is shown in Figure 6 . Evaluation Method The most commonly used techniques for measuring creativity assess the originality , feasibility , elaboration , and flexibility of an answer and count the number of responses [ 19 ] . In this experiment , we used the increase in the number of responses during brainstorming as a measure of the creativity improvement because brainstorming aims to generate a large number of ideas . In fact , many previous studies used the number of responces for the measurement of the productivity of brainstorming [ 17 ] because of high correlations between quantity and quality [ 20 , 21 ] . Therefore , we investigated the effects of the facial appearance on creativity by measuring the number of responses during each brainstorming task . The participants were asked to rate their emotional state before the experiment and after each task . We evaluated the emotional state of the participants using the Japanese version of the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule ( J - PANAS ) [ 22 , 23 , 24 ] . The J - PANAS comprises two 11 - item scales that measure the positive and negative affect . Each item was answered using a seven - point scale ( 1 = strongly disagree ; 7 = strongly agree ) . Positive affect means the degree that person feels enthusiastic , active , and alert . Negative affect means the degree that person feel subjective anger , contempt , disgust , guilt , fear , and nervousness . In addition , it is assumed that positive affect and negative affect have a relationship of the orthogonal dimensions , and positive affect and negative affect are independent [ 25 ] . At the end of the experiment , we asked the participants to record their views of the experiment and checked whether the participants were aware of the actual purpose of the experiment . Experimental Results Figure 7 . Mean number of answers . Figure 7 shows the number of responses in the brainstorming task with each facial appearance . The error bars represent the standard error . The mean and standard error for the brainstorming responses was 8 . 3 ± 0 . 8 answers with no deformation , 12 . 2 ± 1 . 3 answers with a smiling face , 6 . 9 ± 0 . 7 answers with a sad face , and 7 . 7 ± 1 . 0 answers with the facial resemblance . A multiple comparison using the Benjamini - Hochberg ( BH ) method showed that there were significant differences between the smiling face condition and the no deformation condition , between the smiling face condition and the sad face condition , and between the smiling face condition and facial resemblance condition ( p < . 05 ) . These results suggest that the creativity during brainstorming was improved if the conversation partner appeared to be smiling . However , the sad face condition and the facial resemblance condition were not significantly different from the no deformation condition . Figures 8 and 9 show the average differences in the positive and negative affect scores before and after the conversation in each condition . The error bars represent the standard error . The figures represent the average evaluation values attached to each of 11 results that corresponded to the positive and negative affects . The multiple comparisons using the BH method showed that there were significant differences in the pleasantness between the facial resemblance condition and the no deformation condition , between the facial resemblance condition and the smiling face condition , and between the facial resemblance condition and the sad face condition ( p < . 05 ) . Furthermore , there was a significant difference in the unpleasantness between the facial resemblance condition and the smiling face condition . Therefore , the CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 80 Figure 8 . Mean positive affect scores . Figure 9 . Mean negative affect scores . participants felt discomfort when they looked at another person who shared their features . In the post - experiment questionnaire , some participants pointed out that the difficulty varied among the brainstorming tasks . However , the difference in difficulty was not reflected in the experimental results . In addition , only three subjects noted the change in the other participant’s face in the facial deformation condition , so most participants were unaware of the changes in the conversation partner’s facial expressions . Six participants were aware of the facial blending and they noted that it looked unnatural . The reason why is that the faces were not blended correctly because they moved quickly or violently . In addition , the reason why more participants were aware of facial blending than those who were aware of facial deformation was that the mismatched blending with a white background was more obvious than the mismatched deformation with a white background . Discussion The proposed system had a significant effect on improving creativity based on the increased number of brainstorming responses with smiling faces using our system . However , the number of brainstorming responses with a sad face was not reduced compared with the no deformation condition , so the sad face did not reduce creativity in our experiment . In addition , the number of brainstorming responses did not increase as predicted by our hypothesis with the facial resemblance / blending condition . This was because the participants felt discomfort with the facial resemblance condition , according to the results of the comfort - discomfort rating using J - PANAS . Based on the free descriptions of the participants , we consider that they felt strong discomfort because the participants were acquaintances . The blended face differed from the faces of their acquaintances , which was very unsettling . According to Zajonc , the “mere exposure effect” also occurs with real people in everyday scenes [ 26 ] , where the real face of a friend may look friendlier than a blended face . In addition , Giang et al . showed that the effects of facial resemblance on trust and cooperation were small and negligible compared with the strong effects of other cues on facial likability and facial trustworthiness [ 27 ] . In addition , we considered that the face blending did not function properly when the facial tracking failed , which was another problem . We observed that the tracking failed infrequently and the position of the tracking point was shifted as previously mentioned , which made the other participant look unpleasant . These experiments used subjects who were already acquainted , so different results may have been obtained if we performed the same experiment using two subjects who were not mutual acquaintances . In addition , positive or negative affects might not have been observed if they had viewed smiling or sad faces . The free descriptions indicated that the facial expressions looked unnatural to a few people , which was uncomfortable . Thus , it is necessary to improve the method to generate better facial expressions . Some participants pointed out in their free descriptions that the difficulty varied among the brainstorming tasks . However , these differences in difficulty were not reflected in the experimental results . Thus , it is possible that the system affected the sense of difficulty . Therefore , the system might have affected the perceived difficulty of the collaborative task and avoided a loss of motivation when the problems appeared difficult . CONCLUSION We proposed a method for changing the facial appearance of subjects , thereby improving their creativity , especially during collaborative work . Based on previous reports that CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 81 the facial appearance can affect creativity , and that “emotions can affect creativity” and “the appearance of others can affect the emotions , ” we developed a method to enhance creativity by changing the facial appearance in real - time , including facial expressions and facial resemblance . We built a creativity improvement system for cooperative work situations such as video conferences using the proposed method . We focused on brainstorming to test whether our system helped to generate creative solutions to problems by facilitating more effective communication with others . Next , we evaluated the effects of the proposed system on the brainstorming ability of participants to measure the improvement in creativity . The user study showed that our method could enhance the creativity by showing a modified smiling face . However , it was not possible to improve creativity by showing a blended face ( the facial resemblance condition ) . The technique used to make faces each other needs further consideration . In summary , these results suggest that we can augment creativity without changing the circumstances and the actions of users . We believe that this study contributes to the field of CSCW . Our proposed method was applied to a video conference system where the facial characteristics of a single partner were changed in the experiment . However , brainstorming and other types of cooperative work are usually performed in face - to - face situations with several participants . Thus , we should consider how to apply this system in face - to - face situations . In addition , we used the facial blending system to increase the facial resemblance , but we did not allow the user to evoke a positive emotion by changing their partner’s face . By combining these methods , we could expand the potential applicability of our proposed system . In this study , we focused only on creativity . We also plan to focus on other abilities such as communication with unfamiliar subjects , presenting a good speech , and concentrating on the speech of other people . We could construct a more effective system by changing the way a user hears another person’s voice , or by changing gestures such as nods . This system could be used to practice for interviews so the user will be less nervous about answering the interviewer correctly . In particular , the user can practice with their friend using a blended interviewer’s face . Finally , this method could be applied to communication assistance such as understanding others , psychotherapy for depression , and entertainment technology . This type of HCI techniques may be helpful for promoting social health and expanding the field of CSCW . ACKNOWLEGEMENT This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant - in - Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research ( Grant Numbers : 80418657 ) and Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology ( CREST ) Program “Creation of Human - Harmonized Information Technology for Convivial Society” of Japan Science and Technology Agency ( JST ) . REFERENCES 1 . Amabile , T . , Barsade , S . , Mueller , J . and Staw , B . , Affect and Creativity at Work . Administrative Science Quarterly 50 , ( 2005 ) , 367 - 403 . 2 . Mansfield , R . S . , Busse , T . V . and Krepelka , E . J . The effectiveness of creativity training . Review of Educational Research 48 , 4 ( 1978 ) , 517 - 536 . 3 . Isen , A . , Daubman , K . and Nowicki , G . P . Positive Affect Facilitates Creative Problem Solving . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52 , ( 1987 ) , 1122 - 1131 . 4 . Lewis , S . , Dontcheva , M . and Gerber , E . , Affective computational priming and creativity . Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems , ( 2011 ) , 735 - 744 . 5 . Dimberg , U . , Facial reactions to facial expressions . Psychophysiology 19 , 6 ( 1982 ) , 643 - 647 . 6 . DeBruine , L . M . , Facial resemblance enhances trust . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London . Series B : Biological Sciences 269 , 1498 ( 2002 ) 1307 - 1312 . 7 . Amabile , T . , The social psychology of creativity : A componential conceptualization . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 45 , ( 1983 ) , 357 - 376 . 8 . Nishimoto , K . and Sumi , Y . and Mase , K . , Toward an outsider agent for supporting a brainstorming session - an information retrieval method from a different viewpoint . Knowledge - Based Systems 9 , 6 ( 1996 ) , 377 - 384 . 9 . Nishimoto , K . , Sumi , Y . and Mase , K . , Enhancement of creative aspects of a daily conversation with a topic development agent . Coordination Technology for Collaborative Applications , ( 1998 ) , 63 - 76 . 10 . Watanabe , T . , Okubo , M . and Danbara , R . , InterActor for human interaction and communication support . Proceedings of the International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , ( 2003 ) , 113 - 120 . 11 . Ishii , Y . and Watanabe , T . , E - VChat : A video communication system in which a speech - driven embodied entrainment character working with head motion is superimposed for a virtual face - to - face scene . RO - MAN , 2012 IEEE , ( 2012 ) , 191 - 196 . 12 . Yoshida , S . , Sakurai , S . , Narumi , T . , Tanikawa , T . and Hirose , M . , Manipulation of an emotional experience by real - time deformed facial feedback . Proceedings of the 4th Augmented Human International Conference , ( 2013 ) , 35 - 42 . CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 82 13 . Saragih , J . M . , Lucey , S . and Cohn , J . F . , Deformable model fitting by regularized landmark mean - shift . International Journal of Computer Vision 91 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 200 - 215 . 14 . Schaefer , S . , McPhail , T . and Warren , J . , Image deformation using moving least squares . ACM Transactions on Graphics ( TOG ) 25 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 553 - 540 . 15 . Ekman , P . and Friesen W . , Unmasking the Face . Prentice Hall , Inc , Englewood Cliffs ( 1975 ) . 16 . Clark , C . , Rona , G . and Patrel , P . , Brainstorming . Dunod , ( 1971 ) . 17 . Isaksen , Scott G . A review of brainstorming research : Six critical issues for inquiry . Creative Research Unit , Creative Problem Solving Group - Buffalo , ( 1998 ) . 18 . Meadow , A . and Parnes , S . J . , Evaluation of training in creative problem solving . Journal of Applied Psychology 43 , 3 ( 1959 ) , 189 . 19 . Bao , P . , Gerber , E . , Gergle , D . and Hoffman , D . Momentum , getting and staying on topic during a brainstorm . In Proc . CHI 2010 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 1233 - 1236 . 20 . Diehl , M . , and Wolfgang S . " Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . " Journal of personality and social psychology 53 . 3 ( 1987 ) : 497 . 21 . Parnes , Sidney J . " Effects of extended effort in creative problem solving . " Journal of Educational psychology 52 . 3 ( 1961 ) : 117 . 22 . Clark L . A . and Watson D . , Mood and the mundane : Relations between daily life events and self - reported mood . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54 , ( 1988 ) , 296 - 308 . 23 . Watson D . , Clark L . A . and Tellegen A . , Cross - cultural convergence in the structure of mood : A Japanese replication and comparison with U . S . findings . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 47 , ( 1984 ) , 127 - 144 . 24 . Clark , L . A . , and Watson , D . , The Japanese Positive and Negative Affect Schedule : Factor - based scales for the assessment of mood . Unpublished manuscript , University of Iowa ( 1989 ) . 25 . Watson D . , Clark L . A . and Tellegen A . , Development and Validation of Brief Measures of Positive and Negative Affect : The PANAS Scales . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54 , ( 1988 ) , 1063 - 1070 26 . Zajonc , R . B . , Attitudinal effects of mere exposure . Journal of personality and social psychology 9 , 2 ( 1968 ) , 1 . 27 . Trang G . , Raoul B . and Axel B . , Does facial resemblance enhance cooperation ? PloS one 7 , 10 ( 2012 ) , e47809 . CSCW 2014 • Telepresence February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 83