1 “Being Simple on Complex Issues” – Accounts on Visual Data Communication about Climate Change Regina Schuster , Kathleen Gregory , Torsten Möller , Senior Member , IEEE , and Laura Koesten Abstract —Data visualizations play a critical role in both communicating scientific evidence about climate change and in stimulating engagement and action . To investigate how visualizations can be better utilized to communicate the complexities of climate change to different audiences , we conducted interviews with 17 experts in the fields of climate change , data visualization , and science communication , as well as with 12 laypersons . Besides questions about climate change communication and various aspects of data visualizations , we also asked participants to share what they think is the main takeaway message for two exemplary climate change data visualizations . Through a thematic analysis , we observe differences regarding the included contents , the length and abstraction of messages , and the sensemaking process between and among the participant groups . On average , experts formulated shorter and more abstract messages , often referring to higher - level conclusions rather than specific details . We use our findings to reflect on design decisions for creating more effective visualizations , particularly in news media sources geared toward lay audiences . We hereby discuss the adaption of contents according to the needs of the audience , the trade - off between simplification and accuracy , as well as techniques to make a visualization attractive . Index Terms —Data visualization , climate change , experts , lay people , sense - making , understandability , takeaway messages , uncertainty , design decisions ✦ 1 M OTIVATION P UBLIC understanding of climate change is a persistent and urgent topic of concern . Despite overwhelming scientific consensus regarding the threat of climate change [ 1 ] , public opinion on the topic continues to be divided [ 2 ] with alarming prognoses coexisting with a lack of public engagement . Potential reasons for this division are as complex as the topic itself , ranging from a lack of emotional interest among the public [ 3 ] to trade - offs between short - and long - term benefits [ 4 ] to a lack of understanding about scientific evidence [ 5 ] . The ‘wickedness’ of the climate change problem [ 6 ] further complicates public understanding , as does the vast amounts of heterogeneous data [ 7 ] , which are used to create and test climate models , often with a high degree of uncertainty attached . The complexity of the topic , coupled with the mixture of data and methods , makes communication , particularly to lay audiences , a challenge . Visual communication formats are increasingly used as a way to address these challenges [ 8 ] . Climate - related data are visualized in a variety of ( at times contentious ) ways [ 9 ] , for decision - makers as well as the general public [ 10 ] . Despite this , there is little research exploring how laypeople interpret data visualizations related to climate change , particularly those in news sources . In this study , we combine two perspectives by investigating how experts and laypeople make sense of climate change data visualizations to improve how data visualizations are utilized to communicate the complexities of climate change to the general public . To this end , we conducted semi - structured interviews with 17 participants with expertise in either climate change , data visualiza - tion , or science communication , as well as with 12 laypersons . During the interviews , we asked participants to interact with and determine the main takeaway message for two visualizations published in news sources , which had been adapted from the well - known graphics in a recent report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) [ 11 ] . We then showed participants the original IPCC graphics and asked them to make comparisons . Using a thematic analysis of the takeaway messages and our in - depth interviews , we identify common challenges in making sense of visualizations and potential avenues for creating understandable cli - mate change visualizations in news sources . This work contributes to existing research by providing : • insights about how laypeople understand climate change data visualizations and how their takeaway messages differ from messages formulated by experts • expert opinions about the role of news sources and data visualizations in climate change communication • a better understanding of how to cater climate change data visualizations to lay audiences based on ( perceived ) difficulties and preferences / opinions from experts and laypersons 2 R ESEARCH B ACKGROUND We situate our study in research investigating climate change data visualizations from two common sources , the IPCC and news outlets . We further examine how people make sense of and understand data visualizations by analyzing takeaway messages . 2 . 1 Climate Change Data Visualizations by the IPCC The IPCC publishes regular assessments summarizing the latest science related to climate change . With 195 member countries and thousands of contributing scientists and experts , the IPCC is per - haps one of the most established sources of climate knowledge [ 12 ] . Data visualizations , such as charts , have become an integral part of climate change communication ; the IPCC also emphasizes the importance of visualizations for their communication strategy : “data visuals are integral to the work of the IPCC” [ 13 , p . 23 ] . The importance of visuals in IPCC publications has also been studied scientifically . Pidcock et al . [ 14 ] conducted an online survey and semi - structured interviews with IPCC authors to investigate how they engage non - expert audiences with climate change topics . Study participants mentioned that the use of effective visualizations is a a r X i v : 2211 . 10254v2 [ c s . H C ] 25 J u l 2023 2 key factor in public engagement ; 35 % of respondents mentioned IPCC figures and 21 % named scientific data - driven figures as important tools to facilitate public understanding . The IPCC itself has acknowledged that non - scientists often struggle to interpret their data visualizations correctly [ 13 ] . How - ever , creating data visualizations that are both scientifically correct and accessible for lay readers is challenging : As Wozniak states , “visual science communication on climate change has always been walking a thin line between scientific accuracy on the one hand and reducing complexity for public understanding and engagement on the other” [ 15 , p . 136 ] . IPCC visualizations fulfill a variety of functions . They depict complex facts and simulated projections and provide guidelines to ( non - expert ) decision - makers while needing to conform to aesthetic guidelines [ 15 ] . In a study involving both IPCC authors and a group of students , Harold et al . [ 16 ] found that IPCC authors are generally aware that lay audiences have difficulty comprehending their visuals . Further analysis suggests that more complex visualizations are more difficult to comprehend . Other research explicitly focuses on identifying how understand - able IPCC graphics are for their intended audiences . Fischer et al . [ 17 ] examined how accurately a sample of visitors at a climate change conference and a sample of students interpreted IPCC visualizations . Both groups showed a low interpretation accuracy ; respondents from the conference sample also incorrectly assessed which graphs they had interpreted correctly ( meta - cognition ) . Fischer et al . [ 18 ] evaluated graph comprehension among decision - makers from 54 countries using two IPCC graphs , which either employed or violated principles of intuitive design ( such as when higher numbers indicate lower numbers of climate change impact ) . Counter - intuitive visualizations were systematically misinterpreted . McMahon et al . [ 19 ] further found that study participants represen - tative of the IPCC’s target audience ( such as interested scholars , governments , and non - governmental intermediaries ) had difficulties identifying the types of uncertainty present in IPCC visualizations . Harold et al . [ 20 ] recommend four pillars that the IPCC should consider to create accessible data visualizations : identifying a message , assessing the audience’s prior knowledge , familiar design formats , and evaluation with the target audience . While IPCC graphics previously have been criticized for being inaccessible for non - specialists [ 21 ] , current efforts to improve accessibility seem to have paid off . Reactions to a 2021 report were much more positive [ 22 ] , for example , climate scientist and IPCC author Ed Hawkins wrote : “the graphics are clear and usable , having been user - tested through several design iterations” [ 23 ] . 2 . 2 Climate Change Data Visualizations in News Media In a longitudinal analysis of climate change imagery , O’Neill [ 24 ] examined over a thousand images published in UK and US newspapers between 2001 and 2009 . While the number of visuals increased rapidly after 2005 , scientific data visualizations , such as charts or maps , were still fairly uncommon in the corpus . Research on climate change visuals in news sources tends to focus on i . the content or ii . the public perception . While the former studies the themes / frames ( see examples like [ 24 ] – [ 26 ] ) , the latter focuses on the perception of climate change visuals and people’s engagement with them ( for example [ 27 ] – [ 29 ] ) . Most of this research addresses the use of imagery in general , focusing on photographs and lacking a clear distinction of data visualizations . Analyses of the design spaces of climate change data visualizations [ 30 ] , [ 31 ] do not focus solely on news sources . Little is known about how public audiences understand climate change data visualizations , compared to other forms of imagery . At the same time , analyses that investigate the understandability of data visuals about climate change often use graphics published by the IPCC , rather than visualizations from news sources . 2 . 3 Visual Sensemaking and Takeaway Messages Many factors influence how humans understand or make sense of data visualizations , including graph formats , visual characteristics , and readers’ knowledge about graphs and contents [ 32 ] . People are also selectively attentive , and their perception is influenced by visualization design choices , which “have the power to embolden a message or to mute it” [ 33 ] . Previous studies into visual sensemaking have investigated the effects of various design aspects , for example , the usage of pictographs [ 34 ] or the visual arrangement of bar charts [ 35 ] . Understanding is also not easy to measure [ 36 ] . Methods that provide some insight into practices of understanding focus on measuring engagement and interaction , such as eye - tracking [ 37 ] or mouse clicks [ 38 ] . Other studies question how well readers understand a particular visualization [ 17 ] . Assessing if visualization readers can ‘accurately decode [ the ] message / insight’ is used as a quality criterion by many visualization producers [ 39 ] . Formulating takeaway messages has also been used as a proxy for measuring readers’ understanding of data visualizations , as in work by Bateman et al . [ 40 ] or Gammelgaard et al . [ 41 ] , who studied how students make sense of the messages conveyed through a dome theater movie about climate change . Previous work has also acknowledged the diversity of the audiences of data visualizations . Quispel et al . [ 42 ] investigated how two distinct target groups , namely experts and laypersons , evaluate graphs in terms of their perceived ease of use , their attractiveness , and their familiarity . They found that perceived ease of use and the readers’ self - assessed familiarity appeared to predict the readers’ evaluations for attractiveness , with this effect being stronger for laypersons than for experts . While we are too examining expert vs . lay opinions , our work focuses on how those different audiences make sense of and understand climate change data visualizations and on their opinions concerning visual appeal , understandability , and trustworthiness . 3 M ETHODOLOGY To investigate how data visualizations can be better utilized to communicate the complexities of climate change to different audiences , we conducted interviews with experts and laypeople . The rationale behind this is outlined in the subsequent sections . 3 . 1 Research Focus and Questions With IPCC materials being used as the basis for the public discourse on climate change [ 43 ] , many analyses testing the understandability of such visuals commonly use IPCC figures . This leads to the question of whether news media sources frequently publish data visualizations about climate change that differ from the ones by the IPCC . To gain insights into how news sources report on IPCC publications , we investigated 85 of the most popular online news sources from the UK , the USA , and Germany for articles that were released in response to the Working Group I contribution to the IPCC’s Sixth Assessment Report “Climate Change 2021 : The Physical Science Basis” ( AR6 - WGI ) . This investigation was 3 conducted in November 2021 ; details about it can be found in the supplementary material . 132 articles met our selection criteria and were further examined for data visualizations . While the Summary for Policy Makers ( SPM ) of the AR6 - WGI includes ten data visualizations , five of those were rarely depicted in news media sources ; the other five were more heavily used . In total , our online news article sample contained 47 data visualizations , from which 34 were modified / recreated versions of the originals . We conclude that even for this sample consisting only of direct reports about an IPCC publication , there were more recreations / modified versions of IPCC visualizations in news sources than copies . Considering that studies focusing on the understandability of climate change data visualizations from news sources are still scarce , we identify a need for investigations going beyond IPCC material . This study aims at establishing a better understanding of experts’ and laypeople’s perceptions of how data visualizations can be created to meet the needs of different audiences . To meet our research aims , we used newspaper representations of climate change data visualizations as discussion prompts in interviews with members of groups that commonly create and use climate change data visualizations . Research questions RQ - 1 and RQ - 2 account for the reader’s perspective , exploring how climate change visualizations from different sources are understood by different audiences and readers’ perceived needs . Research question RQ - 3 was formulated to represent the creator’s point of view and investigates how data visualizations can be designed and used in different channels to address the needs of different audiences . RQ - 1 : How do laypeople and experts make sense of climate change data visualizations and what do they take away as a main message ? RQ - 2 : What are common challenges people face when interpreting data visualizations about climate change ? RQ - 3 : How can data visualizations about climate change be designed to support readability , understandability , and trustworthiness ? 3 . 2 Interview Study Participants Most studies investigating climate change data visualizations derive implications from interviewing / surveying IPCC authors and typical readers of IPCC reports such as policymakers ( for example [ 14 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 18 ] ) . Contrary to those , we aim to study different perspectives on this issue . Climate change is a complex topic , and creating data visualizations that are accurate and understandable is a problem that can only be tackled by involving different stakeholders . By combining different perspectives and types of expertise , we explore “different ways of knowing” , how particular views might dissent or coincide , and how they can be put together . We opted to interview experts as they are potentially involved in creating data visualizations and not only have experience in and opinions about their design , but they also have an interest in outreach and creating understandable visuals . Experts are also readers themselves , who see visualizations on a regular basis . Experts were selected according to their affiliation with one of the following fields of expertise : climate change ( climate ) , data visualization ( vis ) , and science communication ( scicomm ) . Contrary to previous studies , we expand our sample to climate experts in general instead of solely IPCC authors to also account for opinions from persons who do not have any stake in IPCC publications and might be potentially less biased . We also include vis and scicomm experts in our analysis , as vis experts bring expertise on what works technically and in terms of perception , and scicomm experts have insights on how lay audiences can be reached . We further interviewed a sample of laypeople ( lay ) to compare the expert opinions with their viewpoints . We consider a person to be “lay” in our sense if a person has no professional expertise in either climate change , data visualization , or science communication . The study was approved by the [ name removed for review ] ethics committee . We used purposive sampling within an expert network to contact participants of the expert group . Besides their expertise in either climate , vis , or scicomm , all participants are international experts and known scientists who are experienced in their field and at an advanced stage in their careers . Experts with a scientific background regularly publish in peer - reviewed journals . Further inclusion criteria included proficiency in English and diversity factors concerning age and gender . Figure 1 shows participants’ age ranges . A total of 17 experts from Europe and North America were interviewed , from which 6 had a climate , 5 a vis , and 6 a scicomm background . As can be seen in Table 1 , experts’ job roles and research areas / disciplines span a number of areas . Interviewees were asked about their expertise in the other fields ; for example , climate experts were asked to rate their experience in scicomm and vis on a scale from 1 ( very low ) to 10 ( very high ) . Table 2 shows an overview of the median values within each expert group . Lay participants were recruited using a combination of pur - posive and convenience sampling , resulting in 12 interviews . Participants were selected on the basis of diversity factors ( age , gender , education , occupation ) and contacted via email / phone . We did not define it as a necessity that lay interview partners would consume specific news sources or data visualizations or have any interest in climate change . Table 3 shows the participants’ self - reported age group , job roles , education , and news media usage . Interviewees received no compensation for their participation . 3 . 3 Interview Procedure and Schedule In semi - structured interviews , participants were asked to share their opinions about climate change data visualizations . Questions were formulated broadly , as they were intended to serve as discussion prompts to identify aspects the interviewees regarded as important . Further questions were included on the basis of the individual discussion focus . Rating questions evaluating aspects on a scale were used to understand the participants’ assessments , often leading to more in - depth explanations . Interviews were conducted and recorded online via Zoom or in person . Two pairs of data visualizations were used as a discussion basis about aspects such as quality , understandability , or trustworthiness . The visuals were selected from the sample of news representa - tions of IPCC graphics . The supplementary material provides an overview of how often copies or recreations of the ten figures in the SPM - AR6 - WGI were included in 132 investigated online articles . We picked two visualizations of the ones that were most often recreated . After discussing the news version , the original Fig . 1 . Participants’ age ranges 4 TABLE 1 Experts’ self - reported job roles & research areas / disciplines Job role Research area Climate change experts ( climate ) Director of a Climate Research Institute , IPCC author Climate / ocean modeling Department Head of Sociology Social policies Professor for Climate Science Physical climate science Sociologist Environmental issues Professor , Faculty Vice Head Environmental science Professor in European Ethnology Urban anthropology Data visualization experts ( vis ) Research Scientist Data visualization , analytics Retired Visualization Researcher Data visualization Professor of Visual Data Science Data visualization , expl . AI Professor in Visualization Visualization Professor Visualization Science communication experts ( scicomm ) Researcher , Chief Scientific Officer Modeling and simulation Head of Communications Communication Social Science Method . Professor Political science Company Head Communication Creative Director Design , advertising CEO of Information Design Firm Information design TABLE 2 Experts’ self - reported expertise rated on a scale from 1 ( very low ) to 10 ( very high ) , median values of all participants in a group Expertise ( median values ) Expert group climate vis scicomm Climate change ( climate ) 10 6 7 Data visualization ( vis ) 3 10 7 Science communication ( scicomm ) 4 7 10 IPCC graphic was shown to the participants to make comparisons on design choices . If the news version depicted only a part of the original , this was stated , and a zoomed - in version depicting the same data was provided . For lay participants , we provided the visualizations in [ language removed for review ] . Figure 2 ( recreation by BBC News at bbc . co . uk / news [ 45 ] ) and Figure 3 ( original by the IPCC [ 11 ] ) show the first pair of visualizations . We did not receive permission to publish the second visualization , which can be accessed on the Guardian’s Instagram channel [ 44 ] . The interviews took 30 - 60 minutes each and followed a set structure , with some questions being only posed to a specific group : ( i ) Introduction & consent . ( ii ) Demographics ( iii ) Climate change : climate experts were asked about their opinion concerning climate change awareness / understanding among the public and actions taken by companies and governments ; lay participants were asked about their interest in climate change . ( iv ) Data visualiza - tions : Participants were asked about aspects of climate change data visualizations and common interpretation difficulties . ( v ) Example visualizations : Questions included aspects of understandability , improvement potential , and personal preference concerning design choices . The interview schedule can be found in the supplementary material . For the news versions of the example visualizations , we asked the participants : “What do you think is the main takeaway message of this visualization ? ” . To avoid priming the responses , we did not provide explanations or examples of takeaway messages . Visualization 1 ( Figure 2 ) was shown to all lay participants ( 12 ) and experts ( 17 ) ; visualization 2 [ 44 ] was shown to all lay participants and 6 experts for time reasons . Two lay participants did not formulate a message for visualization 2 , stating that they did not understand the graph . This results in 45 messages for thematic analysis . This analysis builds on an unpublished workshop paper [ reference removed for review ] . The interview recordings were transcribed and analyzed using the qualitative data analysis software Atlas . ti . Codes were created by systematically going through the transcriptions employing a combination of deductive and inductive thematic analysis [ 46 ] . The analysis was performed by the main author of the paper , who created an initial code book with supporting examples . To enhance the reliability of the coding scheme , three senior researchers checked and discussed the codebook for a sample of the data until a consensus was reached . The main codebook consisted of a nested coding tree with 5 code groups , 52 primary , and 371 child codes ; two separate codebooks were created for the takeaway message analysis . The interviews were analyzed a second time to ensure the correct assignment . Sample sizes of both groups exceed the threshold at which code saturation has been found to occur ( like in [ 47 ] – [ 49 ] ) . We conducted the interviews with laypeople after the expert interviews , whereby the majority of the codes remained , and further conceptual codes were added ; the codebook stabilized after one - third of the interviews in each group . With a total of 29 interviews , we also exceed the “meaning” saturation threshold identified in previous work by Hennink et al . [ 48 ] . 4 F INDINGS The findings are structured according to the following major themes : public climate change communication , takeaway messages formulated by experts and lay participants ( RQ - 1 ) , common perceived challenges for readers ( RQ - 2 ) , and design considerations for creating understandable climate change data visualizations ( RQ - 3 ) . Quotes and selected findings are listed with an indication of group affiliation . Lay participants’ statements were marked with an ID ( LAY - X , as in Table 3 ) to differentiate between viewpoints ; expert participants’ statements are presented without specific ID to ensure anonymity . We do not claim the generalizability of aspects mentioned in this section , rather they represent the views in our sample . A full list of findings , including different perspectives of participants , can be found in the supplementary material . 4 . 1 Public Climate Change Communication This section summarizes the main findings in terms of climate change communication to the public in general and facilitated through data visualizations in specific . We Need to Act . According to climate experts , extreme weather events , migration , and changes concerning the economic / health situation count among the main consequences of climate change . Climate experts were asked what they think are the most important messages people need to understand about climate change . The answers give a sense of urgency : “We need swift action and we need massive action . If we hesitate to act now , and that’s actually what’s happening , then the burden for the next generations [ . . . ] will be extremely hard . ” ( climate expert ) . 4 of the 6 climate experts rated the efforts of companies and governments to address climate change on a scale from 1 ( very low ) to 10 ( very high ) below or equal to 5 . Lay participants were asked about their assessment of efforts by companies , governments , 1 . Social Media Channels mentioned : Instagram , Facebook , Linkedin , Twitter 5 TABLE 3 Lay participants’ self - reported age group , job role , highest level of education , news media usage , and opinions regarding the shown visualizations ( X : participant uses a source , X : primary source ; colors : participant evaluated the visualization as good [ green ] , mediocre [ yellow ] , or bad [ red ] ) Used news media sources Opinion visuali - Opinion visuali - ID Age Job role Education Social 1 Online TV Radio Print zation 1 ( Figure 2 ) zation 2 ( [ 44 ] ) LAY - 1 18 - 24 Apprentice as a caregiver Intermediate school X X X Not understandable Interesting , too bold LAY - 2 18 - 24 Waiting for a place at university Grammar school X X Clear call to action Informative , too pale LAY - 3 25 - 34 Master student Bachelor X X X X Would not look at it Not understandable LAY - 4 25 - 34 Job seeking Master X X X X Fine , details missing Untrustworthy design LAY - 5 35 - 44 Clerk in accounting Grammar school X X X Clear , not overloaded Clear , good design LAY - 6 35 - 44 Geriatric nurse , nanny Intermediate school X X X Too scientific Untrustworthy design LAY - 7 35 - 44 Dentist Doctorate X X X Details missing Untrustworthy design LAY - 8 35 - 44 Goldsmith Master goldsmith X X X X Not understandable Untrustworthy design LAY - 9 45 - 54 Manager of a biotech firm Habilitation X X Fine , details missing Fine , details missing LAY - 10 55 - 64 Manager of a family business Diploma X X X Unclear color choice Untrustworthy design LAY - 11 55 - 64 Retired machine fitter Secondary school X X Would not look at it Not interesting LAY - 12 65 - 74 House - wife Secondary school X X X Not easy for everyone Good , message in text and private persons . While all lay participants claimed that not enough is done , all but two rated the efforts below or equal to 5 . Lay participants expressed their anger toward the government for their lack of action , and the unequal distribution of efforts among countries . As opportunities for improvement , participants mentioned the necessity of government - appointed regulations and actions individuals can take such as reducing meat consumption and flights . As reasons for the lack of action , they named cost factors , political reasons , resistance to reduce personal freedom , and a lack of understanding , which could be addressed by visual data communication . News Media Sources Play a Pivotal Role . All but one climate expert rated the understanding among the public concerning climate change and its consequences below or equal to 5 , on a scale from 1 ( low ) to 10 ( high ) , with awareness being rated as higher . In comparison , all lay participants claimed that climate change is something they think about , with reasons spanning the perceived urgency and affectedness , anger towards politics and regulations , and the reporting about activism and nature catastrophes in news sources . Lay participants also suggested that climate change topics are not covered enough in news sources they use . We asked climate experts “What academic journals or non - academic media for the general public do you think are important in the context of climate change ? ” Even though the question was not aimed at a comparison , experts stressed the irrelevance of scientific sources for the general public : “The IPCC report is extremely helpful , but not because people read it , but because it gives weight” ( climate expert ) . They emphasized the essential role of news sources and social media in the public discourse about climate change , as well as the importance of training journalists in science communication . Lay participants reported using social media , online news sources / apps , television , radio , and print newspapers ( Table 3 ) ; single participants further mentioned climate change books , papers , and podcasts ( LAY - 4 , LAY - 9 ) . 4 . 2 RQ - 1 : Takeaway Messages As part of the takeaway message analysis , we analyzed the contents or subjects that participants included in their messages . Participants formulated diverse takeaway messages with a high variation of included contents they regarded as crucial . Table 4 shows exemplary takeaway messages and the respective coded contents . Visualization 1 . For Figure 2 , the following contents were included in more than half of the participants’ messages : men - tions of an increase , temperature , future , and positive / negative influence / impact . Some aspects were mentioned more by lay participants than by experts , including concrete temperature specifications , specific years , increase , worst - / best - case situations , sustainability , and fossil fuel use . Aspects like the positive / negative influence / impact of actions , the potential / chance for improvement , and humans or mankind were more frequently included in the experts’ messages . Two lay participants ( LAY - 5 , LAY - 10 ) and one expert mentioned the “relativity” of the shown best - case scenario , as it is still getting hotter . Messages formulated by lay participants were considerably longer than the expert messages , with a median of 73 vs . 29 words per message . While lay participants typically included specific details , experts tended to formulate more abstract messages , as can be seen in the following examples : “If we focus on sustainability in the future , the global average temperature can be kept below the two - degree target that is being striven for , or even below 1 . 5 degrees and then even drop slightly by 2100 . And in contrast , if we keep using everything fossil the way we have been using it , by 2100 we will be close to five degrees of global warming . ” ( LAY - 7 ) vs . “In all cases , it’s going to be hotter than it is now . And how much worse it gets depends on which scenario happens with people’s actions . ” ( vis expert ) . Visualization 2 . For visualization 2 [ 44 ] , the only common contents included in more than half of the participants’ messages were temperature and increase . Almost half of the participants included the aspect of humans’ fault . Similarly to visualization 1 , the median length of messages for this figure was more than double in length for lay persons than for experts ( 60 vs . 28 words per message ) . While lay participants mentioned the color red , the line in the chart , and concrete years more often , experts , again , tended to formulate more abstract messages : “It’s clearly about the global surface temperature , again viewed over different years . And the main message is now , if I look at 2020 , for example , I see that the red line shoots up here , and steeply at that . [ . . . ] A retrospect , where it was actually , I would say , relatively the same and then a little lower , and then it got higher again , and now it is shooting up” ( LAY - 5 ) vs . “Climate change is human - driven” ( scicomm expert ) . Sensemaking and Understandability . We asked lay partici - pants to share their thinking process while seeing the visualizations for the first time , with some participants naming the chart parts they were looking at one by one . This process was highly individual , with some reading the title / subtitle before looking at the graph and others the other way around . Lay participants often claimed that their attention was guided by the color of the objects and mentioned bold design choices like the prominent title of visualization 2 . 6 Fig . 2 . Visualization created by and reproduced with permission of BBC News at bbc . co . uk / news [ 45 ] ; referred to as visualization 1 Fig . 3 . Extract of Figure “SPM . 8” from the IPCC SPM - AR6 - WGI [ 11 ] , [ 50 ] Attitudes toward their ability to read data visualizations and their general interest in the topic seemed to influence lay participants’ efforts . In comparison to experts , it took more time for the lay participants to arrive at an understanding . While 10 of the 12 lay participants appeared to interpret Fig - ure 2 in a way that matched our interpretation as researchers , LAY - 1 expressed that they were having difficulties . For visualization 2 [ 44 ] 5 lay participants appeared to interpret the graph in a way that is supported by the shown data ; the interpretation of 5 further lay participants was unclear and LAY - 1 , LAY - 3 , LAY - 6 , and LAY - 8 expressed having difficulties ( the 2 latter did not formulate a message ) . However , not only lay participants had difficulties interpreting the chart , but also 2 scicomm experts stated that they struggled to deduct what the chart should tell them . Table 3 shows the lay participants’ opinions towards the visualizations . 4 . 3 RQ - 2 : Common Challenges Participants mentioned various benefits of visual communication including the potential to increase attention and engagement , complexity reduction , and visual preference . 11 experts and 8 lay participants stated that they would first look at a data visualization in a news article about climate change before reading the text . However , experts from all groups acknowledged that interpreting data visualizations about climate change can be difficult for laypeople . The opinions about the understandability of the example figures were quite diverse : 6 experts and 5 lay interviewees thought Figure 2 would be difficult to interpret for many people ; 5 experts and 6 lay participants thought so for visualization 2 [ 44 ] . Visualization 1 . While Figure 2 seemed to be easier than the second visualization for participants to grasp , interviewees frequently commented that the missing degree Celsius symbol on the temperature axis slowed down their sensemaking process . With some participants speaking in favor of the title and the annotations , interviewees from all groups criticized that the used wording is too complicated for a news source : “It’s too complex wording : ‘different possible scenarios’ , [ . . . ] ‘future based on sustainability’ . Nice for us scientists , for the broader public : way too complicated” ( climate expert ) . Some lay participants acknowledged that they would not understand the subtitle or why the 1850 - 1900 time frame was chosen as a reference . LAY - 1 seemed to misinterpret some connections : “This fuel and sustainability actually have nothing to do with the rise in temperature and anything like that . ” ( LAY - 1 ) . Visualization 2 . Participants felt less confident about their interpretation of visualization 2 [ 44 ] , partially mentioning the graph fluctuation , which reminded them of a cardiogram or a lie detector test , as a reason for the felt increase in complexity . Wording like “reconstructed multi - model average” and “‘very likely’ range for reconstructions” was an issue for several participants . Again , several participants expressed that they would not be able to understand the 1850 - 1900 reference time frame without further explanation . The chosen time frame on the time axis was the reason for much discussion with some participants : LAY - 9 expressed doubts about the unprecedented rate of the temperature increase , claiming that it would be necessary to look at a larger time frame than just the last 2020 years . Contrary to that , LAY - 10 criticized the time frame as being too large , as humans did not record temperature data for such a long time and hence doubted the correctness of the data . After looking at the original version by the IPCC [ 11 ] , LAY - 8 and LAY - 9 wondered if indeed there have been periods before 1 AD in which it has been warmer than now . Such clarity issues resulted in several lay participants doubting the information . Interpreting Data Visualizations Is Difficult . The majority of participants thought that interpreting data visualizations , in general , requires different kinds of background knowledge . Areas of educa - tion that should be emphasized include mathematics ( like graphs and scales ) , visualization knowledge ( like visualization types ) , and basics about predictions and uncertainty . Experts mentioned the lack of visual data literacy , or graphicacy , among the public as a problem : “One mistake we in the visualization community make is that we overestimate the visual literacy of people” ( vis expert ) . Participants shared their opinions about common difficulties with data visualizations and named uncommon visualization types as one of the main factors that hinder understanding . While lay participants frequently commented on the use of color , vis and scicomm experts mentioned that colors can be the cause of misinterpretation ( due to different cultural or emotional connotations ) . Experts and lay interviewees thought that predictions , uncertainties , as well as scales / axes are difficult for lay users to understand : “In future it should be normal to have this uncertainty included , but then you have to teach this [ . . . ] , what is a prediction about , what is the confidence interval [ . . . ] , nobody knows this” ( scicomm expert ) . Climate Change Is Complex . Lay participants named insuf - ficient understanding due to the complexity of climate change and insufficient education as two of the causes for the lack of action . Both were also mentioned by experts as major factors why interpreting climate change data visualizations can be difficult : “It’s just a very complex topic and unless you’re willing to spend serious time on thinking about it , I believe it’s just hard” ( climate expert ) . Experts also acknowledged that a deep understanding among the public might not be a realistic goal and it is more the trust in science that gets laypeople to grasp the urgency of climate change : “You have to trust science , which is very close to believing in something because you cannot reproduce that knowledge” ( scicomm expert ) . 7 TABLE 4 Example messages and coded contents Example messages Coded contents “The effect that sustainability could have on the temperature or global temperature on average . And there are like 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 scenarios . So I think the main message is that sustainability would help . And that , if you continue to live like we do it , we would be at plus five , I guess , degree Celsius . ” ( LAY - 3 about visualization 1 ) Sustainability , positive / negative influence / impact , global earth average , temperature , scenarios , 5 - degrees “They show how different the future can be , depending on humans , how humans behave . ” ( vis expert about visualization 1 ) Positive / negative influence / impact , future , human influence or fault “Things are going extremely up now . Like the red line , from 1850 , it was still down , and then in 2020 , we are already a long way up . ” ( LAY - 12 about visualization 2 ) Increase , severity , red , line , year - 1850 , year - 2020 , difference “We see that in a very short time that the earth got hotter . So there’s no way this is a normal cycle if you compare it to the historic data . So it’s us basically , is what the message is . ” ( vis expert about visualization 2 ) Short time frame , global earth average , temperature , increase , anomaly , past , human influence or fault 4 . 4 RQ - 3 : Design Considerations The importance of the quality of a visualization was mentioned by participants among all expert groups . However , creating high - quality data visualizations is not a trivial task : “It’s very hard to create a graphic that is unambiguous in its message . Can be done , but requires work . [ . . . ] It’s a technical issue and thus can be taught . And we don’t do that” ( climate expert ) . Participants shared their opinions on what makes a high - quality visual for them and made recommendations on how to create effective climate change data visualizations ( RQ - 3 ) . We summarized the findings under three main themes : Embrace the audience ; make it simple , but transparent ; and make it attractive . 4 . 4 . 1 Embrace the Audience According to the experts , the assessment of whether a visualization is well - designed or not strongly depends on the visualization‘s purpose , outlet , or audience : “I argue to students , there’s not a good or a bad visualization — it really depends on the purpose” ( vis expert ) . Adapting climate change data visuals to the knowledge and needs of the users was named by vis and scicomm experts as a way to influence the quality of data visualizations . Relatability of Contents . Participants have emphasized that relatability to the contents of a data visualization plays a big role in getting and keeping the readers’ attention : “You really have to make sure that people can relate with whatever you communicate [ . . . ] , which is definitely difficult when it comes to climate change because it’s a very abstract thing” ( scicomm expert ) . While vis / scicomm experts have mentioned creating relatable visuals as a general recommendation , they have also criticized Figure 2 for not showing any consequences . Visualization types were mentioned as a means to increase relatability , for example , maps to show the consequences for specific regions . Lay participants claimed that climate change content that focuses on the future , showing consequences or solution strategies is most relatable . Designing for Different Channels . According to participants , requirements for creating data visualizations massively differ between channels like online vs . print , static vs . video , or article vs . social media post : “I can complain that a visualization is far too simple and doesn’t show enough detail . Well , if you have three seconds to look at the picture , it’s good if it’s very simple” ( vis expert ) . LAY - 2 and LAY - 3 , who use Instagram as their primary source of information , explained that content needs to adhere to different standards on social media : Instagram would be used for pleasure and users might not stop scrolling for a complicated graphic ( which they might otherwise find interesting ) . They suggested a format by the German Instagram channel “Tagesschau” [ 51 ] : using the slideshow function , they typically include several pieces of content , starting with something lightweight like a photograph and a catch - line . Consecutively , users can then swipe through the slides to learn more in small digestible doses , including bullet points , photographs / videos , quotes , or data visualizations . LAY - 10 claimed that they would prefer short explanatory videos including animated data visualizations that build up over time . Designing for Reachable Audiences . Some participants re - flected on different target groups within the general public and how different design choices speak to different audiences . For example , LAY - 9 explained that in their opinion the public can be split into three groups : people who are already convinced that climate change is a problem , people who will never believe in climate change , and people in a gray area , who have no strong opinion . They described this audience as 40 - 50 years old , not opposed to climate change topics , but critical . They might be reached through infographics about the potential impact of personal decisions . However , visualizations could easily have the opposite effect : LAY - 9 explained how contrarians , people who doubt predominant science about Covid - 19 / climate change , would be skeptical about Figure 2 as it is not concrete enough . The importance of clarity of the shown contents was mentioned by several participants . Leaving any ambiguity open for interpretation ( like whether or not there were times with similar temperatures before in visualization 2 ) , could result in critical readers not trusting the visualization . Human - centered Process . In the context of creating visuals for their intended target audience , experts mentioned a user - centered design process : discussed factors included co - design , iterative design , and framework conditions like time , funding , and expertise . An iterative co - design process was described as the collaboration between climate change scientists and visualization experts ( with communication mentioned as a challenge ) that starts with the purpose of a visual and passes through several design iterations : “Embrace the audience in the design process to make sure that you understand how they interpret the information . ” ( scicomm expert ) 4 . 4 . 2 Make it Simple , but Transparent Participants among all groups named simplicity and complexity reduction as key factors in creating effective data visualizations : “If the visualization is done very good , it should be super easy to understand it . And that’s the problem with most visualizations , [ they ] are still too complex” ( climate expert ) . Having a Clear Intent . As a factor that positively influences understandability , experts mentioned the definition of a clear main 8 message or intent : “If you don’t know what the intent is , [ . . . ] there’s no way you can ever do a good graphic , except by complete accident” ( climate expert ) . While the felt ambiguity about the different scenarios in Figure 2 was brought up by most participants , several explicitly criticized the main point the figure seems to make . They were missing more quantitative details about the scenarios and what kind of behavior change would be required for each of the scenarios : “But what does that mean for my life ? [ . . . ] It’s always good to have some recommendations for actions” ( LAY - 4 ) . One scicomm expert pointed out that the visualization’s purpose appears not to be about giving precise numbers , but only wants to show that there is “some room for taking levers to have an impact on the future” ( scicomm expert ) . Simplification . The issue of simplification vs . accuracy was discussed throughout the interviews , with a climate expert naming “being simple on complex issues” as one of the most difficult challenges . Factors that support this need for simplification include the complexity of climate change and readers’ missing time / involvement : “The risk you run , if you insist on scientific rigor [ . . . ] , is that you might lose your audience altogether . And then you’re not conveying the depth of your message either” ( climate expert ) . While the simplifications made in Figure 2 compared to Figure 3 were mentioned as positive , some participants thought that it was still too complicated due to wording or the visualization type : “This would not be the type of data visualization I would envision for the broader public . It is too complex” ( climate expert ) . Most participants favored depicting climate change content as simple as possible . One lay participant ( LAY - 9 ) criticized that Figure 2 did not go far enough and that in the discussion of climate change a stronger scientific presence is needed . Some experts also mentioned over - simplification as a problem , with scicomm experts being more set on maintaining scientific accuracy than others . As a solution strategy , it was suggested to put additional information in the text or cite sources that go into more detail . Uncertainty . With climate and vis experts naming visualizing uncertainty as a major challenge , opinions on whether to include or exclude uncertainty in climate change data visualizations for the public varied among participants . For Figure 2 , 8 experts and 8 lay participants regarded it as positive , and 3 climate / scicomm as negative that the uncertainty ranges of Figure 3 were not shown in the BBC’s version . Independent of the examples , single climate / scicomm experts spoke in favor of showing uncertainty in order not to lose the reader’s trust ; vis experts argued more for excluding the uncertainty for lay audiences unless it eliminates the heart of the matter : “I don’t see an added benefit of putting that burden of uncertainty onto the [ general public ] because it doesn’t make a huge difference for the main message” ( vis expert ) . Several lay participants either had trouble understanding the uncertainty ranges shown in Figure 3 themselves or thought that it would be hard for the general public . Single lay participants spoke in favor of including uncertainty as a personal preference : “I’d rather know the uncertainty range . And then again , how important is it ? ” ( LAY - 4 ) . LAY - 7 preferred the uncertainty ranges to ease the public’s concern ( despite the deviations in both directions ) . 4 . 4 . 3 Make it Attractive The question of whether Figure 2 would be easy or difficult to interpret was answered by LAY - 3 as follows : “The main problem is : would you actually look at it ? ” ( LAY - 3 ) . Climate / scicomm experts have also mentioned the lack of attention as one of the main problems in visual data communication . We asked lay participants if the example visualizations would catch their attention if they saw it in their everyday news sources . For Figure 2 , half of the lay interviewees stated that it would catch their attention ; 7 found visualization 2 [ 44 ] engaging : “It catches your eye and you can’t in good conscience just go on spending your time on Instagram without knowing what the bad news is” ( LAY - 2 ) . However , the attention - getting design was not to everybody’s liking : “That’s like an accident , you look there to see if there’s blood” ( LAY - 8 ) . Design Choices . Principles of good design and aesthetics were mentioned by participants from all groups : The amount of information should not overload the visualization , contents should be presented clearly , and user perception should be guided through positioning and highlighting . Some interviewees expressed that Figure 2 appears to be cluttered , suggesting a reduction of text or different positioning of the annotations . Participants had different opinions concerning the line coloring in Figure 2 . While 3 vis experts spoke in favor of the categorical colors , 7 experts and 8 lay interviewees felt that the colors seem random and would have liked a blue - to - red color scale like in Figure 3 : “The color for the worst case is completely wrong , it should actually be deep red and not somehow yellow ; maybe the air will be yellow then” ( LAY - 10 ) . Design choices also highly affected perceived trustworthiness . With the exception of LAY - 7 and LAY - 8 , all lay participants found Figure 2 trustworthy . Opinions on the trustworthiness of visualization 2 [ 44 ] were split , with LAY - 2 expressing that the figure seems like a neutral communication of facts and LAY - 4 calling the design a “crime against humanity” because of its emotional framing . Four further participants felt that they were being manipulated ( see Table 3 ) and criticized the dark and judgmental design . LAY - 7 perceived the scales to be manipulative , even though it was similar to the IPCC version : “The scientific graphic is true to scale [ . . . ] , which is not the case for [ Figure 2 ] . It was stretched insanely : the good part from the old days and the bad part , for which we are responsible” ( LAY - 7 ) . Infographics . Infographics were mentioned by vis , scicomm , and lay participants as a way to engage the general public in complex topics . Two scicomm experts and one lay participant criticized Figure 2 for its lack of pictures / icons . We realized during the interviews that lay participants partially lacked an understanding of the term infographic . We hence brought an example depicting the same data as visualization 2 to the rest of the interviews . This figure [ 52 ] shows the data in a more casual style facilitated , for example , by a light blue background or an earth icon that appears to suffer from a fever . None of the lay participants felt that this design is less trustworthy . LAY - 6 has not enjoyed any of the previously shown visualizations and felt unable to formulate a takeaway message for visualization 2 : “This looks so technical , so highbrow , so professional . [ . . . ] I would think to myself ; I don’t need to look ; I don’t get it anyway” ( LAY - 6 ) . However , when shown the infographic version , they expressed their enthusiasm and shared that they feel that even children should now get the main message . LAY - 10 , while not opposed to the idea of infographics , expressed that the content is still too complicated for anyone to understand , while the design looks like it was made for toddlers . Interaction . Participants stated that interactive visualization techniques can be a powerful way to engage users in climate change data . While interactivity can be suitable for specific purposes , such as for historical data , participants argued that creators should only use it if users need it : “Interactivity has to be a consequence of [ the user’s ] needs . It’s not just something that we decide to do because it’s cool” ( scicomm expert ) . Mentioned benefits and 9 drawbacks include : increased engagement ( possibility to explore data ) , increased relatedness ( possibility to pose own questions ) , limited accessibility ( technical means necessary ) , and limited engagement ( interest can drop quickly ) . While lay participants confirmed the potential relatability benefits , none of them reported having used a concrete interactive tool . 5 D ISCUSSION With previous studies in the field mainly investigating IPCC visual - izations and their target audience , our study provides insights into which factors are important in formats for the general public . We build on and validate past work , but we also extend it as we i ) focus on news sources , ii ) combine perspectives of experts in different fields and laypeople , and iii ) shed light on what the participants read from a visualization through investigating takeaway messages . Our study shows how experts and laypeople emphasize specific aspects and have different beliefs and opinions . While partially being a factor of people’s individual expertise and experience , it also highlights the contextual nature of understanding data and visualizations [ 61 ] . This section summarizes the interviews’ most prevalent findings and situates them in existing literature ( Table 5 ) . Designing for Attention . Prior work by Harold et al . [ 20 ] gives recommendations to IPCC researchers for creating effective visuals , which partially align with our findings . However , previous studies make their claims about the IPCC target audience and outreach through IPCC channels . In our interviews , it became apparent that scientific sources like the IPCC are not something that laypeople typically use . Rather , we must think about climate change communication happening at the front lines of news / social media channels . With the abundance of information provided to us over various channels , the question of whether or not users would look at a visualization constitutes the first hurdle . An important factor in attracting users’ attention according to the interviews and previous work is the reduction of perceived complexity in a visual [ 53 ] . While participants provided valuable suggestions on how to make climate change data more “digestible” ( such as using Instagram slides and mixing up contents ) , it also became clear that design choices have to be carefully contemplated . Dramatic designs emphasizing human fault and unprecedented situations seem to increase attention but potentially lower trustworthiness , as readers easily feel manipulated . More studies are necessary to determine how we can effectively design for different groups of the general public and what kind of data visualizations are capable of acquiring and keeping users’ attention in real - life consumption scenarios . The Individuality of Sensemaking . Our study confirms findings from prior research ( such as [ 54 ] , [ 62 ] , [ 63 ] ) suggesting that the process of understanding data visualizations is highly individual and influenced by a person’s prior knowledge / education , attitudes , beliefs , and experiences . Lay participants who felt they lacked the skills to understand data visualizations made less of an attempt to interact with the data in our study . Their beliefs about the trustworthiness of news media or specific sources influenced whether they liked and trusted the example visualizations . Both , perceived understandability and trustworthiness , were also heavily influenced by the visualizations’ design choices . We have further seen similarities to the findings of Lee et al . [ 64 ] , who have categorized novices’ visualization sensemaking along five cognitive activities . While we have encountered instances of those activities during the interviews with lay participants , the occurrence or sequence of those were , again , highly individual . Contrary to the experts , lay participants’ attention was highly influenced by the color of objects and textual parts of the figures , with the formulation of the title being crucial for their interpretation . Those findings are partially coherent with previous research stressing the importance of the narrative of visuals [ 55 ] , as well as users’ focus on the title [ 56 ] . Kong et al . [ 57 ] have shown that the framing of a visualization title can influence the perceived main message and rightfully warned about viewers’ unwarranted conviction of the neutrality of visualizations . However , for our specific sample of laypersons , it was striking how many doubted the shown information , especially for visualization 2 , which they perceived to have a very sensational title . We conclude that design choices play a crucial role when communicating with laypeople , much more so if the topic is as emotionally loaded as climate change . Designing for Understandability . Our findings suggest that substantial simplifications in visualizations for the public , for example , compared to IPCC visualizations , are necessary to meet the needs of public audiences . However , visualization designers must be transparent to avoid oversimplifying content and potentially losing the reader’s trust . In this regard , text can play an important role . When a data visualization excludes information for the sake of simplicity , interviewees suggested that accompanying text could bridge the gap between simplification and accuracy . A major point of criticism regarding the example visualizations has been the perceived complexity ( in general and concerning wording ) . The reduction of complexity for climate change visuals for the public was recommended previously [ 21 ] , and the usage of simple captions and known terminology was shown to have a positive impact on readers’ understanding [ 58 ] . Our findings provide insights into the visual literacy of our lay sample as well as into expert opinions about public understanding , suggesting that the level of complexity shown in the example visualizations was still too high and would require explanations in the text . While the difficulty of understanding uncertainty in public climate change communication was also acknowledged previ - ously [ 13 ] , we specifically asked if showing uncertainty ranges in public communication is necessary or counterproductive . Our sample predominantly spoke in favor of not showing the uncertainty ranges in a visual for a newspaper source to reduce complexity and instead providing explanations about it in the accompanying text . Mentioned solutions that are possible in an online / video context are adaptable visualizations or visual storytelling that builds up complexity step by step , allowing people to stop engaging when they see fit , as can be seen in the work of some practitioners . Participants acknowledged the benefits of incorporating images and icons into climate change visuals , as they appear more interesting and understandable . Previous research has shown that infographics can increase user engagement and aesthetic value [ 65 ] , which aligns with the assessments of the lay participants . McMahon et al . [ 59 ] investigated the perception of IPCC graphics in comparison to infographics , claiming that infographics can increase accessibility but might have a negative impact on scientific credibility . For our sample , the infographic [ 52 ] was indeed perceived as more accessible but not as less trustworthy . Future research could shed light on how data visualizations about climate change are created and used in news media sources and test how different design options ( such as including / excluding uncertainty , infographic style ) affect readers’ interest and understanding . Takeaway Messages on Different Levels . By investigating takeaway messages of two exemplary visualizations , we observed differences in the included contents among and within participant 10 TABLE 5 Overview of key themes and findings during the interviews and comparison to previous work Theme Findings during interviews ( partially comparing lay and expert participants ) Comparison to previous work Attention • Perceived attractiveness of a data visualization depends on channel • Willingness to look at a data visualization depends on perceived simplicity • Lay participants evaluated bold design choices as more attention - grabbing but less trustworthy Validating & extending prior work on IPCC graphics [ 16 ] , [ 20 ] and general design principles [ 53 ] Sensemaking • The process was influenced by a person’s prior knowledge , attitudes , and experiences • Lay participants’ attention was guided by lower - level design details , such as color , lines , text Partially supported by previous studies like [ 54 ] – [ 57 ] Understandability • Most participants spoke in favor of simplifications & using text for further explanations • Participants criticized the visualizations for their complex terminology / lack of explanations • The majority of participants preferred leaving out the uncertainty for the general public • Lay participants found infographics more understandable and not less trustworthy Extending and supporting previous work by [ 13 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 58 ] ; challeng - ing findings about infographics’ negative impact on credibility [ 59 ] TakeawayMessages • The median length of formulated messages was more than double for lay participants • Messages formulated by lay participants were less abstract and contained lower - level details Previous work focuses on different aspects Action • Participants asked for relatable content ( consequences of climate change or individual actions ) • Especially lay participants were opposed to content that is negatively framed Partially confirming previous re - search [ 13 ] , [ 60 ] groups . Lay participants’ messages were shorter than the expert ones due to different levels of abstraction . In the context of natural language descriptions of visualizations , Lundgard and Satyanarayan [ 66 ] introduced four levels of semantic content , namely 1 ) visualization construction properties , 2 ) statistical concepts / relations , 3 ) perceptual / cognitive phenomena , and 4 ) domain - specific insights . Despite the different fields of application , the contents of our takeaway messages can be categorized along those levels . Lay interviewees more frequently included lower - level contents like visualization properties or statistical details ( levels 1 and 2 ) . In contrast , experts tended to formulate messages on a higher level , often referring to conclusions , trends , and contexts ( levels 3 and 4 ) . A possible reason for this might be the fact that experts are more likely to have seen similar visualizations or are familiar with interpreting data visualizations in general . Hence , visualization properties might not stand out to them in a way that they would include them in their takeaway messages . On top of the expertise , also the visualization design seemed to influence the usage of lower vs . higher - level content : visualization properties , like colors or lines , were more often mentioned in messages for visualization 2 than for visualization 1 . It is interesting how another does not mention aspects that are essential to one person but might eventually shape what we remember about a data visualization [ 40 ] . Future work could explore further influencing factors on the sensemaking and message formulation process , as well as how people remember data visualizations based on their individual takeaways . From Visualization to Action . How do we design climate change data visualizations that adhere to the needs of diverse users ? Literature , as well as our findings , indicate that a highly iterative , user - centered co - design process , including domain and visualiza - tion experts as well as user - testing , is the way forward [ 67 ] . While such approaches have been in place for IPCC visualizations , our findings suggest that these practices can also benefit common news sources . In general , our findings show parallels to general principles of science communication ( for example [ 68 ] ) and principles of visual data communication ( for example [ 65 ] ) . However , what makes climate change stand out is the complexity of the data , the urgency to act , and the emotional aspect that design choices can trigger . The feeling of responsibility for the current situation , fear about the future , and the perceived need / social pressure to change one’s personal behavior were apparent during the discussion of the visualizations and make climate change communication all the more complex . Especially , acknowledging the need for personal behavior change is inconvenient for many people . Hence , not only a lack of interest in and understanding of climate change but also cognitive phenomena , like the status quo bias ( like in [ 69 ] , [ 70 ] ) , could restrain us from giving “climate action the high priority it is due” [ 71 , p . 3 ] . Our findings suggest that an important factor in motivating users to engage with and act according to a data visualization lies in the relatability of the contents , which is , in part , comparable to Corner et al . ’s [ 13 ] principles for public engagement . Interview participants shared concrete suggestions on addressing users’ interests , including showing the consequences of climate change on a map [ 72 ] , visualizing the impact of actions , and giving concrete recommendations for action . Building on previous work ( such as [ 60 ] ) , our findings also show that messages are most effectively framed in a positive solution - oriented way , which motivates readers to act . Reflections about Studying Laypersons . Burns et al . ’s [ 73 ] recent work on visualization novices is a helpful resource for thinking about lay people . Despite the justified concerns of defining laypersons in terms of their perceived limitations in comparison to an expert group , we were still in need of a definition that excluded persons from the lay group who had a professional background in our chosen areas of expertise . As we were interested in people’s opinions with different habits , experiences , and interests , we decided against limiting our lay sample , for example , according to peoples’ news / visualization consumption . While some participants reported seeing data visualizations on a regular basis , others would barely encounter any graphics in their day - to - day life . However , it was valuable to also capture their perspectives , for example , on what would catch their attention and what they would find understandable . We hence had to significantly adapt how we ask questions and talk about ‘data visualizations’ , which in itself was not an easy - to - understand term for many . We also did not want to create an atmosphere where participants felt that their knowledge or understanding of a specific visualization was being tested or judged . We realized that this feeling was mainly present in the questions about the main takeaway message of the visualizations . We explained in detail the aims of this study to make participants feel comfortable sharing their thought processes and opinions . Limitations . Our findings have to be understood within the limits of the study design . While the sample size at which data 11 saturation is normally reached was exceeded , the interviews are still limited in number in terms of fields of expertise and backgrounds . Furthermore , our sample shows a focus on European and [ country name removed for review ] participants , with some of them making their arguments for local circumstances . We identified important themes for public climate change communication , but further studies with a larger and more diverse ( culturally and geographically ) sample are necessary to test concrete assumptions . For the example visualizations , we opted for line charts as one of the most common choices of IPCC authors [ 15 ] and for our sample of news article visualizations . While the example visualizations were very helpful in encouraging a discussion and also led to participants sharing their general recommendations , both visualization pairs depicted line graphs with a time axis and temperature trends . We acknowledge that the chosen example visualizations have shaped our findings , which could be accounted for with different chart types in follow - up studies . Finally , our questions were aimed at opinions about broader themes . Hence , findings might , in part , not be specific to climate change data visualizations but apply to data visualization and science communication in general . 6 C ONCLUSION Communicating climate change not only to decision - makers but also to the public is one of the most pressing challenges of our time in order to raise awareness and understanding and facilitate action . With climate change communication experiencing a shift toward visualization , visuals are used by a variety of stakeholders to achieve a number of different goals . However , visualizing climate change data in a way that makes it accessible to different audiences while still maintaining scientific accuracy is difficult . On the basis of interviews with experts and laypeople , we discussed design considerations for creating more effective climate change data visualizations , particularly in news media sources geared toward lay audiences . For our sample , we determined a need for further simplification of the shown news media ( and IPCC ) visualizations and / or further explanations , for example in the form of text . In comparison to the experts , lay participants formulated longer and less abstract takeaway messages , with their sensemaking being highly influenced by design details , which eventually affected perceived attractiveness , understandability , and trustworthiness . Our findings suggest that such design details have to be carefully contemplated to fit the needs of lay audiences and we discuss such considerations along the key themes of our interviews . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] R . Bayes , T . Bolsen , and J . N . Druckman , “A research agenda for climate change communication and public opinion : The role of scientific con - sensus messaging and beyond , ” Environmental Communication , vol . 17 , no . 1 , pp . 16 – 34 , 2023 . [ 2 ] Pew Research Center , “In response to climate change , citizens in advanced economies are willing to alter how they live and work , ” https : / / www . pewresearch . org / global / 2021 / 09 / 14 / in - response - to - climate - change - citizens - in - advanced - economies - are - willing - to - alter - how - they - live - and - work / ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) , 2021 . [ 3 ] T . Brosch , “Affect and emotions as drivers of climate change perception and action : a review , ” Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , vol . 42 , pp . 15 – 21 , 2021 . [ 4 ] A . Markman , “Why people aren’t motivated to address climate change , ” https : / / hbr . org / 2018 / 10 / why - people - arent - motivated - to - address - climate - change ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) , 2018 . [ 5 ] S . Joslyn and R . Demnitz , “Explaining how long CO2 stays in the atmosphere : Does it change attitudes toward climate change ? ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Applied , vol . 27 , no . 3 , pp . 473 – 484 , 2021 . [ 6 ] B . W . Head , “Wicked problems in public policy , ” Public Policy , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 101 – 118 , 2008 . [ 7 ] J . Johansson , T . - S . S . Neset , and B . - O . Linnér , “Evaluating climate visu - alization : An information visualization approach , ” in 14th International Conference on Information Visualisation , 2010 , London , UK , E . Banissi , S . Bertschi , R . A . Burkhard et al . , Eds . IEEE Computer Society , 2010 , pp . 156 – 161 . [ 8 ] S . J . O’Neill and N . Smith , “Climate change and visual imagery , ” WIREs Climate Change , vol . 5 , no . 1 , pp . 73 – 87 , 2014 . [ 9 ] M . Mann , The hockey stick and the climate wars . Columbia University Press , 2012 . [ 10 ] B . Schneider , “Climate model simulation visualization from a visual studies perspective , ” WIREs Climate Change , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 185 – 193 , 2012 . [ 11 ] IPCC , “Summary for Policymakers , ” in Climate Change 2021 : The Physical Science Basis . Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , V . MassonDelmotte , P . Zhai , A . Pirani et al . , Eds . Cambridge , United Kingdom and New York , NY , USA : Cambridge University Press , 2021 . [ 12 ] IPCC , “About the IPCC , ” https : / / www . ipcc . ch / about / ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) . [ 13 ] A . Corner , C . Shaw , and J . Clarke , “Principles for effective communication and public engagement on climate change : A handbook for IPCC authors , ” 2018 , Oxford : Climate Outreach . [ 14 ] R . Pidcock , K . Heath , L . Messling , S . Wang , A . Pirani , S . Connors , A . Corner , C . Shaw , and M . Gomis , “Evaluating effective public engagement : Local stories from a global network of IPCC scientists , ” Climatic Change , vol . 168 , no . 3 , 2021 . [ 15 ] A . Wozniak , “Stakeholders’ visual representations of climate change , ” in Research Handbook on Communicating Climate Change . Edward Elgar Publishing , 2020 , pp . 131 – 142 . [ 16 ] J . Harold , I . Lorenzoni , T . F . Shipley , and K . R . Coventry , “Communication of IPCC visuals : IPCC authors’ views and assessments of visual complexity , ” Climatic Change , vol . 158 , no . 2 , pp . 255 – 270 , 2020 . [ 17 ] H . Fischer , S . Schütte , A . Depoux , D . Amelung , and R . Sauerborn , “How well do COP22 attendees understand graphs on climate change health impacts from the Fifth IPCC Assessment Report ? ” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , vol . 15 , no . 5 , 2018 . [ 18 ] H . Fischer , K . L . van den Broek , K . Ramisch , and Y . Okan , “When IPCC graphs can foster or bias understanding : Evidence among decision - makers from governmental and non - governmental institutions , ” Environmental Research Letters , vol . 15 , no . 11 , 2020 . [ 19 ] R . McMahon , M . Stauffacher , and R . Knutti , “The unseen uncertainties in climate change : Reviewing comprehension of an IPCC scenario graph , ” Climatic Change , vol . 133 , no . 2 , pp . 141 – 154 , 2015 . [ 20 ] J . Harold , I . Lorenzoni , K . Coventry , and A . Minns , “Enhancing the accessibility of climate change data visuals : Recommendations to the IPCC and guidance for researchers , ” https : / / tyndall . ac . uk / wp - content / uploads / 2021 / 09 / Data _ Visuals _ Guidance _ Full _ Report _ 0 . pdf ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) , 2017 . [ 21 ] J . Harold , I . Lorenzoni , T . F . Shipley , and K . R . Coventry , “Cognitive and psychological science insights to improve climate change data visualization , ” Nature Climate Change , vol . 6 , no . 12 , pp . 1080 – 1089 , 2016 . [ 22 ] T . Gaulkin , “Why the bad news in the IPCC report is good news for visual learners , ” https : / / thebulletin . org / 2021 / 08 / why - the - bad - news - in - the - ipcc - report - is - good - news - for - visual - learners / ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) , 2021 . [ 23 ] E . Hawkins , “IPCC SPM Figures , ” https : / / www . climate - lab - book . ac . uk / 2021 / ipcc - spm - figures / ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) , 2021 . [ 24 ] S . O’Neill , “More than meets the eye : A longitudinal analysis of climate change imagery in the print media , ” Climatic Change , vol . 163 , no . 1 , pp . 9 – 26 , 2020 . [ 25 ] J . E . Hopke and L . E . Hestres , “Visualizing the Paris Climate Talks on Twitter : Media and climate stakeholder visual social media during COP21 , ” Social Media + Society , vol . 4 , no . 3 , 2018 . [ 26 ] H . Wessler , A . Wozniak , L . Hofer , and J . Lück , “Global multimodal news frames on climate change : A comparison of five democracies around the world , ” The International Journal of Press / Politics , vol . 21 , no . 4 , pp . 423 – 445 , 2016 . [ 27 ] S . Wang , A . Corner , D . Chapman , and E . Markowitz , “Public engagement with climate imagery in a changing digital landscape , ” Wiley Interdisci - plinary Reviews : Climate Change , vol . 9 , no . 2 , 2018 . [ 28 ] L . Feldman and P . S . Hart , “Is there any hope ? How climate change news imagery and text influence audience emotions and support for climate mitigation policies , ” Risk Analysis , vol . 38 , no . 3 , pp . 585 – 602 , 2018 . [ 29 ] J . Metag , M . S . Schäfer , T . Füchslin , T . Barsuhn , and K . Kleinen - von Königslöw , “Perceptions of climate change imagery : Evoked salience and 12 self - efficacy in Germany , Switzerland , and Austria , ” Science Communica - tion , vol . 38 , no . 2 , pp . 197 – 227 , 2016 . [ 30 ] F . Windhager , G . Schreder , and E . Mayr , “On inconvenient images : Exploring the design space of engaging climate change visualizations for public audiences , ” in 7th Workshop on Visualisation in Environmental Sci - ences , EnvirVis @ EuroVis 2019 , Porto , Portugal , June 3 , 2019 , R . Bujack , K . Feige , K . Rink et al . , Eds . Eurographics Association , 2019 , pp . 1 – 8 . [ 31 ] T . Nocke , T . Sterzel , M . Böttinger , and M . Wrobel , “Visualization of climate and climate change data : An overview , ” in Ehlers et al . ( Eds . ) Digital Earth Summit on Geoinformatics 2008 : Tools for Global Change Research ( ISDE’08 ) , Wichmann , Heidelberg , pp . 226 - 232 , 2008 . [ 32 ] S . Lee , “Investigation of visualization literacy : A visualization sensemak - ing model , a visualization literacy assessment test , and the effects of cognitive characteristics , ” Ph . D . dissertation , Purdue University , 2017 . [ 33 ] K . Giuseffi , B . Sievert , B . M . Wells , and F . Westfall , “Storytelling and sensemaking through data visualization , ” in The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee Behavior , R . N . Landers , Ed . Cambridge University Press , 2019 , pp . 836 – 846 . [ 34 ] A . Burns , C . Xiong , S . Franconeri , A . Cairo , and N . Mahyar , “Designing with pictographs : Envision topics without sacrificing understanding , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 28 , no . 12 , pp . 4515 – 4530 , 2022 . [ 35 ] C . Xiong , V . Setlur , B . Bach , K . Lin , E . Koh , and S . Franconeri , “Visual arrangements of bar charts influence comparisons in viewer takeaways , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 2021 . [ 36 ] A . Burns , “Communicative information visualizations : How to make data more understandable by the general public , ” Ph . D . dissertation , University of Massachusetts Amherst , 2022 . [ 37 ] Z . Bylinskii , M . A . Borkin , N . W . Kim , H . Pfister , and A . Oliva , “Eye Fixation Metrics for Large Scale Evaluation and Comparison of Information Visualizations , ” in Eye Tracking and Visualization , ser . Mathematics and Visualization , M . Burch , L . Chuang , B . Fisher et al . , Eds . Cham : Springer International Publishing , 2017 , pp . 235 – 255 . [ 38 ] N . W . Kim , Z . Bylinskii , M . A . Borkin , K . Z . Gajos , A . Oliva , F . Durand , and H . Pfister , “BubbleView : An interface for crowdsourcing image importance maps and tracking visual attention , ” ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , vol . 24 , no . 5 , pp . 1 – 40 , 2017 . [ 39 ] E . Adar and E . Lee , “Communicative visualizations as a learning problem , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 27 , no . 2 , pp . 946 – 956 , 2021 . [ 40 ] S . Bateman , R . L . Mandryk , C . Gutwin , A . Genest , D . McDine , and C . Brooks , “Useful junk ? the effects of visual embellishment on comprehension and memorability of charts , ” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 2010 , p . 2573 – 2582 . [ 41 ] A . G . Ballantyne , V . Wibeck , and T . - S . Neset , “Images of climate change – A pilot study of young people’s perceptions of ICT - based climate visualization , ” Climatic Change , vol . 134 , no . 1 , pp . 73 – 85 , 2016 . [ 42 ] A . Quispel , A . Maes , and J . Schilperoord , “Graph and chart aesthetics for experts and laymen in design : The role of familiarity and perceived ease of use , ” Information Visualization , vol . 15 , no . 3 , pp . 238 – 252 , 2016 . [ 43 ] K . Dudman and S . de Wit , “An IPCC that listens : Introducing reciprocity to climate change communication , ” Climatic Change , vol . 168 , no . 1 , p . 2 , 2021 . [ 44 ] Guardian , “As a verdict on the climate crimes of humanity , the new Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report could not be clearer : We’re guilty as hell . ” https : / / www . instagram . com / p / CSXHuKIqCs1 / ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) , 2021 , Slide 4 . [ 45 ] M . McGrath , “Climate change : Five things we have learned from the IPCC report , ” https : / / www . bbc . com / news / science - environment - 58138714 ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) , 2021 , BBC News at bbc . co . uk / news . [ 46 ] C . Robson and K . McCartan , “Real world research , 4th edition , ” 2017 . [ 47 ] M . Hennink and B . N . Kaiser , “Sample sizes for saturation in qualitative research : A systematic review of empirical tests , ” Social Science & Medicine , vol . 292 , 2022 . [ 48 ] M . M . Hennink , B . N . Kaiser , and V . C . Marconi , “Code saturation versus meaning saturation : How many interviews are enough ? ” Qualitative Health Research , vol . 27 , no . 4 , pp . 591 – 608 , 2017 . [ 49 ] G . Guest , A . Bunce , and L . Johnson , “How many interviews are enough ? : An experiment with data saturation and variability , ” Field Methods , vol . 18 , no . 1 , pp . 59 – 82 , 2006 . [ 50 ] IPCC , “AR6 WGI SPM Basic slide deck with figures , ” https : / / www . ipcc . ch / report / ar6 / wg1 / downloads / outreach / IPCC _ AR6 _ WGI _ SPM _ Basic _ Slide _ Deck _ Figures . pdf ( accessed Mar . 29 , 2021 ) , 2021 . [ 51 ] @ tagesschau | Instagram , https : / / www . instagram . com / tagesschau / ( ac - cessed July 22 , 2023 ) . [ 52 ] @ quarks | Instagram , “So hat sich die globale Temperatur der Erde entwickelt , ” https : / / www . instagram . com / p / CbnFrMIK9fl / ( accessed July 22 , 2023 ) , 2022 . [ 53 ] R . Williams , The Non - designer’s Presentation Book : Principles for Effective Presentation Design . Peachpit Press , 2017 . [ 54 ] E . M . Peck , S . E . Ayuso , and O . El - Etr , “Data is personal : Attitudes and perceptions of data visualization in rural pennsylvania , ” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser . CHI ’19 . Association for Computing Machinery , 2019 , p . 1 – 12 . [ 55 ] J . Hullman and N . Diakopoulos , “Visualization rhetoric : Framing effects in narrative visualization , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 17 , no . 12 , pp . 2231 – 2240 , 2011 . [ 56 ] M . A . Borkin , Z . Bylinskii , N . W . Kim , C . M . Bainbridge , C . S . Yeh , D . Borkin , H . Pfister , and A . Oliva , “Beyond memorability : Visualization recognition and recall , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 519 – 528 , 2016 . [ 57 ] H . - K . Kong , Z . Liu , and K . Karahalios , “Frames and slants in titles of visualizations on controversial topics , ” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser . CHI ’18 . Association for Computing Machinery , 2018 , p . 1 – 12 . [ 58 ] A . Kause , W . Bruine de Bruin , F . Fung et al . , “Visualizations of projected rainfall change in the United Kingdom : An interview study about user perceptions , ” Sustainability , vol . 12 , 2020 . [ 59 ] R . McMahon , M . Stauffacher , and R . Knutti , “The scientific veneer of IPCC visuals , ” Climatic Change , vol . 138 , no . 3 , pp . 369 – 381 , 2016 . [ 60 ] M . Ferreira , M . Coelho , V . Nisi , and N . Jardim Nunes , “Climate change communication in HCI : A visual analysis of the past decade , ” in Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 2021 , pp . 1 – 16 . [ 61 ] A . Burns , C . Xiong , S . Franconeri , A . Cairo , and N . Mahyar , “How to evaluate data visualizations across different levels of understanding , ” in 2020 IEEE Workshop on Evaluation and Beyond - Methodological Approaches to Visualization ( BELIV ) , 2020 . [ 62 ] K . Rothermich , E . K . Johnson , R . M . Griffith , and M . M . Beingolea , “The influence of personality traits on attitudes towards climate change – An exploratory study , ” Personality and Individual Differences , vol . 168 , p . 110304 , 2021 . [ 63 ] S . Deng and V . Sloutsky , “Selective attention , diffused attention , and the development of categorization , ” Cognitive Psychology , vol . 91 , 2016 . [ 64 ] S . Lee , S . - H . Kim , Y . - H . Hung , H . Lam , Y . - A . Kang , and J . S . Yi , “How do people make sense of unfamiliar visualizations ? : A grounded model of novice’s information visualization sensemaking , ” IEEE Trans . Vis . Comput . Graph . , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 499 – 508 , 2016 . [ 65 ] S . L . Franconeri , L . M . Padilla , P . Shah , J . M . Zacks , and J . Hullman , “The science of visual data communication : What works , ” Psychological Science in the Public Interest , vol . 22 , no . 3 , pp . 110 – 161 , 2021 . [ 66 ] A . Lundgard and A . Satyanarayan , “Accessible visualization via natural language descriptions : A four - level model of semantic content , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 2021 . [ 67 ] A . Morelli , T . G . Johansen , R . Pidcock , J . Harold , A . Pirani , M . Gomis , I . Lorenzoni , E . Haughey , and K . Coventry , “Co - designing engaging and accessible data visualisations : A case study of the IPCC reports , ” Climatic Change , vol . 168 , no . 3 , p . 26 , 2021 . [ 68 ] B . Fischhoff , “The sciences of science communication , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol . 110 , 2013 . [ 69 ] W . Samuelson and R . Zeckhauser , “Status quo bias in decision making , ” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , vol . 1 , no . 1 , pp . 7 – 59 , 1988 . [ 70 ] A . Patt and R . Zeckhauser , “Action bias and environmental decisions , ” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , vol . 21 , no . 1 , pp . 45 – 72 , 2000 . [ 71 ] S . Boehm , K . Lebling , K . Levin et al . , “State of climate action 2021 : Systems transformations required to limit global warming to 1 . 5°C , ” 2021 . [ 72 ] C . S . Fish , “Cartographic content analysis of compelling climate change communication , ” Cartography and Geographic Information Science , vol . 47 , no . 6 , pp . 492 – 507 , 2020 . [ 73 ] A . Burns , C . Lee , R . Chawla , E . Peck , and N . Mahyar , “Who do we mean when we talk about visualization novices ? ” in Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 2023 .