Social , Individual & Technological Issues for Groupware Calendar Systems Leysia Palen 1 Department of Computer Science University of Colorado , Boulder ECOT 717 , Campus Box 430 Boulder , CO 80309 - 0430 USA palen @ cs . colorado . edu 1 This research was conducted while the author was at the Information & Computer Science Department , University of California , Irvine . ABSTRACT Designing and deploying groupware is difficult . Groupware evaluation and design are often approached from a single perspective , with a technologically - , individually - , or socially - centered focus . A study of Groupware Calendar Systems ( GCSs ) highlights the need for a synthesis of these multiple perspectives to fully understand the adoption challenges these systems face . First , GCSs often replace existing calendar artifacts , which can impact users(cid:213) calendaring habits and in turn influence technology adoption decisions . Second , electronic calendars have the potential to easily share contextualized information publicly over the computer network , creating opportunities for peer judgment about time allocation and raising concerns about privacy regulation . However , this situation may also support coordination by allowing others to make useful inferences about one(cid:213)s schedule . Third , the technology and the social environment are in a reciprocal , co - evolutionary relationship : the use context is affected by the constraints and affordances of the technology , and the technology also co - adapts to the environment in important ways . Finally , GCSs , despite being below the horizon of everyday notice , can affect the nature of temporal coordination beyond the expected meeting scheduling practice . Keywords Groupware Calendar Systems , ethnography , CSCW , calendars , diaries , time , sociotemporality , meeting scheduling INTRODUCTION Groupware offers a challenge to both design and deployment . Intended to support coordination over multiple people , groupware must be useful to single users as well , and have consonance with the norms and practices of its use environment . Unfortunately , groupware applications are frequently masterminded by developers who base a design on their own experience , without testing these designs . Although a technology - centered perspective has fewer up - front costs , it can often yield technology that is not usable nor useful in practice . The field of human - computer interaction ( HCI ) arose in reaction to this technology - centered perspective , and has had a positive impact on the quality of individual - user software available today [ 13 ] . However , the problem of groupware design continues to elude , even when user - centered design techniques are used [ 4 ] . Individual - centered approaches have difficulty addressing multiple - user technologies because they cannot be evaluated in a lab . The field of Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) has broadened design perspectives still further by addressing the social and organizational contexts of technology use . Examination of work practice , institutional incentive and control structures , the production system of the enterprise , and other aspects of social organization is important because these factors can impact groupware use in unexpected ways . To this end , design may be expanded to include deployment and training issues . However , in an effort to identify and understand these factors , a broad organization - centered perspective introduces its own challenges : Turning observations into groupware design implications as well as accounting for technological constraints and individual variance are difficult to do . Technology - , individual - , or organization - centered perspectives each have their limitations ( albeit to varying degrees ) when used in isolation to inform groupware design . In an ethnographic study of Groupware Calendar Systems , a synthesis of these perspectives was used to yield a more holistic understanding of groupware technology use to inform design and deployment strategies . MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES Groupware Calendar Systems ( GCSs ) highlight the need for multiple , convergent perspectives . GCSs appear simple in function , but become complex in execution . Conventional paper calendars support people in idiosyncratic , personally customized ways ( Figure 1 , arrow 1 ) . GCSs replace conventional calendars , requiring that they be used simultaneously for both personal use and social To appear in the Proceedings of the ACM CHI ’99 Conference , May 1999 . coordination . These dual functions of groupware calendars introduce new challenges and opportunities for interpersonal communication ( arrow 2 ) . Additionally , GCSs publicly display the use of (cid:210)personal(cid:211) and (cid:210)company(cid:211) time , which has implications for both individual users and the function of the system in the business enterprise more broadly . In an effort to make meeting scheduling more efficient , GCSs indirectly affect much more fundamental issues of information sharing and temporal coordination . In this critical position , the social environment and technology co - evolve and co - adapt ( arrow 3 ) . FIGURE 1 : Convergent Perspectives GROUPWARE CALENDAR SYSTEMS What are Groupware Calendar Systems ? While specific features vary , GCSs are systems of on - line calendars that can be shared across a network . Individual users keep their own calendar on - line , and allow various degrees of access to other GCS users . Some GCS applications allow for non - person entities to (cid:210)own(cid:211) a calendar , such as conference rooms or equipment resources . Collaboration is supported by simple sharing or viewing of other people(cid:213)s calendars , or by sending special meeting invitations through the GCS . The primary site for this research uses a GCS in one of the most open ways possible , where individuals(cid:213) calendar information is read - accessible to other users by default ( an (cid:210)Open(cid:211) Model GCS ) . Other GCSs may reveal only blocks of free and busy times by default ( a (cid:210)Restricted(cid:211) Model GCS ) , while still others may reveal no information to other users on the network by default ( a (cid:210)Closed(cid:211) Model GCS ) . GCSs have been available since the late 1970s , making them one of the earliest groupware technologies to emerge . Cited illustratively in discussions of groupware , GCSs are sometimes described in a way that implies simplicity in function , trivialized as generic groupware without the complexities that other collaboration support systems have . Limitations of Existing Calendar Research Despite the ubiquity of conventional calendars artifacts and the steady proliferation of electronic calendar systems , relatively little empirical research has been conducted on either conventional paper - based calendars or new electronic calendar technology . Kelley and Chapanis [ 8 ] did early empirical work on conventional calendar artifacts to inform the design of the then - emerging electronic , but not networked , calendars . Subsequent studies focused on electronic calendars primarily for individual use [ 9 , 16 ] , although Payne did point out the challenge of the dual nature of networked calendars [ 16 ] . Still other studies on electronic calendars emphasize feature design [ 1 , 5 ] , although Beard et . al . do address the impacts of particular features on calendar sharing [ 1 ] . S . F . Ehrlich [ 2 , 3 ] was the first to address the social impacts of calendar systems , and insightfully described them as communication devices . Grudin [ 6 ] subsequently pointed out important adoption issues around groupware , with meeting scheduling as the focus of these observations . Subsequent work by Grudin and Palen [ 7 ] on GCSs identified a set of socio - technical factors that contribute to widespread adoption of groupware , but with less of a focus on the impacts of the calendaring functionality itself . Mosier and Tammaro [ 12 ] examined some of the interactions between personal and social use of GCSs in a small , short - term trial . Among other findings , they found that if insufficient use is made of one(cid:213)s calendar by others , maintaining an on - line calendar may not be worthwhile . THE STUDY Sun Microsystems has used an internally developed GCS (cid:209) (cid:210)Calendar Manager(cid:211) ( CM ) (cid:209) for about a decade , with GCS deployment matching rapid corporate growth from hundreds of employees to over 20 , 000 today . Although more companies are using GCSs with increased success , Sun is unusual for two reasons . The GCS has been in wide deployment for a long duration ( estimates of a 75 % deployment rate ) , and allows for the highest degree of information sharing compared to other commercial GCSs . Specifically , the contents of each user(cid:213)s calendar are readable by default by everyone on the internal network . Although employees can customize and change their access settings , over 80 % of the users maintain the defaults . Data were collected through a combination of ethnographic techniques including interviews of multiple members of workgroups selected across the organization ( for a total of over 40 subjects ) . In - office observation was conducted , including some video recording . Subjects(cid:213) work environments were photographed , and hardcopies of on - line calendars were collected . In cases where subjects also used paper calendars , samples of these were collected as well . Other documents were collected , including orientation training materials , internal web pages on calendar help , and usability (cid:210)bug(cid:211) reports . Additionally , a survey was administered to about 3000 employees over an email distribution list , with a 50 % response rate . The survey questions were informed by qualitative interview data collected in an early phase of the study . The purpose of the survey was to assess GCS use demographics , and to 1 . Single - User Calendar 2 . Interpersonal Communication 3 . Socio - Technical Evolution SOCIO - ORGANIZATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TECHNOLOGY INDIVIDUALUSER Evaluation & Design of Groupware Calendar Systems determine how broadly findings from the interviews applied across the company . In general , qualitative and quantitative data sets were highly consistent . SINGLE - USER DEMANDS ( ARROW 1 ) The activities of calendaring and scheduling underpin the use of GCSs . Designers will sometimes try to use metaphors from the physical world to assist in design . In general , this would seem to be a good heuristic for developing useful systems , but can fall short if superficial assumptions are made , which can be easily done for (cid:210)everyday(cid:211) artifacts like calendars . Diversity in Calendar Form & Function Consider the diverse formats and locations of paper - based calendar artifacts , and the functions afforded as a result . Kelley and Chapanis found that over 150 unique published calendar formats are available through stationers [ 8 ] . Daily , monthly , and weekly formats afford different functions and (cid:210)views(cid:211) on information . Other formats include appointment calendars , which use a much finer granularity of time , such as 15 minute units . Reference calendars are intended to keep track of days , and have comparably little additional space to record information . Journal - type calendars devote a whole blank page per day , rendering them all - purpose . Location of calendar artifacts can signal appropriate access by others . The hallway project planner may be intended to communicate important events and deadlines to workgroup colleagues ; everyone may be invited and even encouraged to read it , but perhaps social sanctions limit its content and authorship . Desk organizers naturally have more access restrictions ; although , again , the social sanctions may deem it appropriate for an officemate to quickly browse the organizer to find the whereabouts of the owner . “Calendar Work” The ways in which people interact with calendars extends beyond the activity of meeting scheduling . I call the range of activities for which calendars are employed (cid:210)calendar work . (cid:211) In brief , calendars support : Temporal Orientation . Like clocks , calendars orient us in time . Instead of hours , we refer to them to determine the day , month , and year . We also use them to orient to events in time that are relevant to us but may have no relationship to the Gregorian calendar . For example , relative to the current date , one can figure the number of days left until the summer holiday or to prepare for an upcoming meeting . Scheduling . Scheduling is a complex task of balancing constraints and priorities . Scheduling appointments involve managing competing requirements , priorities , and constraints , meaning that appointments are often juggled and moved around . Scheduling is less an (cid:210)optimizing(cid:211) task and more often a (cid:210)satisficing(cid:211) task , where , because of the complexity , the appointment is typically made as soon as the requirements are met . Tracking . Where scheduling is an activity of advanced planning , (cid:210)tracking(cid:211) records events that happen in the present , typically for reference later . Contacts , medical conditions , and spending habits are among the examples of things that are tracked . Reminding . Calendars assist in reminding users of future events . Users may also include non - appointment information to aid memory , such as recurring anniversary - types dates , and (cid:210)to - do(cid:211) lists (cid:209) information that exists only to remind , in fact . Reminding can be opportunistic as well (cid:209) when scheduling an event , one may be reminded of some other deadline that occurs on that same day . Or , in an example Payne provides , one event (cid:209) (cid:210)appointment with director(cid:211) may remind a person to do some related but unrecorded task like (cid:210)press suit this evening(cid:211) [ 16 , p . 92 ] . Note Recording / Archiving . Calendar artifacts may be used to record notes ( like meeting notes , product information , etc . ) , often with the intention of associating them with a particular point in time for possible retrieval in the future . Retrieval & Recall . Temporal association of information can assist in retrieval and recall . Some information may be deliberately recorded in calendars for later retrieval , but retrieval may be opportunistic as well . Several subjects said that they will sometimes look through their calendars to locate the spelling of a name or a lost phone number that they previously recorded . Reconciling Calendar Needs & Design Affordances Discussions of technology adoption are often restricted to aggregates of users . Although a broad view of the social organization is important , adoption is ultimately accomplished one user at a time . One of the major hurdles in GCS adoption , then , is a reconciliation of individual calendar demands with the affordances of GCSs for calendar support . For heavy calendar users , this reconciliation is of particular importance . For those whose calendar work habits extend beyond discrete appointment entries , electronic calendars can be poor substitutes . Finding ways to work - around or relocate supplemental information about meetings and business contacts and to - do - lists , for example , are often part of the decision to participate in a GCS . One of the risks for heavy calendar users is competition between calendar artifacts . Attracted to the benefits of the GCS but still needing other kinds of calendar support , some people will attempt to employ multiple calendar artifacts . While this approach can be successful , maintenance of multiple artifacts is rarely without some struggle , and often one calendar artifact loses the battle . For infrequent or erratic calendar users , the requirements for adoption are different . GCSs must make calendar maintenance simple and attractive to users who are not in the habit of keeping paper calendars . Discretionary Appeal Electronic calendars have the potential to hold great appeal [ 7 ] . Much of calendar work is repetitive : by their very nature , the time - based representations of calendars are cyclic on daily , weekly , monthly and yearly bases . Computer automation suits some tasks superbly : the ability to perform a single one - time entry for weekly staff meetings , anniversary - type dates , pay - days , for example , is attractive . Additionally , automatic reminders ( in the form of email , beeps , and dialogue boxes ) generated by these entries are repeatedly cited as helpful ; in fact , Sun survey subjects cited (cid:210)reminders(cid:211) as the most important CM feature . Recurring appointment settings and automated reminders represent long strides toward making calendaring appeal to low - use users in particular . Some people are infrequent users because they do not have many appointments to attend ; these users do not need to check their calendars frequently to enter appointments , which greatly reduces opportunistic reminding of other appointments . Increased social coordination is another reason to participate in a GCS , even if users must make tradeoffs in personal calendar support . INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION ( ARROW 2 ) Groupware Calendar Systems create new opportunities for social coordination . They also introduce opportunities for conflict , and challenge notions of personal privacy and control over information and time , especially openly configured GCSs like Calendar Manager What are the special characteristics of calendar systems that impact interpersonal communication ? On first glance , the primary issues appear to be about information disclosure and the mechanics of meeting scheduling . A closer examination of the function of calendars reveals additional coordination challenges and opportunities . Artifacts of Temporality Clocks and calendrical systems make time tangible and meaningful by imposing both natural and artificial boundaries on it (cid:209) minutes , hours , days , weeks , months , years . In this sense , calendrical systems ( like the Gregorian calendar ) are themselves artifacts . Paper and electronic calendars contain these time system representations , which allow for the manipulation of time : exchanging one meeting hour for another , allotting time for a task , splicing events in between others . It is time - as - artifact that , in part , makes calendars useful . Peer Judgment & Inference However , with open calendar systems like Sun(cid:213)s , information about time use becomes public , creating the opportunity for peer judgment about time allocation . Open calendar systems also create the opportunity to use calendars to coordinate with colleagues by allowing them to make inferences about the quality of the time allocation . Employees can make inferences about others(cid:213) workload not only by the numbers of appointments in their calendars , but also by the nature of the appointments . This issue is addressed in more depth later in the paper . Interpersonal Boundary Management Unpacking Privacy Privacy regulation is central to the adoption of an open model GCS . Privacy is a broad term , often serving as a catch - all for more subtle meanings of disclosure and control . With respect to the domain of networked calendars , five primary privacy concerns are at issue . These privacy concerns can be further organized by matters of information - and time - based content . Privacy Concerns about Information - Based Content : • Personal Privacy of Information : Information considered totally innocuous to some is considered personally private to others ( medical appointments are a good example of this ) . • Social Sensitivity of Information : Information that could have implications for other people , but is not personally private to the calendar owner . A frequently cited example is the internal job interview , where the interviewer may unwittingly include the entry in her calendar making it possible for the interviewee(cid:213)s colleagues to see . • Company Security of Information : Information that is proprietary or reveals undisclosed business strategy ( via appointments with other companies , for example ) . Privacy Concerns about Time - Based Content : • Personal Privacy of Time Allocation : Concern about judgments made about one(cid:213)s use or allocation of time . • Control of Access to Time : For some , open calendars relinquishes control of their schedules to others ; some are more specifically concerned about relinquishing control of access to the self as represented by their schedule . Managing Privacy Ways of managing calendar privacy while participating in the open calendar system at Sun involve a combination of techniques utilizing built - in technical mechanisms and strategic uses of information . Access Settings . Globally across the calendar or locally for each appointment , users can restrict what others see by explicitly using privacy settings . Options include displaying all appointment details , only free / busy times , or nothing at all . Using privacy settings explicitly controls interpersonal boundaries . Cryptic & Context - Sensitive Entries . This technique allows appointments to be left readable while still protecting one(cid:213)s privacy . Calendar owners both deliberately and inadvertently control access by making entries context - sensitive , such that only restricted audiences understand the meaning . Listing one(cid:213)s daughter(cid:213)s name at 2pm , for example , sufficiently reminds the calendar owner to pick up his child from school , but also signals to immediate group members ( who presumably know the child(cid:213)s name ) that the appointment probably cannot be moved , and that their colleague intends to return shortly . The entry looks like a business appointment to everyone else . Omissions . Users may simply omit appointments on their networked calendar that are private , recording them elsewhere or memorizing them . A foolproof way to control sensitive information , the interpersonal boundary unambiguously delimits personal information space . Scheduling Defensively . Scheduling work time in calendars allows people to participate in the GCS while imparting a feeling of control over time . Time can be protected even further by using a fake appointment to disguise work time , and minimize the possibility of being asked to attend a meeting instead . However , at Sun , this practice is employed judiciously . Expectation by others to cooperate within the groupware system caps excessive blocking out of work time , as does one(cid:213)s own investment in making the calendar accurate enough to act as one(cid:213)s proxy . Calendar Reciprocity Reciprocity plays a critical role in GCS use . People are strongly influenced by what others are doing around them : for most of Sun , calendar openness is reinforced every time someone browses another(cid:213)s calendar . Those who have different access settings (cid:209) either more restrictive or less restrictive (cid:209) often have immediate colleagues with similar access configurations . Willingness to keep a calendar open is in large part based on the security of knowing that everyone else keeps their calendars open , too . Restricted or closed calendars can challenge norms and expectations , and be perceived as unwillingness to reciprocate the trust others offer . In reaction , calendar openness may give way to closedness . Over time , pockets of users in the same social network develop their own norms . Some employees do not appear to realize that their groups handle calendars differently than the company - wide norm of open calendars , suggesting that some groups have long - entrenched local norms around calendar use . Meeting Arranging Many GCSs are touted as applications that can drastically improve the efficiency of meeting scheduling . CM at Sun is used as part of the meeting scheduling negotiation : 88 % of survey respondents reported using others(cid:213) calendars for the purposes of meeting arranging . However , CM is used for more than meeting scheduling : almost 70 % of respondents also report reading calendars to locate a colleague . In addition to these survey responses , qualitative data indicates that shared calendars serve a variety of functions . “Beyond Meeting Arranging” Many Sun employees cannot imagine using GCSs where only free and busy times are visible , as other GCSs are designed . When given the choice , Sun employees will choose to view calendars so that the content details can be read , instead of viewing only the free / busy times . With open calendars , a meeting arranger can assess the quality of what appears to be free time in someone(cid:213)s calendar . Examining what immediately precedes and follows a free hour can give some indication of what a colleague might be doing at that time . Does the following meeting require preparation ? Is the preceding meeting being held across town , requiring the employee to travel during traffic hours ? Does the employee have a big deadline that will preclude any meetings that day ? Employees frequently make these kind of determinations about others(cid:213) schedules , and welcome others to do the same in the hopes of reduced interruption and negotiation overall . At Sun , the GCS also functions as a distributed information system , around which people organize and synchronize their work . Information Access Distributed calendar information is used in several ways , reviewed here in brief : Locating Someone & Assessing Availability . Some employees will even provide supplemental information , including contact information specifically for others to see . Meeting Verification . An employee will sometimes browse colleagues(cid:213) calendars to confirm meeting agreement . Information Retrieval . Colleagues(cid:213) calendars can also be used as resources for finding information like the location of meetings that went unrecorded in one(cid:213)s own calendar . Organizational Learning . Open GCSs act as an opportunistically - created repository for an organization(cid:213)s (cid:210)memory . (cid:211) A great deal can be inferred about the organization simply by reading calendars . Synchronization . Employees can synchronize some aspects of their work by perusing calendars . For example , an employee who typically works at home sees upcoming deadlines and meetings that signal when to come to the office . (cid:210)Schedule inheritance(cid:211) is when actions or deadlines in one person(cid:213)s schedule are adopted by co - workers and put in their own schedules . The interdependency of schedules is made more explicit with open calendars , and is utilized to support coordination . SOCIO - TECHNICAL EVOLUTION ( ARROW 3 ) GCSs are often below the horizon - of - notice for decision makers , and are also taken - for - granted by the users themselves . Because GCSs support an important part of business activity (cid:209) meetings (cid:209) and have the potential to support coordination beyond meeting scheduling , their technological constraints can affect use on a large scale . Likewise , the viability of such a technology depends on reasonable consonance with the organizational culture . Orlikowski(cid:213)s (cid:210)Duality of Technology(cid:211) theory describes the process of co - evolution and institutionalization of technology and the behaviors around it . Orlikowski builds upon Gidden(cid:213)s theory of structuration , a social process of (cid:210)reciprocal interaction of human actors and structural features of organizations(cid:211) [ 14 , p . 404 ] . Structural features include rules , procedures , norms (cid:209) the intangible components of organizations . Employment of structural properties by human agents through the production of work institutionalizes the structures over time , continuing to legitimate their existence and the human agents employing them . For Orlikowski , technology is another structural property of organizations . (cid:210)Technology is created and changed by human action , yet it is also used by humans to accomplish some action(cid:211) : this describes the duality of technology [ 14 , p . 405 ] . Development Environment Decisions about technology(cid:213)s early design and development arise out of one social context , such that the design choices are understood and resonate with the developers - as - users . Calendar Manager , now a commercial application , was developed in - house for Sun(cid:213)s internal use . The early institutional properties of Sun provided a high degree of freedom for technology development by individual employees : operating under a code of (cid:210)openness(cid:211) and the need to develop useful functionality for a new platform , an early calendar program was developed that helped set the direction for calendar sharing . In such an environment , an open calendar model (cid:209) where calendars are read accessible (cid:209) was consistent with the early culture . Company growth did put new demands on its own technology , and also created a need to organize its available technology for commercial release . Calendar Manager was appropriated by the production system of the company for commercial value , while at the same time enmeshing itself in day - to - day business operations . Impacts of Early Design Choices Remarkably , the open calendar environment survived and deployment levels were sustained even as the company rapidly grew to over 20 , 000 people . Although Sun is a high - tech environment that has far fewer technological obstacles to overcome than other industries and institutions , it is no longer the small UNIX shop of a decade ago . Sun today is a large corporation with production functions that require a variety of job positions , with many new employees having no previous UNIX experience . Today , survey data indicates that 81 % of users maintain the defaults for their access settings , leaving their calendars readable for the (cid:210)world(cid:211) of Sun . This practice can be explained by two factors : 1 ) user passivity for customizing default settings (cid:209) as has long been established in HCI research [ 10 ] (cid:209) and 2 ) a process of institutionalization of the technology [ 14 ] . Consider the very similar results of Microsoft(cid:213)s use of Schedule + ( when studied in 1994 ) : 80 % of GCS users maintain their access default settings (cid:209) except their defaults display only free / busy availability ( a (cid:210)restricted(cid:211) model GCS ) ! Interestingly , the GCS in each company can be user - configured to work very much like the other , but are not because the majority of users maintain the defaults . Social Impacts on Evolving Design New conditions of the changing environment put restrictions on what the technology could do , which had direct impacts on the technology design . A fourth access setting (cid:209) the (cid:210)executable(cid:211) setting that executed system commands at appointed times as entered in the calendar (cid:209) was removed . As the company grew and becoming more heterogeneous with respect to job positions , the executable setting was seen as a risk to computer security and (cid:209) by virtue of the business of Sun (cid:209) was therefore seen as a risk to company security . More recently , a design proposal by engineers to limit the range of privacy access settings in an new incarnation of CM was met with user disapproval , and the full range of controls were reinstituted . Even though most employees do not use the specific controls proposed for removal , retaining the ability to technologically control access was important to them . Also , new features were gradually added . Time zone compatibility became more important as Sun expanded geographically , for example . Deployment , Institutionalization & Niche - Creation Catalyzed by distribution of the technology to specific employees (cid:209) administrative assistants (cid:209) who found the technology useful in conducting their jobs , awareness of Calendar Manager spread throughout the company laterally and from the bottom - up . Mechanics of structuration appeared in iterative design feature inclusion and exclusion . Structuration also appeared in language , where users would invoke the name of the calendar read feature in everyday language as a directive to others (cid:209) (cid:210)Browse me . (cid:211) However , the presence of another scheduling system with its own institutional momentum served to keep the room reservation function beyond the scope of Calendar Manager . CONVERGENT PERSPECTIVES I have examined the situated use of a GCS addressing the demands of single - users on calendaring technology ( both paper - based and electronic ) , interpersonal communication and coordination over the medium of calendars , and the co - evolution and institutionalization of the technology and the organizational environment . A final examination of the situated use of a GCS also requires consideration of the interaction between these perspectives . This final convergence of perspectives reveals how institutionally sanctioned (cid:210)temporal autonomy(cid:211) affects GCS interpersonal communication ; how technological infrastructure helps regulate privacy ; and how a combination of conditions result in primarily group - wise interactions over Calendar Manager , despite its highly public configuration . Institutional Value : Temporal Coordination Most Sun employees enjoy temporal autonomy , possessing a good deal of control over their work time . The work ethic stresses personal responsibility for quality and completion of work , with comparatively little attention to when the work is actually performed . Although expectations vary between groups , many employees arrive at and depart from work later than conventional business hours , or keep schedules that vary daily . Telecommuting is common , and employees sometimes attend to personal appointments during the work day . These flexible schedules make requirements for coordination with colleagues different than in workplaces with conventional business hours . With conventional business hours , people can reliably predict when colleagues will be in their offices ; greater concurrence of working hours increases opportunities to interact with colleagues . With flexible schedules , the window of time in a day or week that colleagues are co - present may be quite narrow . Calendar Manager plays an important role in supporting temporal coordination by communicating employee availability , enabling people to plan their interactions with others and reduce dependence on chance interactions . In this way , CM substitutes for and elaborates on traditional office in / out boards ( and few in / out boards exist at Sun ) . These demands for temporal coordination help propel adoption , which is supported by a two - way peer pressure delivery . In return for a great deal of temporal autonomy , employees must be responsible for conveying their availability to their colleagues : this is a source of peer pressure to individual employees to keep a calendar on - line . Likewise , by keeping a calendar on - line , colleagues are expected to refer to employees(cid:213) calendars to reduce interruptions to calendar owners . Reciprocal peer pressure sustains GCS use . Technology Constraints Affect Social Interaction Technological constraints indirectly regulate privacy to further enable the widespread practice of (cid:210)world(cid:211) readable calendars at Sun . The technological infrastructure that supports CM limits easy calendar access . An early design decision that suited a much smaller Sun scales up in way that requires users to be quite deliberate about specifying the calendars they browse (cid:209) calendars cannot be (cid:210)surfed(cid:211) like Web pages . Connection to remotes calendars use the convention user @ hostname . Another example of structuration , this design decision was influenced by the early socio - technical environment . Although there are reasons to consider this design legacy problematic , I believe that it has instead helped continue to make open calendars viable in the face of rapid corporate growth . In the early days , when Sun was a mere fraction of today(cid:213)s size , hostnames could be almost as easily remembered as usernames . Today(cid:213)s 20 , 000 employees have at least one workstation each : therefore , for every user name specified , an equally unique machine hostname must be specified to locate the calendar . Even though an on - line company rolodex contains all the necessary information to locate a calendar , doing so requires a few extra steps . Although certainly no obstacle to the persistent , these additional steps have been repeatedly noted by informants as requiring just enough work to reduce rampant browsing . Group - wise Interactions In addition to deliberate privacy regulation strategies , socio - technical conditions indirectly control privacy in this highly open calendar environment as well . The technological infrastructure , as noted above , restricts calendar (cid:210)surfing . (cid:211) Calendar reciprocity means that one(cid:213)s immediate colleagues are more likely to share calendars in the same way . Finally , social anonymity helps control access . Although 20 , 000 people can read one(cid:213)s calendar , only a few people in the company are actually known to everyone . Employee names are needed to retrieve calendar addresses to in turn read calendars . Privacy breakdowns certainly do occur , but far less than one might expect . Additional treatment of these issues are available in [ 15 ] . Despite being (cid:210)world(cid:211) readable , Sun(cid:213)s on - line calendars are used for mostly group - wise interactions . In fact , keeping calendars world readable supports group interaction . Open calendars allows group membership boundaries to be fluid , without vigilant maintenance of access lists . GROUPWARE DESIGN & DEPLOYMENT IMPLICATIONS Designing for Individual Support Goodness of Fit with Work Practice . GCSs bring into relief individual user demands even for multiple - user support applications . With expectations for integration into fundamental aspects of work practice , groupware technologies need to pay attention to the functions that physical analogues perform . Adoption & Discretionary Appeal . Additionally , discretionary appeal is important for adoption by satisfying individual users to sustain them long enough until a critical mass of users is achieved . Once achieved , groupware benefits commence [ 7 , 11 ] . However , a potential tradeoff exists between maximizing individual support and privacy regulation in a groupware system . The more GCSs support personal work , the greater the chance that openness might be threatened . Imagine if Calendar Manager (cid:209) which supports some calendar work very well , and others not at all (cid:209) was more closely modeled after a paper organizer : would open sharedness be nearly as widespread or successful ? Building “Group”ware The seemingly small design decisions and features have largest impact on groupware functionality . Access setting defaults (cid:209) possibly accidents of design (cid:209) constrain the range of possible behaviors around a GCS . Through a combination of user passivity and institutionalization of the technology , particularly for internally developed applications , defaults settings are rarely changed . (cid:210)Heavyweight(cid:211) groupware features have lower importance , and only become useful after the central norms and practices around the groupware have been established . For example , features supporting meeting invitations that are sent from the GCS to one(cid:213)s inbox can be useful , but the nature of their use is determined only after the degree of information sharing is established . Compared to other companies with other GCSs , Sun users prefer to read the details of each others calendars to make informed invitations to meetings ; other companies with other systems more likely send hit - or - miss meeting invitations because colleagues cannot see the details of each others(cid:213) calendars . Deployment & Socio - Technical Adaptability Groupware is not one - size - fits - all ; groupware design must be adaptable . An overlooked but important design decision that can affect the fundamental model of collaboration are default settings . Companies acquiring GCSs or other groupware must consider the impact of default settings , and make decisions about their configuration upon initial deployment . Software developers have obligations as well . Mackay notes : (cid:210)A Software manufacturer should also seriously consider the impact of delivering a poorly - conceived set of default values when the first version of the software is shipped . Unlike many features that can be fixed in subsequent updates , decisions that affect individual patterns of use are likely to have long - term effects(cid:211) [ 10 ] . Furthermore , software developers must make it possible for companies to modify deployment default settings to suit conditions . A seemingly trivial requirement , many applications cannot be modified for large - scale deployment . SUMMARY Calendar Manager ( CM ) has grown to be a quiet but important part of day - to - day business operations at Sun . Not a high - profile networked application like others in the Sun environment , CM nevertheless sits in a fundamental substrate of social organization (cid:209) the (cid:210)sociotemporal order(cid:211) [ 18 ] . In addition to supporting meeting scheduling , CM supports temporal coordination more generally . Early design decisions configured access setting defaults for maximum sharing of calendar information . Over time , the benefits of an open system became clear : in an environment where employees enjoy temporal autonomy , CM fills a need to communicate one(cid:213)s whereabouts and availability . It is this need that stimulates bilateral peer pressure to adopt and use the openly - configured groupware calendar system . The role of calendar artifacts in work is integral to understanding CM(cid:213)s place in the sociotemporal order . (cid:210)Calendaring(cid:211) is a kind of non - digital technology that depends on the artifactual representation of time for its function . Personally - and socially - significant information are contained and made public in calendars . CM is conceived as a system of individuals(cid:213) distributed calendars ; to use the GCS , users must modify their existing calendaring practice to suit the electronic medium . In addition , users must modify their calendaring practice and calendars to suit a public forum (cid:209) a potential conundrum for things as idiosyncratic and personal as calendars . Behavioral and technical mechanisms are employed by individual users to delineate privacy boundaries in an environment where their calendars are open to the (cid:210)world(cid:211) of the company network . These , together with features and customs of the social environment ( like calendar reciprocity and social anonymity ) and affordances of the technological infrastructure , influence how people handle their calendars as personal artifacts in a social space . These conditions conceptually constrain the space in which their calendars are truly accessible . It is in this way that CM , with its read - accessible defaults , is viable on such a large scale . CM has an institutionalized role in the organization studied , where users depend on its function as a distributed information system in support of coordination . Subtle peer and institutional pressure to keep calendars open in support of these benefits creates an environment protective of liberal interpretations of privacy . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I thank Jonathan Grudin , John King , Mark Ackerman , Tom Moran , Ellen Isaacs , Suzanne Schaefer , Ken Anderson , and Ashley Andeen Mastrorilli for their support and contributions to this work . I thank Don Gentner , John Tang , Harry Vertelney , Mike Albers , Ellen Isaacs and Rick Levenson for their sponsorship and assistance at Sun Microsystems . Kent Sullivan and Marshall McClintock of Microsoft provided invaluable assistance with the Microsoft survey . Roy Fielding , Wayne Lutters , Peyman Oreizy and Jonathan Grudin deserve special thanks for their help with this paper . This work was in part funded by NSF grant # IRI - 9612355 and an NSF Graduate Fellowship . REFERENCES 1 . Beard , D . , Palanlappan , M . , Humm , A . , Banks , D . , Nair , A . & Shan , Y - P . ( 1990 ) . A Visual Calendar for Scheduling Group Meetings . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW(cid:213)90 Conference , 279 - 290 . 2 . Ehrlich , S . F . ( 1987a ) . Social and Psychological Factors Influencing the Design of Office Communication Systems . Proceedings of the ACM CHI + GI’87 Conferenc e , 323 - 329 . 3 . Ehrlich , S . F . ( 1987b ) . Strategies for Encouraging Successful Adoption of Office Communication Systems . ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems 5 ( 4 ) , 340 - 357 . 4 . Francik , E . , Rudman , S . E . , Cooper , D . Levine , S . ( 1991 ) . Putting Innovation to Work : Adoption Strategies for Multimedia Communication Systems . Communications of the ACM 34 ( 12 ) , 52 ( 12 pages ) . 5 . Greif , I . ( 1984 ) . The User Interface of a Personal Calendar Program . In Y . Vassiliou ( Ed . ) Human Factors and Interactive Systems : Proc . of the NYU Symposium on User Interfaces ’82 . Ablex , 207 - 222 . 6 . Grudin , J . ( 1988 ) . Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Design and Evaluation of Organizational Interfaces . Proceedings of ACM CSCW’88 Conference , 85 - 93 . 7 . Grudin , J . & Palen , L . ( 1995 ) . Why Groupware Succeeds : Discretion or Mandate ? Proc . of European CSCW ( ECSCW’95 ) , H . Marmolin , Y . Sundblad , K . Schmidt ( eds . ) , Kluwer Academic Publishers , 263 - 278 . 8 . Kelley , J . F . & Chapanis , A . ( 1982 ) . How Professional Persons Keep Their Calendars : Implications for Computerization . Journal of Occupational Psychology , 55 , 241 - 256 . 9 . Kincaid , C . , Dupont , P . & Kaye , A . ( 1985 ) . Electronic Calendars in the Office : An Assessment of User Needs and Current Technology . ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems 3 ( 1 ) , 89 - 102 . 10 . Mackay , W . E . ( 1990 ) . Users and Customizable Software : A Co - Adaptive Phenomenon . Dissertation , Sloan School of Management . Cambridge , MA , MIT . 11 . Markus , M . L . & Connolly , T . ( 1990 ) . Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW(cid:213)90 Conference , 371 - 380 . 12 . Mosier , J . N . & Tammaro , S . G . ( 1997 ) . When are Group Scheduling Tools Useful ? CSCW : The Journal of Collaborative Computing , 6 , 53 - 70 . 13 . Myers , B . ( 1998 ) . A Brief History of Human - Computer Interaction Technology . interactions 5 ( 2 ) , 44 - 54 . 14 . Orlikowski , W . ( 1992 ) . The Duality of Technology : Rethinking the Concept of Technology in Organizations . Organization Science 3 ( 3 ) , 398 - 427 . 15 . Palen , L . ( 1998 ) . Calendars on the New Frontier : Challenges of Groupware Technology . Dissertation , Info . & Computer Science , Univ . of California , Irvine . 16 . Payne , S . J . ( 1993 ) . Understanding Calendar Use . Human Computer Interaction 8 ( 2 ) , 83 - 100 . 17 . Schwartz , B . ( 1968 ) . The Social Psychology of Privacy . American Journal of Sociology 73 ( 6 ) , 741 - 752 . 18 . Zerubavel , E . ( 1981 ) . Hidden Rhythms : Schedules and Calendars in Social Life . Univ . of Chicago Press .