Neuron , Vol . 22 , 89 – 101 , January , 1999 , Copyright ª 1999 by Cell Press Prior Exposure to Neurotrophins Blocks Inhibition of Axonal Regeneration by MAG and Myelin via a cAMP - Dependent Mechanism allows extensive regrowth of neurons on myelin in vitro or after injury in vivo ( Caroni and Schwab , 1988 ; Schnell and Schwab , 1990 ) . In addition , we ( Mukhopadhyay et al . , 1994 ) and others ( McKerracher et al . , 1994 ) have shown myelin - associated glycoprotein ( MAG ) , a well Dongming Cai , Yingjing Shen , MariaElena De Bellard , Song Tang , and Marie T . Filbin * Biology Department Hunter College of the City University of New York characterized myelin component , potently inhibits axo - New York , New York 10021 nal regeneration in culture . Interestingly , MAG is a bi - functional molecule inhibiting regeneration from a wide variety of postnatal neurons ( McKerracher et al . , 1994 ; Summary Mukhopadhyay et al . , 1994 ; De Bellard et al . , 1996 ) yet promoting axonal growth from dorsal root ganglion MAG is a potent inhibitor of axonal regeneration . Here , ( DRG ) neurons up to postnatal day 4 , after which DRG inhibition by MAG , and myelin in general , is blocked regrowth is also inhibited by MAG ( Johnson et al . , 1989 ; if neurons are exposed to neurotrophins before en - Mukhopadhyay et al . , 1994 ) . Although it is demonstrably countering the inhibitor ; priming cerebellar neurons a strong inhibitor of axonal regrowth in vitro , MAG’s with BDNF or GDNF , but not NGF , or priming DRG contribution to inhibition by myelin in vivo is less clear . neurons with any of these neurotrophins blocks inhibi - Using the MAG knockout mice , one group reported not tion by MAG / myelin . Dibutyryl cAMP also overcomes only an improvement in the distance damaged axons inhibition by MAG / myelin , and cAMP is elevated by regenerated but also an improvement in the number of neurotrophins . A PKA inhibitor present during priming axons regrowing ( Li et al . , 1996 ) . Their results contrast , abrogates the block of inhibition . Finally , if neurons however , with the report by Bartsch et al . ( 1995 ) , who are exposed to MAG / myelin and neurotrophins simul - observednodifferenceinregenerationbetweenMAG (cid:50) / (cid:50) taneously , but with the G i protein inhibitor , inhibition and wild - type mice . is blocked . We suggest that priming neurons with par - In apparent contradiction to the dogma that CNS my - ticular neurotrophins elevates cAMP and activates elin is inhibitory , two recent studies report extensive PKA , which blocks subsequent inhibition of regenera - axonal growth into white matter distal to the site of a tion and that priming is required because MAG / myelin lesion ( Berry et al . , 1996 ; Bregman , 1998 ) . Bregman and activatesaG i protein , whichblocksincreasesincAMP . her colleagues showed that when embryonic tissue was This is important for encouraging axons to regrow implanted into a lesion created in rat spinal cord , there in vivo . was extensive axonal growth into the embryonic tissue but not out into the host white matter beyond the lesion . Introduction Significantly , they noted that when pumping either of two neurotrophins—brain - derived neurotrophic factor The immature mammalian CNS will readily regrow in ( BDNF ) or neurotrophic factor 3 ( NT - 3 ) —into the im - vivo after injury ( Bates and Stelzner , 1993 ; Hasan et al . , planted experimental tissue , axons not only grew into 1993 ) . In contrast , mature axons of the mammalian CNS the embryonic tissue , but they also extended long pro - will not regenerate if damaged ( see Johnson , 1993 ; cesses into the white matter beyond . Berry and cowork - Schwab and Bartholdi , 1996 ) . Although the precise ers independently ( Berry et al . , 1996 ) showed that if an mechanisms regulating this developmental switch are explant of peripheral nerve tissue was placed in the not known , it is widely accepted that both environmental retina after a lesion was created in the optic nerve , optic cues and neuronal response change with maturity and nerve axons grew extensively into the white matter , dis - contribute to the lack of regeneration ( Keirstead et al . , tal to the lesion site . It should be noted that in this 1992 ; Li and Raisman , 1993 ; Li et al . , 1995 ; see Schwab experiment , unlike previous studies of Aguayo and his and Bartholdi , 1996 ) . One of the most notable differ - colleagues ( David and Aguayo , 1981 ; Benfey and Agu - ences between the mature and the immature nervous ayo , 1982 ) , the regenerating axons never contacted the systems is the presence of myelin . Indeed , from both peripheral nerve explant . The unexpected results from in vivo ( Schnell and Schwab , 1990 ; Keirstead etal . , 1992 ; both these studies suggest that the neurotrophins used Cheng et al . , 1996 ) and in vitro ( Crutcher , 1989 ; see for the spinal cord study and some component secreted Schwab et al . , 1993 ) studies , strong evidence implicates fromthe peripheralnerveexplantsaffects howthegrow - CNS myelin as a potent inhibitor of axonal regeneration ing axon responds to myelin , even to the extent of neu - in the damaged , adult CNS . While myelin probably has tralizing its ability to inhibit axonal regrowth . many inhibitory components , very few have been identi - In addition to supporting neuronal survival and differ - fied and characterized ( see Johnson , 1993 ; Schwab et entiation ( see Barde , 1990 ; Thoenen , 1991 ; Klein , 1994 ; al . , 1993 ; Filbin , 1995 , 1996 ; Keynes and Cook , 1995 ) . It Snider , 1994 ; Lindsay , 1996 ) , neurotrophic factors can is generally accepted that the antigen ( s ) recognized by also behave as neurotropins . Axons will turn and grow the IN - 1 antibody contributes substantially to overall toward a high concentration of nerve growth factor inhibition by myelin since the presence of antibody ( NGF ) ( Letourneau , 1978 ) , and Xenopus spinal neurons in culture turn toward a gradient of BDNF ( Ming et al . , 1997a ; Song et al . , 1997 ) . Interestingly , this chemoat - * To whom correspondence should be addressed ( e - mail : filbin @ genectr . hunter . cuny . edu ) . tractant effect of BDNF can be switched to a repulsive Neuron90 one if a competitive analog of cAMP or an inhibitor of control cells . ( Older DRGs always refers to older than postnatal day 5 , selected because MAG is bifunctional protein kinase A is added to the culture ( Song et al . , 1997 ) . Furthermore , a recently identified axonal guid - and promotes neurite outgrowth from DRG neurons up to P3 – P4 , after which it inhibits regeneration [ Mukho - ance molecule , netrin - 1 , also attracts Xenopus spinal neurons ( Ming et al . , 1997b ) , and like MAG , netrin - 1 is padhyay et al . , 1994 ; De Bellard et al . , 1996 ] . ) As we reported previously ( Mukhopadhyayet al . , 1994 ) , neurite bifunctional ( Colamarino and Tessier - Lavigne , 1995 ) . As with BDNF , netrin - 1 repels axons that have been cul - outgrowth from neonatal cerebellar neurons and from older DRG neurons is inhibited by about 70 % and 50 % , tured with a cAMP competitive analog or with an inhibi - tor of protein kinase A ( Ming et al . , 1997b ) . Curiously , respectively , when grownon MAG - expessing cells com - paredtocontrolcells , regardlessofwhetherneurotroph - under these same conditions , a soluble recombinant form of MAG repels these Xenopus growth cones , but ins were present in the media . Therefore , of the neuro - trophins tested , none had an effect on MAG’s inhibition this repulsion is switched to attraction by addition of a cAMP agonist to the culture media ( Song et al . , 1998 ) . of neurite outgrowth when added at the same time as cultured neurons are exposed to MAG . These studies imply that the neuronal cytosolic cAMP levels may dictate whether a particular molecular guid - However , we noted from Bregman ( 1998 ) that spinal neurons in vivo that extended long axons into white ance cue is repulsive / inhibitory or attractive / promoting . In this study , we ask if the inhibitory effects of MAG matter distal to a lesion site had been exposed to neuro - trophins prior to encountering myelin . Therefore , we and of CNS myelin can be modulated by neurotrophins and if this modulation involves cAMP . We show that asked if this prior exposure to neurotrophins affects the ability of MAG to inhibit outgrowth . Cerebellar and older growth inhibition by MAG and myelin is indeed blocked in cerebellar neurons that are first cultured overnight DRG neurons were isolated as usual , but instead of plating them directly onto the MAG - expressing and con - ( primed ) with BDNF or with glial - derived neurotrophic factor ( GDNF ) , but not with NGF . For DRG neurons , trol cells , they were first grown overnight on poly - l - lysine in the presence or absence of one of the neurotrophins , inhibition by MAG and myelin is blocked when the neu - rons are primed with BDNF , GDNF , or NGF . The priming each at a concentration of 200 ng / ml . After overnight priming , the neurons were then replated onto the MAG - effectisbothtimedependentanddosedependent . Add - ing neurotrophins at the same time as exposure to MAG expressing or the control cells . For cerebellar neurons primed with BDNF or GDNF , but not NGF , before being or myelin has no effect on inhibition . In addition , we show that artificial elevation of cAMP levels with dibu - exposed to MAG , the inhibition by MAG was completely blocked . Figure 1 shows that priming with BDNF or tyryl cAMP also blocks inhibition by both MAG and myelin . Following from this , we show that neurotroph - GDNF resulted in the same neurite growth in the pres - ence of MAG as on the control cells ( Figures 1c – 1f ) . In ins increase neuronal cAMP levels , and if neurons are primed with neurotrophins in the presence of a protein contrast , priming with NGF or without neurotrophin has noeffectontheabilityofMAGtoinhibitaxonalregenera - kinase A ( PKA ) inhibitor , the block of MAG and myelin inhibition is completely abrogated . Finally , if neurons tion ( Figures 1a , 1b , 1g , and 1h ) : inhibition is about 70 % , as we found previously for unprimed neurons ( Mukho - are not primed but are instead exposed simultaneously to neurotrophins and MAG or myelin along with the padhyay et al . , 1994 ) . These results demonstrate that if cerebellar neurons are exposed to specific neurotroph - G protein inhibitor , pertussis toxin , inhibition is also blocked . Together , these results indicate that increased ins ( BDNF or GDNF but not NGF ) before being exposed to MAG , inhibition is completely blocked . cAMP levels and activation of PKA can block the inhibi - tory effects of MAG and myelin , but only when they are Similar experiments with older DRG neurons , which are also inhibited by MAG ( Mukhopadhyay et al . , 1994 ; elevated / activated prior to exposure to MAG or myelin . The requirement for priming indicates that binding MAG De Bellard et al . , 1996 ) , showed that priming the neurons with BDNF or GDNF completely blocked the inhibitory or myelin to neurons activates an inhibitory G protein that blocks any increase in cAMP , a conclusion sup - effects of MAG ( Figure 2 ) . However , unlike cerebellar neurons , older DRG neurons primed with NGF also re - ported by finding that MAG blocks neurotrophin - induced elevation of cAMP and pertussis toxin neutral - sisted the inhibitory effects of MAG ( Figures 2g and 2h ) . Overnight culture in the absence of growth factor had izes the block by MAG . Along with recent studies in vivo ( Berry et al . , 1996 ; Bregman , 1998 ) , our results point no effect on the ability of MAG to subsequently inhibit axonal growth , nor did priming with any of the neuro - to a model of enhanced regeneration and functional trophins have any effect on neurite outgrowth on the recovery in vivo by elevating cAMP and activation of control cells ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . Therefore , depending on PKA in neurons or growth cones very soon after injury , the type of neuron , priming with specific neurotrophins before growth cones encounter myelin inhibitors . can completely and specifically block the inhibitory ef - fects of MAG . It is important to note that exactly the Results same inhibition , or block of inhibition , was recorded whether total process outgrowth or length of the longest Priming Neurons with Neurotrophins neurite was measured . Similarly , the same inhibition by prior to Exposure to MAG MAG or its block by neurotrophin priming was seen To determine if neurotrophins can reverse the inhibitory when cerebellar or DRG neurons from adult rats ( (cid:46) P60 ) effects of MAG on neurite outgrowth , BDNF , NGF , or were used ( data not shown ) ; although , in the majority GDNF were added separately at a concentration of 200 of these experiments , neurons from P7 – P9 rats were ng / ml to either cerebellar ( usually P7 – P9 ) or older DRG used to facilitate neuronal preparation . To further establish the specificity of neurotrophin neurons grown on monolayers of MAG - expressing or Neurotrophin Priming Blocks MAG / Myelin Inhibition 91 Figure 1 . The Effect of Priming Cerebellar Neurons with Neuro - trophins on Subsequent Inhibition of Neurite Outgrowth by MAG Dissociated cerebellar neurons were first primed overnight on poly - l - lysine without neurotrophin ( a and b ) or with BDNF ( c and d ) , GDNF ( e and f ) , or NGF ( g and h ) , each at 200 ng / ml , before being trypsinizedandtransferredtoamonolayerofeitherMAG - expressing CHO cells ( b , d , f , and h ) or control CHO cells ( a , c , e , and g ) for further overnight culture before being fixed and immunostained for GAP43 . Resultsingraphshowthemeanlengthofthelongestneurite per neuron ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) sem ) for 180 – 200 individual neurons grown on either MAG - expressing CHO cells ( stippled bars ) or control cells ( solidbars ) . Resultsarestandardizedtopercentageofcontrol , taken as neurite length from neurons primed without neurotrophin , and then grown on control CHO cells . NT refers to neurons primed with either BDNF , GDNF , or NGF before being subsequently cultured on control cells . priming on blocking the inhibition by MAG , we investi - primed neurons should no longer bind MAG . In our pre - viously established assay to measure neuronal binding gated the dose dependence and time dependence of this effect . Cerebellar neurons were primed for different of MAG ( De Bellard et al . , 1996 ; Tang et al . , 1997a ) , MAG - Fc—extracellular domain of MAG fused to Fc—is times in the presence of 200 ng / ml BDNF , GDNF , or NGF and then transferred to either MAG - expressing or immobilized , and neurons , vitally labeled with a fluores - cent dye , are allowed to bind . After washing , the number control CHO cells . Figure 3 shows that for BDNF and GDNF , but not for NGF , longer priming times increase of bound neurons is assessed in a FluorImager and compared to binding to a control chimera , MUC18 - Fc , the block of outgrowth inhibition by MAG . BDNF and GDNF blocks MAG inhibition quite rapidly ; 6 hr of prim - also a 5 Ig domain – containing protein ( Kelm et al . , 1994 ) . Priming either cerebellar or DRG neurons with any of ing preventsthe majorityof inhibitionby MAG . Overnight priming blocks inhibition by MAG completely . As before , the neurotrophins has no effect on their binding to MAG - Fc , and there is only background binding to MUC18 - priming with NGF for any length of time did not affect MAG’sabilitytoinhibitneuriteoutgrowthfromcerebellar Fc ( data not shown ) . These results demonstrate that priming neurons with BDNF , GDNF , or NGF has no ef - neurons . To determine if the priming effect is dose de - pendent , cerebellar neurons were primed overnight with fect on neuronal binding to MAG and suggests that surface expression of the MAG receptor is unaffected different concentrations of either BDNF , GDNF , or NGF . As the concentration of BDNF and GDNF increases , by priming . the block of MAG inhibition also increases , essentially neutralizing inhibition by MAG at 200 ng / ml of either Priming Neurons with Neurotrophins prior to Exposure to Myelin growth factor ( Figure 4 ) . Throughout this concentration range , NGF has little effect on MAG’s inhibition of axonal MAG is a component of myelin , and CNS myelin has long been known to be inhibitory for axonal regeneration growth . Similar effects of time dependence and dose dependence of priming were shown for older DRG neu - ( see Schwab et al . , 1993 ) . We asked if the inhibitory properties of myelin itself could be blocked by priming rons primed with any one of these three growth factors ( data not shown ) . neurons with growth factors . To do this , cerebellar or olderDRGneuronswereprimedasdescribedabove , but instead of plating on CHO cells , they were transferred to Binding of MAG to Neurons Primed with Neurotrophins a substrate of purified CNS myelin and cultured over - night . Under these conditions , BDNF and GDNF , but not One possibility is that priming neurons with neurotroph - ins downregulates the putative MAG receptor . If so , then NGF , extended neurites that were about twice as long Neuron92 Figure 2 . The Effect of Priming Older DRG Neurons with Neuro - trophins on Subsequent Inhibition of Neurite Outgrowth by MAG Dissociated older DRGneurons were first primedovernight on poly - l - lysine without neurotrophin ( a and b ) or with BDNF ( c and d ) , GDNF ( e and f ) , or NGF ( g and h ) , each at 200 ng / ml , before being trypsinizedandtransferredtoamonolayerofeitherMAG - expressing CHO cells ( b , d , f , and h ) or control CHO cells ( a , c , e , and g ) for further overnight culture before being fixed and immunostained for GAP43 . Resultsingraphshowthemeanlengthofthelongestneurite per neuron ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) sem ) for 180 – 200 individual neurons grown on either MAG - expressing CHO cells ( stippled bars ) or control cells ( solidbars ) . Resultsarestandardizedtopercentageofcontrol , taken as neurite length from neurons primed without neurotrophin , and then grown on control CHO cells . NT refers to neurons primed with any one of the neurotrophins used , before being subsequently cul - tured on control cells . as for control neurons primed without growth factor db cAMP ( data not shown ) . Importantly , when 1 mM db cAMP is added to either cerebellar ( Figure 6b ) or DRG or not primed at all ( Figure 5a ) . Similarly , if older DRG neurons were primed with BDNF or GDNF and also with neurons ( data not shown ) growing on purified myelin , neurites were about twice as long as those grown in the NGF , they extended neurites on CNS myelin that were also about twice as long as controls ( Figure 5b ) . These absence of db cAMP . Since artificially elevating the cAMP levels in neurons results suggest that the inhibitory effects of myelin , like those of MAG , can be reversed by exposing neurons with db cAMP or priming neurons with specific neuro - trophins can each block the inhibitory effects of MAG to specific neurotrophins prior to when they encounter inhibitors in myelin . and myelin , we asked if particular neurotrophins in - crease the intracellular levels of neuronal cAMP . Mea - sured by competitive immunoassay , the cAMP levels in Involvement of cAMP in Inhibition by MAG and Myelin cerebellar and older DRG neurons , after priming for 24 hr with BDNF , GDNF , or NGF , initially showed no consis - Sincebinding ofMAG toneurons isunaffected byneuro - trophinpriming , theblockofinhibitionisunlikelytoresult tent increase . However , a consistent increase in cAMP was observed after neuronal priming for 30 min . Figure from downregulation of the putative MAG receptor . In - stead , the difference between the neurotrophin - primed 7 shows that exposure of cerebellar neurons to either BDNF or GDNF results in a 2 - fold increase in cAMP and unprimed neurons probably occurs as a signal transduction step downstream from receptor – ligand in - levels . Under the same conditions , NGF had no effect ( Figure 7a ) . In contrast , exposure of older DRG neurons teraction . To investigate this idea , we tested a battery of reagents known to block or activate various compo - to BDNF , GDNF , or NGF each resulted in a 2 - fold in - crease inneuronal cAMP ( Figure 7b ) . The 2 - foldincrease nents of signaling mechanisms . Of all the reagents tested ( data not shown ) , only dibutyryl cAMP ( db cAMP ) , is relative to basal levels of cAMP , which range from 20 – 50 fmol / 10 5 cerebellar neurons and 150 – 280 fmol / an analog of cAMP readily taken up by cells , reversed inhibition completely when added to cerebellar neurons 10 4 DRG neurons . Within any one experiment , the in - creaseincAMPwasalwaysnear2 - fold , except , asnoted growing onMAG - expressing cellswithout affectingneu - rite outgrowth on the control cells ( Figure 6a ) . Further - above , for cerebellar neurons treated with NGF . There - fore , depending on the neuron and the particular neuro - more , the effect of db cAMP was dose dependent ( data not shown ) . Inhibition by MAG of neurite outgrowth from trophin , exposure to neurotrophins can elevate the en - dogenous neuronal levels of cAMP . This suggests that older DRG neurons is also completely blocked by 1 mM Neurotrophin Priming Blocks MAG / Myelin Inhibition 93 Figure 3 . The Effect of Priming Neurons for Different Times with Figure 4 . The Effect of Priming Neurons with Different Concentra - Neurotrophins on Subsequent Inhibition of Neurite Outgrowth by tions of Neurotrophins on Subsequent Inhibition of Neurite Out - MAG growth by MAG Cerebellarneurons wereprimedfor differenttimeswith BDNF ( open Cerebellar neurons were primed overnight with various concentra - squares ) , GDNF ( closed circles ) , or NGF ( dotted line ) , each at 200 tions ( 25 – 300ng / ml ) ofBDNF ( opensquares ) , GDNF ( closedcircles ) , ng / ml , before transfer to either MAG - expressing or control CHO or NGF ( dotted line ) before transfer to either MAG - expressing or cellsandculturedforafurther18hr . Theneuronswerethenfixedand control CHO cells and cultured for a further 18 hr . The neurons were immunostained for GAP43 , and the longest neurite from 180 – 200 then fixed and immunostained for GAP43 , and the longest neurite neuronswasmeasured . Resultsareexpressedaspercentageinhibi - from 180 – 200 neurons was measured . Results are expressed as tion ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) sem ) , where 100 % inhibition is taken as the neurite out - percentage inhibition ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) sem ) , where 100 % inhibition is taken as growth of neurons primed without neurotrophin and subsequently the neurite outgrowth of neurons primed without neurotrophin and grown on MAG - expressing CHO cells . subsequently grown on MAG - expressing CHO cells . priming with neurotrophins may block inhibition by MAG neurotrophin ( Figure 9 ) . Similar results were obtained if and myelin in part by elevating endogenous cAMP lev - the cAMP antagonist , Rp cAMP , was used at 100 nM els . However , althoughwe measure an increasein cAMP ( data not shown ) . These results indicate that before ex - after 30 min , 6 hr of priming are required to block signifi - posure to the inhibitor , elevation of cAMP , leading to cantly inhibition of neurite outgrowth . This suggests that activation of PKA , can overcome inhibition by MAG and downstream events required for block of inhibition , sub - myelin . sequent to elevation of cAMP , require longer to become activated . This appears to be the case because if cere - Involvement of G i in Inhibition by MAG and Myelin bellar neurons are primed for 1 hr with BDNF or GDNF , Pertussis toxin binds to and inactivates the heterotri - inhibition is only partially blocked ( Figure 3 ) . On the meric GTP - binding proteins , G i and G o ( see Post and other hand , if cerebellar neurons are primed for 1 hr with Brown , 1996 ) . To assess if either G protein must be BDNF or GDNF and the neurotrophin is then removed activated for inhibition by MAG , we first cultured the but the neurons are not exposed to MAG for a further neurons for 1 – 2 hr in the presence of toxin before 5 hr , inhibition is almost completely blocked ( data not exposing them to MAG . This procedure had no effect shown ) . on the inhibition of neurite outgrowth by MAG ( data not shown ) . However , if cerebeller neurons were cultured first with pertussis toxin and then exposed simultane - Priming Neurons with Neurotrophins in the Presence of a Protein Kinase A Inhibitor ously to neurotrophins and MAG or myelin ( i . e . , without priming ) , BDNF and GDNF blocked the inhibitory effects Elevation of cytosolic cAMP activates protein kinase A ( PKA ) . To determine if activation of PKA is necessary of MAG and myelin ( Figure 10 ) while BDNF , GDNF , or NGF blocked inhibition of older DRG neurons by MAG for the block of MAG and myelin’s inhibition by priming with particular neurotrophins , the PKA inhibitor KT5720 and myelin ( data not shown ) . Pertussis toxin , therefore , eliminates the need to prime with neurotrophins to block ( 200 nM ) was included during neurotrophin priming . Fig - ure 8 shows that addition of KT5720 during priming with inhibition by MAG and myelin . This suggests that prim - ing neurons is required because MAG / myelin activates either BDNF or GDNF for cerebellar neurons and BDNF , GDNF , or NGF for DRG neurons completely abrogates a pertussis toxin – sensitive G protein that prevents neu - rotrophin - induced elevation of cAMP . This idea is sup - the block of MAG’s inhibition of axonal growth ; in the presence of KT5720 , MAG again inhibits regeneration ported by the fact that soluble MAG - Fc , which effec - tively inhibits axonal regeneration ( Tang et al . , 1997b ) , from those neurons primed with growth factors . Impor - tantly , the presence of KT5720 during priming of either can prevent the neurotrophin - induced increase in cAMP , and pertussis toxin neutralizes the MAG - Fc block of cerebellar or DRG neurons also prevents the neuro - trophin block of inhibition by myelin ; myelin is as effec - increasing cAMP , allowing cAMP to increase ( Figure 7 ) . Figure 7 shows effects of MAG - Fc and pertussis toxin tive an inhibitor of neurons that were primed in the pres - ence of KT5720 as neurons that were never exposed to onGDNF - inducedcAMPincreasesincerebellarneurons Neuron94 Figure 5 . TheEffectofPrimingNeuronswithNeurotrophinsonSub - sequent Inhibition by Myelin Dissociated cerebellar neurons ( a ) or older DRG neurons ( b ) were first primed overnight on poly - l - lysine with no neurotrophin or with Figure 6 . The Effect of Dibutyryl cAMP on Inhibition by MAG and BDNF , GDNF , or NGF ( each at 200 ng / ml as indicated ) before being Myelin of Neurite Outgrowth from Cerebellar Neurons transferred to a substrate of isolated myelin ( 1 (cid:109) g / ml ) for further Cerebellar neurons were plated onto monolayers of either ( a ) MAG - overnight culture before being fixed and immunostained for GAP43 . expressing CHO cells ( solid bars ) or control cells ( stippled bars ) or Results show the mean length of the longest neurite per neuron ( b ) immobilized myelin membranes and cultured overnight in the ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) sem ) for 180 – 200 individual unprimed neurons ( solid bar ) or presence or absence of dibutyryl cAMP at a concentration of 1 mM . neurons primed ( stippled bar ) without neurotrophin or with the vari - The cultures were then fixed and immunostained for GAP43 , and ous neurotrophins as indicated . Results are percent of control , with the neurites were measured . Results show the mean length of the 100 % control taken as growth of neurons primed in the absence of longest neuron ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) sem ) for 180 – 200 neurons . neurotrophin before subsequent culture on myelin . are first exposed to particular neurotrophins before en - and NGF - induced increases in DRG neurons . Identical countering MAG or myelin , their axonal growth is no effects were observed for BDNF - induced elevation in longer inhibited . Furthermore , since priming with neuro - cerebellar and for BDNF - and GDNF - induced cAMP ele - trophins is so effective in blocking inhibition by myelin , vation in DRG neurons ( data not shown ) . both in culture and in vivo , it strongly implies that either ( 1 ) the action of all the major myelin - specific inhibitors is blocked by priming with neurotrophins or ( 2 ) that MAG Discussion is , itself , the major contributor to the overall inhibition by myelin . For the neurotrophins studied here , the effect For a number of years , the dogma has been that dam - aged axons of the mammalian CNS will not regrow into of priming is clearly mediated through activation of a cAMP - dependent pathway . If priming with neurotrophin areas of white matter , which is essentially myelin ( see Johnson , 1993 ; Schwab and Bartholdi , 1996 ) . Recent is carried out in the presence of an inhibitor of PKA , priming has no effect—myelin and MAG still inhibit axo - studies by two groups of workers appear to contradict this long - held view by showing extensive axonal re - nal regeneration . In contrast to the effect of priming , simultaneous addition of neurotrophin and exposure to growth into white matter , distal to a site of injury , without any obviousinhibition by myelin ( Berry et al . , 1996 ; Breg - MAG or myelin has no effect on inhibition . This distinc - tion deserves emphasis : in orderto grow in the presence man , 1998 ) . We now offer an explanation for these sur - prising results by providing evidence that when neurons of myelin’s inhibitory components , neuronal cAMP must Neurotrophin Priming Blocks MAG / Myelin Inhibition 95 Figure 7 . Measurement of cAMP in Neurons after Exposure to Neu - rotrophins Dissociated cerebellar ( 2 (cid:51) 10 5 ) or DRG ( 5 (cid:51) 10 4 ) neurons were Figure 8 . The Effect of Priming Neurons with Neurotrophins in the placed in individual wells of a 96 - well dish . The neurons were cul - Presence of an Inhibitor of Protein Kinase A on Subsequent Inhibi - tured for at least 6 hr after which time BDNF , GDNF , or NGF , each tion of Neurite Outgrowth by MAG at 200 ng / ml , was added as indicated and incubated for a further Dissociated cerebellar neurons ( a ) , or older DRG neurons ( b ) , were 30 min . Where indicated , neurotrophin was added with MAG - Fc first primed overnight on poly - l - lysine with no neurotrophin or in the ( (cid:49) MAG ) at a concentration of 20 (cid:109) g / ml or neurons were incubated presence of BDNF , GDNF , or NGF each at 200 ng / ml , with and with 2 ng / ml pertussis toxin ( (cid:49) PTX ) prior to addition of neurotrophin without the PKA inhibitor KT5720 at 200 nM as indicated , before andMAG - Fc . Followingincubation , thecAMPlevelsweremeasured being transferred to a monolayer of either MAG - expressing CHO and compared to a standard . The results are the mean of between cells ( stippled bars ) or control CHO cells ( solid bars ) for further four and seven experiments , each done in quadruplicate . Results overnight culture before being fixed and immunostained for GAP43 . represent the fold - increase relative to neurons incubated for the Neurite length was measured . Results show the mean length of the same length of time but without the addition of neurotrophin . longest neurite per neuron ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) sem ) for 180 – 200 individual neu - rons . Results are standardized to percentage of control . Control was taken as neurite length from neurons primed without neuro - be elevated and PKA activated before the neuron or trophin and subsequently grown on control CHO cells . NT refers to neurons primed with either BDNF , GDNF , or NGF before being axon encounters the inhibitor . We interpret the require - subsequently cultured on control CHO cells . mentforprimingtoindicatethatMAGormyelinactivatesaninhibitory , pertussis toxin – sensitive , heterotrimeric G protein—most likely G i —which in turn prevents any elevation of cAMP that would otherwise be stimulated state is now exposed to MAG / myelin , the activated PKA or some downstream protein blocks or neutralizes the by neurotrophin binding . Based on these observations , we propose the model inhibitorysignalingstepslaunchedbyMAG / myelinbind - ing . It is important to note that PKA can inactivate the inFigure11toexplainhowprimingwithparticularneuro - trophins overcomes the inhibitory effects of MAG / my - G protein RhoA by phosphorylation ( Lang et al . , 1996 ) , and activated RhoA has been implicated in growth cone elin . In our model , neurotrophin binding results in a rise in intracellular cAMP in the absence of MAG / myelin . In collapse and neurite retraction ( Katoh et al . , 1996 ; Tigyi et al . , 1996 ) , a possible step in the inhibition of axonal turn , elevated cAMP activates PKA and other , as yet unidentified downstream proteins . If the neuron in this growth . On the other hand , if the neuron is exposed Neuron96 Figure 9 . The Effect of Priming Neurons with Neurotrophins in the Presence of an Inhibitor of Protein Kinase A on Subsequent Inhibi - Figure 10 . TheEffectofNeurotrophins , withoutPriming , inthePres - tion of Neurite Outgrowth by Myelin ence of Pertussis Toxin on Inhibition of Neurite Outgrowth by MAG Dissociatedcerebellar ( a ) orolderDRGneurons ( b ) werefirstprimed and Myelin overnight on poly - l - lysine with no neurotrophin or in the presence Cerebellar neurons were cultured for 1 – 2 hr in the presence of 2 of BDNF , GDNF , or NGF each at a concentration of 200 ng / ml , with ng / ml pertussis toxin ( PTX ) before being cultured overnight on ( a ) ( stippled bars ) and without ( solid bars ) the PKA inhibitor KT5720 at a monolayer of either MAG - expressing ( stippled bars ) or control 200 nM , as indicated , before being transferred to a substrate of CHO cells ( solid bars ) or ( b ) on a substrate of immobilized myelin immobilized myelin for further overnight culture before being fixed and BDNF , GDNF , or NGF each at 200 ng / ml , as indicated , before and immunostained for GAP43 . Neurite length was measured . Re - being fixed and immunostained for GAP43 . Results show the mean sults show the mean length of the longest neurite per neuron ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) length of the longest neurite per neuron ( (cid:49) / (cid:50) sem ) for 180 – 200 sem ) for 180 – 200 individual neurons . Results are standardized to individual neurons . Results are standardized to percentage of percentage of control . Control was taken as neurite length from control . Control was taken as neurite length from neurons grown neurons primed without neurotrophin and subsequently grown on on control CHO cells ( a ) or on myelin in the absence of pertussis myelin . toxin ( b ) . These are important results for several reasons . First , to MAG / myelin and the neurotrophin simultaneously , endogenous cAMP levels are kept low by MAG / myelin - they suggest a general strategy to overcome myelin - specific inhibitors of regeneration in vivo : the elevation activated G i , and inhibition by MAG / myelin persists . Ac - tivation of G i by MAG / myelin , however , is not directly of neuronal cAMP levels and activation of PKA before the axon is challenged to regrow into white matter . responsible for inhibition of axonal regeneration be - cause pertussis toxin alone , in the absence of growth Second , they provide direct evidence of specific signal transduction pathways involved in inhibition by MAG factor , has no effect on inhibition by MAG / myelin ( Figure 10 ) . One prediction from this model is that interfering and myelin . Third , they describe a novel function for neurotrophinsinmodulatinganaxon’sresponsetoguid - with these signaling steps should interrupt the MAG / myelin inhibitory events and permit axonal regeneration ance molecules . Finally , MAG , and perhaps all myelin - specific inhibitors , can now be added to the growing through white matter in vivo . Neurotrophin Priming Blocks MAG / Myelin Inhibition 97 same lines , direct competition by MAG for diverse neu - rotrophinreceptors ( Trkfamilymembersand GDNFfam - ily receptors ) is not expected . Instead , as we show here , the neurotrophins BDNF , NGF , and GDNF activate PKA via elevation of cAMP , and we suggest that this is the mechanism by which MAG / myelin inhibition is neutral - ized . Both BDNF and NGF have been previously shown to increase cAMP levels in the PC12 neuronal line and intact isolated nerve endings from rat brain ( Knipper et al . , 1993a , 1993b ) . In those systems , the increase occurredwithinsecondsandwasbelievedtobevianon - Trk receptors . Importantly , no functional consequence was attributed to the increase . We do not yet know what receptors mediate the effect we report here . These results enlarge the view that levels of cAMP in neurons , with the subsequent activation of PKA , affect guidance responses by neurons ( Ming et al . , 1997a , 1997b ; Song et al . , 1997 , 1998 ; Wang and Zheng , 1998 ) . Xenopus spinal axons have been shown to grow toward a source of either BDNF ( Song et al . , 1997 ) or netrin - 1 ( Ming et al . , 1997b ) , the axonal guidance molecule se - Figure 11 . ModeltoExplainHowPrimingwithNeurotrophinsBlocks creted from the floor plate ( Kennedy et al . , 1994 ) . In the Inhibition by MAG or Myelin presence of a PKA inhibitor , however , these axons grow During priming , neurotrophins ( NT ) interact with a surface neuronal away from the source of BDNF or netrin - 1 . Blocking receptor inducing an increase in neuronal cAMP , which in turn acti - PKA activation does not merely neutralize the chemoat - vatesKT5720 - sensitiveproteinkinaseA ( PKA * ) . ActivationofPKAor tractant response to BDNF or netrin - 1 ; it changes to a someasyetunidentifieddownstreamsignalthenblockssubsequent repellent response ( Ming et al . , 1997b ; Song et al . , 1997 ) . inhibition by MAG or myelin , perhaps by inactivating the small G In contrast , Xenopus spinal axons were repelledby solu - protein , Rho . If , however , neurotrophin is added to the neuron at the same time as exposure to MAG or myelin , cAMP is prevented ble , recombinant MAG ( Song et al . , 1998 ) . Consistent fromincreasingbyMAG / myelinactivationofapertussistoxin ( PTX ) – with our observations here , repulsion of Xenopus axons sensitive G protein ( G i * ) and so inhibition of axonal regeneration is by MAG was switched to attraction if a cAMP agonist not blocked . G protein activation by MAG or myelin has no direct wasaddedtotheculturemedia ( Songetal . , 1998 ) . Under effect on inhibition of axonal regeneration by MAG or myelin . defined conditions , then , BDNF , netrin - 1 , and MAG are all bifunctional . For MAG , we have shown that it pro - number of molecules whose effect as either inhibitors / motes axonal growth from neonatal DRG neurons up to repellents or promoters / attractants of axonal growth postnatal day 4 , after which it inhibits growth ( Mukho - canbedeterminedbytheendogenouslevelsofneuronal padhyay et al . , 1994 ; De Bellard et al . , 1996 ) . Netrin - 1 cAMP . This underscores the suggestion by Poo and his acts as a chemoattractant for axons that typically grow coworkers ( Song et al . , 1997 , 1998 ) that the response toward the floorplate and as a chemorepellent for those of an axon to a particular guidance molecule may readily axonsthattypicallygrow away ( ColamarinoandTessier - switch between inhibition / repulsion and promotion / Lavigne , 1995 ) . In freshly isolated Xenopus spinal neu - attractionbychangesin theneuron’sendogenouslevels rons , BDNF was recently shown to induce growth cone of cAMP . It should be noted , however , that cAMP - collapse ( Wang and Zheng , 1998 ) , but when the neurons dependent signals are not the only mechanism whereby are first cultured for longer periods , exposure to BDNF inhibition by myelin / MAG can be blocked . We found that leads to growth toward the BDNF source ( Song et al . , priming either cerebellar or older DRG neurons with the 1997 ) . The bifunctional behavior of MAG and BDNF cor - neurotrophin NT - 3 also blocked subsequent inhibition relates with the changes in endogenous cAMP levels . by MAG / myelin , but its block of inhibition was unaf - In DRG neurons from newborns , promotion by MAG can fected by inhibiting PKA ( data not shown ) . It is possible also be prevented by blocking PKA activation ( D . Cai et the step directly responsible for blocking inhibition by al . , submitted ) while , as we now report , inhibition can neurotrophins is downstream from cAMP - dependent be blocked by elevating cAMP . Similarly , when Xenopus activation of PKA and that NT - 3 activates the same spinal neurons are first isolated and cultured ( within 6 downstream event via a cAMP - indepedent pathway . In - hr ) , BDNF induces growth cone collapse , which can deed , NT - 3 , by itself , has been shown to exert neuro - be overcome by artificially elevating endogenous cAMP tropic effects on axons via a cGMP - rather than cAMP - levels ( Wang and Zheng , 1998 ) . After longer periods dependent pathway ( Song et al . , 1998 ; see discussion in culture , when these neurons grow toward BDNF , below ) . blocking PKA activation blocks chemoattraction ( Song The neurotrophin effect cannot be due to a simple et al . , 1997 ) . In these studies , it is assumed that for competitive inhibition through neurotrophin binding at Xenopus spinal neurons , the endogenous cAMP levels the MAG / myelin receptor since inhibition of PKA activa - are initially low and rise either spontaneously when cul - tion during priming permits subsequent inhibition by tured or as a consequence of the culture media , and so MAG / myelin , which is possible only if the MAG / myelin PKA is activated . It appears that elevated cAMP levels and activation of PKA are key components of a general receptor is not occupied by neurotrophin . Along the Neuron98 mechanism to override the inhibition of axonal growth role in the case of DRG axonal growth . The implication is that axonal sprouting is under MAG / myelin control , caused by a variety of molecules : MAG , BDNF , and netrin - 1 . Incontrast , attractionof Xenopus growthcones as we ( Shen et al . , 1998 ) and others ( Schwegler et al . , 1995 ) havesuggestedforthephysiologicalroleforMAG / to NT - 3 and repulsion by the guidance molecule sema - phorin have been shown to be brought about by a myelin inhibition . Finally , our demonstration that priming neurons with cGMP - dependent mechanism ( Song et al . , 1998 ) . Curi - ously , NT - 3 can overcome inhibition by MAG / myelin in neurotrophins can overcome inhibition by MAG / myelin can explain the extensive growth of axons into white a cAMP - independent manner ( data not shown ) . For inhi - bition to occur , cAMP levels may have to be low and matter in vivo recently reported by others ( Berry et al . , 1996 ; Bregman , 1998 ) . In Bregman’s experiments , the PKA may have to be inactive . On the other hand , while elevating cAMPblocks inhibition ofaxonal regeneration , neurons are exposed to either BDNF or NT - 3 prior to encountering myelin . As we show , priming with either other mechanisms , bypassing the cAMP step , may also block inhibition . of these neurotrophins blocks inhibition by MAG / myelin , although one neurotrophic effect appears to be through One key difference between growth inhibition by MAG / myelin and inhibition by BDNF or netrin - 1 may a cAMP - dependent pathway , while the other is through a cAMP - independent pathway . In experiments of Berry be that MAG / myelin prevents endogenous cAMP from rising in addition to inhibiting axonal regeneration . From and his coworkers ( Berry et al . , 1996 ) , the retinal gan - glion cell body is exposed to a number of neurotrophins our studies here , we know that BDNF certainly does not ( NGF , PDGF , CNTF , and GDNF ) secreted by Schwann prevent cAMP accumulation ; in fact , we use BDNF to cells in the peripheral nerve explant . The authors sug - induce a cAMP increase . Although we find that pertussis gest that retinal ganglion cells downregulate receptor ( s ) toxin has no direct effect on inhibition of axonal regener - for myelin inhibitors after exposure to these neurotroph - ation by MAG / myelin , others have found that pertussis ins . Instead , our studies here suggest that these neuro - toxin can partially block growth cone collapse by myelin trophins elevate cAMP levels in the ganglion neurons , ( Igarashi et al . , 1993 ) . The more dynamic , transient phe - thereby blocking the intracellular inhibitory effects of nomenon of growth cone collapse could well be more MAG and myelin . Recently , Davies et al . ( 1997 ) reported sensitiveto Gproteinactivation thanthe long - termregu - that adult DRG neurons implanted into the adult CNS lation of net axon growth . We did not examine the dy - extended long axons through white matter . In their stud - namics of the growth cone in these studies . ies , some of the neurons underwent an equivalent to Our present results allow us to expand the repertoire priming by being cultured overnight with NGF before of neurotrophins beyond their well studied effects on implantation . In addition , because they took great care neuronal survival and differentiation ( see Barde , 1990 ; to minimize glial scarring , which undoubtedly encour - Thoenen , 1991 ; Klein , 1994 ; Snider , 1994 ; Lindsay , 1996 ) . ages growth , there was also little or no damage to my - We can also now characterize them as modulators of elin . The implanted DRG axons would then encounter axonal response to guidance cues . BDNF , NGF , and intact myelin and grow over the outer surface , which has NT - 3 havealready beenshown to modulategrowth cone no MAG but does have a growth - promoting molecule collapse by a recently identified guidance molecule , col - termed MOG ( Turnley and Bartlett , 1998 ) . Others have lapsin - 1 ( Tuttle and O’Leary , 1998 ) . That study , however , implanted transfected fibroblasts secreting NT3 or BDNF reported only the effects of these neurotrophins on col - into lesion sites in the spinal cord ( Schnell et al . , 1994 ; lapsin - induced growth cone collapse relative to each Grill et al . , 1997 ; McTigue et al . , 1998 ) . However , in those other , not whether they could directly block the effects experiments either limited or no regeneration into white of collapsin - 1 . The ability of neurotrophins to modulate matter was observed , perhaps because the neuron / axonal response to guidance cues may be widespread , axons were not primed before encountering myelin . The a conclusion supported by ( 1 ) the fact that members of studies of Bregman ( 1998 ) and Berry et al . ( 1996 ) in vivo , two different neurotrophin families , the Trks and the together with our study here , demonstrate two major GDNF - like neurotrophins , can each block MAG / myelin points : ( 1 ) neurotrophins exposed to either the growth inhibition and ( 2 ) the observation that the axonal re - cone ( Bregman’s studies ) or to the neuronal cell body sponse to a number of guidance molecules can be ( Berry’s studies and this report ) can affect the response switched by altering cAMP levels . Obviously , the re - to myelin inhibitors , and ( 2 ) more importantly , they point sponse of a particular neuron to neurotrophins is quite to a feasible approach to encouraging axonal regenera - complex , especially given the likelihood that any one tion after injury in vivo . Bregman and Berry show that neuron will be exposed to many neurotrophins and guid - it will work in vivo . We now show how it works . The next ance cues at any one time . It remains to be seen whether steps are to determine the optimal neurotrophin profile neurotrophins elevate neuronal cAMP to modulate axo - for different neurons to regenerate under different cir - nal growth during development . We have shown that cumstances—quitelikelytobedifferentfromtheoptimal the response of DRG neurons to MAG switches dur - neurotrophin profile for survival—and to develop a prac - ing postnatal development and that cAMP - dependent tical means of administering them after injury to gener - mechanisms can regulate both the promoting and inhib - ate effective regeneration . iting response ( D . Cai et al . , submitted ) . It is possible that the decreased supply of neurotrophins , accompa - Experimental Procedures nied by the decreased responsiveness of neurons to neurotrophins , during development ( see Jelsma and Preparation of Myelin Aguayo , 1994 ) leads to a decline in the neuronal levels of Myelin was purified as described previously ( Norton and Poduslo , 1973 ) from rat CNS white matter . After the final hypotonic shock , cAMP , permitting MAG / myelin to switch to an inhibitory Neurotrophin Priming Blocks MAG / Myelin Inhibition 99 the membranes were centrifuged and resuspended in 10 mM adsorbed at 30 (cid:109) g / ml for 3 hr at 37 (cid:56) C to wells of microtitre plates coated for 2 hr at 37 (cid:56) C with anti - human IgG at 15 (cid:109) g / ml in 0 . 1 M HEPES . The protein concentration of the preparation was deter - mined ( Biorad ) and used immediately as a substrate in the neurite bicarbonatebuffer ( pH9 . 6 ) . Priortothebindingassay , neuronswere vitallylabeledwithafluorescentdye , calceinAM ( MolecularProbes ) , outgrowth assay . by incubating 2 (cid:51) 10 6 neurons in 5 ml of 10 (cid:109) M calcein AM in PBS for 15 min at 37 (cid:56) C before being washed and resuspended in PBS . Isolation of Neurons The cerebella from two animals was combined in 5 ml of 0 . 025 % A suspension ( 100 (cid:109) l ) of vitally labeled neurons , containing 1 – 2 (cid:51) 10 5 cells , was added to each well and allowed to incubate for 1 hr trypsin , triturated , and incubated for 10 min at 37 (cid:56) C . DMEM ( 5 ml ) containing 10 % FCS was added , and cells were centrifuged at 800 at room temperature . The plates were washed three times with PBS applied to each well under gravity , and the fluorescence was rpm for 6 min . The cells were resuspended to a single - cell suspen - sion in 2 ml of Sato ( Progesterone , 20 nM ; selenium , 30 nM ; putres - measured in a FluorImager ( Molecular Dynamics ) . cine , 100 (cid:109) M ; insulin , 5 (cid:109) g / ml ; BSA , 4 mg / ml ; L - thyroxine , 0 . 1 (cid:109) g / ml ; tri - iodo - thyronine , 0 . 08 (cid:109) g / ml ) ( Doherty et al . , 1990 ) . For older cAMP Assay DRG neurons , ganglia were removed from two animals and incu - For each assay , 2 (cid:51) 10 5 cerebellar or 2 (cid:51) 10 4 DRG neurons were bated in 5 ml of Sato media containing 0 . 025 % trypsin and 0 . 15 % plated per well of a 96 - well dish . The neurons were incubated for collagenase type I ( Worthington ) for 30 min at 37 (cid:56) C . The ganglia at least 6 hr in Sato . Then either BDNF , GDNF , or NGF was added were triturated and trypsinization was stopped by adding 5 ml of at 200 ng / ml , with and without MAG - Fc at 20 (cid:109) g / ml as indicated , DMEM containing 10 % FCS , centrifuged at 800 rpm for 6 min , and and incubated for a further 30 min . Where indicated , neurons were resuspended in Sato ( De Bellard et al . , 1996 ) . incubated with pertussis toxin at 2 ng / ml for 1 – 2 hr prior to the addition of neurotrophin or neurotrophin and MAG - Fc . Cyclic AMP Priming Neurons with Neurotrophins was measured in neurons using a competitive immunoassay , ac - Tissue culture dishes ( 6 cm ) were coated 16 . 6 (cid:109) g / ml with poly - l - cording to the manufacturer’s instruction ( Amersham ) . lysine ( Sigma ) for 30 min at room temperature . Excess poly - l - lysine was washed off with H 2 O , and the plates were washed one more Acknowledgments time . Isolated neurons in Sato were plated onto the poly - l - lysine - coated dishes at 1 (cid:51) 10 6 cells / dish . Where indicated , either BDNF , We thank Dr . Roger Persell for critically reading this manuscript and GDNF , or NGF ( all from Sigma ) was added at a concentration be - Dr . Lloyd Williams for his assistance with the image analysis . This tween 25 and 200 ng / ml in the presence or absence of a protein work was supported by a grant from the National Multiple Sclerosis kinase A inhibitor , KT5720 ( Calbiochem ) , at 200 nM . After culture Society , the National Institutes of Health ( NS 37060 ) , and a core for various times from 1 to 24 hr , the media was removed , neurons facility grant from the Research Centers for Minorities Institute - NIH . were washed with PBS , and removed with 0 . 1 % trypsin with 5 mM M . T . F . is the Marie L . Hesselbach Professor of Biological Sciences EDTA . Trypsinization was stopped by adding 5 ml of DMEM con - and is a recipient of an Established Investigator Award from the taining 10 % FCS ; neurons were centrifuged at 800 rpm for 6 min , American Heart Association , New York chapter . resuspended in Sato , and plated immediately onto either MAG - expressing CHO cells , control CHO cells , or purified , immobilized Received October 23 , 1998 ; revised December 3 , 1998 . myelin . References Neurite Outgrowth on Immobilized Myelin or Transfected Cells For myelin membranes , wells of an eight - chamber tissue culture Barde , Y . A . ( 1990 ) . The nerve growth factor family . Prog . Growth slide ( Lab - Tek ) were coated with 16 . 6 (cid:109) g / ml poly - L - lysine at room Factor Res . 2 , 237 – 248 . temperature for 1 hr and washed with 0 . 1 M NaHCO 3 . Rat CNS Bartsch , L . , Bandtlow , C . E . , Schnell , L . , Bartsch , S . , Spillmann , A . A . , myelin at 0 . 5 – 1 (cid:109) g total protein / well was dried overnight onto the Rubin , B . P . , Hillenbrand , R . , Montag , D . , Schwab , M . E . , and coatedwellsandusedasasubstrate ( Shenetal . , 1998 ) . Monolayers Schachner , M . ( 1995 ) . Lack of evidence that the myelin - associated ofcontrolandMAG - expressingCHOcellsweregrowntoconfluency glycoprotein is a major inhibitor of axonal regeneration in the CNS . in individual chambers of an eight - well tissue culture slide ( Lab - Neuron 15 , 1375 – 1381 . Tek ) . The neurite outgrowth assay was carried out as described previously ( Mukhopadhyay et al . , 1994 ; De Bellard et al . , 1996 ; Tang Bates , C . A . , and Stelzner , D . J . ( 1993 ) . Extension and regeneration et al . , 1997b ) by adding 2 (cid:51) 10 4 cerebellar or DRG neurons , either of corticospinal axons after early spinal cord injury and the mainte - primed or not , to the immobilized myelin substrate or to the CHO nance of corticospinal topography . Exp . Neurol . 123 , 106 – 117 . cell monolayers . Where indicated , db cAMP at 1 mM , BDNF , GDNF , Benfey , M . , and Aguayo , A . J . ( 1982 ) . Extensive elongation of axons or NGF , each at 200 ng / ml , was added or neurons were incubated from rat brain into peripheral nerve grafts . Nature 296 , 150 – 152 . with pertussis toxin at 2 ng / ml for 1 – 2 hr prior to the addition of Berry , M . , Carlile , J . , andHunter , A . ( 1996 ) . Peripheralnerveexplants neurotrophin . After 16 – 18 hr of culture , the neurons were fixed for grafted into the vitreous body of the eye promote the regeneration 30 min with 4 % paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with ice - cold of retinal ganglion cell axons severed in the optic nerve . J . Neurocy - methanol for 2 min . The cells were then blocked for 30 min with tol . 25 , 147 – 170 . DMEM containing 10 % FCS and incubated for 4 hr with a rabbit Bregman , B . S . ( 1998 ) . Transplants and neurotrophins increase re - polyclonal antibody against GAP43 ( 1 : 4000 , from R . Curtis and G . generation and recovery of function after spinal cord injury . In Fron - Wilkins , Imperial College , London ) . Cells were washed three times tiers of Neural Development , K . Uyemura , ed . ( Tokyo : Springer - withPBS - BSA ( 2 % ) and thenincubated for30 minat roomtempera - Verlag ) . ture with a biotinylated donkey anti - rabbit Ig ( 1 : 500 , Amersham ) , washed three times , and incubated with streptavidin - conjugated Caroni , P . , and Schwab , M . E . ( 1988 ) . Antibody against myelin - asso - Texas Red ( 1 : 300 , Amersham ) for 45 min . After three more washes , ciated inhibitor of neurite growth neutralizes nonpermissive sub - the slides were mounted in Permafluor ( Baxter ) and viewed with a strate properties of CNS white matter . Neuron 1 , 85 – 96 . fluorescent microscope . The length of the longest neurite or the Cheng , H . , Cao , Y . , and Olson , L . ( 1996 ) . Spinal cord repair in adult total process outgrowth for each GAP43 - positive neuron for the paraplegic rats : partial restoration of hind limb function . Science first 180 – 200 neurons encountered when scanning the slide in a 273 , 510 – 513 . systematic manner was determined using an Oncor image analysis Colamarino , S . A . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 1995 ) . The axonal che - program . Using a video camera , the neuron image was projected to moattractant netrin - 1 is also a chemorepellent for trochlear motor acomputerscreen . Thelongestneuriteorallprocessweremanually axons . Cell 81 , 621 – 629 . traced and quantitated . Crutcher , K . A . ( 1989 ) . Tissue sections from the mature rat brain and spinal cord as substrates for neurite outgrowth in vitro : extensive Binding of MAG - Fc to Neurons growthongreymatter , butlittlegrowthonwhitematter . Exp . Neurol . Protein A – Sepharose – purified Fc chimeras , either MAG - Fc or MUC18 - Fc as a control ( Kelm et al . , 1994 ; Tang et al . , 1997a ) were 104 , 39 – 54 . Neuron100 David , S . , andAguayo , A . J . ( 1981 ) . Axonalelongation intoperipheral Li , D . , Field , P . M . , and Raisman , G . ( 1995 ) . Failure of axon regenera - nervous system “bridges” after central nervous system injury in tionin postnatalslice entorhino - hippocampalslice co - cultureis due adult rats . Science 214 , 931 – 933 . to maturation of the axon , not that of the pathway or target . Eur . J . Neurosci . 7 , 1164 – 1171 . Davies , J . A . , Fitch , M . T . , Memberg , S . P . , Hall , A . K . , Raisman , G . , and Silver , J . ( 1997 ) . Regeneration of adult axons in white matter Li , M . , Shibata , A . , Li , C . , Braun , P . E . , McKerracher , L . , Roder , J . , tracts of the central nervous system . Nature 390 , 680 – 683 . Kater , S . B . , and David , S . ( 1996 ) . Myelin - associated glycoprotein inhibits neurite / axon growth and causes growth cone collapse . J . De Bellard , M . E . , Tang , S . , Mukhopadhyay , G . , Shen , Y . , and Filbin , Neurosci . Res . 46 , 404 – 414 . M . T . ( 1996 ) . Myelin - associatedglycoproteininhibitsaxonalregener - ation from a variety of neurons via interaction with a sialoglycopro - Lindsay , R . M . ( 1996 ) . Role of neurotrophins and trk receptors in the tein . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 7 , 89 – 101 . development and maintenance of sensory neurons : an overview . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 351 , 365 – 373 . Doherty , P . , Fruns , M . , Seaton , P . , Dickson , G . , Barton , C . H . , Sears , T . A . , and Walsh , F . S . ( 1990 ) . A thresholdeffect ofthe majorisoforms McKerracher , L . , David , S . , Jackson , D . L . , Kottis , V . , Dunn , R . J . , and of N CAM on neurite outgrowth . Nature 343 , 464 – 466 . Braun , P . E . ( 1994 ) . Identification of myelin - associated glycoprotein Filbin , M . T . ( 1995 ) . Myelin - associatedglycoprotein : aroleinmyelina - as a major myelin - derived inhibitor of neurite outgrowth . Neuron 13 , tion and in the inhibition of axonal regeneration ? Curr . Opin . Neuro - 805 – 811 . biol . 5 , 588 – 595 . McTigue , D . M . , Horner , P . J . , Stokes , B . T . , and Gage , F . H . ( 1998 ) . Filbin , M . T . ( 1996 ) . The muddle with MAG . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 8 , Neurotrophin - 3 and brain - derived neurotrophic factor induce oligo - 84 – 92 . dendrocyte proliferation and myelination of regenerating axons in the contused adult rat spinal cord . J . Neurosci . 18 , 5354 – 5365 . Grill , R . , Murai , K . , Blesch , A . , Gage , F . H . , andTuszynski , M . H . ( 1997 ) . Cellular delivery of neurotrophin - 3 promotes corticospinal axonal Ming , G . L . , Lohof , A . M . , andZheng , J . Q . ( 1997a ) . Acutemorphogenic growth and partial functional recovery after spinal cord injury . J . and chemotropic effects of neurotrophins on cultured embryonic Neurosci . 17 , 5560 – 5572 . xenopus spinal neurons . J . Neurosci . 17 , 7860 – 7871 . Hasan , S . J . , Keirstead , H . S . , Muir , G . D . , and Steeves . J . D . ( 1993 ) . Ming , G . , Song , H . , Berninger , B . , Holt , C . E . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , Axonalregenerationcontributestorepairofinjuredbrainstem - spinal and Poo , M . ( 1997b ) . cAMP - Dependent growth cone guidance by neurons in embryonic chick . J . Neurosci . 13 , 492 – 507 . netrin - 1 . Neuron 19 , 1225 – 1235 . Igarashi , M . , Strittmatter , S . M . , Vartanian , T . , and Fishman , M . C . Mukhopadhyay , G . , Doherty , P . , Walsh , F . S . , Crocker , P . R . , and ( 1993 ) . Mediation by G proteins of signals that cause collapse of Filbin , M . T . ( 1994 ) . A novel role for myelin - associated glycoprotein growth cones . Science 259 , 77 – 79 . as an inhibitor of axonal regeneration . Neuron 13 , 757 – 767 . Jelsma , T . N . , and Aguayo , A . J . ( 1994 ) . Trophic factors . Curr . Opin . Norton , W . T . , and Poduslo , S . E . ( 1973 ) . Myelination in rat brain : Neurobiol . 4 , 717 – 725 . method of myelin isolation . J . Neurochem . 21 , 749 – 757 . Johnson , A . R . ( 1993 ) . Contact inhibition in the failure of mammalian Post , G . R . , and Brown , J . H . ( 1996 ) . G protein - coupled receptors CNS axonal regeneration . BioEssays 15 , 807 – 813 . and signaling pathways regulating growth responses . FASEB J . 10 , Johnson , P . W . , Abramow - Newerly , W . , Seilheimer , B . , Sadoul , R . , 741 – 749 . Tropak , M . B . , Arquint , M . , Dunn , R . J . , Schachner , M . , and Roder , Schnell , L . , and Schwab , M . E . ( 1990 ) . Axonal regeneration in the rat J . C . ( 1989 ) . Recombinant myelin associated glycoprotein confers spinal cord produced by an antibody against myelin - associated neural adhesionand neurite outgrowthfunction . Neuron 3 , 377 – 385 . neurite growth inhibitors . Nature 343 , 269 – 272 . Katoh , H . , Negishi , M . , and Ichikawa , A . ( 1996 ) . Prostaglandin E Schnell , L . , Schneider , R . , Kolbeck , R . , Barde , Y . , and Schwab , M . E . receptor EP3 subtype induces neurite retraction via small GTPase ( 1994 ) . Neurotrophin - 3 enhances sprouting of corticospinal tract Rho . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 29780 – 29784 . during development and after adult spinal cord lesion . Nature 367 , Keirstead , H . S , Hasan , S . J . , Muir , G . D . , and Steeves , J . D . ( 1992 ) . 170 – 173 . Suppression of the onset of myelination extends the permissive Schwab , M . E . , andBartholdi , D . ( 1996 ) . Degenerationand regenera - period for the functional repair of embryonic spinal cord . Proc . Natl . tion of axons in the lesioned spinal cord . Physiol . Rev . 76 , 319 – 370 . Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 11664 – 11668 . Schwab , M . E . , Kapfhammer , J . P . , and Bandtlow , C . E . ( 1993 ) . Inhibi - Kelm , S . , Pelz , A . , Schauer , R . , Filbin , M . T . , Tang , S . , de Bellard , tors of neurite growth . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 16 , 565 – 596 . M . E . , Schnaar , R . L . , Mahoney , J . A . , Hartnell , A . , Bradfield , P . , and Crocker , P . R . ( 1994 ) . Sialoadhesin , myelin - associated glycoprotein Schwegler , G . , Schwab , M . E . , and Kapfhammer , J . P . ( 1995 ) . In - and CD22 define a new family of sialic acid - dependent adhesion creased collateral sprouting of primary afferents in the myelin - free moleculesoftheimmunoglobulinsuperfamily . Curr . Biol . 4 , 965 – 972 . spinal cord . J . Neurosci . 15 , 2756 – 2767 . Kennedy , T . E . , Serafini , T . , de la Torre , J . R . , and Tessier - Lavigne , Shen , Y . , De Bellard , M . E . , Salzer , J . L . , Roder , J . , and Filbin , M . T . M . ( 1994 ) . Netrinsarediffusiblechemotropicfactorsforcommissural ( 1998 ) . Myelin - associated glycoprotein ( MAG ) in myelin and ex - axons in the embryonic spinal cord . Cell 78 , 425 – 435 . pressed by Schwann cells inhibits axonal regeneration . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 12 , 79 – 91 . Keynes , R . J . , and Cook , G . M . W . ( 1995 ) . Repulsive and inhibitory signals . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 5 , 75 – 82 . Snider , W . D . ( 1994 ) . Functions of the neurotrophins during nervous system development : what the knockouts are telling us . Cell 77 , Klein , R . ( 1994 ) . Role of neurotrophins in mouse neuronal develop - 627 – 638 . ment . FASEB J . 8 , 738 – 744 . Knipper , M . , Beck , A . , Rylett , J . , and Breer , H . ( 1993a ) . Neurotrophin Song , H . , Ming , G . , and Poo , M . ( 1997 ) . cAMP - induced switch in inducedcAMPandIP3responsesinPC12cells . Differentpathways . turning direction of nerve growth cones . Nature 388 , 275 – 279 . FEBS Lett . 324 , 147 – 152 . Song , H . , Ming , G . , Lehmann , M . , McKerracher , L . , Tessier - Lavigne , Knipper , M . , Beck , A . , Rylett , J . , and Breer , H . ( 1993b ) . Neurotrophin M . , and Poo , M . ( 1998 ) . Conversion of neuronal growth cone re - induced second messenger responses in rat brain synaptosomes . sponses from repulsion to attraction by cyclic nucleotides . Science Neuroreport 4 , 483 – 486 . 281 , 1515 – 1518 . Lang , P . , Gesbert , F . , Delespine - Carmagnat , M . , Stancoum , R . , Tang , S . , Shen , Y . , Mukhopadhyay , G . , De Bellard , M . E . , Crocker , Pouchelet , M . , and Bertoglio , J . ( 1996 ) . Protein kinase A phosphory - P . , and Filbin , M . T . ( 1997a ) . Myelin - associated glycoprotein , MAG , lation of RhoA mediates the morphological and functional effects recognizes neurons via two epitopes , a sialic acid binding site at of cyclic AMP in cytotoxic lymphocytes . EMBO J . 15 , 510 – 519 . Arg118 and a distinct neurite inhibition epitope . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1355 – 1366 . Letourneau , P . C . ( 1978 ) . Chemotactic response of nerve fiber elon - gation to nerve growth factor . Dev . Biol . 66 , 183 – 196 . Tang , S . , Woodhall , R . W . , Shen , Y . J . , De Bellard , M . E . , Saffell , J . L . , Doherty , P . , Walsh , F . S . , and Filbin , M . T . ( 1997b ) . Soluble myelin - Li , Y . , and Raisman , G . ( 1993 ) . Long axon growth from embryonic associatedglycoprotein ( MAG ) foundinvivoinhibitsaxonalregener - neurons transplanted into myelinated tracts of the adult rat spinal cord . Brain Res . 629 , 115 – 127 . ation . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 9 , 333 – 346 . Neurotrophin Priming Blocks MAG / Myelin Inhibition 101 Tigyi , G . , Fischer , D . J . , Sebok , A . , Yang , C . , Dyer , D . L . , and Miledi , R . ( 1996 ) . Lysophosphatidic acid - inducedneurite retraction in PC12 cells : controlbyphosphoinositide - Ca 2 (cid:49) signalingandRho . J . Neuro - chem . 66 , 537 – 548 . Thoenen , H . ( 1991 ) . The changing scene of neurotrophic factors . Trends Neurosci . 14 , 165 – 170 . Turnley , A . M . , and Bartlett , P . F . ( 1998 ) . MAGa nd MOG enhance neurite outgrowth of embryonic mouse spinal cord neurons . Neuro - report 9 , 1987 – 1990 . Tuttle , R . , and O’Leary , D . D . M . ( 1998 ) . neurotrophins rapidly modu - late growth cone response to the axon guidance molecule collap - sin - 1 . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 11 , 1 – 8 . Wang , Q . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 1998 ) . cAMP - Mediated regulation of neurotrophin - induced collapse of nerve growth cones . J . Neurosci . 18 , 4973 – 4984 .