Delay of HeLa Cell Cleavage into Interphase Using Dihydrocytochalasin B : Retention of a Postmitotic Spindle and Telophase Disc Correlates with Synchronous Cleavage Recovery St6phanie N . Martineau , Paul R . Andreassen , and Robert L . Margolis Institut de Biologie Structurale - Jean - Pierre Ebel , 38027 Grenoble , France Abstract . The molecular signals that determine the po - sition and timing of the cleavage furrow during mam - malian cell cytokinesis are presently unknown . We have studied in detail the effect of dihydrocytochalasin B ( DCB ) , a drug that interferes with actin assembly , on specific late mitotic events in synchronous HeLa cells . When cleavage furrow formation is blocked at 10 ~ xM DCB , cells return to interphase by the criteria of refor - mation of nuclei with lamin borders , degradation of the cyclin B component of p34 cdc2 kinase , and loss of mito - sis specific MPM - 2 antigens . However , the machinery for cell cleavage is retained for up to one hour into G1 when cleavage cannot proceed . The components re - tained consist prominently of a " postmitotic " spindle and a telophase disc , a structure templated by the mi - totic spindle in anaphase that may determine the posi - tion and timing of the cleavage furrow . Upon release from DCB block , G ~ cells proceed through a rapid and synchronous cleavage . We conclude that the mitotic spindle is not inevitably destroyed at the end of mitosis , but persists as an integral structure with the telophase disc in the absence of cleavage . We also conclude that cell cleavage can occur in G1 , and is therefore an event metabolically independent of mitosis . The retained te - lophase disc may indeed signal the position of furrow formation , as G1 cleavage occurs only in the position where the retained disc underlies the cell cortex . The protocol we describe should now enable development of a model system for the study of mammalian cell cleavage as a synchronous event independent of mitosis . URING telophase , the terminating phase of mitosis , the cell cortex constricts inward at the position of the mitotic spindle equator , yielding two daughter cells . The process of cell cleavage thus represents the cul - mination of the mammalian cell cycle . Normally , the cleavage mechanism is precisely controlled to commence once the chromosomes have completed their poleward mi - gration , but the specific proximal signals that control cleavage onset with such precise timing are not known . In - deed , despite its vital importance to the proper partition - ing of chromosomes and of the cytoplasmic contents at the end of mitosis , the regulation and mechanism of cell cleav - age are not well understood . We have previously identified a late mitotic structure in mammalian cells , the telophase disc , which forms tran - siently in late anaphase at the site of the future cleavage event ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ) . The telophase disc ap - pears to arise from proteins that are transported from the separating chromosomes during anaphase , which then mi - Address correspondence to Robert L . Margolis , lnstitut de Biologie Structurale - J . P . Ebel , 41 avenue des Martyrs , 38027 Grenoble , France . Tel . : ( 33 ) 76 88 96 16 . Fax : ( 33 ) 76 88 54 94 . grate toward the equatorial position of the mitotic spindle . During late anaphase , the telophase disc expands from the mitotic spindle to the cell cortex at the position of the fu - ture cleavage furrow , until it bifurcates the cell ( Andreas - sen et al . , 1991 ) . As cleavage progresses , the interpolar mi - crotubules of the mitotic spindle disassemble toward the equatorial position of overlap between the two half spin - dles ( Rattner , 1992 ) . Finally , at the end of the cleavage process , the telophase disc and spindle microtubule rem - nants link the two daughter cells together in a midbody bridge ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ; Rattner , 1992 ) . It has previously been demonstrated that the mitotic spindle is involved in determining the site of cleavage ( Rappaport and Rappaport , 1974 ; Heidemann and Kirsch - net , 1975 ; Kawamura , 1977 ) , which normally occurs at the position of the spindle equator . Given the close temporal and spatial association of the telophase disc with the site of the future cleavage furrow , we have proposed that the mi - totic spindle communicates this information through the te - lophase disc that , once positioned by the spindle , then determines the site of cell cleavage ( Margolis and An - dreassen , 1993 ) . Although telophase is temporally coordinated to follow © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 95 / 10 / 191 / 15 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , Number 1 , October 1995 191 - 205 191 previous steps in mitosis , and occurs in cells that are still morphologically mitotic by the criteria of containing con - densed chromosomes and mitotic spindles , it is not appar - ent whether any telophase events are directly subject to mitotic control . Anaphase and telophase are not directly controlled by p34 ode2 kinase activity . While p34 cdc2 is uni - versally required to induce the onset of mitosis in eukary - otes ( Nurse and Bisset , 1981 ; Nurse , 1990 ; Th ' ng et al . , 1990 ) , it is abruptly inactivated at the onset of anaphase ( Hunt et al . , 1992 ; Holloway et al . , 1993 ) . We have here addressed the interdependency and the possible mitotic control of the different events in telophase by carefully ex - amining the effect of inhibiting cleavage through use of di - hydrocytochalasin B ( DCB ) 1 . DCB , a member of the cy - tochalasin family ( Yahara et al . , 1982 ) , inhibits actin assembly in cells ( Aubin et al . , 1981 ) with a greater speci - ficity than certain other cytochalasins ( Atlas and Lin , 1978 ) , and also interferes with the cell cleavage process ( Atlas and Lin , 1978 ; Aubin et al . , 1981 ; Andreassen et al . , 1991 ) . In this study , we have found that reformation of inter - phase nuclei and the downregulation of mitosis - specific MPM - 2 phosphorylation epitopes ( Davis et al . , 1983 ; Van - dre et al . , 1984 ) are not impeded by cleavage failure in the presence of DCB . However , the DCB - treated cells retain a persistent postmitotic spindle , which maintains its posi - tion between the two reformed nuclei and , in turn , the postmitotic spindle retains a telophase disc at its equator . We term this structure a " postmitotic spindle " because it has a spindle morphology clearly distinguishable from stembodies that are present in telophase cells , and because it is present in a cell that is largely interphase in character . Our results suggest that the dissolution of the anaphase spindle and of the telophase disc are to some extent cou - pled to successful cell cleavage rather than being strictly coordinated with other events in mitotic exit . The persis - tence of these structures also suggests that they play a role in the cleavage mechanism . We define a cell as postmitotic when it has reconstituted interphase nuclei , but retains a spindle and telophase disc . A role for the postmitotic spin - dle and the telophase disc in cell cleavage is strongly sup - ported by our finding that postmitotic cells synchronously cleave at the position of the telophase disc within minutes of the removal of DCB , but only if the cell ' s cortex main - tains association with elements of the telophase disc . Importantly , it now appears that cell cleavage is an event independent of mitotic control , and that it can be dissociated to occur in G1 . Additionally , postmitotic cleav - age correlates well with the presence and position of both a persistent mitotic spindle and a telophase disc . Finally , as a result of our observations , we have shown that a syn - chronous system can be developed in which the control and mechanism of cell cleavage can be studied in a context that is independent of concurrent mitotic events . Materials and Methods Cell Culture and Synchronization HeLa cells were cultured as monolayers in Dulbecco ' s Modified Eagle ' s 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : DCB , dihydrocytochalasin B ; MKLP - 1 , mitotic kinesin - like protein - 1 . Medium ( GIBCO BRL , Paisley , UK ) supplemented with 5 % defined bo - vine calf serum ( Hyclone , Logan , UT ) , and were kept in a humid incuba - tor at 37°C with 5 % CO2 . Cells were grown on polylysine - coated coverslips for 48 h and were then treated for 12 h with 40 ng / ml nocodazole ( Sigma Chem . Co . , St . Louis , MO ) to obtain a population arrested in mitosis . Progression in mi - tosis was initiated by washing with fresh culture medium ( 3 x 1 rain each ) and ceils were then cultured in fresh medium either with or without 10 IzM dihydrocytochalasin B ( DCB ; Sigma ) . At timepoints , cells were fixed in preparation for immunofluorescence microscopy . Cells were recovered from treatment with DCB by washing with fresh medium ( 3 × 1 min ) after exposure to DCB for varying times , depending upon the experiment . Immunofluorescence Microscopy For immunolocalization of all antigens except cyclin B and Eg5 , cells were fixed 20 min at 37°C with 2 % paraformaldehyde in PBS ( 136 mM NaC1 , 2 mM KC1 , 10 . 6 mM Na2PO4 , and 1 . 5 mM KH2PO 4 at pH 7 . 4 ) . Cells were then permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 3 min , and washed 5 min with PBS . Incubation with primary antibodies diluted in PBS con - taining 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 and 3 % bovine serum albumin was for 60 min in a humid chamber . After three washes with PBS , cells were incubated for 30 min with secondary antibodies and subsequently washed with PBS . Secondary antibodies were from Cappel ( West Chester , PA ) , and in - cluded FITC - conjugated affinity purified goat anti - human IgG , anti - mouse IgG , and anti - mouse IgM , and anti - rabbit IgG antibodies ; Rhodamine goat anti - rabbit IgG antibodies ; and Texas Red sheep anti - mouse IgG antibodies . All secondary antibodies were applied at 2 . 5 ~ g / ml . F - actin was detected by 30 min incubation at 37°C with 1 . 7 ixg / ml FITC - phalloidin . Counterstain with propidium iodide ( 0 . 2 Ixg / ml ) was for 5 min in PBS . For immunolocalization of cyclin B , cells were fixed 5 rain in methanol at - 20°C , washed with PBS , and then incubated with primary and second - ary antibodies , as above . For immunodetection of Eg5 , cells were rinsed in 45 mM Pipes , 45 mM Hepes , 10 mM EGTA , 5mM MgCI2 , pH 6 . 9 PHEM , Bailly et al . , 1989 . Cells were then permeabilized with PHEM + 0 . 1 % Tri - ton X - 100 for 40 s , and were then fixed 6 min in methanol at - 20°C . The following antibodies were utilized for indirect immunofluores - cence microscopy . JH human autoimmune serum ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ) , a kind gift of M . Wener ( University of Washington , Seattle ) was used at a 500 - fold dilution to detect TD - 60 . CHO1 ascites fluid ( Sellitto and Kuriyama , 1988 ) , a kind gift from R . Kuriyama ( University of Minne - sota , Minneapolis ) , was used at a 1 , 000 - fold dilution to detect MKLP - 1 . Rabbit polyclonal antiserum 1 . 6 specific for CENP - E ( Yen et al . , 1992 ) , obtained from T . Yen ( Fox Chase Cancer Research Center , Philadelphia ) , was used at a 200 - fold dilution . Anti - 13 - tubulin ascites antibody from Sigma ( TUB 2 . 1 ) was used at a 400 - fold dilution . L3 , an antibody specific for non - tyrosinated tubulin ( Paturle - Lafanech6re et al . , 1994 ) , was ob - tained from L . Paturle - Lafanech6re and D . Job ( DBMS , CENG , Greno - ble , France ) , and was used at a 250 - fold dilution to detect centrosomes in mitotic cells . Anti - lamin B human autoimmune serum ( patient F ) and rab - bit anti - lamin B antiserum ( Chaudhary and Courvalin , 1993 ) , gifts from J . - C . Courvalin ( Institut Jacques Monod , Paris ) , were used at dilutions of 400 - and 150 - fold , respectively . MPM - 2 mouse monoclonal antibody ( Davis et al . , 1983 ) , supplied by J . Kuang ( M . D . Anderson Cancer Center , Houston ) , was used at a 750 - fold dilution of the ascites fluid . GNS - 1 hybri - doma supernatant , a gift from S . Schiff and E . Harlow ( Massachusetts General Hospital , Boston , MA ) , was used at a 50 - fold dilution to detect cyclin B1 . Rabbit antiserum recognizing Eg5 , a gift from M . Kress ( CNRS , Villejuif , France ) , was used at a 50 - fold dilution . Images were registered with a MRC - 600 Laser Scanning Confocal Ap - paratus ( BioRad Microscience Division , Herts , England ) coupled with a Nikon Optiphot microscope . Photographs were taken on TMAX - 100 film ( Kodak , Rochester , NY ) with a Polaroid CI - 3000 film recorder ( Cam - bridge , MA ) . Color pictures were generated with a Sony UP - 3000P Color Video Printer . Quantitation of cells by microscopy was performed by selecting ran - dom fields and counting at least three sets of 250 cells for each time point and condition . Determination of Mitotic Index The mitotic index after treatment with nocodazole was determined ( Fig . 1 ) using either a two - dimensional flow cytometric analysis with MPM - 2 antibody and propidium iodide ( Andreasssen and Margolis , 1994 ) , or by chromosome condensation , as detected microscopically by staining with The Joumal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 192 propidium iodide ( Figs . 3 and 9 ) . For flow cytometric analysis , data were collected using a Becton - Dickinson FacScan , and the mitotic region was quantitated using Lysys II software . Results Members of the cytochalasin family of compounds , includ - ing DCB , cause mammalian cells to fail in cell cleavage ( Carter , 1967 ; Atlas and Lin , 1978 ; Aubin et al . , 1981 ) . At 10 txM DCB , the vast majority of HeLa cells completely fail in both furrow formation and in cleavage ( Fig . 1 A ) . 100 0 u 0 B 75 50 25 A o 0J . 50 / ° ° 100 150 Time ( rnin ) Control 10 ~ tM DCB 200 100 - 5 0 ' o i Control 10 ~ tM DCB 0 0 50 100 1 ' 50 200 Time ( rain ) Figure 1 . Cell cleavage and mitotic exit after nocodazole release . ( A ) HeLa cells , released at time 0 from nocodazole arrest , begin cytokinesis by 60 rain , and have largely completed cleavage by 90 min , whereas cells treated with 10 p . M DCB at the time of no - codazole release exhibit no cleavage . Coverslips were removed from culture at the timepoints indicated , and cells were prepared for immunofluorescence microscopy with anti - TD - 60 antiserum and anti - lamin B antibody . Cleaved cells , identified by the pres - ence of a midbody ( TD - 60 antigen ) bridging between two inter - phase cells , were scored as a percent of the initial mitotic popula - tion . ( B ) Failure of cleavage does not impede mitotic exit . Cells were treated with DCB and time points taken as in A , and la - beled with anti - lamin B antibody and anti - TD - 60 antiserum . Control cells were scored positive for mitotic exit by the presence of interphase nuclei and a midbody ; DCB - treated cells were scored positive if they contained two nuclei with lamin borders . All data were recorded as a percentage of the mitotic cells present at time 0 . Each time point represents at least three counts of 300 cells each . Control cells , released from a 12 - h block in 0 . 04 txg / ml no - codazole , progress with reasonable synchrony through mi - tosis , and complete cytokinesis with a tv2 of ~ 70 rain . In contrast , very few cells ( < 0 . 4 % of mitotic cells ) that have been given DCB at the time of release from nocodazole block give evidence of initiating cleavage through the en - tire course of the experiment . The concentration of DCB used was determined in pre - liminary experiments , in which a range of DCB concentra - tions were tested for their ability to suppress furrow for - mation and cell cleavage . In accord with our previous report ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ) there was a dose - depen - dent effect of DCB upon furrowing . Complete furrow for - mation occurred at 2 IxM DCB , followed by subsequent reversion and formation of binucleate cells . DCB at 5 ~ M moderately suppressed furrowing , and doses of 10 ixM or higher were completely effective . At high concentrations , no more than 0 . 4 % of mitotic cells display evidence of any furrowing . We had previously reported that cleavage could occur at high DCB concentrations ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ) , but this occurs with very low frequency . Failure to undergo cleavage does not substantially im - pede mitotic exit . By the criterion of reformation of a nu - clear iamin border , both control and DCB - treated cells exit mitosis with approximately the same kinetics ( Fig . 1 B ) . At the time of reformation of a nuclear envelope ( see Fig . 2 , D and E ) , these cells are also in interphase by the criteria of the decondensation of chromatin and the refor - mation of nucleoli . Lamin B is a highly discriminant marker that distin - guishes between interphase or mitotic states ( Chaudhary and Courvalin , 1993 ) . Interphase cells display a brightly staining lamin B ring around their nuclei ( Fig . 2 A ) and show little cytoplasmic background . In contrast , lamin is dispersed from chromatin upon nuclear disassembly , and remains dispersed both at metaphase ( Fig . 2 B ) , and as cells proceed through cleavage at the end of mitosis ( Fig . 2 C ) . Cytoplasmic accumulations of lamin are normally apparent in all mitotic cells . In accord with previous obser - vations ( Chaudhary and Courvalin , 1993 ) , we find that reformation of lamin borders normally occurs after the completion of furrowing . By the criterion of lamin label , DCB - treated cells have reformed nuclei by 90 rain after nocodazole release and reenter interphase without cleav - age ( Fig . 2 D ) . Curiously , although there is a nearly complete lamin border around the nuclei , there is frequently a small re - gion facing the opposing nucleus that is devoid of lamin . A field of DCB - treated cells with reestablished lamin bor - ders is shown in Fig . 2 E . In Fig . 2 and in subsequent figures , a " postmitotic " cell denotes an uncleaved cell in a transient state in which the nuclei have reconstituted an interphase character ( Fig . 2 , D and E ) , while mitotic elements such as a mitotic spindle and a telophase disc are retained ( see Fig . 6 ) . Retention of the Telophase Disc in Uncleaved Cells Because of the potential role of the telophase disc in cy - tokinesis , we have examined its behavior in DCB - treated cells ( Fig . 3 ) . When HeLa cells are recovered into 10 ixM DCB , the telophase disc is formed at the appropriate time , Martineau et al . lnterphase Cell Cleavage 193 Figure 2 . Reformation of nu - clei in cleavage arrested cells . HeLa cells , synchronized in mitosis by release from no - codazole arrest , were ana - lyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy with anti - lamin B antibodies ( left ) and DNA stain ( Propidium Iodide , right ) . ( A ) Control inter - phase . A control interphase cell , showing a lamin border around an intact nucleus con - taining a nucleolus that is highly stained by propidium iodide . ( B ) Control meta - phase . A control metaphase cell , showing aligned chro - mosomes and dispersed lamin . ( C ) Control telophase . A control telophase cell , with dispersed lamin . ( D ) Postmi - totic DCB - treated cell . DCB - treated cell in blocked cleav - age at 90 min after nocoda - zole release . A reestablished lamin rim has almost com - pletely encircled the chroma - tin . Note the indentations and gaps in lamin borders where the nuclei face each other . Propidium iodide stain ( right ) shows reconstituted nuclei with nucleoli evident . ( E ) Postmitotic DCB - treated cell field . A field of DCB - treated cells in blocked cleavage , showing reconsti - tuted nuclei with lamin bor - ders . Anti - lamin primary an - tibodies were detected with FITC - goat anti - rabbit IgG antibodies . Bars , 10 p ~ m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 194 40 o / f 30 20 10 ~ / \ / / / / o \ / - - - - - - O 0 , I ~ ' . - - - L ' ~ , n , i , I n 0 30 60 90 120 150 Time ( rain . ) Figure 3 , Retention of the telophase disc in the presence of DCB . Synchronous control cells , released from nocodazole - induced mitotic arrest , display a telophase disc for a brief period of time during late mitosis . In contrast , cells released into 10 IxM DCB form the telophase disc at approximately the same time , but retain it for a prolonged period of time compared to controls . Cells were fixed on coverslips at timepoints and prepared for im - munofluorescence microscopy . A telophase disc is defined by the linear arrangement of TD - 60 antigen present at the equatorial position between two separated sets of chromatin ( see Fig . 4 ) . Each data point represents at least three counts of 500 cells each . Data are expressed as a percent of the initial mitotic index . The mitotic index was determined at 0 , 30 , and 60 min after nocoda - zole release by calculating the ratio of cells with condensed chro - mosomes relative to total cells . Control 10 gM DCB but then persists for a prolonged period of time in the ab - sence of cleavage ( Fig . 3 ) . In contrast , the telophase disc is present only transiently during cleavage in a control popu - lation released from nocodazole synchronization . The telophase disc , as visualized with the TD - 60 marker ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ) , is present at the equatorial posi - tion of control cells in early cleavage ( Fig . 4 A ) , and re - mains at the precise position of cleavage through tile en - tire cleavage process ( Fig . 4 B ) . Similarly , in the presence of 10 IxM DCB , the telophase disc is evident at the equato - rial position between the two daughter sets of chromatin ( Fig . 4 C ) . Notice that , unlike cleaving control cells where chromosomes are evident until cleavage has completed ( Fig . 4 B ) , DCB - blocked cells often contain reconstituted interphase nuclei simultaneously with a telophase disc ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . Additionally , in the reconstituted inter - phase nuclei shown in Fig . 4 C , nucleoli are evident . TD - 60 is one of a family of proteins that accumulate at the position of the telophase disc in late anaphase and te - lophase ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ; Earnshaw and Bernat , 1991 ) . Two such proteins , CENP - E ( Yen et al . , 1992 ) and MKLP - 1 ( Nislow et al . , 1992 ) , have microtubule motor do - mains . In DCB - treated cells , both CENP - E and MKLP - 1 persist at the position of the telophase disc after inter - phase nuclei have been reconstituted ( Fig . 4 , E and F ) . We previously presented evidence that the telophase disc is an integral structure independent of the mitotic spindle ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ) . This conclusion was based on the fact that TD - 60 , when incorporated into the telophase disc , resists cold temperature treatment , which causes the complete disassembly of the anaphase spindle in HeLa cells . Further evidence that TD - 60 distributes in - dependently of the anaphase spindle is presented in Fig . 5 . For this analysis , TD - 60 distribution is compared with that of CENP - E and MKLP - 1 in late anaphase cells . CENP - E and MKLP - 1 are microtubule associated proteins that dis - tribute to the equator of the anaphase spindle ( Sellitto and Kuriyama , 1988 ; Yen et al . , 1991 ) . The comparison clearly shows that TD - 60 is associated with the cortex beyond the central mitotic spindle . As shown by color merge of dou - ble - label images for TD - 60 and MKLP - 1 , these antigens are colocalized in the region of overlap of interpolar mi - crotubules in the center of the cell ( Fig . 5 A ) . TD - 60 , but not MKLP - 1 , extends across the equator of the cell to the cortex . A plot of pixel intensity for both TD - 60 and MKLP - 1 , as scanned across the equator of the cell , demon - strates that TD - 60 alone traverses the cell to the cortex . Sim - ilar results , demonstrating colocalization of TD - 60 and CENP - E in the region of spindle overlap , but not at the cortex are also shown ( Fig . 5 B ) . Retention of the Mitotic Spindle in Uncleaved Cells TD - 60 and other mitotic antigens migrate to the equato - rial position between the chromosome sets during late mi - tosis through an association with the mitotic spindle ( An - dreassen et al . , 1991 ; Earnshaw and Bernat , 1991 ) . On this basis , we have proposed that the mitotic spindle templates the formation of the telophase disc ( Margolis and An - dreassen , 1993 ) . Given that the telophase disc persists in the absence of cleavage , we asked if microtubule elements of the mitotic spindle might also be present . In a synchronous population of cells that has been blocked in cleavage by 10 txM DCB , one indeed frequently finds a persistent spindle lying between two reconstituted nuclei , containing a telophase disc at its equator , as shown in Fig . 6 A . By phase contrast , it is clear that each cell is uncleaved and contains two reconstituted nuclei , while the anti - tubulin signal reveals a persistent spindle composed of microtubules lying between the two nuclei . Additional evidence that interphase nuclei coexist with a mitotic spindle comes from double label staining with lamin B and anti - tubulin antibodies ( Fig . 6 B ) . With these two labels , it is evident that nuclei with lamin borders are present in the same cell as an apparent mitotic spindle . The persistent spindle is focused at its poles , in contrast with the normal parallel array of microtubules present in the spindle in telophase . We designate the persistent spin - dle , which is present in cells that have failed in cleavage and have reconstituted interphase nuclei , as a " postmi - totic " spindle . Frequently , as seen here , the nuclei deform around the ends of the spindle . Interestingly , at the point of juncture between the spindle and the nuclei , one often finds a hole in the lamin border ( see Fig . 2 ) , suggesting that the persistent spindle prevents lamin deposition where it contacts the chromatin . The mechanism by which the morphology of the postmi - totic spindle is retained is not clear . Normally , the mitotic spindle has two focal origins , the two spindle poles , where the microtubules converge on the centrosomes . As the Martineau et al . Interphase Cell Cleavage 195 centrosomes normally are present on the exterior surfaces of the chromosome sets during anaphase and telophase , we asked where they were relative to the postmitotic spin - dies . Using an anti - glu - tubulin marker , demonstrated to be specific for mitotic centrosomes ( Paturle - Lafanech6re et al . , 1994 ) , we find that centrosomes in DCB - treated cells are distinctly separate from the poles of the postmi - totic spindle . This is in contrast with controls , where the centrosomes are always present at the spindle poles ( Fig . 7 ) . In both cases , the centrosomes are present on the exte - rior surfaces of the chromatin . It is evident that the DCB - blocked cell retains mitotic character with respect to its spindle after the point in time when the cell ' s chromatin has reentered interphase . With respect to several standard mitotic markers , the cell has re - entered interphase , although it retains a telophase disc . Cyclin B is normally degraded at the onset of anaphase ( Whitfield et al . , 1990 ; Pines and Hunter , 1991 ) . DCB - treated cells that have progressed past anaphase and have reformed nuclei are therefore negative for cyclin B , as ex - pected ( Fig . 8 A ) . For comparison , a prophase cell in the same field is strongly positive for cyclin B . Control cells , released from nocodazole arrest , similarly display a cyclin B signal only until the onset of anaphase ( data not shown ) . MPM - 2 antibodies detect mitosis - specific phosphoepi - topes ( Davis et al . , 1983 ) . Postmitotic cells treated with DCB ( Fig . 8 B ) display very little MPM - 2 reactivity , whereas cells at prophase and metaphase display clear sig - nals . By comparison to DCB - treated cells , control cells in mid - cleavage are still moderately positive for MPM - 2 , and in particular display centrosomal signals ( Fig . 8 C , arrow ) . The postmitotic spindle retains some mitotic character . This is evident from the continued presence of the mitosis specific proteins CENP - E and MKLP - 1 ( Fig . 4 ) at the spindle equator . We also assayed for the presence of an - other motor protein , Eg - 5 , that has been reported present only on microtubules in the mitotic spindle ( Sawin et al . , 1992 ) , and absent from interphase microtubules . Eg - 5 is present on postmitotic spindles , with an abundance that appears equivalent to its presence on a control metaphase spindle ( Fig . 8 D ) . The signal then disappears as the post - mitotic spindle degenerates ( data not shown ) . Synchronous Cleavage of Postmitotic Cells The continued presence of the mitotic spindle and the te - lophase disc in interphase cells that have failed in cleavage suggests that these structures may play a role in the cleav - age mechanism and are normally disassembled in the Figure 4 . Persistence of the telophase disc in cleavage - arrested cells . ( A ) Control cell , mid - telophase . The telophase disc , marked with antibodies to TD - 60 , normally is present at the equatorial position between chromosomes of late anaphase cells and early telophase cells , as shown here . Chromosomes are shown at right , counterstained with propidium iodide . ( B ) Control cell , late telo - phase . The telophase disc remains in the precise position of cleav - age during telophase . ( C ) Postmitotic DCB - treated cell . In a DCB - blocked postmitotic cell , containing reconstituted nuclei , the telophase disc is retained at a position midway between the nuclei . ( D ) Postmitotic DCB - treated cell field . A field of cells blocked in 10 IxM DCB , including two postmitotic cells and a mi - totic cell in late anaphase ( arrow ) , demonstrates that the telo - phase disc undergoes no apparent change during transition of the cell to the postmitotic state . ( E and F ) Postmitotic DCB - treated cells . ( E ) CENP - E and ( F ) MKLP - 1 , two microtubule motor pro - teins , also are retained at the position of the telophase disc in DCB blocked postmitotic cells . Bars : ( C ) 10 ixm ; ( D ) 20 Ixm ; ( F ) 5 ixm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 196 TD - 60 200 ~ 100 0 MKLP - 1 200 ~ 3 • ~ lO0 0 0 I I I 50 100 150 200 250 Pixei Number TD - 60 200 100 0 CENP - E 200 100 0 50 100 150 200 250 Pixel Number Figure 5 . TD - 60 is present throughout the equator of late - anaphase cells . ( A ) TD - 60 ( red ) and MKLP - 1 ( green ) partially codistribute at the spindle equator during late anaphase , as shown here with a color merge of a double - label image collected as an optical section by confocal microscopy ( left ) . TD - 60 consistently extends beyond the MKLP - 1 signal toward the cell cortex , as shown here . The image is yellow where TD - 60 and MKLP - 1 coincide , and is red where TD - 60 alone is distributed . Scans of pixel intensity across the equator ( the axis of the scan indicated by lines on the photo at left ) are displayed for TD - 60 and MKLP - 1 at right . ( B ) A color merged image of TD - 60 ( red ) and CENP - E ( green ) in a late anaphase cell is shown at left . Scans of pixel intensity for TD - 60 and CENP - E are shown at right . Ar - rows indicate the position of the cell cortex . Bar , 10 Ixm . course of successful cleavage . The potential importance of the mitotic spindle and the telophase disc was tested by the ability of the postmitotic cell to resume cleavage upon the removal of DCB . A synchronous population of postmitotic cells , sup - pressed in cleavage by the presence of DCB , will cleave within minutes of the removal of DCB . In this experiment , DCB was removed from the medium at 90 minutes after mitotic recovery from nocodazole arrest ( Fig . 9 A ) . For the purpose of this analysis , postmitotic cells were distin - Martineau et al . lnterphase Cell Cleavage 197 Figure 6 . A mitotic spindle and nuclei with lamin borders can coexist in DCB - treated cells after inhibition of cleavage . ( A ) An un - cleaved cell in the presence of DCB has exited mitosis by the criterion of intact nuclei visible by phase contrast microscopy ( left ) ; but contains a mitotic spindle structure ( middle ) between the nuclei and a telophase disc ( right ) detected by TD - 60 immunofluorescence . This cell was imaged on a confocal microscope after preparation with mouse anti - tubulin antibody and with human anti - TD - 60 antise - rum . Note the extensive blebbing of the cell visible by phase contrast microscopy . ( B ) Another postmitotic cell treated with DCB shows the presence of interphase lamin borders around nuclei ( left ) . The same cell also contains an apparent mitotic spindle ( right ) , detected with antibodies specific for tubulin . Bar , 5 Ixm . guished by the presence of two nuclei and of a telophase disc spanning the equator between the two nuclei . Cells in the process of cleavage appear within minutes of the re - moval of DCB from the culture medium , and reach a peak at approximately 10 - 15 min after drug washout , and a population of cells that have completed cleavage accumu - lates shortly thereafter ( Fig . 9 A , open triangles ) . The capacity to resume cleavage upon removal of DCB diminishes with time after recovery from nocodazole ar - rest , and is strongly correlated with the continued pres - ence of the postmitotic spindle and the telophase disc ( Fig . 9 B ) . Beginning at 90 min after recovery from nocodazole arrest , binucleate cells , in which the telophase disc and the postmitotic spindle have degenerated , progressively accu - mulate . At later times , as the population of cells contain - ing a postmitotic spindle and telophase disc declines , the capacity to cleave after removal of DCB strongly dimin - ishes . A comparison of the time of mitotic exit in DCB ( Fig . 1 B ) with the time of loss of cleavage competence ( Fig . 9 B ) indicates that , on average , postmitotic cells re - main cleavage competent for approximately one hour af - ter mitotic exit . The synchrony of cell cleavage after removal of DCB is clearly evident in microscopic fields . Before DCB re - moval , fields of postmitotic ceils containing both spindles and reformed interphase nuclei are evident ( Fig . 9 C , left ) , but by 15 min after DCB washout , cleavage is widespread among this population ( Fig . 9 C , right ) . After release from DCB , cleaving cells characteristically contain equatorially compacted spindles . Cleaved cells with interphase nuclei , as visualized by phase contrast microscopy , contain a com - pacted telophase disc at the site of cleavage ( Fig . 9 D ) . By contrast , in the continued presence of DCB , degeneration of both the postmitotic spindle and the telophase disc progresses steadily in postmitotic cells , finally yielding bi - nucleate G1 cells . The potent capacity of DCB to block cleavage is of course a direct consequence of the requirement for F - actin in the cleavage process . The specific role of actin in the cleavage process in mammalian cells is , however , not com - pletely clear . During normal cleavage , only a small per - centage of mammalian cells exhibit a clear concentration of actin at the furrow ( Cao and Wang , 1990 ) . Frequently , the actin that accumulates in an array parallel with the cleavage axis is evident only on the cell surface in contact with the substratum ( Fishkind and Wang , 1993 ) . We ( An - dreassen et al . , 1991 ) and others ( Krishan , 1972 ; Sanger and Holtzer , 1972 ) have shown that lower concentrations of cytochalasins ( e . g . , 2 t ~ M DCB ) cause extensive disas - sembly of actin but do not impede furrowing . We have therefore examined the state of actin assembly during DCB blockage and recovery in HeLa cells , using fluorescent phalloidin , a probe that is specific for assem - bled actin ( Wulf et al . , 1979 ) . Typically , in accord with pre - vious reports ( Cao and Wang , 1990 ; Fishkind and Wang , 1993 ) , we find little evidence for specific accumulation of actin at the cleavage furrow during control HeLa cell cleavage ( Fig . 10 A ) . Instead , typically , F - actin is uni - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 198 Figure 7 . ( Top ) Postmitotic DCB - treated cell . Postmitotic spin - dles are not associated with centrosomes . In postmitotic DCB - treated cells , where nuclei and a spindle coexist , the centrosomes ( top right ) are always present on the outer sides of the nuclei , op - posite to the position of the spindle poles ( top left ) . ( Bottom ) . This is in comparison to a normal metaphase spindle ( bottom left ) , in which the centrosomes ( bottom right ) are localized to the spindle poles . Note also that the postmitotic spindle is substan - tially smaller than a control metaphase spindle , and has a dark equatorial bar that corresponds to the telophase disc . Cen - trosomes were visualized with anti - glu - tubulin , which is specific for centrosomes in mitotic cells ( Paturle - Lafanech6re et al . , 1994 ) . Centrosome position relative to the mitotic spindle was verified by overlay of digital images collected with a confocal mi - croscope . Bar , 10 txm . formly dispersed throughout the cell cortex . In the pres - ence of 10 IxM DCB , actin is randomly associated with the cell cortex , with the exception of local accumulations in the surface blebs that are characteristic of DCB treatment ( Fig . 10 B ) . Thus the disruption of cytokinesis by 10 txM DCB is correlated with the disruption of cortical actin or - ganization . In contrast , during synchronous cleavage of postmitotic cells after 10 min of recovery from DCB treat - ment , we find actin has specifically reassociated with the cell cortex at the position of the cleavage furrow ( Fig . 10 , C and D ) . Cells in which the telophase disc contacts only one cortical surface undergo a one - sided cleavage after re - lease from DCB treatment ( Fig . 10 E ) . One can see the as - sociation of the telophase disc and actin at the furrowing side during one - sided cleavage . This may suggest that the position of the telophase disc , or of the spindle , locally de - termines the position of furrow formation . Cells in which the telophase disc has degenerated or in which it makes no contact with the cell cortex ( data not shown ) , consistently fail to cleave during DCB recovery . This fact argues against the contrary possibility , that furrowing causes the cortex to locally contact the telophase disc . Discussion We have presented evidence that cleavage failure induced in HeLa cells by DCB is accompanied by a transient " post - mitotic " state . We define the cell as postmitotic when in - terphase nuclei have been reconstituted , but the mitotic spindle and telophase disc remain . The capacity for cell cleavage is preserved in these postmitotic cells , and a syn - chronous cell cleavage can be induced by removal of DCB . In postmitotic cells , the cleavage furrow forms only when and where the telophase disc makes contact with the cell cortex . We draw several conclusions from these observations . First , the reconstitution of all elements of the interphase cell does not necessarily occur synchronously . Second , cy - tokinesis is dissociable from mitosis . Third , the anaphase spindle and telophase disc may act integrally in establish - ing the time and place of furrow formation in mammalian cells . Finally , cleavage can be induced to occur with high synchrony in cells recovering from DCB . With the meth - ods described here , it should now be possible to produce a synchronous model system for the analysis of mammalian cell cleavage independent of concurrent mitotic events . Postmitotic Cells : Interphase or Mitotic ? We have demonstrated that , in the event of failure of cell cleavage , the mitotic spindle and the telophase disc are re - tained into interphase . Interphase is here defined by the disappearance of mitosis specific markers such as MPM - 2 and cyclin B , and by the reconstitution of interphase nu - clei . The nuclei in these cells are recognized as interphase on the basis of several characteristics , including a re - formed lamin border , decondensed chromatin and the presence of nucleoli . DCB - treated cells retain this partial and selective mi - totic character for a period of time in G1 , after which the spindle and telophase disc degenerate . The various mito - sis - specific elements arise at the onset of mitosis under the control of the protein kinase p34 cdc2 ( Lamb et al . , 1990 ; Nigg , 1991 ) . Despite the fact that p34cdcZ - cyclin B kinase activity is rapidly degraded at the onset of anaphase ( Hunt et al . , 1992 ; Holloway et al . , 1993 ) , elements of the mitotic spindle in the anaphase cell are normally retained until cleavage is complete . The mechanism by which mitotic character is retained through the period of anaphase and telophase is unknown , but may involve late mitotic protein kinases that are active specifically at anaphase and telo - phase ( Fenton and Glover , 1993 ; Toyn and Johnston , 1994 ) . Postmitotic cells in the presence of DCB possess a mi - crotubule structure that appears to represent the remain - ing interpolar elements of the anaphase mitotic spindle . It perhaps shares some similarity with stembody microtubule bundles of telophase cells , as the residual spindle , like the stembody , lacks association with centrosomes . The cen - trosomes are present on the opposite side of the nuclei in postmitotic cells , leaving open the interesting question of the mechanism by which the integrity of the postmitotic spindle is maintained . In addition to retention of the form of a mitotic spindle , the postmitotic spindle retains association with the mitosis specific ( Sawin et al . , 1992 ) microtubule motor protein Eg - 5 . Martineau et al . lnterphase Cell Cleavage 199 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 200 Additionally , at its equator we have found several mitosis specific antigens that normally migrate toward the equato - rial position of the spindle during anaphase , including TD - 60 , CENP - E , and MKLP - 1 . Such equatorial antigens may serve to maintain the anti - parallel microtubules of the two half spindles in register at their overlapping ends ( Nislow et al . , 1990 ) , and thus may be responsible for the spindle shape of the microtubule array in postmitotic cells . The spindle poles might perhaps represent parallel microtu - bules associated by cross - linking at their minus ends . In addition to a postmitotic spindle , DCB - treated post - mitotic cells also retain a telophase disc . Although the te - lophase disc can exist independently of microtubules ( An - dreassen et al . , 1991 ) , it seems that the postmitotic spindle and the telophase disc interact as an integral element in postmitotic cells . The telophase disc is present perpendicu - larly at the center of the postmitotic spindle . At longer times after reentry into G1 , both the postmitotic spindle and telophase disc degenerate . Retention of both the mi - crotubule spindle and the telophase disc in postmitotic cells may be important to the capacity of the cell to resume cleavage upon removal of DCB ( see below ) . Independence of Cytokinesis from Mitosis Cells that retain a spindle and a telophase disc , but which are otherwise interphase in character , cleave after release from treatment with DCB . This demonstrates that cytoki - nesis can occur independently from normally concurrent events in mitosis . Since cyclin B has been degraded in postmitotic cells that can cleave upon removal of DCB , it is apparent that cytokinesis does not require the presence of active p34 cdc ~ . Perhaps specific late mitotic kinases , such as polo ( Fenton and Glover , 1993 ) are involved in the reg - ulation of cytokinesis . In comparison to other events in the cell cycle such as S - phase and the onset of mitosis , the molecular control of mammalian cell cleavage has not been substantially eluci - dated . An important impediment to molecular analysis of mammalian cell cleavage has been the lack of a synchro - nous in vitro model system with which to study this process . The system we describe here of postmitotic mammalian cells undergoing synchronous cleavage upon recovery from DCB lends itself to the development of a model sys - tem for the in vitro study of mammalian cell cleavage mechanisms . This system would offer the potential of in - vestigating cell cleavage independent of mitosis . The only component apparently lacking in the DCB - blocked cell is sufficient assembly competent actin to complete cleavage . We hope to be able to reconstitute synchronous cleavage by addition of assembly competent actin in an open cell system . Such a system promises to permit the analysis of the control of cytokinesis , and of the role of the telophase disc , the residual mitotic spindle and the cortical ring of ac - tin in cleavage . The Role of the Telophase Disc and of Actin in Cleavage Our experiments have demonstrated conclusively that or - ganized actin is essential to the furrowing process during mammalian cell cleavage . There have been conflicting re - ports concerning whether cytochalasins actually prevent furrow completion ( reviewed in Margolis and Andreassen , 1993 ) . In accord with others , we have previously demon - strated that a concentration of DCB sufficient to depoly - merize interphase F - actin ( 2 ~ M ) does not impede furrow - ing of HeLa cells ( Krishan , 1972 ; Sanger and Holtzer , 1972 ; Andreassen et al . , 1991 ) . The cleavage furrows sepa - rating the daughter cells finally revert during early inter - phase , giving rise to binucleate cells . Here we show that a Figure 8 . Assay for mitotic markers in DCB - treated postmitotic cells . ( A ) Confocal microscopic images of HeLa cells released from no - codazole block in the presence of DCB . By TD - 60 signal , the cell at the bottom is in prophase , and contains abundant cyclin B ( left ) . In contrast , the postmitotic cell , identified by a telophase disc ( right ) , is negative for cyclin B . ( B ) Postmitotic DCB - treated cells . MPM - 2 antigen is absent from the three postmitotic cells ( left ) , while it is strongly positive in the prophase cell at bottom . The postmitotic cells are identified by the presence of telophase discs , detected with anti - TD - 60 antibodies ( middle ) . The two upper cells have nuclei , appar - ent in phase contrast ( right ) . The third postmitotic cell has a degenerated telophase disc . ( C ) Control cells . In contrast , a control cell at the beginning of telophase has a faint residual stain for MPM - 2 ( left , arrow ) . For comparison , a pro - metaphase cell in the same field ( left , cell on left ) labels intensely with MPM - 2 antibody ; and three pairs of cells that have just exited mitosis , as determined by TD - 60 antigen in midbodies ( middle ) and figure eight appearance ( right ) , are not reactive with MPM - 2 antibodies ( left ) . ( D ) Control ( top ) and postmi - totic DCB - treated cells ( bottom ) . Eg - 5 , a mierotubule motor protein that is specific for mitotic microtubules gives a signal ( top left ) that is coincident with that for tubulin in a metaphase control . In a DCB - treated cell , identified as postmitotic by the small central spindle and dark areas where there are reformed nuclei ( bottom right ) , Eg - 5 ( left ) is still coincident with the spindle microtubules ( right ) . The same signal is obtained in experiments using Eg - 5 antibody and propidium iodide counterstain . We have also observed that Eg - 5 is absent from interphase microtubules in these cell populations ( not shown ) . Bars ( A and C ) 10 p , m ; ( D ) 5 p ~ m . Martineau et al . lnterphase Cell Cleavage 201 A 8O 6O 40 i ~ 2O 0 Post mitotic : 0 Uncleaved ] A / • Cleaving ~ A / A Cleaved - - / 1 / I / ! . 25 50 75 100 125 150 Time ( rain . ) B 80 6O ÷ 40 O E - 20 I 0 175 [ ] Post Mitotic cleaved • Binucleate cells , / O without telophase disc / / , . O \ o ~ / o [ ] n . I , I , I , I , I 25 50 75 100 125 150 Time ( min . ) Figure 9 . Rapid induction of synchronous cleavage in postmitotic cells upon release from DCB . ( A ) After removal of DCB , postmitotic cells initiate furrowing and progress to complete cleavage . HeLa cells were synchronized with nocodazole , released from nocodazole block into DCB ( time 0 ) , and finally released from the DCB block at 90 min ( arrow ) , a time when a majority of cells have exited mitosis ( see Fig . 1 ) . Postmitotic cells in the process of cleavage ( solid circles ) , were scored by the presence of TD - 60 label at a constricting fur - row lying between two nuclei . Cleaved cells ( open triangles ) were characterized by progression of the furrow to completion , and by the presence of a compacted TD - 60 signal typical of cleaved cells ( see D ) . Uncleaved postmitotic cells ( open circles ) were scored on the ba - sis of the absence of detectable furrowing between the two nuclei . ( B ) The capacity for cleavage recovery correlates with the continued presence of the telophase disc and the postmitotic spindle . The ability to cleave was measured by release from DCB for 10 min after in - creasing intervals of DCB exposure . Time points indicate the point of fixation , representing the time of DCB release plus 10 min . Post - mitotic cells were scored for their ability to form a complete cleavage furrow ( open squares ) . At longer times , the population of postmi - totic cells declined , and was replaced by binucleate G1 cells lacking a telophase disc and a postmitotic spindle ( closed circles ) . In these experiments , the combined percentage of mitotic and postmitotic populations ( M + PM ) was determined at 90 min ( A ) or by the aver - age of values from 60 - 90 rain ( B ) after release from nocodazole . Cells with the phenotypes indicated are expressed as a percentage of the total mitotic and postmitotic cells ( M + PM ) , Each point represents at least three counts of 250 cells each . ( C ) Merged confocal mi - croscopic images of a field of HeLa cells either before cleavage after 105 min treatment with DCB ( left ) , or with completed cleavage 15 min after release from 90 rain treatment with DCB ( right ) . Anti - tubulin label is imaged in green , and propidium iodide stain of chroma - tin is in red . ( D ) A merged confocal image of a field of cleaving cells 15 min after DCB release showing the phase contrast image in grey , and TD - 60 in salmon red . Bar , 15 p , m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 202 Figure 10 . Distribution of ac - tin in cleaving control and postmitotic cells . Polymeric actin , detected with FITC - phalloidin is shown at the left ; the telophase disc marker TD - 60 is at the right , except in ( E ) , for which poly - meric actin and TD - 60 im - ages are merged in color . ( A ) Control telophase cell . A control HeLa cell in mid - cleavage at 65 min after re - lease from nocodazole arrest . Actin is dispersed randomly in the cell cortex , and exhib - its no particular enrichment at the position of the furrow ( TD - 60 marker ) . This result is typical of the majority of cleaving cells . ( B ) In a field of cells in DCB block at 100 min after nocodazole release , actin is dispersed in random patches on the cell cortices . ( C ) At 10 min after release from DCB - induced cleavage block , the majority of cells in this field are in mid - cleavage and all cleaving cells show a marked concentration of ac - tin polymer at the furrow . ( D ) Close - up of a cell in mid - cleavage , 10 rain after release from DCB . ( E ) Close - up of two cells undergoing one - sided cleavage . The merged images show a coassociation of local concentrations of cortical actin , and telophase disc structures at the form - ing furrow during one sided cleavage after DCB release . Polymeric actin ( white ) , de - tected with FlTC - phalloidin , is highly concentrated at the site of the forming furrow and , internal to the actin , TD - 60 antigen ( red ) gives ev - idence of cortically associ - ated telophase disc ele - ments . There is no concentrated cortical actin , nor TD - 60 , on the noncleav - ing side . Bars : ( A , D , and E ) 5 ~ m ; ( B and C ) 20 p ~ m . Martineau et al . lnterphase Cell Cleavage 203 fivefold higher concentration of DCB , which disrupts the organization of cortical actin in mitotic cells , suppresses onset of furrowing in HeLa cells . Upon removal of DCB , cleavage in postmitotic cells rapidly follows the re - assem - bly of actin specifically at the site of the furrow . We have previously proposed that the telophase disc de - termines the position of cleavage by interacting locally with actin and its associated proteins at the cortex of the cell ( Andreassen et al . , 1991 ; Margolis and Andreassen , 1993 ) . In support of an essential role for the telophase disc in promulgating cleavage , we have now found that only cells that retain a telophase disc can resume cleavage upon removal of DCB . Further , in such cells , F - actin organizes and cleavage occurs only at the intersection of the telo - phase disc with the cell cortex . Finally , with increasing time in DCB , the telophase disc can lose association with one side of the cortex . In cells where this has occurred , one always observes a one - sided cleavage occuring only at that portion of the cortex still in contact with the telophase disc . The mitotic spindle has also been implicated in position - ing the site of cleavage ( Rappaport , 1986 ) , and the astral microtubule rays of the spindle have been proposed to de - termine the site of cleavage by distal contact with the cor - tex . Since both the postmitotic spindle and the telophase disc are retained in cells that remain competent to com - plete cleavage after removal of DCB , it is possible that the retained spindle is required for cleavage . Various experi - ments have indicated that the signal for cytokinesis origi - nates from the midzone of the spindle ( Rappaport and Rappaport , 1974 ; Kawamura , 1977 ) . However , since the mammalian spindle is relatively small , it is not apparent that the astral microtubules can reliably contact the cortex to establish the site of cleavage . One possibility , therefore , is that the spindle positions the telophase disc , which then maintains contact with the cortex and determines the site of cleavage . The telophase disc , in this manner , may physi - cally transmit the equatorial signal produced by the spindle . In conclusion , we find a strong correlation between the presence and position of the telophase disc and furrow for - mation . Considering that it may now be possible to create a synchronous open cell system for the study of mamma - lian cell cleavage , it will be of substantial interest to use this system to begin to define the components of the telo - phase disc and the nature of their interaction with actin , actin associated proteins , and cell cortex elements in the formation of a contractile apparatus . We are grateful to the following people for providing antibodies used in this study : Dr . J . Kuang for MPM - 2 antibodies , Dr . T . Yen for anti - CENP - E antibodies , Dr . R . Kuriyama for anti - MKLP antibodies , Dr . M . Wener for anti - TD - 60 antiserum , Dr . M . Kress for anti - human Eg5 antibodies , Drs . Paturle - Lafanech ~ re and D . Job for anti - non - tyrosinated ( glu ) tubulin an - tibodies , Dr . J . - C . Courvalin for anti - lamin antibodies , and Drs . S . Schiff and E . Harlow for anti - cyclin B antibodies . This work was supported in part by grants from the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer ( ARC ) , from the National Institutes of Health ( GM32022 ) , from the International Human Frontiers of Science Program ( RG - 513 / 94 M ) , and by institutional support from the Commisariat h PEn - ergie Atomique and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique . Ms . Martineau is supported by a doctoral fellowship from La Ligue Con - tre le Cancer . This is publication no . 280 of the Institut de Biologie Struc - turale . Received for publication 17 November 1994 and in revised form 28 March 1995 . References Andreassen , P . R . , D . K . Palmer , M . H . Wener , and R . L . Margolis . 1991 . Telo - phase disc : a new mitotic organelle that bisects telophase cells with a possi - ble role in cytokinesis , or . Cell Sci , 99 : 523 - 534 . Andreassen , P . R . , and R . L . Margolis . 1994 . Microtubule dependency of p34 c ~ 2 inactivation and mitotic exit in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 789 - 802 . Atlas , S . J . , and S . Lin . 1978 . Dihydrocytochalasin B : biological effects and binding to 3T3 ceils . J . Cell Biol . 76 : 360 - 370 . Aubin , J . E . , M . Osborn , and K . Weber . 1981 . Inhibition of eytokinesis and al - tered contractile ring morphology induced by cytochalasins in synchronised PtK2 cells . Exp . Cell . Res . 136 : 63 - 79 . Bailly , E . , M . Dur6e , P . Nurse , and M . Bornens . 1989 . p34 cdc2 is located in both nucleus and cytoplasm : part is centrosomally associated at G2 / M and enters vesicles at anaphase . EMBO J . 8 : 3985 - 3995 . Cao , L . - G . , and Y . - L . Wang . 1990 . Mechanism of the formation of contractile ring in dividing cultured mammalian cells . II . Cortical movement of microin - jected actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 1089 - 1095 . Carter , S . B . 1967 . Effects of cytochalasins on mammalian cells . Nature ( Lond , ) . 213 : 261 - 264 . Chaudhary , N . , and J . - C . Courvalin . 1993 . Stepwise reassembly of the nuclear envelope at the end of mitosis . J , Cell Biol . 122 : 295 - 306 . Davis , F . M . , T . Y . Tsao , S . K . Fowler , and P . N . Rao . 1983 . Monoclonal anti - bodies to mitotic cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 80 : 2926 - 2930 . Earnshaw , W . C . , and R . L . Bernat . 1991 . Chromosomal passengers : toward an integrated view of mitosis . Chrornosoma . 100 : 139 - 146 . Fenton , B . , and D . M . Glover . 1993 . A conserved mitotic kinase active at late anaphase - telophase in syncytial Drosophila embryos . Nature ( Lond . ) . 363 : 637 - 640 . Fishkind , D . J . , and Y . L . Wang . 1993 . Orientation and three - dimensional orga - nization of actin filaments in dividing cultured ceils . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 837 - 848 . Heidemann , S . R . , and M . W . Kirschner . 1975 . Aster formation in eggs of Xeno - pus laevis : induction by isolated basal bodies . J . Cell Biol . 67 : 105 - 117 . Holloway , S . L . , M . Glotzer , R . W . King , and A . W . Murray . 1993 . Anaphase is The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 204 initiated by proteolysis rather than by the inactivation of maturation - pro - moting factor . Cell . 73 : 1393 - 1402 . Hunt , T . , F . C . Luca , and J . V . Ruderman . 1992 . The requirements for protein synthesis and degradation , and the control of destruction of cyclins A and B in the meiotic and mitotic cell cycles of the clam embryo . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 707 - 724 . Kawamura , K . 1977 . Microdissection studies on the dividing neuroblast of the grasshopper with special reference to the mechanism of unequal cytokinesis . Exp . Cell Res . 106 : 127 - 137 . Krishan , A . 1972 . Cytochalasin B , time lapse cinematographic studies on its ef - fects on cytokinesis . . L Cell Biol . 54 : 657 - 664 . Lamb , N . J . C . , A . Fernandez , A . Watrin , J . - C . Labb6 , and J . - C . Cavadore . 1990 . Microinjection oi p34 cdc2 kinase induces marked changes in cell shape , cytoskeletal organization , and chromatin structure in mammalian fibro - blasts . Cell . 60 : 151 - 165 . Margolis , R . L . , and P . R . Andreassen . 1993 . The telophase disc : its possible role in mammalian cell cleavage . Bioessays . 15 : 201 - 207 . Nigg , E . A . 1991 . The substrates of the cdc2 kinase . Semin . Cell Biol . 2 : 261 - 270 . Nislow , C . , C . Sellitto , R . Kuriyama , and J . R . McIntosh . 1990 . A monoclonal antibody to a mitotic microtubule - associated protein blocks mitotic progres - sion . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 511 - 522 . Nislow , C . , V . A . Lombillo , R . Kuriyama , and J . R . McIntosh . 1992 . A plus - end - directed motor enzyme that moves antiparallel microtubules in vitro local - izes to the interzone of mitotic spindles . Nature ( Lond . ) . 359 : 543 - 547 . Nurse , P . , and Y . Bissett . 1981 . Gene required in G1 for commitment to cell cy - cle and in G2 for control of mitosis in fission yeast . Nature ( Lond . ) . 292 : 559 - 560 . Nurse , P . 1990 . Universal control mechanism regulating onset of M - phase . Na - ture ( Lond . ) . 344 : 503 - 508 . Paturle - Lafanech ~ re , L . , M . Manier , N . Trigault , F . Pirollet , H . Mazarguil , and D . Job . 1994 . Accumulation of delta 2 - tubulin , a major tubulin variant that cannot be tyrosinated , in neuronai tissues and stable microtubule assemblies . J . Cell Sci . 107 : 1529 - 1543 . Pines , J . , and T . Hunter . 1991 . Human cyclins A and B1 are differentially lo - cated in the cell and undergo cell cycle - dependent nuclear transport . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1 - 17 . Rappaport , R . 1986 . Establishment of the mechanism of cytokinesis in animal cells . Int . Rev . CytoL 105 : 245 - 281 . Rappaport , R . , and B . N . Rappaport . 1974 . Establishment of cleavage furrows by the mitotic spindle . J . Exp . Zool . 183 : 115 - 119 . Rattner , J . B . 1992 . Mapping the mammalian intracellular bridge . Cell MotiL Cytoskeleton . 23 : 231 - 235 . Sanger , J . W . , and H . Holtzer . 1972 . Cytoehalasin B : effects on cytokinesis , gly - cogen , and 3H - D - glucose incorporation . Am . I . Anat . 135 : 293 - 298 . Sawin , K . E . , K . LeGuellec , M . Philippe , and T . J . Mitchison . 1992 . Mitotic spin - dle organisation by a plus - end - directed microtubule motor . Nature ( Lond . ) . 359 : 540 - 543 . Sellitto , C . , and R . Kuriyama . 1988 . Distribution of a matrix component of the midbody during the cell cycle in chinese hamster ovary cells . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 431 - 439 . Th ' ng , J . P . H . , P . S . Wright , J . Hamaguchi , M . G . Lee , C . J . Norbury , P . Nurse , and E . M . Bradbury . 1990 . The FT210 cell line is a mouse G2 phase mutant with a temperature - sensitive CDC2 gene product . Cell . 63 : 313 - 324 . Toyn , J . H . , and L . H . Johnston . 1994 . The Dbf2 and Dbf20 protein kinases of budding yeast are activated after the metaphase to anaphase cell cycle tran - sition . EMBOJ . 13 : 1103 - 1113 . Vandre , D . D . , F . M . Davis , P . N . Rao , and G . G . Borisy . 1984 . Phosphoproteins are components of mitotic microtubule organizing centers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 81 : 4439 - 4443 . Whitfield , W . G . F . , C . Gonzalez , G . Maldonado - Codina , and D . M . Glover . 1990 . The A - and B - type cyclins of Drosophila are accumulated and de - stroyed in temporally distinct events that define separable phases of the G2 - M transition . EMBO J . 9 : 2563 - 2572 . Wulf . E . , A . Deboben , F . A . Bautz , H . Faulstich , and T . Wieland . 1979 . Fluores - cent phallotoxin , a tool for the visualization of cellular actin . Proe . Natl . Aead . Sci USA . 76 : 4498 ~ 502 . Yahara , I . , F . Harada , S . Sekita , K . Yoshihira , and S . Natori . 1982 . Correlation between effects of 24 different cytochalasins on cellular structures and cellu - lar events and those on actin in vitro . Z Cell Biol . 92 : 69 - 78 . Yen , T . J , D . A . Compton , D . Wise , R , P . Zinkowski , B . R . Brinkley , W . C . Earnshaw , and D . W ~ Cleveland . 1991 . CENP - E , a novel human centromere - associated protein required for progression from metaphase to anapbase . EMBO J . 10 : 1245 - 1254 . Yen , T . J . , G . Li , B . T . Schaar , I . Szilak , and D . W . Cleveland . 1992 . CENP - E is a putative kinetochore motor that accumulates just before mitosis . Nature ( Lond . ) . 359 : 536 - 539 . Martineau et al . lnterphase Cell Cleavage 205