Building the knowledge map : an industrial case study Suyeon Kim , Euiho Suh and Hyunseok Hwang Suyeon Kim is a Researcher in Management Information Systems at the Pohang University of Science and Technology , Korea ( tomi @ postech . ac . kr ) . Euiho Suh is a Professor and the Director of the Management Information Systems Laboratory at the Pohang University of Science and Technology , Korea ( ehsuh @ postech . ac . kr ) . Hyunseok Hwang is a doctoral candidate in Management Information Systems at the Pohang University of Science and Technology , Korea ( ieman @ postech . ac . kr ) . Abstract Recently , research interest in knowledge management has grown rapidly . Much research on knowledge management is conducted in academic and industrial communities . Utilizing knowledge accumulated in an organization can be a strategic weapon to acquire a competitive advantage . Capturing and representing knowledge is critical in knowledge management . This paper proposes a practical methodology to capture and represent organizational knowledge . The methodology uses a knowledge map as a tool to represent knowledge . We explore several techniques of knowledge representation and suggest a roadmap with concrete procedures to build the knowledge map . A case study in a manufacturing company is provided . Keywords Knowledge management , Knowledge mapping , Knowledge processes Introduction Knowledge management is an emerging (cid:142)eld that has commanded attention and support from the industrial community . Many organizations currently engage in knowledge management in order to leverage knowledge both within their organization and externally to their shareholders and customers ( Rubenstein - Montano et al . , 2001 ) . Companies regard intellectual capital as important asset and strive to deploy knowledge management in an organization to gain a competitive edge . Capturing and representing knowledge buried in people and an organization are the fundamental building blocks of knowledge management implementation . Walczak ( 1998 ) notes that a signi(cid:142)cant and time consuming problem for knowledge - based system developers is how to ef(cid:142)ciently elicit knowledge from experts and transform this elicited knowledge into a machine usable format . A variety of researches on knowledge representation have been conducted . This paper proposes a practical methodology for capturing and representing organizational knowledge . The methodology is composed of a six - step procedure , from de(cid:142)ning an organizational knowledge step to a knowledge map validation step . Practical guidelines and tips are provided in each step . We use a knowledge map as a tool for representing knowledge in these procedures . We (cid:142)rst explore several techniques of knowledge representation and suggest a roadmap for building the PAGE 34 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 , pp . 34 - 45 , ã MCB UP Limited , ISSN 1367 - 3270 DOI 10 . 1108 / 13673270310477270 knowledge map , providing detailed procedures . A case study of a manufacturing company is provided to verify our proposed methodology . Finally , we discuss lessons learned from an industrial case study . Related works Several techniques of knowledge representation have been devised for knowledge - based applications . These techniques can provide a bridge between human knowledge and machine knowledge . Some of these representational methods are discussed here . Frame Frame is a powerful knowledge representation system that is accessible to both humans and machines . A frame is a collection of information and associated actions that represents a simple concept ( Gordon , 2000 ) . Petri net Petri net can depict important knowledge about the structure and dynamic behavior of the system . Rudas and Horvath ( 1997 ) used Petri net for process model entities and their evaluation knowledge . Petri net representations of generic manufacturing process entities contain information on all available process variants , and knowledge on their evaluation procedures . The main elements of Petri net models are transitions , for information on the process and its components , and places , for information on evaluation knowledge and status . Semantic network Semantic network is a powerful knowledge representation system , which is easy to understand by human and can be used in automated processing systems . This means that they can also become a vehicle to archive company knowledge ( Gordon , 2000 ) . Each node is speci(cid:142)c knowledge and links show the interrelationship between knowledge in semantic network . Concept mapping Concept mapping is a type of structured conceptualization used by groups to develop a conceptual framework which can guide evaluation or planning ( Trochim , 1989 ) . Trochim considers concept mapping as a structured process , focused on a topic or construct of interest , involving input from one or more participants , that produces a pictorial view of their ideas and concepts and how these are interrelated . Concept mapping can be embodied by a node - link structure ( a concept map ) , in which nodes denote concepts , and links show the relationships between these concepts . Knowledge mapping Speel et al . ( 1999 ) de(cid:142)ne knowledge mapping as the process , methods and tools for analyzing knowledge areas in order to discover features or meaning and to visualize these in a comprehensive , transparent form , such that the business - relevant features ‘‘ Capturing and representing knowledge buried in people and an organization are the fundamental building blocks of knowledge management implementation . ’’ VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | PAGE 35 are clearly highlighted . Knowledge maps are created by transferring certain aspects of knowledge into a graphical form that is easily understandable . According to Grey ( 1999 ) , a knowledge map is a navigation aid to explicit and tacit knowledge , illustrating how knowledge (cid:143)ows throughout an organization . The know - ledge map portrays the sources , (cid:143)ows , constraints and terminations of knowledge within an organization . Knowledge mapping helps to understand the relationships between knowledge stores and dynamics . Davenport and Prusak ( 1998 ) note that developing a knowledge map involves locating important knowledge in the organization and then publishing some sort of list or picture that shows where to (cid:142)nd it . Knowledge maps typically point to people as well as to document and databases . A conceptual framework We employ a knowledge map approach to represent explicit and tacit knowledge within an organization . We de(cid:142)ne a knowledge map as a diagrammatic representation of corporate knowledge , having nodes as knowledge and links as the relationships between knowledge , and knowledge speci(cid:142)cation or pro(cid:142)le . Figure 1 depicts a conceptual model of knowledge map . As shown in Figure 1 , knowledge map consists of two components : ( 1 ) Diagram : Graphical representation of knowledge , having node and linkage : Node : Rectangular object denoting Knowledge captured from business process ; Linkage : Arrow between nodes implying relationships among knowledge ; and ( 2 ) Speci(cid:142)cation : Descriptive representation of knowledge . Knowledge map provides a knowledge worker with a robust cornerstone to capture , share , and use organizational knowledge . Advantages gaining from building the knowledge map can be summarized as follows : formalization of all knowledge inventories within an organization ; perception of relationships between knowledge ; ef(cid:142)cient navigation of knowledge inventory ; and Figure 1 A conceptual model of knowledge map PAGE 36 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 promotion of socialization / externalization of knowledge by connecting domain experts with knowledge explorers . The knowledge map plays important roles in implementing knowledge management . All captured knowledge can be summarized and abstracted through the knowledge map . The knowledge map also gives a useful blueprint for implementing a knowledge management system ( KMS ) . Figure 2 shows a knowledge management framework based on the knowledge map . Corporate culture and leadership form the foundation for successful knowledge management implementation . Infrastructure such as IT and the Internet is also indispensable . Organizational knowledge is inherent in diverse locations , including written documents , corporate databases , the human brain , and corporate memory . Explicit knowledge is chie(cid:143)y extracted from documents or databases and tacit knowledge from human resource while executing business processes . Explicit and tacit knowledge can be transformed into objects in the knowledge map . Knowledge map not only represents knowledge and knowledge streams within an organization , but also provides a well - organized basis for KMS . The knowledge map plays a key role in the KM project because it gives a knowledge pro(cid:142)le ( knowledge warehouse ) , knowledge link ( navigation aids among knowledge ) , and expert (cid:142)nder . Procedures of building the knowledge map According to the knowledge management framework , we proposed procedures for building the knowledge map . Figure 3 shows procedures of building the knowledge map . The procedure consists of six steps : de(cid:142)ning organizational knowledge , process map analysis , knowledge extraction , knowledge pro(cid:142)ling , knowledge linking and knowledge map validation . Figure 2 A knowledge management framework VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | PAGE 37 De(cid:142)ning organizational knowledge This step starts with de(cid:142)ning knowledge ontology . Ontology is a formal speci(cid:142)cation of the vocabulary to be used in specifying knowledge . The purpose of the ontology is to provide a uniform , text - based intermediate representation of the knowledge types speci(cid:142)c to a development effort that is comprehensible by either humans or machines . The intermediate representation provides a means of describing knowledge , at any level of granularity , without expert knowledge of the speci(cid:142)c technologies that will be used to implement that knowledge ( Kenyon , 1998 ) . This step covers de(cid:142)ning knowledge and baseline taxonomy within an organization . The scope and level of detail of the knowledge map are also determined by using questionnaires and interview techniques . The scope of the knowledge map decides whether the knowledge map is constructed throughout an entire company or a speci(cid:142)c organization . After deciding the scope , we determine the detail level ( level of granularity ) of knowledge analysis . When deciding the level of granularity , we should take into account the trade - off of granularity . Highly decomposed knowledge may impede rapid knowledge retrieval and knowledge map construction due to knowledge - glut . Therefore , it is important to determine the proper level of detail to meet organizational knowledge demand . When analyzing the source of knowledge within an organization , we can use operation manuals , meeting minutes , external data , project deliverables , and customer contact records . Process map analysis In this study we extract organizational knowledge based on the business process . We (cid:142)nd experience and know - how acquired during business execution . By capturing and managing knowledge involved in business processes , we can (cid:142)nd solutions to problems easily . Figure 3 Procedures of building the knowledge map PAGE 38 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 Business process is analyzed using a process map technique . Process is a systematic series of actions directed to some end ( customer or next process ) . Process is triggered when a certain event happens . A process map is composed of process , (cid:143)ow ( dependency ) , event , and external object . A horizontal axis in a process map denotes a related organization and processes are laid out vertically by an execution order . The relationship between pre - and post - process is represented by an arrow . External object and event are also drawn , if any . Figure 4 shows a simple process map of issuing a membership card . When many organizations are involved in a process , we should keep the process consistent over related organizations . Knowledge extraction In this step , knowledge is extracted through a process map . The extracted knowledge is of three types : prerequisite knowledge before process execution , used knowledge during execution , and produced knowledge after execution . Knowledge irrelevant to any process may exist . It can be general knowledge or external knowledge . After identifying knowledge through the process map , we extract knowledge independent of the business process . The following techniques are available in knowledge extraction : Interviewing ( structured , unstructured , semi - structured ) : to extract knowledge from domain experts using a prepared questionnaire . Document analysis : to extract knowledge from documents , such as operation manual , organization chart , training material and external documents . System analysis : to extract knowledge based on information stored in database , including system log and (cid:142)le structure . Figure 4 An example of a process map ‘‘ It is important to determine the proper level of detail to meet organizational knowledge demand . ’’ VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | PAGE 39 Knowledge workshop ( KW ) : to capture and analyze knowledge in a speci(cid:142)ed knowledge area . KW is highly interactive . Components of KW are general presentation about KM project , ontology de(cid:142)nition , building knowledge consensus among participants , and knowledge extraction session . We can use another techniques such as traditional brainstorming , nominal group techniques , focus groups , qualitative text analysis , and task environment analysis to extract knowledge . Knowledge pro(cid:142)ling We produce a knowledge pro(cid:142)le of extracted knowledge . We describe knowledge with pre - de(cid:142)ned items ( attributes ) and derive relationships with process . Junnarkar ( 1997 ) notes that knowledge management has two aspects : connecting people with information and connecting people with people . Knowledge pro(cid:142)ling can support these two aspects by providing informational attributes , such as keywords , description , importance , and people - (cid:142)nder attributes such as an expert or author . Sample attributes of knowledge pro(cid:142)le are listed in Table I . Each attribute may be mandatory , optional , or system - generated . Knowledge linking We identify the knowledge link after completing the knowledge pro(cid:142)le . The knowledge link is (cid:142)rst indicated when producing knowledge pro(cid:142)le , and is later con(cid:142)rmed . We identify new links and examine and con(cid:142)rm existing links . Knowledge link is represented as an arrow in a knowledge map . The knowledge map shows a navigation path of knowledge . The knowledge map is a type of directed graph and consists of nodes and links , each node denoting knowledge item and link denoting pre - and post - relationship between knowledge . Figure 5 shows an example of a knowledge link . Knowledge map validation User validation is performed on knowledge map . A structured walkthrough is conducted with domain experts , business managers , and knowledge map producer . The following are review checkpoints : Table I Sample attributes of knowledge pro(cid:142)le Category Item Mandatory Optional System General Knowledge ID TitleType ( tacit / explicit ) Creating date Last modi(cid:142)ed Expired date Storage FormatLocation Ownership AuthorOrganization Access right Contents Keyword Description Evaluation ImportanceRating Link Prerequisite Expert PAGE 40 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 Are all knowledge extracted ? ( Unidenti(cid:142)ed knowledge should be found ) Is any knowledge redundant over organizations ? Are pro(cid:142)les and links fully described for all knowledge ? Are the knowledge pro(cid:142)le and knowledge map consistent ? When completing knowledge mapping procedures we can acquire the following deliverables ( Speel and Shadbolt , 1999 ) : Knowledge mapping deliverables : a standardized terminology , new knowledge creation , knowledge maps , knowledge gaps . Knowledge dissemination deliverables : (cid:142)nal report , an electronic system containing the captured knowledge . People - oriented deliverables : a network of experts . Case study : P steel company Overview The P steel company is the most competitive company in the steel industry . Annual sales and net pro(cid:142)t amounts to more than ten billion dollars and one billion dollars , respectively . As the steel industry requires various kinds of technologies and know - how , we select a steel company to apply the suggested methodology . P steel company accumulates its own knowledge of fabricating crude steel for 30 years . A knowledge map of hot rolling process , core part of steel production process , is constructed . The procedure to build the knowledge map follows a six - step procedure . De(cid:142)ning organizational knowledge We (cid:142)rst de(cid:142)ne knowledge which occurs in a hot rolling mill . The rolling mill reduces a hot slab into a coil of speci(cid:142)ed thickness ; the whole processing procedure occurs at a relatively high temperature . A knowledge workshop on ontology was held to specify the knowledge requirements , analyze input sources , and develop basic taxonomy . We prescribed segment knowledge under (cid:142)ve categories : mechanical , electrical , instrumental , information system , and control . Figure 5 An example of a knowledge link VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | PAGE 41 Process map analysis We then produced process maps based on task (cid:143)ow . Figure 6 shows a series of procedures for the raw material to be transformed from the input yard through several processes to the next step or customer . Knowledge extraction Knowledge is extracted based on each process de(cid:142)ned in a process map . Knowledge is organized according to the operation manual , and domain knowledge of onsite technician . Knowledge is extracted using interview and questionnaires with domain experts having 20 years (cid:142)eld experience . Most experts are required to describe their own knowledge at least (cid:142)ve items . They also describe characteristics of knowledge and evaluate the knowledge . An example of knowledge extraction in roughing mill process is shown in Figure 7 . Knowledge pro(cid:142)ling We matched the knowledge with process map based on interview results and reviewed the knowledge list with domain experts . After re(cid:142)ning unidenti(cid:142)ed and duplicated knowledge , we con(cid:142)rm the (cid:142)nal knowledge pro(cid:142)le . The knowledge pro(cid:142)le is composed of several attributes , such as title , creating date , author , expert , location , and a brief description . Figure 8 is an example of a knowledge pro(cid:142)le . Knowledge linking A knowledge link is built for automatic input and roughing mill process , typical processes of a hot rolling mill . It is very helpful in identifying knowledge (cid:143)ow and association . An example of a knowledge link is shown in Figure 9 . Knowledge map validation After completing the production of the knowledge map , a structured walkthrough is conducted with domain experts to validate the knowledge map . Conclusion Management of intellectual assets can improve business performance by extracting , sharing , and reusing experience and know - how . Knowledge representation methods are crucial to manage knowledge inventory in an organization . They should be easy to Figure 6 Process map of hot rolling mill PAGE 42 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 understand by humans and used in automated processing systems . We employ a knowledge map approach to represent organizational knowledge . In this paper we de(cid:142)ne knowledge ontology to represent organizational knowledge , and analyze business process using a process map technique . After extracting knowledge based on the business process , a detail pro(cid:142)le of each knowledge is produced . Finally , we construct a knowledge map representing a knowledge link by investigating the pre - and post - relationship . Figure 8 An example of a knowledge pro(cid:142)le Figure 7 An example of knowledge extraction ‘‘ Maintaining knowledge is more dif(cid:142)cult than creating knowledge ; promotion of knowledge sharing culture is indispensable . ’’ VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | PAGE 43 The suggested methodology is applied to a manufacturing company which , by nature , possesses much technology , many skills and specialized knowledge . Domain experts describe and evaluate their own knowledge , and (cid:142)nally con(cid:142)rm the knowledge map . The knowledge map helps to replace knowledge lost by ‘‘brain drain’’ and to transfer knowledge from experts to novices . Some lessons were learned from the P steel company : maintaining knowledge is more dif(cid:142)cult than creating knowledge , promotion of knowledge sharing culture is indispensable , top management support on knowledge management project is inevitable , reward system is clearly declared to enhance knowledge sharing , knowledge management system should satisfy knowledge requirement . Acknowledgement The authors would like to thank the Ministry of Education of Korea for its (cid:142)nancial support toward the Electrical and Computer Engineering Division at POSTECH through its BK21 program . References Davenport , T . H . and Prusak , L . ( 1998 ) , Working Knowledge , Harvard Business School Press . Gordon , J . L . ( 2000 ) , ‘‘Creating knowledge maps by exploiting dependent relationships’’ , Knowledge - Based Systems , Vol . 13 , pp . 71 - 9 . Figure 9 An example of a knowledge link PAGE 44 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 Grey , D . ( 1999 ) , ‘‘Knowledge mapping : a practical overview’’ , SWS Journal , available at : http : / / smithweaversmith . com / knowledg2 . htm , March . Junnarkar , B . ( 1997 ) , ‘‘Leveraging collective intellect by building organizational capabilities’’ , Expert Systems with Applications , Vol . 13 No . 1 , pp . 29 - 40 . Kenyon , J . D . ( 1998 ) , ‘‘A process for knowledge acquisition and management’’ , 11th Workshop on Knowledge Acquisition Modeling and Management , Alberta , Canada , April . Rubenstein - Montano , B . et al . ( 2001 ) , ‘‘A systems thinking framework for knowledge management’’ , Decision Support Systems , Vol . 31 , pp . 5 - 16 . Rudas , I . J . and Horvath , L . ( 1997 ) , ‘‘Modeling of manufacturing processes using a Petri net representation’’ , Engineering Applications of Arti(cid:142)cial Intelligence , Vol . 10 No . 3 , pp . 243 - 55 . Speel , P . - H . , Shadbolt , N . , de Vries , W . Van Dam , P . H . and O’Hara , K . ( 1999 ) , ‘‘Knowledge mapping for industrial purposes’’ , 12th Workshop on Knowledge Acquisition Modeling and Management , Alberta , Canada , October . Trochim , W . M . ( 1989 ) , ‘‘An introduction to concept mapping for planning and evaluation’’ , Evaluation and Program Planning , Vol . 12 No . 1 , pp . 1 - 16 . Walczak , S . ( 1998 ) , ‘‘Knowledge acquisition and knowledge representation with class : the object - oriented paradigm’’ , Expert Systems with Applications , Vol . 15 , pp . 235 - 44 . Further reading Gruber , T . ( 1991 ) , ‘‘The role of common ontology in achieving sharable , reusable knowledge bases’’ , in Allen , J . A . , Fikes , R . and Sandewall , F . ( Eds ) , Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning : Proceedings of the Second International Conference , Morgan Kaufmann , San Mateo , CA . VOL . 7 NO . 2 2003 | JOURNAL OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT | PAGE 45