Cell , Vol . 122 , 735 – 749 , September 9 , 2005 , Copyright ©2005 by Elsevier Inc . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 06 . 043 Rab Conversion as a Mechanism of Progression from Early to Late Endosomes Jochen Rink , 1 Eric Ghigo , 1 , 2 Yannis Kalaidzidis , 1 , 3 and Marino Zerial 1 , * 1 Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics Pfotenhauerstrasse 108 01307 Dresden Germany 2 Unité des Rickettsies CNRS UPRES A6020 Faculté de Médecine 27 boulevard Jean Moulin 13385 Marseille Cedex 05 France 3 A . N . Belozersky Institute of Physico - Chemical Biology Building A Moscow State University Moscow 119899 Russia Summary The mechanisms of endosome biogenesis and main - tenance are largely unknown . The small GTPases Rab5 and Rab7 are key determinants of early and late endosomes , organizing effector proteins into specific membrane subdomains . Whether such Rab machiner - ies are indefinitely maintained on membranes or can disassemble in the course of cargo transport is an open question . Here , we combined novel image - analysis algorithms with fast live - cell imaging . We found that the level of Rab5 dynamically fluctuates on individual early endosomes , linked by fusion and fission events into a network in time . Within it , degra - dative cargo concentrates in progressively fewer and larger endosomes that migrate from the cell periphery to the center where Rab5 is rapidly replaced with Rab7 . The class C VPS / HOPS complex , an estab - lished GEF for Rab7 , interacts with Rab5 and is re - quired for Rab5 - to - Rab7 conversion . Our results re - veal unexpected dynamics of Rab domains and suggest Rab conversion as the mechanism of cargo progression between early and late endosomes . Introduction The endocytic system of eukaryotic cells embraces a complex network of membrane compartments , each fulfilling a specific set of tasks in cargo sorting , distri - bution , and catabolism ( for review , see Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Gruenberg and Maxfield , 1995 ; Mellman , 1996 ; Pelkmans and Helenius , 2003 ) . After internaliza - tion in early endosomes , cargo to be recycled ( exempli - fied by the transferrin receptor [ TFR ] or low - density li - poprotein receptor [ LDLR ] ) returns to the cell surface via recycling endosomes , whereas cargo destined for degradation ( epidermal growth factor receptor [ EGFR ] * Correspondence : zerial @ mpi - cbg . de or low - density lipoprotein [ LDL ] ) is transferred to late endosomes and , ultimately , to lysosomes . However , whereas there is a broad consensus on the organiza - tion of the endocytic pathway in terms of organelles and trafficking routes , the mechanisms whereby trans - port occurs from one endosomal compartment to an - other are still unsolved , as reflected by the different views formulated over the years . On the one hand , ve - sicular transport has been the general mechanistic par - adigm , proposing that cargo moves by means of vesi - cles between distinct compartments of stable identity ( Geuze et al . , 1988 ; Griffiths and Gruenberg , 1991 ; Hele - nius et al . , 1983 ; Palade , 1975 ; Schekman and Orci , 1996 ) . On the other hand , compartment maturation has been evoked as an alternative transport mode , with the membrane enclosing the cargo progressively changing its composition ( Helenius et al . , 1983 ; Murphy , 1991 ) , as observed during phagocytosis ( Vieira et al . , 2002 ; Henry et al . , 2004 ) . The traditional experimental reper - toire , including morphological analysis of fixed speci - mens , subcellular fractionation , and in vitro transport assays , could not unambiguously distinguish between the aforementioned scenarios . A more suitable ap - proach to address this long - standing problem would be the direct visualization of the dynamics of the endo - some trafficking machinery , an approach brought within reach by recent advances in live - cell - imaging tech - niques . Besides vesicle coats and adaptors , SNAREs and Rab GTPases have been identified as central regulators of intracellular transport . Both SNAREs and Rab GTPases occur as large families in eukaryotic genomes ( Bock et al . , 2001 ) , are enriched in specific membrane compart - ments , and participate in virtually every membrane traf - ficking reaction ( Sollner et al . , 1993 ; Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) . Rab GTPases mediate membrane tethering up - stream of SNARE - mediated fusion ( Rothman and Sol - lner , 1997 ; Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) and function as membrane organizers by regulating a plethora of solu - ble effector molecules . Rab5 provides a striking exam - ple of the aforementioned principle , recruiting different effector proteins that oligomerize within a membrane domain enriched in PI ( 3 ) P ( Christoforidis et al . , 1999 ; McBride et al . , 1999 ) . Rab5 , Rab4 , and Rab11 occupy distinct membrane domains sequentially traversed by recycling cargo ( Sonnichsen et al . , 2000 ) . Late endo - somes also consist of separate Rab7 and Rab9 do - mains ( Barbero et al . , 2002 ) , and cargo destined for degradation is first internalized into Rab5 domains on early endosomes and later appears in Rab7 domains on late endosomes . Thus , from a molecular viewpoint , transport between endosomes can operationally be de - fined as transport of cargo between membranes har - boring different Rab machineries . An important consideration in relation to the mecha - nisms of such transport is that the Rab machinery is peripherally associated with the membrane in a dy - namic equilibrium that depends on the balance be - tween guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) and GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) . In principle , such a Cell736 dynamic GDP / GTP cycle could confer two completely different modes of function to the Rab machinery , being indefinitely maintained or remodeled along with the flow of cargo . In light of both the inherent dynamics of Rab domains and their suitability as compartmental identity markers , the question pertaining to the mecha - nism of transport from early to late endosomes can be rephrased as follows : is the Rab5 domain on early en - dosomes stably maintained or dynamically assembled and disassembled in the course of cargo transport ? Is cargo transferred from stable Rab5 - positive early endo - somes to Rab7 - positive late endosomes , or do Rab5 - positive membranes eventually lose Rab5 and acquire Rab7 ? Discriminating between these two functional modes depends on the ability to study the dynamics of the Rab machineries on endosomes in the course of cargo transport . However , this is not a trivial task due to the high frequency of short - and long - range movements of endosomes on actin and microtubule filaments ( Gas - man et al . , 2003 ; Nielsen et al . , 1999 ) , which make their tracking increasingly difficult over long periods of time . We overcame this problem here by combining fast live - cell - imaging techniques with the development of new software tools to visualize and quantify the dynamics of membrane bound Rab5 and Rab7 during the trans - port of LDL from early to late endosomes . Results Live - Cell Imaging and Rab - Domain Tracking To probe the dynamics of Rab5 domains on early endo - somes , we used an A431 cell line stably expressing moderate levels of GFP - Rab5 ( 1 - to 5 - fold over endoge - nous ; Sonnichsen et al . , 2000 ) . Because these cells dis - play neither enlarged endosomes , as under Rab5 hy - peractivation ( Stenmark et al . , 1994 ) , nor alterations in the kinetics of transferrin uptake and recycling ( Son - nichsen et al . , 2000 ) , GFP - Rab5 can be expected to faithfully reflect the dynamics of the endogenous pro - tein . We developed an experimental strategy ( Figure 1A ) to track early endosomes over long periods of time by combining high - speed 4D imaging with novel track - ing algorithms ( see Movie S1 and the Supplemental Ex - perimental Procedures in the Supplemental Data avail - able with this article online ; Y . K . , unpublished data ) . The imaging protocol did not cause any appreciable photo - damage to the cells . First , cells did not contract but often continued to expand . Second , photobleaching of GFP over 30 min was below 20 % of the total signal ( Figure S1E ) . Third , endocytosis was not compromised since cells continued to internalize LDL throughout the experiment ( see below ) . The accuracy of the tracking algorithm was ascertained by systematically comparing computer - generated with manually followed endosome tracks . Based on 200 endosomes from three different sequences , we estimated that the program correctly tracked a structure between successive frames with a probability of 99 . 4 % . Premature track termination ac - counted for the majority of errors . Wrong connections occurred only in 0 . 08 % of cases ( Figures S2A – S2C ) . Using GFP - tagged rotavirus - like particles as standards ( Charpilienne et al . , 2001 ; Figure S2D ) , we estimated that the smallest visible structures contained w 300 molecules of GFP - Rab5 . Reliable tracking required a minimum of 630 ( ±150 , n = 3 ) molecules . Whereas the majority of endosomes contained 2 – 3 × 10 3 molecules of GFP - Rab5 , the few brightest and biggest structures harbored R 2 × 10 4 ( Figure S2D ) . Most importantly , im - munofluorescence microscopy of the very same struc - tures previously visualized by high - speed imaging ( Fig - ure 1C ) showed that they corresponded to essentially the entire complement of EEA1 - positive membranes , thus establishing that the tracked structures were bona fide Rab5 - positive early endosomes . Stability of Rab5 Domains on Early Endosomes Depending on whether Rab5 domains are permanent / long - lived or transient assemblies , two main scenarios can be envisaged . Transient assemblies would be indi - cated by GFP - Rab5 traces undergoing “fade in” and “fade out” ( gradual brightening from / dimming to back - ground level ) . Permanent association , on the other hand , would be incompatible with such events . Figure 1D shows the fluorescence - over - time traces of six ex - emplary endosomes , all tracked over 7 min and longer . Two conclusions could be drawn from this analysis . First , the half - life of Rab5 - positive early endosomes is in the range of 2 min , as deduced from the distribution of track lengths ( data not shown ) . However , since 70 % of tracks are terminated by homotypic fusion events ( Movie S1 ) , these data indicate that the bulk of early endosomes are not subjected to rapid turnover . Sec - ond , the amount of Rab5 associated with a given endo - some was unexpectedly found to vary considerably over time , as GFP - Rab5 fluorescence exhibited strong fluctuations ( Figures 1D and 2C ) . We can rule out the possibility that these fluctuations are imaging artifacts : ( 1 ) fluctuations are out of phase , excluding changes in laser intensity ; ( 2 ) they occur over tens of seconds , making movements between focal planes an unlikely cause ; and ( 3 ) in two color tracks ( see below , Figure 3C ) , they are not paralleled by fluctuations in cargo fluorescence . We next attempted to identify possible causes of these fluctuations by a close inspection of the image sequences . Interestingly , the frequent sharp upstrokes in a trace could mostly be attributed to a fusion event with another GFP - Rab5 endosome ( Movie S2 ) . We esti - mated that an early endosome undergoes up to two homotypic fusion events per min . However , despite such high frequency , the fluorescence signal of indivi - dual endosomes did not increase in a stepwise manner , as fusion events were generally followed by rapid ( w 40 – 80 s ) loss of GFP - Rab5 from the membrane . This was not mediated by visible fission events , which were observed , albeit with much lower frequency than fu - sions . Therefore , either fission of vesicles escaping de - tection or extraction of Rab5 from the membrane via Rab - GDI could explain such removal . We favor the lat - ter since the loss of Rab5 often proceeds without a de - tectable change in diameter of the structure ( see be - low ) , inconsistent with scission . Importantly , loss of Rab5 can proceed to apparent completion , as illustrated by the progressive dimming of the GFP - Rab5 fluorescence to background levels in Rab Conversion from Early to Late Endosomes 737 Figure 1 . Dynamic Density Changes of Membrane - Associated Rab5 In Vivo ( A ) Experimental setup for tracking of endosomes in living cells . ( 1 ) Fast 4D imaging at 8 – 10 frames / s at 37°C . ( 2 ) Collapse of individual Z stacks into one pseudo - 3D image plane by maximum projection for subsequent processing ( fluorescence intensity values were sufficiently preserved , as shown in Figure S1 ) . ( 3 ) Computational modeling and quantification of endosomes . ( 4 ) Tracking of individual endosomes across the image sequence . ( B ) Endosome identification and fitting by Motiontracking II . Most endosomes in the left panel ( raw data ) are recognized and modeled by the software ( fitted image , right ) . The accuracy of modeling is illustrated by the asymmetric endosome boxed in the raw image . Left : measured intensity distribution within the boxed region ( gray ) ; right : modeled intensity distribution ( red ) . Scale bar : 3 (cid:1) m . ( C ) Live - cell imaging was terminated by the perfusion of fixative into the imaging chamber , immunolabeling of the early - endosomal marker protein EEA1 was performed , and the cell featured in the live recording was located and imaged by high - resolution confocal laser scanning . Computational alignment of the resulting image ( right : GFP - Rab5 , green ; EEA1 , red ) with the last frame of the live - cell sequence ( left , GFP - Rab5 labeling only ) shows that ( 1 ) most endosomes visualized by immunolabeling are also seen in the high - speed sequence and ( 2 ) most GFP - Rab5 - bearing structures in the live - cell sequence are also positive for EEA1 ( 86 % ± 0 . 5 % , n = 3 ) . ( D ) GFP - Rab5 endosomes within a typical sequence ( 4 frames / Z stack , 2 stacks / s ) were tracked automatically . Color - coded plots of total fluorescence - over - time traces of six representative endosomes are shown ( see also Movie S1 ) . All traces are characterized by strong fluctua - tions of associated Rab5 signal . ( E ) Fusion events as major cause of fluctuations . One total fluorescence trace from Figure 1C ( orange , top ) is shown above the radius trace of the same endosome ( black , bottom ) . Arrows denote the temporal position of F = fusion , E = encounter , and Fi = fission events . F was operationally defined as coalescence without subsequent fission , E as coalescence immediately followed by fission , and Fi as splitting of a previously stable structure ( see also Movie S2 ) . The yellow shading highlights the phase of terminal Rab5 loss from the structure . Cell738 Figure 2 . Global Analysis of Rab5 Endosome Dynamics ( A ) Individual endosome measurements resulting from automated tracking of a typical GFP - Rab5 sequence ( 4 frames per Z stack , 2 stacks / s ) were plotted as a 2D histogram according to their intensity ( total fluorescence divided by 2× cross - sectional area ) and radius ( effective radius ) values . The radius resolution limit in these experiments was experimentally determined to be 0 . 25 (cid:1) m ( see Experimental Procedures ) . The large number of individual measurements scatters into a broad cloud ( gray ) . The positive slope of the trend line ( black , representing the average intensity value of each radius bin ) indicates increasingly intense Rab5 labeling with increasing endosome radius . Such positive slope is not an artifact of the systematic error in radius measurements , as the slope of the corrected trend line ( red , shifted up for better visibility ; see Figure S1F ) is almost identical for structures above the resolution limit . Rab Conversion from Early to Late Endosomes 739 the trace presented in Figure 1E ( top , shaded section ) . The radius of such structures clearly resolved by the microscope optics remained constant throughout the dimming process ( Figure 2C , bottom ) , ruling out break - down as trivial cause . We reproducibly observed such rapid fade - out events , although fusion was by far the predominant mode of track termination . Furthermore , fade - out events occurred most frequently among big , vacuole - like endosomes . Altogether , GFP - Rab5 is sta - bly maintained on membranes over long periods of time but can , under certain circumstances , completely and irreversibly dissociate . Population Dynamics of Rab5 Domains Since fade - out events were observed comparatively rarely during the visual inspection of a small set of en - dosome tracks , we sought to confirm the reversible membrane association of the Rab5 machinery by a sys - tematic population analysis of endosomes . Given that large endosomes appeared to preferentially undergo fade out , we first asked whether the surface density of GFP - Rab5 was in any way dependent on endosome size . We subjected the very large number of individual endosome measurements in a track set ( typically 300 , 000 / 15 min sequence ) to a histogram analysis of Rab5 fluorescence intensity ( I , defined as total fluores - cence / 2× cross - sectional area ) versus radius ( R ) . The individual data points were widely scattered , as ex - pected from the low signal - to - noise ratio of the image sequences and the fluctuations in the individual tracks ( Figure 1D ) . Strikingly , however , the I / R plot revealed that the intensity of Rab5 labeling increased with the size of the structures and the magnitude of such in - crease far exceeded the systematic error inherent to optical radius measurements ( Figure 2A and Figure S1F ) . Assuming that the majority of visible endosomes are individual structures and further approximating them to spherical vesicles , our data suggest that large endosomes generally have a higher Rab5 surface den - sity than smaller endosomes . In the case of very large structures , however , this trend appeared to reverse again , although the significance of this observation was tempered by the low density of data points in this re - gion of the histogram . Even though the correlation be - tween endosome size and intensity is not deterministic , as indicated by the broad scattering of individual mea - surements , it is highly reproducible ( Figure 2B ) . The characteristic I / R relationship of GFP - Rab5 en - dosomes could reflect either a general progression ( B ) Radius - intensity trend lines from three independent sequences ( raw trend lines : gray ; smoothened trend lines : black ; average of smooth - ened trend lines : red ) . The close correspondence over the central regions indicates that the size - dependent intensity increase is a general feature of Rab5 - positive endosomes . The divergence at large radius values is likely due to the low data densities in these regions ( A ) . ( C ) Highlighting of measurements from a manually verified track spanning 900 frames ( red ) within the total cloud of data points ( gray ) illustrates that individual endosomes can traverse the breadth of the radius - intensity diagram during their lifetime . ( D ) The total set of tracks from three independent sequences was randomly fragmented into 100 - frame segments . Average changes in intensity and radius over 100 frames were determined and visualized as radius - intensity vectors ( arrows ) . Their positive slope demonstrates that , on average , both radius and intensity of individual endosomes increase over time . ( E ) Population analysis of endosome movements . Four independent sequences , each spanning 13 min , were analyzed and tracked automati - cally . The image frame was subdivided into quadrants , and the net flow of tracked endosomes within quadrants was calculated . Arrows , superimposed on the last frame of the sequence , indicate the local direction of net flow over the entire observation interval . The nonrandom orientation of flow vectors indicates that , on average , Rab5 endosomes move toward the cell center . The outline of the cells at the start shown in red rules out contraction . from small and dim to large and bright structures or , alternatively , the existence of distinct , albeit partially overlapping , populations of endosomes with discrete I / R ratios . That the data points contributed by individual long tracks generally scattered over the entire width of the I / R diagram argued for the first hypothesis ( Figure 2C ) . We next asked whether intensity or radius system - atically change during the lifespan of endosomes . Inter - estingly , when examining large sets of tracks , we al - ways detected a net increase of both I and R over the observation interval . The magnitude of the net change was always smaller than the SD of the measurement due to the large fluctuations and occasional fission events . Nevertheless , this result is significant . First , the standard error of the measurements was very small ow - ing to the large data sets . Second , the net increases were independent of the length of the track fragments ( between 50 and 600 frames ) . Third , all sequences ex - amined invariably displayed a net increase in both I and R ( Figure 2D ) . We therefore conclude that , on the whole , early endosomes grow in size and concomitantly in - crease the surface density of GFP - Rab5 , thereby caus - ing the characteristic shape of the I / R diagram . Changes in Rab5 Dynamics Are Linked to the Movement of Early Endosomes We next asked whether the population behavior of GFP - Rab5 - positive endosomes was coordinated with endosome motility . When computationally analyzing the movement of all endosomes within a cell , we always de - tected net centripetal motility over most cellular areas ( except for the cell edge , where rearrangements during cell locomotion interfere with the analysis ; Figure 2E ) . The observed directionality is not a mere consequence of cell contraction since all cells analyzed actually ex - panded during the imaging . The directional component relative to total flow was small , consistent with the largely random movements at the single - endosome level . Thus , besides growing in I and R , endosomes also undergo a concomitant net movement from the cell periphery to the center . Since the directional changes were observed under steady - state conditions , one must deduce that Rab5 continuously redistributes from large structures in the cell center to small periph - eral structures . The emergence of the latter is consis - tently visible in image sequences ( Movie S3 ) . The re - quired loss of large structures is likely achieved by the fade - out events observed at the single - track level . This system analysis therefore strengthens our earlier con - Cell740 Figure 3 . Cargo Exit from Rab5 - Positive Structures ( A ) A431 cells coinfected with adenoviruses expressing YFP - Rab4 ( top ) and CFP - Rab5 ( middle ; bottom : merge ) 20 hr before the experiment were imaged at 37°C on an epifluorescence setup . Images were acquired at a frame rate of 1 . 2 Hz , with separate exposures for the two channels . * and + demarcate two independent events of Rab4 - tubule outgrowth and fission from a Rab5 - positive endosome . The stable GFP - Rab5 A431 cell line was imaged during the continuous uptake of DiI - LDL from the medium at 37°C . One four - frame / two - color Z stack / s was acquired for 40 min . ( B and C ) A single frame out of a typical sequence is shown in ( B ) corresponding to 30 min . of DiI - LDL uptake . The white asterisk marks the endosome featured in ( C ) ( top , approximate image center ) ; the corresponding total fluorescence traces are shown below ( Rab5 : green ; LDL : red ) . Inset : radius trace ( black ) of the LDL core and Rab5 total fluorescence trace ( green ) during Rab5 loss , throughout which the radius of the endosome remains nearly constant . Three morphological stages of Rab5 perimeter labeling are distinguished in the panel . ° : full Rab5 perimeter labeling ; # : Rab5 perimeter labeling dimmed almost to background levels shortly before completion of Rab5 loss ; + : apparently restored Rab5 labeling is due to the temporal association of the LDL core with a separate endosome , previously tracked ( + label in 37 . 2 min frame ) . ( D ) Quantification of LDL exit mode from Rab5 - positive endosomes , based on 22 Rab5 / LDL - positive structures randomly chosen from three independent sequences . Rab Conversion from Early to Late Endosomes 741 clusion that the Rab5 machinery is not indefinitely membrane associated . Rab5 Dynamics during Cargo Transport through Early Endosomes Loss of the Rab5 machinery from endosomal mem - branes may occur during the progression of cargo out of early endosomes . We therefore set up two - channel imaging protocols to visualize the dynamics of Rab5 in relation to markers of the recycling or degradative pathway ( Rab4 / Tf and Rab7 / LDL , respectively ) . We ob - served the frequent outgrowth of Rab4 - positive tubules from Rab5 - positive endosomes ( Figure 3A ) . Tf - contain - ing tubules showed the same behavior ( data not shown ) . Separation between Rab5 and Rab4 occurred by fission rather than loss of Rab5 ( Figure 3A , Movie S4 ) , likely reflecting the iterative removal of recycling cargo from early endosomes ( Dunn et al . , 1989 ; van der Sluijs et al . , 1992 ; Sonnichsen et al . , 2000 ; Ward et al . , 2005 ) . Next we investigated the possibility of Rab5 dissociation in conjunction with transport to late endo - somes . Cells were allowed to internalize fluorescent LDL for 10 min prior to imaging . As expected , LDL en - tered GFP - Rab5 - positive early endosomes , increasing almost linearly ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . Small at first , LDL - positive endosomes gradually expanded , turning into vacuolar structures of ring - like morphology . Through - out , the Rab5 signal displayed the typical fluctuations described above ( Figure 1D ) , which could again be mostly attributed to homotypic fusion with smaller Rab5 structures ( data not shown ) . Interestingly , the exit of LDL from early endosomes , as indicated by a loss of colocalization between LDL and Rab5 , occurred through a relatively rapid fade out of the Rab5 signal around the perimeter of the LDL - structure ( Figures 3C and 3D ) , suggestive of GDI - medi - ated extraction . Consistently , the R of the LDL core hardly changed throughout this process ( inset , Figure 3C ) . However , recovery of minor amounts of Rab5 in budding events cannot be entirely ruled out . LDL struc - tures that had just undergone GFP - Rab5 loss were often found to transiently associate with GFP - Rab5 - bearing endosomes ( Figure 3C ) without , however , rees - tablishing Rab5 association along the full perimeter of the membrane . Therefore , such events likely represent peripheral interactions with distinct vesicles , also con - firmed by careful visual inspection of the underlying movie sequences ( Movie S5 ) . Following loss of GFP - Rab5 , LDL structures tended to be much more motile than Rab5 - positive structures of comparable diameter and often tubulated and fused with similar Rab5 - nega - tive structures ( Movie S6 ) . The sequence of events described above represents the general mode of transition from Rab5 - positive to Rab5 - negative membranes . First , the timescale of Rab5 turnover on cargo - bearing structures was in the range of the kinetics of transport along the degradative pathway ( Dunn and Maxfield , 1992 ; Futter et al . , 1996 ; Griffiths et al . , 1989 ; Stoorvogel et al . , 1991 ) . Second , we systematically analyzed the loss of colocalization between LDL and Rab5 on 21 randomly chosen double - positive structures from three independent sequences ( Figure 3D ) . All tracks eventually progressed to com - plete separation between Rab5 and LDL , which always occurred by Rab5 loss . We never observed a Rab5 structure to lose its LDL content . We cannot exclude the possibility that some LDL is also delivered to late endosomes by small carriers invisible in our experimen - tal system . We find it unlikely since the high concentra - tion of fluorescent LDL in the Rab5 / LDL double - posi - tive structures should allow the detection of even small budding vesicles . Conversion from Rab5 to Rab7 during Early - to - Late - Endosome Transport The above results raised the question of whether the loss of Rab5 was coordinated with the acquisition of Rab7 . To visualize the dynamics of the two Rab pro - teins simultaneously , we constructed mRFP - tagged Rab5 and verified the functionality of the chimera as described above . Cells coexpressing mRFP - Rab5 and GFP - Rab7 were imaged during the continuous endocy - tosis of DiD - labeled LDL from the culture medium . LDL consistently accumulated in large , perinuclear mRFP - Rab5 - positive endosomes ( Figure 4A ) , which eventually lost Rab5 . Remarkably , the Rab7 signal increased in parallel , resulting in conversion of the membrane pe - rimeter from Rab5 positive / Rab7 negative to Rab5 negative / Rab7 positive ( Figures 4B and 4C ; Movie S7 ) . Similar results were observed both under conditions of transient expression as well as in stable cell lines ex - pressing the two tagged Rab proteins ( data not shown ) . We next addressed the temporal relationship be - tween Rab conversion and the appearance of cargo in late endosomes by developing software for the quanti - tative analysis of high - resolution confocal images of fixed cells ( Experimental Procedures ) . Late - endosomal compartments of stably GFP - Rab5 - expressing cells were labeled by a 15 min pulse of DiI - LDL , followed by a 2 . 5 hr chase . Thereafter , a 10 min pulse of DiD - LDL was administered , and cells were fixed after suitable chase intervals . Twelve high - resolution confocal images were analyzed per time point , amounting to w 20 , 000 endosomes in 100 cells . Figure 5A shows that , after loss of the Rab5 machinery by conversion , cargo rap - idly appeared in DiI - LDL - labeled late endosomes . We noticed that , in contrast to lipid - core - labeled LDL ( DiI - and DiD - LDL ) , the fluorescence signal of Alexa 405 fluorophores covalently linked to LDL surface proteins was rapidly lost after uptake . Such loss was strongly delayed by the microtubule - depolymerizing drug noco - dazole ( see Figure 5C ) , implying that it occurred upon transfer into a degradative compartment . We thus ex - ploited this property to measure the kinetics of such transfer . Stably GFP - Rab5 - expressing cells were pulsed with both DiD - and Alexa 405 - LDL for 10 min and fixed after suitable chase intervals . Whereas the signal of DiD - LDL remained constant , the Alexa 405 signal de - creased rapidly ( Figure 5B ) . Interestingly , the decay ki - netics were nearly identical to those of LDL exit from Rab5 - positive compartments , indicating that , immedi - ately after loss of the Rab5 machinery , cargo molecules encounter a degradative environment . To verify that the removal of Rab5 is accompanied by the dissociation of its effector machinery and the subsequent acquisition of late - endosome features , we Cell742 Figure 4 . Endosomes Undergoing Rab5 - to - Rab7 Conversion Wild - type A431 cells transiently cotransfected with GFP - Rab7 and mRFP - Rab5 were imaged during the continuous uptake of DiD - LDL from the medium at 37°C for 60 min . One three - channel frame of a single focal plane was acquired every 4 . 6 s . Rab7 and DiD - LDL images were acquired simultaneously , mRFP - Rab5 in an independent scan ( causing the color channel shift evident in [ B ] ) . A single frame out of a typical sequence is shown in ( A ) ( color coding as indicated ) , corresponding to 30 min of DiD - LDL uptake . The asterisk marks the endosome featured in ( B ) , depicted at the indicated times . The corresponding total fluorescence traces of Rab5 ( green ) and Rab7 ( blue ) are shown in ( C ) . The traces were scaled to the DiD - LDL signal to smooth fluctuations caused by movements in and out of the acquisition plane . measured the transit rates of LDL ( 10 min pulse ) through GFP - Rab5 - , EEA1 - , or Lamp1 - positive com - partments by four - channel high - resolution confocal mi - croscopy . Under control conditions ( Figure 5C , top ) , the kinetics of LDL exit from Rab5 - and EEA1 - positive compartments again closely paralleled loss of the Alexa 405 - LDL signal , demonstrating that Rab5 effec - tors dissociate from converting structures along with Rab5 . Furthermore , the loss of Alexa 405 fluorescence occurs in Lamp1 - positive compartments since ( 1 ) colo - calization with Lamp1 increases rapidly at early time points , in agreement with Figure 5A , ( 2 ) Alexa 405 - LDL is last detected in Lamp1 - positive compartments , and ( 3 ) the total amount of LDL within the cell can at all times be largely accounted for by the two pools colo - calizing either with EEA1 or Lamp1 . To kinetically resolve the processes between Rab conversion and appearance in late endosomes , we treated cells with 3 (cid:1) M of nocodazole for 2 hr prior to the experiment . Under conditions of microtubule de - polymerization ( verified by immunofluorescence , data not shown ) , the Alexa 405 - LDL signal was dramatically stabilized , suggesting that cargo transfer into degrada - tive compartments was impaired ( Figure 5C , bottom ) . Interestingly , the colocalization of LDL with Rab5 and EEA1 kept decreasing over time , consistent with on - going egress from early endosomes . Live - cell - imaging experiments further confirmed that Rab conversion occurs without intact microtubules . However , the colo - calization between LDL and Lamp1 was still found to increase over time , yet without the concomitant degrada - tion of Alexa 405 - LDL observed under control condi - tions . Therefore , microtubule depolymerization does not inhibit Rab conversion but likely a fusion step with a downstream hydrolytic compartment . Regulation of Rab5 - to - Rab7 Conversion Finally , we addressed the molecular mechanisms un - derlying Rab5 - to - Rab7 conversion . First , we examined the role of cargo destined for degradation . Given the Rab Conversion from Early to Late Endosomes 743 Figure 5 . Rab Conversion and Transport to Late Endosomes All traces are shown as mean values ± SD . ( A ) Late endosomes in A431 cells stably expressing GFP - Rab5 and serum starved for 20 hr were labeled by a 15 min pulse of DiI - LDL and 2 . 5 hr chase in serum - free medium . Thereafter , a 10 min pulse of DiD - LDL was internalized , and cells were chased in serum - free medium for different periods of time , processed , and imaged by high - resolution confocal microscopy . Green : colocalization of DiD - LDL with GFP - Rab5 over time . Red : colocalization of DiD - LDL with DiI - LDL - labeled late endosomes over time . ( B ) Cells were starved as in ( A ) , labeled by internalization of a mix of DiD - LDL and Alexa 405 - LDL for 10 min , chased in serum - free medium for different periods of time , processed , and imaged by high - resolution confocal microscopy . Blue : total DiD - LDL fluorescence . Green : total Alexa 405 - fluorescence . Red : DiD - LDL fluorescence colocalizing with GFP - Rab5 . Traces have been scaled to the same peak value . ( C ) Cells starved as in ( A ) were either left untreated ( control , top panel ) or exposed to 3 (cid:1) M nocodazole for the last 2 hr of serum starvation and all subsequent incubation steps ( bottom ) . Following internalization of a 10 min pulse of Alexa 405 - LDL , cells were chased in serum - free medium , fixed after the indicated chase intervals , immunostained , and imaged by high - resolution confocal microscopy . Total Alexa 405 - LDL alone ( black ) or colocalizing with EEA1 ( blue ) , Rab5 ( green ) or Lamp1 ( red ) . ( D ) A431 cells stably expressing GFP - Rab5 were serum starved for 20 hr . A 10 min pulse of DiD - LDL was internalized and mixed with either 1 (cid:1) g / ml rhodamine - transferrin ( control , black ) or 200 ng / ml rhodamine - EGF ( red ) . Cells were chased in serum - free medium , fixed after the indicated chase intervals , and imaged as above . Relative colocalization between LDL and GFP - Rab5 over time is shown . Mean half - time values ( ±SD ) under control and EGF conditions were derived from three independent experiments by fitting the decay phase of the traces with single exponentials . reported interaction between activated EGFR and regu - lators of the Rab5 cycle ( Di Fiore and De Camilli , 2001 ) , we tested the effect of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) on LDL - transit rates through early endosomes . Cells were serum starved for 20 hr , pulsed for 10 min with DiD - LDL either mixed with 5 (cid:1) g / ml rhodamine - Tf ( con - trol ) or 200 ng / ml rhodamine - EGF , and chased in se - rum - free medium . Interestingly , LDL transit was slower in the presence of EGF ( Figure 5D ) . Fitting of the expo - nential decay phase of the curves yielded estimates of transit half - times of 10 . 9 ± 0 . 6 min under control condi - tions and 15 . 4 ± 1 min in the presence of EGF ( n = 3 ) . As the decay parameters of control and EGF curves differed , we can rule out that the delay is caused by a curve shift due to delayed LDL uptake . These data show that EGFR activation not only stimulates endocy - tosis via activation of Rab5 ( Di Fiore and De Camilli , 2001 ) but also exerts a negative effect on early - to - late - endosomal transport . Rab conversion depends on the ability of Rab5 to hydrolyze GTP , allowing its extraction from the mem - brane . Consequently , a Rab5 mutant defective in GTP hydrolysis would be expected to result in endosomes that recruit Rab7 but fail to displace Rab5 . We tested this by examining the effects of the GTPase - deficient Rab5 Q79L mutant ( Stenmark et al . , 1994 ) . In contrast to wt Rab5 ( Figure 4A and data not shown ) , Rab5 Q79L in - duced a striking recruitment of Rab7 onto the ex - panded endosomes ( Figure 6A ) . EEA1 and Lamp1 also colocalized on the vacuoles ( data not shown ) . Altogether , these observations suggest the existence of a molecular link between the Rab5 and Rab7 ma - chineries . Analysis of the Rab5 - interacting molecules identified by affinity chromatography from HeLa cell cy - tosol ( Christoforidis et al . , 1999 ) provided an important clue into such a mechanism . Among the proteins spe - cifically interacting with GST - Rab5 : GTP γ S , hVps11 was identified by mass spectrometry ( MS ) sequencing ( Fig - Cell744 Figure 6 . Molecular Mechanism of Rab5 - to - Rab7 Conversion All scale bars : 10 (cid:1) m . ( A ) A431 cells cotransfected with the GTP - hydrolysis - deficient Rab5 mutant Q79L and GFP - Rab7 were fixed , processed for immunofluores - cence , and imaged by confocal microscopy . A maximum - projected Z stack is shown . ( B ) Silver - stained gel of Rab5 effectors isolated from HeLa cytosol by affinity chromatography with GDP ( left ) or GTP γ S ( right ) loaded GST - Rab5 . The bands corresponding to EEA1 and hVps11 are indicated . ( C ) Rab5 - column eluates were probed with anti - hVps18 , - hVps16 , - hVps39 , - hVps11 , and - EEA1 ( positive control ) and anti - RILP ( negative control ) antibodies . Input : HeLa cytosol . ( D ) Effects of hVps39 knockdown . A431 cells were transfected either with control ( top ) or anti - hVps39 siRNA ( as indicated ) and grown for 72 hr , the last 20 hr thereof in serum - free medium . A 10 min pulse of Alexa 405 - LDL was internalized , and the cells were chased in serum - free medium , fixed , immunostained for the indicated markers , and imaged by confocal microscopy . To visualize Rab5 and Rab7 , the cells shown in row 3 were coinfected with adenoviruses expressing GFP - Rab7 or mRFP - Rab5 12 hr before the LDL uptake . The top two rows show cells after 30 min of chase ; the third row shows cells after 90 min of chase . ( E ) A431 cells were transfected with anti - hVps39 siRNA as above . Twelve hours prior to the experiment , cells were coinfected with adeno - viruses expressing mRFP - Rab5 and GFP - Rab7 . A 10 min pulse of Alexa 405 - LDL was internalized , and the coverslips were mounted in serum - free medium . Live - cell imaging was carried out at 37°C , and single three - channel optical sections were acquired every 10 s . ure 6B ) . Vps11 is one of six subunits of the class C VPS / HOPS complex ( Rieder and Emr , 1997 ; Seals et al . , 2000 ) , highly conserved from yeast to man ( Caplan et al . , 2001 ; Kim et al . , 2001 ; Richardson et al . , 2004 ) . The presence of the class C VPS / HOPS complex was con - firmed by Western blot . All four subunits for which anti - bodies were available ( Richardson et al . , 2004 ) could be detected in the GST - Rab5 - column eluate ( Figure 6C ) . Rab Conversion from Early to Late Endosomes 745 Similar pull - down experiments with GST - Rab7 con - firmed the expected Rab7 - class C VPS / HOPS interac - tion in mammalian cells ( data not shown ) . Importantly , the Vps39p subunit of class C VPS / HOPS has been shown to have GEF activity toward Ypt7p , the S . cerevisiae Rab7 ortholog . These data are consistent with an involvement of the complex in the Rab5 - dependent recruitment of Rab7 onto endosomes about to undergo conversion . Accordingly , impeding the function of the class C VPS / HOPS complex should lead to delayed conversion . We therefore set up condi - tions to knock down hVps39 by RNAi as determined by RT - PCR ( Supplemental Data ) . Treatment of A431 cells with anti - hVps39 , but not control siRNA , led to a strik - ing enlargement of EEA1 / Rab5 - positive early endo - somes and Lamp1 / Rab7 - positive late endosomes ( Figure 6D ) , a phenotype partially mimicked by the knockdown of other subunits of the class C VPS / HOPS complex ( Vps16 , data not shown ) . These phenotypic alterations are consistent with a delayed recruitment / activation of Rab7 onto the Rab5 - positive early endosomes that consequently grow beyond their normal size ( Figure 2A ) . Although early - and late - endosomal markers re - mained mostly segregated , occasionally vacuoles posi - tive for both could be observed . Importantly , although the EEA1 / Rab5 - positive vacuoles were still accessible to 10 min pulses of endocytosed Alexa 405 - LDL , the exit kinetics of LDL were dramatically reduced relative to control conditions ( Figure 6D ) . After 90 min of chase , the majority of LDL still resided in EEA1 - positive com - partments , and colocalization between LDL and EEA1 persisted for up to 4 hr ( data not shown ) . Alexa 405 - LDL could eventually be observed within enlarged Lamp1 / Rab7 - positive vacuoles , suggesting that the lat - ter arise from EEA1 / Rab5 - positive vacuoles by conver - sion . This hypothesis could indeed be confirmed by live - cell imaging under hVps39 depletion . However , in stark contrast to basal conditions , the kinetics of con - version shifted from a timescale of minutes to hours . The endosome labeled by an asterisk in Figure 6E ex - emplifies such gradual increase of Rab7 and concomi - tant decrease of Rab5 labeling over a 2 . 5 hr interval . The greatly reduced conversion kinetics further provide an explanation for the vacuoles double - positive for early ( EEA1 / Rab5 ) and late ( Lamp1 / Rab7 ) endosomal markers occasionally observed under hVps39 knock - down . Altogether , these results implicate the class C VPS / HOPS complex in the Rab5 - dependent recruit - ment of Rab7 onto endosomes . Discussion Rab proteins are a central element of the trafficking ma - chinery and are of strategic importance in the determi - nation of organelle identity ( Pfeffer , 2001 ; Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) . Their dynamics are largely unexplored in vivo , especially in the course of intracellular trans - port . Here , we developed a quantitative live - cell - imaging approach to analyze the dynamics of Rab5 - positive early endosomes and the transfer of cargo to Rab7 - positive late endosomes . Our experiments led to three key findings . First , the level of Rab5 dynamically fluctu - ates on individual early endosomes , which by fusion and fission events are linked into a network in time . Second , through repetitive fusion events , degradative cargo becomes highly enriched in progressively fewer and larger endosomes , which are rapidly removed from the early - endosomal network in the cell center via the loss of Rab5 and the concomitant acquisition of Rab7 . Third , this conversion requires the class C VPS / HOPS complex , an established Rab7 GEF , which we found to interact with Rab5 . These results establish a mecha - nistic paradigm for the remodeling of membrane iden - tity via the coordinated exchange of Rab machineries . Dynamic Association of Rab5 with an Early - Endosomal Network Our data allow us to formulate a model whereby dy - namic association and dissociation of Rab GTPases are key aspects of endosome biogenesis and mainte - nance , as well as cargo progression along the endo - cytic pathway ( Figure 7 ) . An important finding is that the association of Rab5 with early endosomes is much more dynamic than expected . Rab5 levels on individual endosomes fluctuate constantly , rapidly relaxing back to a steady - state level after the frequent increments upon homotypic fusion events . Due to such high fre - quency of homotypic fusion events ( Figure 2 ) , early en - dosomes can no longer be considered as individual en - tities but rather comprise a network in time . This behavior is part of a functional cycle where Rab5 - posi - tive endosomes are constantly generated / renewed in the cell periphery and move toward the cell center while growing in size . The cyclical assembly / disassembly of the Rab5 machinery confers dynamic properties to early endosomes ranging between two extremes : they can either be stably maintained over several minutes or , alternatively , undergo rapid loss of their early - endo - somal identity in conversion events . All endosomes receive incoming vesicles from the plasma membrane . Recycling cargo exits in Rab4 - posi - tive tubules , which frequently grow out and detach from Rab5 - positive cores , consistent with constant nucle - ation of Rab4 domains . Cargo destined for late endo - somes is retained in individual endosomal units . Thus , by the parallel sorting activities and interconnectivity of endosomes , degradative cargo gradually accumulates in fewer and bigger endosomes . Although homotypic fusion events can temporarily restore Rab5 levels , Rab conversion eventually occurs on such structures , caus - ing their rapid removal from the early - endosomal net - work and rendering them fusion competent with late endosomes . The early - and late - endosomal systems are thus kept largely separated , connected only by the sparse one - way connections of conversion events . As these are rare at steady state , Rab5 - positive mem - branes undergo comparatively slow turnover with half - lifes of 10 – 15 min , remarkably consistent with the reported kinetics of transport from early to late endo - somes ( Futter et al . , 1996 ; Salzman and Maxfield , 1989 ; Stoorvogel et al . , 1991 ; Griffiths et al . , 1989 ) . Conver - sion is instrumental to the integrity of the endosomal network , as it also allows the recycling of Rab5 onto nascent endosomes in the cell periphery . Recycling is most likely mediated by Rab - GDI , but some Rab5 may also be recovered from converting structures in bud - Cell746 Figure 7 . Model Depicting Rab5 and Early - Endosome Dynamics The network properties of early endosomes are symbolized on the left . The transient colocalization of Rab5 and Rab7 during conversion is illustrated by cyan color ; hatching represents degradative late endosomes . Green arrows show recycling of dissociated Rab5 back onto peripheral endosomes ; blue arrows show the recruitment of Rab7 onto converting endosomes . Gray arrows represent fusion of cargo vesicles and subsequent recycling . The bars at the bottom depict the dynamic processes occurring concomitantly with centripetal translocation : Red : gradual accumulation and concentration of LDL . Green : gradual accumulation of Rab5 , followed by conversion to Rab7 . See text for detailed discussion . ding events below the detection limits of our tech - niques . Rab Domains Undergo Assembly and Disassembly Rab GTPases organize the endocytic pathway into a mosaic of biochemically and functionally distinct mem - brane domains ( Barbero et al . , 2002 ; Sonnichsen et al . , 2000 ) . Our present observations suggest that Rab domains are not maintained indefinitely but can be dis - assembled . These dynamics are controlled by the nu - cleotide cycle of Rab GTPases , as it determines the association and dissociation of Rab GTPases from the membrane . Such coupling to the GTP - free energy gra - dient maintains Rab domains in a metastable state , al - lowing for rapid and complete disassembly . Given the large number of Rab effectors ( Zerial and McBride , 2001 ) , exchange of the resident Rab GTPases alone en - tails the release of a much greater number of peripheral membrane proteins . Rab GTPases therefore seem to have evolved as strategic switches to rapidly remodel membranes . They are uniquely tailored to such a dy - namic system : SNAREs , for example , are integral mem - brane proteins that cannot be extracted from the mem - brane , entailing a much broader distribution between compartments and thus a diminished utility as com - partment identity cues . We further found that cargo modulates the kinetics of transport between early and late endosomes . EGF slows the transport of LDL through early endosomes by 50 % . This effect can be explained by the increased GTP loading of Rab5 in response to activated EGFR ( Di Fiore and De Camilli , 2001 ) . A higher ratio of GTP ver - sus GDP bound Rab5 would be expected to retard the loss of Rab5 from cargo - bearing membranes , as ob - served with the Rab5 Q79L mutant . Such cargo depen - dence may be a general feature of this transport route , given the importance of cargo concentration in the overall efficiency of transport by Rab conversion . An interesting conclusion from our study is that activated growth - factor receptors may actively exploit such cargo dependence in order to modulate the extent of their downstream signaling processes . Molecular Mechanism of Rab Conversion In light of our findings , the distinct protein composition of early and late endosomes demonstrated by Schmid et al . ( 1988 ) can thus be expected to result , at least in part , from the exchange of Rab5 for Rab7 at the inter - face between early and late endosomes . We could fur - ther demonstrate that this transition is regulated by the class C VPS / HOPS complex ( Price et al . , 2000 ; Rieder and Emr , 1997 ) , which we here found to interact with Rab5 : GTP . Since the Vps39p subunit of class C VPS / HOPS has GEF activity on Ypt7p ( Wurmser et al . , 2000 ) , the yeast ortholog of Rab7 , the coupling between Rab5 and activation of Rab7 is remarkably similar to the se - quential activation of Ypt31 / 32p and Sec4p in the yeast secretory pathway ( Ortiz et al . , 2002 ) . Ypt31 / 32p has been shown to recruit Sec2p , leading to the activation of Sec4p on secretory vesicles . However , whereas Sec2p has been interpreted to link the function of Ypt31 / 32p in vesicle budding with the function of Sec4p in vesicle targeting , the mechanism here described is used in - stead to reprogram the molecular identity of a compart - Rab Conversion from Early to Late Endosomes 747 ment as a means of cargo transport . Consistently , we found that RNAi - mediated knockdown of the hVps39 subunit caused a striking enlargement of both early and late endosomes . The Rab5 - positive vacuoles accumu - lated internalized cargo over many hours , providing a likely explanation for their gross enlargement . These vacuoles eventually acquired Rab7 , but with kinetics in the range of hours rather than minutes . These results are consistent with a rate - limiting function of the class C VPS / HOPS complex in the recruitment of Rab7 dur - ing conversion . This complex likely exerts a range of functions in trafficking , including tethering / fusion to late endosomes / lysosomes ( Caplan et al . , 2001 ; Pou - pon et al . , 2003 ; Price et al . , 2000 ; Rieder and Emr , 1997 ) . However , it appears unlikely that the observed phenotype is due to an impairment of the latter activity , as fragmented rather than enlarged endosomes would be expected . Moreover , localization data in mammalian cells ( Kim et al . , 2001 ; Richardson et al . , 2004 ) as well as functional studies in S . cerevisiae ( Peterson and Emr , 2001 ) are consistent with the proposed function at the interface between early and late endosomes . Fol - lowing the class C VPS / HOPS - dependent recruitment of Rab7 onto Rab5 - positive endosomes , the comple - tion of conversion likely involves negative feedback be - tween the Rab7 and Rab5 domains , which could possi - bly be exerted via a Rab5 - GAP amongst the Rab7 effectors . Relationship to Existing Models Our data has the benefit of reconciling mechanistic as - pects of both the maturation and vesicle - transport models of the endocytic pathway ( Griffiths and Gruen - berg , 1991 ; Murphy , 1991 ) . Overall , the process of con - version can be related to the endosomal carrier vesicle ( ECV ) model described by Gruenberg et al . ( 1989 ) . Al - though originally proposed to bud from early endo - somes , we now suggest that these 400 – 800 nm vesi - cles arise from early endosomes by conversion from Rab5 to Rab7 , based on the following observations . First , whereas Rab5 is depleted from ECV - enriched fractions ( Aniento et al . , 1993 ) , at least exogenously ex - pressed Rab7 can be detected in such preparations ( J . Gruenberg , personal communication ) , consistent with Rab conversion . Second , ECVs have been isolated from nocodazole - treated cells , where conversion still takes place . Third , the nocodazole - induced accumula - tion of ECVs has been attributed to impaired fusion with late - endosomal compartments , consistent with the lack of Alexa 405 - LDL degradation under these condi - tions . As individual endosomes have a much greater probability of being consumed in homotypic fusion events than undergoing conversion , early endosomes can be seen as the stable compartment evoked pre - viously ( Griffiths and Gruenberg , 1991 ) . On the other hand , the infrequent conversion events are consistent with maturation models of endosomal transport ( Mur - phy , 1991 ) . Further , the progressive density shift of early - endosomal fractions detected ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1991 ) and the 30 min period of EGF accumulation by individual endosomes ( Futter et al . , 1996 ) can likely be attributed to the gradual convergence of cargo in fewer and bigger structures prior to conversion . Overall , therefore , our results provide a novel view of endosomal transport , in which the global dynamics of an endosomal network are intimately linked to the local dynamics of Rab GTPases on individual organelles . Such a view emerged from the development and appli - cation of novel tools allowing the quantitative analysis of endosomal transport in living cells . Our study thus paves the way toward a system - biology - analysis ap - proach to this essential cellular process . Experimental Procedures For details on cell culture , transfection , DNA constructs , antibod - ies , LDL labeling and uptake , and RNA interference , see Supple - mental Data . Imaging For high - resolution imaging of fixed cells , coverslips were mounted in Mowiol and imaged on an inverted LSM510 confocal laser scan - ning microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) . Twelve bit images were acquired through Plan - Apochromat objectives under zoom settings of 1 , scan speed 7 , averaging 2 , and pinhole settings resulting in 0 . 8 (cid:1) m Z sections . Epifluorescence live - cell imaging was carried out as described ( Sonnichsen et al . , 2000 ) . For fast confocal live - cell im - aging , coverslips were mounted in normal growth medium in a closed chamber with internal temperature control ( Harvard Appara - tus ) . All imaging was carried out at 37°C on an inverted LSM510 confocal laser scanning microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) equipped with a heated 40× / 1 . 2 W C - Apochromat objective and a piezo - driven Z stage . Sequences were acquired as 12 bit 512 / 300 image frames , using 3 (cid:1) m optical sections and bidirectional scanning at speeds 12 or 13 . Three to four Z planes were acquired per time point . Multitrack protocols utilizing bidirectional scanning and “switch be - tween lines” were used for fast multichannel imaging . Z stacks were collapsed by maximum projection and exported as 16 bit TIF sequences for further analysis . The radius resolution limit was taken as the peak of the radius distribution of processed image sequences of green fluorescent 170 nm beads ( Molecular Probes ) in aqueous suspension . Image Analysis All image processing and analysis was carried out with the Mo - tiontracking II program : Image Fitting Following background subtraction by windowed floating mean , flu - orescent structures in the images were modeled by : where A i = intensity ; x i , y i = center coordinates ; w i , h i = width by two perpendicular dimensions ; a i = angle between main axes and x / y image axes , B ( x i , y i ) = background residue in the vicinity of the particle ; and index i refers to the i th particle . Fitted structures were subtracted from the image , and the pro - cedure was repeated iteratively to capture all structures above two SD of noise . Two partially overlapping peaks were combined if the ratio between peak height and local minimum did not exceed 50 % . Image fitting produced a particle set with known position , cross - sectional area , and total fluorescence , serving as basis for all fur - ther calculations . Vesicle Tracking The algorithm was developed as generalization of the Hungarian algorithm , assigning four consecutive image frames at once with track breaks as assignment possibility and essentially overcoming the use of greedy algorithms . Track assignments were made on basis of the weighted sum of scores for position , speed , cross - sectional area , maximum intensity , total vesicle fluorescence , and Cell748 termination penalty , calculated according to Verestoy et al . ( 1999 ) . Weights were manually adjusted . Net - Flow Analysis The image frame was divided into square cells , in which flow was calculated as sum F = S I i , v i , where I i = the integral intensity of i th vesicle and v i = the speed of i th vesicle , which included all vesicle tracks of the image sequences . Colocalization Analysis Colocalization was assessed on basis of cross - sectional overlap , scoring > 50 % overlap as colocalized . Colocalized fluorescence was calculated as the sum of integral fluorescence intensities of all colocalized vesicles . Fluorescence measurements were standard - ized to cell area by the ratio of “masked” area to the total frame area . The mask was calculated by extreme smoothing ( σ w 1 (cid:1) m ) and subsequent threshold cutoff on the basis of the GFP - Rab5 background fluorescence . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Pro - cedures , two figures , and seven movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 122 / 5 / 735 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments We are indebted to Dr . R . Piper and Dr . J . Neevjes for providing antisera against class C VPS / HOPS components and RILP , respec - tively ; Dr . J . Cohen for GFP - rotavirus - like particles ; and Dr . R . Tsien for mRFP - cDNA . We would further like to thank R . Schaefer for expert technical assistance ; Dr . O . Vieira for advice on preparation of LDL ; and Drs . M . Miaczynska , K . Simons , J . Howard , K . Khairy , B . Hoflack , L . Pelkmans , and A . Schenck for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by grants from the HFSP ( RG - 0260 / 1999 - M ) , the European Union ( HPRN - CT - 2000 - 00081 ) , and the Max Planck Society . Received : August 30 , 2004 Revised : May 10 , 2005 Accepted : June 24 , 2005 Published : September 8 , 2005 References Aniento , F . , Emans , N . , Griffiths , G . , and Gruenberg , J . ( 1993 ) . Cyto - plasmic dynein - dependent vesicular transport from early to late en - dosomes . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 1373 – 1387 . Barbero , P . , Bittova , L . , and Pfeffer , S . R . ( 2002 ) . Visualization of Rab9 - mediated vesicle transport from endosomes to the trans - Golgi in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 511 – 518 . Published online February 4 , 2002 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200109030 . Bock , J . B . , Matern , H . T . , Peden , A . A . , and Scheller , R . H . ( 2001 ) . A genomic perspective on membrane compartment organization . Na - ture 409 , 839 – 841 . Caplan , S . , Hartnell , L . M . , Aguilar , R . C . , Naslavsky , N . , and Bonifac - ino , J . S . ( 2001 ) . Human Vam6p promotes lysosome clustering and fusion in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 109 – 122 . Charpilienne , A . , Nejmeddine , M . , Berois , M . , Parez , N . , Neumann , E . , Hewat , E . , Trugnan , G . , and Cohen , J . ( 2001 ) . Individual rotavi - rus - like particles containing 120 molecules of fluorescent protein are visible in living cells . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 29361 – 29367 . Pub - lished online May 16 , 2001 . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M101935200 . Christoforidis , S . , McBride , H . M . , Burgoyne , R . D . , and Zerial , M . ( 1999 ) . The Rab5 effector EEA1 is a core component of endosome docking . Nature 397 , 621 – 625 . Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . Di Fiore , P . P . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Endocytosis and signaling . an inseparable partnership . Cell 106 , 1 – 4 . Dunn , K . W . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1992 ) . Delivery of ligands from sort - ing endosomes to late endosomes occurs by maturation of sorting endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 301 – 310 . Dunn , K . W . , McGraw , T . E . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1989 ) . Iterative frac - tionation of recycling receptors from lysosomally destined ligands in an early sorting endosome . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 3303 – 3314 . Futter , C . E . , Pearse , A . , Hewlett , L . J . , and Hopkins , C . R . ( 1996 ) . Multivesicular endosomes containing internalized EGF - EGF recep - tor complexes mature and then fuse directly with lysosomes . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 1011 – 1023 . Gasman , S . , Kalaidzidis , Y . , and Zerial , M . ( 2003 ) . RhoD regulates endosome dynamics through Diaphanous - related Formin and Src tyrosine kinase . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 195 – 204 . Geuze , H . J . , Stoorvogel , W . , Strous , G . J . , Slot , J . W . , Bleekemolen , J . E . , and Mellman , I . ( 1988 ) . Sorting of mannose 6 - phosphate re - ceptors and lysosomal membrane proteins in endocytic vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 2491 – 2501 . Griffiths , G . , and Gruenberg , J . ( 1991 ) . The arguments for pre - exist - ing early and late endosomes . Trends Cell Biol . 1 , 5 – 9 . Griffiths , G . , Back , R . , and Marsh , M . ( 1989 ) . A quantitative analysis of the endocytic pathway in baby hamster kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2703 – 2720 . Gruenberg , J . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1995 ) . Membrane transport in the endocytic pathway . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 552 – 563 . Gruenberg , J . , Griffiths , G . , and Howell , K . E . ( 1989 ) . Characteriza - tion of the early endosome and putative endocytic carrier vesicles in vivo and with an assay of vesicle fusion in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 1301 – 1316 . Helenius , A . , Mellman , I . , Wall , D . A . , and Hubbard , A . ( 1983 ) . Endo - somes . Trends Biochem . Sci . 8 , 245 – 250 . Henry , R . M . , Hoppe , A . D . , Joshi , N . , and Swanson , J . A . ( 2004 ) . The uniformity of phagosome maturation in macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 185 – 194 . Kim , B . Y . , Kramer , H . , Yamamoto , A . , Kominami , E . , Kohsaka , S . , and Akazawa , C . ( 2001 ) . Molecular characterization of mammalian homologues of class C Vps proteins that interact with syntaxin - 7 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 29393 – 29402 . Published online May 29 , 2001 . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M101778200 . McBride , H . M . , Rybin , V . , Murphy , C . , Giner , A . , Teasdale , R . , and Zerial , M . ( 1999 ) . Oligomeric complexes link Rab5 effectors with NSF and drive membrane fusion via interactions between EEA1 and syntaxin 13 . Cell 98 , 377 – 386 . Mellman , I . ( 1996 ) . Endocytosis and molecular sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , 575 – 625 . Murphy , R . F . ( 1991 ) . Maturation models for endosome and lyso - some biogenesis . Trends Cell Biol . 1 , 77 – 82 . Nielsen , E . , Severin , F . , Backer , J . M . , Hyman , A . A . , and Zerial , M . ( 1999 ) . Rab5 regulates motility of early endosomes on microtu - bules . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 376 – 382 . Ortiz , D . , Medkova , M . , Walch - Solimena , C . , and Novick , P . ( 2002 ) . Ypt32 recruits the Sec4p guanine nucleotide exchange factor , Sec2p , to secretory vesicles ; evidence for a Rab cascade in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 1005 – 1015 . Published online June 3 , 2002 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200201003 . Palade , G . ( 1975 ) . Intracellular aspects of the process of protein synthesis . Science 189 , 347 – 358 . Pelkmans , L . , and Helenius , A . ( 2003 ) . Insider information : what viruses tell us about endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 414 – 422 . Peterson , M . R . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2001 ) . The class c vps complex functions at multiple stages of the vacuolar transport pathway . Traffic 2 , 476 – 486 . Pfeffer , S . R . ( 2001 ) . Rab GTPases : specifying and deciphering or - ganelle identity and function . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 487 – 491 . Poupon , V . , Stewart , A . , Gray , S . R . , Piper , R . C . , and Luzio , J . P . ( 2003 ) . The role of mVps18p in clustering , fusion , and intracellular localization of late endocytic organelles . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 4015 – 4027 . Published online July 11 , 2003 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 01 - 0040 . Price , A . , Seals , D . , Wickner , W . , and Ungermann , C . ( 2000 ) . The docking stage of yeast vacuole fusion requires the transfer of pro - Rab Conversion from Early to Late Endosomes 749 teins from a cis - SNARE complex to a Rab / Ypt protein . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 1231 – 1238 . Richardson , S . C . , Winistorfer , S . C . , Poupon , V . , Luzio , J . P . , and Piper , R . C . ( 2004 ) . Mammalian late vacuole protein sorting or - thologues participate in early endosomal fusion and interact with the cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 1197 – 1210 . Published online December 10 , 2003 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 06 - 0358 . Rieder , S . E . , and Emr , S . D . ( 1997 ) . A novel RING finger protein com - plex essential for a late step in protein transport to the yeast vacu - ole . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 2307 – 2327 . Rothman , J . E . , and Sollner , T . H . ( 1997 ) . Throttles and dampers : controlling the engine of membrane fusion . Science 276 , 1212 – 1213 . Salzman , N . H . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1989 ) . Fusion accessibility of en - docytic compartments along the recycling and lysosomal endo - cytic pathways in intact cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2097 – 2104 . Schekman , R . , and Orci , L . ( 1996 ) . Coat proteins and vesicle bud - ding . Science 271 , 1526 – 1533 . Schmid , S . L . , Fuchs , R . , Male , P . , and Mellman , I . ( 1988 ) . Two dis - tinct subpopulations of endosomes involved in membrane recycl - ing and transport to lysosomes . Cell 52 , 73 – 83 . Seals , D . F . , Eitzen , G . , Margolis , N . , Wickner , W . T . , and Price , A . ( 2000 ) . A Ypt / Rab effector complex containing the Sec1 homolog Vps33p is required for homotypic vacuole fusion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 9402 – 9407 . Sollner , T . , Whiteheart , S . W . , Brunner , M . , Erdjument - Bromage , H . , Geromanos , S . , Tempst , P . , and Rothman , J . E . ( 1993 ) . SNAP recep - tors implicated in vesicle targeting and fusion . Nature 362 , 318 – 324 . Sonnichsen , B . , De Renzis , S . , Nielsen , E . , Rietdorf , J . , and Zerial , M . ( 2000 ) . Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycl - ing pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of Rab4 , Rab5 , and Rab11 . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 901 – 914 . Stenmark , H . , Parton , R . G . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Lutcke , A . , Gruenberg , J . , and Zerial , M . ( 1994 ) . Inhibition of rab5 GTPase ac - tivity stimulates membrane fusion in endocytosis . EMBO J . 13 , 1287 – 1296 . Stoorvogel , W . , Strous , G . J . , Geuze , H . J . , Oorschot , V . , and Schwartz , A . L . ( 1991 ) . Late endosomes derive from early endo - somes by maturation . Cell 65 , 417 – 427 . van der Sluijs , P . , Hull , M . , Webster , P . , Male , P . , Goud , B . , and Mell - man , I . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rab4 controls an early sorting event on the endocytic pathway . Cell 70 , 729 – 740 . Verestoy , J . , Chetverikov , D . , and Marcell , N . ( 1999 ) . Digital particle image velocimetry : a challenge for feature based tracking . Machine Graphics and Vision 8 , 553 – 569 . Vieira , O . V . , Botelho , R . J . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2002 ) . Phagosome maturation : aging gracefully . Biochem . J . 366 , 689 – 704 . Ward , E . S . , Martinez , C . , Vaccaro , C . , Zhou , J . , Tang , Q . , and Ober , R . J . ( 2005 ) . From sorting endosomes to exocytosis : association of Rab4 and Rab11 GTPases with the Fc receptor , FcRn , during re - cycling . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2028 – 2038 . Published online February 2 , 2005 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 08 - 0735 . Wurmser , A . E . , Sato , T . K . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2000 ) . New component of the vacuolar class C – Vps complex couples nucleotide exchange on the Ypt7 GTPase to SNARE - dependent docking and fusion . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 551 – 562 . Zerial , M . , and McBride , H . ( 2001 ) . Rab proteins as membrane or - ganizers . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 .