384 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib MODELLING THE INFORMATION SEEKING PATTERNS OF ENGINEERS AND RESEARCH SCIENTISTS IN AN INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT DAVID ELLIS * d . ellis @ shefﬁeld . ac . uk Department of Information Studies , University of Shefﬁeld , Shefﬁeld S10 2TN MERETE HAUGAN mjh @ statoil . no Statoil , Trondheim , Norway The study explores the role of information and information seeking in the Research and Development Department of an international oil and gas company . The information seeking patterns of engineers and research scientists at Statoil’s Research Centre , in Trondheim , Norway were studied in relation to their research activities in different phases and types of project . The project phases were evaluation of alternative solutions ; development and testing ; and summary of experiences . The project types were incremental ; radical ; and fund - amental . Eight major characteristics were identiﬁed in the patterns : surveying ; chaining ; monitoring ; browsing ; distinguishing ; ﬁltering ; extracting and ending . The study analyses the requirements for different types of information in an environment where the need for internal and external resources are intertwined ; it also compares features of the information seeking patterns of engineers and research scientists from this and previous studies . It was found that , although there were differences in the features of the information seeking patterns of the research scientists and engineers , the behavioural characteristics were similar ; and the study identiﬁed identical or very similar categories of information seeking behaviour to those of previous studies of academic researchers . INTRODUCTION THE FIELD OF USER STUDIES has recently experienced something of a shift both in conceptualisation and research design [ 1 ] with the adoption of a more holistic perspective to the study of information use [ 2 ] . This has been characterised by a change in the nature of data collection from a macro - approach , studying large groups via questionnaires or structured interviews , to 384 Journal of Documentation , vol . 53 , no . 4 , September 1997 , pp . 384 – 403 * To whom all correspondence should be addressed a micro - approach , studying small groups via observation or unstructured interviews . But it has also , and perhaps more signiﬁcantly , been characterised by a change in the nature of the approach to analysis , in particular by the explicit attempt to generate models of the information seeking patterns of the individuals or groups studied . Examples of this kind of approach to analysis can be found in the work of Kuhltau , Palmer and Ellis . Kuhlthau [ 3 ] , adopting Kelly’s concept [ 4 ] of ‘personal construct’ , formed the hypothesis that information seeking is a process of construction that begins with uncertainty and anxiety . From a cognitive state of uncertainty concerning a problem springs emotional uncertainty . The hypothesis forms a model consisting of the six stages : ( 1 ) initiation ; ( 2 ) selection ; ( 3 ) exploration ; ( 4 ) formulation ; ( 5 ) collection ; and ( 6 ) presentation . Each stage represents a task considered most appropriate to move the process on to the subsequent stage . The model of the information seeking process , representing the user’s sense - making process , incorporates three realms of human experience : the affective ( feelings ) , the cognitive ( thoughts ) and the physical ( actions ) within each stage . Palmer [ 5 ] used semi - structured , in - depth interviews , and a hybrid qualitative and quantitative approach to analysis , in an exploration of the inﬂuence of personality , discipline and organisational structure on the information behaviour of biochemists , entomologists and statisticians working in agricultural research . Cluster analysis was used to reveal groupings in data . Five groups emerged : ( 1 ) non - seekers ; ( 2 ) lone , wide rangers ; ( 3 ) unsettled self - conscious seekers ; ( 4 ) conﬁdent collectors ; and ( 5 ) hunters . The key factors determining the information seeking behaviour of the researchers were discipline , work role and time spent in the subject ﬁeld and organisation . Ellis [ 6 ] , employing Glaser and Strauss’s [ 7 ] ‘grounded theory’ approach , derived six generic characteristics of the information seeking patterns of social scientists : ( 1 ) starting ; ( 2 ) chaining ; ( 3 ) browsing ; ( 4 ) differentiating ; ( 5 ) monitoring , and ( 6 ) extracting . This work was extended to physicists and chemists in studies which found that the original model ﬁts behaviour in these ﬁelds with very little modiﬁcation , the principal being the addition of the categories ( 7 ) verifying and ( 8 ) ending [ 8 , 9 ] . Recently Westbrook [ 10 ] has attempted a synthesis of features of the various models in a ﬁve category model : ( 1 ) needing ; ( 2 ) starting ; ( 3 ) working ( 4 ) deciding and ( 5 ) closing , while Wilson [ 11 ] has argued that the studies represent : ‘the emergence of a common theoretical position vis - à - vis information - seeking behaviour , under a relatively new ‘person - centred’ paradigm’ [ 11 , p . 34 ] . The present study represents an attempt to extend the behavioural approach to modelling the information seeking patterns of academic researchers [ 8 ] further , to encompass the information seeking patterns of engineers and research scientists in the industrial and business environment of an international oil and gas company . Naturalistic inquiry [ 12 ] was adopted as the basic research methodology for the study , the particular form employed being based on Glaser and Strauss’s [ 7 ] ‘grounded theory’ approach . Informal semi - structured interviews were employed to explore the information seeking behaviour of the research workers using an interview guide [ 13 ] . The interviews September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 385 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib focused on two central issues : the information seeking behaviour of the researchers in relation to their general work situation , and the project speciﬁc requirements for information . Twenty - three respondents were interviewed altogether . The sample were selected to represent : ( 1 ) the different research areas within the Research Centre ; ( 2 ) the three basic types of R & D projects : incremental , radical and fundamental ( see Table 1 ) ; ( 3 ) the project phases : evaluation of alternative solutions , development and testing , and summary of experiences ; ( 4 ) the different project roles : Head of programme , Head of project , Head of activity and Project participant ; ( 5 ) a mix of scientists and engineers ( see Table 2 ) . The interviews generally lasted for forty - ﬁve minutes to an hour , and were conducted in Norwegian . They were tape - recorded , and the tapes were tran - scribed as soon as possible after the completion of each interview to provide feedback and to serve as a guide for further interviews . All the transcripts were written in Norwegian . The average transcript consisted of around six thousand words , providing a total of some 138 , 000 words of transcript for analysis . During the analysis themes were identiﬁed and arranged into patterns of behaviour , sorted into coding categories or statements , to identify the idea they seemed to ﬁt . The categories were judged by two criteria : ‘internal homogeneity’ JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 386 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Table 1 . Characteristics of R & D Projects Type of R & D Probability Time to Competitive Durability of of technical completion potential competitive success advantage gained Incremental Very high , Short , Modest , but Short , typically ( developmental ) typically typically necessary imitable by 40 % – 80 % 1 – 2 years competitors Radical ( research In early stages Medium , Large Long , often and development ) modest , typically protectable by typically 2 – 5 years patents 20 % – 40 % Fundamental In early Long , Large Long , often ( research ) stages difﬁcult typically protectable by to assess ; 5 – 10 years patents depends on R & D concept Source : Roussel , P . A . et al . Third generation R & D : managing the link to corporate strategy . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 1991 . September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 387 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Table 2 . Data about the respondents Respondent Experience Profession Education Title / Level Project ( years ) A 25 Engineer Mechanical Head of Radical engineering Programmeand Project B 9 Engineer Physical Project Radical chemistry participant C 16 Engineer Chemistry Head of Radical ProjectActivity D 15 Engineer Chemical Head of Radical engineering Project E 7 Scientist Mechanical Head of Radical engineering ProjectActivity F 9 Engineer Chemistry Head of Incremental Project G 8 Engineer Chemistry Project Incremental participant H 12 Engineer Chemistry Head of Incremental ProjectActivity I 9 Engineer Chemistry Project Incremental particpant J 3 Technician Chemistry Project Incremental participant K 5 Scientist Bio - chemistry Head of Incremental ProjectActivity L 18 Engineer Industrial Head of Radical Chemistry Programmeand Project M 2 Scientist Marine Project Fundamental biology participant N 18 Engineer Chemical Head of Incremental engineering Programmeand Project O 15 Engineer Physics and Head of Incremental mathematics Project P 14 Engineer Applied Head of Incremental geology Project Q 1 Scientist Geophysics Project Incremental participant R 7 Technician Chemistry Project Fundamental participant S 32 Scientist Analytical Head of Fundamental chemistry Project and Projectparticipant T 4 Scientist Bio - chemistry Project Incremental participant U 3 Engineer Physics Project Incremental participant V 9 Engineer Mining Project Incremental participant W 10 Engineer Chemistry Head of Incremental Project and ‘external heterogeneity’ as explained by Guba [ 14 ] . The former concerns the extent to which the data that belong in a certain category hold together in a meaningful way . The latter concerns the extent to which differences between categories are clear . Eight categories were considered to be sufﬁcient to describe the information seeking patterns of the researchers and form the behavioural model : ( 1 ) surveying ; ( 2 ) chaining ; ( 3 ) monitoring ; ( 4 ) browsing ; ( 5 ) distinguishing ; ( 6 ) ﬁltering ; ( 7 ) extracting ; and ( 8 ) ending . The model does not attempt to specify either the exact interrelationships of the activities or the order in which they are undertaken , because this might vary from project to project and to some extent depends on the phase and stage of the project . The organisational setting , phases and types of research and development projects , and the main features recognised to be characteristic of the informa - tion seeking behaviour of the researchers , are outlined in the following sections . THE ORGANISATIONAL SETTING Statoil , established in 1972 and wholly owned by the Norwegian state , is an international oil company with operations in eighteen countries and is the biggest producer of crude oil in the North Sea with more than 14 , 000 employees . Statoil’s Research Centre is located in Trondheim . The premises are a combined ofﬁce and laboratory building housing about 300 research personnel . The Research Centre is Statoil’s corporate research and development division and embraces the following research areas in accordance with the overall strategies and goals : ( 1 ) exploration and petroleum technology ( geology , geophysics , reservoir technology , drilling and well technology ) ; ( 2 ) ﬁeld development and operations ( multiphase transport , ﬂow mechanics and thermodynamics , production systems , ﬁeld installations ) ; ( 3 ) downstream technology ( catalysts , reactor technology , process technology ) ; ( 4 ) gas and corporate technology ( material technology , energy , co - ordination technology , environmental technology ) . Research and development in Statoil are intended to yield improvements to proﬁtability , safety and environmental impact in the group’s present and future business operations [ 15 ] . The work is ﬁnanced mainly through the research budget and offshore exploration and production licences . The Information Technology Strategy and Action Plan for Statoil’s Research Centre [ 16 ] states the following business objective : ‘The Research Centre shall have the leading role within the company for information seeking and informa - tion use , on selected key competence areas in accordance with the business plan’ . The Research Centre is engaged in applied research and development . The aim of the research is to derive knowledge applicable to the company’s business needs which enable the company to participate in the forefront of new technology or lay the scientiﬁc foundation for the development of new products or processes . The development of concepts , equipment , methods and tools is a JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 388 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib central part of the R & D activity [ 17 ] . To manage the R & D - portfolio [ 18 ] the projects are characterised according to the model described by Roussel et al . [ 19 ] where each category offers its own standards of reward , cost , risk and time to usable results . The department of Data and Information Processing ( D & I ) is one of the support services within the Research Centre . D & I is responsible for planning , operating and maintaining the electronic data and information systems . This section is also responsible for the User Service Centre with library facilities including stand - alone workstations for end - user searching via the Internet ; CD - ROM databases ; and collections of books , conference proceedings , scientiﬁc journals , internal documentation etc . A reference counter for library services also serves as a help desk for enquiries regarding computerised user systems . The researchers have access to networked CD - ROM databases and diverse internal databases from their own workstations . Groupware , such as Lotus Notes , is also in place , based on company - wide usage . The research and development portfolio in Statoil is organised and accomplished within a project - oriented structure with a focus on values achieved through the right choice of projects and the employment of results . The project structure is amenable to changes in the annual R & D portfolio which may require the movement of staff between groups or departments . Consequently , multi - disciplinary interaction is actively encouraged . To encourage creativity , barriers between disciplines have been broken down in a systematic way . Project teams are assembled from researchers who think in different ways and complement each other in terms of knowledge and experience . Interaction and communication are factors considered to be crucial for success . In order to reach the business objectives , close co - operation between the Research Centre , other research groups , and the company’s operational units is considered essential . RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS A ﬁxed structure is usually followed over the life of R & D projects as described in the Project Handbook in R & D [ 18 ] . This structure characterises the different phases and decision points during the projects , and may serve as a tool for analysing how work situation and information seeking are inter - related . The information seeking behaviour will to some extent depend on the situation and type of project . However , based on the analysis , it is possible to derive a pattern that is applicable to most R & D projects . Project phases The projects chosen for this study represent different phases from the list described below with emphasis on the ﬁrst two : ( 1 ) evaluation of alternative solutions ; ( 2 ) development and testing ; ( 3 ) implementation ; September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 389 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib ( 4 ) commercialisation ; ( 5 ) summary of experiences . Phases 1 , 2 and 5 are those which require the type of information of interest for this study . Evaluation of alternative solutions The purpose of this phase is to provide a broad interdisciplinary appraisal of problems usually stated by the customers , resulting in alternative solutions as well as opportunities for further project activities . The following stages are involved in this phase : ( 1 ) idea - generating : ideas for solutions are generated based on the problem description . Information about appropriate solutions are gathered from different disciplines and hypotheses are formulated ; ( 2 ) surveying : the aim of surveying is to gather information about what has been done by others to solve the same or equal problems . Retrospective literature searches are carried out , including searches for patent literature , and people with relevant knowledge and experience are identiﬁed ; ( 3 ) formulation of requirements and hypotheses for solutions : this stage is based on the proposals from the ﬁrst two stages ; ( 4 ) description of alternative solutions : the solutions are described in terms of what is familiar and what is unfamiliar or uncertain ; ( 5 ) processing of alternative solutions : initial experimental work and technical and economic evaluation are carried out ; ( 6 ) comparison and choice of solutions for further development : based on existing information a review of the proposals with recommendations in the form of a partial report is presented to the customer ; ( 7 ) decision with regard to the continuation of the project : the customer decides whether or not to continue the project . The last ﬁve stages within this phase are usually based on information gathered during the idea - generating and surveying stages . Before this ﬁrst phase starts , computerised literature searches are often carried out to decide if a pre - project should be started before the real planning phase . Internal information from earlier studies carried out within the company is usually consulted in the pre - project stage , this being mainly obtained through the library and personal contacts . During the ﬁrst idea - generating stage of this phase the information gathering process is characterised more by unplanned activities where new topics appear that must be checked . When the decision has been taken to go ahead with a project , surveying activities take place through a screening of different data - bases to survey the ﬁeld before the processing of alternative solutions and the initial experimental work starts . In the ﬁrst idea - generating stage the researchers rely heavily on informal channels , while they use both formal and informal channels during the second surveying stage as the basis for the provision of JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 390 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib data and the development of methodology . Sometimes surveying activities are carried out even before the project proposal . Development and testing The purpose of this phase is to develop a technical and economic solution to be implemented for the customer , and to evaluate opportunities and conse - quences connected with the continuation of the project into the implementation phase . The solution and method for implementation , as well as the potential , costs and success criteria for implementation and commercialisation are described . In this phase relevant information is needed in relation to the selected proposal . Experimental work is often required , such as simulating , modelling , laboratory experiments , or ﬁeld experiments and information from the business units . This phase includes the following stages : ( 1 ) planning of experiments : considerations are made with regard to what has to be examined and by which approach ; ( 2 ) experimental work ( laboratory / ﬁeld ) : the way the experimental work is carried out depends on the particular project . The results have to be interpreted and data presented in appropriate ways ; ( 3 ) technical and economic evaluation : based on the information at hand , i . e . results from experimental work , a technical and economic evaluation of the solution is undertaken ; ( 4 ) pilot testing : in some cases it might be necessary to test the solution on a larger scale than the one in the laboratory ; ( 5 ) reporting : the phase ﬁnishes with the provision of a report with recom - mendation with regard to the implementation and with a description of the solution ; ( 6 ) decision about implementation : the customer decides whether or not to continue the project . This second project phase is characterised by the more practical , experimental work based on data collected as well as a need for applicable information regarding the work . During this phase there is little time for information gathering activities . A series of experiments is carried out until the need may occur to keep up - to - date at the end of the phase , to compare the results with others , and to look at newly published literature . However , there may be many cycles : checking the literature , experimental work , evaluation of results through analysis and interpretation of data , discussions with customers , and relating own results to earlier literature gathered . Sometimes internal information combined with experimental data , perhaps with an additional small scale search , is sufﬁcient for this phase . Summary of experiences The purpose of the ﬁnal phase is to strengthen the capability to utilise the know - ledge in the future . An evaluation report must be written and further efforts initi - ated in the project or possibly in the Research Centre or the customer’s own unit . September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 391 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Project types To manage the R & D portfolio the projects are characterised according to the following model : ( 1 ) incremental ; ( 2 ) radical ; ( 3 ) fundamental . Incremental projects The aim of such projects is small advances in technology , typically based on an established foundation of scientiﬁc and engineering knowledge . The projects are characterised by low risk , modest reward and a short term perspective , by the use of contacts mainly within the Research Centre , but also within the company as a whole through contacts with the plants and production units . Outside contacts are targeted towards technological suppliers , those in other scientiﬁc establishments and the same line of business , people visiting the Research Centre , and personal contacts through conferences and exhibitions . Much exchange of information is carried out through project collaboration , but the importance of personal networks is increasing and considered of greater value than pure research collaboration . The sharing of information within incremental projects is characterised by unstructured , informal and oral communication , with the project participants working mainly within isolated areas with their particular tasks . Face - to - face communication seems to have preference over electronic communication , especially for in - house communication : ‘There is a great creative process included in discussions . I feel that you lose a dimension when you communicate through email’ ( W ) . The choice of information channels is ﬁrst personal contacts , second personal knowledge and experience , and third the library . There is little or no usage of computerised alert proﬁles and the need for advanced new literature is not so pressing as is the case for radical and fundamental projects : ‘When you are working with relatively applied sciences . . . not so long - termed projects , then you don’t need as much new and advanced reference literature , as if you were working within a new and more advanced area – that differs’ ( O ) . Most of the incremental projects are basically working with technology already known . Usually they are modifying existing technology ; consequently , the approach towards information sources is mainly based on traditional patterns . Such projects rarely start within new topics totally unfamiliar to the researchers . Internal reports , especially those produced by consortium or collaboration projects , are frequently utilised and often considered more relevant than journals , which are sometimes considered too out - of - date . There seems to be a two - fold need for information within incremental projects : broad knowledge within some key areas when a great deal of information is needed within a new topic ; and more project oriented in - depth knowledge for problem solving , to look for particular types of equipment or methods in the market , to compare alternative solutions , or to get ideas for JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 392 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib own experiments . Questions which often demand an answer are those such as : ‘Who are the suppliers of speciﬁc equipment ? Who has made equal tests before and what type of equipment was employed ? ’ ( H ) ; ‘What is relevant ? What do we know already ? ’ ( K ) . The search for information is characterised by retrospective searching of online databases covering a shorter period of time compared to fundamental and radical projects . A general knowledge of the different disciplines is necessary when new topics relevant to the company come into focus . This type of information seems to be easily available through personal networks . General business comprehension is also necessary – to have an overview of the activities carried out within the company ; to be able to look at problems in a broader perspective ; to know where expertise is required ; and to generate ideas for new projects in the future . The aim is to utilise the competence that already exists in new and non - traditional ways . This type of information seems difﬁcult to obtain and ‘projects are often initiated more or less by chance’ to quote one of the respondents . Hence , a system for more systematic communication between the Research Centre and the business units in this context would be of great value . Radical projects These projects are based on a foundation of existing scientiﬁc and engineering knowledge , but one which is considered insufﬁcient to obtain the desired results . Usually , the projects start as feasibility studies to test the basic concepts . The projects are characterised by higher risk , high reward and a mid - term perspec - tive . Communication is with colleagues within the projects or within the Research Centre as a whole , with people with experience from exactly the same ﬁeld , with other research institutions , with contractors and with suppliers of technology ; the last group particularly in relation to factual information about new sorts of equipment . However , internal communication within the company is usually emphasised , as the researchers are handling information of commercial interest . External communication is mainly oriented towards project collabo - ration and alliances with other research institutions and towards engineering and consulting companies working within the same ﬁeld . The primary means of maintaining awareness is the established personal network within the company as a whole , in the form of easily accessible interdisciplinary knowledge about the technological developments in the market , derived from the many actors who keep up - to - date within the ﬁeld . The choice of information channels is based ﬁrst on personal knowledge and experience , second on personal contacts , and third on the library . To approach a new topic personal contacts are used as the predominant source , based on the respondent’s own knowledge of whom to contact . Existing internal information is usually consulted before literature searches are carried out . Sharing of information within radical projects is characterised by collabo - ration through core teams , oral information transfer through meetings , or electronic exchange within the company as a whole . The search for information September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 393 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib is characterised by retrospective searching in bibliographic online databases . However , factual information is also often needed , such as information about thermodynamic and physical properties . Other types of information needed within radical projects that are worth mentioning are technical solutions , basic disciplinary knowledge and knowledge about plants and production units . Published literature is recognised as the easiest means to get information and is often chosen ‘to take the line of least resistance’ with review articles and conference proceedings as the primary sources . Conference proceedings are considered to be of poor quality compared with scientiﬁc journals and too out - of - date . Scientiﬁc journals are used for maintaining awareness purposes but are considered to be very time consuming to use and again too out - of - date . Review articles are primarily used for interdisciplinary work , often combined with com - puterised literature searches . These are used as the basis for the considerations of different concepts and to generate ideas for new projects , or to identify developments in the market within a particular ﬁeld . Research reports are considered important for obtaining an overview of a ﬁeld , and for the re - use of existing experience and knowledge within the company . However , the premises on which published information is based are often hidden in such literature , therefore internal information is utilised to get the commercial angle of the information on which decisions on pricing and market potential may be based . Patent information is also of interest for radical projects in relation to the development of new technology . Fundamental projects This type of project is initiated to enhance the company’s understanding of a scientiﬁc or engineering area . The projects are characterised by high risk , uncertain applicability to business needs and a long term perspective , and by communication with external personal networks . To approach a new topic unfamiliar to the researchers a computerised literature search is usually carried out as the starting point , followed by personal contacts . Preliminary inves - tigations by means of literature searches are often needed , since the project participants are often unsure about whom to contact . Consequently , the choice of channels within such projects is based on the library as the primary source , and the respondents’ own knowledge and experience as the secondary . Sharing of information within fundamental projects is characterised by the exchange of information in project meetings . There is much face - to - face communication within the projects through the transfer and delivery of infor - mation between the project participants . Searching for information is charac - terised by retrospective as well as current monitoring of online databases , the latter by means of alert proﬁles to continue the retrospective searches . Not only scientiﬁc information is required , but also customer information , i . e . knowledge and understanding of the activities in the plants and production units as a basis for problem solving when required . This is acquired through discussions with the customers and by means of internal documentation from earlier projects . JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 394 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib THE INFORMATION SEEKING MODEL The focus of this study is limited to research projects within some of the key competence areas of Statoil’s business plan , and concentrates on information seeking and use of information within these key areas . The intention was to identify the information seeking patterns of the research workers , to employ this as the basis for deriving a behavioural model , which , in turn , could be used as the basis for making recommendations for information systems and services needed when R & D projects are carried out . Eight categories were considered to be sufﬁcient to describe the information seeking patterns of the researchers and form the behavioural model : ( 1 ) surveying ; ( 2 ) chaining ; ( 3 ) monitoring ; ( 4 ) browsing ; ( 5 ) distinguishing ; ( 6 ) ﬁltering ; ( 7 ) extracting ; and ( 8 ) ending . The main features of each of the categories are outlined below . Surveying The activities subsumed are those characteristic of the initial search for infor - mation to obtain an overview of the literature within a new subject ﬁeld , or to locate key people operating in the ﬁeld . Informal personal contacts and computerised retrospective searches are the primary means for surveying . The latter are used to approach a new topic within an unknown ﬁeld to ﬁnd out what has been done within that ﬁeld earlier ; to identify the current status of a particular topic ; or to ﬁnd background information for new elements of a project . Such searches are primarily undertaken by librarians , as intermediaries , since external commercial online databases are not accessible on the network for end - user searching . Surveying is usually initiated in the beginning of a project’s life cycle to approach a new or unfamiliar subject ﬁeld and is recognised as a method for planned information gathering among the researchers . However , some of the respondents also make use of surveying activities to generate ideas for new projects or to carry out pre - studies prior to the project plan . When researchers start a new project surveying is usually carried out through a combination of retrospective computerised literature searches and personal contacts – chaining is then often used to identify other new sources in the form of written infor - mation , or human resources , employing secondary sources , such as printouts from online databases , as a starting point . ‘If it’s a totally unfamiliar subject , then I would probably start through a computerised literature search , and through that process identify material or research milieus’ ( S ) . Very often , researchers use colleagues within their own organisational unit as a starting point , people whom they believe are knowledgeable about a particular area , who might have been working within the area earlier , to get some guide - lines and information about the topic : ‘Firstly , I get to know who has some knowledge of the subject ﬁeld among colleagues or other contacts in order to get the ﬁrst approach to the subject . Often they can give you tips and advice about where to search for more information . Secondly , I make use of computerised literature searches’ ( B ) . Surveying is also employed when a new laboratory activity is started , to get an overview of what has already been done by other research establishments . September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 395 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Many of the researchers are formal advisers to students undertaking research for their diplomas or doctor’s degrees . When asked how they would approach the task of inducting a research student into a subject ﬁeld familiar to them , they considered they would primarily make use of literature sources from their own ﬁles , and probably a literature search via the library for the last period of time to bring them up - to - date . Probably the same approach adopted for research students could be used for new employees , since : ‘there are many new employees who spend much time reading information that they don’t need to read’ ( W ) . This form of consulting might be considered a sub - aspect of surveying for a new ﬁeld or topic . Such activities are undertaken when the researchers know whom to contact , e . g . colleagues , other scholars , ﬁrms or customers who possess knowledge within special areas , to ask for their advice . Internal documentation , from studies carried out in earlier projects , was another means of consulting – the value of this re - use of information should not be underestimated . Chaining Chaining is characterised by following chains of different forms of referential connection between sources to identify new sources of information . Chaining is mainly performed by following references in one particular article as a starting point , often obtained through literature searches or colleagues , to references in other articles referred to in the ﬁrst one . The decision to stop following a chain of references is usually based on the time available , while the chaining of personal contacts depends on the knowledge the persons possess , their willingness to give information , and if they know the names of others who are more knowledgeable . Printouts from literature searches , articles and personal contacts may all form the basis for chaining . Author names are often pursued through the chaining of references from one article to another especially when an author has a good reputation in the ﬁeld . This approach is more frequently used in the later phases of a project , when the topic has become more speciﬁc and knowledge about the topic has increased . Interestingly , Science Citation Index , especially when a respondent was approach - ing a new subject area , was only mentioned by two as a means for chaining . The more common approach is the classic one illustrated by the following quotation : ‘you ﬁnd an article within a topic and scan the references looking for some other articles of interest’ ( D ) . Verifying can be treated as a sub - aspect of chaining . Often the researchers make use of review articles in their own internal reports to give an overview of a topic . In such cases the original sources are rarely consulted . However , when they publish their own articles or papers in international journals or conference proceedings , then the original sources are consulted to verify that the infor - mation is correct . Monitoring Monitoring is characterised by activities involved in maintaining awareness of developments and technologies in a ﬁeld through regularly following particular JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 396 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib sources . Both formal and informal information channels are used for keeping up - to - date , the former by means of scientiﬁc journals , conference proceedings and alert proﬁles , the latter by means of personal contacts to exchange infor - mation . In addition , actual practice through ﬁeld research and experimental work was mentioned . The extent to which monitoring is undertaken depends on the type of project and the actual project phase . However , most of the researchers were interested in monitoring their own ﬁelds to keep up - to - date with developments during the whole life cycle of a project . The monitoring of developments in technology is given high priority in the company . Knowledge of the developing trends within particular core competence areas is needed to analyse the strategic position and to devise appropriate initiatives . Consequently , this type of activity requires a systematic approach . The responsibility for the monitoring of technology within particular topics is usually dedicated to some key persons as a part of their jobs . The systematic monitoring of new patents within speciﬁc topics is another activity considered valuable , to look for existing patents and to avoid re - inventing the wheel . Collaboration and dialogue with scientists and other scholars with good reputations within a ﬁeld to pick up fresh ideas are considered to be of great importance and to be the most effective way to get information . The reason for this is probably the time - saving aspect : ‘You can get a lot through conver - sations that you would need a long time to obtain through reading . I do not have enough time to read journals . . . that’s a problem experienced by everybody’ ( T ) . For most of the engineers the exchange of information through contact with suppliers of technology is of great importance and the value of personal contacts with suppliers of equipment and technology is strongly emphasised . The type of contact chosen , e . g . internal contact with colleagues within the Research Centre , contact within the company as a whole , or external contact towards other research milieus , depends on the situation and type of project : ‘I have less and less time [ for keeping up - to - date ] since the projects require more and more time . . . Those who are most important are actually those working within the company , because [ their knowledge ] is of main interest for the projects at Statoil’ ( V ) . This response is in fact not unexpected since the respondent is working within an incremental project ; that is , short term , and typically imitable by competitors . Consequently , researchers who are working in such projects use internal contacts as their primary source . External contacts may also be utilised , but more often in the form of consortium projects supported by Statoil , or through collaboration projects with other oil companies . The importance of including new project participants or employees in already established personal networks is also recognised . In some cases the personal network is decisive for the access to information which otherwise is unavailable . Participation in international conferences and other international forums is another means for monitoring . The frequent use of conference proceedings was also mentioned , although the respondents expressed a preference for using scientiﬁc journals to keep up with the literature . Scientiﬁc journals are probably September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 397 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib most useful in providing information needed to place the work carried out in a proper context with similar work already completed . Some of the respondents have their own journals in subscriptions through the library and circulate them within their departments . Beyond this , journals are received on circulation directly from the library , or sent to decentralised depot libraries in some of the departments . The journals are valued not merely for their articles but also for equipment and product news : ‘It’s not only the articles that are of interest to me , but a great deal of equipment and product advertisements’ ( C ) . This type of information is not so easily found through computerised literature searching . Alert proﬁles , i . e . ﬁxed search strings periodically carried out in online databases , are a means of ensuring the current awareness of particular subjects . Such alert proﬁles are usually employed to follow up retrospective searches , as a means of carrying out surveying activities on a more current basis . The printouts often circulate within a project and are browsed regularly by the project participants to ﬁnd articles of interest : ‘I’m not sure if it’s the most effective way . . . but there might be something of interest to me not necessarily recognised by others’ ( T ) . As the quotation illustrates , the researchers usually wish to browse the sources personally . Colleagues are not entrusted with this work . However , the general trend is to employ librarians , as intermediaries , for the literature searches . The researchers rarely carry out such searches on their own . It seems that the different systems provided on the network look somewhat overwhelming to the respondents . The increase in the services offered on the net requires follow up through information , training and support , as well as a current evaluation of the different services already in place . Browsing Browsing , both primary and secondary sources , often casually , is an important part of the information seeking process . Browsing is not only a visible phenomenon in monitoring activities through the scanning of journals and tables of contents , and the browsing of printouts from alert proﬁles , but also in surveying activities through the browsing of references and abstracts of printouts from retrospective literature searches . When the browsing activities are targeted towards scientiﬁc journals they are basically unstructured and ad hoc , and the journals are hardly effectively utilised . The opposite situation occurs when the browsing activities are targeted towards printouts from literature searches . In order to maintain awareness , many of the respondents receive many scientiﬁc journals and other types of publications on circulation initiated by their own departments , without any other criteria for pre - selection than the broad subject ﬁeld . They usually scan through all the publications to ﬁnd something of particular interest . Other sources frequently browsed are supplier catalogues , used to survey the market about particular laboratory equipment and instruments ; a large number of copies of such catalogues are spread throughout the Research Centre . JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 398 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib Distinguishing Distinguishing is characterised through activities undertaken when information sources are ranked according to their relative importance based on the respondents’ own perceptions . Lack of time and the problem of information overload are strong themes throughout the responses and informal information channels and secondary sources are prioritised . Informal information channels are given preference over formal information channels . Participation in discussions and conversations is considered to be more effective than the reading of literature . For this reason the respondents value highly their personal networks . The main reason for this is probably the time - saving aspect , but also because much information is not available through formal channels . In their use of the formal channels secondary sources are usually put before primary sources . This assertion is supported by the fact that tables of contents from periodicals and abstracts from computerised literature searches are often given preference over the full text and considered to be a means for saving time . The conscious orientation towards particular sources is revealed through the monitoring of the most relevant core journals and particular conferences speciﬁed by some of the respondents . Such sources are also chosen for publish - ing their own articles or papers . Conference proceedings from a recognised organisation , and the repeated utilisation of speciﬁc online databases most relevant for the subject ﬁeld are other contenders . Filtering Filtering is characterised by the use of certain criteria or mechanisms when searching for information , to make the information as relevant and precise as possible . The conﬂict between the lack of time and the risk of failing to obtain important information is frequently apparent . Computerised literature searches are considered the main means of ﬁltering . The ﬁltering criteria most frequently reported are those used to restrict the searches , such as keywords as the primary criterion and a ﬁxed period of time as the secondary criterion . The unsystematic means of ﬁltering is the one carried out by colleagues working within the same area , who pass on information considered to be of interest to others , and thus act like ﬁlters . More systematic attempts have been tried to share the ﬁltering work equally between colleagues through the reading of journals , but usually such methods fail partly because most of the respondents seem to be reluctant in their ﬁltering behaviour for fear that useful information could be lost : ‘It’s important to keep - up - to - date , but . . . it takes time . . . you have to ﬁlter , but then you can lose something , that’s the problem’ ( N ) ; ‘when you ﬁlter . . . you often lose such things that you hadn’t thought about . . . but from which you suddenly get some ideas’ ( H ) . Extracting Extracting is characterised by working through sources to locate material of interest . Extracting represents a major feature of the information seeking patterns of many of the researchers . Such activities are usually employed when September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 399 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib the researchers are giving different kinds of scientiﬁc presentations , when pure research reports are required , when pre - studies prior to a project are executed , when review articles are written , when projects are summarised through periodical reporting , or when papers or articles are written for publication . Ending Ending activities are those involved in actually ﬁnishing the information seeking process , and are mainly carried out at the end of an R & D project . In the ﬁnal stage of a project , when the researchers are knowledgeable about the study ﬁeld and conclusions are drawn , there may be a need to carry out a small scale search targeted towards particular unsolved questions , or to look for newly published literature that might be of interest for the conclusions . Such activities are usually undertaken in the form of a small scale search to complete the sources already gathered , to check if something has appeared during the last period that may inﬂuence the project . This approach is also employed if there are questions left which must be clariﬁed : ‘Often you ﬁnd some articles that are published at the end of a project . . . just what you have been looking for . . . then you must order those articles’ ( K ) . There is often a need to carry out more speciﬁc searches for supplementary comments when summary reports are provided : ‘it’s a need to work through the literature in the end , in order to sum up the activities’ ( T ) . However , the summary of experiences which is required in the end of a project is not always a top priority : ‘When you have ﬁnished a project . . . you are in a hurry to start the next project . . . you have rarely time for summing up the results satisfactorily’ ( O ) . CONCLUSION This study provides a picture of the nature of communication in research projects and the role of information seeking in relation to the performance of project work tasks . It seems clear that information seeking is most extensive in the initial phase of a project , when both formal and informal channels are utilised . When the researchers progress through preliminary to advanced phases of the project , and become more knowledgeable and speciﬁc about the problem , they are increasingly selective . The use of formal channels decreases as they progress in the project , and person to person communication seems to be a more dominant factor . In the ﬁnal phase , however , both formal and informal channels are again utilised , but indeed on a smaller scale , mainly in the form of a small literature search or through contacts with knowledgeable persons in the ﬁeld to supplement the information already gathered . Information gathering is an iterative process , and recurring activities often take place when new situations occur over the life of projects . The long term projects , such as radical and fundamental projects , will have the opportunity to go through more than one life cycle . It is interesting to compare the ﬁndings of this study and the previous studies of physical scientists [ 9 ] with those of Allen [ 20 ] who also studied how JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 400 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib technological information is acquired and used by physical scientists and engineers in R & D organisations . In his studies Allen found that the scientists concentrated their attention heavily upon the literature and upon colleagues outside their laboratory organisation . The engineers spread their attention more evenly over the channels and received ideas from two sources unused by the scientists – the customers and the vendors . He also found that the two groups differed in the degree to which they used oral and written channels . Scientists devoted 75 % more of their time to communication ; most of it is given to the literature . Both groups spent about 10 % of their overall time discussing technical matters with colleagues , but the engineers spent more time in personal contact than in reading . Engineers turned ﬁrst to the channel that was most accessible – based on the criterion : ‘least average rate of probable work’ . In the study at Statoil the scientists tended to look outwards for most of their information , and made more use of widespread contacts with other scholars to keep up - to - date compared with the engineers . They also used computerised alert proﬁles for the monitoring of particular topics more frequently . Secondary sources were more often ranked over primary sources . When approaching a subject ﬁeld unfamiliar to them , the scientists usually chose retrospective computerised literature searches as a starting point . Secondly , they made use of personal contacts in other scientiﬁc milieus . The scientists relied mainly on the library and the competence and skills of the librarians when choosing information channels , especially for computerised literature searching . They made use of the information services provided on the network more frequently than the engineers . Scientiﬁc journals and conferences recognised in the subject ﬁeld were also more often used by the scientists , who were working towards scientiﬁc recognition in the form of publications . The engineers made heavy use of internal communication within their own departments or project teams or within the company as a whole to keep up - to - date . External contacts were primarily projected towards technological suppliers and persons in the same line of business . Internal documentation was more often recognised as an important source . When the engineers were confronted with a subject ﬁeld unfamiliar to them , they tended ﬁrst to look for colleagues or other contacts within their own personal network who possessed the knowledge ; second , they employed librarians as intermediaries , for comput - erised retrospective literature searches . The engineers chose their information channels based on their own experience and knowledge , through the consultation of personal contacts , or both methods . They had little experience of the use of information services on the network . The engineers , working with more technical tasks , used internal reports and internal magazines more frequently for publishing purposes than they used journals and conferences . Allen noted that the information needs of an individual vary greatly as that person progresses through a project . At least part of this variation is attributed to the fact that different information channels serve different problem - solving functions better , a ﬁnding conﬁrmed by Garvey et al . ’s [ 21 ] examination of the different kinds of information that scientists need at different stages of research . This ﬁnding is reinforced by the present study in relation to the September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 401 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib different kinds of information required , and channels preferred , for the different project phases and for the different stages in the projects . Allen’s work also highlighted the role that technological ‘gatekeepers’ played in the commu - nication process for the R & D organisation , a role which was also evident in the responses of the scientists and engineers in this study , despite the frequent changes in the focus and composition of the project teams and the different kinds of information required for the different project phases and types . It is also interesting to note that , in spite of the differences in detail in terms of the sources of information explored , the behavioural characteristics were also similar , in general and in detail , to the models of the information seeking patterns of academic researchers reported in the earlier studies of physicists , chemists and social scientists [ 6 , 8 , 9 ] . The categories identiﬁed deﬁne identical or very similar features of information seeking behaviour and , as with the earlier studies , the same basic set of categories seem to be sufﬁcient to describe the information seeking patterns of the engineers and researchers . In this respect the general behavioural model can be considered to be quite robust in relation to the information seeking patterns of scientists , engineers and social scientists in both an academic and an industrial research environment and over a period of time which has seen accelerating changes in the information environment itself . REFERENCES 1 . Dervin , B . and Nilan , M . Information needs and uses . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , 21 , 1986 , 3 – 33 . 2 . Paisley , W . J . Information needs and uses . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , 3 , 1968 , 1 – 30 . 3 . Kuhlthau , C . C . Inside the search process : information seeking from the user’s perspective . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 42 , 1991 , 361 – 371 . 4 . Kelly , G . A theory of personality : the psychology of personal constructs . New York : Norton , 1963 . 5 . Palmer , J . Scientists and information : I . Using cluster analysis to identify information style . Journal of Documentation , 47 , 1991 , 105 – 129 . 6 . Ellis , D . A behavioural approach to information retrieval system design . Journal of Documentation , 45 , 1989 , 171 – 212 . 7 . Glaser , B . G . and Strauss , A . L . The discovery of grounded theory : strategies for qualitative research . New York : Aldine , 1967 . 8 . Ellis , D . Modelling the information - seeking patterns of academic researchers : a grounded theory approach . Library Quarterly , 63 , 1993 , 469 – 486 . 9 . Ellis , D . , Cox , D . and Hall , K . A comparison of the information seeking patterns of researchers in the physical and social sciences . Journal of Documentation , 49 , 1993 , 356 – 369 . 10 . Westbrook , L . User - needs : a synthesis and analysis of current theories for the practitioner . RQ , 32 , 1993 , 541 – 549 . JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION vol . 53 , no . 4 402 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib 11 . Wilson , T . D . Information needs and uses : ﬁfty years of progress ? In : Vickery , B . C . , ed . Fifty years of information progress : a Journal of Documentation review . London : Aslib , 1994 , 15 – 51 . 12 . Mellon , C . A . Naturalistic inquiry for library science : methods and applications for research , evaluation , and teaching . New York : Greenwood Press , 1990 . 13 . Patton , M . Q . Qualitative evaluation and research methods . 2nd ed . London : Sage , 1990 . 14 . Guba , E . G . Toward a methodology of naturalistic inquiry in educational evaluation . Los Angeles : University of California Center for the Study of Evaluation , 1978 . ( CSE monograph series in evaluation no 8 ) 15 . Statoil . Forretningsplan for Forskningssenteret 1995 – 1998 ( A business plan for Forskningssenteret 1995 – 1998 ) . F & U / OH - 03 . Utgivelsesdato ( Date of publication ) : 1994 . 16 . Statoil . Strategi og handlingsplan . Informasjonsteknologi : 1995 – 97 ( The information technology strategy and action plan ) . F & U / OH - 05 . Utgivelsesdato ( Date of publication ) : 1994 . 17 . Statoil . 5 - yrsplan for Forskning og Utvikling 1995 – 1999 ( A ﬁve year plan for research and development 1995 – 1999 ) . K / KR - 33 . Utgivelsesdato ( Date of publication ) : 1995 . 18 . Statoil . Prosjekthandbok i F & U ( Project handbook in R & D ) . F & U / KP - 02 / V - 001 . Utgivelsesdato ( Date of publication ) : 1995 . 19 . Roussel , P . A . , Saad , K . N . and Erickson , T . J . Third generation R & D : managing the link to corporate strategy . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 1991 . 20 . Allen , T . J . Managing the ﬂow of technology : technology transfer and the dissemination of technological information within the R & D organisation . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press , 1977 . 21 . Garvey , W . D . , Tomita , K . and Woolf , P . The dynamic scientiﬁc - informa - tion user . In : Garvey , W . D . , ed . Communication , the essence of science . Oxford : Pergamon Press , 1979 , 256 – 279 . ( Revised version received 20 January 1997 ) September 1997 INFORMATION SEEKING 403 Journal of Documentation , Vol . 53 , No . 4 , September 1997 © Aslib , The Association for Information Management . All rights reserved . Except as otherwise permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , no part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic , mechanical , photocopying or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher . Aslib , The Association for Information Management Information House , 20 – 24 Old Street , London EC1V 9AP Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 253 4488 , Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 171 430 0514 Email : pubs @ aslib . co . uk , WWW : http : / / www . aslib . co . uk / aslib