The small world inside large metabolic networks Andreas Wagner 1 , 2 , David Fell 3 1 University of New Mexico , Department of Biology , 167A Castetter Hall Albuquerque , NM 817131 - 1091 Tel . + 1 - 505 - 277 - 2021 ; FAX + 1 - 505 - 277 - 0304 ; wagnera @ unm . edu 2 The Santa Fe Institute , 1399 Hyde Park Road , Santa Fe , NM 87501 3 School of Biological & Molecular Sciences , Oxford Brookes University , Oxford OX3 0BP , UK . Tel . + 44 ( 0 ) 1865 483247 ; FAX + 44 ( 0 ) 1865 484017 ; Abstract We analyze the structuture of a large metabolic network , that of the energy and biosynthesis metabolism of Escherichia coli . This network is a paradigmatic case for the large genetic and metabolic networks that functional genomics efforts are beginning to elucidate . To analyze the structure of networks involving hundreds or thousands of components by simple visual inspection is impossible , and a quantitative framework is needed to analyze them . We propose a graph theoretical description of the E . coli metabolic network , a description that we hope will prove useful for other genetic networks . We find that this network is a small world graph , a type of graph observed in a variety of seemingly unrelated areas , such as friendship networks in sociology , the structure of electrical power grids , and the nervous system of C . elegans . Moreover , its connectivity follows a power law , another unusual but by no means rare statistical distribution . This architecture may serve to minimize transition times between metabolic states , and also reflect the evolutionary history of metabolism . The information necessary to characterize the genetic and metabolic networks driving all functions of a living cell is being put within our reach by various genome projects . With the availability of this information , however , a problem so far unknown to molecular biologists will arise : how to adequately represent and describe the structure of large genetic networks . While it is trivial to understand the structure of metabolic pathways , transcriptional cascades , or signalling pathways that consist of a small number of genes , networks consisting of anywhere from hundreds to tens of thousands of components are less easily described . If networks encountered in areas ranging from neurobiology to sociology are any guide , we can assume that the structure of genetic and metabolic networks will be a complex mix of ordered and random elements . However , a body of theory suitable to analyze large networks exists only for networks at either end of this spectrum , networks that are perfectly orderly or completely random . Thus , a quantitative framework suitable to describe the structure of large biological networks remains to be developed . A description of genetic and metabolic networks is , however , only a first step towards a second , deeper level of inquiry , which asks for an explanation of the structure of such networks . Needles to say , any explanation of a network’s organization , whether it invokes historical accidents or functional optimality principles requires a prior understanding of what that organization is . Here , we analyze the structure of a large metabolic network , that of the Escherichia coli intermediary metabolism for energy generation and small building block synthesis . To obtain insight into both structural and functional aspects of this network , we first propose and motivate a mathematical representation suitable for our purpose . We then introduce some quantities useful to describe the network’s structure . Significantly , we find that this structure is similar to one observed for networks in several unrelated areas of science , such as sociology . Qualitatively new hypotheses on network function and evolution can be based upon the detection of such global organizational patterns . While this attempt is only a modest beginning , we hope that it points towards the kind of global properties of biological networks that will be found in years to come , and that similar approaches will lead to an understanding of the evolutionary forces shaping such networks . Metabolic and genetic networks can be represented at multiple levels of mathematical resolution . The most fine - grained of these involves detailed modeling of each gene products’ activity as a function of substrate , product , and effector concentration . This level of detail may be difficult to achieve even for the smallest networks , because individual enzymes may show quite complex behavior . A case in point is glutamine synthase , which has at least nine small - molecule effectors regulating its activity 1 , 2 . Modeling an entire metabolism on this level of detail is certainly hopeless . A second , coarser level of representation is metabolic control analysis , which requires less detailed information about enzyme kinetics . The hundreds of steps for which even this smaller amount of information would be required , together with needed information on metabolic fluxes and concentrations , makes this representation currently impractial for a network of this magnitude . A third and more manageable level of representation is that of stoichiometric equations describing network reactions ( Fig . 1a ) , a representation for which the apparatus of metabolic flux balance analysis and linear programming can provide useful information on admissible steady state metabolic fluxes 3 - 6 Here , we choose a fourth , graph theoretic representation derived from stoichiometric equations . Our motivation to use a graph representation of metabolism instead of analyzing metabolic flux is twofold . First , in graph theory a mathematical toolbox is already in place that can be used to describe the structure of metabolic networks , and that is currently not available for stoichiometric equations . Second , a graph theoretic representation is a common denominator permitting a comparison of seemingly unrelated networks , which has recently led to the exposure of deep similarities among networks found in sociology , engineering , and neurobiology 7 . While undoubtedly crude , we note that a graph model still allows a qualitative analysis of network function , for example in terms of how disturbances propagate through a network 7 . Based on publicly available information 8 - 12 we assembled a list of 317 stoichiometric equations involving 287 substrates that represent the central routes of energy metabolism and small - molecule building block synthesis in E . coli . Because there is considerable variation in the metabolic reactions realized under different environmental conditions , we attempted to include only those that would occur under one particular condition : aerobic growth on minimal medium with glucose as sole carbon source and O 2 as electron acceptor . We deliberately omitted ( i ) reactions whose occurrence is reportedly strain - dependent 8 , ( ii ) biosyntheses of complex cofactors ( e . g . , adenosyl - cobalamine ) which are not fully understood , and ( iii ) syntheses of most polymers ( RNA , DNA , protein ) because of their complex stoichiometry . Our metabolic map comprises the following pathways : Glycolysis ( 12 reactions ) , pentose phosphate and Entner - Doudoroff pathways ( 10 ) , glycogen metabolism ( 5 ) , acetate production ( 2 ) , glyoxalate and anaplerotic reactions ( 3 ) , tricarboxylic acid cycle ( 10 ) , oxydative phosphorylation ( 6 ) , amino acid and polyamine biosynthesis ( 95 ) , nucleotide and nucleoside biosynthesis and ( 72 ) , folate synthesis and 1 - carbon metabolism ( 16 ) , glycerol 3 - phosphate and membrane lipids ( 17 ) , riboflavin ( 9 ) , coenzyme A ( 11 ) , NAD ( P ) ( 7 ) , porphyrins , heme , and sirohaem ( 14 ) , lipopolysaccharides and murein ( 14 ) , pyrophosphate metabolism ( 1 ) , transport reactions ( 2 ) , glycerol 3 - phosphate production ( 2 ) , isoprenoid biosynthesis and quinone biosynthesis ( 13 ) . The reaction list is available from DAF upon request . From these reaction equations , a stoichiometric matrix 3 was automatically generated from the reaction list using the software package INDIGO 13 ( http : / / members . tripod . co . uk / sauro / biotech . htm ) . From this matrix , the substrate and reaction graph were derived under omission of the following metabolites : CO 2 , NH 3 , SO 4 , thioredoxin ( oxidized and reduced form ) , organic phosphate ( P i ) and pyrophosphate ( PP i ) . Graph analysis software was written in C + + using the LEDA library of data types 14 . We will consider two complementary representations of a metabolic network . The first of these is the substrate graph G S = ( V S , E S ) . Its vertex set V S consists of all chemical compounds ( substrates ) that occur in the network . Two substrates S 1 , S 2 are adjacent if there exists an edge e , i . e . , e = ( S 1 , S 2 ) ˛ E S , the edge set of this graph , if they occur ( either as substrates or products ) in the same chemical reaction ( Fig . 1b ) . Second , consider the reaction graph G R = ( V R , E R ) . Its vertex set V R shall consist of all chemical reactions in the network . Two reactions are adjacent if there exists an edge , i . e . , ( R 1 , R 2 ) ˛ E R , the edge set of the reaction graph , if they share at least one chemical compound , either as substrate or as product ( see Fig . 1c ) . We will now briefly discuss why we have avoided two obvious alternatives to these representations . First , perhaps the most natural representation of a metabolic network is that of a hypergraph 15 . However , hypergraphs are much less intuitive constructs than graphs , and the tools our analysis needs have not yet been developed for them . Second , one might argue that the existence of irreversible chemical reactions would make a directed graph 15 a better choice , i . e . , a graph where each edge has a direction . For instance , one might wish to connect a substrate S and a product P of an irreversible reaction as S (cid:213) P . However , we deliberately avoid directed graphs here for the following reasons . One of the uses of a graph representation of metabolic networks is to assess qualitatively how perturbations of either enzyme concentrations ( e . g . , via mutation ) or substrate concentrations ( e . g . , via changes in consumption or availability ) propagate along the network . A directed graph representation , however , would not accurately reflect how perturbations at individual vertices propagate . Consider the substrate graph , and a perturbation in the concentration of a compound that is the product of an irreversible reaction . Even for irreversible reactions , the concentration of a reaction product potentially affects the reaction rate by occupancy of the active site . Thus , a perturbation in a product concentration downstream of an irreversible reaction ( S (cid:213) P ) can affect the reaction rate , and thus substrate concentrations (cid:210)upstream(cid:211) of that reaction . A directed substrate graph would not capture this behavior , because by definition P can not influence S in this representation . In a similar vein , in control analysis , flux and concentration control coefficients of an enzyme 16 and not the reversibility of the reaction , show how it is possible for a change in concentration of an enzyme to propagate into the part of the network (cid:210)upstream(cid:211) of the reaction 17 , 18 . A directed reaction graph would not capture this behavior . The two graph representations used here are complementary and obviously related . Consider three substrates S 1 - S 3 in the substrate graph , connected by two reactions R 1 , R 2 . Then , R 1 and R 2 are nodes in the reaction graph connected by an edge corresponding to S 2 . Conversely , consider three reactions R 1 - R 3 in the reaction graph , connected by two substrates S 1 , S 2 . Then , S 1 and S 2 are vertices of the substrate graph connected by reaction R 2 . The terminology introduced now will apply equally to both types of graph 15 . The degree k of a vertex is the number of other vertices it is adjacent to . Two vertices v 0 , v i are connected if there exists a path , i . e . , a sequence of adjacent vertices v 0 , v 1 , (cid:201) , v i - 1 , v i from v 0 to v i . We will be concerned only with connected graphs , i . e . , graphs where all vertex pairs are connected . Notice that ( i ) the law of mass conservation , and ( ii ) the fact that the carbon of all biomass is ultimately derived from CO 2 imply that metabolic networks are connected . The path length l is defined as the number of edges in the shortest path between v 0 and v i . The characteristic path length L of a graph is the pathlength between two vertices , averaged over all pairs of vertices . Another important quantity 19 is the clustering coefficient C ( v ) of a vertex v . Consider all k v vertices adjacent to a vertex v , and count the number m of edges that exist among these k v vertices ( not including edges connecting them to v ) . The maximally possible m is k v ( k v - 1 ) / 2 , in which case all m vertices are connected to each other , and we define C ( v ) : = m / ( k v ( k v - 1 ) / 2 ) . C ( v ) measures the (cid:210)cliquishness(cid:211) of the neighborhood of v , i . e . , what fraction of the vertices adjacent to v are also adjacent to each other . In extension , the clustering coefficient C of the graph is defined as the average of C ( v ) over all v . It is best viewed as a measure of the graph(cid:213)s (cid:210)cliquishness(cid:211) ( see also below ) . In analogy to statistics , where hypotheses are tested by comparing a data set to some random distribution , we will find it useful to compare the properties of the metabolic graph to a reference graph , a random graph with the same number of vertices n and mean degree k . This is not to say that we believe that metabolic network graphs will be well approximated by random graphs , only that random graphs provide a useful benchmark to evaluate exactly how metabolic graphs are different from them . This is made feasible by the available statistical theory of random graphs 20 . Importantly , random connectivity and a close variant , k - regular random connectivity 15 , have frequently been the assumptions of choice during more than three decades of modeling genetic networks 21 - 24 . It is thus useful to see how the actual structure of a cell biological network ( albeit not a regulatory one ) relates to one key assumption made in this tradition . In connected sparse random graphs with n nodes and average degree k ( k˙n ) , the probability p of two vertices being connected is given by p = k / ( n - 1 ) . Such graphs show ( i ) a binomial distribution of vertex degree k , ( ii ) a very small clustering coefficient C = ( k - 1 ) / n , close to the theoretically attainable minimum of zero for large n , and ( iii ) a characteristic path length that is also close to the theoretically attainable minimum , although no closed mathematical form exists 7 . Thus , among all connected graphs with the same number of vertices and edges , random graphs are among the most rapidly traversed . Variation in connectivity of metabolic networks greatly exceeds that of random graphs . Because of the ubiquity of the metabolites adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) , nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD ) , as well as its phosphorylated and reduced forms 1 , we explored two situations , one in which these metabolites are included , and another one in which they are omitted . Table 1 shows basic connectivity statistics for reaction and substrate graphs representing the central energy and biosynthetic metabolism of Escherichia coli . Similar to networks found in neurobiology or ecology 25 , 26 , metabolic graphs are sparse ( Table 1 ) . That is to say that the average degree of each vertex ( metabolite or reaction ) is small compared to the maximally possible degree k = n - 1 . For our E . coli network , k is of order log n . In a random graph with n nodes and probability p of two nodes being connected , the degree of each vertex follows a binomial distribution with variance ( n - 1 ) p ( 1 - p ) . The variance in degree for the metabolic graphs , however , is up to 20 - fold greater than that of the corresponding random graph with p = k / ( n - 1 ) . This implies that some vertices in metabolic graphs have many more , and others many fewer neighbors than vertices for a random graph . Given this enormous dispersion , k - regular random graphs would be particularly poor statistical models of metabolic networks . Comparison to random graphs also lends itself to a statistical definition of (cid:210)key - metabolites(cid:211) or (cid:210)key - reactions(cid:211) , particularly highly connected vertices in metabolite graphs . For example , for the substrate graph , one might define a key metabolite as one whose vertex degree k m exceeds the average k by three standard deviations , Applying this to the substrate graph with k = 4 . 76 ( Table 1 ) , leads to k m > 11 . 25 and 13 key metabolites , of which the five most highly connected are glutamate , coenzyme A , a - ketoglutarate , pyruvate , and glutamine ( Table 2 ; left column ) . This list overlaps with sets of key metabolic intermediates of E . coli used by other authors in metabolite balancing studies , where they represent the common biosynthetic source of all cell materials . For instance , Varma and Palsson 27 followed Ingraham et al . 28 in using a set of 12 biosynthetic precursors produced by the catabolism of all carbon sources : glucose 6 - phosphate , fructose 6 - phosphate , ribose 5 - phosphate , erythrose 4 - phosphate , triose phosphate , 3 - phosphoglycerate , phosphoenolpyruvate , pyruvate , oxaloacetate , 2 - oxoglutarate , acetyl CoA and succinyl CoA . Holmes 29 chose a smaller subset of 8 key precursors from which all cell biomass could be produced : glucose 6 - phosphate , triose phosphate , 3 - phosphoglycerate , phosphoenolpyruvate , pyruvate , oxaloacetate , 2 - oxoglutarate , and acetyl CoA . Substrate graphs have a power - law degree distribution . The high variance in connectivity warrants a closer look at the distribution of metabolite degrees ( " connectivity " ) , which is shown in figures two and three for substrate graphs and reaction graphs , respectively . Each figure shows a histogram of degree vs . frequency , as well as a rank distribution of vertices ( metabolites or reactions ) , where the vertex with the highest connectivity was assigned rank 1 . Figure 2 reveals that the degree distribution of a substrate graph is consistent with a power - law , i . e . , the probability P ( k ) of finding a . 1 ) 1 ( 3 3 - - - + = + > n k n k k k k random m s vertex with degree k , P ( k ) (cid:181) k - t . While displaying frequency data as a log - log binned histogram is the most common way of visualizing a power law , much statistical information is lost by binning , resulting in little statistical confidence for a small graph such as this one ( Fig . 2a ) . It is thus reassuring that the rank distribution which does not discard information and is essentially an estimate of the cumulative probability distribution of k , is also in good agreement with a power law ( Fig . 2b ) However , little confidence can be placed in the estimated value of the exponent t ( e . g . , t » 1 . 38 from the rank distribution ) , because of the small network size . The large variance in degree discussed above is a consequence of the power law relation . Power laws are (cid:210)fat - tailed(cid:211) probability distributions that have been detected in a variety of seemingly unrelated processes in nature and society , such as population size fluctuations in birds , price fluctuations in the stock market , the topography of the world wide web , or the magnitude of extinction events in the fossil 30 - 33 . Their fat tail reflects an overabundance of large events or objects , e . g . , stock market crashes or highly connected metabolites . While it has been proposed that power laws reflect some deep commonalities among many processes in nature 34 , alternative explanations resort to more mundane explanations . For instance , power laws may result from pooling log - normal distributions which are commonly found in nature ( Li , pers . comm . ) . The distribution of vertex degrees in the reaction graph does not follow a simple power law ( Fig . 3 ) . The rank vs . degree plot ( Fig . 3b ) shows that the it defies a straightforward classification , and appears to be governed by at least two qualitatively different regimes ( Fig . 3b ) . Metabolic graphs are small world graphs . What do the architecture of the C . elegans nervous system , the power grid of the western United States , the structure of some sociological network , and the world wide web have in common ? The surprising answer is that they are all small world graphs , a type of graph formally characterized by 7 , 19 , 30 . Small - world graphs are best illustrated with friendship networks in sociology , where small - worldness is known in folklore as (cid:210)six degrees of separation(cid:211) . Friendship networks are sparse ( each of > 2x10 8 individuals in the United States is connected to at most 1000 (cid:210)friends(cid:211) ) , and highly clustered ( one(cid:213)s friends tend to be friends of each other ) . This means that most of the few connections per individual are tied up in local interactions within (cid:210)cliques(cid:211) of individuals . Nevertheless , every individual in the U . S may be linked to every other individual by a short chain of acquaintances , as suggested by empirical work in sociology 35 , a suggestion that has been confirmed for some completely mapped sociological networks 19 . A more formal definition of a small - world graph is that it is sparse and is much more highly clustered than an equally sparse random graph ( C¨C random ) , but that its characteristic path length L is close to the theoretically possible minimum , that of a random graph ( L » L random ) . The reason why a graph can have small L despite being highly clustered is that few nodes connecting distant clusters may suffice to cause small L 7 . It follows that " small - worldness " is a global graph property that can not be found by studying local graph properties . Figure 4a demonstrates that the E . coli metabolic network is much more highly clustered than random graphs . However , its characteristic path length is very small , and within one step of that of random graphs . Thus , it falls into the category of small world graphs , a feature that would not be obvious on the level of individual metabolic pathways . Substrate graphs illustrate this property particularly well . Their characteristic path length is within 5 percent ( < 0 . 1 steps ) of that of an equally sparse random graph , although they are at least 17 times more clustered than random graphs . The high clustering coefficient is the result of local interations within metabolic pathways , the (cid:210)cliques(cid:211) in this network . To illustrate this , we analyzed separately the substrate graphs of ten of the longest individual pathways in our metabolic network , which were otherwise chosen arbitrarily . The analyzed pathways comprise 203 substrates and include glycolysis , the tricarboxylic acid cycle , biosyntheses of riboflavine , folate , histidine , branched chain amino acids , aromatic amino acids , threonine and lysine , arginin , putrescine and spemidine , porphyrene and heme , and coenzyme A . Their mean clustering coefficient , averaged over 10 pathways , calculates as C = 0 . 44 ( s = 0 . 14 , n = 10 ) , not significantly different to that of C = 0 . 48 measured for the whole network . We interpret this as an indication that the overall high clustering of the network is due to the individual metabolic pathways or modules . When considered as separate pathways , the coefficient of variation s in vertex degree ( mean vertex degree averaged over ten pathways : k = 3 . 2 ) is found to be equal to s = 0 . 52 , which is much lower than that observed for the complete network ( s = 1 . 01 ; Table 1 ) , and closer to that expected for a random graph with the same number of vertices ( n = 203 ) and average degree k ( s = 0 . 39 ) . This suggests that the highly connected metabolites linking the individual pathways into a connected network are responsible for the great variance in degree . Their high connectivity provides the (cid:210)glue(cid:211) of the network and is also responsible for the short pathlength . This is suggested by the mean characteristic path among each of the ten separate pathways , which is L = 3 . 08 ( s = 0 . 62 ) , and thus not much smaller than the L = 3 . 88 observed for the whole network . Like most graph theoretical models , our model of metabolic networks omits most quantitative information , and is suited only to analyze network topography . However , it has two advantages to more fine - grained models . First , the required information ( stoichiometric equations ) is available . Second , by using a conceptual framework not restricted to chemistry , but important to many areas of science , it allows us to expose a deep structural similarity to seemingly unrelated networks . However , having identified a common design principle , one has to return to biology and think about its possible origins . What might be the functional or phylogenetic significance of the observed patterns , a power law distribution of connectivity , and the small - world nature of the metabolic graph ? It is of course possible that there is no such significance , because the laws of chemistry might constrain network structure so severely that only one design of a metabolic network can ensure that all basic cellular functions are fulfilled . In this case , the observed structure is determined by chemical constraints alone , and because the nature of these constraints is poorly understood , we could say little further . We can not strictly exclude this possibility , but some existing work speaks to the issue and suggests otherwise . First the biosyntheses of various compunds , such as lysine or isopentenyl diphosphate , occur by different routes in different organisms 36 . Recent analysis of the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle from the viewpoint of chemical design showed that there are several chemically possible solutions to the tasks it performs , of which the solution realized in cells is the one that involves the fewest chemical transformations 37 . Moreover , considerable variation exists in the presence or absence of particular reactions in the TCA cycle in 19 prokaryotes with completely sequenced genomes 38 . Strikingly , in a majority of these species , the TCA cycle appears incomplete or absent 38 . If even key components of metabolism can show such variation , how much more variation must there be in more peripheral parts of a metabolic network ? At the very least , these studies suggest that chemistry does allow flexibility in the design of a metabolic net . If this is the case , then the observed architecture may be a relic of evolutionary history , a product of evolutionary optimization , or a mixture of both . Which of these may be more important we may never know , but we will offer two speculations . First , could the observed network structure be an indicator of the evolutionary history of metabolism ? Barab(cid:135)si and collaborators 39 have recently proposed a mathematical model that generates large graphs from small graphs by adding nodes and edges . If new links between nodes are made preferentially between nodes that already have many links , then the resulting graphs are small - world graphs with power - law degree distributions . A key prediction is that vertices with many connections are vertices that have been added early in the history of the graph . Cast in terms of metabolism , if early in the evolution of life metabolic networks have increased in size by adding new metabolites , then the most highly connected metabolites should also be the phylogenetically oldest . Indeed , many of the most highly connected metabolites in Table 2 have a proposed early evolutionary origin . RNA cofactors such as coenzyme A , NAD , or GTP are among the most highly connected metabolites , and are thought to be among the remnants of an RNA world . Glycolysis and the TCA cycle are perhaps the most ancient metabolic pathways , and various of their intermediates ( a - ketoglutarate , succinate , pyruvate , 3 - phosphoglycerate ) occur in Table 2 . Early proteins are thought to have used many fewer amino acids than extant proteins , and the highly connected amino acids glutamine , glutamate , aspartate , and serine are thought to be among those used earliest . 40 - 45 . The potential relation between evolutionary history and connectivity of metabolites corroborates a postulate put forth and defended forcefully by Morowitz [ , 1992 ; 493 ] , namely that intermediary metabolism recapitulates the evolution of biochemistry . Our highly connected metabolites pyruvate , a - ketoglutarate , acetyl CoA , oxaloacetate are identified by Morowitz 46 as belonging to the original core metabolism , and glutamate , glutamine and aspartate are the links from this core into the next earliest subset of compounds , the first amino acids . Second , which aspect of metabolic function might a small - world network optimize ? Metabolic networks need to react to perturbations , either perturbations in enzyme concentrations , or changes in metabolite concentrations . Because metabolic networks are connected , each component in the network may be affected by such perturbations , and thus the network as a whole must adapt to the changed conditions by assuming a different metabolic state . The importance of minimizing the transition time betwen metabolic states has been recognized and discussed by other authors 47 , 48 . Any response to a perturbation and transition to a new metabolic state requires that information about the perturbation has spread within the network . Watts and Strogatz 7 studied how fast perturbations spread through small - worldnetworks . Significantly , they found that the time required for spreading of a perturbation in a small - world network is close to the theoretically possible minimum for any graph with the same number of nodes and vertices . In other words , perturbations spread extremely fast , and small - worldness may thus allow a metabolism to react rapidly to them . These hypotheses might not be tested easily . However , they serve to illustrate that a suitable mathematical framework can allow us to perceive global patterns of biological organization , patterns that are not visible on a local level , patterns that allow us to build qualitatively new kinds of hypotheses . Detecting order in the torrent of genomic data descending upon the life science community will certainly require such hypotheses . Acknowledgments Financial support by the Santa Fe Institute for a two - week visit of D . F . which led to completion of this manuscript is gratefully acknowledged . References 1 . Stryer , L . Biochemistry ( Freeman , New York , 1995 ) . 2 . Rhee , S . G . , Chock , P . B . & Stadtman , E . R . Regulation of Escherichia coli glutamine synthetase . Advances in Enzymology 62 , 37 - 92 ( 1989 ) . 3 . Heinrich , R . & Schuster , S . The regulation of cellular systems ( Chapman and Hall , New York , 1996 ) . 4 . Schilling , C . H . , Schuster , S . , Palsson , B . O . & Heinrich , R . Metabolic pathway analysis : Basic concepts and scientific applications in the post - genomic era . Biotechnology Progress 15 , 296 - 303 ( 1999 ) . 5 . Schuster , S . , Dandekar , T . & Fell , D . A . Detection of elementary flux modes in biochemical networks : a promising tool for pathway analysis and metabolic engineering . Trends in Biotechnology 17 , 53 - 60 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Fell , D . A . & Small , J . R . Fat synthesis in adipose tissue : an examination of stoichiometric constraints . Biochemical Journal 238 , 781 - 786 ( 1986 ) . 7 . Watts , D . J . The structure and dynamics of small world networks . Ph . D . Thesis ; Cornell University . ( 1997 ) . 8 . Neidhardt , F . C . ( ed . ) Escherichia coli and Salmonella ( ASM Press , Washington , D . C . , 1996 ) . 9 . Karp , P . , Riley , M . , Paley , S . , Pellegrini - Toole , A . & Krummenacker , M . EcoCyc : electronic encyclopedia of E . coli genes and metabolism . Nucleic acids research 27 , 55 - ( 1999 ) . 10 . Pramanik , J . & Keasling , J . D . Stoichiometric model of Escherischia coli metabolism : incorporation of growth rate dependent biomass composition and mechanistic energy requirements . Biotechnology and Bioengineering 56 , 398 - 421 ( 1997 ) . 11 . Selkov , E . et al . The metabolic pathway collection from EMP : the enzymes and metabolic pathways database . Nucleic Acids Research 24 , 26 - 29 ( 1996 ) . 12 . Bairoch , A . The enzyme data bank in 1999 . Nucleic Acids Research 27 , 310 - 311 ( 1999 ) . 13 . Fell , D . A . & Sauro , H . M . Metabolic control analysis by computer : progress and prospects . Biomed . Biochim . Acta 49 , 811 - 816 ( 1990 ) . 14 . Mehlhorn , K . & Naeher , S . The LEDA platform of combinatorial computing ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1999 ) . 15 . Graham , R . L . , Groetschel , M . & Lovasz , L . ( eds . ) Handbook of combinatorics ( MIT press , Cambridge , 1995 ) . 16 . Fell , D . Understanding the control of metabolism ( Portland Press , London , 1997 ) . 17 . Hofmeyr , J . - H . S . Control pattern analysis of metabolic pathways : flux and concentration control in linear pathways . European Journal of Biochemistry 275 , 253 - 258 ( 1991 ) . 18 . Sen , A . K . Quantitative analysis of metabolic regulation : a graph - - theoretic approach using spanning trees . Biochemical Journal 275 , 253 - 258 ( 1991 ) . 19 . Watts , D . J . & Strogatz , S . H . Collective Dynamics of Small - World Networks . Nature 393 , 440 - 442 ( 1998 ) . 20 . Bollob(cid:135)s , B . Random graphs ( Academic Press , London , 1985 ) . 21 . Kauffman , S . A . Metabolic stability and epigenesis in randomly constructed genetic nets . Journal of theoretical biology 22 , 437 - 467 ( 1967 ) . 22 . Glass , L . & Hill , C . Ordered and Disordered Dynamics in Random Networks . Europhysics Letters 41 , 599 - 604 ( 1998 ) . 23 . Chiva , E . & Tarroux , P . Evolution of Biological Regulation Networks Under Complex Environmental Constraints . Biological Cybernetics 73 , 323 - 333 ( 1995 ) . 24 . Wagner , A . Does Evolutionary Plasticity Evolve ? Evolution 50 , 1008 - 1023 ( 1996 ) . 25 . Murre , J . M . J . & Sturdy , D . P . F . The Connectivity of the Brain : Multilevel Quantitative - Analysis . Biological Cybernetics 73 , 529 - 545 ( 1995 ) . 26 . Cohen , J . E . & Briand , F . Trophic Links of Community Food Webs . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America - Biological Sciences 81 , 4105 - 4109 ( 1984 ) . 27 . Varma , A . & Palsson , B . O . Metabolic capabilities of Escherichia coli . synthesis of biosynthetic precursors and cofactors . Journal of theoretical biology . 165 , 477 - 502 ( 1993 ) . 28 . Ingraham , J . L . , Maaloe , O . & Niedhardt , F . C . Growth of the bacterial cell . ( Sinauer , Sunderland , MA , 1983 ) . 29 . Holms , W . H . The central metabolic pathways of Escherischia coli : relationship between flux and control at a branch point , efficiency of conversion to biomass and excretion of acetate . Current Topics Cell . Regul . 28 , 69 - 105 ( 1986 ) . 30 . Albert , R . , Jeong H . , Barabasi , A . L . Internet : Diameter of the world - wide web . Nature 401 , 130 - 131 ( 1999 ) . 31 . Newman , M . E . J . & Eble , G . J . Power spectra of extinction in the fossil record . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B - Biological Sciences 266 , 1267 - 1270 ( 1999 ) . 32 . Gopikrishnan , P . , Meyer , M . , Amaral , L . A . N . & Stanley , H . E . Inverse Cubic Law For the Distribution of Stock - Price Variations . European Physical Journal B 3 , 139 - 140 ( 1998 ) . 33 . Keitt , T . H . & Stanley , H . E . Dynamics of North - American Breeding Bird Populations . Nature 393 , 257 - 260 ( 1998 ) . 34 . Bak , P . Self - Organized Criticality . Physica a 163 , 403 - 409 ( 1990 ) . 35 . Milgram , S . The small world problem . Psychology Today 2 , 60 - 67 ( 1967 ) . 36 . Rohmer , M . , M . , K . , Simonin , P . , Sutter , B . & Sahm , H . Isopentenyl diphosphate synthesis in bacteria does not proceed via the acetate / mevalonate pathway used by mammals : . Biochemical Journal 295 , 517 - 524 ( 1993 ) . 37 . Melendez - Hevia , E . , Waddell , T . G . & Cascante , M . The Puzzle of the Krebs Citric - Acid Cycle : Assembling the Pieces of Chemically Feasible Reactions ; and Opportunism in the Design of Metabolic Pathways During Evolution . Journal of Molecular Evolution 43 , 293 - 303 ( 1996 ) . 38 . Huynen , M . A . , Dandekar , T . & Bork , P . Variation and evolution of the citric acid cycle : a genomic perspective . Trends in Microbiology 7 , 281 - 291 ( 1999 ) . 39 . Barabasi , A . - L . , Albert , R . , Jeong , H . Mean - field theory for scale - free random networks . Los Alamos National Laboratory Preprint cond - mat / 9907068 ( 1999 ) . 40 . Morowitz , H . J . Beginnings of cellular life ( Yale University Press , New Haven , 1992 ) . 41 . Kuhn , H . & Waser , J . On the origin of the genetic code . FEBS letters 352 , 259 - 264 ( 1994 ) . 42 . Lahav , N . Biogenesis ( Oxford University Press , New York , 1999 ) . 43 . Benner , S . A . , Ellington , A . D . & Tauer , A . Modern metabolism as a palimpsest of the RNA world . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U . S . A . 86 , 7054 - 7058 ( 1989 ) . 44 . Waddell , T . G . & Bruce , G . K . A new theory on the origin and evolution of the citric acid cycle . Microbiologia sem 11 , 243 - 250 ( 1995 ) . 45 . Taylor , B . L . & Coates , D . The code within the codons . Biosystems 22 , 177 - 187 ( 1989 ) . 46 . Morowitz , H . J . A theory of biochemical organization , metabolic pathways , and evolution . Complexity 4 , 39 - 53 ( 1999 ) . 47 . Easterby , J . S . The effect of feedback on pathway transient response . Biochemical Journal 233 , 871 - 875 ( 1986 ) . 48 . Cascante , M . , Melendez - - Hevia , E . , Kholodenko , B . N . , Sicilia , J . & Kacser , H . Control analysis of transit - - time for free and enzyme - - bound metabolites - physiological and evolutionary significance of metabolic response - - times . Biochemical Journal 308 , 895 - 899 ( 1995 ) . Fig . 1 : Graph representation of metabolic networks . a ) Four stoichiometric equations taken from the pentose - phosphate pathway of E . coli after 1 , 8 . Names in parentheses are acronyms for compounds used in b ) . Acronyms above arrows indicate genes encoding the respective reactions ( enzymes ) in E . coli ( zwf : Glucose - 6 - phosphate dehydrogenase [ EC 1 . 1 . 1 . 49 ] ; pgl : 6 - Phosphogluconolactonase [ EC 3 . 1 . 1 . 31 ] ; gnd : 6 - Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase [ EC 1 . 1 . 1 . 4 ] ; rpe : Ribose - 5 - phosphate isomerase [ EC 5 . 3 . 1 . 6 ] ) . b ) Substrate graph derived from stoichiometric equations as describd in the text . c ) Reaction graph derived from stoichiometric equations as described in the text . a ) Stoichiometric Equations zwf 1 Glucose 6 - phosphate ( G6P ) + 1 NADP + (cid:222) 1 6 - Phosphoglucono d - lactone ( 6PGL ) + 1 NADPH pgl 1 6 - Phosphoglucono d - lactone + 1 H 2 O (cid:222) 1 6 - Phosphogluconate ( 6PG ) gnd 1 6 - Phosphogluconate + 1 NADP + (cid:222) 1 Ribulose 5 - phosphate ( R5P ) + 1 NADPH rpe 1 Ribulose 5 - phosphate (cid:219) 1 Xylulose 5 - phosphate ( X5P ) c ) Reaction Graph b ) Substrate Graph G6P 6PGL NADP + NADPH H 2 O 6PG R5P X5P zwf pgl gnd rp Fig . 2 . The substrate graph shows a power law distribution of metabolite connectivity . a ) Log - log histogram of the relative frequency of metabolites with a given degree ( number of connections ) k . Vertices were binned into five intervals according to degree : 1 £ k < 8 , 8 £ k < 16 , 16 £ k < 32 ; 32 ; 32 £ k < 64 ; 64 £ k < 128 ) . Values on the abscissa indicate the upper boundary of each interval . Coefficient of determination r 2 » 0 . 93 . b ) Metabolites were ranked according to the number of connections ( degree ) they have in the substrate graph . Shown is metabolite rank vs . degree on a log - log scale . Assuming that the degree of a metabolite can be described by a random variable D , plotting data as in a ) can be used to estimate the probability function P ( log D = k ) , whereas b ) estimates the counter - cumulative probability function P ( log D > k ) . Both a ) and b ) are consistent with a power law distribution of D , i . e . , P ( log D > k ) (cid:181) e - k t and thus P ( D > k ) (cid:181) k - t . However , little confidence can be placed in the estimated value of the exponent t because of the small network size . Fig . 3 . Degree distribution in the reaction graph . Plotted are connectivity ( degree ) of nodes in the reaction graph vs . binned frequency in a ) and rank in b ) , completely analogous to Fig . 3 ( see legend ) . a ) already indicates that the degree distribution does not follow a power law , and b ) shows further that no simple cumulative probability function would appropriately approximate the rank distribution shown . This is because there are at least two distinct regimes in the degree distribution , where the degree changes much slower among the most highly connected reactions among less highly connected reactions . Fig . 4 . Metabolic network graphs are small - world graphs . Shown are characteristic path length L in a ) and clustering coefficients C in b ) for reaction graphs , substrate graphs , and random graphs . Notice the great difference between metabolic graphs and random graphs in clustering coefficient , and the similarity between metabolic graphs and random graphs in characteristic path length . This similarity becomes more striking if one considers how large L can become for graphs with the same connectivity ( k ) 7 shows that the maximally possible L is close to n / 2 ( k + 1 ) ] . Using Table 1 , these values calculate as 15 . 14 , 5 . 38 , 24 . 2 , and 16 . 9 from left to right for the metabolic graphs shown in the figure . The substrate graph conforms better to the small world model than the reaction graph . Values shown for random graphs are mean and standard deviations ( error bars ) over 100 numerically generated connected random graphs where the probability for two vertices to be connected was chosen as k / n ( Table 1 ) . 3 . 85 2 . 62 3 . 88 2 . 9 2 . 81 1 . 98 3 . 78 3 . 04 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 w / o ATP , ADP , NAD ( P ) ( H ) complete w / o ATP , ADP , NAD ( P ) ( H ) complete C h a r ac t e r i s t i c P a t h L e ng t h Reaction Graph Substrate Graph b ) Path Length a ) Clustering Coefficient 0 . 43 0 . 59 0 . 48 0 . 32 0 . 03 0 . 09 0 . 017 0 . 026 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 w / o ATP , ADP , NAD ( P ) ( H ) complete w / o ATP , ADP , NAD ( P ) ( H ) complete C l u s t e r i ng C o e ff i c i e n t Metabolic Graph Random Graph Reaction Graph Substrate Graph Table 1 : Elementary Statistics of Substrate and Reaction Graphs . Shown are the number of nodes ( n ) , the mean degree ( k ) , and standard deviation in degree ( s k ) for reaction graph and substrate graph . For reference , standard deviation in degree is also shown for 100 numerically generated random graphs with the same n and k as those of the metabolic graphs . Two versions of each metabolic graph were analyzed , one in which the metabolites ATP , ADP , NAD , NADP , NADH , NADPH , CO 2 , NH 3 , SO 4 , thioredoxin , phosphate and pyrophosphate were eliminated , and another one in which ATP , ADP , NAD , NADP , NADH , and NADPH were included . Upon removal of one or more metabolites , other vertices in the graph may become isolated . Such vertices were removed before analysis . n k s k s k random graph Substrate Graph 275 4 . 76 4 . 79 2 . 12 – 0 . 08 w / o ATP , ADP , NAD ( P ) ( H ) Substrate Graph 282 7 . 35 10 . 5 2 . 67 – 0 . 11 Reaction Graph 311 9 . 27 9 . 59 3 . 01 – 0 . 12 w / o ATP , ADP , NAD ( P ) ( H ) Reaction Graph 315 28 . 3 29 . 1 5 . 04 – 0 . 21 Table 2 : Thirteen " key metabolites " defined as metabolites whose degree in the substrate graph lies at least three standard deviations beyond the mean metabolite degree . Also shown for comparison are the 13 metabolites with the shortest mean path length ( also known as the " importance number " ) . These two indicators of a metabolite’s centrality are correlated but not identical . Values in parentheses are metabolite degree ( left column ) and mean pathlength ( right column ) . NAD , ATP and their derivatives would be the most highly connected metabolites , but are not shown in the table . ranked by degree ranked by mean path length ( " connectivity " } ( " importance number " ) glutamate ( 51 ) glutamate ( 2 . 46 ) pyruvate ( 29 ) pyruvate ( 2 . 59 ) coenzyme A ( 29 ) coenzyme A ( 2 . 69 ) a - ketoglutarate ( 27 ) glutamine ( 2 . 77 ) glutamine ( 22 ) acetyl CoA ( 2 . 86 ) aspartate ( 20 ) oxo - isovalerate ( 2 . 88 ) acetyl - CoA ( 17 ) aspartate ( 2 . 91 ) phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate ( 16 ) a - ketoglutarate ( 2 . 99 ) tetrahydrofolate ( 15 ) phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate ( 3 . 1 ) succinate ( 14 ) anthranilate ( 3 . 1 ) 3 - phosphoglycerate ( 13 ) chorismate ( 3 . 13 ) serine ( 13 ) valine ( 3 . 14 ) oxo - isovalerate ( 12 ) 3 - phosphoglycerate ( 3 . 15 )