INNOVATION IN ANALOGICAL DESIGN : A MODEL - BASED APPROACH S . BHATTA AND A . GOEL College of Computing Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA 30332 - 0280 , USA AND S . PRABHAKAR School of Computing Sciences University of Technology , Sydney POB 123 , Broadway Sydney , NSW 2007 , Australia In the Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design ( AID - 94 ) , Aug . 15 - 18 , 1994 , Lausanne , Switzerland , pp . 57 - 74 . Abstract . Analogical reasoning , it is commonly accepted , plays an important role in innovation and creativity . Since design often isinnovative , and canbe creative , the design task provides a good context for exploring the role of analogy in innovation and creativity . In the ID E AL project , we are exploring the processes of innovation and creativity in the context of conceptual ( or preliminary , qualitative ) design of physical devices . In particular , we are developing a model - based approach to innovation and creativity in analogical design : our core hypothesis is that innovative analogical design involves both reasoning from past experiences in designing devices ( in the form of analogs or cases ) and comprehension of how those devices work ( in the form of device models or theories ) . In this paper , we focus on the issues of understanding feedback on the performance of a design , discovery of new design constraints , and reformulation of the design problem , and describe how the model - based approach addresses these issues . 1 . Introduction Analogical reasoning , it is commonly accepted , plays an important role in inno - vation and creativity . Analogical reasoning is the process of retrieving knowledge of a familiar problem or situation ( called source analog ) that is relevant to a given 2 S . Bhatta ET AL . problem ( called target ) and transferring that knowledge to solve the current prob - lem . Since design often is innovative , and occasionally can be creative , the design task provides a good context for exploring the role of analogy in innovation and creativity . Much of artiﬁcial intelligence ( AI ) research in design , however , has focused on routine design , for example , McDermott , 1982 ; Mittal et al . , 1986 ; Marcus et al . , 1988 ; Brown and Chandrasekaran , 1989 . This is true even for work on analogical design in the framework of case - based reasoning . The capabilities of most case - based design systems are limited to the retrieval of design cases from the same domain as a given problem , and to making small and simple ‘tweaks’ to the retrieved design to ﬁt the speciﬁcations of the given problem , e . g . , ARGO ( Huhns and Acosta , 1988 ) and the earlier versions of STRUPLE ( Maher and Zhao , 1987 ) . Further , this is true not only of autonomous case - based design systems but also of interactive case - based design aids , which too are limited to retrieval of cases that almost exactly match the speciﬁcation of a given problem , e . g . , Archie ( Pearce et al . , 1992 ) , AskJef ( Barber et al . , 1992 ) and BOGART ( Mostow et al . , 1989 ) . In the ID E AL 1 project , we are exploring the processes of innovation and cre - ativity in the context of conceptual ( or preliminary , qualitative ) design of physical devices . In particular , we are investigating the following hypotheses and issues : 1 . Innovative and creative design involves not only the development of a new design but also the reformulation of the design problem ( Tong , 1988 ) . The design problem space may be characterized by the design variables and the ranges of values they can take . In routine design , both the variables , and the ranges of values they can take , are ﬁxed ; in innovative design , the variables of the design problem space are ﬁxed but the ranges of values may change ; and in creative design , even the variables may change ( Gero , 1990 ) . So the issue becomes how does a designer discover new problem constraints and use them to generate new problem spaces ? 2 . Innovative and creative design involves the reminding of analogs from do - mains different and distant from that of the given problem . This requires exploration of the analog memory rather than searching it for a speciﬁc ana - log ( Navinchandra , 1991 ) . So the issue becomes what memory organization and processes enable this exploration ? 3 . Innovative and creative design involves non - local adaptationof designanalogs . This requiresexperimentation with adaptation strategies that resultin “global” modiﬁcations to a design , for example , combining portions of multiple de - signs . So the issue becomes what strategies are useful for non - local modiﬁ - cations and for reasoning about the effects of such modiﬁcations ? 1 ID E AL stands for Integrated “DEsign by Analogy” and Learning . INNOVATION IN MODEL - BASED ANALOGICAL DESIGN 3 4 . Innovative and creative design involves the learning of high - level abstractions and their use in reminding and adaptation . So , the issues become what might be the content , representation , and organization of these abstractions and how might they be acquired from design experiences and used in analogical design ? 5 . The task of evaluating candidate designs plays a key role in innovative and creative design . This is because innovative and creative design involves the exploration of the analog memory and experimentation with adaptation strategies . So the issue becomes how might the results of the evaluation ( or performance ) of candidate designs be incorporated in the design process ? The ID E AL project takes a model - based approachto these issues . This approach evolves from our earlier work on the K RITIK project ( Goel , 1991a ; Goel , 1991b ) . The core hypothesis is that intelligent design of physical devices requires both a memory of past experiences in designing devices ( in the form of design cases or analogs ) and comprehension of how these previously encountered devices work ( in the form of device models or theories ) . Elsewhere ( Stroulia and Goel , 1992 ; Bhatta and Goel , 1993 ) , we have described how a designer might learn the high - level abstractions of generic mechanisms ( e . g . , cascading ) from speciﬁc design experiences and use them in making non - local modiﬁcations to a design . Also , Prabhakar and Goel ( 1992 ) have earlier sketched a conceptual framework for “performance - driven creative design . ” The goal of this paper is to describe a speciﬁc theory of performance - basedconstraint discovery , problem reformulation , and model revision as implemented in ID E AL . 2 . The Role of Evaluation in Analogical Design Although different computational models vary in the precise number of stages , analogical reasoning is generally considered to have ﬁve different stages ( Gentner , 1983 ) : ( i ) retrieval of a source analog , ( ii ) mapping and transfer of the relevant knowledge from the source to the target problem , ( iii ) evaluation of the solution to the target problem , ( iv ) generalization over the source and the target , and ( v ) storage of the solution to the target problem and the generalization . In the model - based approach to analogical design , these stages may include the following considerations : ( i ) the source analog may be at the same level of abstraction as the target problem or at a different level ; ( ii ) mapping and transfer may involve a number of processes depending on how different is the domain of the source analog from that of the target problem , and how abstract is the source relative to the target , for instance : (cid:0) if the domains of the source and target are the same , and the source and target are at the same level of abstraction , then this involves localization 4 S . Bhatta ET AL . of differencesbetween the source and the target and elimination of those differences ( such as adaptation in case - based reasoning ) ; (cid:0) if the domains of the source and target are different , but the source and target are at the same level of abstraction , then mapping and trans - fer involves generalizing from the source analog and instantiating the learned abstraction in the target domain ; (cid:0) if the source and target are at different levels of abstraction , and the level of abstraction of source is higher than that of the target , then mapping and transfer involves only instantiating the source analog in the target domain . ( iii ) evaluation of candidate solutions can be done in many ways , for example , by simulating a candidate design or by implementing it in a physical device and testing the device in a real environment ; the incorporation of feedback from evaluation is critical in the design process ; ( iv ) generalization from the source and target analogs involves abstracting away a model common to both , especially if they are at the same level of abstraction ; and ( v ) storage of the new analog and the new model in memory includes learning proper indices to them and placing them in memory in the “right” place . In the model - based approach , the answers to these issues are constrained by and arise from a deeper understanding of how devices work . In ID E AL , this under - standing is expressed in the form of structure - behavior - function ( SBF ) models , which provide functional and causal explanations of how the structure of a device delivers its function . Figure 1 illustrates a partial process model of model - based analogical design that centers around the evaluationtask . A candidate design may fail due to a variety of reasons , e . g . , it may not deliver the function desired of it , it may produce an undesirable behavior , etc . When a candidate design fails for some reason , several new tasks are set up : ( i ) understanding the feedback from evaluation of a candidate design ( for instance , by forming a causal explanation for the undesired behaviors ) ; ( ii ) reformulating the problem ( for instance , by discovering and incorporating new design constraints ) ; and ( iii ) redesigning the candidate design . When the candidate design fails , there are several ways of generating a new design : ( i ) repair the failed candidate design to meet the new problem constraints ; or ( ii ) generate an alternative candidate design . 2 . 1 . AN ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE We will consider the design of a coffee maker in order to illustrate this process model . Informally , the function of a coffee maker may be described as automatic brewing of hot coffee from coffee powder and hot water . Suppose that the de - signer generates a candidate design for achieving this function as illustrated in INNOVATION IN MODEL - BASED ANALOGICAL DESIGN 5 if failed Design Evaluation if successful candidate design feedback on the candidate design To Index Learning and Storage in Memory new design constraints To Generation of New Candidate Design Understandingthe Feedback Discovering New Design Constraints Reformulation of the Design Problem Redesign of the Candidate Design RedesignedCandidate Design Figure 1 . A Partial Process Model of Model - Based Analogical Design Figure 2 ( a ) . This design has two containers and a ﬁlter in between these two con - tainers . Initially , Container - 1 contains coffee powder . When hot water is added to it , the coffee powder dissolves in the water , forming a mixture of coffee powder , water and coffee decoction as indicated in Figure 2 ( a ) . Coffee decoction permeates through the ﬁlter and gets collected in container - 2 as illustrated in Figure 2 ( b ) . Suppose that the candidate design is implemented in a real device . Suppose further that an evaluation of the device in a real environment shows that while this coffee maker achieves the function desired of it , two problems occur : ( i ) coffee - decoction formed in Container - 2 is only lukewarm , and ( ii ) coffee - decoction does not stay warm in Container - 2 . Then the issue becomes how might a designer understand such feedback from evaluation and incorporate it in a new design for the coffee maker ? One way a designer might understand this is by forming a causal explanation for the observed , undesired behaviors . The plausiblecausal explanations for the undesired behaviors in the coffee maker are : ( i ) the coffee - decoction in Container - 2 is only lukewarm because coffee making process is taking a long time during which heat escapes from the coffee - decoction in Container - 1 to the environment , and ( ii ) coffee - decoction does not stay warm in Container - 2 because it loses heat to the environment over time , which lowers its temperature . Such causal explanations might enable a designer to discover new constraints on the design that introduce new variables and thereby change the design prob - 6 S . Bhatta ET AL . Container - 1 Hot Water CoffeePowder Water + CoffeePowder + CoffeeDecoction Filter Container - 2 Coffee Decoction ( i ) ( ii ) ( a ) Structure of the Coffee Maker in an initial design [ ( i ) before and ( ii ) after coffee - decoction is formed ] Container - 1 Hot Water CoffeePowder Water + CoffeePowder + CoffeeDecoction Filter Container - 2 Coffee Decoction ( i ) ( ii ) Plunger Hot Plate ( b ) Structure of the Coffee Maker in a new design [ ( i ) before and ( ii ) after coffee - decoction is formed ] Figure 2 . Failed and Redesigned Coffee Makers lem space . For instance , the causal explanations for the two undesired behaviors respectively suggest these two new constraints : ( i ) need to reduce the time for brewing coffee , and ( ii ) need to either reduce the time coffee stays in Container - 2 ( which is not under designer’s control ) or supply heat to Container - 2 to compensate for the heat loss . Given the reformulated problem with new constraints , a designer can either redesign the failed coffee maker or generate a new candidatedesign altogether . The failed design of the coffee maker may be redesigned , for example , by introducing a Plunger into Container - 1 and a Hot - plate beneath Container - 2 , where these design modiﬁcations address the two newly discovered constraints . Figure 2 ( b ) illustrates the redesigned coffee maker . 3 . Models of Physical Devices and Principles The above process model requires two kinds of knowledge : ( i ) comprehension of how the coffee maker works , and ( ii ) comprehension of the process of ﬂow of heat from hot object to cold ones ( i . e . , the zeroth law of thermodynamics ) . This gives rise to two sets of issues : ( i ) what might be the content , representation , organization and indexing of models of devices such as the coffee maker , and ( ii ) what might be the content , representation , organization and indexing of models of physical principles such as the zeroth law of thermodynamics . 3 . 1 . CASE - SPECIFIC DEVICE MODELS ID E AL represents its comprehension of devices in the form of structure - behavior - function ( SBF ) models ( Goel , 1991a ) . In ID E AL , a design experience ( or , design case or analog ) has an associated case - speciﬁc SBF model that explains how the INNOVATION IN MODEL - BASED ANALOGICAL DESIGN 7 loc : Container - 1 COFFEE - POWDER quantity : small solubility : ( medium wrt water ) loc : COFFEE - DECOCTION Container - 2 quantity : medium WATERloc : Container - 1 quantity : medium sol - capacity : ( medium wrt coffee - powder ) HEAT magnitude : large GIVEN : MAKES : ( a ) Function " Make Coffee " of Coffee Maker loc : COFFEE - DECOCTION quantity : medium Container - 1 WATERloc : Container - 1 sol - capacity : ( medium wrt coffee - powder ) quantity : small / none Under - Condition - Transition Using - Function ALLOW Coffee - Decoction of Container - 1 As - Per " Dissolution Laws of Solids in Liquids " Using - Function ALLOW Coffee - Decoction of Filter " GIVEN " state of COFFEE - POWDER " GIVEN " state of WATER " MAKES " state of COFFEE - DECOCTION BY - BEHAVIOR : < pointer to the behavior " Make Coffee " of Coffee Maker > state1 state2 state3 t r a n s i t i on 1 - 2 t r a n s i t i on 2 - 3 . . . ( b ) Behavior " Make Coffee " of Coffee Maker Under - Condition - Structure CONNECTED Container - 1 Filter Container - 2 Figure 3 . Function and Behavior of An Initial Design of Coffee Maker structure of the device in that case delivers its functions . A design analog consists of ( i ) function ( s ) of the device ( i . e . , the problem ) , ( ii ) the structure of the device ( i . e . , the solution ) , and ( iii ) a pointer to the SBF model of the device . ID E AL ’s SBF model of a device explicitly represents the internal causal behaviors that signify the system’s comprehension of how the device works : they specify how the functions of the structural components of the device are composed into the device functions . ID E AL uses a behavioral representation language ( BRL ) ( Goel , 1991a ) to represent SBF device models . BRL is a generalization of the functional representation language of Sembugamoorthy and Chandrasekaran ( 1986 ) and is based on the component - substance ontology of Bylander and Chandrasekaran ( 1985 ) . In this section , we will present the design of a Coffee Maker ( Figures 2 ( a ) & 3 ) as an example to describe the representations of the design analogs and SBF models of devices . The constituents of the SBF model of the Coffee Maker are given below . 8 S . Bhatta ET AL . Structure : The structure of a device in BRL is expressed in terms of its constituent components and substances and the interactions between them . Figure 2 ( a ) shows a schematic of the Coffee Maker . In this design , the structural and behavioral interactions are such that coffee decoction can ﬂow from Container - 1 to Container - 2 only if they are connected , and due to behavior allow of Filter . The typology of such primitive interactions is borrowed from ( Bylander and Chandrasekaran , 1985 ) . Function : The function of a device in BRL is represented as a schema that speciﬁes the behavioral state the function takes as input , the behavioral state it gives as output , and a pointer to the internal causal behavior of the design that achieves the function . Figure 3 ( a ) shows the function “make coffee” of the Coffee Maker . In this case , both the input state and the output state are represented as substance schemas . The input state speciﬁes the states of two substances , coffee powder and water . It speciﬁes that coffee powder at location Container - 1 in the topography of the device ( Figure 2 ( a ) ) has the properties quantity and solubility , and the corresponding parameters small and medium ( with respect to coffee powder ) . It also speciﬁes the state of water at location Container - 1 and that water contains another substance heat whose magnitude is large . Similarly , the output state speciﬁes the properties and the corresponding parameters of the substance , coffee decoction , at location Container - 2 . In addition , the slot by - behavior acts as an index into the causal behavior that achieves the function of making coffee . Behavior : The internal causal behaviors of a device in BRL are represented as sequences of state transitions between behavioral states . The annotations on the state transitions express the causal , structural , and functional contexts in which the state transitions occur and state variables get transformed . Figure 3 ( b ) shows the causal behavior that explains how coffee - decoction is made from coffee - powder and water . (cid:0)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:6) 1 is the preceding state of (cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:17)(cid:9)(cid:10) 1 (cid:19) 2 and (cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:6) 2 is its suc - ceeding state . (cid:0)(cid:22)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:6) 1 describes the state of coffee - powder at location Container - 1 and (cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:6) 2 that of coffee - decoction at the same location . The annotation AS - PER in (cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:23)(cid:10)(cid:24)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:14)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:9)(cid:10) 1 (cid:19) 2 indicates the laws that govern the dissolution of coffee - powder in water . Similarly , the annotation USING - FUNCTION in (cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:24)(cid:12)(cid:26)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:17)(cid:9)(cid:10) 2 (cid:19) 3 indi - cates that the transition occurs due to the behavior allow of Container - 1 . Similarly , the annotation UNDER - CONDITION - STRUCTURE speciﬁes the structural re - lation that Container - 1 , Filter and Container - 2 be CONNECTED in order for the (cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:23)(cid:10)(cid:24)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:14)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:9)(cid:10) 2 (cid:19) 3 to occur . Annotations may also include conditions on other transitions as indicated by UNDER - CONDITION - TRANSITION . For example , (cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:24)(cid:12)(cid:26)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:17)(cid:9)(cid:10) 1 (cid:19) 2 refers to another behavior of Coffee Maker ( i . e . , the behavior by which water is “consumed” when coffee - powder dissolves in it ) . In addition , a transition may be annotated by knowledge of qualitative equations that relate the variables characterizing the states . INNOVATION IN MODEL - BASED ANALOGICAL DESIGN 9 state2 state3 state6 state7 UNDERCONDITIONTRANSITION - - contains HEAT ? SUB1loc : ? loc1 temperature : ? T1 magnitude : ? Q 1 contains HEAT ? SUB1loc : ? loc1 temperature : ? T magnitude : ? Q 2 2 contains HEAT ? SUB loc : ? loc temperature : 1 magnitude : 1 2 2 ? t ? q contains HEAT ? SUB loc : ? loc temperature : magnitude : 2 2 ? t ? q 2 2 USING - FUNCTION relations : has UNDER - CONDITION - SUBSTANCE ? SUB2temperature : 1 ? t ? t < ? T = > ? T < ? T 1 1 2 1 ? t > ? T = > ? T > ? T 1 1 2 1 USING - FUNCTION relations : has UNDER - CONDITION - SUBSTANCE ? SUB temperature : 1 1 ? T ? t < ? T = > ? t > ? t 1 1 2 1 ? t > ? T = > ? t < ? t 1 1 2 1 ALLOW heat of 1 2 connector ( ? loc , ? loc ) ALLOW heat of 1 2 connector ( ? loc , ? loc ) ( a ) BF Model of the Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics ? SUB - 0 ? SUB - 0 temperature : ? T1 temperature : ? T2 PARAMETER - RELATIONS ? T1 < > ? T2 ( b ) A Behavioral Abstraction of the Zeroth Law As An Index statei statej Figure 4 . The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics 3 . 2 . CASE - INDEPENDENT MODELS OF PHYSICAL PRINCIPLES In addition to case - speciﬁc device models , ID E AL contains case - independent mod - els of physical processes and principles . ID E AL uses the structure - independent de - scriptions of SBF models , called behavior - function ( BF ) models , for representing physical principles . For instance , Figure 4 ( a ) illustrates the BF model representa - tion of the zeroth law of thermodynamics . This law states that when a hot body is brought in thermal contact with a cold body , heat ﬂows from the hot body to the cold body . Note that the parametric relations in Figure 4 ( a ) cover both possibili - ties , that is , increase and decrease in the temperature of substances , because it is case - independent . Further , the temperature changes in the two substances are in - terdependent as indicated by UNDER - CONDITION - TRANSITION annotation . ID E AL indexes its case - independent models by their behavioral abstractions . For instance , the BF model of the zeroth law of thermodynamics is indexed by a behavioral abstraction such as “temperature change in a substance” illustrated in Figure 4 ( b ) . 4 . Constraint Discovery , Problem Reformulation , and Model Revision We will now describe how ID E AL uses the SBF models of devices and BF mod - els of physical principles for understanding feedback from the evaluation ( by forming causal explanations ) , reformulating the design problems ( by discover - 10 S . Bhatta ET AL . ing new constraints ) , and ﬁnally redesigning the coffee maker to satisfy the new and old constraints . Let us again consider the problem of designing the coffee maker described earlier . The SBF model of the candidate design for the coffee maker is shown in Figure 3 . Although the initial design of coffee maker satisﬁed the constraints in its functional speciﬁcation , recall that an evaluation of the de - sign suggested two performance failures : ( i ) coffee - decoction that is formed in Container - 2 was only lukewarm , and ( ii ) coffee - decoction did not stay warm in Container - 2 . We will focus on the second failure for the purpose of illustrating ID E AL ’s processes . Again , the issue is how can ID E AL understand the feedback from the evalua - tion . ID E AL understands the feedback from the evaluation of a candidate design by forming causal explanations of the undesired behaviors described in the feedback . ID E AL uses the BF models of physical principles for this task . It accesses the phys - ical principles by their behavioral abstractions . Given the undesired behaviors in the candidate design , ID E AL uses them as probe into its memory and retrieves the physical principles whose behavioral abstractions match with the given behaviors . ID E AL provides the behavioral representation language for a user to specify the undesired behaviors of a device in terms of states and state transitions . The use of this vocabulary allows ID E AL to access the relevant knowledge of physical princi - ples . For instance , given the second failure of coffee maker design , ID E AL uses a description of the undesired behavior as a probe into memory and retrieves the BF model of the zeroth law of thermodynamics because the behavioral abstraction of the principle ( i . e . , temperature change in a substance ) matches with the speciﬁed undesired behavior ( i . e . , change of temperature of coffee - decoction from high to low ) . The retrieved BF model of the zeroth law and its index are illustrated in Figure 4 . ID E AL then forms a causal explanation of why and how a given undesired behavior arises by instantiating the retrieved principle in the context of the un - desired behavior and the candidate design . The annotations on the transitions in the BF model of a physical principle provide an explanation for the behavioral abstraction of the principle used as an index for it . For instance , ID E AL instantiates the retrieved zeroth law of thermodynamics in the context of the second failure of coffee maker to form a speciﬁc causal explanation for the failure as illustrated in Figure 5 . That is , it substitutes the speciﬁc substances and the values of their properties from the given undesired behavior into the retrieved principle . Once the causal explanation for the failure has been formed , ID E AL can ﬁnd the causes for the failure from the annotations on transitions in the explanation . ID E AL then hypothesizes new constraints on the design problem in the form of violation ( or negation ) of the causes for the failure . For instance , ID E AL ﬁnds from the causal explanation illustrated in Figure 5 that the cause for the second failure of coffee maker is due to the ﬂow of heat from coffee - decoction in Container - 2 to some substance outside the coffee maker ( that is , in the device environment ) . INNOVATION IN MODEL - BASED ANALOGICAL DESIGN 11 contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : COFFEE - DECOCTION high large contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : COFFEE - DECOCTION Container - 2 low small ADDITION - OF - DOMAIN - PRINCIPLE Zeroth - Law - of - Thermodynamics ? SUB2 loc : ? p temperature : low ? SUB2 loc : ? p Container - 2 temperature : high Under - Condition - Transition . . . . . . . . . Figure 5 . A Causal Explanation for One Failure of Coffee Maker contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : COFFEE - DECOCTION Container - 2 low small contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : COFFEE - DECOCTION high large Container - 2 GIVEN : MAKES : Figure 6 . A New Function ( subfunction ) Desired of Coffee Maker Hence , it formulates a new constraint : avoid the loss of heat from coffee - decoction in Container - 2 . In general , problem reformulation may involve addition of new constraints and deletion or modiﬁcation of some old constraints . ID E AL reformulates the design problem of the coffee maker by adding the discovered constraints to the initial set of design constraints . Once the design problem has been reformulated , ID E AL redesigns the failed design to generate a new candidate design . This involves two steps : ( i ) formation of behaviors for satisfying the new constraints ( which might involve the addition of substructures in the design ) , and ( ii ) composition of the new behaviors with the behaviors of the failed design to generate a revised model . For each new constraint , ID E AL postulates a new device function and posits it as a new design subproblem to be solved . For instance , ID E AL generates the new subfunction illustrated in Figure 6 for the new constraint it discovered from the explanation of the second failure of coffee maker . It generates this subfunction by reasoning that the transformation of the temperature of coffee - decoction from high to low ( see Figure 5 ) needs to be reversed in order to eliminate the failure . ID E AL then uses the subfunction as a probe into its memory of analogs to retrieve a matching design . Let us suppose that its memory contains the design of 12 S . Bhatta ET AL . contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : low small contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : high large Using - Function CREATE Heat of Hot - Plate . . . WATER WATER Beaker Beaker Under - Condition - Structure BELOW Hot - Plate Beaker Using - Function ALLOW Heat of Beaker contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : low small WATER Beaker contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : high large WATER Beaker GIVEN : MAKES : BY - BEHAVIOR : < pointer to the behavior " Heat Water " of Hot - Plate > ( a ) Function " Heat Water " of Hot - Plate ( b ) Behavior " Heat Water " of Hot - Plate Figure 7 . Function and Behavior of A Design Case of Hot - Plate a HOT - PLATE whose function and behavior are illustrated in Figure 7 . Informally , the function of this HOT - PLATE is to heat water contained in a Beaker . ID E AL indexes the design of HOT - PLATE by its function . Given the subfunction as a probe into the memory of analogs , it retrieves the designs whose functions match with the subfunction . In this example , it retrieves the design of HOT - PLATE because its function ( Figure 7 ( a ) ) matches with the new subfunction to be achieved by the coffee maker ( Figure 6 ) . Since the retrieved design differs from the given subfunction in the substances involved , ID E AL adapts the retrieved design by a repair plan of substance substitution ( Goel , 1991a ) , that is , it substitutes the substances in the given subfunction for the corresponding substances in the function and behavior of the retrieved design . Similarly , it replaces the substance locations in the given subfunction for the corresponding ones in the retrieved design . By substituting coffee - decoction for water and Container - 2 for Beaker in the behavior of the HOT - PLATE , it generates a new behavior , illustrated in Figure 8 , that satisﬁes the constraint speciﬁed in the subfunction ( Figure 6 ) . By this process , it proposes that the loss of heat from coffee - decoction in Container - 2 can be compensated by supplying heat to coffee - decoction by introducing a HOT - PLATE below Container - 2 . Next , the behavior thus formed for the new subfunctions ( Figure 8 ) is com - posed with the behavior of the failed design of coffee - maker ( Figure 3 ( b ) ) to generate a behavior for the new coffee - maker design . In general , this process of model revision involves identifying the behavior segment ( i . e . , a transition and its preceding and succeeding states ) or a state in the old behavior where the new behavior is to be added . ID E AL matches the initial and ﬁnal states in the new behavior against the states in the old behavior , and selects a behavior segment where the new behavior can be added . For instance , ID E AL ﬁnds the ﬁnal state in the old behavior ( Figure 3 ( b ) ) matches with the initial state of the new behavior , and hence it needs to add the new behavior at the end of the old behavior . For INNOVATION IN MODEL - BASED ANALOGICAL DESIGN 13 contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : COFFEE - DECOCTION Container - 2 low small contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : COFFEE - DECOCTION high large Container - 2 Using - Function CREATE Heat of Hot - Plate Under - Condition - Structure BELOW Hot - Plate Container - 2 Using - Function ALLOW Heat of Container - 2 . . . Figure 8 . A new sub - behavior of Coffee Maker that achieves the new subfunction instance , the new behavior ( Figure 8 ) is appended at the end of the behavior seg - ment (cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:6) 2 (cid:0) (cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:6) 3 of the behavior of the failed coffee maker ( Figure 3 ( b ) ) . This process results in the revision of the behavior of failed coffee maker into the behavior of a new design of coffee maker , which is illustrated in Figure 9 . In a similar process , ID E AL redesigns the coffee maker to eliminate the ﬁrst failure described earlier . It ﬁrst forms a causal explanation for the failure by instantiating a BF model of the heat exchange process and ﬁnds the cause for the failure as : the flow - rate of coffee - decoction from Container - 1 to Container - 2 is small . It then postulates a new device subfunction which is to increase the ﬂow - rate of coffee - decoction . It uses this subfunction to retrieve the design of a PLUNGER from its memory and adapts it to achieve the new subfunction of the coffee maker . Then it composes the adapted behavior of PLUNGER with the new behavior of coffee maker as illustrated in the behavior segment (cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:6) 2 (cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:6) 3 in Figure 9 . ID E AL now evaluates the redesigned candidate design by qualitatively simulat - ing the revised device model ( Figure 9 ) , generated by the above procedure ( Goel and Prabhakar , 1991 ) . If the simulation reveals inconsistencies between the new functions of the device and its output behaviors , the redesign step is repeated . In the case of the new coffee - maker , the simulation of the new SBF model ( Figure 9 ) veriﬁes that the candidate design indeed satisﬁes the new set of constraints ( i . e . , make coffee as well as keep it warm ) . Nevertheless , the new design of coffee - maker may again fail when deployed in a real environment just like the initial design did , due to new interactions with the environment . 14 S . Bhatta ET AL . loc : COFFEE - DECOCTION quantity : medium Container - 1 Under - Condition - Transition Using - Function ALLOW Coffee - Decoction of Container - 1 " GIVEN " state of COFFEE - POWDER temperature : high . . . HEAT magnitude : large contains loc : COFFEE - DECOCTION quantity : medium HEAT contains Container - 2 . . . < Transition by which WATER is consumed > temperature : low magnitude : small contains HEAT loc : temperature : magnitude : COFFEE - DECOCTION high large Container - 2 Using - Function CREATE Heat of Hot - Plate Under - Condition - Structure BELOW Hot - Plate Container - 2 Using - Function ALLOW Heat of Container - 2 . . . quantity : medium state1 state2 state3 state4 Using - Function PUMP Coffee - Decoction of Plunger Figure 9 . A Fragment of the Behavior of The Redesigned Coffee Maker 5 . Evaluation of the Model - Based Approach We have evaluated the model - based approach to creativity in analogical design in a number of dimensions described below . ( i ) Computational feasibility and efﬁcacy : ID E AL is a working system that uses the model - based approach to some of the processes in creative design , such as understanding of feedback from the evaluation of a candidate design , discovery of new constraints , reformulation of design problems , and redesigning the candidate design . The question for ID E AL was how it might use the BF models of principles and SBF models of devices in these processes . We have tested ID E AL in the domain of coffee makers with the task of redesigning a failing coffee maker . As we have described , ID E AL could recognize the relevance of the BF model of the zeroth law of thermodynamics , retrieve it , and instantiate it in the context of the design of coffee maker in order to form causal explanations of the observed undesired behaviors . ID E AL could then use the causal explanations of failure behaviors in discovering new design constraints . Finally , it could redesign the coffee maker to satisfy the new constraints and revise the SBF model of the coffee maker by INNOVATION IN MODEL - BASED ANALOGICAL DESIGN 15 composing the behaviors for the new constraints . This indicates the utility and effectiveness of our model - based method : the BF models of physical principles and SBF models of devices facilitate some aspects of creative design . ( ii ) Generality in terms of uniform representations across different stages in analogical design : An important aspect of ID E AL ’s evaluation is that it addresses all ﬁve stages of analogical reasoning . It is important to consider the different stages because each stage imposes constraints on the others ; otherwise , the re - sulting theories may be underconstrained . Another important aspect of ID E AL ’s evaluation is the uniformity of its representations across different stages of analog - ical design . ID E AL uses the same representations of device models for supporting the different stages . Of course the inferences drawn , and , therefore , the func - tional role played by the models changes from one stage of processing to another . Furthermore , the BF model representation of physical principles is a graceful extension of SBF models . ( iii ) Learning of proposed knowledge : It is a common practice in AI to propose different kinds of knowledge in building computational models of reasoning tasks without accounting for how such knowledge might be acquired . ID E AL not only proposes and demonstrates the use of BF models of physical principles but also learns them from design experiences as described in ( Bhatta and Goel , 1994 ) . 6 . Related Research As we mentioned in the introduction , much of AI research in design has focused on routine design , for example , McDermott , 1982 ; Mittal et al . , 1986 ; Marcus et al . , 1988 ; Brown and Chandrasekaran , 1989 . For instance , Brown and Chan - drasekaran’s AIR - CYL system solves routine design problems in the domain of mechanical devices by instantiating and expanding design plans . Even AI work on analogical design in the framework of case - based reasoning has focused on routine design . ARGO ( Huhns and Acosta , 1988 ) for example , uses domain - speciﬁc heuristics for adapting previous design plans to solve design problems in digital circuit design . Most interactive case - based design aids too are limited to retrieval of cases that almost exactly match the speciﬁcation of a given problem ( e . g . Archie ( Pearce et al . , 1992 ) , AskJef ( Barber et al . , 1992 ) and BOGART ( Mostow et al . , 1989 ) ) . For instance , BOGART is a partially autonomous design system that helps students design digital circuits . It “replays” previous design plans , that are very speciﬁc to its domain , in solving problems from the same domain . In contrast , ID E AL attempts to model some processes in innovative and creative design . Recently there have been some other attempts to develop systems that can do some kinds of innovative / creative design . Williams ( 1991 ) describes an approach called interaction - based design in which new designs are created by reasoning from ﬁrst principles . This approachviews design as a process of building 16 S . Bhatta ET AL . interaction topologies—networks of qualitative interactions between quantities , used by a device to achieve its desired behavior . It also proposes a search method for focusing the design of novel devices among the large space of possibilities . A second set of approaches evolve from the work on case - based design . In his work on CYCLOPS , Navinchandra ( 1991 ) used a case - based approach to architectural design in which new design ideas are generated by exploring the memory for appropriate cases . In this , new designs are generated by composing subcases from multiple cases . New constraints are discovered through the process of demand posting where a problem with the present case is posted to the case base , requesting the previous cases to solve the problem . If a matching case is not found , then the causes of the problem are retrieved and new demands are posted . CYCLOPS shares ID E AL ’s view of the importance of the discovery of new constraints in innovative design . Zhao and Maher ( 1992 ) also describe a a case - based approach in the domain of building design . They combine analogies with domain - independent operators for design mutation . They retrieve design prototypes from a case memory and then apply mutation operators ( e . g . , COMBINE ) to change the retrieved prototype to include portions of other designs . Qian and Gero ( 1992 ) describe a design sup - port system that uses design prototypes to perform analogical mappings between designs from different domains . ID E AL ’s model - based approach evolves from our past work on within - domain analogical design ( e . g . , Goel , 1991a , 1991b ; Stroulia and Goel , 1992 ) and on - going work in cross - domain analogical design ( e . g . , Bhatta and Goel , 1993 ; Bhatta and Goel , 1994 ) . The K RITIK system ( Goel , 1991a , 1991b ) , for example , demonstrates how SBF models provide indexing vocabulary for design cases , how the internal organization of SBF models helps to localize the modiﬁcations to a source design in adaptation , and how SBF models can be qualitatively simulated to verify a proposed design . Elsewhere ( Bhatta and Goel , 1993 ; Bhatta and Goel , 1994 ) we describe how SBF models provide the content and constraints in learning of BF models of generic engineering mechanisms and physical principles from design experiences . 7 . Conclusions Analogy plays an important role in innovation and creativity in complex problem solving such as design . Creative design involves ( 1 ) problem reformulation , ( 2 ) exploration of analog memory and cross - domain remindings ( 3 ) experimentation with non - local adaptation of design analogs and composition of different designs , ( 4 ) learning and use of high - level abstractions . The evaluation of candidate de - signs plays a central role because of the exploratory and experimental nature of innovative and creative design . In this paper , we have described a partial process model of analogical design INNOVATION IN MODEL - BASED ANALOGICAL DESIGN 17 emphasizing the role of evaluation . In particular , we have described a model - based approach to understanding feedback from evaluation of candidate designs , discovery of new constraints , reformulating design problems , and redesigning candidate designs to satisfy new constraints . We have demonstrated the use of two different types of models—case - speciﬁc SBF models of physical devices and case - independent BF models of physical principles—in these tasks . SBF models of speciﬁc devices help in redesigning candidate designs , in particular in revising the models of the candidate designs . BF models of physical principles provide the content in the formation of causal explanations for understanding the feedback from evaluation and the reformulation of the design problems . Acknowledgements . This researchhas beneﬁtedfrom many discussionswith the Geor - gia Tech AI group . This work has been supported by the National Science Foundation ( re - search grant IRI - 92 - 10925 ) , the Ofﬁce of Naval Research ( research contract N00014 - 92 - J - 1234 ) , Northern Telecom ( research gift ) , and the Advanced Projects Research Agency . In addition , this work has been supported by a general grant from Georgia Tech’s Ofﬁce of Interdisciplinary Affairs , and equipment grants and gifts from IBM and Symbolics . References Barber , J . , Bhatta , S . , Goel , A . , Jacobson , M . , Pearce , M . , Penberthy , L . , Shankar , M . , Simpson , R . , and Stroulia , E . ( 1992 ) AskJef : Integration of Case - Based and Multimedia Technologies for Interface Design Support . In Proc . of the Second International Conference on AI in Design ( AID’92 ) , pp . 457 – 475 , Pittsburgh , PA . Bhatta , S . and Goel , A . ( 1993 ) Learning Generic Mechanisms from Experiences for Analogical Reasoning . In Procs . of the Fifteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , pp . 237 – 242 , Boulder , CO . Bhatta , S . and Goel , A . ( 1994 ) Discovery of Physical Principles from Design Experiences , Special Issue on “Machine Learning in Design” of the International Journal of AI EDAM ( AI in Engineering Design , Analysis , and Manufacturing ) , 8 ( 2 ) , May ( expected ) . Brown , D . and Chandrasekaran , B . ( 1989 ) Design Problem Solving : Knowledge Structures and Control Strategies . Pitman , London , UK . Bylander , T . andChandrasekaran , B . ( 1985 ) UnderstandingBehaviorUsing Consolidation . In Procs . of the Ninth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp . 450 – 454 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) Structure - Mapping : A Theoretical Frameworkfor Analogy , Cognitive Science , 7 , pp . 155 – 170 . Gero , J . ( 1990 ) Design Prototypes : A Knowledge Representation Schema for Design , AI Magazine , 11 ( 4 ) , Winter . Goel , A . ( 1991a ) A Model - Based Approach to Case Adaptation . In Procs . of the Thirteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , pp . 143 – 148 , Chicago , IL . Goel , A . ( 1991b ) Model Revision : A Theory of Incremental Model Learning . In Procs . of the Eighth International Conference on Machine Learning , pp . 605 – 609 . Chicago , IL . Goel , A . and Prabhakar , S . ( 1991 ) A Control Architecture for Model - Based Redesign Problem Solving . In Procs . of the IJCAI 1991 Workshop on AI in Design , Sydney , Australia . Huhns , M . and Acosta , E . ( 1988 ) Argo : A System for Design by Analogy , IEEE Expert , Fall . Maher , M . and Zhao , F . ( 1987 ) Using Experiences to Plan the Synthesis of New Designs . In J . Gero , ( Ed . ) , Expert Systems in Computer - Aided Design , pp . 349 – 369 . North - Holland , Amsterdam , Netherlands . 18 S . Bhatta ET AL . Marcus , S . , Stout , J . and McDermott , J . ( 1988 ) VT : An Expert Elevator Designer that Uses Knowledge - Based Backtracking , AI Magazine , 9 ( 1 ) , pp . 95 – 114 . McDermott , J . ( 1982 ) R1 : A Rule - Based Conﬁgurer of Computer Systems , Artiﬁcial Intelligence Journal , 19 , pp . 39 – 88 . Mittal , S . , Dym , C . and Morjaria , M . ( 1986 ) PRIDE : An Expert System for the Design of Paper Handling Systems , IEEE Computer , 19 ( 7 ) , pp . 102 – 114 . Mostow , J . , Barley , M . and Weinrich , T . ( 1989 ) Automated Reuse of Design Plans , International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Engineering , 4 ( 4 ) , pp . 181 – 196 . Navinchandra , D . ( 1991 ) Exploration and Innovation in Design : Towards a Computational Model . Springer - Verlag , New York . Pearce , M . , Goel , A . , Kolodner , J . , Zimring , C . , Sentosa , L . , and Billington , R . ( 1992 ) Case - Based Design Support : A Case Study in Architectural Design , IEEE Expert , 7 ( 5 ) , pp . 14 – 20 . Prabhakar , S . and Goel , A . ( 1992 ) Using Diagnostic Experiences in Experience - Based Innovative Design . In Procs . of the Tenth SPIE conference on Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence : Knowledge - BasedSystems , pp . 420 – 434 , Orlando , FL . Qian , L . and Gero , J . ( 1992 ) A Design Support System using Analogy . In J . Gero , ( Ed . ) , Procs . of the Second International Conference on AI in Design , pp . 795 – 813 , Pittsburgh , PA . Sembugamoorthy , V . and Chandrasekaran , B . ( 1986 ) Functional Representation of Devices and Compilation of Diagnostic Problem - Solving Systems . In J . Kolodner and C . Riesbeck , ( Eds . ) , Experience , Memory and Reasoning , pp . 47 – 73 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Stroulia , E . andGoel , A . ( 1992 ) GenericTeleologicalMechanismsandtheir Use in CaseAdaptation . In Procs . of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , pp . 319 – 324 , Bloomington , IN . Tong , C . ( 1988 ) Knowledge - BasedCircuit Design . Ph . D . diss . , Dept . of Computer Science , Stanford University . Williams , B . ( 1991 ) Interaction - Based Design : Constructing Novel Devices from First Principles . In Procs . of IFIP International CAD conference , Columbus , OH . Zhao , F . and Maher , M . ( 1992 ) Using Network - Based Prototypes to Support Creative Design by Analogy and Mutation . In J . Gero , ( Ed . ) , Procs . of the Second International Conference on AI in Design , pp . 773 – 793 .