Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Thinking Skills and Creativity j o ur na l ho me pag e : h ttp : / / www . elsevier . com / locate / tsc Predicting creative problem solving in engineering design Denis Dumas a , ∗ , Linda C . Schmidt b , Patricia A . Alexander a , c a Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology , University of Maryland , United States b Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Maryland , United States c Development , Learning and Professional Practice University of Auckland , New Zealand a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 19 February 2015 Received in revised form 15 March 2016 Accepted 3 May 2016 Available online 12 May 2016 Keywords : Creative problem solving Engineering design Relational reasoning a b s t r a c t Developing students’ creative problem solving ( CPS ) is widely considered to be an impor - tant goal in engineering design education . However , the cognitive processes required for CPS are not currently well understood , limiting educators’ capacity to support this ability in students . This study used three cognitive abilities : divergent thinking , working mem - ory , and relational reasoning to predict CPS in engineering design graduate students both before and after they learned to use the TRIZ ideation method . TRIZ , a Russian acronym meaning Theory of Inventive Problem Solving , is a method for improving the originality of the designs that engineers generate . In this study , relational reasoning is conceptualized as a construct encompassing analogical , anomalous , antinomous , and antithetical reasoning . In this study , master’s level engineering design students were given a creative design task before and after they were instructed on the TRIZ method . Then , their performance before and after instruction was compared . Using paired sample t - tests , it was found that partici - pants produced signiﬁcantly fewer design ideas after TRIZ instruction than they had before . But , TRIZ informed designs were signiﬁcantly more original than those produced before . In a sequence of linear regression models , relational reasoning was found to be the strongest predictor of the originality of designs both before and after TRIZ instruction . Antinomous reasoning in particular was implicated in the production of original designs using TRIZ . © 2016 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction The design engineers of today are confronted with a number of important and extraordinary challenges . For example , engineers are pushed to create new products that will at once be lucrative and helpful to humankind . However , fundamen - tal constraints and contradictions , such as the need to be environmentally conscious while being cost effective , minimizing energy requirements while still providing adequate operating power , increasing device accessibility to all users while sim - plifying manufacturing activities , and promoting sustainability complicate this endeavor . In recognition of these important endeavors , The National Academy of Engineering has posed “grand challenges” to the engineering community designed to motivate innovation in today’s complex world ( NAE , 2014 ) . For example , engineers are tasked with designing new solar energy technology to surpass current conversion efﬁciencies of roughly 30 % , while simultaneously reducing the cost of solar energy production ( NAE , 2014 ) . As the engineering design community continues its focus on challenges such as these , a critical question has been posed : how can engineering design students be adequately prepared to engage effectively with today’s engineering challenges ? In ∗ Corresponding author at : Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 - 1131 , United States . E - mail address : ddumas @ umd . edu ( D . Dumas ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2016 . 05 . 002 1871 - 1871 / © 2016 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 51 response to this question , numerous scholarly ( e . g . , Passig & Cohen , 2014 ; Vargas Hernandez , Schmidt , & Okudan , 2013 ) and popular publications ( e . g . , Boss , 2012 ; Wagner , 2012 ) , governmental policy reports ( National Science and Technology Council , 2013 ) , and even presidential addresses ( Obama , 2011 ) have given this general response : cultivate creative problem solving . This general call for creative problem solving in engineering design education is driven by the observation that few of today’s major engineering challenges ( e . g . , producing technologies to combat climate change ) can be solved through the simple application of existing processes or equipment . Therefore , novel technology , materials , and systems must be engineered . Crucially , without the development of creative problem solving , the next generation of engineers may be unprepared to create novel designs . In this way , creative problem solving is deeply important for engineering designers . Despite the widely acknowledged importance of creative problem solving in engineering design , the actual effectiveness of engineering design education in fostering the creative potential of students is relatively understudied ( Charyton , 2014 ) . Today , many design methods exist with the explicit purpose of improving the creativity of designs ( e . g . , Theory of Inventive Problem solving [ TRIZ ] ; Altshuller , 1996 ; WordTree ; Linsey et al . , 2012 ) , but their effectiveness has rarely been systematically examined . Further , the cognitive capacities that predict students’ ability to beneﬁt from such design methods , or to think creatively about engineering design problems in general , is severely underexamined . Here , we examine the effectiveness of one widely used engineering design method , TRIZ ( Altshuller , 1996 ) , and investigate the predictive relation of three cognitive abilities ( i . e . , divergent thinking , working memory , and relational reasoning ) to two components of creative problem solving ( i . e . , ﬂuency and originality ) in the performance of graduate students enrolled in an engineering design course . 1 . 1 . Components of creative problem solving Creative problem solving is often measured in terms of a number of interrelated processes or components ( Silvia , Martin , & Nusbaum , 2009 ) . Two of the most commonly measured components are ﬂuency , which refers to the quantity of ideas that a participant is able to generate , and originality , which refers to the comparative novelty of each of those generated ideas ( Hocevar , 1979 ; Hokanson , 2007 ; Runco & Mraz , 1992 ; Silvia , 2008 ) . Fluency can be relatively easily and objectively assessed in performance by simply counting the number of distinct ideas individuals generate ( Benedek , Fink , & Neubauer , 2006 ; Torrance , 1972 ) . Originality , on the other hand , has historically been operationalized in variety ways , including by means of multiple raters ( e . g . , Sternberg , 2006 ) , semantic networks ( Dumas & Dunbar , 2014 ) , and relative originality algorithms , which measure how original a given idea is within a given sample ( Silvia , 2008 ) . Importantly , such an operationalization of originality stems from a theoretical orientation rooted in the history of psychometric investigations of creativity ( e . g . , Hocevar , 1979 ; Torrance , 1972 ) , in which originality is theorized to represent the unlikeliness that a given idea will be put forward by a given participant drawn from a particular sample . Therefore , based on this theoretical standpoint , those ideas that are common in a dataset are considered less original than those ideas that are uncommon . When examining creative problem solving within a particular domain , such as engineering design , relative originality algorithms may be the most valid , because they allow for a high degree of objectivity in scoring ( Shah , Smith , & Vargas - Hernandez , 2003 ; Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) , and approximate the way originality is conceptualized in the professional practice of engineering , where ideas are original only if they are rarely generated in a given professional context ( Passig & Cohen , 2014 ) . Moreover , relative originality algorithms are particularly suited to scoring the originality of creative problem solutions within the domain of engineering design , because designs can be coded based on the physical and working principles utilized ( Shah et al . , 2003 ; Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) . Here , a physical principle refers to the general aspect of a design that allows for a problem to be solved . For example , mechanical and chemical physical principles , among others , may be utilized . Further , a working principle refers to the particular way in which a psychical principle is instantiated in a given design . For example , mechanical solutions for preventing snow accumulation on a surface may be instantiated by a number of particular working principles including ; covers , vibration , or wipers . ( See Table 1 for a full list of physical and working principles utilized in this study . ) This method for modeling designs is consistent with the functional representation system popularized by Pahl , Beitz , Feldhusen , and Grote ( 2007 ) and serving as a foundation for a function - based modeling system in engineering design ( Hirtz , Stone , McAdams , Szykman , & Wood , 2002 ) . While previous research has investigated the efﬁcacy of the TRIZ method in terms of the creative performance of designers , that creative performance was frequently assessed in terms of only one component of creative problem solving , such as ﬂuency or originality ( e . g . , Nordstrom & Korpelainen , 2011 ) . Indeed , studies of changes in ﬂuency and originality in response to TRIZ instruction have been limited ( Dumas & Schmidt , 2015 ) . In this study , we examined changes in the performance of engineering design students associated with the TRIZ method in terms of both of these components of creative problem solving . 1 . 2 . TRIZ method TRIZ is an acronym for the Russian Teoriya Resheniya Izobretatelskikh Zadatch , meaning theory of inventive problem solving . The TRIZ method is a systematic process that has been used for decades to support design engineers’ creative problem solving , ﬁrst formulated by Soviet naval engineer Genrich Altshuller . In the TRIZ method , Altshuller ( 1996 ) sought to objectively describe the creative process , and construct a mechanism for the systematic support of human designing of invention . Therefore , Altshuller posited the TRIZ method , which includes application of inventive principles in appropriate design 52 D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 Table 1 Complete physical and working principle counts . Physical Principle Working Principle Count Relative Originality Score Mechanical Controller of Light ( Flash or Blink ) 3 9 . 923 Cover ( stationary ) 22 9 . 437 Cover + Geometry 14 9 . 642 Cover + Motion 15 9 . 616 Geometry 38 9 . 028 Geometry + motion 8 9 . 795 Geometry + Sweeping 1 9 . 974 Material 2 9 . 949 Material + Cover 2 9 . 949 Motion 9 9 . 77 Pressure 23 9 . 412 Sweeping ( e . g . wiper ) 37 9 . 054 Vibration 30 9 . 233 Cover + Motion + Sweep 1 9 . 974 Wash ( Liquid ) 7 9 . 821 Sweeping ( e . g . wiper ) + cover 2 9 . 949 Cover + Pressure 1 9 . 974 Geometry + Controller of Light 1 9 . 974 Geometry + Motion + Sweep 1 9 . 974 Heat Electrical Resistance 69 8 . 235 Incandescent Source 8 9 . 795 LED Source 3 9 . 923 Incandescent + LED Sources 13 9 . 668 Laser Source 3 9 . 923 Microwave Source 1 9 . 974 Mechanical + Heat Geometry + Electrical Resistance 1 9 . 974 Pressure + Electrical Resistance 6 9 . 847 Sweeping + Electrical Resistance 2 9 . 949 Vibration + Electrical Resistance 1 9 . 974 Cover + Electrical Resistance 4 9 . 898 Wash + Electrical Resistance 1 9 . 974 Tribology Microgeometry ( coatings ) 23 9 . 412 Mechanical + Tribology Geometry + Microgeometry 1 9 . 974 Cover + Microgeometry 6 9 . 847 Chemical Antifreeze 11 9 . 719 Heat Generation 4 9 . 898 Optical Reﬂection 2 9 . 949 Added Light Conﬁguration 6 9 . 847 Separate LEDS into Smaller Units 1 9 . 974 Use New Colors w / Lights or Filters 1 9 . 974 Mechanical + Optical Geometry + Reﬂection 2 9 . 949 Geometry + Cover + Reﬂection 2 9 . 949 Cover + Added Light Conﬁguration 1 9 . 974 Mechanical + Chemical Wiper + Antifreeze 2 9 . 949 Heat + Chemical Electrical Resistance + Antifreeze 1 9 . 974 situations . TRIZ inventive principles are generalized from the analysis of millions of patents from around the world ( Cascini & Russo , 2007 ) . Some examples of TRIZ inventive principles are segmentation ( No . 1 ) , change dimensionality ( No . 17 ) , feedback ( No . 23 ) , and phase transitions ( No . 36 ; Shulyak & Rodman , 1998 ) . Importantly , these TRIZ principles are designed to be highly generalizable , and designers must relate them to the particular tasks or problems at hand . Moreover , the TRIZ inventive principles are explicitly formulated to help designers solve what Altshuller ( 1996 ) termed design technical contradictions , which occur when an improvement in one engineering aspect of a design creates or exacerbates another engineering problem . In the TRIZ method , technical contradictions are represented as a conﬂict between two of a set of 39 engineering parameters ( e . g . , weight of a non - moving object , temperature , speed ) deﬁned by Altshuller . TRIZ materials include a contradiction matrix , a table of possible design trade - offs which designers use to identify the inventive principles that have been found to be applicable to a given design contradiction . Therefore , the TRIZ method requires designers to discern both the salient design contradictions , and the relation of the relevant inventive principles to a given problem . Further , the principal goal of TRIZ is to improve the creative problem solving of engineers by helping them confront existing problems in previously unthought - of ways ( Altshuller , 1996 ; Mann , 2001 ) . There is evidence in the engineering design literature that the TRIZ method accomplishes this goal , especially in terms of the originality of concepts generated for a design task and the number of new patents professional engineers are able to produce ( Birdi , Leach , & Magadley , 2012 ; Cascini & Russo , 2007 ; Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) . However , important questions remain about how the TRIZ method triggers creative problem solving in the mind of an engineer . For instance , what aspects of creative problem solving change when using the TRIZ method ? And what cognitive abilities can predict engineering design students’ ability to be successful when applying the TRIZ method ? In this investigation , we sought to D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 53 answer these questions by measuring inventive problem solving before and after engineering design students learned the TRIZ method , and by using cognitive abilities such as divergent thinking , working memory , and relational reasoning to predict the outcomes of those problem solving efforts . 1 . 3 . Predictors of creative problem solving Given the importance of creative problem solving to the engineering design process , and the high value placed on inno - vative performance both in engineering education ( e . g . , Charyton , 2014 ; Passig & Cohen , 2014 ) and professional practice ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) , this study sought to identify cognitive abilities that might predict performance outcomes . The three predictors of creative problem solving utilized here were ( a ) divergent thinking , ( b ) working memory , and ( c ) relational reasoning . Each of these variables will be brieﬂy described . 1 . 3 . 1 . Divergent thinking In the literature , perhaps the most widely measured predictor of creative problem solving is divergent thinking ( Plucker & Makel , 2010 ) , which involves the generation a variety of ideas ( Hudson , 1968 ; Torrance , 1972 ) . Importantly , divergent thinking tasks are almost always domain - general , meaning they rely as little as possible on knowledge that is speciﬁc to any particular topic or ﬁeld of learning ( Guilford , 1950 ; Silvia , 2011 ) . Despite their domain - general character , divergent thinking tasks have also been shown to be good predictors of innovative problem solving in domain - speciﬁc contexts . For example , Runco , Millar , Acar , and Cramond , ( 2010 ) found that scores on a divergent thinking test taking during childhood predicted adults’ professional creative activities ( e . g . , publications ) even 50 years later . In the domain of engineering design , divergent thinking tasks have been used to predict ideation ( Charyton , Jagacinski , Merrill , Clifton , & DeDios , 2011 ; Noguchi , 1997 ) , but results from this endeavor have been mixed . For example , Charyton et al . ( 2011 ) determined that divergent thinking was closely linked to creative problem solving in engineering design . In contrast , Apedoe and Schunn ( 2013 ) concluded that domain - speciﬁc knowledge , including design strategies , was more predictive of design success . Interestingly , some in the engineering community ( e . g . , Shah et al . , 2012a , 2012b ) are working to develop domain - speciﬁc tests of divergent thinking that would indicate engineering student skill at ideation . However , validation of these measures is ongoing . In the current examination , we aimed to parse the effect of domain - general divergent thinking from that of other cognitive abilities in order to understand better its unique contributors to creative problem solving within the domain of engineering design . 1 . 3 . 2 . Working memory The cognitive system that allows for the temporary storage and manipulation of multiple pieces of information is often termed working memory ( Baddeley , 1992 ) . In the literature , working memory has been strongly linked to a host of mental functions such as learning ( e . g . , Schweppe & Rummer , 2014 ) , intelligence ( e . g . , Unsworth , Fukuda , Awh , Vogel , 2014 ) , reading comprehension ( Kendeou , Papadopoulos , & Spanoudis , 2012 ) , and academic success in a wide array of domains , including engineering ( Baddeley , 2003 ) . However , the role of working memory in creative problem solving is not yet well understood ( Fugate , Zentall , & Gentry , 2013 ; Vartanian et al . , 2013 ) . Some researchers have argued that working memory capacity is unrelated or even negatively related to domain - general divergent thinking ability ( e . g . , Fugate et al . , 2013 ; Takeuchi et al . , 2011 ) . However , domain - speciﬁc innovative processing , such as engineering design ideation , requires the simultaneous consideration of many pieces of information for successful idea generation ( Charyton , 2014 ; Shah et al . , 2013 ) . Therefore , working memory may play an important role in engineering design . Moreover , because working memory capacity can affect individuals’ ability on a range of cognitive tasks , it is widely included in cognitive investigations as a control variable ( Conway & Kovacs , 2013 ) . In this investigation , working memory will be incorporated in predictive models of creative problem solving in engineering design . 1 . 3 . 3 . Relational reasoning The role of analogical reasoning , or the ability to discern patterns of relational similarity among multiple pieces of information , in the creative process has long been of interest in the creative problem solving literature generally ( Johnson - Laird , 1989 ) , and the engineering design literature speciﬁcally ( Chan et al . , 2011 ; Linsey , Markman , & Wood , 2012 ; Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) . Analogical reasoning has been positively linked to creative problem solving not only psychologically ( e . g . , De Acedo & Closas , 2011 ) but also neurologically , in terms of the brain regions ( e . g . , the rostrolateral pre - frontal cortex ) associated with both processes ( e . g . , Green , Kraemer , Fugelsang , & Dunbar , 2012 ) . Moreover , in engineering design , a number of methods that explicitly utilize analogies to support designers’ creative problem solving have emerged . For example , the Synectics method has long utilized four different types of analogies ( i . e . , direct , fantasy , personal , and symbolic ) to support design success ( Gordon , 1961 ) . More recently , the WordTree method was developed to aid designers in identifying salient analogies that may support the development of an original design ( Linsey et al . , 2012 ) . Further , the bio - inspired design movement has encouraged designers to analogically map attributes from a biological system onto their designs ( e . g . , Chakrabarti , 2013 ; Vattam , Helms , & Goel , 2010 ) . For example , Sartori , Pal , and Chakrabarti ( 2010 ) have developed the SAPPhiRE model that includes four steps ( i . e . , formulate search objectives , search for biological analogs , analyze biological analogs , and transfer ) for successfully mapping a biological analogy onto 54 D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 an engineering design problem . While Synectics , WordTree , and SAPPhiRE differ in important ways , they share an explicit reliance on analogical reasoning to support creative problem solving the engineering design . The TRIZ method has also been described as being implicitly reliant on analogical reasoning , because relations of similarity inherently play a part in the TRIZ - supported design process ( Jeong & Kim , 2014 ; Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) . However , unlike explicitly analogical design methods such as those just described , the TRIZ method requires a variety of relations to be mapped between the source material and the problem at hand ( Altshuller , 1996 ; Shulyak & Rodman , 1998 ) . For instance , analogy and relational similarity may not strongly pertain to the use of the TRIZ contradiction matrix , which explicitly requires a relation of incompatibility to be mapped between multiple ideas . Interestingly , recent work by Arlitt et al . ( 2012 ) has explored the impact of the selection of such technical contradiction parameters on the process of ideation . Therefore , a broader construct that includes a variety of relational mappings may be more appropriately linked to design success using the TRIZ method . In the educational psychology literature , where analogy and the discernment of similarities it requires are perennially linked to creative problem solving , a variety of other types of structural relations ( e . g . , deviance , incompatibility , and opposi - tion ) have also been implicated as critical for complex thought ( Chi , 2013 ; Chinn & Brewer , 1993 ; Holyoak , 2012 ) . Therefore , analogical reasoning may best be conceptualized as a form of a larger construct termed relational reasoning , which comprises the human ability to discern meaningful patterns of any type , not just similarity , within any informational stream ( Alexander & the DRLRL , 2012 ; Alexander , Dumas , Grossnickle , List , & Firetto , 2015 ; Dumas , Alexander , & Grossnickle , 2013 ) . In addition to analogy , relational reasoning has been conceptualized as including anomaly , or any deviation from an established pattern ( Klahr & Dunbar 1988 ; Tricket , Trafton , & Schunn , 2009 ) . For example , when designers are conceptu - alizing potential weaknesses or ﬂaws in a design , they are likely to be reasoning with anomalies by looking for systematic deviations in the product’s performance data ( Chikofsky & Cross , 1990 ) . Similarly , engineering designers are required to discern salient contradictions or trade - offs within a product or system ( Altshuller , 1996 ) . For example , in the design of any type of ﬂying vehicle there is a natural tradeoff between the weight of the vehicle and the strength to withstand impact . Such a realization constitutes recognition of an antinomy , which is predicated on a relation of incompatibility or mutual exclusivity among multiple sets of information ( Dumas , Alexander , Baker , Jablansky , & Dunbar , 2014 ) . Finally , engineering design frequently requires the management of two ( or more ) opposing forces ( Shulyak & Rodman , 1998 ) . For example , the change to a thinner - walled plastic water bottle will increase the chance of failure by buckling which was never a signiﬁcant failure mode prior to the change . Therefore , antitheses , or relations based on directly opposing ideas ( Bianchi , Savardi , & Kubovy , 2011 ; Sinatra & Broughton , 2011 ) may also play an important role in the design process . These four types of relational reasoning ( i . e . , analogy , anomaly , antinomy , and antithesis ) have jointly been implicated as critical in a wide variety of complex academic domains including reading ( Rapp & Kendeou , 2009 ) , chemistry ( Bellocchi & Ritchie , 2011 ) , and medicine ( Dumas et al . , 2014 ) . In this examination , we aim to empirically investigate the predictive potential of relational reasoning and its forms to creative problem solving in engineering design . Therefore , although the aforementioned forms of relational reasoning have yet to be explicitly linked to engineering design ; there is reason to hypothesize that they should individually and collectively play an important role in creative problem solving within engineering design . It was the purpose of this investigation to investigate those potential roles in relation to the TRIZ intervention , as well as other relevant cognitive factors . As such , we formulated the following questions to be investigated in this study : 1 . How does creative problem solving performance on an engineering design task differ in terms of ﬂuency and originality before and after TRIZ instruction ? 2 . What are the relative contributions of divergent thinking , working memory , and relational reasoning , to performance on an engineering design task ? 3 . Do the four forms of relational reasoning independently contribute to creative performance on an engineering design task ? 2 . Method 2 . 1 . Participants Participants for this study were 44 graduate students at a large mid - Atlantic American university ( 32 male ; 72 . 7 % ) . At the time of their participation , students were enrolled in a mechanical engineering graduate design course at the university . Participants ranged in age from 22 to 33 years old , with a mean age of 25 . 36 years old ( SD = 2 . 48 ) . The sample was diverse , with 38 . 6 % ( n = 17 ) of the students reporting their ethnicity as White , 9 . 1 % of students reporting their ethnicity as African American / Black ( n = 4 ) ; 18 . 2 % of students reporting their ethnicity as Hispanic / Latino ( n = 8 ) ; and 34 . 1 % reporting their ethnicity as Asian ( n = 15 ) . Also , 75 % of the sample reported English as their ﬁrst language ( n = 33 ) . Participants reported a mean grade point average of 3 . 28 ( SD = 0 . 41 ) on a four point scale , with GPAs ranging from 3 to 4 . 34 . 1 % ( n = 15 ) of the sample reported working full - time as engineers at the time of the study , while the remainder were full - time graduate students . D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 55 Fig . 1 . A snow - covered LED trafﬁc light , such as the one included in the trafﬁc light problem . 2 . 2 . TRIZ instruction This study investigated participants’ creative problem solving before and after TRIZ instruction in the use of the TRIZ Contradiction Matrix . TRIZ materials are designed to be able to be effectively utilized with minimal instruction , so long as the designer has adequate engineering background knowledge ( Shulyak & Rodman , 1998 ) . Because our participants were graduate level engineering students who had demonstrated success at the undergraduate level , this necessary level of background knowledge was assumed . However , previous studies ( e . g . , Okudan , Ogot , & Shirwaiker , 2006 ; Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) have shown that TRIZ materials may require some speciﬁc explanation in order to be used effectively , even by knowledgeable engineers . Therefore , TRIZ instruction for this study not only included the dissemination of ofﬁcial TRIZ materials , including the contradiction matrix , list of 39 engineering parameters and list of 40 inventive principles ( Altshuller , 1996 ) , but also a detailed explanation of the structure , purpose , and meaning of these materials . The instructor also presented examples of how design problems could be modeled as technical contradictions between engineering parameters , and demonstrated the use of the contradiction matrix and list of inventive principles . Instruction did not end until all of participants’ questions about the TRIZ method and materials were answered , and they felt comfortable using the method for creative problem solving . TRIZ instruction took approximately 50 min of class - time . 2 . 3 . Outcome measure In order to measure students’ creative design process adequately , the ﬂuency and originality of solutions to a particular design problem - solving task was utilized as our outcome measure . Participants’ generated design solutions to the task both before and after TRIZ instruction , focusing on an existing problem in colder climates in the US – complications with the use of LED trafﬁc lights . Because of detrimental environmental effects associated with wasting energy , one of the most important aspects of mod - ern engineering design is energy efﬁciency . However , sometimes energy - efﬁcient designs have unintended consequences . For example , many towns and cities in the U . S . have recently replaced older incandescent light bulbs traditionally used in trafﬁc lights with newer , more efﬁcient light emitting diodes ( LEDs ) . LEDs use much less energy than traditional incandes - cent bulbs , partly because they produce much less heat . Unfortunately , because of this reduced heat production , ice and snow can accumulate on LED trafﬁc lights making travel dangerous during winter months . This situation made national news because of the trafﬁc accidents that occurred , and one such news article ( i . e . , Ramde , 2009 ) was adapted for use in this study , and is hereafter referred to as the trafﬁc light problem . Fig . 1 is an image associated with the trafﬁc light problem—an ice and snow covered trafﬁc light . The experimental task involved recording solutions to resolve the trafﬁc light problem . 2 . 3 . 1 . Scoring ﬂuency and originality Solutions to the trafﬁc - light problem were scored in two ways to create separate variables for analysis . First , participants’ written responses were scored for the total number of non - redundant solutions offered . In this case , non - redundant refers to ideas that a participant generated that were each different from one another , with no two ideas being precisely the same design repeated . This count became the measure of ﬂuency . Next , all responses were scored using a speciﬁc formula developed by Shah et al . ( 2003 ) to calculate the relative originality of each generated problem solution , based on the other solutions produced by the sample of participants . That algorithm was : Originality = (cid:2) N of all ideas generated − N of particular idea generated N of all ideas generated (cid:3) × 10 the equation above describes the a posteriori method of calculating originality ( or novelty , Shah et al . , 2003 ) . Speciﬁcally , this formula assessed originality of a given idea or generated design using a calculation relative to the existence of similar ideas 56 D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 in a sample . Formulas such as this one have been utilized for decades in the creative problem solving literature ( Silvia , 2008 ; Torrance , 1972 ) . In fact , this originality metric was developed from creativity work by Torrance ( 1962 , 1964 ) and Jansson and Smith ( 1991 ) , by Shah et al . ( 2003 ) . Ideation metrics such as these are commonly used in engineering design literature pertaining to creative problem solving ( e . g . , Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) . In this investigation , the originality values of each idea that a given participant produced was averaged to produce a mean originality score for each participant . Further , each participant’s maximum originality score was also saved in the dataset 2 . 3 . 2 . Coding physical and working principles Physical and working principles are related to the well - established functional decomposition process of representing mechanical designs and have been fruitfully utilized previously in many published examinations of the engineering design process ( e . g . , Hirtz et al . , 2002 ; Pahl et al . , 2007 ; Shah et al . , 2003 ; Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) . In this study , generated ideas were ﬁrst coded based on the physical principle at work , and then further based on the working principle on which a physical device would be based . The physical principles that participants utilized to solve the trafﬁc light problem were ( a ) mechanical ( e . g . , using a windshield wiper to wipe away the snow ) , ( b ) heat ( e . g . , using electrical resistance coils to melt the snow ) , ( c ) tribology ( e . g . , lubricating the bulbs so snow will slide off ) , ( d ) chemical ( e . g . , spraying antifreeze on the bulbs ) , and ( e ) optical ( e . g . , adding more LEDs so light will be bright enough to shine through snow ) . Combinations of each of these physical principles ( e . g . , mechanical and chemical ) were also observed and coded . Then , ideas representing each of these physical principles were further coded according to the working principle they utilized . Importantly , problem solutions based on the same physical principles , may not share the same working principle . For example , ideas using a mechanical physical principle used a variety of working principles including wipers , vibrating trafﬁc lights , and spinning trafﬁc lights to combat the snow . An example of one of these ideas is depicted in Fig . 2 , where a participant put forward an idea for a spring - loaded light cover for each bulb of a trafﬁc light . Ideas using the heat physical principle utilized a variety of working principles to generate that heat including electrical resistance , incandescent bulbs , and microwaves . An example of the heat physical principle is also available in Fig . 2 , where a participant conceptualized resistance - coils afﬁxed to the trafﬁc light . Moreover , tribological solutions used a variety of lubricants and application methods , and chemical solutions utilized a variety of chemicals . Finally , optical solutions used working principles , such as reﬂection , to generate or redirect light with mirrors . Combinations of working principles were also coded . In accordance with previous work in the engineering design literature ( e . g . , Shah et al . , 2003 ) , ideas were only designated as the same if both their physical and working principles were shared . A total of 45 separate ideas were identiﬁed in our sample , with the single most popular being the use of electrical resistance coils to heat the trafﬁc light and melt snow . A total of 20 % of the problem solutions were independently coded by both the ﬁrst and second author with a high level of reliability ( (cid:2) = 0 . 89 ) . Therefore , the second author coded the remainder of the problem solutions . A complete count of physical principles and working principles coded in our sample is available in Table 1 . 2 . 4 . Predictive measures 2 . 4 . 1 . Divergent thinking As our measure of divergent thinking , we administered the Uses of Objects Task ( UOT ) , a psychometric test that requires participants to generate multiple original uses for a given every day object , was utilized in this study ( Guilford , 1950 ) . The UOT has been widely used for the measurement of divergent thinking for many years ( Guilford , 1950 ; Hudson , 1968 ; Torrance , 1972 ) . In this study , the UOT was administered to the students in class , and the object they were asked to consider was a tin can . Speciﬁcally , the engineering design students were directed to : “list as many interesting or unusual uses for a tin can as you can think of . ” Participants were given 10 min to complete the task . Afterward , the number of uses each participant produced was tallied , and the total count was used as their score for the UOT . In this way , the UOT was scored in terms of ﬂuency . 2 . 4 . 2 . Working memory In this investigation , we measured working memory capacity with the Shapebuilder task ( Sprenger et al . , 2013 ) . The Shapebuilder task requires participants to maintain a mental representation of serially presented shapes ( e . g . , circle , square , or triangle ) and recall those shapes in sequential order . In addition to order of presentation , the various shapes differed in number displayed , their color , and their location on a grid . Each participant has 15 min to be presented with varying serially presented strings of shapes . Each shape in a string correctly recalled earns a participant a certain number of points , calculated based on the number of varying dimensions associated with that shape , and the length of the strong of shapes being recalled . Because of its interactive nature , Shapebuilder is necessarily administered to participants on a computer . In this investigation , participants completed the Shapebuilder task outside of class via the Internet . A screenshot of the Shapebuilder task is included in Fig . 4 . 2 . 4 . 3 . Test of Relational Reasoning In order to assess the participants’ ability to discern meaningful patterns within given information , we administered the TORR ( Alexander et al . , 2015 ) . The TORR ( (cid:3) = 0 . 83 ) is a 32 - item reasoning test , designed to limit the need for participant prior D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 57 Fig . 2 . Example solutions to trafﬁc light problem using mechanical and heat physical principles respectively . knowledge , and language through the use of graphical , non - linguistic items . This reasoning measure is comprised of four scales representing each of the four forms of relational reasoning previously described ( i . e . , analogy , anomaly , antinomy , and antithesis ) . Each scale consisted of two practice items followed by eight test items . A sample item from the antinomy scale is included in Fig . 3 . In this item , a participant is required to decide which of the answer sets is mutually exclusive with the given set . In this study , the TORR was administered during class time , in paper and pencil form . Students were given as much time as they needed to complete the TORR , with no participant taking longer than 1 h . On the TORR , each item was worth 1 point , and the therefore the total number of items that a participant answered correctly on either the whole test or an individual scale was their score on the TORR or a scale , respectively . 2 . 5 . Procedure Prior to receiving TRIZ instruction and completing the trafﬁc light problem , participants completed the TORR , Shape - builder , and the UOT . As previously mentioned , the TORR and the UOT were both administered to participants during class 58 D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 Fig . 3 . Sample item from the TORR antinomy scale . Fig . 4 . Screenshot of Shapebuilder task . in paper and pencil form , while Shapebuilder was completed outside of class via the internet . Then , the trafﬁc - light problem and TRIZ instruction were administered . In the engineering design literature pertaining to TRIZ , between - subjects exper - iments exist ( Okudan et al . , 2006 ) , however , investigations of the cognitive changes associated with TRIZ instruction are more rare . Because the changing cognitive processes of students are of paramount interest here , and within - subjects study designs are uniquely suited for capturing such changes ( Gravetter & Wallnau , 2013 ) , a within - subjects design was adopted for this study . Speciﬁcally , the graduate students ﬁrst completed the trafﬁc light problem individually without the aid of any text or instructional tool , using their own intuition and experience , and engineering knowledge . They were given 20 min for this ideation period with most ﬁnishing much sooner than 20 min and then their ideas were collected . The participating students were then given a 50 - min lecture on the use of the TRIZ Contradiction Matrix with ofﬁcial TRIZ materials , and a copy of the lecture materials including a worked example . Finally , the students revisited the trafﬁc light problem with explicit instructions to apply the TRIZ method to their individual ideation process . Thirty minutes were allotted for this ideation session and participant ideas were collected at the end of the period . Importantly , applying the TRIZ Contradiction Matrix strategy is much more time consuming than using one’s intuition and experience to generate ideas . Users must ﬁrst represent the design problem as one or more valid technical contradictions using the TRIZ set of 39 engineering parameters . Earlier implementations of this experiment showed that few participants were able to generate multiple ideas to solve the LED trafﬁc light problem in a 30 - min ideation period , and some students did not get any solutions . Therefore , the graduate students were asked to apply the TRIZ method to the design task ( without the beneﬁt of their in - class work ) as a homework assignment with a two - hour time limit . Participants submitted their work one - week later . The homework assignment results were coded for this analysis . It should be noted that the procedures D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 59 Table 2 TRIZ - related outcome variables before and after instruction . Variable Sample Mean ( SD ) t p d Pre - TRIZ Post - TRIZ Fluency 5 . 09 ( 2 . 65 ) 4 . 11 ( 2 . 02 ) − 2 . 26 . 029 * 0 . 389 Originality ( Mean ) 9 . 17 ( . 32 ) 9 . 31 ( . 26 ) 2 . 15 . 038 * 0 . 413 Originality ( Max ) 9 . 69 ( . 41 ) 9 . 77 ( . 21 ) 1 . 58 0 . 121 0 . 210 Note : * p < 0 . 05 . followed in this study were approved by our university Institutional Review Board , and all of the ethical guidelines of the American Psychological Association were followed during the collection and analysis of these data . 2 . 6 . Results and implications 2 . 6 . 1 . Creative problem solving before and after TRIZ instruction In general , this work is situated within an empiricist , or positivist , tradition , in which the understanding of psychological phenomena ( e . g . , creative problem solving ) is driven by the collection of reliable empirical data . Therefore , the data collected through this described procedure was analyzed , and inferences concerning the nature of creative problem solving were drawn from that analysis . Therefore , means , standard deviations , and paired - sample t - test values for ﬂuency and originality ( both mean and maximum ) , as well as associated effect sizes ( d ) , are depicted in Table 2 . Signiﬁcant differences form pre to post instruction were found both in terms of ﬂuency and average originality of ideas . However , these differences were in opposite directions . Speciﬁcally , the participating students produced signiﬁcantly fewer ideas after TRIZ instruction , but the ideas they did produce were signiﬁcantly more original on average . This ﬁnding suggests that , prior to TRIZ instruction , the graduate students were using a basic individually - based ideation strategy : searching for problem solutions in a non - systematic way and putting forward each of the ideas that crossed their mind . However , because many participants thought of ideas with the same few physical and working principles , these pre - TRIZ ideas received signiﬁcantly lower originality scores on average . These ﬁndings suggest that post - TRIZ participants’ use of the TRIZ Contradiction Matrix enabled the production of ideas with a greater variety of physical and working principles , and less redundancy among the ideas in the sample . Therefore , the ideas received signiﬁcantly greater originality scores on average . Interestingly , while maximum originality scores did rise from pre to post - TRIZ , they did not differ signiﬁcantly . This ﬁnding may imply that , because of the greater number of ideas produced pre - TRIZ , participants were somewhat likely to achieve a high level of originality with at least one idea . 2 . 7 . Predictors of creative problem solving Next , the predictive relations among the individual difference and TRIZ - related outcome variables were examined . A full bivariate correlation matrix with each collected variable , including a breakdown of the TORR by scale , is available in Table 3 . The ability of each collected individual difference variable ( i . e . , relational reasoning , working memory capacity , and divergent thinking ) to predict ﬂuency and originality before and after TRIZ was examined using multiple regression . Speciﬁcally , six multiple regression models were run , each predicting a different outcome variable associated with creative problem solving in engineering design before or after TRIZ , and using scores on the TORR , Shapebuilder , and the UOT as predictor variables . All of these models signiﬁcantly predicted their respective outcome variable . R 2 and F - test values associated with each of these six regression models are available in Table 4 . Interestingly , our three predictor variables accounted for the greatest proportion of variance when predicting post - TRIZ average originality , the same outcome variable that signiﬁcantly increased after TRIZ instruction . This ﬁnding implies that the cognitive abilities tapped by our individual difference measures are related in an important way to the cognitive processes required for the successful application of the TRIZ method to engineering design . 2 . 7 . 1 . Differences among predictor variables While each of the already mentioned multiple regression models signiﬁcantly predicted its outcome variable , the pre - dictive ability of each of the individual predictor variables ( i . e . , TORR , Shapebuilder , and UOT ) differed depending on the outcome variable . Beta values associated with each predictor variable for each regression model are available in Table 5 . For example , after controlling for both relational reasoning ability and working memory capacity , the UOT signiﬁcantly predicted ﬂuency both pre and post - TRIZ , but did not signiﬁcantly predict originality ( mean or max ) either before or after instruction . Moreover , the UOT predicted ﬂuency best before TRIZ , implying that the divergent thinking ability tapped by the UOT is most strongly related to pre - TRIZ ideation . Importantly , because the UOT was itself scored in terms of ﬂuency in this investigation , its predictive relation to ﬂuency on the trafﬁc - light problem makes theoretical sense . Further , the Shapebuilder task was not a signiﬁcant predictor of any of the outcome variables after controlling for relational reasoning ability and divergent thinking in our multiple regression models , despite being signiﬁcantly correlated to many of the outcome variables bivariately ( Table 3 ) . This pattern of relations may imply that much of the variance in ﬂuency and 6 0 D . D u m a s e t a l . / T h i n k i n g S k i ll s a n d C r e a t i v i t y 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 Table 3 Bivariate correlation matrix . TORR Analogy Scale Anomaly Scale Antinomy Scale Antithesis Scale Shapebuilder UOT Pre - TRIZ Fluency Pre - TRIZ Original - ity ( Mean ) Pre - TRIZ Original - ity ( Max ) Post - TRIZ Fluency Post - TRIZ Original - ity ( Mean ) Post - TRIZ Original - ity ( Max ) TORR 1 . 00 Analogy Scale 0 . 899 * * 1 . 00 Anomaly Scale 0 . 891 * * . 727 * * 1 . 00 Antinomy Scale 0 . 817 * * 0 . 633 * * 0 . 622 * * 1 . 00 Antithesis Scale 0 . 883 * * 0 . 719 * * 0 . 750 * * 0 . 602 * * 1 . 00 Shapebuilder 0 . 487 * * 0 . 419 * * 0 . 354 * * 0 . 419 * * 0 . 503 * * 1 . 00 UOT 0 . 341 * 0 . 322 * 0 . 275 0 . 280 0 . 310 * 0 . 319 * 1 . 00 . Pre - TRIZ Fluency 0 . 350 * 0 . 291 0 . 341 * 0 . 382 * 0 . 207 0 . 346 * 0 . 575 * * 1 . 00 Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 590 * * 0 . 517 * * 0 . 510 * * 0 . 457 * * . 566 * * 0 . 473 * * 0 . 347 * 0 . 337 * 1 . 00 Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 433 * * 0 . 428 * * 0 . 417 * * 0 . 385 * * 0 . 276 0 . 173 0 . 233 0 . 292 0 . 433 * * 1 . 00 Post - TRIZ Fluency 0 . 586 * * 0 . 571 * * 0 . 468 * * 0 . 476 * * 0 . 522 * * 0 . 405 * * 0 . 530 * * 0 . 489 * * 0 . 366 * 0 . 220 1 . 00 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 678 * * 0 . 489 * * 0 . 616 * * 0 . 670 * * 0593 * * 0 . 443 * 0 . 320 * 0 . 346 * 0 . 518 * * 0 . 282 0 . 413 * * 1 . 00 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 684 * * 0 . 559 * * 0 . 618 * * 0 . 647 * * 0 . 560 * * 0 . 363 0 . 257 0 . 327 0 . 392 * * 0 . 548 * * 0 . 322 * 0 . 799 * * 1 . 00 Note : * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 61 Table 4 R - square values for regression models . Outcome Variable R 2 F p Pre - TRIZ Fluency 0 . 37 7 . 83 < 0 . 001 Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 41 9 . 13 < 0 . 001 Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 23 3 . 92 0 . 015 Post - TRIZ Fluency 0 . 47 11 . 93 < 0 . 001 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 48 12 . 40 < 0 . 001 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 46 11 . 77 < 0 . 001 Table 5 Beta values for regression models . Outcome variable Predictor Variables TORR Shapebuilder UOT Pre - TRIZ Fluency 0 . 12 0 . 13 0 . 50 * * Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 44 * * 0 . 22 0 . 12 Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 49 * * 0 . 21 0 . 3 Post - TRIZ Fluency 0 . 42 * * 0 . 08 0 . 36 * * Post - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 59 * * 0 . 13 0 . 08 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 66 * * 0 . 03 0 . 01 Note : * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Table 6 R - square values for scale - score regression models . Outcome Variable R 2 F p Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 36 5 . 42 0 . 001 Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 24 3 . 10 0 . 026 Post - TRIZ Fluency 0 . 36 5 . 58 0 . 001 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 54 11 . 29 < 0 . 001 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 49 9 . 72 < 0 . 001 originality post - TRIZ that was accounted for by Shapebuilder was also explained by the TORR or the UOT , leaving Shapebuilder with little predictive power after these other variables were entered into the model . However , because working memory capacity has been strongly implicated as relevant to both relational reasoning ability and divergent thinking ( Fugate et al . , 2013 ; Waltz et al . , 1999 ) , it remains important in these models as a control variable . In our regression models , the TORR was the only variable to signiﬁcantly predict the originality of ideas , both before and after TRIZ instruction . This ﬁnding suggests that relational reasoning may crucially relate to an individual’s ability to produce ideas that utilize original physical and working principles , even when working memory capacity and divergent thinking ability are controlled for . Moreover , while both the UOT and Shapebuilder predicted the outcome variables better before TRIZ instruction , the TORR predicted more strongly after TRIZ instruction . These ﬁndings suggests that relational reasoning , above and beyond the other variables included in this investigation , was critically related to the cognitive processes required for the successful application of the TRIZ method to engineering design . The TORR also signiﬁcantly predicted ﬂuency post - TRIZ , although it did not signiﬁcantly predict ﬂuency pre - TRIZ . This ﬁnding may imply that relational reasoning ability is associated with the observed signiﬁcant reduction in total ideas produced post - TRIZ , perhaps because relational reasoning allows for the conceptualization of the potentially contradictory relations between elements of problem solutions , causing them to be discarded in favor of more effective and original ideas . 2 . 7 . 2 . Forms of relational reasoning Because this investigation is the ﬁrst study of which we are aware to bring the TORR , and the four forms of relational reasoning it measures , to bear on creative problem solving in engineering design , questions pertaining to the differential predictive power of the forms of relational reasoning remain . In order to address these questions , each of the outcome variables of which the TORR was a signiﬁcant predictor were regressed on participants’ scores on the four subscales of the TORR . Each of these 5 models signiﬁcantly predicted its outcome variable , with R 2 and F values available in Table 6 . Beta weights associated with each of the forms of relational reasoning are available in Table 7 . Each of these Beta values were likely attenuated due to the high level of collinearity among the scales of the TORR , and therefore only rarely reach signiﬁcance individually ( Gravetter & Wallnau , 2013 ) . However , the magnitude of particular values and the speciﬁc betas that do reach signiﬁcance reveal an interesting pattern . For instance , the analogy scale is the strongest predictor of ﬂuency post - TRIZ , implying that an analogical process may underlie a participants’ ability to produce a greater quantity of ideas using the TRIZ method . Conversely , the anomaly scale was the weakest predictor of ﬂuency , but predicted originality more strongly than the analogy scale did . The antithesis scale predicted each outcome variable relatively equally , implying the ability to concep - 62 D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 Table 7 Standardized beta values for scale - score regression models . Outcome Variable Predictor Variables Analogy Anomaly Antinomy Antithesis Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 326 0 . 090 0 . 113 0 . 146 Pre - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 291 0 . 175 0 . 287 0 . 255 Post - TRIZ Fluency 0 . 357 0 . 036 0 . 151 0 . 200 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Mean ) 0 . 176 0 . 284 0 . 471 * * 0 . 223 Post - TRIZ Originality ( Max ) 0 . 051 0 . 275 0 . 397 * 0 . 178 Note : * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . tualize oppositional relations may be associated similarly with both ﬂuency and originality before and after TRIZ . Perhaps most importantly , the only scale that signiﬁcantly predicted an outcome variable after each of the other scales were con - trolled for was the antinomy scale . Speciﬁcally , the beta values associated with the antinomy scale reached signiﬁcance when predicting originality , both mean and maximum , post - TRIZ . The ﬁnding suggests that the ability to recognize relations of mutual exclusivity or incompatibility may be particularly strongly linked to a participant’s ability to produce ideas using the TRIZ method that utilize relatively original physical and working principles . Given that the TRIZ method is predicated on the need for engineering designers to recognize and eliminate contradictions or trade - offs , which are conceptually similar to the relational incompatibilities present on the antinomy scale of the TORR , it makes theoretical sense that an ability to reason with antinomies would be strongly linked to success using the TRIZ method . 3 . Conclusion This study represents a systematic examination of the efﬁcacy of the TRIZ method for engineering design in terms of the ﬂuency and relative originality of engineering problem solutions . Further , the predictive relations among ﬂuency , originality , and cognitive abilities such as relational reasoning , working memory capacity , and divergent thinking were examined . The ability of individual forms of relational reasoning to predict ﬂuency and originality before and after TRIZ instruction were also investigated . As such , three main conclusions can be drawn from this investigation that can be widely applied to engineering design education and practice : ( a ) when using the TRIZ method , designers produce signiﬁcantly fewer ideas , but those ideas are signiﬁcantly more original on average , ( b ) relational reasoning ability is a strong predictor of a designer’s ability to be ﬂuent and original with the TRIZ method , and ( c ) antinomous reasoning , more than any other form of relational reasoning is a good predictor of a designer’s ability to produce ideas using relatively original physical and working principles . Each of these conclusions will now be further discussed . 3 . 1 . Changes in ﬂuency and originality In the creative problem solving literature , the relation between ﬂuency and originality is much debated ( Dumas & Dunbar , 2014 ) . Most modern examinations of the relation between these two components of creative problem solving have argued that ﬂuency and originality are positively related , in some cases very strongly so ( Silvia , 2008 ) . Indeed , this investigation did uncover uniformly positive correlations between originality and ﬂuency . However , one important way that these two constructs diverge was also uncovered in this study . Speciﬁcally , ﬂuency and originality were both observed to change signiﬁcantly after TRIZ instruction , but those changes were in opposite directions , with participants becoming signiﬁcantly less ﬂuent and more original when using the TRIZ method . Because the TRIZ method explicitly strives to make it easier for designers to eliminate problem solutions with an inherent contradiction or trade - off , the observed decrease in produced ideas post - TRIZ could mean that such ideas were being rejected by the designer . Nonetheless , the observed increase in originality also implies that the TRIZ method allows designers to tap more rarely used physical and working principles for their ideas , therefore broadening the body of potential problem solutions . Because the TRIZ method has been previously found to increase the effectiveness of designers working in professional settings , especially in terms of the originality of ideas ( Shah et al . , 2003 ; Vargas Hernandez et al . , 2013 ) , we may conclude that this observed effectiveness is related to the increase in the originality of ideas . Of course , if a designer produces a solution to a given problem that utilizes never before tapped physical and working principles , they may apply for a patent to protect their idea . Yet , no matter how many already - thought - of ideas a designer produces , no new patents can be ﬁled . Therefore , the current research supports previously published ﬁndings about the efﬁcacy of the TRIZ method , but adds speciﬁc information as to how and why TRIZ works . 3 . 2 . Relational reasoning predicts creative problem solving In this investigation , we found that , even after all the other variables in our models were controlled for , the TORR was a consistently signiﬁcant predictor of ﬂuency and originality using the TRIZ method . This ﬁnding suggests that relational reasoning ability may be crucially linked to creative ability in cognitively demanding domains such as engineering design . D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 63 Further , this ﬁnding highlights the potential to use the TORR , a culture - fair psychometric measure of relational reasoning ability , to identify students with a high potential to beneﬁt from the TRIZ method , and to succeed in engineering design by virtue of their high relational reasoning ability . Finally , explicit instruction in relational reasoning strategies for engineering design students may support design success and creative problem solving . Instruction of strategies for relational reasoning has demonstrated success in other cognitively demanding domains such as mathematics ( Richland & McDonough , 2010 ) , and may be an important next step for research in engineering design education . 3 . 3 . Antinomous reasoning and TRIZ success Of the four forms of relational reasoning included on the TORR , antinomous reasoning was the strongest predictor of TRIZ success . Speciﬁcally , even after each of the other forms of relational reasoning were controlled for , antinomous reasoning signiﬁcantly predicted originality ( both mean and maximum ) post - TRIZ . Importantly , antinomous reasoning requires the mapping of a relation of incompatibility or exclusivity among ideas . As such , antinomous reasoning is conceptually similar to the identiﬁcation of engineering design performance trade - offs or contradictions , which the TRIZ method is speciﬁcally meant to support ( Altshuller , 1996 ) . Therefore , antinomous reasoning may play a special role in the design process . Because antinomous reasoning , to our knowledge , has never before been brought to bear on engineering design , this ﬁnding repre - sents the identiﬁcation of an important and potentially open area for research on the cognitive abilities underlying design success . Of the four forms of relational reasoning included on the TORR , analogical reasoning has received the greatest atten - tion in the literature ( e . g . , Vattam et al . , 2010 ) . However , our ﬁndings suggest a focus on antinomous reasoning within the engineering design community may be more warranted . Interestingly , ﬁndings in a variety of cognitively demanding domains of learning have revealed a differing pattern of importance for the forms of relational reasoning . For example , in a recent investigation in the domain of medicine , it was found that medical residents relied most heavily on anomalies when reasoning about a patient’s diagnosis ( Dumas et al . , 2014 ) . In contrast to that ﬁnding , the current study has revealed that graduate level engineering design students appear to rely most heavily on their antinomous reasoning ability when producing original problem solutions . As a fuller picture of the forms of relational reasoning and their varying importance in different domains of learning emerges in the research literature , the ﬁeld’s understanding of how these reasoning forms support human cognition and education grows—and the potential for systematically supporting each of the forms of relational reasoning in all students grows with it . 3 . 4 . Limitations and future directions It should be noted that this investigation utilized a quasi - experimental repeated measures design , and as such , cannot be the ﬁnal word on the nature of creative problem solving in engineering design . On the contrary , this study represents a preliminary foray into the predictive relation between relational reasoning and engineering design success and a number of future research endeavors are apparently worthwhile given the results of this study . For example , a fully experimental study , incorporating random selection and assignment , as well as a control group , would serve to fruitfully parse apart the effects observed here . Unfortunately , fully experimental designs are often both ethically and practically impossible in the classroom , so a laboratory study may need to sufﬁce in that regard . Moreover , a greater number of covariates and predictor variables could potentially be entered into a follow - up analysis . For instance , it may be interesting to ascertain which of the many other available divergent thinking tasks also predict creative problem solving in mechanical engineering , and which do not . Further , do other variables associated with academic success in general such as achievement motivation or intelligence play a signiﬁcant role in creative problem solving with the engineering domain ? Further , the present study was conducted entirely with individual tasks , including all of the predictive measures , and the trafﬁc light problem itself . This individual - measurement paradigm is helpful in research , because it simpliﬁes the structure of data for analysis ; however , the individual measurement utilized in this study may also be an important limitation . This is because , in many professional engineering design contexts , designers work in teams rather than individually . Although some group - level studies of relational reasoning in engineering design have been conducted ( Chan & Schunn , 2015 ) , the power of relational reasoning to predict engineering design ability in teams remains largely an open question . Therefore , future investigations into the engineering design process generally , and the role of relational reasoning within that process speciﬁcally , may need to focus on group - level measurement of creative problem solving . Moreover , while this investigation focused on predicting the originality and ﬂuency of engineering design students’ cre - ative problem solutions using mainly cognitive abilities ( i . e . , relational reasoning , working memory , divergent thinking ) , non - cognitive psychological traits ( e . g . , personality , motivation , or emotions ) may also be highly predictive of design cre - ativity . Moreover , background variables related to professional or educational experience ( e . g . , number of years working or studying in a particular ﬁeld ) may also be meaningfully utilized as predictor variables in future research within this line of inquiry . For this reason future work on engineering design and CPS may focus more speciﬁcally on such non - cognitive traits , with the goal of uncovering all of the psychological variables—not only the cognitive abilities—that support engineering design . Finally , while this investigation unfolded entirely quantitatively , using psychometric measures to account for variance in a quantitatively coded outcome variable , qualitative or mixed - methods approaches may be fruitfully utilized in the future to explain the meaning of the quantitative ﬁndings observed here . For example , as has been pioneered by those within 64 D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 the literature on scientiﬁc thinking and reasoning ( e . g . Chan & Schunn , 2015 ; Dumas et al . , 2014 ) , teams of engineering designers may be audio or video recorded while they produce design ideas . Then , those recordings may be coded for process and outcome related variables , in order to better understand precisely how relational reasoning , as a process , contributes to the process of engineering design . Indeed , only through such nuanced qualitative or mixed - methods analyses may the process of engineering design , and the psychological traits that support it , be fully understood . In the research literature on creative problem solving and engineering design , the identiﬁcation of cognitive abilities that predict creative performance is of high importance . This investigation has been a systematic investigation linking relational reasoning , working memory capacity , and divergent thinking to creative problem solving in engineering design using one of the most popular engineering design methods : TRIZ . With the growing emphasis being placed on creative problem solving and innovation from with the scientiﬁc literature ( Passig & Cohen , 2014 ; Silvia , 2011 ; Vargas Hernandez , Schmidt , & Okudan , 2013 ) , as well as governmental policy ( National Science and Technology Council , 2013 ) , it may be more important now than ever before to continue focusing engineering design education on creative problem solving . With an empirically based understanding of the cognitive abilities that underlie the design process , such as we examined in this investigation , the engineering community may develop an enhanced ability to support students’ creative problem - solving performance . References Alexander , P . A . , Dumas , D . , Grossnickle , E . M . , List , A . , & Firetto , C . ( 2015 ) . Measuring relational reasoning . Journal of Experimental Education , 1 – 33 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00220973 . 2014 . 963216 Alexander , P . A . , & The Disciplined Reading and Learning Research Laboratory . ( 2012 ) . Reading into the future : competence for the 21st century . Educational Psychologist , 47 ( 4 ) , 259 – 280 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 722511 Altshuller , G . ( 1996 ) . And suddenly the inventor appeared : TRIZ , the theory of inventive problem solving . Worcester , MA : Technical Innovation Center , Inc . Apedoe , X . S . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2013 ) . Strategies for success : uncovering what makes students successful in design and learning . Instructional Science , 41 ( 4 ) , 773 – 791 . Arlitt , R . , Nix , A . , & Stone , R . ( 2012 ) . Evaluating TRIZ as a provider of provocative stimuli . Proc . ASME . 45196 ; Vol . 3 : Design , materials and manufacturing , Parts A , B , and C : 441 - 449 , IMECE2012 - 89500 . 10 . 1115 / IMECE2012 - 89500 . Baddeley , A . ( 1992 ) . Working memory . Science , 255 ( 5044 ) , 556 – 559 . Baddeley , A . ( 2003 ) . Working memory : looking back and looking forward . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4 ( 10 ) , 829 – 839 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrn1201 Bellocchi , A . , & Ritchie , S . M . ( 2011 ) . Investigating and theorizing discourse during analogy writing in chemistry . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 48 ( 7 ) , 771 – 792 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 20428 Benedek , M . , Fink , A . , & Neubauer , A . C . ( 2006 ) . Enhancement of ideational ﬂuency by means of computer - based training . Creativity Research Journal , 18 ( 3 ) , 317 – 328 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1803 7 Bianchi , I . , Savardi , U . , & Kubovy , M . ( 2011 ) . Dimensions and their poles : a metric and topological approach to opposites . Language and Cognitive Processes , 26 , 1232 – 1265 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01690965 . 2010 . 520943 Birdi , K . , Leach , D . , & Magadley , W . ( 2012 ) . Evaluating the impact of TRIZ creativity training : an organizational ﬁeld study . R & D Management , 42 ( 4 ) , 315 – 326 . Boss , S . ( 2012 ) . Bringing innovation to school : empowering students to thrive in a changing world . Bloomington , IN : Solution Tree . Cascini , G . , & Russo , D . ( 2007 ) . Computer - aided analysis of patents and search for TRIZ contradictions . International Journal of Product Development , 4 ( 1 ) , 52 – 67 . Chakrabarti , A . ( 2013 ) . Supporting analogical transfer in biologically inspired design . In A . Goel , R . B . Stone , & D . McAdams ( Eds . ) , Biologically inspired design . Springer : London . Chan , J . , & Schunn , C . ( 2015 ) . The impact of analogies on creative concept generation : lessons from an in vivo study in engineering design . Cognitive Science , 39 ( 1 ) , 126 – 155 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cogs . 12127 Chan , J . , Fu , K . , Schunn , C . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2011 ) . On the beneﬁts and pitfalls of analogies for innovative design : ideation performance based on analogical distance , commonness , and modality of examples . Journal of Mechanical Design , 133 , 8 . Charyton , C . , Jagacinski , R . J . , Merrill , J . A . , Clifton , W . , & DeDios , S . ( 2011 ) . Assessing creativity speciﬁc to engineering with the revised creative engineering design assessment . Journal of Engineering Education , 100 ( 4 ) , 778 – 799 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / j . 2168 - 9830 . 2011 . tb00036 . x Charyton , C . ( 2014 ) . Creative engineering design assessment : background , directions , manual , scoring guide and uses . New York : Springer Science and Business Media . Chi , M . T . H . ( 2013 ) . Thinking about relations in learning . In : Kulikowich J . M . ( Chair ) , Exploring and leveraging relational thinking for academic performance . Symposium conducted at the meeting of the American Educational Research Association , San Francisco , CA , April . Chikofsky , E . J . , & Cross , I . J . H . ( 1990 ) . Reverse engineering and design recovery : a taxonomy . IEEE Software , 7 ( 1 ) , 13 – 17 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / 52 . 43044 Chinn , C . A . , & Brewer , W . F . ( 1993 ) . The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition : A theoretical framework and implications for science instruction . Review of Educational Research , 63 ( 1 ) , 1 – 49 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 00346543063001001 Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2007 ) . The relationship of analogical distance to analogical function and preinventive structure : the case of engineering design . Memory and Cognition , 35 ( 1 ) , 29 – 38 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BF03195939 Conway , A . R . A . , & Kovacs , K . ( 2013 ) . Individual differences in intelligence and working memory : a review of latent variable models . In B . H . Ross ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 58 ) ( pp . 233 – 270 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . De Acedo , M . L . S . , & Closas , A . H . ( 2011 ) . Development and validation of a questionnaire to assess analogy and creativity in open problem - solving . Studia Psychologica , 53 ( 3 ) , 235 – 252 . Dumas , D . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2014 ) . Understanding ﬂuency and originality : a latent variable perspective . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 14 , 56 – 67 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2014 . 09 . 003 Dumas , D . , & Schmidt , L . ( 2015 ) . Relational reasoning as predictor for engineering ideation success using TRIZ . Journal of Engineering Design , 26 ( 1 – 3 ) , 74 – 88 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2015 . 1020287 Dumas , D . , Alexander , P . A . , & Grossnickle , E . M . ( 2013 ) . Relational reasoning and its manifestations in the educational context : a systematic review of the literature . Educational Psychology Review , 25 , 391 – 427 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 013 - 9224 - 4 Dumas , D . , Alexander , P . A . , Baker , L . M . , Jablansky , S . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2014 ) . Relational reasoning in medical education : patterns in discourse and diagnosis . Journal of Educational Psychology , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a003677 Fugate , C . M . , Zentall , S . S . , & Gentry , M . ( 2013 ) . Creativity and working memory in gifted students with and without characteristics of attention deﬁcit hyperactive disorder : lifting the mask . Gifted Child Quarterly , 57 ( 4 ) , 234 – 246 . Gordon , W . ( 1961 ) . Synectics : the development of creative capacity . New York : Harper & Brothers . Gravetter , F . , & Wallnau , L . ( 2013 ) . Essentials of statistics for the behavioral sciences . New York : Cengage Learning . D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 65 Green , A . E . , Kraemer , D . J . , Fugelsang , J . A . , Gray , J . R . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2012 ) . Neural correlates of creativity in analogical reasoning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 38 ( 2 ) , 264 – 272 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0025764 Guilford , J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . American Psychologist , 5 , 444 – 454 . Hirtz , J . , Stone , R . B . , McAdams , D . A . , Szykman , S . , & Wood , K . L . ( 2002 ) . A functional basis for engineering design : reconciling and evolving previous efforts . Research in Engineering Design , 13 ( 2 ) , 65 – 82 . Hocevar , D . ( 1979 ) . Ideational ﬂuency as a confounding factor in the measurement of originality . Journal of Educational Psychology , 71 ( 2 ) , 191 – 196 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 71 . 2 . 191 Hokanson , B . ( 2007 ) . By measure : creativity in design . Industry and Higher Education , ( October ) , 353 – 359 . Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 ) . Analogy and relational reasoning . In K . J . Holyoak , & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 234 – 260 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Hudson , L . ( 1968 ) . Frames of mind : Ability , perception and self - perception in the arts and sciences . Oxford , UK : W . W Norton . Jansson , D . G . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Design ﬁxation . Design Studies , 12 , 3 – 11 . Jeong , C . , & Kim , K . ( 2014 ) . Creating patents on the new technology using analogy - based patent mining . Expert Systems with Applications , 41 ( 8 ) , 3605 – 3614 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1989 ) . Analogy and the exercise of creativity . In S . Vosniadou , & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 313 – 331 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Kendeou , P . , Papadopoulos , T . C . , & Spanoudis , G . ( 2012 ) . Processing demands of reading comprehension tests in young readers . Learning and Instruction , 22 ( 5 ) , 354 – 367 . Klahr , D . , & Dunbar , K . ( 1988 ) . The psychology of scientiﬁc discovery : search in two problem spaces . Cognitive Science , 12 , 1 – 48 . Linsey , J . , Markman , A . , & Wood , K . ( 2012 ) . Design by analogy : a study of the WordTree method for problem re - representation . Journal of Mechanical Design , 134 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4006145 Mann , D . ( 2001 ) . An introduction to TRIZ : the theory of inventive problem solving . Creativity and Innovation Management , 10 ( 2 ) , 123 – 125 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8691 . 00212 National Science and Technology Council . ( 2013 ) . Federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) education 5 - year strategic plan . Washington , DC : Government Printing Ofﬁce . Noguchi , H . ( 1997 ) . An idea generation support system for industrial designers . Knowledge - Based Systems , 10 ( 1 ) , 37 – 42 . Nordstrom , K . , & Korpelainen , P . ( 2011 ) . Creativity and inspiration for problem solving in engineering education . Teaching in Higher Education , 16 ( 4 ) , 439 – 450 . Obama , B . ( 2011 ) . State of the Union address . Address delivered January , 27 , 2011 : Washington , DC . Okudan , G . E . , Ogot , M . , & Shirwaiker , R . ( 2006 ) . An investigation on the effectiveness of design ideation using TRIZ . In Proceedings of IDETC / CIE 2006 Design Education Conference . Pahl , G . , Beitz , W . , Feldhusen , J . , & Grote , K . H . ( 2007 ) . . Engineering design : a systematic approach ( Vol . 157 ) Springer Science & Business Media . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 84628 - 319 - 2 Passig , D . , & Cohen , L . ( 2014 ) . Measuring the style of innovative thinking among engineering students . Research in Science and Technological Education , 32 ( 1 ) , 56 – 77 . Plucker , J . A . , & Makel , M . C . ( 2010 ) . Assessment of creativity . In J . C . Kaufman , & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of creativity ( pp . 48 – 73 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Ramde , D . ( 2009 ) . Energy - efﬁcient trafﬁc lights can’t melt snow . Associated Press . Rapp , D . N . , & Kendeou , P . ( 2009 ) . Noticing and revising discrepancies as texts unfold . Discourse Processes , 46 ( 1 ) , 1 – 24 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01638530802629141 Richland , L . E . , & McDonough , I . M . ( 2010 ) . Learning by analogy : discriminating between potential analogs . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 35 ( 1 ) , 28 – 43 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cedpsych . 2009 . 09 . 001 Runco , M . A . , & Mraz , W . ( 1992 ) . Scoring divergent thinking tests using total ideational output and a creativity index . Educational and Psychological Measurement , 52 ( 1 ) , 213 – 221 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 001316449205200126 Runco , M . A . , Millar , G . , Acar , S . , & Cramond , B . ( 2010 ) . Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking as predictors of personal and public achievement : a ﬁfty - year follow - up . Creativity Research Journal , 22 ( 4 ) , 361 – 368 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2010 . 523393 Sartori , J . , Pal , U . , & Chakrabarti , A . ( 2010 ) . A methodology for supporting “transfer” in biomimetic design . AIEDAM , 24 , 483 – 506 . Schweppe , J . , & Rummer , R . ( 2014 ) . Attention , working memory , and long - term memory in multimedia learning : an integrated perspective based on process models of working memory . Educational Psychology Review , 26 ( 2 ) , 285 – 306 . Shah , J . J . , Smith , S . , & Vargas - Hernandez , N . ( 2003 ) . Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Design Studies , 24 ( 2 ) , 111 – 134 . Shah , J . J . , Millsap , R . E . , Woodward , J . , & Smith , S . M . ( 2012a ) . Applied tests of design skills . Journal of Mechanical Design , 134 ( 2 ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4005594 Shah , J . J . , Millsap , R . E . , Woodward , J . , & Smith , S . M . ( 2012b ) . Applied tests of design skills—part I : divergent thinking . Journal of Mechanical Design , 134 ( 2 ) , 021005 . Shah , J . J . , Woodward , J . , & Smith , S . M . ( 2013 ) . Applied tests of design skills − part II : visual thinking . Journal of Mechanical Design , 135 ( 7 ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4024228 Shulyak , L . , & Rodman , S . ( 1998 ) . 40 principles : TRIZ keys to innovation . Worcester , MA : Technical Innovation Center , Inc . Silvia , P . J . , Martin , C . , & Nusbaum , E . C . ( 2009 ) . A snapshot of creativity : evaluating a quick and simple method for assessing divergent thinking . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 4 ( 2 ) , 79 – 85 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2009 . 06 . 005 Silvia , P . J . ( 2008 ) . Creativity and intelligence revisited : a latent variable analysis of Wallach and Kogan ( 1965 ) . Creativity Research Journal , 20 ( 1 ) , 34 – 39 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400410701841807 Silvia , P . J . ( 2011 ) . Subjective scoring of divergent thinking : examining the reliability of unusual uses , instances , and consequences tasks . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 6 ( 1 ) , 24 – 30 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2010 . 06 . 001 Sinatra , G . M . , & Broughton , S . H . ( 2011 ) . Bridging reading comprehension and conceptual change in science education : the promise of refutation text . Reading Research Quarterly , 46 ( 4 ) , 374 – 393 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / RRQ . 005 Sprenger , A . M . , Atkins , S . M . , Bolger , D . J . , Harbison , J . I . , Novick , J . M . , Chrabaszcz , J . S . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Training working memory : limits of transfer . Intelligence , 41 ( 5 ) , 638 – 663 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2013 . 07 . 013 Sternberg , R . J . ( 2006 ) . The Rainbow Project : enhancing the SAT through assessments of analytical , practical , and creative skills . Intelligence , 34 ( 4 ) , 321 – 350 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2006 . 01 . 002 Takeuchi , H . , Taki , Y . , Hashizume , H . , Sassa , Y . , Nagase , T . , Nouchi , R . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Failing to deactivate : the association between brain activity during a working memory task and creativity . Neuroimage , 55 ( 2 ) , 681 – 687 . Torrance , E . P . ( 1962 ) . Guiding creative talent . NJ , US : Englewood Cliffs , Prentice - Hall , Inc . Torrance , E . P . ( 1964 ) . Multiphasic study of creativity . PsycCRITIQUES , 9 ( 7 ) , 277 – 278 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 007602 Torrance , E . P . ( 1972 ) . Predictive validity of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 6 ( 4 ) , 236 – 252 . Trickett , S . B . , Trafton , J . G . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2009 ) . How do scientists respond to anomalies ? Different strategies used in basic and applied science . Topics in Cognitive Science , 1 , 711 – 729 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1756 - 8765 . 2009 . 01036 . x Unsworth , N . , Fukuda , K . , Awh , E . , & Vogel , E . K . ( 2014 ) . Working memory and ﬂuid intelligence : capacity , attention control : and secondary memory retrieval . Cognitive Psychology , 71 , 1 – 26 . Vargas Hernandez , N . , Schmidt , L . , & Okudan , G . ( 2013 ) . Systematic ideation effectiveness study of TRIZ . Journal of Mechanical Design , 135 ( 10 ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4024976 , 101009 – 101009 66 D . Dumas et al . / Thinking Skills and Creativity 21 ( 2016 ) 50 – 66 Vartanian , O . , Jobidon , M . E . , Bouak , F . , Nakashima , A . , Smith , I . , Lam , Q . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Working memory training is associated with lower prefrontal cortex activation in a divergent thinking task . Neuroscience , 236 , 186 – 194 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroscience . 2012 . 12 . 060 Vattam , S . , Helms , M . , & Goel , A . ( 2010 ) . A content account of creative analogies in biologically inspired design . AIEDAM , 24 , 467 – 481 . Wagner , T . ( 2012 ) . Educating the next Steve Jobs . Wall Street Journal , http : / / www . wsj . com / articles / SB10001424052702304444604577337790086673050 Waltz , J . A . , Knowlton , B . J . , Holyoak , K . J . , Boone , K . B . , Mishkin , F . S . , de Menezes Santos , M . , et al . ( 1999 ) . A system for relational reasoning in human prefrontal cortex . Psychological Science , 10 ( 2 ) , 119 – 125 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9280 . 00118