Method of Design through Mythology as Analogical Source for Product Service System Design Hung - Hsiang Wang Department of Industrial Design , National Taipei University of Technology wanghh @ mail . ntut . edu . tw XiaoTian Deng ∗ Doctoral Program in Design , College of Design , National Taipei University of Technology dengxtdesign @ gmail . com Ching - Ying Lin Department of Industrial Design , National Taipei University of Technology t108588030 @ ntut . org . tw Le - Geng Lin Department of Industrial Design , National Taipei University of Technology t108588031 @ ntut . org . tw ABSTRACT In the current environment , the product service system ( PSS ) , which can bring more value to customers and be helpful to sustainable development , is important for design education . This study pro - posed a new design method based on the innovation requirements of the product service system ( PSS ) in the growing market . The analogical reasoning ( AR ) , with mythology as the analogical source , is the basis of this new design method . In order to obtain inspiration from mythology and apply them into design , the AEIOU framework is used to analyze the design problem and the mythology in fea - ture and structure . In this study , we first reviewed previous related works and illustrated the framework of new design method . And then , we demonstrated an example to verify the new design method . Finally , this article puts forward suggestions and directions for fur - ther research of the method . Based on this new design method , designers can utilize mythology to provide innovative solutions of PSS in design education . CCS CONCEPTS • Applied computing ; • Education ; • E - learning ; KEYWORDS Analogical Reasoning , Product Service System , Design Method , Design Education ACM Reference Format : Hung - Hsiang Wang , XiaoTian Deng , Ching - Ying Lin , and Le - Geng Lin . 2020 . Method of Design through Mythology as Analogical Source for Prod - uct Service System Design . In 2020 3rd International Conference on Educa - tion Technology Management ( ICETM 2020 ) , December 17 – 19 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 6 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3446590 . 3446609 ∗ Corresponding author Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . ICETM 2020 , December 17 – 19 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8875 - 7 / 20 / 12 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3446590 . 3446609 1 INTRODUCTION In an increasingly competitive market environment , general prod - ucts themselves can no longer meet customers’ further needs . The product service system ( PSS ) can bring more value to customers . Integrating the design thinking of PSS into design education can cultivate students’ creativity and respond to the needs of the fu - ture market . However , the PSS contains both tangible products and intangible services . Compared with general products , more levels of content need to be considered in the design , which makes innovation more difficult . A more complex product service system can bring more value , but it may also make it harder for students to master than before in innovation . The analogical reasoning ( AR ) is an important thinking method that aims to match the similari - ties between existing knowledge ( source ) and unknown concepts ( target ) and generate new understandings or new solutions to the target through analogical mapping to achieve innovation [ 1 ] . The ability of AR is also closely linked to creativity . Design - by - analogy ( DbA ) is based on analogy reasoning , which realizes new designs through analogy , enhances design creativity [ 1 - 5 ] , and provides the possibility to produce innovative solutions for PSS [ 6 ] . Nevertheless , most the past DbA teaching research focused on the product itself and paid less attention to PSS . In addition , the service in PSS is intangible , while the analogical sources in the DbA are normally tangible artifacts . In DbA , finding the appro - priate source of analogy is a crucial step . From the perspective of modern anthropology , different behaviors of human beings have the same structure , especially the unique mythology , which can inspire the sustainable development for future generations who are deeply impacted by technological innovation . In addition to society , economy and environment , culture is also a closely related element of sustainable development [ 7 ] , which influences the ecologically sustainable future [ 8 ] . This kind of thinking hidden in the culture is worthy of in - depth study and widespread promotion , especially in mythology . Therefore , how to get inspiration from cultural phe - nomena , especially the mythologies , and apply them in design is worthy of further research . Market demand makes it necessary to introduce PSS in design education . Facing this more complex object , DbA has the potential to bring innovation to it . In addition , the past research on AR mostly focused on the product itself , and less research on PSS . Thus , based on the review of previous research , this study proposes a design 117 ICETM 2020 , December 17 – 19 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom Hung - Hsiang Wang et al . Figure 1 : Analogical reasoning framework method that integrates DbA and PSS , using the mythology as the analogical source , and demonstrates the design method through an example . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Analogical Reasoning ( AR ) The characteristic of AR is to use existing knowledge to solve current problems [ 1 ] . When faced with the problem of how to describe the internal structure of atoms , Ernest Rutherford proposed the " atomic solar system model " , which uses the known physical phenomenon of planets to revolve around the sun to describe the rotation of electrons around the nucleus , thereby describing the relationship between electrons and nuclei . This problem - solving feature of AR can create many novel solutions , which makes AR closely connected with creativity [ 1 , 4 , 9 ] . DbA is an innovative design method based on AR . This method matches the similarity of the target and the source in feature ( tangible things , e . g . surface ) or structure ( intangible things , e . g . relations between parts ) then extracts the corresponding feature or structure from the source ( i . e . mapping ) and applies it to the target to obtain a new design ( Figure 1 ) , Based on the innovative characteristics of AR , DbA is often used in teaching to cultivate students’ creativity [ 2 , 5 , 10 , 11 ] . AR focuses on the internal connections between representatives , not just the similarity in appearance [ 1 , 4 ] . The classic model of AR is " A : B : : C : D " ( that is , A to B is equivalent to C to D ) . For example , a bird’s nest is equivalent to a dog’s kennel . Although they have little similarity in appearance , their internal connections are the same because both of them are animals in the place of residence . The focus of AR is also applied to DbA . The ability to find and match the structural relationship between the target and the source and apply it on design is the core of DbA , which affects design innovation [ 1 , 4 ] . It can be seen that finding the appropriate source of AR and realizing the structure mapping between source and target are the core of AR . 2 . 2 Product Service System ( PSS ) In recent years , PSS has received extensive attention in innovation [ 12 ] . PSS not only includes products , but also integrates services and business models , focusing on the overall service system [ 13 ] . In the context of fierce market competition , bringing more value to customers is the core of the PSS [ 14 ] . In the past , printer manufactur - ers simply sold printers . As the market continues to saturate , some printer manufacturers have changed their business models , pro - viding free printer rental and maintenance services , while selling special ink cartridges . In this model , manufacturers provide not only printers , but a complete set of services from lease to maintenance . This reduces one - time input costs and equipment management costs for customers , and also brings more profits to manufacturers . PSS requirements can bring more value to customers , which makes innovation an essential element . PSS contains products and ser - vices that are integrated with each other . Students need to consider more levels of content . This makes PSS more difficult to design than traditional products , and it is a major challenge for students . [ 15 , 16 ] . PSS need methods that can provide innovative solutions for them . The internal drive of the PSS is to bring more value to customers , but it also needs to face more challenges . AR has the potential to help the PSS provide solutions . In teaching research , the help of AR on PSS is worthy of further exploration . 2 . 3 Sustainable Development and Culture Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs [ 17 ] . MacKenzie pointed that for sustainable development , people should not only consider economic factors , but also environmental and social factors , and people should evaluate the long - term and short - term consequences of actions [ 18 ] . PSS also conforms to the sustainable development nowadays . Enterprises that have transformed from manufacturing have proposed new product service models including leasing , independent maintenance and remanufacturing products , such as Philips lighting and Siemens wind power . In addition to society , economy and environment , culture is also a closely related element of sustainable development [ 7 ] . In the broad definition , culture refers to human art or mental work , as well as human thought and the development process of culture [ 19 ] . Culture shapes the meaning of development and determines how people behave in the world , especially production and consumption 118 Method of Design through Mythology as Analogical Source for Product Service System Design ICETM 2020 , December 17 – 19 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom Table 1 : AEIOU Descriptions AEIOU Descriptions Activities What actions and behaviors are people taking to reach goals ? Environments What is the overall setting in which the activities are taking place ? How are people behaving in the environment ? Interactions What are the basic interactions occurring for people to reach goals ? What effect do people have on activities and environment ? Objects What are all the details that form the environment ? How do objects relate to people , activities and interactions ? Users Who are the people being observed ? What are their personalities like ? How do they engage with other people to reach goals ? Figure 2 : Framework of new design method culture influences the ecologically sustainable future [ 8 ] . For exam - ple , the culture of life styles of health and sustainability ( LOHAS ) has changed the lifestyle of a lot of people in the last few decades , which drives more companies to provide sustainable products and services [ 20 ] . This kind of thinking hidden in the culture is worthy of in - depth study and widespread promotion . For example , since ancient times , the Dawu people in Taiwan have been guided by the flying fish god in mythology , stipulating that the tribe can only catch flying fish during the flying fish season , and can only catch fish other than flying fish after the flying fish season . In fact , this is the same as the fishing period of modern humans . It is consistent with the behaviour pattern during the fishing moratorium , so that all fishes can have opportunities for reproduction and recovery . Therefore , this study explores the concept of sustainable development hidden in its traditional culture from the mythology , and explores the shape , function , action of it , which can be regarded as the analogical source for modern life PSS . 3 STRUCTURE OF MEANINGS 3 . 1 Framework The design method proposed in this research is based on the frame - work of AR , combined with AEIOU [ 21 ] to describe the analogy between PSS design problems and mythology ( Figure 2 ) . AEIOU is a method that provides ethnographic researchers with a frame - work for recording and classifying observations and information about their subject’s Activities ( A ) , Environments ( E ) , Interactions ( I ) , Objects ( O ) , and Users ( U ) . The purpose of importing AEIOU is to distinguish descriptions of PSS design problems and mythology in Feature and Structure . Environments , Objects , and Users belong to the tangible Feature , Activities and Interactions belong to the intangible Structure ( Table 1 ) . 119 ICETM 2020 , December 17 – 19 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom Hung - Hsiang Wang et al . Figure 3 : The steps in the new design method 3 . 2 Definition and Mapping The steps of the new design method are developed based on the it’s framework ( Figure 3 ) . This design method uses the following steps for the design analysis and concept design . It corresponds to the stage A to B in the method framework . Stage A involves the design analysis of definition and mapping and Stage B involves the concept design of product and service . The steps are : ( A1 ) defining Activities , Environments , Interactions , Objects , and Users for target ; ( A2 ) defining Activities , Environments , Interactions , Objects , and Users for source ; ( A3 ) mapping the similar feature or structure from tar - get and source ; ( B1 ) according to the mapping , thinking out of the product concept ; ( B2 ) thinking out of the service concept . 4 VERIFICATION OF DESIGN METHODOLOGY 4 . 1 Design Task The design example in this research is a PSS design of the hand grip . The hand grip is a kind of exercise equipment which is suitable for exercise at home . The traditional hand grip is only used for grip exercises . However , with the increasing demand for services , the design of the hand grip from the perspective of the PSS is worth exploring . 4 . 2 Mythology of White Deer Mythologies are one of the most important components in the cultures of various nationalities . This study uses the mythology as the analogical source . In the classic mythology of the Thao nationality in Taiwan , the " Mythology of White Deer " tells the story of the Thao nationality’s settlement in Sun Moon Lake : " A long , long time ago , when a team of Thao hunters were hunting in the mountains , they found a big white deer . The hunters wanted to grab the antlers and capture the white deer . So , they drove the hunting dogs and chased the big white deer all the way over the mountains and cut the bark for signs . After chasing the white deer into the deep mountains , the Thao ancestors used hunting knives in the woods along the way . When everyone was exhausted , they saw a lake in front of them . The white deer chased by the Thao hunters was desperate and rushed into the lake . After that , these hunters hunted many wild animals in this area . In addition , there are many fish in the lake , and everyone is really happy . The lake area is not only beautiful and pleasant , but also has inexhaustible fish in the lake . It was a good place for the tribe to live in , so these hunters hurried to follow the signs of cutting the bark and return to the original community to bring in the tribe . Since then , Thao has settled in Sun Moon Lake " . 4 . 3 Design Analysis Analyzing the hand grip and the mythology of the white deer according to the five elements of AEIOU ( Table 2 ) . For example , the Activities of the hand grip is " grip exercise " and the Environments are " at home " ; Activities of the mythology of white deer are " hunt , find food , deliver good news , settle " . 4 . 4 Concept Design According to the previous analysis , the first thing is designing the hand grip itself ( Figure 4 ) . In the mythology of the white deer , hunters want to control the white deer by grabbing the antlers , which matches the gripping of the hand grip , so the hand grip is designed as an integrated hand grip , which is squeezed for exercise . In terms of shape , the protruding shape similar to antlers helps to grip and . Next , the service system of the hand grip is designed ( Figure 4 ) . In the mythology of white deer , hunters hunted animals in the mountains and found fish in Sun Moon Lake at the same time and brought the good news back to the family . In fact , with the popularity of the Internet , more and more people will share their exercise results on the Internet . Therefore , a communication module is installed inside the hand grip to upload the exercise data to the cloud and display it in the online community to share with friends and family . In general , the grip design of the grip is equivalent to the hunter grabbing the antlers and sharing the results of the exercise to the community , which is equivalent to sharing the information about the prey harvest with the tribe . 120 Method of Design through Mythology as Analogical Source for Product Service System Design ICETM 2020 , December 17 – 19 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom Table 2 : Design Analysis AEIOU Hand Grip ( target ) Mythology of White Deer ( source ) Activities grip exercise hunt , find food , deliver good news , settle Environments at home in the mountains , by the lake Interactions grasp catch , chase , drive Objects the use of a gripper allows people to exercise their grip in the process of chasing the white deer , the hunters discovered the fertile Sun Moon Lake and brought good news back to the ethnic group Users exerciser hunter Figure 4 : Hand grip product and service concept design 5 CONCLUSION In this study , we proposed a new design method for PSS , which used the mythology as the analogical source and shew the process from defining problems to concept design . And , this study used a conceptual design example of PSS design to verify the method of this study . This design example demonstrated the design method in a more systematic way and showed how to map the target and the source according to the relationship between target and source in five elements of AEIOU , and extract feature and structure to design the product and service . Based on the five elements of AEIOU , it can not only provide the designer with a faster understanding of the analogical source , but also provides qualitative standards , and has an auxiliary effect on the design decision - making . By using mythology as the analogical source , this new design method pro - vides the possibility in a more systematic way to produce innovative solutions for PSS in design education . 6 FUTURE WORK Considering the large number of applications in the future , this method needs to further establish a database of mythologies , so that designers can search for different mythologies from the database to get more and better inspirations . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank all who contributed to the study and the financial support of NTUT - SZU Joint Research Program under grant number NTUT - SZU - 109 - 10 . The authors sincerely thank Editor - in - chief and reviewers for their kind and constructive comments which led to substantial improvements of this paper . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Gentner , D . , and Markman , A . B . , 1997 , Structure mapping in analogy and simi - larity , American Psychologist , 52 ( 1 ) , pp . 45 - 56 . DOI : 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066x . 52 . 1 . 45 [ 2 ] Fu , K . , Chan , J . , Cagan , J . , Kotovsky , K . , Schunn , C . , and Wood , K . , 2013 , The meaning of “near” and “far” : the impact of structuring design databases and the effect of distance of analogy on design output , Journal of Mechanical Design , 135 ( 2 ) , pp . 021007 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4023158 [ 3 ] Fu , K . , Moreno , D . , Yang , M . , andWood , K . , 2014 , Bio - inspireddesign : anoverview investigatingopenquestionsfromthebroaderfieldofdesign - by - analogy , Journal of Mechanical Design , 136 , pp . 111102 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4028289 . [ 4 ] Gentner , D . , 1983 , Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy , Cognitive Science , 7 ( 2 ) , pp . 155 - 170 . DOI : 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog0702 _ 3 [ 5 ] Linsey , J . S . , Markman , A . B . , and Wood , K . L . , 2012 , Design by analogy : a study of the WordTree method for problem re - representation , Journal of Mechanical Design , 134 ( 4 ) , pp . 041009 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4006145 [ 6 ] Grandas , M . , Paola , D . , Blessing , L . , Luciënne , Yang , and Wood , K . , 2015 , " The potential of design - by - analogy methods to support product , service and prod - uct service systems idea generation , " International Conference on Engineering Design , ICED15 , 27 - 30 July . 121 ICETM 2020 , December 17 – 19 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom Hung - Hsiang Wang et al . [ 7 ] Nurse , K . , 2006 , Culture as the fourth pillar of sustainable development , Small states : economic review and basic statistics , 11 , pp . 28 - 40 . DOI : 10 . 14217 / smalst - 2007 - 3 - en [ 8 ] Haque , M . S . , 1999 , Thefateofsustainabledevelopmentunderneo - liberalregimes in developing countries , International Political Science Review , 20 ( 2 ) , pp . 197 - 218 . [ 9 ] Gentner , D . , Brem , S . , Ferguson , R . , and Wolff , P . 1997 . Analogy and creativity in theworksofJohannesKepler . InCreativethought : Aninvestigationofconceptual structures and processes , edited by T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith and J . Vaid , 403 - 459 . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . [ 10 ] Casakin , H . , 2004 , Visual analogy as a cognitive strategy in the design process : expert versus novice performance , Journal of Design Research , 4 ( 2 ) , pp . 124 . DOI : 10 . 1504 / JDR . 2004 . 009846 [ 11 ] Lenau , T . A . , Keshwani , S . , Chakrabarti , A . , and Ahmed - Kristensen , S . , 2015 , Biocards and level of abstraction , 20th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED15 ) : Design for Life , Milan , Italy , July 27 - 30 . [ 12 ] Diehl , J . C . , and Christiaans , H . , 2015 , " Product service systems : The future for designers ? the changing role of the industrial designer , " International Design Congress , Gwangju , Korea , 17 - 23 , October . [ 13 ] Annamalai Vasantha , G . , Roy , R . , Lelah , A . , and Brissaud , D . , 2012 , A Review of Product - Service Systems Design Methodologies , Journal of Engineering Design , 23 , pp . 635 - 659 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2011 . 639712 [ 14 ] Lockett , H . , Johnson , M . , Evans , S . , and Bastl , M . , 2011 , Product service sys - tems and supply network relationships : An exploratory case study , Jour - nal of Manufacturing Technology Management , 22 ( 3 ) , pp . 293 - 313 . DOI : 10 . 1108 / 17410381111112684 [ 15 ] Morelli , N . , 2002 , Designing product / service systems : A methodological explo - ration , Design Issues , 18 ( 3 ) , pp . 3 - 17 . DOI : 10 . 5040 / 9781474282932 . 0024 [ 16 ] Vezzoli , C . , Ceschin , F . , Diehl , J . C . , and Kohtala , C . , 2015 , New design challenges to widely implement ‘Sustainable Product – Service Systems’ , Journal of Cleaner Production , 97 , pp . 1 - 12 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . jclepro . 2015 . 02 . 061 [ 17 ] Imperatives , S . 1987 . Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development : Our common future . [ 18 ] MacKenzie , J . J . 1997 . Driving the road to sustainable ground transportation . In Frontiers of sustainability : environmentally sound agriculture , forestry , trans - portation , and power production , 121 - 190 . Washington , D . C . , USA : Island Press . [ 19 ] Williams , R . , 1981 , Culture , Fontana , Glasgow , Scotland . [ 20 ] Emerich , M . M . , 2011 , The gospel of sustainability : Media , market and LOHAS , University of Illinois Press , Champaign , IL . [ 21 ] Hanington , B . , and Martin , B . , 2012 , Universal methods of design : 100 ways to research complex problems , develop innovative ideas , and design effective solutions . , Rockport Publishers , Beverly , MA . 122