ICPM - 2012 . Crisis Management in the Time of Changing World © 2012 . The authors - Published by Atlantis Press Group Decision - Making Model of Control Experiments in Crisis Management Tian Haifeng 1 Liu Zezhao 1 , 2 1 Department of Business , Shaanxi Business College , Shaanxi Radio & TV University , Xi ` an , P . R . China , 710119 ) 2 Shaanxi Emergency Management Academy , Xi ` an , P . R . China , 71007 ( Emali : ecsi @ 163 . com ) Abstract As one of the most important technical decision model , Group Decision Supporting System ( GDSS ) has been paid more and more attention for its effects on constructing the group decision innovation capability and sustainable strategic competitiveness in the problem - solving tools . The study aims to explore the impacts of GDSS to decision process and decision effectiveness via series of urgencies , and furthermore analyze the differences of group decision process together with outcomes under different group decision making supporting mode . Additionally , by the specific control experiment our study ought to explore scientific model of urgent group decision as well as application scope and pre - assumptions . Keywords : group decision - making ; control experiment ; crisis urgency ; GDSS 1 . Introduction Research on Group Decision - making Supporting System ( GDSS ) involves fields of management , behavioral science , computer science , mathematics , psychology and sociology disciplines , which remains a study hot point in international conferences and academic journals . Watson et al ( 1988 ) [ 1 ] conducted an experimental study ; the results show that face - to - face GDSS members on group decision - making process presents higher satisfaction . Chun and Park ( 1998 ) [ 2 ] delivered a GDSS research literature review , pointing out that the GDSS group in some cases , some aspects will be better than the manual group and group without any outer support . Studies by Fjermestad and Hiltz ( 1998 ) [ 3 ] have shown no significant differences between GDSS supporting groups and face - to - face group with no supports . According to research done by Dennis and Gallupe ( 1993 ) [ 4 ] , Nunamaker et al ( 1991 ) [ 5 ] , there are three structures embedded in the GDSS technology , which can lead the interactions between the groups , these three structures are the simultaneity , anonymity and process structured . Previous researchers from the following three aspects evaluate the impact of GDSS : effectiveness , efficiency , and participant satisfaction . ( Chun and Park , 1998 [ 2 ] ; Nunamaker et al . , 1991 ) [ 5 ] . Of all the evaluation indexes , the quantity of ideas , decision time , and decision quality and decision satisfaction are the most common ones . Generally , the application of GDSS would increase the quantity of ideas elevated . ( Dennis et al . , 1996 [ 6 ] ; Hung et al . , 1997 [ 7 ] ) . The idea quantity is also the alternative option in our study . Some research indicate that compared to face - to - face group , GDSS group need more decision time , just as Easton ( 1989 ) [ 8 ] and Lewis ( 1982 ) [ 9 ] did . Although previous research results on GDSS decision quality appear some conflicts , GDSS groups in general raise the items . Decision quality is already used in many GDSS positive research to measure the effectiveness of group work ( Sambamurthy , Poole , 1992 [ 10 ] ) . Some positive study found that satisfactions of GDSS group participants are higher than non - GDSS counterparts , ( Dennis et al . 1990 [ 11 ] ; Post 1992 [ 12 ] ; Vogel and Nunamaker 1990 [ 13 ] ) . Other relevant experiments manifests the opposite analysis or results . ( Easton et al . , 1989 [ 8 ] ; Gallupe , 1990 [ 14 ] ; Watson , 1988 [ 1 ] ) . The main conclusion above is generally built on the typical business decision - making problems ; however , there is little research on 210 the complexity aspects of sudden crisis event group decision - making . It is necessary to study the system support and manually difference about complex group decision - making in order to elevate the GDSS theory and technology to improve efficiency and effectiveness of group decision making . 2 . Control experiment and technical design 2 . 1 . Experiment objective We use the control experiment to test differences of group decision process and results performances by crisis urgencies decisions under different decision supporting model . Control experiment is one of testing method frequently used in scientific research , which is applied to find the influence from target factors to specific test . Typically , one control experiment is divided into experimental group and control group , of which the experimental group admits variable handling while control group does not . By controlling other variables and randomly assigning members of experimental group & control group , make irrelevant variable a considerable impact on the experimental and control groups . Therefore , the differences between two sectors above could be regarded as the leading factor by experimental variables . In our study , we offer or do not offer GDSS for experimental participants , and explore impacts from group decision process by GDSS through comparing , analyzing results of control experiment . Additionally , we also expect to find the weakness as well as shortcomings of GDSS in order to lay positive foundations for the improvement and application scope of GDSS . 2 . 2 . Procedural designs The experiment applied 2 * 3 factor design , and is divided into experimental group and control group according to the system support . Each group ought to face the same crisis urgency which is cut in three stages , and every group need offer a team of alternative options to make group decision in each stage . In the end , one option case will be chosen as the final solution for the team . Each group owns the same hardware resources and gets the task done independently . Also each group would acquire the current spot - time scenario information of crisis urgencies by the projection scream tool . Every member in the team owns a computer connecting the Internet , but they are only permitted to use GDSS system ( namely system team below ) ; members of control group are not allowed to use GDSS system , but are permitted to search the similar incidents in the history at their own disposal ( we call it as manual team below ) . One point should be instructed that each group at the very beginning should raise the alternative options , and then make the final program in order for group decision . In the stage of alternatives , members need to raise one program without any mutual exchange . System group check example case by CBR and then raise program , while manual group with no GDSS finish the step through individual experience as well as the internet . In the group decision stage , members of system group achieve anonymous exchanges by Bulletin Board offered from system , and provide AHP score through GDSS . By system setback the process could not end until certain common sense achieved . When designing testing questions of urgent crisis , the task in three stages will be divided into 3 categories according to the complexity , namely simple , general complex , complex . At the same time , every stage all establishes a set of program as the “standard key” . In detail , each experiment simulates a group decision process under the context of urgent crisis , such as tsunami , rainstorm . All the experimental subjects are originated from the true historical incidents , and take into account of possible best decision in the specific environment . If the decision was a failure one , we would adjust them correspondingly . 211 3 . Control experiment process The experiment is divided by system group and manual group just as the Figure1 shows below . Fig . 1 Experiment group and process 212 3 . 1 . System groups embedded with GDSS For system group , each stage is comprised of three parts : Display current disaster information The host is responsible for providing current information of urgent incident for experimental participants , including disaster state quo , development , side effects , etc . Raise alternative options participants select traits of disaster according to current development , and carry out search about historical examples by the use of CBR deductive system . Through this step , it ought to search the correspondent crisis decision program . Each participant makes discrepancy analysis and predictions according to the incomplete disaster information admitted . Each participant analyzes the known information , and ought to raise the alternative as the optional program accompanying with their own judgment , experiences , tuition , knowledge and preferences . The optional program ought to be stored and submitted to the host . the group decision After accumulating all the alternatives raised by the participants , the host takes the merger process , and chooses the feasible options as the option sets for all participants . With the aid of GDSS participants start to make group decisions via human - computer interaction . Entering GDSS , participants make anonymous discussion and mutual comparison among different programs . After that according to the preferences , each takes score and submits the results . GDSS makes back accounting in ref - erence to the score table , put forward such indexes consistency , conscious differences , assertive , and return to every participants . Participants achieve a comprehensive understanding for oneself according to the feedback , and then enter into the next round for scoring . The system repeats process a . b . c . until the host believes agreement has been achieved . Put the agreed case into the data sto rage for better use after . In the total process , GDSS makes time mark for every options as well as the process achieved , and takes record of consistency , conscious differences , assertive aspects . After agreement in each stage , the process enter into next one , this time information of a new urgent incident could be checked for a new round group decision . 3 . 2 . Manual group without GDSS support For the traditional face - to - face group decision group , each stage is comprised of three parts : After the experiment the host display current information of urgent crisis for participants , including disaster status quo , development , side disaster happening . The host is not supposed to provide GDSS and supporting function . Manual groups do not offer thesame example with aid of CBR , only in the assistance of individual experiences and internet search . With the face to face discussion and simple record , participants make record of agreed program , while each one scores according to the relative degree of significance and preference judgment . Therefore , members of manual group could not be able to achieve such feedback indexes of consistency , conscious differences as well as assertive After all the three stages , aside from the final feedback of standard answer from experimental participants , the system also issued satisfaction survey papers for appraisal of experiment process ( only adaptive to system group ) . 213 4 Analysis of experimental results 4 . 1 . Relevance between the assertive natures with system among participants The assertive nature in the system group remains a relative low standard , which indicates participants present a well recognition for different options under the system support . Additionally , as time went by , system team remains a more stable assertive nature while the manual team grows worse . with development of group decision our opinion is that decision - makers could become anxious for the previous option through comparisons among other examples , and quit previous view for the mainstream one . While the incidents become more and more serious as well as complicated decision problems , participants could be more willing to accept outer opinions and make adjustments . System group is able to harvest specific intuitive results and remain assertive nature by independent thoughts . On the contrary , manual group is more easily influenced from outer elements due to face - to - face discussion and therefore the assertive nature become worse . 4 . 2 . Relevance between the decision efficiency with system among participants In the aspect of search time for alternatives , the part of system group averages 8 . 1 minutes . Owing to each search in the current state of incident , participants would manifest significant difference in reading and presenting options . Additionally , from the standard deviation the first stage remains higher , just because different participant keep various in acquaintance with system time . In the next round , deviation is gradually less indicating 214 the applicability becomes less to individual effects , and participants are in familiar with the system . In the manual group , the average search time in every stage remains 10 . 2 minute and grows less gradually , we believe that participants have master relevant skills in searching data on the internet and consider the former state ( namely the assistance of every search for disaster incidents ) . From the standard deviation every stage varies less possibly due to its searching capabilities . In the aspect of decision time , the manual group could experience a process of long discussion before individual scoring , but the consensus time still faster than the system group . The decision time is longer just because system group has achieved consensus through many round group decision . While the speed in manual group remains higher after long discussions . If the quality of group decision has an obvious elevation , we believe all the time cost is worthwhile . 5 . Conclusions According to the analysis of control experimental results for GDSS disaster group decision , we could conduct the following conclusions : a . the system use could keep assertive nature for participants , and assertive nature of manual team is unstable even becomes more and more worse ; b . due to support of case data as well as data search system , time of alternative in every stage is superior to manual team ; c . the system support could effectively improve degree of consensus for participants , but could not effectively lessen decision time ; d . decision effects of system team keep growing stably , while the part of manual one remains unstable . e . on the condition of more complex crisis incidents in the experimental test subjects , the effect of GDSS indicates better for group decision . The face - to - face group decision becomes even better for relative simple problems . References [ 1 ] Watson R . T . , DeSanctis G . L , Poole M . S . “Using a GDSS to facilitate group consensus : some intended and unintended consequences” . MIS Quarterly , 1988 . 12 ( 3 ) : 463 - 478 . [ 2 ] Chun K . J , Park H . K . 1998 . “Examining the conflicting results of GDSS research” . Information & Management , 33 ( 6 ) : 313 - 325 . [ 3 ] Fjermestad J , Hiltz S . R . 1998 . “An assessment of group support of systems experiment research : methodology and results” . Journal of Management Information Systems , 15 ( 3 ) : 7 - 149 . [ 4 ] Dennis A . R , Gallupe R . B . 1993 . “A history of group support systems empirical research : lessons learned and future directions” . Jessup L . M , Valacich J . S , Group Support Systems : new perspectives . New York : Macmillan Publishing Company . [ 5 ] Nunamaker J . F , Dennis A . R , Valacich J . R , et al . “Electronic meeting systems to support group work” . Communications of the ACM , 1991 , 34 ( 7 ) : 40 - 61 . 215 [ 6 ] Dennis A . R . “Information exchange and use in group decision making : you can lead a group to information , but you can’t make it think” . MIS Quarterly , 1996 , 20 ( 4 ) : 433 - 457 . [ 7 ] Huang S . Y , Huang J . S , et al . “Revisiting the effects of electronic meeting systems : a meta - analysis of literature” . Proceedings of the Third Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems . Brisbane , Australia : Queensland University of Technology . 1997 . [ 8 ] Easton A . C , Vogel D . R . “Stakeholder identification and assumption surfacing in small groups : an experimental study” . The Twenty - Second Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) . Hawaii , USA : IEEE Computer Society Press . 1989 . [ 9 ] Lewis L . F . “Facilitator : A Microcomputer Decision Support System for Small Groups” . University of Louisville . 1982 . [ 10 ] Sambamurthy V , Poolo , M . S . “The effects of variations in capabilities of GDSS designs on management of cognitive conflict in groups” . Infor mation System Research . 1992 , 3 ( 3 ) : 224 - 251 . [ 11 ] Dennis A . R . Heming A . R , Nunamaker J . F . “Bringing automated support to large groups : the burr - brown experience” . Information and Management , 1990 , 18 ( 3 ) : 111 - 121 . [ 12 ] Post B . Q . “A business case framework for group support technology” . Journal of Management Information Systems , 1992 , 9 ( 3 ) : 7 - 26 . [ 13 ] Vogel D , Nunamaker J . F . “Group decision support system impact : multi - methodological exploration” . Information and Management , 1990 , 18 ( 1 ) : 15 - 28 . [ 14 ] Gallup R . B . MaKeen J . D . “Enhancing computer - mediated communications : an experimental investigation into the use of a group decision support system for face - to - face versus remote meetings” . Information & Management , 1990 , 18 ( 1 ) : 1 - 13 . 216