Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Developing and Validating an Instrument to Measure the Impact of Group Support Technology on Affective Reward Bruce A . Reinigl , Robert 0 . Briggs ' , Morgan M . Shepherd ' , Jerome Yen2 , Jay F . Nunamaker , Jr . 1 1 University of Arizona Tucson , AZ 85721 breinig @ bpa . arizona . edu Abstract Research shows that Group Support S : vstems ( GSS ) have dramatically increased group productivity . However , researchers in the field discovered that users sometimes find themselves feeling emotionally unfuljilled despite exceptionally good results . They report a loss of the affective reward often associated with a challenging meeting where they struggle and succeed . This lack of engagement has been documented to be a cause of user resistance to adopting GSS technology . Team effectiveness may be reduced over time as users seek less - effective but more - engaging alternatives . This paper presents preliminary theory development framing affective reward as a $ unction of excitation transfer . It describes the development and validation of an instrument to measure affective reward , and presents the results of the first laboratory investigation of the construct . 1 : Introduction Group Support Systems ( GSS ) are an emerging technology with the potential to dramatically increase group productivity . GSS field stules have shown average labor savings of 50 % - 70 % , and reductions in project cycle time ( days elapsed from start date to finish date ) averaging 90 % ( Nunamaker , et al . , 1989 ; Post , 1992 ; Vogel , et , al . , 1989 - 90 ) . A great deal is now known about how and when a GSS can improke productivity ( Dennis & Gallupe , 1993 ) , although much remains to be learned . Features such as parallel and anonymous contributions can overcome process losses like production blocking and evaluation apprehension , permitting much larger groups to collaborate than would otherwise be possible ( Connolly , Jessup , & Valacich , 1990 ; Gallupe , et al , 1992 ; Valacich , Dennis . & Connolly , 1994 ) . Many studies report higher quality outcomes and higher satisfaction for groups using GSS ( For reviews See Bembasat & Lim , 1993 ; Dennis , Nunamaker , & Vogel , 1991 ; Dennis & Gallupe , 1993 ; Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Kowloon , Hong Kong Fjermestad , filtz , & Turoff , 1993 ) . The assimilation of GSS into the business routine is now a topic of considerable interest ( Applegate , 199 1 ) . A great deal has been written about innovation , adoption and m s i o n of information technologies . Much of the existing literature examines these phenomena using an organizational ( Cooper & Zmud , 1990 ; Daft , 1978 ; Moch & Morse , 1977 ) ; sector ( Bretschneider & Wittmer . 1993 ) ; or societal unit of analysis ( Fried , 1993 ) . King , et al . ( 1994 ) found that institutions at all of these levels affected technological innovation . Much less has been written about innovation using the individual as a unit of analysis . Cooper & Zmud ( 1990 ) argued that characteristics of the user community - - Job tenure . education , and resistance to change - - are important considerations for diffusion of information technology in adltion to characteristics of the organization , task , and organizational environment Field experience with GSS suggested a new construct , affective reward , at the individual unit of analysis that is critical to understanding the adoption and diffusion of this emerging technology The issue first surfaced when several executives from a Fortune 500 company used an electronic meeting system for an annual tactical planning meeting . In the five previous years the meeting had taken three days . With a GSS , the group accomplished its task in under two hours , and all participants agreed that the results were more detailed and of substantially higher quality than in past years . Satisfaction with the outcome was high Nonetheless , when questioned about how they liked the electronic meeting process , the participants were uniformly negative . The comments ran along these lines , " It went pretty slowly . It left me feeling flat . It was a little boring . It felt kind of mundane and routine . " These responses surprised researchers , who were accustomed to enthusiastic reports of satisfaction with GSS use . Further questioning elicited responses like : " I ' ve made my career by being able to pound on the table , talk people down , and ram an agenda through a recalcitrant meeting . Aftenvards I feel charged up , It 798 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 4 . 00 0 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 feels like I scored a touchdown . It just doesn ' t feel like I ' ve won with this electronic meeting system . " Despite the productive session , the executives were reluctant to use the technology again . Other GSS users in the field have since voiced similar sentiments ; they missed the affective reward , or sense of emotional gratification often expressed by participants after a successful meeting . Thus , championship of GSS may be limited by low affective reward , leadmg to slow or no hffusion of the technology . In order to investigate , an instrument to measure affective reward is required . This paper presents a theoretical model relating affective reward to the difision of GSS technology and describes the process of developing and testing a measurement instrument . It then suggests a theoretical foundation for the occurrence of affective reward , and reports the results of the first experiments manipulating GSS design and facilitation techniques to impact the construct . 2 : ' Theory People experiencing low affective reward with GSS may choose lower - productivity methods in order to strengthen group well - being - - methods that engender more desirable patterns of group development ( Poole & DeSanctis , 1990 ; Poole & Jackson , 1993 ; Mennecke , Hoffer , & Wynne , 1992 ; McGrath , 1991 ) . The successful adoption of GSS technology in an organization requires a strong internal champion ( Vogel , Nunamaker , Applegate , & Konsynski . 1987 . Grohowski et al . , 1990 ) . Yet anecdotal evidence suggests that some people who would be likely champions for GSS find it singularly unrewarding . Thus , because low affective reward may be a barrier to adoption of GSS by some groups , it becomes important to reach an understanding of the construct and to determine what role . if any , it may play in group development and diffusion of technology . Figure 1 . Affective Reward and The Adoption of GSS Technology It is possible that the affective reward displayed bj some participants after ngorous - but - successful meetings may be an instance of excitation transfer . Excitation Transfer Theory posits that people will attribute whatever physiological arousal they feel to a salient stimulus in their environment , even if that stimulus was not the initial cause of the arousal ( Zanna & Cooper , 1974 ) . ( Figure 1 . ) Shachter & Singer ( 1962 ) found that subjects receiving secret doses of adrenaline would attribute their resulting arousal to either rage or hilarity , matching their mood to the behavior of an accomplice in the experimental setting . Subjects in cognitive hssonance experiments were shown to mis - attribute arousal from counter - attitudinal advocacy to a bogus lie detector ( Stultz , Messe , & Kerr , 1984 ) or to a placebo pill which they believed would make them tense ( Zanna & Cooper , 1974 ) . Subjects who became physiologically aroused by running in place mis - attributed their arousal to anger when placed in situations that pre - disposed them to aggression , unless they were reminded that their arousal came from running ( Zillman , 1972 ) . Table - pounding , arguments , and face - to - face confrontations in unsupported meetings may lead to physiological arousal . At the end of a meeting the participants may attribute that arousal to their satisfaction with the process and outcomes , resulting in high affective reward . GSS eliminates many traditional meeting behaviors that induce arousal - - shouting , pounding and heated debates - - whch could account for reduced affective reward in people whose normal meeting style is active and confrontational . Thus , the reduction of physiological arousal in a GSS meeting may reduce excitation transfer , leading to lower affective reward , and a lower probability of adoption and diffusion . 3 : Developing the Affective Reward Instrument If affective reward derives from increased physiological arousal , then one would expect behavioral cues of arousal from those experiencing affective reward . We observed that GSS users who reported hgh affective reward also tended to marufest such cues . They tended to move into closer clusters ( proxemic cues ) use louder , faster speech ( vocalic cues ) , exaggerate body movements ( kinesic cues ) handshakes and back - pats ( haptic cues ) ( Burgoon , 1985 ) . These cues tended to accompany positive statements about the process and outcomes of their meetings , as in " We really accomplished something today ! " Users reporting low affective reward dld not manifest these cues . We interviewed a number of meeting facilitators and observed participanis to collect sayings that accompany displays of high arousal . We then paraphrased the statements into 28 questionnaire items . Some of the items in the original were paraphrased to the reverse of users ' quotes . For example , several users said things like , " We won , " or " That felt like a win . " We paraphrased that into " It felt like we won ( agreehsagree ) 799 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii intemational Conference on System Sciences - I995 Overall Measures of Sampling Adequacy Data Data Set I Set 2 N 168 107 Bartlett ' s 2190 . 82 1474 . 22 P = . oooo . oooo Overall KMO . go46 . go48 Cronbach ' s a . 9192 . 9247 and " It felt like we lost " ( agree / disagree ) . We framed 20 of the items as 7 - point Likert scales , and the other 8 items as 7 - point semantic anchor differentials . We framed the Likert scale questions with both " Strongly Agree " and " Strongly Disagree " on the left - hand side . We oriented half the answers so that high affective reward corresponded with a high score and half so that high affective reward corresponded with a low score . We framed some of the questions in a positive tone ( i . e . " It felt like we won " ) and others in a negative tone ( i . e . " It felt like we lost " ) . The directionality and tone of the questions were approximately balanced across the instrument . Combined Data 275 3324 . 00 . oooo . 9332 . 9211 3 . 1 : Measures of Internal Consistency We collected two data sels to validate the preliminary affective reward instrument : one to test which of the items on the instrument , if any , appeared to be measuring the same construct . We used the second data set to test whether the first results were consistent with a different sample . We collected the first set of data from 168 subjects . We conducted several statistical tests to determine whether our data were appropriate for factor analysis . A preliminary examination of paired correlations showed that one item did not correlate with any of the others . Consequently , it was dropped from subsequent analysis . The overall Kaiser - Meyer - Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy ( KMO ) for the remaining 27 items was 0 . 9046 ( Table 1 ) . All but one of the KMO values for the individual items was in the high 0 . 80 ' s and 0 . 90 ' s , indicating a strong relationship between the items ( Norusis , 1990 ) . Bartlett ' s test for sphericity suggested that the sample was drawn from a multivariate normal population ( Table 1 ) . Inter - item reliability was high ( Table 1 ) . Based on these tests , we concluded that a factor analysis would be appropriate . 2 ) . No item loaded heavily on any other factor . The Eigen value for the first factor was 9 . 8 ; the value of the second factor was 1 . 78 ( Table 3 ) . A scree test suggested that a one - factor model of Affective reward would be sufficient ( Cattell , 1966 ; Norusis , 1990 ) . We formed a scale of the 21 items , which yielded a Cronbach ' s alpha for inter - item reliability of 0 . 929 , indicating the scale was quite reliable ( Table 4 ) . Thus , the analyses of the first data set suggested strong internal consistency for the 21 - item scale . Table 2 . Factor Analysis Coefficients for Factor I . Items in gray did not load on Factor 1 with both data sets . 11 Variable I Data I Data I Combined 11 AROUSING 1 . 51106 I . 68961 I . 58659 EFFICIEN I . 68172 I , 66703 I . 67583 ACCOMPLI I - 79698 I . 83979 I - 81251 WEWON . 62268 . 68405 . 64258 DISSATIS . 54024 . 71226 . 60652 RATEPROC . 76704 . 69855 . 73584 GRATIFY I . 66313 I . 82014 1 . 72746 BORING I . 69503 I . 76515 I . 71881 11 MOTINUM I . 71770 I . 66526 I - 69703 We replicated the validation with data from 107 new subjects . Results were similar to those from the first data set ( Tables 1 - 3 ) . In the second factor analysis , 20 items loaded on the first factor with a coefficient of 0 . 50 or higher , and no item loaded heavily on any other factor . 800 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Table 3 . Data 10 - 41 10 . 01 1 . 66 1 . 54 Only 17 of the of the 20 items were also in the 2 1 - item scale developed from the first data set . Therefore we made a scale of the 17 items that loaded in both analyses . The 17 item scale yielded an inter - item reliability of 0 . 922 . All 17 items correlated with every other item at a level of significance of p < 0 . 01 . We concluded that all 17 ilems measure components of the same construct and that it was appropriate to combine them into a scale . Appendix A presents the exact wording of the questions in the scale . # Items - 9364 . 9223 11 Standardized I . 9308 I - 9371 I . 9227 4 : Testing the Sensitivity of the Instrument In order for an instrument to be regarded as useful , it must be sensitive enough to differentiate between subjects that receive different stimuli . We conducted a controlled laboratory experiment to test the sensitivity of our instrument , and to gain our first insights into the nature of the phenomenon . We reasoned that it might be possible to induce physiological arousal during GSS by creating a sensc of competition . A number of studies have demonstrated the social comparison effect : people tend to inatch their level of effort to the level of effort being expended by those around them ( Goethals & Darley , 1987 ; Seta . Seta , & Donaldson , 1991 ) . An individual placed in a high - performing group will typically produce more than an individual placed in a low - performing group ( Paulus & Dzindolet 1993 ) . Paulus . Dzindolet , & Camacho ( 1993 ) discovered that they could induce social comparison effects by comparing the performance of a present group to the performance of an absent and mythical " average " group . We reasoned that if we used technology to put a group in competition with a mythical standard group , the competition might induce arousal . which subjects could , in turn . transfer to affective reward . We reasoned that as the salience of comparison increased , the sense of competition would increase , leading to more arousal , and consequently more affective reward . This line of reasoning led us to our first hypothesis : HI : As the salience of social comparison increases , the degree of aflective reward will increase . Goal - setting literature shows that groups with a difficult goal are more productive than groups with an easy goal ( Locke , et al . , 1981 ; Locke & Latham , 1990 ; Prichard , Jones , & Roth , 1990 ) . We reasoned that working towards a cognitively and physically challenging goal might induce physiological arousal which might , in turn , result in affective reward . This line of reasoning led us to our second hypothesis : H2 : As the dfjciculty of achieving the goal increases , [ he degree of affective reward will increase . 4 . 1 : Technology Description We tested our hypotheses using an electronic brainstorming tool . In electronic brainstorming the group members contribute their ideas simultaneously and anonymously by typing into computer . The system immediately makes all contributions available to other members of the group on their screens ( Nunamaker , et al . . 1991 ; Dennis . Valacich , & Nunmiker , 1991 ) . Groups using electronic brainstorming have been shown to be more productive than both unsupported traditional groups and nominal groups ( Gallupe , et al . , 1992 ; Valacich , Dennis & Connolly , 1994 ) . Groups use electronic brainstorming to define problems , identrfy alternative courses of action , identlfy criteria for alternative evaluation , develop strategies , and many other business tasks . Subjects in our experiment used the tool to generate solutions to problems in an imaginary school of business . In order to establish a basis for social comparison and goal setting , we developed an electronic graph display whch , when projected on a front screen , showed how many lines of text had been contributed over time ( Figure 2 ) . The more text the group typed in , the higher the graph would go . The graph permitted experimenters to set goals of varying difficulty , and provided a basis for establislling social comparison with a mythical " average group . " The horiLonta1 line at the middle of the graph was presented to subjects as ! * the baseline " - - the performance of the mythical average group . The experimenter could assign any value to that 801 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 199 . 5 line ; the rest of the graph would automatically rescale itself accordingly . The graph updated every 15 seconds , so subjects could keep track of their performance on a moment by moment basis . The graph plotted in red below the baseline , and in green above the baseline . The background color of the graph gave the subjects additional feedback about their performance . It could change colors every 15 seconds . If fewer than 4 lines of text came in during the previous minute , the background turned black . When four to eight lines of text came in , the background turned gray . If the group submitted more than eight lines of text . the background turned blue . Figure 2 . Graph Display Tool Vertical Axis : Lines of Text Horizontal Axis : Time in Minutes There was concern that the subjects might not glance at the graph as they worked , so several features were built in to attract attention . First , rather than simply adding a bar every 15 seconds , the entire screen cleared and the tool redrew the whole graph , a process that took about 1 second . Second , if the update included a color change , the graph redrew itself twice . Third , when the graph reached the baseline , the tool produced a 5 - second stylized fireworks display to attract attention to the event . In pilot studies , the subjects glanced at the graph an average of 15 times during a 40 minute session . 4 . 2 : Subjects Two - hundred - eighty - five male and female students in four sections of an Introduction to Computer Technology course volunteered to participate and were given extra credit for their involvement . Subjects were randomly assigned to groups of five , and each group was randomly assigned to a treatment . 4 . 3 : Task In a moderate - ambiguity variation on the School of Business task ( Wheeler & Mennecke , 1992 ) , subjects used electronic brainstorming to propose solutions for wicked problems in an imaginary school of business . We assigned each subject to one of five roles : Associate Dean , President of the Student Council . President of the Alumni Association , Chaxperson of the Faculty Council , and Vice President of Undergraduate Instruction . Each was given a packet containing information about the assigned role . Each role had different information and a different interest in the outcome . Wood ( 1986 ) posits three lands of task complexity : component complexity ( number of acts and information cues required ) , coordinative complexity ( need for timing and coordination ) , and dynamic complexity ( degree to which the task requirements shift over time ) . In the School of Business task , the group faced a total of 19 inter - related problems such as declining budgets , over - crowded classrooms , declining reputation , and faculty resignations because of overwork . Solutions to any gwen problem tended to exacerbate other problems , and solutions favorable to one role tended to be unfavorable to another . T h s task is considerably more complex ( Wood , 1986 ) than tasks like the extra - thumb and lost - at - sea tasks often used in brainstorming research , more closely approximating the lands of problems faced in the business environment ( Mennecke & Wheeler , 1993 ) . The School of Business Task requires many more information cues and acts ( higher component complexity ) , much more coordination between cues , acts , and oiitcomes ( higher coordinative complexity ) . 4 . 4 : Treatments We manipulated two independent variables for this experiment : social comparison and goal difficulty . There were three levels of social comparison : none , low salience , and hgh salience . There were two no - social - comparison control treatments . The first used electronic brainstorming without a graph . The second control treatment provided no basis for social comparison by using a graph with neither a baseline nor background color - changes . The low - salience - social - comparison groups viewed a graph with a baseline and color changes , with the following instructions read from a script : . . . . do you see the line at the middle of the 802 graph ? Most groups generate about that many solutions during a problem solving session like this one . In effect , we ' ve put you in competition with the rest of the world . So , try to push the graph above this line by generating as many different solutions as you can . . . Subjects in the hgh - salience - social - comparison also viewed the graph with the baseline , but received variations on the following instructions delivered in a jocular tone : , . . . do you see the line at the middie of the graph ? That ' s how many solutions an average group can generate . I expect you will do much better than average . As a group of undergraduates you have a unique perspective that other groups don ' t have . It won ' t be e a v to reach the baseline but I think given your unique perspective , you can . In effect , we ' ve put you in competition with the rest of the world . So , t v to push the graph above this line by generating as many dfferent solutions as you can . . . . During the 40 - minute brainstorming session the facilitator reminded the subjects to check the graph at seven pre - planned , randomly spaced times . In the low - salience treatment the facilitator cited the time and a number , as in , " It ' s been 11 minutes and you ' ve got 157 . " In the high - salience condition the facilitator cited the time and invoked additional social comparison by commenting on the background color . For example , " At 11 minutes the background is black . You ' ll have to work harder to be above average . " and invoked comparison with the mythical group , as in , " It ' s been 16 minutes and the background is blue . You ' re performing like champions , you ' re an exceptional group . " We established four levels of goal - setting : none , low , average , and high . There were two no - goal control treatments : brainstorming with no graph , and graph - no - baseline - no - color - changes . We learned in pilot studies that groups using no feedback graph averaged 206 lines of text in a 40 minute brainstorming session , so we set the baseline to 210 for the average - goal treatment . We set the baseline to 140 for the low - goal treatment , which is slightly lower than the 145 lines submitted by the lowest group in pilot studies . We set the baseline to 3 10 for the bgh - goal treatment , which was slightly higher than the 305 lines produced by the most productive group in the pilot studles . 4 . 5 : Procedure Subjects signed an attendance sheet when they Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 803 anived , and then seated themselves before one of five computers . The computers were side - by - side facing the projection screen at the front of the room . One of three treatment - blind facilitators greeted the subjects and read them instructions from a script . Facilitators remained treatment blind until it came time to instruct subjects on the use of the electronic brainstorming tool . Subjects received a packet of information and were given 10 minutes to read about their roles . We wanted to assure that all the problems in the scenario surfaced before the group began to generate solutions . Therefore the facilitator , still treatment - blind , conducted a structured interview with each subject in the presence of the others asking what problems the subject had identified in the School of Business . An accomplice sat at another computer pretendmg to type the problems as the subjects identified them . At the end of the interviews the accomplice printed and distributed a standard set of problems , so all groups started generating solutions with an identical problem set . Subjects were then instructed on using the electronic brainstorming tool and the graph . It was at tlus point in the experiment that facilitators learned which treatments would be administered . Subjects were given 40 minutes to generate solutions . When the time was up they responded to a questionnaire . They then went to a conference room to write a final recommendation . Then they were debriefed and released . 5 : Results There were statistically significant differences in affective reward by role and facilitator ( Table 5 ) . Table 5 . 11 Gender 1 1 1 0 . 285 I ns IO . 001 11 I ] Goal - D1Bculty I 4 I 5 . 382 I 0 . 0000 I 0 . 071 11 11 Social Comparison I 2 1 1 . 568 I ns 0 . 011 A Scheffe test revealed that subjects in treatments run by Facilitator I reported less affective reward than did subjects with Facilitators 2 and 3 ( Table 6 ) . A Scheffe test also revealed that subjects playing the Alumni representative and the Vice President of Undergraduate Affairs reported more affective reward than did subjects playing the role of the faculty member ( Table 7 ) . Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 However , because role and facilitator were evenly dlstributed across all treatments , we did not expect these differences to affect outcomes . Nonetheless , we included them as covariates in subsequent analysis . As expected , they made no drfference . There were no gender effects ( Table 5 ) . II Table 7 There were statistically significant Merences by level of goal ( Table 5 ) . A Scheffe test revealed that subjects with no graph , and subjects in the low - baseline treatment reported higher levels of affective reward than Qd subjects in the high - baseline treatment ( Figure 3 ) . There were no statistically significant effects by level of Social Comparison ( Table 5 ) . Figure 3 . Affective Reward by Goal Difficulty 96 94 92 90 88 86 84 82 80 Affective Revrard No No Lo AV Hi Graph Base Base Base Base Goal Difficuity It was not possible to fully cross social comparison with goal - level because one cannot create a basis for social comparison without setting a goal . The subjects in the no - social comparison treatment were the same subjects as those in the no - goal treatment . However , it is possible to cross the top three levels of goal - setting and the top two levels of social comparison . There was a main effect for goal - level ( F ( 2 ) = 7 . 01 , P < . OOl ) , and no effect for salience of social comparison ( F ( 1 ) = 0 . 642 , p = ns ) . There was no effect for the two - way interaction between them ( F ( 2 ) = . 62 , p = ns ) ( Eta " . 062 ) . As before , a Scheffe test showed that subjects in the low - baseline treatment reported higher affective reward than subjects in the high - baseline treatment . 6 : Discussion We can draw two major implications from the results of this experiment : the affective reward instrument is sensitive enough to discriminate between groups receiving different stimuli and there is still much work to be done before we can claim we understand the nature of affective reward . 6 . 1 : The Instrument The instrument displays strong internal consistency , but specifically targets business meetings . However , our approach to developing it - - collecting utterances and paraphrasing them into scale items - - may be broadly useful in preparing affective reward instruments . The approach may generalize to other domains even if the specific scale items do not It is interesting to note that of the , 10 of the original 20 Likert scale questions were excluded from the final instrument , while only one of the original eight semantic anchor differential questions was dropped . This suggests that anchored semantic differential questions may be more useN than Likert scales for measuring affective reward . It may be that the subjects can respond more reliably when asked to express feeling ( 1 feel great - terrible ) than when asked to express agreement ( I feel great . Agree - disagree ) . It will be informative to reframe the excluded Likert scale questions as semantic differentials to see if they become more reliable . It may also be possible that there were simply more poorly - framed questions in the Likert - scale format than in the semantic anchor format . Further investigation is warranted . It is also interesting to note that the final scale includes questions addressing both the process and outcome of meetings . The fact that these questions loaded together on the same factor is at least consistent with the possibility that affective reward is an excitation transfer process . Under the excitation transfer hypothesis , both the process and outcomes would be convenient and salient stimuli to which subjects could attribute arousal . If the affective reward were engendered by processes and 804 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 805 outcomes separately , rather than transferred to them , one might expect process and outcome to contribute Merentially , and therefore to load on separate factors . One can easily imagine a participant being satisfied with a process , but not the outcome , or vice versa . This also suggests that affective reward is a different construct than satisfaction . 6 . 2 : The Experiment Our experiment did not confrm either of our hypotheses . We did not find higher affective reward as the salience of social comparison increased . It may be that our social comparison manipulation did not instill a strong sense of competition , and consequently did not gwe rise to arousal and subsequent affective reward . Another manipulation that might engender stronger competition would be to display a graph showing the productivity of two sub - groups within the meeting . It mal also be that a sense of competition does not cause physiological arousal , dthough experience would suggest otherwise . A thlrd possibility is that affective reward is not an excitation transfer phenomenon , although this study does not provide sufficient evidence for such a conclusion . The goal - dfliculty results were actually opposite from our hypotheses . Subjects experienced less affective reward in the difficult - goal treatment than in the easy - goal and no - graph conditions . It is possible that we may have set the baseline so hgh that the subjects did not believe they could reach it , and consequently . may have been demoralized rather than stimulated by it . It is also possible that difficult goals do not , in and of themselves , stimulate arousal in the subject population . Studies with other goals and other populations are called for . The very low values of Eta2 show that our manipulations accounted for very little of the variance in affective reward ( Table 6 ) . We still don ' t know why the phenomena occurs . nor what can be done to control it . It is clear that the construct requires much more thought and investigation . The authors observed in the field that the groups evidencing low affective reward after electronically supported meetings tended to be comprised of high - powered , entrepreneurial , action - oriented peers , while groups displaying high affective reward after electronic meetings tended to be either hierarclucally mixed or composed of low - key peers . It may well be that affective reward occurs differentially in different management levels or in groups with Merent goals and values . Further study to investigate these possibilities is warranted . 6 . 3 : Limits The results of this investigation must be considered tentative because the subjects were undergraduates ( Gordon , Slade , & Schmitt , 1986 ) . Nonetheless , the reliability of the instrument encourages one to go into the field to see what can be learned among GSS users in industry and government organizations . We only measured affective reward with electronic brainstorming . GSS is much more than brainstorming , and electronically supported meetings involve much more than silent interactions through the computer . It may well be that results will M e r for other tools , and for whole meetings supported by GSS tools . It may be that some of the scale items that are appropriate for electronic brainstorming tasks are less useful for other tasks like idea organization or idea exposition . Further investigation of scale items is therefore warranted . Finally , this paper focused solely on the face - to - face electronic meeting . Other GSS technology is emerging for geographcally distributed meetings , and reports from the field suggest that affective reward may also be a factor for adoption and use of distributed GSS . 7 : Conclusions The affective reward scale developed in this paper is demonstrably ready for use in the laboratory and in the field . Much theoretical and empirical work remains to be done , and this instrument provides a starting point . If we can identify the causal relationslups associated with affective reward , we may be able to minimize a potential barrier to adoption . We may come to understand why some groups regard the technology as disengaging or unrewarding , and others find the technology exciting or rewarding . We present the complete instrument here ( Appendix A ) , and a general method for generating similar instruments , in hopes that othcr researchers will join the investigation . References Applegate , L . M . Technology support for cooperative work : a & mework for studying introduction and assimilation in organizations . Joumal of Organizational computing , 1 ( 1 ) , 1991 , 11 - 40 , Benbasat , I . & Lim , L . H . The effects of group , task , context , and technology variables on the usefulness of group support systems . Small Group Research , November , 1993 , 24 ( 4 ) , 430 - 462 . Bretschneider , S . & Wither , D . Organizational Adoption of Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Microcomputer Technology : The Role of Sector . Information Systems Research , 4 : 1 , I993 , 88 - 108 . Hurgoon , J . Nonverbal Signals . In Knapp , M . , & Miller , G . , ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Interpersonal Communication , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications , Inc . , 1985 , Cattell , R . B . , The meamng and strategic use of factor analysis . in Cattell , R . B . ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Multivariate Experimental Psycholoo , Chicago : Rand McNally , 1966 . Connolly , T , Jessup , L . M . , & Valacich , J . S . Effects of anonymity and evaluative tone on idea generation in computer - mediated groups . Management Science , 3 6 , Cooper , R . B . , & Zmud , R . W . Information Technology Implementation Research : A Technological Diffusion Approach . Management Science , 36 , 2 , 1990 , 123 - 139 . Daft , R . L . , A Dual - Core Model of Organizational Innovation . Academy of Management Journal , 21 , 2 , 1978 , 193 - 210 . Dennis , A . R . , & Gallup , K . B . A History of GSS empirical research : Lessons Learned and Future Directions , in L . Jessup & J . Valacich ( Eds . ) , Group Support Systems : New Perspectives , New York : Macmillan , 1993 . Dennis , A . R . , Nunamaker , J . F . , & Vogel , D . R . A comparison of laboratory and field research in the study of electronic meeting systems . Journal of Management Irformation Systems , 7 ( 3 ) , 1991 , 107 - 135 . Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , & Nunamaker , J . F . An experimental investigation of the effects of group size in an electronic meeting environment . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 25 , Fried , L . , Advanced Infonnation Technology Use : A Survey of Multinational Corporations . lnfonnation Systems Management , Spring , 1993 , 7 - 14 . An integrated framework for the study of group decision support systems . Proceedings of the Twentysixth Annual Hawaii Intenrational Conferenct , on Systems Science , Gallupe , R . B . , Dennis , A . R . , Cooper , W . H . , Valacich , JS , Bastianutti , L . M , & Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . Electronic brainstorming and group size . Academy of Managemtmt Journal , 35 ( 2 ) , 1992 , 350 - 369 . Social Comparison Theory : Self - evaluation in group life . In V . Mullen & G . R . Goethels ( Eds . ) , Theories of Group Behavior , New York : Springer - Verlag , I987 , 2 1 - 48 Gordon , M . E , Slade , L . A , & Schmitt , N . The " science of the sophomore " revisited . Academy of Management 34 1 - 390 . 6 , 1990 , 689 - 703 1990 , ) 049 - 1057 . Fjermestad , J . , Hiltz , S . R . , & TurofT , M . IV , 1993 , 179 - 188 . Goethals , G . R . , & Darlrv , J . M . Review , 11 ( 1 ) , 1986 , 191 - 206 . Grohowslu , R . , McGoff , C . , Vogel , D . R . , Martz , B . , k Nunamaker , J . F . Implementing electronic meeting systems at IBM : lessons learned and success factors . MIS Quarterly . 14 ( 4 ) , December 1990 , 368 - 383 . Kaiser , H . F . An Index of Factorial Simplicity Psychometrih , 1974 , 39 ( 1 ) , 31 - 36 . King , J . L . , Gurbaxani , V . , Kraemer , K . L . , McFarlan , F W . , Raman , K . S . , & Yap , C . S . Institutional Factors in Information Technology Innovation . Information Systems Research , 5 : 2 , 1994 , 139 - 169 . Locke , E . A . , Shaw , K . N . , Saari , L . M . , & Latham , G . P . Goal setting and task performance : 1968 - 1980 . Psychological Bulletin , 90 , 1981 , 125 - 1 52 . Locke , E . A . & Latham , G . P . A theory of goal setting and task pefonnance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall , 1990 . McGrath , J . E . Time , interaction , and performance ( TIP ) : A theory of groups . Small Group Research , 22 ( 2 ) , 1991 , Mennecke , B . E , Hoffer , J . A . , & Wynne , B . E . The implications of group development and history for group support system theory and practice . Small Group Research , 23 ( 4 ) , November , 1992 , 524 - 572 . Mennecke , B . E . & Wheeler , B . C . Tasks Matter : Modeling Group Task Processes in Experimmtal CSCW Research . Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Annual Hawaii International Cor ference on Systems Sciences . 1993 , Volume W , 71 - 80 . Moch , M . K . & Morse , E . V . Sue , Centralization and Organizational Adoption of Innovations . American Sociological Review , 42 , Oct . , 1977 , 716 - 725 . Norusis , Marija J . SPSS Base System IJser ' s Guide . Chicago , IL : SPSS Inc . , 1990 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , & Vogel , D . R . ( I 991 ) . Information technology for negotiating groups : generating options for mutual gain . Management Science , 17 ( 10 ) 1325 - 1346 . Nunmaker , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . , and George , J . F . Electronic meeting systems to support group work . C70mmunicah . ons of the ACM , 34 ( 7 ) , 1991 , 4041 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Vogel , D . R . , Heminger , A . , Martz , B . , Grohowski , R . , & McGoff , C . Experiences at B M with group support systems : a field study . Decision Support Systems , 5 ( 2 ) , 1989 , 183 - 1 96 . Paulus , P . B . & Dzindolet , M . T . Social Mluence Processes in Group Brainstorming . Joumal of Personality and Social Psychology , 64 ( 4 ) , 1993 , 575 - 586 Paulus , P . B . , Dwdolet , M . T . , & Camacho , L . M . Perceptions of performance in group brainstorming : the illusion of group productivity . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 19 ( I ) , 1993 , 78 - 89 . 147 - 174 . 806 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Poole , M . S . & DeSanctis , G . Understanding the use of group decision support systems : The theory of adaptive structuration . In Fulk , J . & Steinfield , C . ( eds . ) Organizations and Communication Technology , Newbury Park , CA : Sage . 1990 , 173 - 193 . Communication Theory and Group Support Systems . in Jessup , L . M & Valacich , J . S ( Eds . 1 Group Support Systems : New Perspectives . New York , NY : Macmillan Publishing Company , Building the Business Case for Group Support Technology . Proceedings of ' the 25th annual Hawaii International ( ' onfirerice on Systems Science , IV , Pnchard , R . D . , Jones , NI . , & Roth , P . L . The effects of feedback , goal setting , and incentives on organizational productivity . Journal of Applied Psychology Monograph Series , 73 ( 2 ) , 1990 , 337 - 358 . Seta , J . J . , Seta , C . E . , & Donaldson , S . The impact of comparison processes on coactors ' frustration and willingness to expend effort . Personality and Social PsJchologv Bulletin , 17 , 199 1 , 577 - 586 . Shachter , S , & Singer , J . E . , Cognitive , social , and psychological determinants of emotional state . Psychological Reviw , 1962 , 69 , 379 - 399 . Belief - discrepant behavior and the bogus pipeline : impression management or arousal attribution . Joumal of Poole , M . S . , & Jackson , M . H . 1993 , 281 - 293 . Post , B . Q . 1992 , 34 - 45 Stultz , D . M . , Messe , L . A . , & Kerr , N . L . Experimental Psychology , 20 ( I ) , 1984 , 47 - 54 . Valacich , JS , Dennis , A . R . , & Connolly , T . Idea generation in computer based poups : A new tnding to an old story . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 57 ( 3 ) , 1994 , 448 - 467 . Vogel , D . R . , Nunamaker , J . F . , Applegate , L . , & Konsynskt , B . Group decision support systems , determinants of success . Dscision Support Systems , 3 , 1987 , 118 - 128 . Vogel , D . R . , Nunamaker , J . F . , Martz , W . B , Grohowski , R . , & McGoff , C . Electronic meeting system experience at EM . Journal of Management Information Systems , Wheeler , B . C . , & Mennecke , B . E . , Modelling group task processes using a hidden profile task . the School of Business Policy task , Indiana University working paper # 513 , 1992 . Wood , R . E . Task complexity : definition of the construct . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 37 ( I ) , 1986 , 60 - 82 Dissonance and the pill : An attnbutional approach to studying the arousal properties of dissonance . Journal of Personalip and Social Psychology , 29 ( 5 j , 1974 , 703 - 709 . Zillman , D . , Katcher , A . H . , & Mlavskl , B Excitation transfer from physical exercise to subsequent aggressive behavior . Journal of experimental and social 6 ( 3 ) , 1989 - 90 , 25 - 43 . Zanna , M . P . , & Cooper . J . psycholom , 8 , 1972 , 247 - 25 ' 3 . 807