Prelinguistic Relational Concepts : Investigating Analogical Processing in Infants Alissa L . Ferry , Susan J . Hespos , and Dedre Gentner Northwestern University This research asks whether analogical processing ability is present in human infants , using the simplest and most basic relation — the same – different relation . Experiment 1 ( N = 26 ) tested whether 7 - and 9 - month - olds spontaneously detect and generalize these relations from a single example , as previous research has suggested . The attempted replication failed . Experiment 2 asked whether infants could abstract the relation via analogical processing ( Experiment 2 , N = 64 ) . Indeed , with four exemplars , 7 - and 9 - month - olds could abstract the same – different relation and generalize it to novel pairs . Furthermore , prior experience with the objects disrupted learning . Facilitation from multiple exemplars and disruption by individual object sal - ience are signatures of analogical learning . These results indicate that analogical ability is present by 7 months . Analogical ability — the ability to make relational comparisons between objects , events , or ideas , and to think about relations independently of a particular set of arguments — is a cornerstone of higher reason - ing abilities . Learning by analogy is a powerful and ef ﬁ cient method for acquiring new information . Equally important , analogical comparison facilitates the formation of abstract categories and rules ( Gent - ner & Medina , 1998 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Indeed , recent theoretical perspectives have asserted that analogical ability is the key capacity supporting higher order cognition and differentiating human cognitive capacity from that of other primates ( Gent - ner , 2003 , 2010 ; Penn , Holyoak , & Povinelli , 2008 ) . Our goal in this research is to trace the develop - ment of relational processing — speci ﬁ cally , to dis - cover whether processes of analogical learning are present in prelinguistic human infants . We focus on the same – different relation , for four reasons . First , it is arguably the simplest and most basic relation , and is likely to be available early in development . Second , the perception of sameness is critical to making sense of the world ; in the words of William James ( 1890 ) , the “ sense of sameness is the very keel and backbone of our thinking ” ( p . 459 ; quoted in Wasserman & Young , 2010 ) . A third point is that the same – different relation has the advantage that it can be tested by a simple perceptual task : the two - item same – different task , which is readily adaptable for infant studies . If a participant can discriminate between same pairs { AA , BB , CC . . . } and different pairs { AB , CD , EF . . . } and can generalize this dis - tinction to new exemplars ( XX vs . YZ ) , then we can infer that they have represented abstract same and different relations . The ﬁ nal reason for focusing on the same – different relation is that it has been the main focus of com - parative research on relational ability in nonhuman species . Beginning with Premack ’ s ( 1983 ) seminal paper , which argued that chimpanzees ( but not monkeys ) possess signi ﬁ cant relational ability , much of this research has focused on the same – dif - ferent relation ( Fagot & Thompson , 2011 ; Flemming , Alissa L . Ferry is currently at Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati . This research was supported by NSF Grant BCS - 1423917 to Susan J . Hespos , NSF SLC Grant SBE - 0541957 awarded to the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center ( SILC ) , and by ONR Grant N00014 - 92 - J - 1098 to Dedre Gentner . Preparation of the article was supported in part by the European Research Council under the European Unions ’ Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 / 2007 - 2013 ) / European Research Council Grant Agreement 269502 ( PASCAL ) , which supported Alissa Ferry during manu - script preparation and an award to Dedre Gentner from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and by a fellowship at the Hanse - Wissenschaftskolleg , Delmenhorst , Germany . We are indebted to parents who agreed to have their infants participate in the research . We thank members of the Infant Cognition Lab for help with data collection . Special thanks go to Don Tyrrell for his willingness to re - engage with these topics after 18 years of retirement . His thoughtful discussion has enhanced the quality of this work and has con ﬁ rmed that these ideas retain their rele - vance across several decades . Finally , we thank Susan Carey for many insightful comments on this work . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Alissa L . Ferry , Cognitive Neuroscience Sector , Scuola Internazio - nale Superiore di Studi Avanzati , Via Bonomea 265 , 34136 Trie - ste , Italy . Electronic mail may be sent to aferry @ sissa . it . © 2015 The Authors Child Development © 2015 Society for Research in Child Development , Inc . All rights reserved . 0009 - 3920 / 2015 / 8605 - 0006 DOI : 10 . 1111 / cdev . 12381 Child Development , September / October 2015 , Volume 86 , Number 5 , Pages 1386 – 1405 Ferry , A . L . , Hespos , S . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2015 ) . Prelinguistic relational concepts : Investigating analogical processing in infants . Child Development , 86 . 1386 - 1405 . Beran , & Washburn , 2007 ; Giurfa , Zhang , Jennett , Menzel , & Srinivasan , 2001 ; Thompson , Oden , & Boysen , 1997 ; Wasserman & Young , 2010 ) . This research has shown that although many species , including pigeons , macaques , and honeybees , can pass the object match - to - sample test ( given a stan - dard A , choose the matching alternative , A , over B ) , the ability to pass the same – different task ( mak - ing one response for AA , BB , CC , etc . and another for AB , CD , EF , etc . ) is sharply graded across spe - cies . For example , Wright and Katz ( 2006 ) found that rhesus monkeys and capuchin monkeys required over 4 , 700 trials to learn to distinguish same pairs from different pairs and generalize the distinction to novel pairs . These ﬁ ndings show the dif ﬁ culty of same – different relational matching for monkeys . In contrast , chimpanzees can learn and generalize the same – different relation in 150 – 500 tri - als ( Premack , 1983 ; Robinson , 1955 ) and human 3 - year - olds given a sorting task can learn to distin - guish same and different relations after fewer than 24 trials ( Christie & Gentner , 2014 ) . A more chal - lenging task , in which the subject must match a same pair to either a same ( correct ) or a different pair , was given to baboons ( Fagot & Thompson , 2011 ) . Only 6 of 29 animals were able to reach criterion , and they required a mean of 21 , 000 trials . In con - trast , human 4 - year - olds succeed at this task ( for the same relation ) in just eight trials without feed - back ( Christie & Gentner , 2014 ) . Thus , relational ability — even with the basic same – different relation — varies strongly across primate species . The Ontogeny of Human Analogical Ability Adult humans — and even children — are virtuo - sos of relational ability compared with other pri - mates . But how does this ability develop ? How do infants come to be able to encode and generalize relations between things ? We can distin - guish three broad positions . The strongest possibility is that human infants are born with a set of privi - leged relations that they naturally use to encode experience — a set of relational semantic primitives . Such a set would almost certainly include the same – different relation . In this case , infants would be able to encode abstract same and different relations even from a single exemplar . A second possibility is that human infants are born with analogical ability , with which they can learn abstract relations from experi - ence , but without a starting set of abstract relations . In this case , infants would be unable to spontane - ously encode the same and different relations from a single exemplar but might be able to use analogical learning mechanisms to encode these relations by comparing exemplars . A third possibility is that analogical ability is not inherent in human biology , but develops by combining other abilities through cultural and linguistic experience . This possibility receives some support from studies that show that learning and using relational language facilitates relational insight in children ( Christie & Gentner , 2014 ; Gentner , 2003 , 2010 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . In this case , we would not expect to see evi - dence of abstract same and different relations until children have acquired a degree of cultural and lin - guistic experience — perhaps including some knowl - edge of relational terms . The ﬁ rst and strongest possibility is that same and different are part of an innate “ starter kit ” of abstract relational primitives , akin to the semantic features postulated by some early theories of mean - ing acquisition ( e . g . , Clark , 1973 ) . This account also assumes that infants are born with analogical abil - ity — that is , the ability to align and map between relations . We consider this possibility in Experiment 1 , and then turn to the other two possibilities . The idea that abstract same and different relations are present from the start has had wide in ﬂ uence , particularly in comparative psychology , through the pioneering work of Tyrrell , Stauffer , and Snowman ( 1991 ) . This research suggested that 7 - month - old humans spontaneously encode and transfer same and different relations from a single exemplar — implying that human infants can encode abstract same – different relation without training . Because of the importance of these claims , our ﬁ rst order of business was to examine and replicate this study . Unfortunately ( to preview ) our attempted replication failed ; further , inspection of the paper revealed that it does not support the strong possibility above . We ﬁ rst review this study and then present our attempted replication . Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) tested twenty - two 7 - month - old infants . Half of the infants were familiarized to an exemplar of the same rela - tion ( AA ; presented twice ) ; the other half were familiarized to an exemplar of the different relation ( BC ) , also presented twice . In the ﬁ rst test trial , infants were shown a side - by - side presentation of AA and BC — that is , the pair they had seen along with a pair they had not seen ( and which depicted a different relation from the familiar pair ) — until 10 s of looking at either pair accumulated . In the second test trial , they saw two new pairs ( DD and EF ) , and the relative positions of the same and differ - ent pairs were switched . The reasoning was if the infants showed a novelty preference for the relation that they had not been familiarized to , this would Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1387 indicate that they already possess an abstract same – different relation , which can be generalized from a single exemplar . Combining both of these test trials , Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) found just this pat - tern : After habituation to same the infants looked signi ﬁ cantly longer at the novel relation ( different ) in the test trials than at the familiar relation ( same ) . The same novelty preference was also found for infants habituated to different . Because the infants had seen only one instance of the relation prior to testing , this seemed to suggest that 7 - month - olds spontaneously encode abstract relational concepts — potentially a very important result . Given the importance of this question , and the oft - cited inter - pretation that their study represents evidence of generalizing same – different relations from a single exemplar , we set out to replicate the experiment using a single exemplar , to test whether infants can spontaneously detect the same – different relations . Before turning to the replication , we note that the original Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) publication contains some ambiguities regarding the exact method . However , subsequent discussions of this in ﬂ uential work have adopted the interpretation offered here — namely , that infants generalized same ( or different ) from a single example — indicating that they already possessed abstract representations of same and dif - ferent ( e . g . , Dewar & Xu , 2010 ; Marcus , Fernandes , & Johnson , 2007 ; Thompson & Oden , 1995 , 2000 ; Tyrrell , Zingardo , & Minard , 1993 ; Zentall , Wasser - man , Lazareva , Thompson , & Rattermann , 2008 ) . Experiment 1 In this study , we set out to replicate the research of Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) . Our goal was to discover whether 7 - month - old infants would encode an abstract same ( or different ) relation from a single familiarization exemplar . We also tested a group of 9 - month - old infants to capture potential develop - mental differences , as previous research had sug - gested that by this age , infants show some evidence of understanding same and different in a different task ( Addyman & Mareschal , 2010 ) . We followed an interpretation of Tyrrell et al . ’ s experimental design with only a single familiarization exemplar . As shown in Figure 1A , during familiarization , infants saw two presentations of the same example pair ( e . g . , AA ) . In the ﬁ rst test trial ( old ) , they chose between this initial example pair ( AA ) and a new pair depict - ing the other relation ( e . g . , BC ) . In the second test trial ( novel ) , same and different were instantiated with new objects . Only if infants differentiate the relations on the second trial can we infer that they already possess abstract same – different relations . Method Participants The participants were 26 healthy , full - term infants , ten 7 - month - olds ( 5 male and 5 female ) ranging from 6 months 23 days to 7 months Figure 1 . ( A ) Schematic of Experiment 1 . During familiarization trials , infants were shown either a pair of same or a pair of different objects . During the test trials , infant saw two pairs of objects presented side by side . For the old test trial , one pair was identical to the pair seen during familiarization ; the other pair consisted of novel objects and a novel relation . For the new test trial , all the objects were novel and one pair depicted the familiarized relation and the other depicted the novel relation . ( B ) Test trial novelty preference scores in Experiment 1 . Box plots showing mean preference score for the novel relation over the familiar relation during both test trials . Black diamonds represent means , the central line in each box is the median , and the upper and lower portions of each box represent the third and ﬁ rst quartiles , respectively . The dashed line represents chance performance . * p < . 05 . 1388 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner 24 days ( M = 7 months 4 days ) and sixteen 9 - month - olds ( 6 male and 10 female ) ranging from 8 months 19 days to 9 months 16 days ( M = 8 months 29 days ) . Approximately half the infants were assigned to the same condition ( n = 11 ) ; the other half , to the different condition ( n = 15 ) . Four additional infants were tested but eliminated from the ﬁ nal analysis , three because of parental interfer - ence and one because he looked only at the right side of the stage during every test trial . For this and the following experiment , we obtained infants ’ names from commercial mailing lists . Parents were contacted by letters and pro - vided informed consent before the experiment . They were given $ 20 as compensation . The ethnic - ity of the sample was 81 % non - Hispanic , 14 % His - panic , and the remaining 5 % chose not to answer . The racial makeup was 76 % white , 6 % Black / Afri - can American , 4 % Asian , 1 % Native Hawaiian / Paci ﬁ c Islander , 1 % American Indian / Alaskan Native , 7 % multiracial . The remaining 5 % chose not to answer . The mothers ’ highest level of education included 1 % some high school , 6 % high school diploma , 14 % some college , and 75 % college degree or higher ; the remaining 4 % chose not to answer . The fathers ’ highest level of education included 1 % some high school , 4 % high school diploma , 11 % some college , 80 % college degree or higher ; the remaining 4 % chose not to answer . Apparatus Parents sat in a chair with infants on their lap facing a wooden puppet stage that displayed all stimulus objects . The stage measured 243 . 5 cm high , 128 cm wide , and 61 cm deep . The opening in the front of the stage that displayed the objects was 93 cm above the ﬂ oor , 61 cm high , and 106 cm wide . The back wall had two rectangular openings with cloth fringe over the openings that allowed the experimenter to manipulate the objects between trials . A screen that covered the infants ’ view of the stage was raised and lowered between trials ( see Figure 1A ) . The stimuli consisted of four pairs of objects , each attached by Velcro to a 26 . 5 cm 9 15 . 5 cm piece of cardboard covered with contact paper . The items in each pair were approximately 12 . 5 cm apart from each other . Two pairs of objects instan - tiated the same relation ( two identical ﬁ sh and two identical frogs ) and two pairs of objects instanti - ated the different relation ( a crocodile and a pig paired together and a dog and a dragon paired together ) . Events Familiarization trials . When the screen went up at the start of a trial , there was a pair of objects on either the right or left side of the stage . Half of the infants were shown the objects with the same relation while the other half of the infants were shown the objects with the different relation . The objects remained sta - tionary on the stage until the infant accumulated 20 s of looking time at the pair , after which the screen was lowered . The pair was moved to the opposite side of the stage and the familiarization trial was repeated . Across the familiarization trials , infants accumulated 40 s of total looking at the pair . Test trials . Two types of test trials were pre - sented in sequence to all participants . The ﬁ rst test trial ( old ) consisted of the pairs from familiarization ( ﬁ sh – ﬁ sh and crocodile – pig ) placed on opposite sides of the stage for 10 s of accumulated infant looking . As in Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) study , the infants had seen one of these pairs before . The second test trial ( novel ) consisted of new object pairs ( e . g . , frog – frog as the same relation and dog – dragon as the different relation ) placed on opposite sides of the stage for 10 s of accumulated infant looking . The amount of time infants ﬁ xated on each object pair for each test trial was recorded . Procedure During the experiment , the infant sat on the par - ent ’ s lap in front of the apparatus . The parents were asked to refrain from interacting with their infant during the experiment and to close their eyes dur - ing the test trials . All trials ended when the infant accumulated the necessary amount of looking time during each trial ( 20 s total infant looking for each familiarization trial and 10 s for each test trial ) . A computer determined the end of the trial and sig - naled the experimenter to lower the screen . The ini - tial placement ( left or right side of the stage ) of the familiarization and test stimuli was counterbal - anced across infants . Coding There was a small hole in the front face of the stage containing a camera that captured a video image of the infant ’ s face . Two research assistants in a separate room viewed this image and coded infants ’ visual ﬁ xations online . Each researcher depressed a computer button when the infant attended to the objects on stage and released the button when the infant looked away . Later , of ﬂ ine Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1389 frame - by - frame coding to determine left and right looks was conducted using ELAN ( 2007 ) . Thirty - three percent of infants in each age and condition were recoded by an independent observer . Reliabil - ity between observers averaged 92 % during famil - iarization and 91 % during test . Three infants ( two familiarized to same and one familiarized to differ - ent ) looked exclusively to one test stimulus on one of the test trials . Because we were uncertain whether these infants noticed the other test stimu - lus , infants were given a 2 - min break to play in the waiting room and the familiarization and test trials were rerun with a completely different set of objects . We obtained the same results ( see below ) whether we included these preference scores for these infants or included the original , exclusive test trials . To measure categorization , a preference score was calculated for each infant by dividing their looking time at the novel - category exemplar during test by their total looking time ( 10 s ) . Results Preliminary analyses revealed no signi ﬁ cant effect of age or sex on the infants ’ looking times , nor any interactions involving these variables . The subsequent analyses therefore collapsed across these variables . The results , depicted in Figure 1B , reveal that infants familiarized to same showed a novelty preference in the old test trial , but no pref - erence in the novel test trial . Infants familiarized to different did not differ from chance in either test trial . Overall , infants were not able to abstract the same – different relation to the novel pairs , and only those infants familiarized to same showed a novelty preference even on the old test trials . These patterns are borne out by an analysis of vari - ance ( ANOVA ) on infants ’ preference scores at test , with condition as a between - subject factor ( familiar - ized to same or different ) and test trial ( old or novel ) as a within - subject factor . This revealed no main effects , but it did reveal a signi ﬁ cant Condition 9 Test Trial interaction , F ( 1 , 24 ) = 5 . 62 , p = . 026 , g 2 = . 19 . Further analyses revealed that within the test trials , infants ’ performance varied as a function of their familiariza - tion condition , F ( 1 , 24 ) = 8 . 60 , p = . 007 . In the old test trial , infants familiarized to same showed a sig - ni ﬁ cant novelty preference ( M = 0 . 70 , SD = 0 . 18 ) , t ( 10 ) = 3 . 577 , p = . 005 , while infants familiarized to different did not signi ﬁ cantly differ from chance ( M = 0 . 43 , SD = 0 . 25 ) , t ( 14 ) = (cid:1) 1 . 007 , p = . 33 . In contrast , within the novel test trials , performance did not differ between the two familiarization groups , F ( 1 , 24 ) = 1 . 53 , p = . 23 ; neither the infants familiar - ized to same ( M = 0 . 45 , SD = 0 . 20 ) , t ( 10 ) = (cid:1) 0 . 84 , p = . 42 , nor the infants familiarized to different ( M = 0 . 56 , SD = 0 . 24 ) , t ( 14 ) = 0 . 96 , p = . 35 , were sig - ni ﬁ cantly different from chance . Discussion Our attempted replication of the Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) experiment failed to ﬁ nd evidence that infants encode abstract same – different relations from a single training exemplar . That is , there was no generalization to novel test pairs , either for infants familiarized to the same pair or for those familiar - ized to the different pair . The only signi ﬁ cant ﬁ nd - ing was that infants familiarized with the same pair looked signi ﬁ cantly longer at the different pair — but only during old test trials , when the same pair was identical to the pair seen in familiarization . Infants familiarized to the different pair showed chance per - formance in both test trial types . Thus , we have no grounds to conclude that 7 - or 9 - month - olds spon - taneously encode abstract same ( or different ) rela - tions . The ﬁ ndings by Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) have been taken as evidence that humans naturally encode abstract relations from very early in development , and may be endowed with a primitive set of abstract relations . Our nonreplication , together with the fact that Tyrell et al . ’ s studies were inconclusive on this point , calls for a reconsideration of this question . Our ﬁ ndings fail to show support for the hypothesis that infants are endowed with same – dif - ferent relations . At the very least , it appears that these relations are not immediately available to the infant . Earlier we laid out three possibilities for how analogical ability might develop . The ﬁ rst two both assume that analogical ability is an innate capacity of our species . Possibility 1 adds the assumption that infants are born with a set of primitive rela - tions , including the same – different relation . This pos - sibility can be set aside , at least as a solution for how same and different are acquired . We now turn to the other two possibilities . Possibility 2 is that infants begin life with analogical learning processes that enable them to abstract relations from experi - ence . Possibility 3 is that analogical ability is not an inherent capacity but is formed by combining more basic processes , guided by cultural and linguistic experience . We now turn to the second possibility : that infants begin life with analogical learning processes that enable them to abstract relations from experience . 1390 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner Experiment 2 will test this possibility . If we ﬁ nd that 7 - month - olds can abstract same and different relations through analogical abstraction processes , then Possi - bility 2 will remain a viable explanation . If not , then we will be left with Possibility 3 . Although little is known about the early origins of human analogical ability , there has been consid - erable research on the development of analogical ability from preschool to adulthood . The available evidence suggests that the same basic analogical mapping processes occur for young children as for older children and adults ( Gentner & Medina , 1988 , 2003 , 2010 ; Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Mix , 2008 ; Richland , Morrison , & Holyoak , 2006 ) . Another parallel between children and adults is that the presence of salient objects can interfere with relational mapping . This propensity is espe - cially pronounced early in development . Young children often focus on object matches , whereas older ( or more knowledgeable ) children focus on relational matches ( Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Kotov - sky & Gentner , 1996 ; Paik & Mix , 2006 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ; Smith , 1984 ) — a pattern that has been described as the relational shift ( Gentner , 1988 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . This shift has been attributed to increases in relational knowledge ( Gentner , 2003 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) , to maturational increases in processing capacity ( Hal - ford , 1992 ) , and to increases in executive ability , including inhibitory control ( Doumas , Hummel , & Sandhofer , 2008 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ; Thibaut , French , & Vezneva , 2010 ) , and it is possible that all three play a role . A signature component of analogical learning is that the ability to perceive abstract relational matches can be enhanced by comparing different instances of a relation . For example , Gick and Holy - oak ( 1983 ) found that comparing two stories that shared causal structure enabled people to generalize that structure and to transfer it to a further situa - tion . These ﬁ ndings are consistent with other research suggesting that the act of comparison entails a structural alignment process that high - lights the relational commonalities between the items compared ( Gentner & Medina , 1998 ; Mark - man & Gentner , 1993 ) . Similar effects of comparison have been found for preschool children ( Gentner , Anggoro , & Klibanoff , 2011 ; Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . The in ﬂ uence of structural alignment in promot - ing relational focus is a de ﬁ ning characteristic of analogical reasoning in adults ( Gentner , Holyoak , & Kokinov , 2001 ) , and the evidence of its in ﬂ uence in children as young as 3 years of age suggests that there may be continuity in analogical learning pro - cesses through human development . A second sig - nature component of analogical learning is that attention to individual objects can interfere with relational processing . This is especially true for young children , who show a strong tendency to focus on objects rather than relations . Preschool children perform far worse on relational matching tasks when competing object matches are present ( Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ) , especially if the objects involved are rich and distinctive ( DeLoache , 1995 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Paik & Mix , 2006 ) . The ﬁ nding that attention to objects can overshadow attention to relations extends to very young age groups ( Casasola , 2005 ; Maguire , Hirsh - Pasek , Golinkoff , & Brandone , 2008 ) . A study by Christie and Gentner ( 2010 ) illus - trates both the appeal of object matches to young children and the effect of comparison in promoting attention to common relational structure . Christie and Gentner taught 3 - year - olds names for novel spatial relational patterns , and asked them to choose a further instance of the pattern ( see Fig - ure 2 ) . Children given only one standard extended the terms on the basis of object matches rather than common relational structure . For example , given a Figure 2 . Sample set used in Christie and Gentner ( 2010 ) study . Children who saw one standard ( either Standard 1 or Standard 2 ) overwhelmingly chose the object match those who compared the two standards were more likely to choose the relational match . Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1391 standard black dog above white dog ; otherwise identical , the children would choose an alternative showing a black dog and a black cat , rather than one showing the same relational pattern instantiated with differ - ent objects . Across two studies , over 90 % of the 3 - year - olds ’ responses were to the object match — demonstrating the strength of the object bias in young children . However , when a new group of 3 - year - olds was led to compare two standards show - ing the same relational pattern , the majority of their responses were to the relational match . The effects of comparison were quite striking : The proportion of relational matches rose from 2 % to 57 % — even though the competing object alternative contained two object matches . Prior Evidence on Early Relational Insight There is considerable evidence that infants pos - sess some understanding of spatial relations ( Casa - sola , 2005 ; Casasola & Cohen , 2002 ; Hespos , Grossman , & Saylor , 2010 ; Hespos & Piccin , 2009 ; Hespos & Spelke , 2004 ; McDonough , Choi , & Mandler , 2003 ; Quinn , Cummins , Kase , Martin , & Weissman , 1996 ) and physical relations ( Hespos & Baillargeon , 2001 , 2006 ; Wang & Baillargeon , 2008 ; for a review , see Baillargeon , Li , Gertner , & Wu , 2011 ) . Much of this work has focused on infants ’ knowledge about interactions between objects . In many of these studies — particularly those using the violation - of - expectation paradigm — the goal is to trace the early development of insight into spatial and physical processes . Although some of this work has investigated the processes involved in gaining knowledge ( e . g . , Casasola , 2005 ; Quinn et al . , 1996 ; Wang & Baillargeon , 2008 ) , in most cases the focus has been on discovering what knowledge infants bring to the laboratory . In con - trast , our goal is to study infants ’ learning pro - cesses during the experiment itself . We ask whether infants can derive abstract same – different relations from speci ﬁ c exemplars by processes of analogical abstraction . Perhaps the clearest case of relational learning in infants comes from arti ﬁ cial grammar tasks ( Aslin & Newport , 2012 ; Saffran , Aslin , & Newport , 1996 ) , particularly those in which infants learn a relational pattern that can be transferred to new exemplars ( Gerken , 2006 ; Gomez & Gerken , 2000 ; Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Kirkham , Slemmer , & Johnson , 2002 ; Marcus , Vijayan , Rao , & Vishton , 1999 ) . For exam - ple , in the Marcus et al . ( 1999 ) study , when 7 . 5 - month - olds heard 48 examples ( 16 patterns , three times each ) of a syllable pattern such as AAB , they could then discriminate new instances of the AAB pattern from instances of an ABA pattern , even when all the speci ﬁ c syllables were new ( see also Gomez & Gerken , 1999 ) . Furthermore , there is evi - dence that the ability to generalize across such pat - terns is not restricted to language - like materials ; it can operate across a broad range of stimuli , includ - ing tones and visual stimuli ( Gomez & Gerken , 2000 ; Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Saffran , Pollak , Seibel , & Shkolnik , 2007 ) . These experiments focus on learning a particu - lar pattern that emerges during the course of the experiments . How might this be done ? Marcus ( 2000 ) notes two main approaches — one based on assuming that the child is trying to predict the next syllable , and the other based on assuming a preprocessor that transforms each input item into an abstract form . We suggest a third possibility — namely , that analogical learning mechanisms might take concrete descriptions as input and gen - eralize across a sequence of items to arrive at a more abstract representation . In support of this possibility , Kuehne , Gentner , and Forbus ( 2000 ) showed that SEQL ( sequential learning engine ) , a computational model of analogical generalization , can capture the Marcus et al . ( 1999 ) ﬁ ndings . SEQL is an offshoot of SME ( structure - mapping engine ) , and operates by using SME to iteratively compare input examples to an ongoing generaliza - tion . The model was given the same input as the infants in Marcus et al . : three repetitions of each of the 16 strings , with each syllable encoded as 12 phonemic features ( following Elman , 1998 ) . The relational pattern within each string ( e . g . , AAB ) was encoded by Magi , which uses SME to encode symmetry and repetition within an item ( Fergu - son , 1994 ) . As the strings were presented , SEQL computed a generalization by comparing the ﬁ rst two exemplars ( via SME ) and storing their com - mon structure , and then incrementally comparing subsequent exemplars to the ongoing abstraction . After three ( randomly ordered ) repetitions of each example string , SEQL was given two test strings with new syllables . Like the infants in Marcus et al . , it was found that the test string with the same relational structure ( e . g . , CCD ) was more similar to its generalization than the one with dif - ferent structure ( e . g . , CDC ) . This rule - like behavior emerged despite the fact that no variables were introduced , and in every run of the simulation , some concrete features were still present at the end . These results provide evidence that analogi - cal generalization could capture the emergence of grammatical patterns . However , because the arti ﬁ - 1392 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner cial grammar studies were not designed to test for analogical processes , evidence for ( or against ) speci ﬁ c signatures of analogical processing is lack - ing . We return to these issues in the General Dis - cussion . The Same – Different Relation in Infants Few studies have looked directly at whether infants can detect same – different relations . We know from the arti ﬁ cial grammar studies just discussed that infants can discriminate AAB patterns from ABA patterns ( Marcus et al . , 1999 ; Saffran et al . , 2007 ) , but this does not tell us whether the infants could distinguish AA from AB . That is , the ability to recognize a pattern does not imply the ability to recognize all of its individual subpatterns ( Palmer , 1977 ; Sinha , Balas , Ostrovsky , & Russell , 2006 ) . More recently , Addyman and Mareschal ( 2010 ) showed infants of 4 and 8 months nonrepeating ex - emplars of either same or different ( up to a maxi - mum of 19 exemplars ) during familiarization . Then the infants viewed test trials , presented sequen - tially . They reported that 8 - but not 4 - month - olds infants showed evidence of looking longer at the novel than at the familiar relation . It is dif ﬁ cult to interpret these results , because half the infants in both age groups had participated in a prior same – different study during the same session . However , it is interesting that although both age groups received over 18 familiarization trials , very few infants showed habituation ( a decline in looking time over the course of trials ) , suggesting that the same – different relation did not emerge readily . Still , these results provide encouragement for the idea that by 8 months of age , infants can distinguish same and different relations under certain conditions . We now turn to the question of how infants extract relational commonalities . Experiment 2 In Experiment 2 , we tested the possibility that infants ’ relational learning stems from analogical processing — that is , carrying out structural align - ment across exemplars and thereby extracting com - mon relational structure . The question then becomes : Can infants derive abstract same – different relations from a brief series of exemplars , and if so does this learning process bear the signatures of analogical learning ? That is , we ask whether infants engage analogical learning mechanisms during the learning phase to extract relational commonalities from a series of exemplars . As reviewed above , two key characteristics of analogical learning are : ( a ) that comparing relation - ally similar exemplars promotes relational abstrac - tion and ( b ) that focusing on individual objects interferes with relational processing . In Experiment 2 , we ask whether infants would show this learning pattern . That is , we ask , ﬁ rst , whether 7 - and 9 - month - olds could successfully abstract same or dif - ferent relations from multiple exemplars , generaliz - ing the relation to exemplars composed of completely new objects . Such a pattern would sug - gest that the ability to align sequential exemplars and extract their common relation — a signature of analogical processing in older children — is evident in infants as well . Second , we ask whether infants would also show adverse effects of object focus . If object focus distracts from relational processing , this would constitute a further parallel with analogical learning in older children . In Experiment 2 , infants received training on either same or different relations . During testing , infants saw pairs instantiating the same and different relation . The question was whether they would dif - ferentiate the familiar relation from the new rela - tion . Critically , each infant saw three kinds of test pairs ( as ampli ﬁ ed below ) . Some test pairs were made up of entirely new objects ; these tested whether infants had abstracted the relation across the habituation pairs . A second kind of test pairs consisted of objects that had been rendered salient earlier in the session ; these tested whether object salience would disrupt relational processing , as in older populations . The third kind of test pairs con - sisted of objects that had been rendered salient but that had subsequently appeared in the habituation series . These pairs tested whether repeated align - ment across pairs would overcome initial object sal - ience , as has also been found for older children . Finally , our method also allowed us to ask whether infants are equally pro ﬁ cient at learning same and different relations . The key predictions from the analogical learning account are ( a ) that alignment across relationally identical pairs should render the common relation more salient and promote abstracting the relation and ( b ) that attention to objects should disrupt structural alignment and therefore interfere with relational abstraction . Thus , if infants are learning via analogical processes , they should differentiate the familiar relation ( e . g . , same , if habituated to same ) from the unfamiliar one ( e . g . , different ) for novel test pairs . Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1393 Method Participants The participants were 64 healthy , full - term infants , thirty - two 7 - month - olds ( 17 male and 15 female ) ranging from 6 months 9 days to 7 months 22 days ( M = 6 months 28 days ) and thirty - two 9 - month - olds ( 13 male and 18 female ) ranging from 8 months 15 days to 9 months 19 days ( M = 9 months 4 days ) . Half the infants were assigned to the same condition ; the other half , to the different condition . Seven additional infants were tested but eliminated from the ﬁ nal analysis — three because of fussiness , three because of parental interference , and one due to inattentiveness . The recruitment and socioeconomic status information was similar to Experiment 1 . Apparatus The stage setup was identical to that used in Experiment 1 . However , for this experiment we adopted a habituation – dishabituation paradigm to allow us to examine the rate of learning during training trials . Another change was that the same and different test trials were presented sequentially , rather than side by side . XHab ( Pinto , 1996 ) was used to record looking times for habituation and test trials during the experiment . The stimuli consisted of 16 objects , composed of 10 distinctive types ( Elmo , blue fuzzy head , pink dotted block , checkered cylinder , dragon , red striped block , camel , pig , green puff balls on wood , and red / green foam block ) , with each pair placed on a 26 . 5 9 15 . 5 cm piece of cardboard covered with contact paper ( see Figure 3 ) . Twelve of the objects ( composed of seven distinct types ) were pre - sented in the playroom before the experiment began . Of these , eight ( four pairs ) were also used in the habituation phase and in the test phase , and three were used in the test phase only . Four pairs of objects were used in habituation and six were used in the test . Events Object experience phase . In the object experience phase , we manipulated object focus by showing some of the test objects to the infants in the play - room prior to the experiments , during naturalistic play interactions . We held up the objects and made comments such as , “ Look ! ” and “ See this one ? ” The objects were presented individually and in no particular order for approximately 5 s for each object . The objects consisted of all of the objects used in the habituation trials ( two of each Elmos , Figure 3 . Schematic of events in Experiment 2 . In the waiting room infants saw a subset of the individual toys before the experiment . Infants were habituated to four pairs of objects , either same or different . In six sequential test trials looking time was recorded to the novel and familiar relational pairs in three different types of test trials ( object experience , object experi - ence + pair habituation , and novel ) . 1394 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner camels , red blocks , and pink blocks ) , as well as a set of objects used only in the object experience test trials ( two blue fuzzy heads , one checkered cylin - der , and one dragon ) . Pair habituation trials . To engage infants ’ atten - tion , in both habituation and test trials the pairs were moved during the trial . When the screen went up at the start of a trial , a pair of objects rested on the cardboard plate on the stage . Each of the exper - imenter ’ s hands grasped one of the objects in the pair and raised the objects straight up ( 1 s ) , tilted the objects to the left ( 1 s ) , returned them to the center ( 1 s ) , tilted them to right ( 1 s ) , returned them to the center ( 1 s ) , returned them to the plate ( 1 s ) , and paused on the plate ( 2 s ) . This 8 - s cycle repeated continuously until the trial ended . In the same condition , infants saw habituation trials in which the pairs of objects were the same ( see Fig - ure 3 ) . In the different condition , infants saw habitu - ation trials in which the pairs of objects were different . Infants saw four sets of object pairs during habituation trials . These four pairs were repeated until the infant reached the habituation criterion . The order of presentation was counterbalanced across infants . Test trials . Infants received six test trials . In each test trial , infants viewed one pair of objects , pre - sented in the same manner as in the habituation tri - als , while their looking time was recorded . Each infant received test trials with both same and differ - ent pairs of objects , presented in alternation , with order counterbalanced across infants . There were three kinds of test trials : ( A ) pairs consisting of objects that the infant had only experienced individ - ually in the playroom ( object experience ) , ( B ) pairs consisting of objects that had been seen individually in the playroom and then in pairs during habitua - tion ( object experience + pair habituation ) , and ( C ) pairs consisting of objects that were completely novel , in that the infants saw them for the ﬁ rst time during the test trials ( novel ) . There were three trial orders in which the test items could appear : ABC , BCA , or CAB . This allowed each type of test pair to be ﬁ rst for a third of the infants . This ensured that the order of the test pairs was counterbalanced across infants and that any effects of test trial type were distinguishable from effects due to the order of the test pairs . Procedure During the experiment , the infant sat on the par - ent ’ s lap in front of the apparatus . The parents were asked to refrain from interacting with their infant during the experiment and to close their eyes dur - ing the test trials . All trials ended when the infant either looked away for 2 consecutive seconds after having looked at the event for at least 2 s , or looked at the event for 60 cumulative seconds with - out looking away for 2 consecutive seconds . A com - puter determined the end of the trial and signaled the experimenter to lower the screen . The habitua - tion criterion was at least a 50 % decline in total looking duration from the ﬁ rst three to the last three habituation trials or a maximum of nine trials . Each infant viewed six test trials , alternating between same or different pairs of objects . The type of test event shown ﬁ rst and the order of the test trials was counterbalanced across infants . Interob - server agreement was measured for all infants and averaged 94 % per trial per infant . Results Preliminary analyses revealed no signi ﬁ cant effect of gender or test trial order on the infants ’ looking times ; the subsequent analyses therefore collapsed across these variables . Overall The ﬁ rst analyses addressed our central question : whether infants are capable of abstracting same and different relations from multiple exemplars . The answer appears to be yes ; infants looked signi ﬁ - cantly longer at the novel relation than at the famil - iar relation during the test trials for both same and different ( see Figure 4 ) . Collapsing across all test trial types , 49 of the 64 infants ( 77 % ) had longer looking times for the novel test events than for the familiar test events ( p < . 001 , binomial comparison ) . Across all participants , the average looking times were 18 . 32 s ( SD = 8 . 34 ) for the novel relations and 14 . 50 s ( SD = 7 . 05 ) for the familiar relations , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 19 . 87 , p < . 001 , g 2 = . 24 . Overall , infants detected a change from the familiar to the novel relation . Effects of Prior Experience The next set of analyses tested whether prior experience in which attention was called to individ - ual objects would impede relational learning for pairs containing these objects ; and if so , whether this adverse effect would be mitigated by exposure to pairs containing these objects during habituation . In both cases , the answer appears to be yes . An ANOVA comparing the within - subject factors of Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1395 relation ( novel , familiar ) , and prior experience ( object experience , object experience + pair habitua - tion , novel ) revealed a signi ﬁ cant effect of relation , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 20 . 01 , p < . 001 , g 2 = . 24 , and a Rela - tion 9 Prior Experience interaction , F ( 2 , 62 ) = 3 . 17 , p = . 049 , g 2 = . 093 ( see Figure 5A ) . Further analyses revealed that infants looked signi ﬁ cantly longer to the novel relation even with completely new objects ( novel test trials ) , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 14 . 15 , p < . 001 , g 2 = . 18 , indicating that they successfully general - ized the abstract relation to new objects presented for the ﬁ rst time in test trials . In the trials in which attention was called to the individual objects ( object experience test trials ) , the generalization of the rela - tion was impeded ; infants showed no signi ﬁ cant difference in looking to the novel and familiar rela - tions , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 0 . 114 , p = . 74 , g 2 = . 002 . However , this adverse effect of object focus was mitigated by exposure to pairs containing these objects during habituation ; on these trials , infants looked signi ﬁ - cantly longer to the novel relation ( object experi - ence + pair habituation test trials ) , F ( 1 , 63 ) = 8 . 70 , p = . 004 , g 2 = . 12 . To isolate the effect of prior experience and train - ing we looked at the recovery scores of the ﬁ rst pair of tests ( the ﬁ rst novel relation test trial and the ﬁ rst familiar relation test trial ) . Recovery scores are a standard looking - time analysis for habitua - tion – dishabituation paradigms , involving three comparisons . The ﬁ rst is a t test comparing the last habituation to the ﬁ rst novel test trial . If infants perceive the test event as novel , then there should be a signi ﬁ cant increase in looking time from the last habituation trial to the novel test trial . The sec - Figure 4 . Box plots showing mean looking times during the habituation and test trials in Experiment 2 . At test , preference for the novel relation was signi ﬁ cant in both same and different conditions . The habituation graphs include results for the ﬁ rst three trials ( H1 , H2 , H3 ) and the last three trials before the habituation criterion was met ( H - 3 , H - 2 , H - 1 ) . Black diamonds represent means , the central line in each box is the median , and the upper and lower portions of each box represent the third and ﬁ rst quartiles respectively . * Signi ﬁ cant difference between novel and familiar test trials . 1396 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner ond is a t test comparing the last habituation to the ﬁ rst familiar test trial . If infants generalize their habituated response to the familiar test event , then looking time should not be statistically different between the last habituation trial and the familiar test trial . For completeness , the third analysis is a t test comparing the novel and familiar test trials , which asks whether infants overall look signi ﬁ - cantly longer at the novel than at the familiar test trials . The recovery analysis goes beyond the signif - icant interaction of relation by prior experience above , in that it focuses on the ﬁ rst test pair , removing the in ﬂ uence of prior test trials on the results . As we found no effect of condition ( habitu - ation to same or different ) or age group ( 7 - or 9 - month - olds ) in the overall analysis of the prior experience effects , we collapse across these in the recovery scores analysis . For infants who saw object experience as the ﬁ rst test trials , there was no change in looking time from the last habituation trial ( M = 12 . 4 s , SD = 9 . 5 s ) to the novel relation ( M = 15 . 4 s , SD = 11 . 7 s ) , t ( 22 ) = 1 . 00 , p = . 33 , or from the last habituation trial to the familiar relation ( M = 17 . 1 s , SD = 10 . 8 s ) , t ( 22 ) = 1 . 88 , p = . 08 . In addition , there was no overall difference between novel - relation and familiar - relation test trials , t ( 22 ) = 0 . 722 , p = . 478 ( see Figure 5B ) . This pattern suggests that when the ﬁ rst test trial consisted of high - salience objects , infants did not detect the same – different rela - tion on that trial . In contrast , infants who saw object experience + pair habituation as their ﬁ rst test trials showed evidence of having encoded the relation . That is , they showed a signi ﬁ cant increase from the last habituation trial ( M = 14 . 71 s , SD = 7 . 0 s ) to the novel - relation test trial Figure 5 . Looking time in Experiment 2 . ( A ) The overall looking time to novel and familiar relations in the three types of test trials . The change in looking time from the last habituation to the ﬁ rst test pair ( solid line for the novel event , dotted line for the familiar event ) for ( B ) object experience , ( C ) object experience + pair habituation , and ( D ) novel test trials . * p < . 05 . Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1397 ( M = 22 . 2 s , SD = 13 . 0 s ) , t ( 20 ) = 2 . 45 , p = . 024 , but not to the familiar - relation test trial ( M = 14 . 6 s , SD = 13 . 3 s ) , t ( 20 ) = 0 . 49 , p = . 96 . Furthermore , there was a signi ﬁ cant overall difference between the novel - relation and the familiar - relation test tri - als , t ( 20 ) = 2 . 16 , p = . 043 ( see Figure 5C ) . This is the classic dishabituation pattern . The infants dishabitu - ated to the novel - relation event and generalized to the familiar - relation event . Infants who saw novel as their ﬁ rst test trials also showed signi ﬁ cant recovery from the last habituation ( M = 11 . 5 s , SD = 7 . 4 s ) to the novel relation ( M = 25 . 5 s , SD = 17 . 9 s ) , t ( 19 ) = 3 . 17 , p = . 005 . In addition , they showed signi ﬁ cant recovery to the familiar relation ( M = 16 . 5 s , SD = 7 . 5 s ) , t ( 19 ) = 2 . 48 , p = . 023 . Importantly , there was a signi ﬁ cant overall differ - ence between the novel - relation and familiar - rela - tion test trials , t ( 19 ) = 2 . 38 , p = . 028 . That infants dishabituated to both the novel - relation and famil - iar - relation test events suggests that they detected the objects as novel . However , the signi ﬁ cant differ - ence between the novel - relation and familiar - rela - tion test events indicates that they also discriminated between the novel and familiar rela - tions ( see Figure 5D ) . Effects of Age To investigate whether there was an effect of age , we did an ANOVA with the within - subject variables of relation ( novel vs . familiar ) and test trial ( ﬁ rst , second , or third pair ) and the between - subject factor of age ( 7 or 9 months ) . This revealed a marginal three - way interaction , F ( 2 , 61 ) = 2 . 78 , p = . 07 , g 2 = . 08 . To make the analysis easier to perceive , we translated the relation factor into a dif - ference score by subtracting the looking times at the familiar from the novel events for each test trial pair . These data are represented in Figure 6 . They demonstrate that 9 - month - old infants show a large difference in looking time ( looking longer at the novel relation pair ) on the ﬁ rst test pair , which diminishes over the course of test trials . In contrast , the 7 - month - old infants show an opposite time course : They also look longer at the novel relation , but their difference in looking time increases across the test sets . Effects of Relation Our next question was whether infants would ﬁ nd it easier to align the same relation than the different relation . Perhaps surprisingly , we found no difference between these two conditions . As shown in Figure 3 , infants detected the novel rela - tion at test regardless of whether they were habit - uated to same or to different . Further analyses revealed that there was no difference in number of trials to meet the habituation criterion for same versus different ( M = 7 . 42 and 7 . 24 , respectively , range = 6 – 9 ) , F ( 1 , 62 ) < 1 , p = . 57 , or in the amount of looking time that infants accumula - ted during habituation ( M = 202 s , SD = 75 s ; M = 218 s , SD = 78 s , respectively ) , F ( 1 , 62 ) < 1 , p = . 38 . Overall , we found no evidence that the same relation was easier to learn than the different relation . This pattern of results was consistent and signi ﬁ - cant within each habituation condition . For the habituation to same condition , 23 of 31 infants ( 74 % ) looked longer at the different test trials ( p = . 011 , binomial comparison ) , and an ANOVA showed a signi ﬁ cant main effect of test relation , F ( 1 , 30 ) = 5 . 01 , p = . 03 , g 2 = . 14 . For the habituation to different condition , 26 of 33 ( 79 % ) infants looked longer at the same test trials ( p = . 001 , binomial comparison ) , and the ANOVA again showed a main effect of test relation , F ( 1 , 32 ) = 18 . 27 , p < . 001 , g 2 = . 36 . We also found no reliable differ - ences between same and different test trials when these relations were both novel , F ( 2 , 61 ) < 1 , or when they were both familiar , F ( 2 , 61 ) < 1 . Thus , we found no evidence in this study that same is eas - ier to learn than different . Effects of Habituation Phase Thirty - eight percent of the infants met the habit - uation criterion in the minimum of six trials , 54 % met the criterion in seven to nine trials , and 16 % of infants did not meet the habituation criteria after the maximum of nine trials . On average , infants Figure 6 . A line graph showing the difference score ( looking time to the novel relation − looking time to the familiar relation ) across the three pairs of test events and separated by age . 1398 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner reached the habituation criterion after seven trials . Thus , infants typically saw three of the four train - ing pairs a second time . An ANOVA of the accu - mulated looking during habituation reveal no main effect of age group , F ( 1 , 60 ) < 1 ; no main effect of condition , F ( 1 , 60 ) = 1 . 13 , p > . 05 ; and no interac - tions , F ( 1 , 60 ) < 1 . Infants accumulated an average of 210 . 6 s ( SD = 76 . 7 s ) of looking during the habit - uation phase . Additionally , there was no correla - tion between the duration of looking time during habituation trials and preference for the novel rela - tion , r ( 62 ) = (cid:1) 0 . 02 . A median split separating the shortest and the longest total looking times during habituation revealed that both groups looked sig - ni ﬁ cantly longer at the novel same – different relation than to the familiar relation ( both F s > 9 . 6 , both p s < . 005 ) . Thus , the amount of looking time during habituation had no impact on performance during test trials . Discussion The ﬁ rst question in this study was whether infants were capable of detecting and generalizing an abstract same – different relation . The results indi - cate that the answer is yes . Infants were able to generalize their learning to purely novel test pairs , showing that they had formed an abstract relation . Furthermore , infants habituated after just seven tri - als ( on average ) consisting of four distinct pairs plus repetitions , suggesting that the abstraction pro - cess was quite ef ﬁ cient . We infer that comparing across exemplars of the relation allowed the infant to abstract the common relational pattern — same or different . This pattern — comparing exemplars of a relation renders the relation more salient — is well established in studies with both adults ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) and children ( Childers & Paik , 2009 ; Christie & Gentner , 2010 ; Gentner et al . , 2011 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Maguire et al . , 2008 ) . These ﬁ ndings suggest that this signature of analog - ical reasoning is present as early as 7 months of age . We note that there is a way to save Possibility 1 here ( that infants are born with abstract representa - tions of same and different ) . It could be that the infants in Experiment 2 generalized better than those in Experiment 1 simply because they had more opportunities to encode the relation ( and more time to encode overall ) than did those in Experiment 1 . Although we cannot rule out this possibility , the overall ﬁ t with predictions suggests that analogical generalization is the more parsimo - nious explanation . The second question was whether there would be evidence of interference from attention to indi - vidual objects . Previous research on analogical learning has found that salient objects impede the structural alignment process ( Gentner & Ratter - mann , 1991 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ) . To address this question , we systemati - cally manipulated the infants ’ prior experience with the objects . Prior experience with the individual objects ( object experience ) interfered with the infants ’ ability to detect the same – different relation . However , this detrimental effect of prior object experience was overcome if infants then experi - enced those same objects within pairs during habitu - ation . In that case , the infants successfully distinguished novel from familiar relations on the test pairs ( object experience + pair habituation ) . Since infants also made this distinction for novel test pairs ( consisting of objects they had not been seen before ) , their failure to show an effect for object experience test pairs is strong evidence that object focus interfered with their ability to detect the relation — consistent with ﬁ ndings demonstrat - ing the detrimental effects of object focus on ana - logical processing . Finally , we discovered an intriguing age effect . The older infants showed a large difference in look - ing time on the ﬁ rst test pair ; then the difference attenuated over the subsequent pairs . The younger infants showed the opposite pattern . There was only a small difference in looking across the ﬁ rst two test trial types , but the difference increased across test trials . These differences suggest that ( as one might have expected ) the relational abstraction process had progressed further during habituation in the older infants than in the younger infants . Our design also allowed us to ask whether per - formance would be better with the same relation than with the different relation . Intuitively , it seems possible that same is an elemental relation , while dif - ferent may be represented as “ not same ” ( Clark & Chase , 1972 ; Hochmann , Mody , & Carey , 2013 ) , suggesting that children should more readily be able to abstract the same relation from experience than the different relation . However , prior evidence is mixed on this point ( Addyman & Mareschal , 2010 ; Smith , Redford , Haas , Coutinho , & Couch - man , 2008 ) . In our study , we found no measurable difference in the likelihood of learning a same ver - sus a different relation . An intriguing question is whether infants younger than 7 months would show an advantage for same over different . If so , then the idea that different is represented as not same might still be maintained . Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1399 What was learned ? After seeing a series of same or different exemplars in Experiment 2 , infants repre - sented an abstract relation of same or different that was not evident when they saw a single example in Experiment 1 . How might this have happened ? One possibility is that the infants had absolutely no notion of same and different relations before experi - encing this series in Experiment 2 . A more plausible explanation is that the infants were able to encode some initial form of the relation , at least for some of the pairs , but that these initial representations were highly context speci ﬁ c . In this case , the effect of structural alignment across examples was to lead the infants to rerepresent the relations in a more abstract way . On this account , infants would fail to apply the relation to a new pair after just one initial example ( as we found in Experiment 1 ) , but would be able to do so after aligning across examples ( as we found in Experiment 2 ) . There is considerable evidence for this kind of sequential analogical abstraction ( e . g . , Gentner , Loe - wenstein & Hung , 2007 ; Gentner et al . , 2011 ; Haryu , Imai , & Okada , 2011 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . For example , in the Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) study , 4 - year - old children were initially able to accurately match higher order spatial relational patterns ( such as monotonic increase from left to right ) within dimension but not across dimension . For example , they could match blue circles increasing in size with red squares increasing in size , but not with red squares increasing in darkness from left to right . But after experiencing several within - dimen - sion trials ( with no feedback ) , the children were able to perceive the cross - dimensional match . Gent - ner , Rattermann , Markman , and Kotovsky ( 1995 ) modeled these results by assuming that children initially represented the relations in a dimensionally speci ﬁ c manner ( roughly “ bigger than ” and “ darker than ” ) and that structural alignment across exam - ples prompted them to rerepresent the relations in a more abstract way ( roughly “ greater along a dimension than ” ) . We think something like this could apply in the current study . General Discussion Analogical ability — the ability to perceive and rea - son about common relational patterns across dispa - rate situations — is central to human intelligence . The available evidence indicates that humans are far better at representing and reasoning about rela - tions than are other species . Recent theoretical accounts have argued that this difference in rela - tional ability is the central cognitive difference between humans and other primates ( Gentner , 2003 , 2010 ; Penn et al . , 2008 ) . The question of how human analogical ability develops is therefore important not only to theories of human develop - ment but also to accounts of comparative cognition and of how to characterize human intelligence . In this article , we asked whether analogical abil - ity is present in human infants , using the simplest and most basic relation — that of sameness or differ - ence between two things . We proposed three broad possibilities : ( a ) that humans are born with analogi - cal ability and a set of primitive relations for encod - ing early experiences , ( b ) that humans are born with analogical ability but not with a set of primi - tive relations , and ( c ) that analogical ability is not inherent in humans but emerges from linguistic and cultural experiences . We began by revisiting Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) in ﬂ uential study , which sug - gested that infants — even at 7 months of age — form an abstract same relation from just one exemplar of a same pair , and likewise for different . If indeed infants encode an abstract relation from a single exemplar , this would suggest that they already have a basic set of abstract relations , which can be applied without prior experience . These ﬁ ndings suggested a qualitative difference between humans and other primates , and have been widely cited in the primate literature . Because of the importance of this question , we ﬁ rst tried to replicate this ﬁ nding . Our data do not support this conclusion . In our attempted replication of the Tyrrell et al . ( 1991 ) study ( Experiment 1 ) , we found no evidence that prelinguistic human infants spontaneously encode abstract same – different matches from a single exem - plar . The infants in our replication study showed a novelty response only when the familiar - relation pair was precisely identical ( in objects as well as relation ) to one that they had experienced before ; there is no indication that they went beyond recog - nizing the identical item they had seen before . They failed to distinguish new same pairs from new differ - ent pairs , as would have been required to conclude that they already have represented an abstract same – different relation . Our second question , given that 7 - and 9 - month - old infants do not immediately encode abstract same and different relations , was whether they could form these abstract relations via analogical learning pro - cesses . To address this , we asked whether the sig - natures of analogical learning seen in older children — the positive effects of multiple exemplars and the adverse effects of object focus — would be evident in infants ’ relational learning . We found that 7 - month - 1400 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner old infants can indeed abstract a same or different relation across multiple exemplars . Although one exemplar was not suf ﬁ cient ( Experiment 1 ) , the results of Experiment 2 showed that if infants are given a series of exemplars , they can form a same or different relation ; that is , they can distinguish between same and different pairs even when these pairs are made up of totally novel objects . Only a modest number of exemplars was required for this learning . Infants saw four exemplars of same ( or dif - ferent ) pairs , with two or three of them repeated , for a total of six to nine exemplars . Although we made no speci ﬁ c predictions here , this ﬁ nding is consistent with the typical ﬁ nding with older chil - dren , that comparing even a few exemplars of a relation can lead to signi ﬁ cant learning . Experiment 2 also bore out the second signature of analogical learning — namely , that object focus interferes with relational matching . When infants saw pairs consisting of objects that had been dem - onstrated as single objects in the playroom prior to the study , they failed to show a distinction between same and different pairs unless they had subse - quently seen the objects in pairs during habituation . This is consistent with other ﬁ ndings demonstrating that a focus on individual objects can disrupt rela - tional processing ( Casasola , 2005 ; Christie & Gent - ner , 2010 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Maguire et al . , 2008 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ) . It appears that there is continuity in the signatures of relational learning in the earliest evidence of this ability . Our ﬁ ndings support the broad position that humans are born with analogical skills and use these skills to extract relational information from experiences . Thus , they argue against the third pos - sibility suggested earlier — that analogical ability emerges developmentally as an amalgam of other cognitive processes , rather than being an inherent cognitive capacity . Of course , this is not to suggest that this ability is fully developed at an early age . Clearly , there are developmental changes and in ﬂ u - ences from language and cultural experiences . Nev - ertheless these are the ﬁ rst data that demonstrate that signatures of the analogical processing are evi - dent early in development . Broader Implications and Future Directions Returning to the question of how to characterize human relational ability , we found no support for the strong view that humans are endowed with a set of abstract relational representations . Rather , our ﬁ ndings suggest that humans are born with consid - erable analogical processing ability , with which they can detect abstract relations . This characterization is consistent with there being a continuum of analogi - cal ability between our species and other apes , rather than a sharp dichotomy . As we see it , the evidence from primate studies suggests that other apes pos - sess some analogical reasoning ability , though to a substantially lesser degree than humans ( Christie , Gentner , Call , & Haun , 2015 ; Haun & Call , 2009 ; Premack , 1983 ; Thompson et al . , 1997 ) . Indeed , recent studies have suggested that even more distant relatives ( hooded crows ) have some analogical abil - ity and can pass the relational - match - to - sample test under some circumstances ( Smirnova , Zorina , Oboz - ova , & Wasserman , 2015 ) . Our ﬁ ndings also bear on the role of language in analogical learning . Gentner and colleagues have suggested that acquiring and using relational language is instrumental in the development of analogical processing ( Christie & Gentner , 2014 ; Gentner , 2010 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gent - ner et al . , 2011 ) . Our results clearly place limits on these claims . The infants in our study were able to carry out analogical generalization of a same – differ - ent relation prior to learning terms for same and dif - ferent . We can infer that analogical ability does not depend on the possession of relational language . However , research with older children shows that language can augment our relational capacity , by inviting comparison ( Namy & Gentner , 2002 ) and by heightening attention to particular relations ( Ca - sasola , 2005 ; Gentner , € Ozy € urek , G € urcanli , & Goldin - Meadow , 2013 ) . Thus , it is an open question whether we might see language effects later in development . We know that relational terms are acquired later than object - reference terms ( Bornstein et al . , 2004 ; Gentner , 1982 ; Gentner & Boroditsky , 2009 ) ; indeed , infants do not appear to understand relational words until the end of the 1st year ( Bergelson & Swingley , 2013 ) . Thus , future research should investigate whether and when we might see language effects for same – different processing in infants . Earlier we raised the question of whether infants ’ abilities in arti ﬁ cial grammar tasks could be related to the analogical learning processes studied here . We think it quite possible that some of the same processes are involved . Arti ﬁ cial grammar tasks capture two crucial requirements for grammar learning : ﬁ rst , the ability to learn sequential transi - tion probabilities ( Saffran et al . , 1996 ) , and second , the ability to extract and learn parallel structure across a set of exemplars ( Marcus , 2000 ; see also Gomez & Gerken , 2000 ) . It is this second ability , often termed rule learning , that is most closely con - Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1401 nected with analogical generalization . That infants can learn this kind of general structure was demon - strated by Marcus et al . ( 1999 ) in their seminal study showing that 7 - month - olds exposed to a ser - ies of exemplars such as pa ti pa and li na li formed an abstract ABA structure — as evidenced by their showing a novelty response to a new pattern ( e . g . , wo wo fe ) but not to an old pattern ( wo fe wo ) . Is this kind of relational generalization a product of analogical learning ? There is some suggestive evidence for this speculation . First , the same kind of generalization patterns have been found for visual stimuli ( Johnson et al . , 2009 ; Saffran et al . , 2007 ) . This is consistent with the operation of a domain - general learning process such as analogy , rather than a dedicated language - speci ﬁ c process . Second , studies by Gerken ( 2006 ) show that when the exemplars all contain the same extra element , the infants ’ generalization retains that element — consistent with analogical learning patterns , which typically show conservative generalization , espe - cially early in learning . A third line of evidence , also noted above , is that we have been able to sim - ulate the Marcus et al . ( 1999 ) study with a compu - tational simulation of analogical generalization ( Kuehne et al . , 2000 ) . Unlike most attempts to simu - late these results , the analogical generalization mechanism requires only the same 48 exemplars given to the infants , and can succeed even with noise added to the data . Of course , these are only plausibility arguments . An important future direc - tion will be to test directly whether analogical gen - eralization processes operate in arti ﬁ cial grammar learning . Another open question is how to square our claims concerning the continuity of relational learn - ing processes with the fact that even 2 ½ - year - old children have dif ﬁ culty with same – different rela - tional matching ( Christie & Gentner , 2014 ) . One possible explanation lies in the difference between the tasks typically given to older and younger chil - dren . For example , there is evidence that 18 - month - old children can succeed in abstracting same – differ - ent relations across examples in service of a causal learning task ( Walker & Gopnik , 2014 ) . Our ﬁ ndings also raise questions for future infant research . First , what is the earlier course of relational learning ? Would we see analogical learn - ing even among much younger infants , and if so , would they require more extensive training ( e . g . , more exemplars , more repetitions or longer expo - sure times ) to abstract relations ? Research with newborn infants by Gervain , Berent , and Werker ( 2012 ) suggests that some sensitivity to relational patterns may appear very early . Using the func - tional near - infrared spectroscopy technique , they found that newborns formed a different neural response to AAB patterns than to ABB patterns after exposure to blocks of syllables in the two patterns . Whether and when this ability would allow infants to generalize to distinguish new instances of one pattern from another is an intrigu - ing question . In conclusion , our ﬁ ndings show that analogical ability is present in infants by at least 7 months of age . Our results also suggest that there is continuity in the analogical learning process across develop - ment , and leave open the possibility of continuity across species . References Addyman , C . , & Mareschal , D . ( 2010 ) . The perceptual ori - gins of the abstract same / different concept in human infants . Animal Cognition , 13 , 817 – 833 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10071 - 010 - 0330 - 0 Aslin , R . N . , & Newport , E . L . ( 2012 ) . Statistical learning : From acquiring speci ﬁ c items to forming general rules . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 21 , 170 – 176 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0963721412436806 Baillargeon , R . , Li , J . , Gertner , Y . , & Wu , D . ( 2011 ) . How do infants reason about physical events ? In U . Goswami ( Ed . ) , The Wiley - Blackwell handbook of childhood cognitive development ( 2nd ed . , pp . 11 – 48 ) . Oxford , UK : Blackwell . doi : 10 . 1002 / 9781444325485 . ch1 Bergelson , E . , & Swingley , D . ( 2013 ) . The acquisition of abstract words by young infants . Cognition , 127 , 391 – 397 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2013 . 02 . 011 Bornstein , M . H . , Cote , L . R . , Maital , S . , Painter , K . , Park , S . - Y . , Pascual , L . , . . . Vyt , A . ( 2004 ) . Crosslinguistic analysis of vocabulary in young children : Spanish , Dutch , French , Hebrew , Italian , Korean , and American English . Child Development , 75 , 1115 – 1139 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2004 . 00729 . x Casasola , M . ( 2005 ) . When less is more : How infants learn to form an abstract categorical representation of sup - port . Child Development , 76 , 279 – 290 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2005 . 00844 . x Casasola , M . , & Cohen , L . B . ( 2002 ) . Infant categorization of containment , support , and tight - ﬁ t spatial relation - ships . Developmental Science , 5 , 247 – 264 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 7687 . 00226 Childers , J . B . , & Paik , J . H . ( 2009 ) . Korean - and English - speaking children use cross - situational information to learn novel predicate terms . Journal of Child Language , 36 , 201 – 224 . doi : 10 . 1017 / s0305000908008891 Christie , S . , & Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Where hypotheses come from : Learning new relations by structural align - ment . Journal of Cognition and Development , 11 , 356 – 373 doi : 10 . 1080 / 15248371003700015 1402 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner Christie , S . , & Gentner , D . ( 2014 ) . Language helps chil - dren succeed on a classic analogy task . Cognitive Sci - ence , 38 , 383 – 397 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cogs . 12099 Christie , S . , Gentner , D . , Call , J . , & Haun , D . ( 2015 ) . Sensi - tivity to relational similarity and object similarity in apes and children . Clark , E . V . ( 1973 ) . What ’ s in a word ? On the child ’ s acquisition of semantics in his ﬁ rst language . In T . E . Moore ( Ed . ) , Cognitive development and the acquisition of language ( pp . 65 – 110 ) . New York , NY : Academic Press . Clark , H . H . , & Chase , W . G . ( 1972 ) . On the process of comparing sentences against pictures . Cognitive Psychol - ogy , 3 , 472 – 517 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 72 ) 90019 - 9 DeLoache , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Early symbol understanding and use . In D . L . Medin ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation : Advances in research and theory ( Vol . 33 , pp . 65 – 114 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Dewar , K . M . , & Xu , F . ( 2010 ) . Induction , overhypothesis , and the origin of abstract knowledge : Evidence from 9 - month - old infants . Psychological Science , 21 , 1871 – 1877 . doi : 10 . 1093 / acprof : oso / 9780199216895 . 003 . 0011 Doumas , L . A . A . , Hummel , J . E . , & Sandhofer , C . M . ( 2008 ) . A theory of the discovery and predication of relational concepts . Psychological Review , 115 , 1 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295x . 115 . 1 . 1 ELAN . ( 2007 ) . ELAN . Nijmegen , Netherlands : Language Archiving Technologies . Elman , J . ( 1998 ) . Generalization , simple recurrent networks , and the emergence of structure . Presented at the annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society , Madison , WI . Fagot , J . , & Thompson , R . K . R . ( 2011 ) . Generalized rela - tional matching by guinea baboons ( Papio papio ) in two - by - two - item analogy problems . Psychological Sci - ence , 22 , 1304 – 1309 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797611422916 Ferguson , R . W . ( 1994 ) . MAGI : Analogy - based encoding using regularity and symmetry . In A . Ram & K . Eiselt ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 283 – 288 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Flemming , T . M . , Beran , M . J . , & Washburn , D . A . ( 2007 ) . Disconnect in concept learning by rhesus monkeys ( Macaca mulatta ) : Judgment of relations and relations - between - relations . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavior Processes , 33 , 55 – 63 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0097 - 7403 . 33 . 1 . 55 Gentner , D . ( 1982 ) . Why nouns are learned before verbs : Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning . In S . A . Kuczaj ( Ed . ) , Language development : Language thought and culture ( Vol . 2 , pp . 301 – 334 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erl - baum . Gentner , D . ( 1988 ) . Metaphor as structure mapping : The relational shift . Child Development , 59 , 47 – 59 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 11303 Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Why we ’ re so smart . In D . Gentner & S . Goldin - Meadow ( Eds . ) , Language in mind : Advances in the study of language and thought ( pp . 195 – 235 ) . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Bootstrapping the mind : Analogical processes and symbol systems . Cognitive Science , 34 , 752 – 775 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6709 . 2010 . 01114 . x Gentner , D . , Anggoro , F . K . , & Klibanoff , R . S . ( 2011 ) . Structure mapping and relational language support children ’ s learning of relational categories . Child Devel - opment , 82 , 1173 – 1188 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2011 . 01599 . x Gentner , D . , & Boroditsky , L . ( 2009 ) . Early acquisition of nouns and verbs : Evidence from Navajo . In V . Gather - cole ( Ed . ) , Routes to language : Studies in honor of Melissa Bowerman ( pp . 5 – 36 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Gentner , D . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Kokinov , B . N . ( 2001 ) . The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Hung , B . ( 2007 ) . Compari - son facilitates children ' s learning of names for parts . Journal of Cognition and Development , 8 , 285 – 307 . Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1998 ) . Similarity and the devel - opment of rules . Cognition , 65 , 263 – 297 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0010 - 0277 ( 98 ) 00002 - x Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . ( 1999 ) . Comparison in the devel - opment of categories . Cognitive Development , 14 , 487 – 513 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0885 - 2014 ( 99 ) 00016 - 7 Gentner , D . , € Ozy € urek , A . , G € urcanli , € O . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2013 ) . Spatial language facilitates spatial cognition : Evidence from children who lack language input . Cogni - tion , 127 , 318 – 330 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2013 . 01 . 003 Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of similarity . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought : Interrelations in development ( pp . 225 – 277 ) . New York , NY : Cam - bridge University Press . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , Markman , A . B . , & Kotov - sky , L . ( 1995 ) . Two forces in the development of rela - tional similarity . In T . J . Simon & G . S . Halford ( Eds . ) , Developing cognitive competence : New approaches to process modeling ( pp . 263 – 313 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and sur - face similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 – 300 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1003 _ 2 Gerken , L . ( 2006 ) . Decisions , decisions : Infant language learning when multiple generalizations are possible . Cog - nition , 98 , B67 – B74 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2005 . 03 . 003 Gervain , J . , Berent , I . , & Werker , J . F . ( 2012 ) . Binding at birth : The newborn brain detects identity relations and sequential position in speech . Journal of Cognitive Neuro - science , 24 , 564 – 574 . doi : 10 . 1162 / jocn _ a _ 00157 Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 83 ) 90002 - 6 Giurfa , M . , Zhang , S . , Jennett , A . , Menzel , R . , & Sriniva - san , M . V . ( 2001 ) . The concepts of “ sameness ” and “ dif - ference ” in an insect . Nature , 410 , 930 – 933 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35073582 Gomez , R . L . , & Gerken , L . A . ( 1999 ) . Arti ﬁ cial grammar learning by 1 - year - olds leads to speci ﬁ c and abstract knowledge . Cognition , 70 , 109 – 135 . Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1403 Gomez , R . L . , & Gerken , L . ( 2000 ) . Infant arti ﬁ cial lan - guage learning and language acquisition . Trends in Cog - nitive Sciences , 4 , 178 – 186 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s1364 - 6613 ( 00 ) 01467 - 4 Halford , G . S . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning and concep - tual complexity in cognitive development . Human Development , 35 , 193 – 217 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000277167 Haryu , E . , Imai , M . , & Okada , H . ( 2011 ) . Object similarity bootstraps young children to action - based verb exten - sions . Child Development , 82 , 674 – 686 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2010 . 01567 . x Haun , D . B . M . , & Call , J . ( 2009 ) . Great apes ’ capacities to recognize relational similarity . Cognition , 110 , 147 – 159 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2008 . 10 . 012 Hespos , S . J . , & Baillargeon , R . ( 2001 ) . Infants ’ knowledge about occlusion and containment events : A surprising discrepancy . Psychological Science , 12 , 141 – 147 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9280 . 00324 Hespos , S . J . , & Baillargeon , R . ( 2006 ) . Decalage in infants ’ knowledge about occlusion and containment events : Converging evidence from action tasks . Cognition , 99 , B31 – B41 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2005 . 01 . 010 Hespos , S . J . , Grossman , S . R . , & Saylor , M . M . ( 2010 ) . Infants ’ ability to parse continuous actions : Further evi - dence . Neural Networks , 23 , 1026 – 1032 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neunet . 2010 . 07 . 010 Hespos , S . J . , & Piccin , T . B . ( 2009 ) . To generalize or not to generalize : Spatial categories are in ﬂ uenced by phys - ical attributes and language . Developmental Science , 12 , 88 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2008 . 00749 . x Hespos , S . J . , & Spelke , E . S . ( 2004 ) . Conceptual precur - sors to language . Nature , 430 , 453 – 456 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nat - ure02634Hochmann , J . , Mody , S . , & Carey , S . ( 2013 ) . Same and dif - ferent relations in match - and mismatch - to - sample . Pre - sented at the Cognitive Development Society , Memphis , TN . James , W . ( 1890 ) . The principles of psychology . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Johnson , S . P . , Fernandes , K . J . , Frank , M . C . , Kirkham , N . , Marcus , G . , Rabagliati , H . , & Slemmer , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Abstract rule learning for visual sequences in 8 - and 11 - month - olds . Infancy , 14 , 2 – 18 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15250000802569611 Kirkham , N . Z . , Slemmer , J . A . , & Johnson , S . P . ( 2002 ) . Visual statistical learning in infancy : Evidence for a domain general learning mechanism . Cognition , 83 , B35 – B42 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0010 - 0277 ( 02 ) 00004 - 5 Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and cate - gorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 – 2822 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 1131753 Kuehne , S . E . , Gentner , D . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 2000 ) . Mod - eling infant learning via symbolic structural alignment . In L . R . Gleitman & A . K . Joshi ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 286 – 291 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Maguire , M . J . , Hirsh - Pasek , K . , Golinkoff , R . M . , & Bran - done , A . C . ( 2008 ) . Focusing on the relation : Fewer exemplars facilitate children ’ s initial verb learning and extension . Developmental Science , 11 , 628 – 634 . doi : 10 . 1 111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2008 . 00707 . x Marcus , G . F . ( 2000 ) . Pabiku and Ga Ti Ga : Two mecha - nisms infants use to learn about the world . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 9 , 145 – 147 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8721 . 00080 Marcus , G . F . , Fernandes , K . J . , & Johnson , S . P . ( 2007 ) . Infant rule learning facilitated by speech . Psychological Science , 18 , 387 – 391 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2007 . 01910 . x Marcus , G . F . , Vijayan , S . , Rao , S . B . , & Vishton , P . M . ( 1999 ) . Rule learning by seven - month - old infants . Sci - ence , 283 , 77 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 283 . 5398 . 77 Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural align - ment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychol - ogy , 25 , 431 – 467 . doi : 10 . 1006 / cogp . 1993 . 1011 McDonough , L . , Choi , S . , & Mandler , J . M . ( 2003 ) . Under - standing spatial relations : Flexible infants , lexical adults . Cognitive Psychology , 46 , 229 – 259 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0010 - 0285 ( 02 ) 00514 - 5 Mix , K . S . ( 2008 ) . Children ’ s equivalence judgments : Crossmapping effects . Cognitive Development , 23 , 191 – 203 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2007 . 03 . 001 Namy , L . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Making a silk purse out of two sow ’ s ears : Young children ’ s use of compari - son in category learning . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : General , 131 , 5 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 131 . 1 . 5 Paik , J . H . , & Mix , K . S . ( 2006 ) . Preschoolers ’ use of sur - face similarity in object comparisons : Taking context into account . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 95 , 194 – 214 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2006 . 06 . 002 Palmer , S . E . ( 1977 ) . Hierarchical structure in perceptual representation . Cognitive Psychology , 9 , 441 – 474 . doi : 10 . 1037 / e666602011 - 014 Penn , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Povinelli , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Darwin ’ s mistake : Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 31 , 109 – 130 . doi : 10 . 1017 / s0140525x 08003798 Pinto , J . P . ( 1996 ) . Xhab : Experimental control software for MS - DOS ( Version 6 . 5 ) [ Computer software ] . Palo Alto , CA : Author . Premack , D . ( 1983 ) . The codes of man and beasts . Behav - ioral and Brain Sciences , 6 , 125 – 167 . doi : 10 . 1017 / s0140525x00015077 Quinn , P . C . , Cummins , M . , Kase , J . , Martin , E . , & Weiss - man , S . ( 1996 ) . Development of categorical representa - tions for above and below spatial relations in 3 - to 7 - month - old infants . Developmental Psychology , 32 , 942 – 950 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 32 . 5 . 942 Richland , L . E . , Morrison , R . G . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Children ’ s development of analogical reasoning : Insights from scene analogy problems . Journal of Experi - mental Child Psychology , 94 , 249 – 271 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2006 . 02 . 002 Robinson , J . S . ( 1955 ) . The sameness - difference discrimi - nation problem in chimpanzee . Journal of Comparative 1404 Ferry , Hespos , and Gentner and Physiological Psychology , 48 , 195 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0042463 Saffran , J . R . , Aslin , R . N . , & Newport , E . L . ( 1996 ) . Statis - tical learning by 8 - month - old infants . Science , 274 , 1926 – 1928 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 274 . 5294 . 1926 Saffran , J . R . , Pollak , S . D . , Seibel , R . L . , & Shkolnik , A . ( 2007 ) . Dog is a dog is a dog : Infant rule learning is not speci ﬁ c to language . Cognition , 105 , 669 – 680 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2006 . 11 . 004 Sinha , P . , Balas , B . , Ostrovsky , Y . , & Russell , R . ( 2006 ) . Face recognition by humans : Nineteen results all com - puter vision researchers should know about . Proceed - ings of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers , 94 , 1948 – 1962 . doi : 10 . 1109 / jproc . 2006 . 884093 Smirnova , A . , Zorina , Z . , Obozova , T . , & Wasserman , E . ( 2015 ) . Crows spontaneously exhibit analogical reason - ing . Current Biology , 25 , 256 – 260 . Smith , J . D . , Redford , J . S . , Haas , S . M . , Coutinho , M . V . , & Couchman , J . J . ( 2008 ) . The comparative psychology of same - different judgments by humans ( Homo sapiens ) and monkeys ( Macaca mulatta ) . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavior Processes , 34 , 361 – 374 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0097 - 7403 . 34 . 3 . 361 Smith , L . B . ( 1984 ) . Young children ’ s understanding of attributes and dimensions : A comparison of conceptual and linguistic measures . Child Development , 55 , 363 – 380 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 1129949 Thibaut , J . - P . , French , R . , & Vezneva , M . ( 2010 ) . The development of analogy making in children : Cognitive load and executive functions . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 106 , 1 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2010 . 01 . 001 Thompson , R . K . , & Oden , D . L . ( 1995 ) . A profound dis - parity revisited : Perception and judgment of abstract identity relations by chimpanzees , human infants , and monkeys . Behavioral Processes , 35 , 149 – 161 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0376 - 6357 ( 95 ) 00048 - 8 Thompson , R . K . R . , & Oden , D . L . ( 2000 ) . Categorical perception and conceptual judgments by nonhuman primates : The paleological monkey and the analogical ape . Cognitive Science , 24 , 363 – 396 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog2403 _ 2 Thompson , R . K . R . , Oden , D . L . , & Boysen , S . T . ( 1997 ) . Language - naive chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ) judge relations between relations in a conceptual matching - to - sample task . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Ani - mal Behavior Processes , 23 , 31 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0097 - 7403 . 23 . 1 . 31 Tyrrell , D . J . , Stauffer , L . B . , & Snowman , L . G . ( 1991 ) . Perception of abstract identity / difference relationships by infants . Infant Behavior and Development , 14 , 125 – 129 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0163 - 6383 ( 91 ) 90059 - 2 Tyrrell , D . J . , Zingardo , M . C . , & Minard , K . L . ( 1993 ) . Learning and transfer of identity difference relation - ships by infants . Infant Behavior and Development , 16 , 43 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0163 - 6383 ( 93 ) 80027 - 6 Walker , C . M . , & Gopnik , A . ( 2014 ) . Toddlers infer higher - order relational principles in causal learning . Psychological Science , 25 , 161 – 169 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797613502983Wang , S . - H . , & Baillargeon , R . ( 2008 ) . Can infants be “ taught ” to attend to a new physical variable in an event category ? The case of height in covering events . Cognitive Psychology , 56 , 284 – 326 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cog - psych . 2007 . 06 . 003 Wasserman , E . A . , & Young , M . E . ( 2010 ) . Same – different discrimination : The keel and backbone of thought and reasoning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavior Processes , 36 , 3 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0016327 Wright , A . A . , & Katz , J . S . ( 2006 ) . Mechanisms of same / different concept learning in primates and avians . Behavioural Processes , 72 , 234 – 254 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . be - proc . 2006 . 03 . 009 Zentall , T . R . , Wasserman , E . A . , Lazareva , O . F . , Thomp - son , R . K . R . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 2008 ) . Concept learning in animals . Comparative Cognition & Behavior Review , 3 , 13 – 45 . doi : 10 . 3819 / ccbr . 2008 . 30002 Prelinguistic Relational Concepts 1405