Effects of Physical Embodiment on Social Presence of Social Robots Younbo Jung , Kwan Min Lee Annenberg School for Communication , University of Southern California , 3502 Watt Way , Los Angeles , CA 90089 - 0281 , USA { younboju @ usc . edu , kwanminl @ usc . edu } Abstract Two experiments were conducted to investigate the relative effectiveness of physical embodiment on social presence of social robots . The results of Experiment 1 show positive effects of physical embodiment of social robots ( PESR ) in the feeling of social presence , the general evaluation of social robots , the assessment of public opinion of social robots , and the evaluation of interaction with social robots . The result of a path analysis also provides the evidence of the mediating effect of social presence in people’s general evaluation of social robots . However , the results of Experiment 2 show that PESR without touch - input capability causes negative effects . Implications for the relative effectiveness of PESR , the importance of tactile communication in human - robot interaction , as well as the market potential for social robots in relation to loneliness are discussed . Keywords - - - Physical embodiment , touch , human - robot interaction , companionship , social robots , tactile communication . 1 . Introduction In the movie “A . I . ” directed by Steven Spielberg , Cybertronics , a firm that manufactures robots , creates a new boy robot to both give and elicit the genuine emotion of love . Its name is David . The major purpose of David is to share emotional reciprocity with human beings , which is totally different from the purpose of utility robots such as cleaning , cooking , or industrial manufacturing . Although we do not have social robots as sophisticated as David in “A . I . ” yet , researchers and practitioners have begun to realize that robots can be social actors whose major purpose is to interact with humans in a socially meaningful way . Lee et al . [ 7 ] define social robots as “new types of robots whose primary goal is social interaction with humans . ” In other words , a social robot is a robot designed to evoke meaningful social interaction with its users . Given the above definition , social robots do not necessarily need physical embodiment to accomplish their goals unlike other functional robots . Physical embodiment is a mandatory requirement for functional robots because the purposes of them are mostly related to labor - intense works such as cleaning , destroying , or lifting . However , the purposes of socially interactive robots are research platform , toys , educational tools , and therapeutic aids including emotional supports [ 4 ] . Most of these goals are not directly related to physical activities per se , thus can be delivered via virtually embodied social robots . One of the most fundamental questions on social robots is whether or not physical embodiment is required for the successful social interaction between human and social robots . This is a critical question to both researchers and practitioners due to high costs for manufacturing physically embodied social robots , not to mention technical difficulties . Nonetheless , there are only a few empirical studies investigating the effects of physical embodiment of social robots ( PESR ) in human - robot interaction . Two experiments were conducted in this study in order to investigate the relative effectiveness of PESR . In addition , the feeling of social presence is examined in a path analysis to investigate its mediating effects in human - robot interaction . Finally , we discuss how lonely and non - lonely people respond differently to social robots such as Sony Aibo or Samsung April . 2 . Literature review 2 . 1 . Embodiment Fong et al . [ 4 ] define embodiment as “that which establishes a basis for structural coupling by creating the potential for mutual perturbation between system and environment . ” Given the definition , as long as the relationship between a system and its environment is perturbative , physical embodiment is not necessary any more . Thus , this relational definition of embodiment raises an important question whether or not a physical embodiment is essential in designing social robots . The positive expectation about physical embodiment is that PESR may result in better affordance , thus lead to less frustration from people . In fact , the form and structure of a robot is important because it helps establish social expectations [ 4 ] . Therefore , the following hypotheses are proposed : PRESENCE 2004 80 H1 : People will evaluate a social robot more positively when they interact with a physically embodied social robot than when they interact with a physically disembodied social robot . H2 : People will assess other people’s evaluation of a social robot more positively when they interact with a physically embodied social robot than when they interact with a physically disembodied social robot . H3 : People will evaluate the interaction with a social robot more positively when they interact with a physically embodied social robot than when they interact with a physically disembodied social robot . 2 . 2 . Social presence Lombard et al . [ 8 ] define presence as “the perceptual illusion of non - mediation . ” Similarly , Lee [ 5 ] defines social presence as “a psychological state in which virtual ( para - authentic or artificial ) actors are experienced as actual social actors in either sensory or nonsensory ways . ” Given the above definitions , the feeling of social presence can play an important role in successful social interactions with even non - human beings . When a person interacts with a social robot , the person may respond to the social robot—an artificial social actor—as if it were an actual social actor . For example , although David in the movie , “A . I . , ” is not a real boy , the mother is satisfied with her emotional fulfillment from social interaction with David . It means that she feels strong social presence of her real son—an actual social actor—when she interacts with David—an artificial actor—in sensory ways . Bartneck [ 2 ] found social facilitation effect in his study with an emotional robot , eMuu . In the study , participants acquired higher score in the negotiation game when they interacted with a robot character—physically embodied character—than when they interacted with a screen character—physically disembodied character . Although Bartneck did not use a specific term of “social presence” in his study , the finding of social facilitation effect can be explained in terms of social presence . Participants in the experiment put more effort into the negotiation when they interacted with the physically embodied character because they felt strong social presence . Indeed , the feeling of social presence is highly likely to be related to the richness of sensory inputs because the more a person feels , the stronger the person believes ( see [ 18 ] ) . PESR can provide people with richer sensory inputs than physically disembodied social robots ( PDSR ) , which may result in people’s strong feeling of social presence . The strong feeling of social presence , then , may result in positive effects of social robots . Therefore , social presence could be a mediating factor in the effectiveness of PESR . Based on this assumption , the following hypotheses are proposed : H4 : People will feel stronger social presence when they interact with a physically embodied social robot than when they interact with a physically disembodied social robot . H5 : The effects of physical embodiment on general attraction of a social robot , assessment of public opinion of a social robot , and evaluation of the interaction with a social robot will be mediated by users’ feeling of social presence . 2 . 3 . Loneliness Social robots are similar to pets in a way that both of them provide people with companionship . Similar to the findings that interaction with pets would be good complementary to or even substitute for traditional interpersonal interaction [ 19 ] , social robots may be able to satisfy one’s needs for social interaction . We are not surprised to see that Rook [ 15 ] found a significant negative relationship between loneliness and companionship . In his study more frequent companionship with other people was associated with less loneliness . Therefore , a lonely person is likely to appreciate the interaction with social robots more positively than a non - lonely person because the former is more in need of social companionship . Based on this assumption , the last hypothesis is proposed : H6 : Lonely people will feel more socially attracted to a social robot than non - lonely people . 3 . Experiment 1 : Effects of physically embodied social robots 3 . 1 . Experiment design A 2 ( embodiment vs . disembodiment ) x 2 ( lonely vs . non - lonely ) between subjects factorial analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) design was used to test the hypotheses in a laboratory environment . A total of 36 undergraduate students enrolled at a major west - coast university were participated in the experiment . 3 . 2 . Procedure The whole experiment process consists of three steps . First , a survey of UCLA Loneliness Scale ( Version 3 ) was administered in a larger data pool of 62 people . Then , 16 participants were selected from each extreme end of the scale based on their survey scores . Second , 16 participants within each group ( lonely vs . non - lonely ) were randomly assigned to one of the two different embodiment conditions ( embodiment vs . disembodiment ) . For example , 8 participants in the lonely group were randomly assigned to the embodied condition . The other half ( 8 participants ) in the lonely group were also randomly assigned to the disembodied condition . Finally , participants were asked to come to a laboratory where they individually interacted with a social PRESENCE 2004 81 robot , Sony Aibo , for about 10 minutes alone . Then , participants were asked to complete a paper - based survey . 3 . 3 . Manipulation Two conditions of physical embodiment were manipulated for Experiment 1 . First , Sony Aibo was selected to represent a physically embodied social robot because Aibo is one of the most successful social robots currently on the market [ 7 ] . Aibo contains sensors in its head , chin , and back that enable interactions with people by affectionate pats . For the experiment purpose , Aibo was programmed to perform singing and dancing for 2 minutes and 20 seconds . After its performance , Aibo was also programmed to interact with participants by responding to its sensory inputs in limited and constant ways . Participants in the physically embodied condition interacted with actual Aibo . Second , physically disembodied Aibo was manipulated by using animation - making software , Director . Aibo’s performances were pre - recorded in a digital camcorder . Then , the digital video files in AVI format were imported to Director for final manipulation . The created program was shown in a shockwave player on a 17 inch flat - screen monitor . When participants in the physically disembodied condition clicked any of Aibo’s sensory input areas , they saw a virtual hand pushing the sensory area on the screen , and then saw a particular response from Aibo just like they would have seen from Aibo in the physically embodied condition . To summarize , the main difference between two embodiment conditions was whether or not participants interacted with actual Aibo or virtual Aibo that was digitally programmed . 3 . 4 . Measure All dependent measures were based on items from paper - based questionnaires . UCLA Loneliness Scale ( Version 3 ) was used to measure participants’ perceived loneliness . The scale has been tested in many studies and regarded to be highly reliable in terms of internal consistency ( coefficient (cid:302) ranging from . 89 to . 94 ) and test - retest reliability over a one - year period ( r = . 73 ) [ 16 ] . Seven questions concerning the general evaluation of Aibo were asked using 10 - point Semantic - differential scale : bad / good ; bitter / sweet ; cruel / kind ; distant / close ; not friendly / friendly ; not loving / loving ; unpleasant / pleasant ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 91 ) . This is a modified measure from the study of Perception Of Pets As A Companion by Poresky et al . [ 13 ] . Six questions about social presence were asked using a combination of 10 - point Semantic - differential scale and independent 10 - point scale : unsociable / sociable ; impersonal / personal ; machine - like / life - like ; insensitive / sensitive ; while you were interacting with this Aibo , how much did you feel as if it was a social being ? ; while you were interacting with this Aibo , how much did you feel as if it was communicating with you ? ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 920 ) . Psychological perspective of social presence such as attention and involvement were disregarded because 10 minutes of interaction time was too short to establish involvement . Besides , participants were asked to pay attention to Aibo and allowed to interact with Aibo alone in a laboratory room . Therefore , measuring participants’ attention is considered to be inappropriate for the measure of social presence in this study . Three questions concerning public opinion of Aibo were asked using independent 10 - point scale : People will find it interesting to play with this Aibo ; People will find this Aibo attractive ; People are likely to buy this Aibo ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 79 ) . Six questions dealing with the evaluation of interaction with Aibo were asked using independent 10 - point scale : enjoyable ; entertaining ; exciting ; fun ; interesting ; satisfying ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 88 ) . Social attraction and physical attraction were measure by a modified version of McCroskey and McCain ' s Interpersonal Attraction Scale [ 9 ] . Three questions about social attraction of Aibo were asked using independent 7 - point scale : I think this Aibo could be a friend of mine ; I think I could spend a good time with this Aibo ; I would like to spend more time with this Aibo ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 92 ) . Finally , three questions concerning physical attraction of Aibo were asked using independent 7 - point scale for the manipulation check : I think this Aibo is quite pretty ; This Aibo is very good looking ; I find this Aibo very attractive physically ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 88 ) . 3 . 5 . Results Table 1 shows a full correlation matrix of the measured variables in Experiment 1 . Although personal evaluation and the assessment of other people’s attraction may sound similar , they are different concepts due to the third person effects [ 12 ] . A person may not feel attracted to Aibo at all , but may think that other people would . Hypotheses were tested with one - way between subjects ANOVA . Consistent with Hypothesis 1 , participants evaluated the physically embodied Aibo more positively ( M = 8 . 14 , SD = 0 . 8499 ) than the physically disembodied Aibo ( M = 7 . 34 , SD = 1 . 0970 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 5 . 141 , p < . 05 , (cid:75) 2 = . 191 . Consistent with Hypothesis 2 , participants assessed other people’s evaluation of a social robot more positively when they interacted with the physically embodied Aibo ( M = 7 . 98 , SD = 1 . 0644 ) than when they interacted with the physically disembodied Aibo ( M = 7 . 21 , SD = 1 . 0829 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 4 . 4 , p < . 05 , (cid:75) 2 = . 233 . Consistent with Hypothesis 3 , participants evaluated the interaction with Aibo more positively when they interacted with the physically embodied Aibo ( M = 8 . 11 , SD = 1 . 1395 ) than when they interacted with the physically disembodied Aibo ( M = 7 . 13 , SD = 0 . 7245 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 15 . 28 , p < . 01 , (cid:75) 2 = . 599 . Consistent with Hypothesis 4 , participants felt stronger social presence when they interacted with the PRESENCE 2004 82 Table 1 Correlation Matrix of Six Measured Variables in Experiment 1 Measured Variables 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 . General Evaluation of Aibo . 228 . 258 . 374 * . 584 * * . 337 2 . Social Attraction of Aibo . 278 . 188 . 261 . 096 3 . Assessment of Public Opinion . 404 * . 454 * * . 117 4 . Evaluation of Interaction with Aibo . 469 * . 250 5 . Social Presence . 343 6 . Physical Attraction of Aibo Note : * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 ( 2 - tailed ) . Figure 1 . Path Analysis of the Mediating Effect of Social Presence in the Evaluation of Aibo : Experiment 1 . Note : Numbers inside arrows are standardized coefficients for each regression . Numbers inside parentheses are standardized coefficients when the evaluation of Aibo was regressed on physical embodiment alone . Two conditions of physical embodiment were dummy coded : 0 disembodied ; 1 embodied . physically embodied Aibo ( M = 7 . 81 , SD = . 8185 ) than when they interacted with the physically disembodied Aibo ( M = 5 . 62 , SD = 1 . 2903 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 32 . 27 , p < . 001 , (cid:75) 2 = . 545 . A path analysis was conducted to test Hypothesis 5 , which predicted the mediating effect of social presence on other dependent variables ( see Figure 1 ) . The physical embodiment was a significant predictor for the general evaluation of Aibo ( (cid:533) = . 385 , p < . 01 ) and for the feeling of social presence ( (cid:533) = . 724 , p < . 001 ) when it was the only predictor entered into a simple linear regression . The feeling of social presence was also a significant predictor when the evaluation of Aibo was the only predictor regressed on social presence ( (cid:533) = . 641 , p < . 01 ) . However , the effect of physical embodiment on the general evaluation of Aibo significantly dropped and became non significant when the dependent variable was regressed on both physical embodiment and social presence . Put together , the series of the regression analyses reported in Figure 1 provide a strong evidence for the mediating effect of social presence on people’s general evaluation of social robots ( for the statistical proof of why the above analyses provide a convincing evidence for mediation , see [ 1 ] ) . For three other dependent variables both of the effects of embodiment and social presence became non significant when the dependent variables were regressed on both embodiment and social presence . In conclusion , the current path analysis provides evidence of the mediating role of social presence only in people’s general evaluation of social robots . 7 . 35 7 . 64 6 . 61 8 . 86 6 6 . 5 7 7 . 5 8 8 . 5 9 9 . 5 Disembodied Embodied Physical Embodiment E v a l u a t i o n o f I n t e r ac t i on Non - lonely Lonely Figure 2 . Interaction Effect of Embodiment and Loneliness in Experiment 1 . Note . The evaluation of interaction with Aibo was measured in 10 - point semantic differential scale . Numbers above markers are means . Evaluation of Aibo Social Presence Standardized coefficients significant at . 05 level ( * * * < . 001 , * * < . 01 , * < . 05 ) Non - significant standardized coefficients . 724 * * * - . 079 ( . 385 * * ) . 641 * * * Physical Embodiment PRESENCE 2004 83 Consistent with Hypothesis 6 , participants in the lonely group felt more social attraction to Aibo ( M = 4 . 57 , SD = 0 . 370 ) than participants in the non - lonely group did ( M = 3 . 95 , SD = 0 . 8151 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 7 . 184 , p < . 05 , (cid:75) 2 = . 208 . In addition , a significant interaction effect between loneliness and embodiment in the evaluation of interaction with Aibo was found with two - way between subjects ANOVA , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 25 . 607 , p < . 001 , (cid:75) 2 = . 599 ( see Figure 2 ) . Specifically , under the disembodied condition , participants in the non - lonely group evaluated the interaction with Aibo more positively ( M = 7 . 64 , SD = 0 . 5523 ) than participants in the lonely group did ( M = 6 . 61 , SD = 0 . 4600 ) . Alternatively , under the embodied condition , participants in the lonely group evaluated the interaction with Aibo more positively ( M = 8 . 86 , SD = 0 . 5664 ) than participants in the non - lonely group did ( M = 7 . 35 , SD = 1 . 0817 ) . Participants did not feel any difference in physical attraction between the physically embodied Aibo and the physically disembodied Aibo , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 1 . 49 , n . s . This non - significant finding suggests that the manipulation of two embodiment conditions is successful . Physical attraction should be same across two embodiment conditions because the physical shapes of Aibo in the two conditions are exactly same . 3 . 6 . Discussion A number of conclusions can be drawn from the results of Experiment 1 . First , physically embodied social robots ( PESR ) are more attractive to people ( H1 & H2 ) . This result implies that physical embodiment is an important component in designing social robots although social robots are not particularly related to physical functions . People prefer interactions with physical social actors to interactions with virtual social actors . Second , social robots are more socially attractive to lonely people ( H6 ) . This finding supports more diverse role of social robots and their market potential . Social robots can provide social companionship , thus can be used as therapeutic aids for lonely people . Indeed , social robots are not just toys for kids . Third , physical embodiment yields higher social presence of artificial social robots than physical disembodiment ( H4 ) . The result implies that PESR influences people’s imagination of actual social actors positively . In addition , the social presence is the key mediating variable for the effect of physical embodiment in the general evaluation of social robots ( H5 ) . The result also implies that people’s social responses to artificial social robots are oriented toward imagined social actors . These findings support the computers are social actors ( CASA ) paradigm suggested by Nass and his colleagues [ 14 , 10 ] . It also replicates the results reported by Lee and Nass [ 6 ] . Finally , an interaction effect between embodiment and loneliness was found in the evaluation of interaction with Aibo ( see Figure 2 in Section 3 . 5 . ) . The result shows that lonely people are more sensitive to PESR than non - lonely people . It implies that touch - input capability can be a potential factor that causes the major difference of effectiveness between physically embodied and disembodied social robots . The distinctive sensory difference between two embodiment conditions is touch . Participants in the physically embodied condition could touch and feel actual Aibo unlike participants in the physically disembodied condition where they saw a virtual hand touching Aibo . Participants in the lonely group might appreciate touch - input capability more positively than participants in the non - lonely group due to their relatively stronger needs for companionship . However , we have to be cautious to draw a conclusion about the positive effects of touch - input capability in human - robot interaction from the results of Experiment 1 . Physical embodiment has two major components : ( 1 ) visual embodiment ; ( 2 ) touch . Of course , in future other human senses such as smell and taste can be incorporated into PESR . For now , however , the incorporation of other human senses is not the major concern for the development of social robots . There is no major difference between physical embodiment and disembodiment with regard to audio . Therefore , people can sense the physical embodiment of social robots by simply seeing them or by directly touching them . Due to the nature of " embodiness , " the above two factors cannot be separated under a normal condition . In fact , touch is a nesting variable because there is no " touch " for physically disembodied conditions . As a consequence , we could not make separate conclusions on the effects of visual embodiment and the effects of touch - input capability based on Experiment 1 . In order to make a clear conclusion about the effects of PESR and to eliminate an alternative explanation of the effects of visual embodiment , we conducted Experiment 2 by manipulating physical embodiment only as a " visually embodied " factor . In Experiment 2 we focused solely on the effects of touch - input capability in human - robot interaction . 4 . Experiment 2 : Effects of touch - input capability in human - robot interaction The importance of tactile communication in interpersonal relationship has been addressed in many studies . Nguyen et al . [ 11 ] found that “touching larger skin surfaces signified playfulness , warmth / love , and friendship / fellowship . ” Similarly , Burgoon et al . [ 3 ] also found that the combination of touch and high communicator valence produced the highest credibility and attraction ratings in their empirical study . These findings from interpersonal communication may hold up in a new type of relationship , human - robot interaction . Therefore , Experiment 2 was conducted to examine the effects of touch - input capability in human - robot interaction . 4 . 1 . Experiment design The same 2 ( embodiment vs . disembodiment ) x 2 ( lonely vs . non - lonely ) between - subjects factorial analysis PRESENCE 2004 84 of variance design with a total of 36 participants was used in Experiment 2 . 4 . 2 . Procedure The procedures were same as Experiment 1 , except the use of a new social robot . April , a prototype robot manufactured by Samsung Electronics , was used instead of Aibo in order to control touch - input capability in the physically embodied condition . April can play music and perform dance as programmed . Unlike Aibo in Experiment 1 , we disabled all the sensors of April and instructed participants in the physically embodied condition not to touch April . By doing so , we could eliminate the potential effects of touch from the effects of PESR in Experiment 2 . Therefore , the only difference between the embodiment and disembodiment conditions was whether or not participants saw actual dancing April or virtual dancing April . 4 . 3 . Manipulation Same as Experiment 1 , two conditions of embodiment were manipulated . First , April was programmed to play a particular song and to perform a dance based on the song for two minutes . Then , the pre - recorded performance in a digital movie format was shown on a 17 inch flat - screen monitor for the physically disembodied condition . 4 . 4 . Measure In addition to the previous measures , three questions concerning the evaluation of music were asked using independent 10 - point scale : how much did you enjoy hearing this music ? ; how likely would you be to recommend this music to your friends ? ; how likely would you be to download this music ? ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 79 ) . Same six questions used in Experiment 1 regarding the general evaluation of April were asked ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 86 ) . One question eliminated from the index used in Experiment 1 was distant / close . The question was regarded irrelevant because participants were not allowed to touch April in Experiment 2 . Same five questions used in Experiment 1 concerning social presence were asked ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 79 ) . Once again , one question used in Experiment 1 was eliminated : impersonal / personal . Because April has an anthropomorphic shape of female body line with futuristic look , asking the question of impersonal / personal seemed to be meaningless . Same three questions used in Experiment 1 were used to measure the assessment of public opinion ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 83 ) . Same six questions used in Experiment 1 concerning the evaluation of interaction with April were asked ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 92 ) . Same three questions used in Experiment 1 regarding social attraction of April were asked ( Cronbach’s (cid:302) = . 92 ) . 4 . 5 . Results Table 2 shows a full correlation matrix of the measured variables in Experiment 2 . Again , hypotheses were tested with one - way between subjects ANOVA . We are rather surprised to find that the results of Experiment 2 were either opposite to the results of Experiment 1 or not significant . More specifically , participants evaluated music more positively when they interacted with the physically disembodied April ( M = 6 . 92 , SD = 0 . 8801 ) than when they interacted with the physically embodied April , ( M = 5 . 23 , SD = 1 . 9196 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 11 . 78 , p < . 01 , (cid:75) 2 = . 393 . There was no significant difference between two embodiment conditions with regard to the feeling of social presence . The non - significant pattern shows that participants felt moderately stronger social presence when they interacted with the physically disembodied April ( M = 5 . 72 , SD = 1 . 4609 ) than when they interacted with the physically embodied April , ( M = 4 . 75 , SD = 1 . 5117 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 3 . 75 , n . s . . Participants assessed other people’s evaluation of April more positively when they interacted with the physically disembodied April ( M = 6 . 77 , SD = 1 . 6063 ) than when they interacted with the physically embodied April , ( M = 4 . 48 , SD = 1 . 6526 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 41 . 78 , p < . 001 , (cid:75) 2 = . 525 . Participants evaluated the interaction with April more positively when they interacted with the physically disembodied April ( M = 6 . 62 , SD = 1 . 2718 ) than when they interacted with the physically embodied April , ( M = 5 . 26 , SD = 2 . 0323 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 7 . 15 , p < . 05 , (cid:75) 2 = . 426 . Table 2 Correlation Matrix of Six Measured Variables in Experiment 2 Measured Variables 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 . Evaluation of Music . 355 . 390 * . 515 * * . 602 * * . 481 * * 2 . General Evaluation of April . 438 * . 609 * * . 651 * * . 557 * * 3 . Social Attraction of April . 529 * * . 643 * * . 684 * * 4 . Assessment of Public Opinion . 721 * * . 642 * * 5 . Evaluation of Interaction with April . 773 * * 6 . Social Presence Note : * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 ( 2 - tailed ) . PRESENCE 2004 85 Lastly , participants in the lonely group felt more social attraction to April ( M = 3 . 65 , SD = 1 . 4062 ) than participants in the non - lonely group , ( M = 2 . 31 , SD = 1 . 3525 ) , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 7 . 57 , p < . 05 , (cid:75) 2 = . 263 . This finding , which replicates the result of Experiment 1 , shows a solid evidence for the strong needs of social robots to lonely people . 4 . 6 . Discussion We can find a possible explanation for the results of Experiment 2 in post - experiment interviews with participants . Followings are excerpts from the in - depth interview with participants : “I thought it was going to talk to me . ” ; “I expected interaction such as sensing users’ movement . ” ; “I want it to have sensors for interaction rather than to do the same thing over and over again . ” ; “I expected it to talk to me . It appears to have personality but repeats the same thing , unsatisfying . ” ; “I expected it to say hi and shake my hands…” As shown above , most of the participants expected to have some level of interactions with April when they first saw it because of its anthropomorphic shape . However , participants could only see April’s performance and were not allowed to touch it even in the physical embodiment condition in Experiment 2 . Although a minimum level of interactivity was provided by allowing participants to push a button on a remote control to make April start its dancing performance , participants did not regard it as a meaningful social interaction . The interaction that participants had in Experiment 2 lacked sensory touch despite April’s highly anthropomorphic shape . According to the uncanny valley effect suggested by Mashiro Mori , the subtle imperfection of the recreation becomes highly disturbing , or even repulsive ( see [ 4 ] ) . Certainly , the anthropomorphic shape of April could set up high expectations [ 17 ] . However , the anthropomorphic shape without touch - input capability might lead to the sudden drop of participants’ high expectations to their frustration and disappointment , which , in turn , might result in the general negative effects of physical embodiment . The results of Experiment 2 show that PESR does not always result in positive effects . We are surprised to find that PESR without touch - input capability causes negative effects . This finding in Experiment 2 suggests that it is important for physically embodied social robots to have touch - input capability . It also implies that the importance of tactile communication in interpersonal relationship holds up in a new type of relationship , human - robot interaction , as well . To put together , the effects of PESR may become synergetic when users are able to fully interact with social robots by touching and feeling them . 5 . Conclusions In summary , the findings of Experiment 1 elucidate the importance of physical embodiment in designing social robots . Physical embodiment usually enhances the feeling of social presence , which results in more positive evaluation of social robots . Furthermore , the findings of Experiment 2 indicate the relative effectiveness of PESR : without the power of touch - input capability and interaction , the effectiveness of PESR diminishes in human - robot interaction . Especially , Experiment 2 helped us to make a solid conclusion about the effects of touch - input capability in human - robot interaction by allowing us to separate two nesting component of physical embodiment : ( 1 ) visual ; ( 2 ) touch . We hope the findings of this study shed light on the design of social robots , the importance of tactile communication in human - robot interaction , and the design of new interfaces for future technologies . References [ 1 ] Baron , R . M . , & Kenny , D . A . ( 1986 ) . The moderator - mediator variable distinction in social psychological research , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 1173 - 1182 . [ 2 ] Bartneck , C . ( 2002 ) . eMuu - An Embodied Emotional Character for the Ambient Intelligen Home ( Doctoral dissertation , Technische Universiteit Eindhoven , the Netherlands , 2002 ) . Dissertation Abstracts International , 64 ( 03c ) , 777 . Retrieved August 24 , 2004 , from http : / / www . bartneck . de / work / bartneck _ phd _ thesis . pdf [ 3 ] Burgoon , Judee K , Joseph B Walther , & E James Baesler ( 1992 ) . Interpretations , evaluations , and consequences of interpersonal touch . Human Communication Research , 19 ( 2 ) , 237 - 263 . [ 4 ] Fong , T . , Nourbakhsh , I . , & Dautenhahn , K . ( 2003 ) . A survey of socially interactive robots . Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 42 , 143 - 166 . [ 5 ] Lee . K . ( 2004 ) . Presence , Explicated . Communication Theory , 14 ( 1 ) : 27 - 50 . [ 6 ] Lee , K . M . , & Nass , C . ( 2004 ) . The multiple source effect and synthesized speech : Doubly disembodied language as a conceptual framework . Human Communication Research , 30 ( 2 ) : 182 - 207 . [ 7 ] Lee , K . M . , Park , N . , & Song , H . ( 2004 ) . Can a Robot be Perceived as a Developing Creature ? : Effects of Artificial Developments on Social Presence and Social Responses toward Robots in Human - Robot Interaction . Paper presented at International Communication Association conference , May 2004 , New Orleans , LA . [ 8 ] Lombard , M . , Reich , R . D . , Grabe , M . E . , Bracken , C . C . , & Ditton , T . B . ( 2000 ) . Presence of television : The role of screen size . Human Communication Research , 26 ( 1 ) , 75 - 98 . [ 9 ] McCroskey , J . C . , & McCain , T . A . ( 1974 ) . The measurement of interpersonal attraction . Speech Monographs , 41 , 261 - 266 . [ 10 ] Nass , C . & Moon , Y . ( 2000 ) . Machines and mindlessness : Social responses to computers . Journal of Social Issues , 56 ( 1 ) , 81 - 103 . [ 11 ] Nguyen , Tuan , Richard Heslin , & Michele L Nguyen ( 1975 ) . The meanings of touch : Sex differences . Journal of Communication , 25 ( 3 ) , 92 - 103 . [ 12 ] Perloff , R . M . ( 1993 ) . Third - person effect research , 1983 - 1992 : A review and synthesis . International Journal of Public Opinion Research , 5 , 167 - 184 . [ 13 ] Poresky , R . H . , Hendrix , C . , Mosier , J . E . , & Samuelson , M . ( 1987 ) . Companion animal bonding scale : Internal reliability and construct validity . Psychological Reports , 60 , 743 - 746 . PRESENCE 2004 86 [ 14 ] Reeves , B . & Nass , C . ( 1996 ) . The media equation : How people respond to computers , television , and new media like real people and places . Cambridge University Press . [ 15 ] Rook , Karen S . ( 1987 ) . Social Support Versus Companionship : Effects on Life Stress , Loneliness , and Evaluations by Others . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 ( 6 ) , 1132 - 1147 . [ 16 ] Russell , Daniel W . ( 1996 ) . UCLA Loneliness Scale ( Version3 ) : Reliability , Validity , and Factor Structure . Journal of Personality Assessment , 66 ( 1 ) , 20 - 40 . [ 17 ] Slater , M . , & Steed , A . ( 2002 ) . Meeting people virtually : experiments in shared virtual environments , in : Schroeder , R . ( Ed . ) , The social life of avatars : Presence and interaction in shared virtual environments ( pp . 146 - 171 ) . London : Springer - Verlag . [ 18 ] Steuer , J . ( 1992 ) . Defining Virtual Reality : Dimensions Determining Telepresence . Journal of Communication , 42 ( 4 ) , 73 - 93 . [ 19 ] Veevers , J . E . ( 1985 ) . The Social Meanings of Pets : Alternative Roles for Companion Animals . Marriage & Family Review . Special Issue : Pets and the family , 8 ( 3 - 4 ) , 11 - 30 . PRESENCE 2004 87