1 Design Heuristics in Engineering Concept Generation Shanna R . Daly , University of Michigan Seda Yilmaz , Iowa State University James L . Christian , Massachusetts Institution of Technology Colleen M . Seifert , University of Michigan Richard Gonzalez , University of Michigan ABSTRACT Background Innovation in design depends on successful concept generation . The ideation stage of design is intended to produce multiple , varied concepts from which to develop and choose . Often , instruction on idea generation methods is not offered in engineering classes , however , when taught , it is often through techniques like " brainstorming , " which lacks specific ways to generate designs . Further , existing ideation strategies are not based on evidence from designers or rigorous testing through empirical studies . Purpose This study investigated how engineering students and practitioners generate ideas . We focused on how designers used product characteristics to define concepts , and how previous concepts were transformed into new solutions by modifying their characteristics . Our methodology is based on previous work identifying Design Heuristics in engineering solutions , defined as cognitive prompts that facilitate exploration of multiple designs during concept generation . 2 Method Think - aloud recordings and concept sketches were collected from 36 engineering students and practitioners ( with varying levels of experience ) as they generated ideas for a novel design task in a laboratory setting . These data , along with retrospective interviews , were analyzed for the ideation strategies evident in the participants’ solutions . Conclusions From this study , we found evidence for over sixty different strategies for concept generation during the ideation stage . Participants generated novel concepts and proposed concept modifications , and specific Design Heuristics were observed in their designs . The results suggest instruction on Design Heuristics can aid in effective idea generation . Keywords : concept generation , design approaches , Design Heuristics I . INTRODUCTION One of the goals of the undergraduate engineering curriculum , as defined by ABET ( ABET Board of Directors , 2011 ) , is to support students’ development of design skills . Additionally , numerous reports have called for engineering students to develop the ability to design innovative solutions to the increasingly complex problems in the world today ( Duderstadt , 2008 ; Sheppard , Macatangay , Colby , & Sullivan , 2009 ) . While engineering design education has adopted project - based courses ( Dym , Agogino , Eris , Frey , & Leifer , 2005 ; Todd , Magleby , Sorensen , Swan , & Anthony , 1995 ) , research indicates challenges in learning to innovate . 3 Students find it difficult to generate creative solutions ( Ahmed , Wallace , & Blessing , 2003 ; Ball , Evans , & Dennis , 1994 ; Cross , 2001 ; Rowe , 1987 ; Ullman , Dietterich , & Stauffer , 1988 ) , and engineering educators find it difficult to teach students how to “think innovatively” ( Grasso , Burkins , Helble , & Martinelli , 2008 ; Klukken , Parsons , & Columbus , 1997 ; Pappas & Pappas , 2003 ; Richards , 1998 ) . Teachable strategies for idea generation could play a significant role in building innovation skills in engineers , and prepare them for the Grand Challenges ( National Academy of Engineering , n . d . ) they will face as practitioners . Creativity and innovation are defined in multiple ways , but for present purposes , we define a creative idea as one that is considered both novel and appropriate ( Amabile , 1996 ; Torrance , 1962 ; Treffinger , Young , Shelby , & Shepardson , 2002 ) . Successful implementations of creative ideas produce innovations . Opportunities for creative ideas exist throughout the design process ; however , the concept generation ( or “ideation” ) phase of the design process is a key step for the emergence of creative ideas ( Cropley , 2006 ; Harvard Business School Press , 2003 ) . Concept generation becomes the foundation for the development of a final product , and serves as a guide for product research , feedback from stakeholders , and testing and experiments on prototypes . Because innovation often hinges on a successful concept generation phase , it is imperative to understand how ideas are generated , and what techniques can facilitate exploration of design solutions . Ideally , the ideation phase would result in a candidate set of designs that are varied in nature , representing a wide variety of possible solutions . By considering a diverse set of potential concepts , the designer is more likely to come across novel and innovative solutions ( Brophy , 2001 ; Liu & Bligh , 2003 ) . However , engineering designers often fail to consider multiple designs , and become focused on specific options early in the design process . This tendency , 4 termed “fixation , ” prematurely limits the variety of designs considered ( Cross , 2001 ; Janssen & Smith , 1991 ; Purcell & Gero , 1996 ) . When engineers are in the ideation phase , it is unclear how they go about generating new concepts , and what strategies they use to introduce variations in their designs . The goal of this study was to explore how engineers generate varied designs , capturing empirical evidence of what successful designers do to create ideas . We report the outcomes of a study in which 36 engineering students and practitioners worked individually to generate creative ideas for a design task . Our focus was on how these engineers generated design solutions , as well as how they introduced variation to form new solutions . Our approach to the empirical study of ideation is based on our previous studies of strategy use in the ideation phase ( Daly , Yilmaz , Seifert , & Gonzalez , 2010 ; Yilmaz , Daly , Seifert , & Gonzalez , 2010 ; Yilmaz & Seifert , 2009 ; 2010 ; 2011 ; Yilmaz , Seifert , Christian , Daly , & Gonzalez , 2012 ; Yilmaz , Seifert , & Gonzalez , 2010 ) . Starting with the collection of these new protocols , we set out to determine how students and practicing engineers approached ideation , and whether they made use of the Design Heuristics ideation strategy , as well as any other ideation methods . We developed a method for extracting idea generation strategies from the observed protocols , and identified a specific set of strategies , called Design Heuristics . The study reported here is situated in a larger project , with long - term goals including : 1 ) to develop a collection of Design Heuristics that have been shown across a variety of design contexts to support creative and diverse thinking in concept generation , 2 ) to examine patterns of Design Heuristics use , i . e . , what strategies designers often use together and what strategies lead toward particular types of solutions , and 3 ) to compare design outcomes developed with Design Heuristics to design outcomes developed with other idea generation techniques . 5 By identifying how concept generation is accomplished successfully , this knowledge can be used to develop educational materials to assist engineers . The identification of successful design strategies can facilitate ideation skill development , which , in term , can support innovation in engineering . II . BACKGROUND Ideation in design is most successful , and most likely to lead to innovation , when multiple and diverse concepts are generated ( Akin , 1990 ; Atman , Chimka , Bursic , & Nachtmann , 1999 ; Brophy , 2001 ; Cross , 2001 ; Liu & Bligh , 2003 ) . “Diverse” idea generation is defined as a process that visits many different areas of the " design solution space " ( following Newell and Simon ' s ( 1972 ) “problem space " ) ( Daly , Christian , Yilmaz , Seifert , & Gonzalez , 2012 ) . In the space of all feasible solutions , some areas are readily found because those types of solutions already exist , or involve simple combinations of known features or elements . However , many ideas are more difficult to generate because they are not obvious , but do exist in the space of possible solutions . Novice designers often have difficulty generating a variety of diverse concepts during concept generation , and they appear hesitant in considering multiple ideas ( Cross , 2001 ) . When an individual designer ( or team of designers ) creates a potential solution , they often continue pursuing this single idea at the expense of exploring other alternatives . A number of studies have investigated this “premature closure” of the search process , defined as fixation ( Cross , 2001 ; Jansson & Smith , 1991 ; Purcell & Gero , 1996 ; Linsey , Tseng , Fu , Cagan , Wood , & Schunn , 2010 ) . Niku ( 2009 ) described some of the reasons for fixation , including holding false assumptions and non - existent limitations , feeling overwhelmed , having incomplete or partial information , and following improper methods of solution . 6 Novice engineering designers have also been shown to have a sense of attachment to early solution ideas , and hang onto concepts even when they realize they may be extremely difficult to pursue or have major flaws ( Ball et al . , 1994 ; Rowe , 1987 ; Ullman et al . , 1988 ) . While Atman et al . ( 1999 ) found that freshman designers generated fewer solutions than senior designers , suggesting that as expertise develops , designers improve at diverging during concept generation . However , studies have shown that even years of professional experience were not enough to avoid fixation ( Jansen & Smith , 1991 ; Purcell , Williams , Gero , & Colbron , 1993 ; Purcell & Gero , 1996 ; Smith , 1995 ) . For example , in studies of advanced undergraduates in engineering by Purcell et al . ( 1993 ) , they suggested that the complexity of examples within a domain might focus attention on specific constraints , leading to fixation . Thus , techniques to help combat this challenge in design may be applicable across levels of expertise . In addition , engineering students may lack knowledge of successful strategies to help them explore other solutions . Previous studies have shown they lack skills to help them generate more concepts that are different from their initial ideas ( Cross , 2001 ; Sachs , 1999 ) . When students do create multiple concepts , they are often minor variations on the same idea ( Rowe , 1987 ) . As a result , engineering students generate an impoverished set of concept options for moving forward in the design process . To combat these challenges , theorists have proposed a number of idea generation techniques and approaches . For example , one proposed approach to support divergent thinking throughout design is divergent inquiry , i . e . , using specific types of questions to guide divergent activity ( Eris , 2004 ) . Table 1 includes a description of popular suggested ideation techniques ( see Smith ( 1998 ) for a more complete listing ) . 7 Table 1 . Example Concept Generation Techniques Technique Description Resources Analogical Thinking Transferring information from familiar instances to construct new ideas ; e . g . , biomimicry Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 ; Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ; Holyoak , & Thagard , 1995 ; Perkins , 1997 Attribute Listing Breaking a problem into pieces and addressing each problem attribute separately Morgan , 1993 Brainstorming Group method of allowing naturally - occurring ideas to be shared without judgment , and built upon by a team Osborn , 1953 Case - based Reasoning Using examples of old designs to inspire the creation of new ones Kolodner , 1993 ; 1997 ; Kolodner & Wills , 1993 ; Riesbeck & Schank , 1989 Forced Connections Using an unrelated stimulus chosen at random , such as a word or an image , as inspiration for design concepts de Bono , 1975 ; Firestien , 1996 ; MacCrimmon & Wagner , 1994 IDEO Cards Using prompts to suggest methods for gathering information about the needs and wants of target users IDEO , 2002 Lateral Thinking Generating a provocative or radical statement about the problem or possible solution to push the designer towards more diverse ideas de Bono , 1975 Morphological Analysis Listing properties and functions of a design solution and multiple options for achieving each , then forming combinations to generate concepts Allen , 1962 ; Zwicky , 1969 SCAMPER Considering transformations to existing concepts of the following types : Substitute , Combine , Adapt , Modify , Put to Other Purposes , Eliminate , Rearrange Eberle , 1995 ; Osborn , 1953 SIT Systematically trying to modify an existing concept using “idea provoking” operators : Unification , Multiplication , Division , Breaking Symmetry , and Object Removal Horowitz , 1999 Synectics Using analogies and metaphors as prompts to motivate joining together different and unrelated elements Gordon , 1961 TRIZ Applying modifications to existing concepts by identifying contradictions Altshuller , 1984 ; Terninko , Zusman , & Zlotin , 1998 Whack Pack Using prompts to identify habitual patterns , new information , and techniques von Oech , 2010 8 These ideation methods vary in their focus , specificity , and usability . For example , TRIZ ( Altshuller , 1984 ) focuses on refinements of engineering mechanisms and design tradeoffs that arise in the implementation phase of the design process . Other techniques , such as brainstorming ( Osborn , 1953 ) , are aimed at ideation starting from a “blank slate” ( without any initial concepts ) . Brainstorming provides three very general guidelines ; namely , “suggest as many ideas as possible , ” “do not evaluate while generating , ” and “build off of others’ ideas . ” However , brainstorming does not provide specific directions for creating ideas . SCAMPER ( Eberle , 1995 ; Osborn , 1953 ) offers more specific guidelines ( e . g . , “combine , ” and “modify” ) . Other methods offer much more detail , but also require extensive training before use ( e . g . , Synectics ( Gordon , 1961 ) , TRIZ ( Altshuller , 1984 ) , and SIT ( Horowitz , 1999 ) ) . Of these approaches , only a few have received any systematic empirical support . TRIZ was the result of a rigorous analysis of the outcomes of designs in the form of engineering patents awarded by the U . S . Patent Office ( Altshuller , 1984 ) . Though based on actual designs , a patent represents the outcome of hundreds of hours of design work rather than the initial stages of idea generation leading to that outcome . In addition , while engineers have been trained to use TRIZ to generate ideas , no scientific evidence has been collected that documents the use of TRIZ principles by untrained engineers . A prime motivation for the present study was to examine the ideation process in engineers as they worked on a single design task . By observing their work session , their methods for generating ideas can be discovered . Analogical reasoning has been proposed as an effective idea generation technique in multiple studies within engineering . For example , “in vivo” studies of practicing engineering teams documented frequent use of analogies both within and across domains ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; 2009 ; Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ) . Experimental studies showed the representation of 9 a simple verbal analogy in memory affected its use in design innovation ( Casakin , 2003 ; Linsey , Murphy , & Markman , 2006 ) . Though all designers were found to profit from visual analogies , reference to them ( for example , a tree with exposed roots ) was particularly helpful for novice designers ( Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 ) . Further , Jin and Benami ( 2010 ) found that instruction to engineers that provided form , behavior , and exemplar analogies resulted in concepts based on the specific analogies provided . However , the meaningfulness and relevance of the specific analogy provided were overwhelmingly important to its successful use in design . This suggests that analogy is a very important source of ideas in design , but that the specific analogies used to prompt concepts matter ( Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) . Thus , as a method for idea generation across design tasks , the use of analogy still requires the designer to generate an appropriate exemplar . Research has shown both positive and negative results from team ideation methods such as brainstorming . For example , research has shown that as teams developed concepts , the quality of the concepts improved ( Linsey et al . , 2011 ) , and that groups outperformed individuals while developing ideas to solve problems ( Collins & Guetzkow , 1964 ; Laughlin , 2002 ) . On the other hand , research has shown that working on ideas individually can be more efficient that collaboration ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Mullen , Johnson , & Salas , 1991 ) . In a study of engineers , brainstorming produced fewer ideas than the combined efforts of an equivalent number of individuals working alone ( Lewis , Sadosky , & Connoly , 1975 ) . This effect is consistent among the majority of the studies focusing on Osborn’s brainstorming ( Mullen et al . , 1991 ) . Other methods for ideation ( in Table 1 ) have been proposed along with many examples illustrating their use . However , little systematic evidence has been presented for their usefulness in engineering design . An exception is an approach to concept generation called “Design 10 Heuristics , ” which has focused on identifying the ideation strategies used by engineers as they solve design problems ( Daly et al . , 2010 ; Yilmaz , Daly , Seifert , & Gonzalez , 2010 ; Yilmaz & Seifert , 2010 ; 2011 ) . Design Heuristics are defined as cognitive “prompts” that point designers towards exploration of design variations . They are intended to help engineering designers move through the space of possible concepts , guiding designers towards non - obvious ideas , and helping them to generate multiple concepts that are different from one other . They are also intended to support designers who have become fixated , and are struggling to generate more , and more different , concepts . An example of a Design Heuristic is Apply an existing mechanism in a new way . This Design Heuristic prompts the designer to take an existing product or component and incorporate it to function differently in the final product . For example , in designing a generator , the engineer may take an existing mechanism like a bicycle and apply it as a power source . This one Design Heuristic can be applied repeatedly to generate other concepts ( e . g . , using a water bottle to squirt water and turn a wheel ) . Other Design Heuristics ( e . g . , Change direction of access ) , can be added and combined ( placing the pedals in the air with the rider beneath ) to produce a variety of novel ideas . The set of Design Heuristics identified in prior empirical studies provide specific directions to assist designers in coming up with novel variations of ideas ( Daly et al . , 2010 ; Yilmaz , Daly , Seifert , & Gonzalez , 2010 ; Yilmaz & Seifert , 2010 ; 2011 ) . Most importantly , the Design Heuristics method is grounded in studies of designers . In a study of award - winning product concepts , characteristics that distinguished creative outcomes from existing products were identified ( Yilmaz & Seifert , 2010 ; Yilmaz et al . , 2012 ) . A detailed investigation of over 400 consumer product concepts identified forty Design Heuristics varying in functionality , form , and user - interaction . Another study examined over 200 designs by a 11 professional designer for a universal access bathroom in residential homes . Thirty - four new Design Heuristics were identified through analysis of sketches showing transitions from one concept to another over time ( Yilmaz & Seifert , 2011 ) . A third study added data based on observing engineers as they worked on novel design problems ( Daly et al . , 2010 ) . Using protocols of their comments while sketching , the engineers’ concept generation techniques were identified ( Gero & McNeill , 1998 ) . These studies together form the empirical basis of Design Heuristics , and we employed these findings in our analyses of the present study . III . RESEARCH DESIGN A . Research Questions The following research questions guided this study : • How do engineering students and practitioners explore the design space during the initial idea generation phase of design ? • How do they use product features to generate potential design solutions ? • What methods do they apply to generate and transform ideas ? B . Participants We recruited individuals through informal networks including engineering students and practitioners from multiple institutions , workplaces , and professional conferences . A $ 5 gift card was provided as a token of appreciation for participation in the study . Our larger project included a broader range of participants , including novice non - engineers and very experienced industrial designers ; for this study , we selected the engineering students and practicing engineers . This resulted in a sample with a range in experience levels with engineering design . We included this population in order to investigate ideation strategies across levels of training . 12 The resulting sample of thirty - six participants is large for a qualitative think - aloud protocol ( Atman & Bursic , 1998 ) , and offered observations of a wide range of idea generation approaches and solutions . Figure 1 includes participant information , including gender , years of experience and educational levels . Those considered first - year students were in their first year of an undergraduate program in engineering and had no design education experiences , although two participants had over five years outside the context of an engineering classroom as part of their prior job . The next category includes sophomore , junior , and senior level engineering undergraduate students who had completed at least one design project as part of engineering coursework . Graduate students and practitioners comprised the last two categories . These groups had many design project experiences in the classroom , and for some of the graduate students and all of the practitioners , outside of the classroom as well . Our intention was to include a range of experience so that naturally occurring strategies , along with methods developed through training and experience , could be observed . Figure 1 . Participants by years of experience in engineering . 13 C . Data Collection Data collection involved laboratory sessions where individuals were presented with a design problem . They were asked to create concept sketches , and to “think aloud” as they worked ( Ericsson & Simon , 1980 ; 1993 ; Hannu & Pallah , 2000 ; Gero & McNeill , 1998 ) . These previous studies indicated people are able to report the thoughts “in mind” without altering their thinking process . A retrospective interview followed , where participants were asked to describe their approaches to ideation , including how they generated each concept , how they moved from one concept to another , and any strategies they used . Participants all reported they were comfortable speaking during the concept generation task . The think - aloud methodology has been successful in previous studies of engineering design cognition ( Akin & Lin , 1995 ; Atman & Bursic , 1998 ; Atman et al . , 1999 ; Atman et al . , 2007 ; Eckersley , 1988 ) . The design task was an open - ended , novel problem related to one of the Grand Challenges for Engineering ( National Academy of Engineering , n . d . ) . It included a small set of criteria and constraints to keep the problem as simple as possible . Participants were given the design task in written form , asked to begin working , and instructed to include labels and descriptions on their sketches . The design task was similar to solar problems used in engineering curricula at the college level , and was stated as follows : Sunlight can be a practical source of alternative energy for everyday jobs , such as cooking . Simple reflection and absorption of sunlight can generate adequate heat for this purpose . Your challenge is to develop products that utilize sunlight for heating and cooking food . The products should be portable and made of inexpensive materials . It should be able to be used by individual families , and should be practical for adults to set up in a sunny spot . 14 Note : Specific materials for a targeted temperature can be postponed to a later stage . Do not worry about the specific quantity of heat that can be generated . Please focus on conceptual designs . Please consider both the ways of capturing the light , and the structural variety of the concepts . The instructions also prompted the engineers to generate as many different concepts as possible during the session : Please draw as many concepts as you can on the papers provided to you . The concepts can be iterations of concepts you generate , or they can be entirely new ideas . Please try to use one page for each concept . Also , elaborate on each concept in writing , using labels and descriptions . Give specifics about what the concepts represent and how you came up with each idea . We want you to create concepts that are creative and appropriate . Participants were given twenty - five minutes to generate ideas . Because we wanted participants to spend their time on concept generation , we added the following information to the session in writing after ten minutes into the task : The Basic Principles of Transferring Solar Energy into Thermal Energy : • Concentrating sunlight : Using usually a mirror or some type of reflective metal to concentrate light and heat from the sun into a small area makes the energy more concentrated and therefore stronger . • Converting light to heat : Any black colored material will improve the effectiveness of turning light into heat , as black absorbs light . 15 • Trapping heat : Once the light is absorbed and converted to heat , trapping the heat inside makes it possible to reach similar temperatures on cold and windy days as on hot days . The intent of this additional information was to encourage participants to move past any desire for more specific technical information before generating concepts . Instead , they were encouraged to make assumptions about the technical feasibility of possible solutions . The ten - minute interval allowed participants to approach the problem first in their own way , and then with the technical description , suggest to those who had not already begun creating to work on less technical solutions . All of the engineers ' drawings and verbal comments were collected using an electronic pen that tracked its own movements and simultaneously recorded verbal data . This allowed us to recreate each participant’s session for analysis . D . Data Analysis Verbal data from the sessions were transcribed to supplement the sketching data . This collection of data was reviewed multiple times as we searched for evidence of how designers generated ideas and transitioned from one concept to another . Consistent with our previous work , in the retrospective interviews , most participants were not able to recall or describe their use of specific ideation strategies or product characteristics ( Yilmaz & Seifert , 2011 ) . Consequently , most of our observations were drawn from our analysis of the concept sketches and think - aloud comments , rather than the retrospective accounts of ideation approaches . The focus of the data analysis was the “extraction” of Design Heuristics . This method involves a close examination of each concept , its labels and description from the engineer , and the analysis of the flow of concepts across the session . This “extraction method” was used 16 successfully in prior studies to capture the relevant similarities among engineers’ designs on a given task ( Yilmaz & Seifert , 2010 ; 2011 ) . The research reported in this paper used the same method to note systematic strategies evident in the concepts on a novel design task , with data collected in a single design session from each participant . We analyzed each participant’s concepts ( sketch with accompanying think - aloud data and retrospective interview data ) for evidence of idea generation strategies . Two coders , both trained designers with Ph . D . credentials , analyzed all of the data separately . Any disagreements in coding were resolved through discussion . The coders examined the data from each subject session separately , examining each concept separately and in sequence , for evidence of strategy use . Coding began with a master list of 74 Design Heuristics , and each concept was examined at length and coded for the presence of specific heuristics . The master list included all of the Design Heuristics identified in previous studies ( Daly , et al . , 2010 ; Yilmaz & Seifert , 2010 ; 2011 ) . In the analysis of each participant’s concept set , we looked for characteristic differences between concepts ; that is , the first concept was compared to all subsequent concepts , and then the second concept was compared to all subsequent concepts , and so on . We identified : 1 ) characteristics that differentiated each participant’s ideas from each other ( i . e . , how one concept compared to the others in a participant’s set ) , 2 ) what transformations moved participants from one concept to the next ( i . e . , how characteristics of a set of concepts were similar and different , as well as how participants described the transformation ) , 3 ) participants’ comments on the source of their ideas as they worked through the task , and 4 ) participants’ explanations of how they proceeded through the design task in the retrospective interview . The goal was to find all strategies of any kind that were evident in the concepts generated by participants . 17 As an example of this analysis method , consider Figure 2 , which shows two concepts from Participant 36 . The first concept used freestanding constructed legs for support , while the second used ropes tied to trees , suggesting the Design Heuristic called , Incorporating the environment . The first concept used a reflective sheet , whereas the second used solar panels , showing a substitution of the functional method of capturing solar energy . Both concepts used components that could attach and detach , improving portability . Figure 2 . Examples of Two Concepts from One Participant in Sequence We also looked for evidence of heuristics within single concepts . Concept 5 from Participant 28 , presented in Figure 3 , provides an example of features detected within a single concept . The concept is a closed black box for holding food with an attached glass lens to focus sunlight . The outside of the box has mirrors to direct light to the lens , and the inside of the box has mirrors to direct the incoming light onto the food . The lens attachment is adjustable to capture the position of the sun . 18 Figure 3 . Example Analysis of a Single Concept One Design Heuristic observed here was Utilize opposite surface , where the inside surface of the box was used to support mirrors . Another Design Heuristic observed in this example was Use multiple components for one function , where the lens to focus light is combined with reflectors to maximize input . Add motion is also evident in how the lens and mirrors on top can rotate to face the sun . Repeat is evident in how the array of mirrors is repeated on both sides of the lens . Finally , the Design Heuristic Cover or wrap was evident because the designer chose to enclose the food within a black exterior shell . Each concept was coded for the identification of specific Design Heuristics . If a participant used the same heuristic in two different concepts , it was counted two times . However , if a Design Heuristic was evident only through a transition from one concept to another , it was counted only in the latter concept . In addition to the Design Heuristic analysis , we also coded all other identified strategies we detected in the concepts . We began with the list in Table 1 ; however , we quickly found that few participants used these specific strategies in their entirety . Instead , we found that participants used smaller aspects of these methods , or formed their own approaches . They did not explicitly refer to any of the existing methods , and did not follow the proposed procedure of the method . For example , one participant stated that he attempted to think about different varieties of food , 19 and then generated solar cooking methods adapted to each food ( e . g . , coffee vs . bread ) . The Morphological Analysis procedure ( Allen , 1962 ; Zwicky , 1969 ) includes identifying each functional goal , considering the different ways of achieving each of those goals of the product , and combining them in different ways . This participant’s approach to modify one functional dimension did not capture the multi - dimensional aspect of Morphological Analysis , thus was coded as a separate strategy and added to the master list . Finally , new strategies were observed that could not be identified as falling into a known Design Heuristic or any known approach from Table 1 . Each observed strategy was added to the master - coding list and counted with each occurrence . The result of this extraction analysis was an inclusive list of concept generation strategies observed anywhere in the protocol data . IV . FINDINGS In total , the 36 engineers generated 179 concepts ; the highest number of concepts generated by one participant was nine , and the fewest , one , with an average of 5 ( sd = 2 . 2 ) per participant . We first present evidence of ideation strategies used by participants that emerged from our analysis . These included general methods for initiating concepts from a starting point , altering the problem description , and working from existing concepts . Next , we present evidence for the use of Design Heuristics with a complete list of heuristics evident in the data . A . Approaches to Idea Generation No participants stated that their approach to concept generation was based on existing ideation methods such as those shown in Table 1 . In many cases , there were similarities to a component of the participant’s approach and an aspect of an existing method . However , in none of these cases did the participants follow the prescribed procedure of the method , nor did they 20 refer to the specific method during the think - aloud task or the retrospective interview . We considered these methods as general approaches to idea generation . In total , we identified 11 different general approaches participants employed to help generate concepts . We categorized these approaches into three groups : 1 ) finding a starting point , 2 ) reformulating the problem , and 3 ) working from prior concepts . Finding a Starting Point . When given the problem statement and tasked to generate concepts , some participants used structured ways to create a basis for a design . We found evidence for four different methods participants used to find starting points during concept generation . These methods focus on the use of past exemplars , including analogies , other existing products , and past autobiographical experiences ( see Table 3 ) . The use of both verbal and visual analogies by participants was closely related to the Analogical Thinking concept generation method . Analogical Thinking involves two stages : 1 ) identification and retrieval and 2 ) mapping and transfer ( Casakin , 2003 ; Finke et al . , 1992 ; Holyoak , & Thagard , 1995 ; Perkins , 1997 ) . Participants who used this technique considered features of their concepts that could be addressed through analogies with existing objects , and transferred those to a solar oven design ( Linsey et al . , 2006 ) . Also , participants often referred to their previous experiences cooking food and cooking or heating using the sun as a way to initiate an idea . Additionally , participants also found starting points by modifying existing cooking products . These approaches can be considered Case - based reasoning , in which problem - solvers adapt old solutions to meet new demands ( Kolodner , 1993 ; 1997 ; Kolodner & Wills , 1993 ) . A final strategy involved designing from “first principles , ” where participants started with a simple form chosen apparently at random , and used it as the basis for a concept , then derived a solution following basic engineering principles ( Cross & Cross , 1998 ) . 21 Table 3 . Methods Participants Used to Find a Starting Point Strategy Description of Evidence ( “The participant…” ) Analogize ( Analogical Thinking ) Used a form or functional analogy to initiate a design Draw from previous experience ( Case - based reasoning ) Identified personal experiences that related to the task Initiate ideas from simple forms Started with simple geometric forms and built concepts around them Redesign existing product ( Case - based reasoning ) Started with an existing product and modified its features Two examples of the “Analogize’ method , along with excerpts from participant protocols , are shown in Figure 4 . Figure 4 . Analogize Examples Reformulating the problem . Some participants voiced their own values , interests , and concerns when interpreting the design task . They seemed to reshape the focus of the design problem by emphasizing specific priorities , evaluating aspects of the problem they wanted to improve , or modifying it to reflect what they considered to be the actual problem . Previous studies have demonstrated that problem reformulation ( also called problem finding and problem framing ) is an important step in the design process that is interleaved with idea generation ( Csikszentmihalyi & Getzels , 1971 ; Chand & Runco , 1993 ; Volkema , 1983 ) . While these problem reformulation strategies are not closely related to any existing idea generation strategies , 22 they are all components of design process models ( Cross , 2000 ; Dubberly , 2004 ; Dym & Little , 2009 ) . Descriptions of the ways in which participants reformulated the problem are included in Table 4 . Table 4 . Ways Participants Reformulated the Design Problem Strategy Description of Evidence ( “The participant…” ) Evaluate Identified problem in individual elements of a concept and used this judgment to generate alternatives Prioritize constraints Applied emphasis to certain constraints , and used those constraints to guide concept development Restructure the problem Redefined the “real” problem according to personal values , and used the new definition to generate concepts In this category of ideation methods , we often observed participants using evaluative criteria to guide concept generation by identifying flaws in concepts , and using those concerns to focus alternatives . Evidence for this approach was generally found in verbal data , where participants made value judgments about their concepts in the ideation session . Two examples are shown in Figure 5 . Figure 5 . Evaluate Examples Participants also applied their own values to the constraints and requirements of the design task . When they identified a certain feature as essential , they focused on it to help generate a concept . For example , if they prioritized “heat adjustability , ” they focused on this feature in their concept generation . 23 Less frequently , participants reconsidered the design problem and created an alternative version . For example , Participant 36 flexibly interpreted what it meant to “cook” in the problem statement , and designed a smoker concept : “And then I thought , well you might not just want to cook , you might want to dry foods . So , drying herbs and things like that you wouldn’t need it to be nearly as hot… I thought , okay , so instead of just drying food there’s also the whole idea that you could slowly smoke food . ” Reformulating the problem served as a means to initiate new concepts . Working from Existing Concepts . Participants were often observed using their existing concepts as a source for additional ones by modifying , merging , dividing , and building upon them , as described in Table 5 . Table 5 . Generation Methods Working from Existing Ideas Strategy Description Split a concept ( aspects of SCAMPER ) Took the basic functioning structure of a previous concept or a unique feature , and rebuilt a new concept around it Elaborate ( aspects of SCAMPER ) Built upon a foundational concept by increasing the level of detail Synthesize ( aspects of SCAMPER ) Took two or more previous concepts and merged them Diversify way of achieving function ( aspects of Morphological Analysis ) Considered a mechanism in a previous concept and identified a new mechanism that could achieve the same function Sometimes , participants used single concepts to build new ideas by adding detail and elaborating on features , or clarifying aspects of the previous concept ; this is similar to the elaboration step in SCAMPER . They also extracted aspects of a previous concept and built a new concept around it , analogous to the substitute step of SCAMPER . For example , Participant 28 identified a general form for the cooking chamber , and then devoted his entire session to 24 generating multiple attachments and variations of this same basic form . Participants also used multiple concepts as a way to generate additional concepts by combining and merging aspects to form a new concept , similar to SCAMPER’s combine . Figure 6 provides one example of synthesizing concepts . Figure 6 . Synthesize Examples Finally , we observed participants emulating aspects of Morphological Analysis by identifying various ways to achieve each function of the solar cooker , and thus quickly creating many concepts . Diversify ways of achieving function was most often observed as a way to work from previous concepts ; participants generally had a concept and identified one of its functions that could be achieved in another way . For example , Participant 28 designed a black box with a magnifying glass on top to collect the sunlight , and then he designed the same black box with a solar panel to collect the sunlight instead of the magnifying glass . However , participants occasionally used this method to find a starting point . For example , Participant 16 listed potential materials for the product at the beginning of his session before generating any concepts . These three approaches for generating ideas - - finding a starting point , reformulating the problem , and working from prior concepts – describe some of the ways participants worked to create concepts . Another way participants created and modified concepts focused on the 25 characteristics and features the products could have . This strategy is called the Design Heuristics approach . B . Design Heuristics From the protocols collected for this study , we identified 62 separate Design Heuristics that participants applied to generate concepts . Fifty - three of these were identified in previous research ( Daly et al . , 2010 ; Yilmaz & Seifert , 2010 ; 2011 ) , and nine were new strategies that emerged in the analysis , and were identified as new Design Heuristics . Twenty - one that were uncovered in our previous work did not appear in this design problem . The heuristics evident in this study and descriptions of the associated evidence are presented in Table 6 . Table 6 . Design Heuristics Extracted from Participant Concepts Heuristic Description of Evidence 1 ) Add features from nature The product has features that mimic nature 2 ) Add motion The product or a component can move by itself 3 ) Add to existing product The product attaches to or functions with a product that already exists 4 ) Adjust function through movement The level of the product’s function can be adjusted by the user by moving components 5 ) Adjust functions for specific users The product is designed for specific users with different needs 6 ) Apply existing mechanism in new way The product incorporates a repurposed existing product as a functional component 7 ) Attach independent functional components Physical connections between multiple components that each serve distinct , separate functions 8 ) Attach product to user The product can be attached to the user 9 ) Bend The product or its components have bends in surfaces that were assumed or previously existed as flat 10 ) Build user community The product is designed to support use by various people or to unite a community toward a common goal 11 ) Change contact surface The points of contact where users are intended to interact with the product are visually or tactilely distinguished 12 ) Change flexibility A component with an assumed flexibility is made more or less flexible 13 ) Change geometry A component with an assumed or previously existing geometry is recreated with a new geometric form 14 ) Compartmentalize The product has multiple compartments to store different components or items , or serve different functions 15 ) Contextualize The product is designed to fit within a specific context 16 ) Convert 2 - D to 3 - D The three - dimensional product or a component is made from a two - dimensional sheet material 26 17 ) Convert for second function The product can be converted to serve a secondary function 18 ) Cover or wrap A volume , a component , or the entire product is wrapped or covered with material for protection or containment 19 ) Create system The product incorporates a multi - stage process in which a medium moves through more than one functional component , or goes through multiple phases to complete the function . 20 ) Distinguish functions visually The different functions of the product are visually distinguished 21 ) Divide continuous surface A surface of the product is physically separated or visually divided into multiple surfaces that each serve different functions 22 ) Elevate or lower The product is lifted off the ground with a stand or through attachment to its environment 23 ) Expand or collapse The product is expandable and collapsible to change size for use 24 ) Extend surface The surfaces of the product are longer or wider than the assumed or previous size 25 ) Extrude The product came from an extrusion of a flat shape 26 ) Flatten The product can be flattened from a non - flat shape , or the product is flat in comparison to its assumed or previously existing shape 27 ) Fold Joints or flexibility in the product allows it to be folded down to a smaller size 28 ) Hollow out A volume of the product is hollow 29 ) Impose hierarchy on functions The function of the product can only be achieved when the user follows a series of steps 30 ) Incorporate environment The product is physically incorporated into its environment , such that the environment plays a role in the function of the product 31 ) Incorporate user input The product has an interface that allows the user to input preferences to modify its function 32 ) Make component multifunctional A component serves multiple functions 33 ) Make components attachable or detachable Individual , separate components of the product have connectors that allow them to be attached or detached 34 ) Merge functions with same energy source The product incorporates two or more functions that use the same energy source 35 ) Merge surfaces The product has a single continuous surfaces where two or more surfaces were assumed or previously existed 36 ) Mirror or Array The components of the product are mirrored or arrayed along a central axis or in a pattern 37 ) Nest The components of the product are shaped to fit inside each other 38 ) Offer optional components The product has multiple optional components among which the user can decide 39 ) Provide sensory feedback The product can return sensory information to the user that describes the function or status of the product 40 ) Reconfigure The components of the product can be reconfigured , or they have been reconfigured from an existing or assumed state 41 ) Reduce material The product uses less material than the assumed amount 42 ) Reorient The product can be flipped vertically or horizontally to serve a different function 43 ) Repeat Multiples of the same functional component 27 44 ) Reverse direction or change angle The product is directed or angled differently than the assumed or previously existing direction or angle 45 ) Roll The product can be rolled along an axis 46 ) Rotate The product or a component can rotate about an axis 47 ) Scale up or down The product is larger or smaller than its existing or assumed size 48 ) Separate parts Different functioning components of the product are physically separated into distinct parts 49 ) Slide components The components of the product can slide along each other 50 ) Stack The components of the product or vertically oriented to rest on each other 51 ) Substitute way of achieving function An assumed or previously existing component is replaced with a new one that will serve the same function 52 ) Synthesize functions The product incorporates multiple functions that work together to achieve its final goal 53 ) Telescope The product or a component can be made smaller or larger by telescoping 54 ) Texturize The product has one or more surface with a distinct texture 55 ) Unify The components share common geometries and form similarities that unite into a cohesive product 56 ) Use alternative energy source The product uses a different energy source than the assumed ( solar , in this case ) to achieve its function 57 ) Use common base to hold components The product has a central base that holds multiple components 58 ) Use multiple components for one function Multiple components work together to achieve the core function of the product 59 ) Use packaging as functional component The packaging of the product can be used to help achieve the core function 60 ) Use recycled or recyclable materials Recycled or recyclable materials are incorporated into the product 61 ) Utilize inner space The inner space of the product or a component is used for a distinct function 62 ) Utilize opposite surface Both sides of a surface , such as top and bottom , front and back , or inside and outside , are used Figure 7 provides examples of two instances of six different Design Heuristics observed from participant concepts to illustrate how we identified them . An excerpt from the protocol is included to provide evidence of the heuristic use . 28 Figure 7 . Examples of Observed Design Heuristics 29 The Design Heuristic , Adjust function through movement , describes concepts in which participants created moving parts that could adjust the core function of the product . The moving parts performed the same function , but moved to control the level of that function ( e . g . , how much sunlight is captured , or how hot the oven gets ) . As shown in Figure 7 , Participant 4 created a box with adjustable side reflecting panels to control heat , while Participant 27 created a tripod stand with a parabolic dish that can swivel to face the sun for the same function . Another Design Heuristic , Change flexibility , captured cases where participants substituted a flexible material for a rigid one , or vice versa . As shown in Figure 7 , Participant 26 created a flexible , transparent food bag to replace a rigid pot , and Participant 36 used reflective blankets instead of rigid mirrors . For Contextualize , evidence included concepts that made use of the location where users would cook . These concepts included places such as campsites , community centers , and stores , and built upon an assumed context . As shown in Figure 7 , Participant 31 designed a system for creating iced tea in a café setting , while Participant 36 created a large - scale device for a park in which community members could place their food dishes to cook . For Create system , concepts were identified that included multi - stage processes moving through more than one functional component or multiple phases to complete the function . Often , participants created systems by heating an alternative fluid that would then be used to cook the food . As shown in Figure 7 , Participant 24 heated water in a long black tube , and then used it to heat the underside of a parabolic dish . After identifying heat loss as a problem with lidded pots , Participant 31 created a device in which food ( beans ) could be inserted in one end , cooked , and then automatically dispensed . 30 Impose hierarchy on functions was evident in concepts that included a set of tasks that need to be performed in a particular order to achieve the function . This is distinguished from Create system by the hierarchical structure of the components and the focus on controlling user interaction with the system . As shown in Figure 7 , Participant 7 created a set of absorbent black cubes that must be put in the sun to collect heat before being placed in the grill to cook the food , and Participant 29 created a cooking device that requires the user to fold down the reflectors in order to access the food compartment . Figure 7 shows concepts with the Design Heuristic Repeat , where multiple similar elements allowed larger functions to be created out of smaller parts , or increased the functional intensity of the product . As shown in Figure 7 , Participant 17 replaced a single metal sheet with small flat reflective strips repeated multiple times to make a parabolic dish , and Participant 9 used multiple mirrors to direct sunlight towards the food . Each Design Heuristic in Table 6 was identified within the protocols between 1 and 100 times ( average = 15 ) . The three most frequently observed Design Heuristics were Cover or wrap ( 100 occurrences ) , Attach independent functional components ( 95 occurrences ) , and Repeat ( 69 occurrences ) . We hypothesize that the nature of the design problem may impact which Design Heuristics show up most frequently . For example , participants identified a key to cooking with solar energy is to retain heat , and therefore they often covered or enclosed a cooking chamber . Since the design problems calls for a compact and portable product , many components ( such as reflectors , mirrors , cooking surfaces , etc . ) were often attached . Lastly , since the participants were generally aware that natural sunlight is not intense enough to cook food , they often repeated elements to collect more and intensify the light on the food . Some of the Design Heuristics observed in other studies were used less frequently by participants in this study , reiterating that heuristics may depend upon features of the problem . For example , the heuristic Use human 31 generated power was not observed at all in this study because it directly opposes the design task . Design problems in prior studies included the redesign of consumer products ( Yilmaz & Seifert , 2010 ; Yilmaz et al . , 2012 ) and the redesign of residential baths for universal access ( Yilmaz & Seifert , 2011 ) . It is possible that some heuristics are more applicable depending upon the specifics of the design problem at hand . While the focus of our analysis was qualitative , we conducted some descriptive analyses to provide comparative information on heuristic use . In particular , we collected protocols from individuals with expertise ranging from college training through professional experience and investigated relationships between experience and the use of heuristics . The highest number of Design Heuristics evident in any one participant’s set of concepts was 26 , and the lowest 6 , with an average of 14 . Twenty - three participants had four or fewer years of experience ( were undergraduate students ) , and the remaining 13 participants had more than four years of experience ( graduate students , instructors , and professionals ) . The more experienced participants used more ( different ) heuristics on average ( 17 ) , while less experienced participants averaged only 12 , t ( 19 . 362 ) = 2 . 836 , p < 0 . 012 ( two tailed Welch t - test ) . That more experienced participants used more heuristics is in line with Anderson’s ( 1982 ) definition of expertise—the skilled execution of highly practiced sequences of procedures . These results also support prior suggestions that heuristic use may follow a developmental sequence , from learning individual heuristics and becoming skilled in their application , to eventually developing patterns of multiple heuristic applications ( Yilmaz & Seifert , 2011 ) . In addition , while there was abundant evidence of the use of Design Heuristics , participants did not often refer to their use in the protocols . Participants did not suggest in the retrospective interview that the application of different heuristics was their strategy for idea 32 generation , nor did they indicate as they were designing that their intentions were to change characteristics of the product . Participants verbalized individual decisions about concepts by saying , “What if I folded this ? ” or “If I covered this piece…” This did not , however , translate to applying diverse ideation strategies . Thus , participants made choices in terms of how to initiate and modify concepts , but did not or could not verbalize these strategies in generating ideas . Rather , Design Heuristics were applied and discussed as a form of implicit knowledge , as often seen in heuristic use in experts ( Klein , 1998 ; Nisbett & Ross , 1980 ) . However , both in the retrospective interviews and during the task , participants verbalized more general strategies , such as using analogies , putting together combinations of concepts , considering related products , drawing on experiences related to the task , and allowing ideas to “appear” in their heads . This was especially true for those with more experience . For example , when reflecting on the task , Participant 36 described how he Synthesized two concepts to create a third . Also , he recognized and identified the constraints that drove his design ideas and the ways he modified the problem statement . In addition to the nature of the task , the application of heuristics also seemed to be a function of participants’ priorities . Participants often verbalized their goals for their concepts , emphasizing certain constraints and requirements over others , including portability , cost , and user interactions . These goals seemed to reframe the ways participants viewed the design problem , which also impacted the heuristics they applied to their exploration of the design space . There may be systematic relationships between specific Design Heuristics and the problem criteria that give rise to their use . Future studies comparing heuristic use across varied problem content may reveal systematic factors in their use . 33 V . DISCUSSION A . Ideation Strategies This work focused on extracting the methods used in idea generation by engineers as they designed a novel device . The results revealed some general methods for initiating concepts , including using analogies and adding variations to prior concepts . We observed similarities among participants in the ways they worked through idea generation ( ways they found starting points , reformulated the problem , and worked from existing concepts ) . These general strategies are similar to proposed methods for concept generation as well as aspects of design process models . Most significantly , the analysis found empirical support for the ubiquitous use of Design Heuristics in concept generation . This use of heuristics was observed in the concepts generated by participants across levels of experience – though we found that more experienced participants used more heuristics . This approach is also unique in that the specific guidelines have arisen through empirical testing with engineering designers . The Design Heuristics approach is a descriptive model , rooted in observations of engineers in action as they generated concept solutions . This approach to developing an idea generation technique allows us to capture unique information about strategy use that has not been captured in previous prescriptive approaches to idea generation . The extraction of heuristics from designers as they are designing results in empirically based guidelines based on information that we could not gain from reports from designers alone . Our past collection of studies to extract Design Heuristics allowed us to build this list of strategies . This study with engineering students and practitioners confirmed many of the heuristics we have seen across other problem contexts , and also allowed us to extract some 34 additional heuristics . While we added to our set of strategies , we did not add a large amount , indicating to us that we are close to a saturation point in our collection of strategies . Design Heuristics have some similarities to other ideation techniques , including SCAMPER ( Eberle , 1995 ; Osborn , 1953 ) and TRIZ ( Altshuller , 1984 ) . Like those approaches , Design Heuristics also serve as prompts to aid designers by suggesting directions for modifying existing concepts . However , while SCAMPER offers information about how to transform ideas , its set of general guidelines ( e . g . , " combine " ) may be difficult to understand what to “combine” and how to apply the guidelines to their tasks . The TRIZ approach provides yet more specific guidelines for designs , but these address refinements in mechanisms and design tradeoffs requiring concrete concept details . As a result , TRIZ strategies may be most suited to use in later stages of design , after concepts have been selected and further developed to the implementation stage . The Synectics framework ( Gordon , 1961 ) focuses on the fusion of opposites using past experiences and analogies ; as a result , it is difficult to observe systematicities cross designers since they have unique sets of experiences to draw upon . IDEO™ Method Cards ( IDEO , 2002 ) emphasize ways to understand the end user rather than proposing specific design strategies , and " Whack Pack " cards ( von Oech , 2010 ) focus on “breaking out” of habitual views by providing general techniques ( “Take a different perspective on the problem” ) and decision - making advice ( “Make a list of the pros and cons of each option” ) . Most importantly , the other methods are not supported by empirical evidence from engineering designers as they design . B . Design Heuristics in Engineering Education We envision a teachable approach to concept generation using the Design Heuristics , which would include representing each Design Heuristic on a separate card , and providing the 35 set of cards to engineering students and practitioners as prompts for concept generation . As an example , we created a sample Design Heuristic card shown in Figure 8 . Figure 8 . Example Design Heuristic Card ( Images from : www . idsa . org / content / content1 / 980 - tatou - sport - shoe - le - parkour , http : / / www . fuseproject . com / category - 3 - product - 19 ) The Design Heuristic card represents one of the extracted strategies from our work ; it includes a description of the heuristic , an abstract image depicting the application of the heuristic , and two product examples that show how the heuristic is evident in existing consumer products . We anticipate that the Design Heuristics could be taught to engineering students in design courses , from freshman to capstone project - based coursed , by instructing them on how to use the cards during the time in their course projects when they are trying to generate ideas . This could be done in a relatively short amount of time , as the cards would include multiple pieces of information to help them understand the strategy . The instruction would include an introduction to the Design Heuristics , how they were developed , an example card , and practice using a few cards with guidance by the instructor on a given design task . The students could then work with the full set or subset of the cards to generate ideas . An introduction to the Design Heuristics 36 Cards and guidelines for their use could be included in a similar workshop or short instruction book for engineering practitioners . Given the set of cards , engineering students and practitioners would have the collection of strategies at their disposal for use to aid their idea generation sessions . The collection of Design Heuristics could become part of their repertoire that they could apply when working on generating multiple diverse design solutions . They may prompt engineering students and practitioners to modify concepts in ways they would not normally consider and expand the types of modifications applied , helping engineers more fully explore design spaces and leading to more creative and diverse sets of ideas . For innovation to occur , these are key . C . Limitations and Future Work This study was limited in that it included only one design task , which may have limited the heuristics that were identified . However , prior studies have also verified the extraction of Design Heuristics from a variety of design problems ( Yilmaz & Seifert , 2010 ; 2011 ; Yilmaz et al . , 2012 ) , thus the results of this study and those combined provide more credibility that these heuristics can be applied more broadly . Additional limitations include the use of a laboratory setting , with an artificial task and time frame . Participants’ usual design environments would allow further time for iterations in participants’ design processes . This controlled study does not capture the usual work settings in industry , nor the flexibility of returning to ideation after doing other tasks , such as problem refinement , data gathering , and prototyping . However , the verification of the presence of Design Heuristics in this laboratory task suggests their potential relevance to the range of design problems , and to design pedagogy for engineering education . We have not yet developed a framework to subdivide the Design Heuristics , as we need more data to determine what kind of categorization , framework , architecture , etc . would be 37 valuable . We do not want to artificially group the Design Heuristics together ; instead , we want the decision to be made based on empirical evidence . Thus , in our future work , we will investigate patterns in heuristic use , i . e . , if certain heuristics are often used together or separately and what types of criteria certain heuristics address in a variety of problem contexts . These studies will guide if and what type of overarching framework would prove useful to engineering students and practitioners . The long - term goal is to develop a collection of strategies that have been shown across a variety of design contexts to support diverse thinking in concept generation . Our goal is not to map all of the Design Heuristics possible , but instead to develop a set of strategies that are useful in multiple problem contexts for the design of products . Thus , as we continue to study the use of heuristics in additional problem contexts , the list of Design Heuristics will be further refined , based on observations about their use . Future studies are necessary to examine how the nature of the design problem affects the use of Design Heuristics , and whether systematic patterns of use occur . Another avenue of research is to examine the impact of professional training on heuristic use , following up on the finding that experts appeared to use more heuristics in their concepts . Finally , a larger question is whether these or other heuristics appear in other parts of the design process . VI . CONCLUSIONS Engineering students and practitioners develop design skills and approaches to ideation through their practice of design . However , it is difficult for designers to recognize their cognitive strategies , making it challenging to share these ideation methods with others . This protocol study of engineering designers provides a collection of heuristics observed in practice that offer new 38 methods for students and practitioners to explore design spaces . The Design Heuristics identified in this and previous work can potentially be learned through training , and then incorporated into the practice of engineering students and practitioners . The Design Heuristics are not “rules for design” that must be followed . Neither do they work alone to generate ideas that are not due to the designer . Rather , Design Heuristics serve as strategies to facilitate one’s own ideation process , building upon ideas while increasing the variety of ways they are expressed . It appears a natural consequence of generation to become “fixated” on a current idea . By their nature , Design Heuristics help an individual build upon that idea to create endless variations , combining and developing ideas in unusual directions . As a result , engineers using Design Heuristics may have an easier time generating more , and more different , concepts within a work session . If Design Heuristics prove helpful in supporting engineers to generate novel and creative designs , innovative solutions will follow . VI . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No . 0927474 . Any opinions , findings , and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author ( s ) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation . We would also like to thank Panos Y . Papalambros for his contributions to our research agenda . References ABET Board of Directors . ( 2011 ) . 2011 - 2012 Criteria for accrediting engineering programs . Retrieved August 30 , 2011 , from http : / / www . abet . org / forms . shtml . 39 Ahmed , S . , Wallace , K . M . , & Blessing , L . T . M . ( 2003 ) . Understanding the differences between how novice and experienced designers approach design tasks . Journal of Research in Engineering Design , 14 ( 1 ) , 1 - 11 . Akin , O . ( 1990 ) . Necessary conditions for design expertise and creativity . Design Studies , 11 ( 2 ) , 107 - 113 . Akin , O . , & Lin , C . ( 1995 ) . Design protocol data and novel design decisions . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 211 - 236 . Allen , M . ( 1962 ) . Morphological creativity . New Jersey : Prentice - Hall . Altshuller , G . ( 1984 ) . Creativity as an exact science . New York : Gordon and Breach . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context : Update to the social psychology of creativity . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . Anderson , J . R . ( 1982 ) . Acquisition of cognitive skill . Psychological Review , 89 ( 4 ) , 369 - 406 . Atman , C . J . , Adams , R . S . , Mosborg , S . , Cardella , M . E . , Turns , J . , & Saleem , J . ( 2007 ) . Engineering design processes : A comparison of students and expert practitioners . Journal of Engineering Education , 96 ( 4 ) , 359 - 379 . Atman , C . J . , & Bursic , K . M . ( 1998 ) . Verbal protocol analysis as a method to document engineering student design processes . Journal of Engineering Education , 87 ( 2 ) , 121 - 132 . Atman , C . , Chimka , J . , Bursic , K . , Nachtmann , H . ( 1999 ) . A comparison of freshman and senior engineering design processes . Design Studies , 20 ( 2 ) , 131 - 152 . Ball , L . , Evans , J . , & Dennis , I . ( 1994 ) . Cognitive processes in engineering design : A longitudinal study . Ergonomics , 37 ( 11 ) , 1753 - 1786 . Brophy , D . R . ( 2001 ) . Comparing the attributes , activities , and performance of divergent , convergent , and combination thinkers , Creativity Research Journal , 13 , 439 - 455 . 40 Casakin , H . ( 2003 ) . Visual analogy as a cognitive strategy in the design process : Expert versus novice performance . In N . Cross & E . Edmonds ( Eds . ) , Expertise in design . Sydney : University of Technology , Creativity & Cognition Press . Casakin , H . , & Goldschmidt , G . ( 1999 ) Expertise and the use of analogy : Implications for design education . Design Studies , 20 ( 2 ) , 153 - 175 . Chand , I . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1993 ) . Problem finding skills as components in the creative process . Personality and Individual Differences , 14 ( 1 ) , 155 - 162 . Christensen , B . , & Schunn , C . ( 2009 ) . Setting a limit to randomness [ or : ‘Putting blinkers on a blind man’ ] : Providing cognitive support for creative processes with environmental cues . In Wood , K . , & Markman , A . ( Eds . ) , Tools for Innovation . Oxford University Press . Christensen , B . , & Schunn , C . ( 2007 ) . The relationship of analogical distance to analogical function and preinventive structure : The case of engineering design . Memory and Cognition , 35 ( 1 ) , 29 - 38 . Collins , B . , & Guetzkow , H . ( 1964 ) . A social psychology of group problem solving . New York : John Wiley and Sons , Inc . Cropley , D . H . ( 2006 ) . The role of creativity as a driver of innovation . Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE International Conference on the Management of Innovation and Technology , Singapore . Cross , N . ( 2000 ) . Engineering design methods . West Sussex , England : John Wiley & Sons . Cross , N . ( 2001 ) . Design cognition : Results from protocol and other empirical studies of design activity . In C . M . Eastman , W . M . McCracken , & W . C . Newstetter ( Eds . ) , Design knowing and learning : Cognition in design education ( pp . 79 - 104 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Cross , N . , & Cross , A . C . ( 1998 ) . Expertise in engineering design . Research in Engineering 41 Design , 10 ( 3 ) , 141 - 149 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . , & Getzels , J . W . ( 1971 ) . Discovery - oriented behaviour and the originality of artistic products : A study with artists . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 19 ( 1 ) , 47 – 52 . Dahl , D . , & Moreau , P . ( 2002 ) . The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research , 39 ( 1 ) , 47 - 60 . Daly , S . , Christian , J . , Yilmaz , S . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gonzalez , R . ( 2012 ) . Assessing design heuristics in idea generation within an introductory engineering design course . International Journal of Engineering Education , 28 ( 2 ) , 1 - 11 . Daly , S . R . , Yilmaz , S . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gonzalez , R . ( 2010 ) . Cognitive heuristic use in engineering design ideation . Proceedings of the 2010 American Society for Engineering Education Conference ( ASEE ) , Louisville , Kentucky . de Bono , E . ( 1975 ) . The uses of lateral thinking . New York : Harper and Row . de Bono , E . ( 1992 ) . Serious creativity : Using the power of lateral thinking to create new ideas . Toronto : HarperCollins Publishers Ltd . Diehl , M . , and Stroebe , W . ( 1987 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 ( 3 ) 497 - 509 . Dubberly , H . ( 2004 ) . How do you design ? Dubberly Design Office . Retrieved August 30 , 2011 , from http : / / www . dubberly . com / articles / how - do - you - design . html . Duderstadt , J . ( 2008 ) . Engineering for a changing world : A roadmap to the future of engineering practice , research , and education . Ann Arbor , MI : The Millennium Project . Retrieved August 30 , 2011 , from http : / / milproj . dc . umich . edu / . 42 Dym , C . , Agogino , A . , Eris , O . , Frey , D . , & Leifer , L . ( 2005 ) . Engineering design thinking , teaching , and learning . Journal of Engineering Education , 94 ( 1 ) , 103 - 120 . Dym , C . , & Little , P . ( 2009 ) . Engineering design . Hoboken , NJ : John Wiley & Sons . Eberle , B . ( 1995 ) . Scamper . Waco , Texas : Prufrock . Eckersley , M . ( 1988 ) . The form of design processes : a protocol analysis study . Design Studies , 9 ( 2 ) , 86 - 94 . Ericsson , K . , & Simon , H . ( 1980 ) . Verbal reports as data . Psychological Review , 87 ( 3 ) , 215 – 251 . Ericsson , K . , & Simon , H . ( 1993 ) . Protocol analysis : Verbal reports as data ( 2nd ed . ) . Boston : The MIT Press . Eris , O . ( 2004 ) . Effective inquiry for innovative engineering design . Boston : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Firestien , R . L . ( 1996 ) . Leading on the creative edge : Gaining competitive advantage through the power of creative problem solving . Colorado Springs , CO : Piñon Press . Gero , J . S . , & McNeill , T . ( 1998 ) . An approach to the analysis of design protocols . Design Studies , 19 ( 1 ) , 21 - 61 . Gordon , W . J . J . ( 1961 ) . Synectics . New York : Harper & Row . Grasso , D . , Burkins , M . B . , Helble , J . , & Martinelli , D . ( 2008 ) . Dispelling the myths of holistic engineering . PE Magazine , 27 - 28 . Hannu , K . , & Pallab , P . ( 2000 ) . A comparison of concurrent and retrospective verbal protocol analysis . American Journal of Psychology , 113 ( 3 ) , 387 – 404 . 43 Harvard Business School Press ( 2003 ) . Harvard business essentials : Managing creativity and innovation . Boston , MA . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Horowitz , R . ( 1999 ) . Creative problem solving in engineering design . ( Doctoral dissertation ) . Tel - Aviv University . IDEO . ( 2002 ) . IDEO method cards . San Francisco , CA : William Stout Architectural Books . Retrieved August 30 , 2011 , from http : / / www . ideo . com / work / method - cards / . Jansson , D . G . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Design fixation . Design Studies , 12 ( 1 ) , 3 - 11 . Jin , Y . , & Benami , O . ( 2010 ) . Creative patterns and stimulation in conceptual design . AI EDAM 24 ( 2 ) , 191 - 209 . Klein , G . ( 1998 ) . Sources of power : How people make decisions . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Klukken , P . G . , Parsons , J . R . , & Columbus , P . J . ( 1997 ) . The creative experience in engineering practice : Implications for engineering education . Journal of Engineering Education , 86 ( 2 ) , 133 - 138 . Kolodner , J . , & Wills , L . ( 1993 ) . Case based creative design . Symposium on AI and Creativity . Stanford , CA . Kolodner , J . ( 1993 ) . Case - based reasoning . San Mateo , CA : Morgan - Kaufman . Kolodner , J . ( 1997 ) . Educational implications of analogy : A view from case - based reasoning . American Psychologist , 52 ( 1 ) , 57 – 66 . Laughlin , P . ( 2002 ) . Groups perform better than the best individuals on letters - to - numbers problems . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 88 ( 2 ) , 605 - 620 . 44 Lewis , A . C . , Sadosky , T . L . , & Connolly , T . ( 1975 ) . Effectiveness of group brainstorming in engineering problem solving . IEEE Transactions of Engineering Management , 22 ( 3 ) , 119 - 124 . Linsey , J . S . , Clauss , E . F . , Kurtoglu , T . , Murphy , J . T . , Wood , K . L . , and Markman , A . B . ( 2011 ) . An experimental study of group idea generation techniques : Understanding the roles of idea representation and viewing methods . Journal of Mechanical Design , 133 ( 3 ) , 031008 - 031023 . Linsey , J . S . , Murphy , J . T . , & Markman , A . B . ( 2006 ) . Representing analogies : increasing the probability of innovation . Proceedings of IDETC / CIE 2006 ASME 2006 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , September 10 - 13 , 2006 , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Linsey , J . S . , Tseng , I . , Fu , L . Cagan , J . , Wood , K . L . , & Schunn , C . ( 2010 ) . A study of design fixation , its mitigation and perception in engineering design faculty . Journal of Mechanical Design , 132 , 1 - 12 . Liu , Y . & Bligh , T . ( 2003 ) . Towards an ‘ideal’ approach for concept generation , Design Studies , 24 ( 4 ) , 341 - 355 . MacCrimmon , K . , & Wagner , C . ( 1994 ) . Stimulating ideas through creativity software . Management Science , 40 , 1514 - 1532 . Morgan , M . ( 1993 ) . Creating workforce innovation : Turning individual creativity into organizational innovation . Sydney , Australia : Business and Professional Publishing . Mullen , B . , Johnson , C . , & Salas , E . ( 1991 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : A metaanalytic integration . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 12 ( 1 ) , 3 - 23 . 45 National Academy of Engineering ( n . d . ) . Grand challenges for engineering . Retrieved on August 30 , 2011 , from www . engineeringchallenges . org / Newell , A . & Simon , H . ( 1972 ) . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Niku , S . B . ( 2009 ) Creative design of products and systems . NJ : John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Nisbett , R . , & Ross , L . ( 1980 ) . Human inference : Strategies , and shortcomings of social judgment . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Osborn , Alex ( 1953 ) . Applied imagination : Principles and procedures of creative problem solving . New York , NY : Charles Scribner ' s Sons . Pappas , J . , & Pappas , E . ( 2003 ) . Creative thinking , creative problem - solving , and inventive design in the engineering curriculum : A review . Proceedings of the 2003 American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference , Nashville , TN . Perkins , D . ( 1997 ) . Creativity’s camel : The role of analogy in invention . In T . Ward , S . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought ( pp . 523 - 528 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Purcell , A . T . , & Gero , J . S . ( 1996 ) . Design and other types of fixation . Design Studies , 17 , 363 - 383 . Purcell , A . T . , Williams , P . , Gero , J . S . , & Colbron , B . ( 1993 ) . Fixation effects : Do they exist in design problem - solving ? Environment and Planning B : Planning and Design , 20 , 333 – 345 . Richards , G . ( 1998 ) . Stimulating creativity : teaching engineers to be innovators . Proceedings of the Frontiers in Education Conference , 1034 - 1039 . Riesbeck , C . K . , & Schank , R . C . ( 1989 ) . Inside case - based reasoning . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . 46 Rowe , P . ( 1987 ) . Design thinking . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Sachs , A . ( 1999 ) . Stuckness in the design studio . Design Studies , 20 ( 2 ) , 195 - 209 . Sheppard , S . , Macatangay , K . , Colby , A . , & Sullivan , W . ( 2009 ) . Educating engineers : Design for the future of the field . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Smith , G . F . ( 1998 ) . Idea - generation techniques : A formulary of active ingredients . Journal of Creative Behavior , 32 ( 2 ) , 107 - 133 . Smith , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Getting into and out of mental ruts : A theory of fixation , incubation and insight . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 229 – 251 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Terninko , J . , Zusman , A . , & Zlotin , B . ( 1998 ) . Systematic innovation , An introduction to TRIZ . Boca Raton : St Lucie Press . Todd , R . , Magleby , S . , Sorensen , C . , Swan , B . , Anthony , D . ( 1995 ) . A survey of capstone engineering courses in North America . Journal of Engineering Education , 84 ( 2 ) , 165 - 174 . Torrance , E . P . ( 1962 ) . Guiding creative talent . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Treffinger , D . , Young , G . , Shelby , E . , & Shepardson , C . ( 2002 ) . Assessing creativity : A guide for educators . Storrs , CT : The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented . Ullman , D . , Dietterich , T . , & Stauffer , L . ( 1988 ) . A model of the mechanical design process based on empirical data . AI in Engineering Design and Manufacturing , 2 ( 1 ) , 33 - 52 . Volkema , R . J . ( 1983 ) . Problem formation in planning and design . Management Science , 29 ( 6 ) , 639 - 652 . von Oech , I . ( 2010 ) . Creative whack pack . Retrieved August 30 , 2011 , from http : / / www . creativethink . com / . 47 Yilmaz , S . , Daly , S . R . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gonzalez , R . ( 2010 ) . A comparison of cognitive heuristics use between engineers and industrial designers . Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Design Computing and Cognition ( DCC ' 10 ) , Stuttgart , Germany . Yilmaz , S . , & Seifert , C . M . ( 2009 ) . Cognitive heuristics employed by design experts : A case study . Proceedings of the 4th International Conference of International Association of Society of Design Research ( IASDR ) , Seoul , Korea . Yilmaz , S . , & Seifert , C . M . ( 2010 ) . Cognitive heuristics in design ideation . Proceedings of the 11th International Design Conference , Dubrovnik , Croatia . Yilmaz , S . , & Seifert , C . M . ( 2011 ) . Creativity through design heuristics : A case study of expert product design . Design Studies , 32 ( 4 ) , 384 - 415 . Yilmaz , S . , Seifert , C . M . , Christian , J . L . , Daly , S . R . , & Gonzalez , R . ( 2012 ) . Design heuristics observed in innovative products . Manuscipt . Iowa State University and University of Michigan . Yilmaz , S . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gonzalez , R . ( 2010 ) . Cognitive heuristics in design : Instructional strategies to increase creativity in idea generation . Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Engineering Design and Manufacturing , 24 , 335 - 355 . Zwicky , F . ( 1969 ) . Discovery , invention , research through the morphological approach . New York , NY : Macmillan . Authors 48 Shanna R . Daly is an Assistant Research Scientist in Engineering Education at the University of Michigan , 210 Gorguze Family Laboratory , 2609 Draper Road , Ann Arbor , Michigan , 48104 ; srdaly @ umich . edu . Seda Yilmaz is an Assistant Professor of Industrial Design and Human Computer Interaction at Iowa State University , 146 College of Design , Ames , Iowa , 50010 ; seda @ iastate . edu . James L . Christian is a Graduate Student in Mechanical Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 235 Albany Street , Cambridge , Massachusetts , 02139 ; jimc @ mit . edu . Colleen M . Seifert is a Professor of Psychology at the University of Michigan , 530 Church St . , Ann Arbor , Michigan , 48109 ; seifert @ umich . edu . Richard Gonzalez is a Professor of Psychology , Marketing , and Statistics at the University of Michigan , 530 Church St . , Ann Arbor , Michigan , 48109 ; gonzo @ umich . edu .