doi : 10 . 1152 / jn . 00018 . 2011 106 : 386 - 397 , 2011 . First published 4 May 2011 ; J Neurophysiol Michale S . Fee Bence P . Ölveczky , Timothy M . Otchy , Jesse H . Goldberg , Dmitriy Aronov and sequence during learning Changes in the neural control of a complex motor You might find this additional info useful . . . 42 articles , 24 of which can be accessed free at : This article cites http : / / jn . physiology . org / content / 106 / 1 / 386 . full . html # ref - list - 1 including high resolution figures , can be found at : Updated information and services http : / / jn . physiology . org / content / 106 / 1 / 386 . full . html can be found at : Journal of Neurophysiology about Additional material and information http : / / www . the - aps . org / publications / jn This infomation is current as of November 8 , 2011 . American Physiological Society . ISSN : 0022 - 3077 , ESSN : 1522 - 1598 . Visit our website at http : / / www . the - aps . org / . ( monthly ) by the American Physiological Society , 9650 Rockville Pike , Bethesda MD 20814 - 3991 . Copyright © 2011 by the publishes original articles on the function of the nervous system . It is published 12 times a year Journal of Neurophysiology on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Changes in the neural control of a complex motor sequence during learning Bence P . Ölveczky , 1 , 2 Timothy M . Otchy , 2 Jesse H . Goldberg , 1 Dmitriy Aronov , 1 and Michale S . Fee 1 1 McGovern Institute for Brain Research , Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge ; and 2 Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology and Center for Brain Science , Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts Submitted 10 January 2011 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 28 April 2011 Ölveczky BP , Otchy TM , Goldberg JH , Aronov D , Fee MS . Changes in the neural control of a complex motor sequence during learning . J Neurophysiol 106 : 386 – 397 , 2011 . First published May 4 , 2011 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / jn . 00018 . 2011 . —The acquisition of complex mo - tor sequences often proceeds through trial - and - error learning , requir - ing the deliberate exploration of motor actions and the concomitant evaluation of the resulting performance . Songbirds learn their song in this manner , producing highly variable vocalizations as juveniles . As the song improves , vocal variability is gradually reduced until it is all but eliminated in adult birds . In the present study we examine how the motor program underlying such a complex motor behavior evolves during learning by recording from the robust nucleus of the arcopal - lium ( RA ) , a motor cortex analog brain region . In young birds , neurons in RA exhibited highly variable ﬁring patterns that through - out development became more precise , sparse , and bursty . We further explored how the developing motor program in RA is shaped by its two main inputs : LMAN , the output nucleus of a basal ganglia - forebrain circuit , and HVC , a premotor nucleus . Pharmacological inactivation of LMAN during singing made the song - aligned ﬁring patterns of RA neurons adultlike in their stereotypy without dramat - ically affecting the spike statistics or the overall ﬁring patterns . Removing the input from HVC , on the other hand , resulted in a complete loss of stereotypy of both the song and the underlying motor program . Thus our results show that a basal ganglia - forebrain circuit drives motor exploration required for trial - and - error learning by adding variability to the developing motor program . As learning proceeds and the motor circuits mature , the relative contribution of LMAN is reduced , allowing the premotor input from HVC to drive an increasingly stereotyped song . motor control ; zebra ﬁnch ; songbird ; vocal MUCH OF OUR BEHAVIORAL REPERTOIRE is made up of learned motor sequences , yet little is known about how the control circuits underlying the acquisition of complex motor behaviors change during learning . The zebra ﬁnch , a songbird , provides an excellent model system for addressing this question . Like human infants learning to speak , juvenile birds start the process of song learning by uttering highly variable and unstructured vocalizations called subsong . Subsequently , in the plastic song stage , recognizable syllables emerge and develop , becoming less variable until the song crystallizes into adult song , a stereotyped sequence of reproducible syllables that resembles the tutor song the birds were exposed to early in life ( see Figs . 1 B and 3 A ) ( Immelmann 1969 ; Tchernichovski et al . 1999 ) . According to the framework of trial - and - error learning ( Sutton and Barto 1998 ) , the variability of juvenile song may represent the motor exploration ( “trial” ) , whereas the auditory feedback re - quired for song learning ( Konishi 1965 ) may allow the practicing bird to evaluate its vocal performance ( “error” ) to guide learning ( Doya and Sejnowski 1995 ; Tumer and Brainard 2007 ) . To understand how song learning is implemented by the nervous system will require a description of how the neural signals that generate the song develop during learning . Learned vocalizations are controlled by the descending “mo - tor pathway” ( Vu et al . 1994 ) , a key nucleus of which is the robust nucleus of the arcopallium ( RA ) , a motor cortex analog brain region that projects to brain stem nuclei controlling the vocal and respiratory muscles ( Nottebohm et al . 1982 ; Vicario 1991 ; Wild 1997 ) . During singing in adult birds , RA neurons generate highly stereotyped sequences of bursts that are tightly locked to the song ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ; Yu and Margo - liash 1996 ) . Two major inputs to RA come from premotor nucleus HVC ( proper name ) and the lateral magnocellular nucleus of the anterior nidopallium ( LMAN ) , the output of an anterior forebrain pathway ( AFP ) that is homologous to mam - malian basal ganglia - thalamocortical loops ( Fig . 1 A ) . LMAN is the cortex analog component of this forebrain loop . HVC neurons generate precisely timed bursts of activity that appear to directly drive the stereotyped sequence of bursts in RA during adult song ( Hahnloser et al . 2002 ; Long and Fee 2008 ) . Lesions to HVC have devastating effect on adult song ( Notte - bohm et al . 1976 ) but little effect on subsong ( Aronov et al . 2008 ) . In contrast to HVC , LMAN plays a larger role in juvenile song than in adult song . LMAN lesions or pharmacological inactivations abolish subsong ( Aronov et al . 2008 ) and largely eliminate song variability in plastic song ( Ölveczky et al . 2005 ; Scharff and Nottebohm 1991 ) and adult song ( Bottjer et al . 1984 ; Kao et al . 2005 ) . The activity of LMAN neurons during singing is highly variable from rendition to rendition in both juvenile ( Ölveczky et al . 2005 ) and adult birds ( Hessler and Doupe 1999 ; Kao et al . 2008 ) , leading to the suggestion that LMAN actively drives song variability through its excitatory projection to RA ( Kao et al . 2005 ; Ölveczky et al . 2005 ; Stark and Perkel 1999 ) . To describe the development of the motor program under - lying song , we recorded from RA neurons in singing juvenile zebra ﬁnches throughout the learning process , spanning from subsong to adult crystallized song . To examine how LMAN contributes to RA neuronal activity and vocal variability , we recorded from single RA neurons in singing juvenile birds while pharmacologically turning LMAN on and off during singing . Finally , we tested how HVC contributes to vocal stereotypy and RA neuronal activity by recording from RA neurons in adult birds with transections of the pathway from HVC to RA ( Aronov et al . 2008 ) . These manipulations allowed Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : B . P . Ölveczky , Harvard Univ . , 52 Oxford St . , Rm . 219 . 30 , Cambridge , MA 021398 ( e - mail : olveczky @ fas . harvard . edu ) . J Neurophysiol 106 : 386 – 397 , 2011 . First published May 4 , 2011 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / jn . 00018 . 2011 . 386 0022 - 3077 / 11 Copyright © 2011 the American Physiological Society www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m us to dissect the relative contributions to the spiking activity in RA made by its two main inputs , HVC and LMAN , and to observe the neural correlates of vocal variability and stereotypy at the level of single neurons in RA . METHODS Subjects Male zebra ﬁnches [ n (cid:1) 13 birds ; 43 – 166 days posthatch ( dph ) during recording ] were obtained from the MIT and Harvard zebra ﬁnch breeding facilities . The care and experimental manipulation of the animals were carried out in accordance with guidelines of the National Institutes of Health and were reviewed and approved by the MIT and Harvard Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees . Surgery Animals were anesthetized with 1 . 5 – 2 % isoﬂurane in oxygen and placed in a stereotaxic apparatus ( MyNeuroLabs ) . RA was localized stereotactically and further conﬁrmed by electrophysiological criteria ( Spiro et al . 1999 ) . A custom - made lightweight ( (cid:2) 1 g ) motorized microdrive with three or four platinum - iridium electrodes ( Micro - probes ; 5 or 10 M (cid:3) ) was implanted , targeting nucleus RA for recording ( Fee and Leonardo 2001 ) . In addition to the microdrive , custom - made microdialysis probes ( (cid:2) 0 . 5 g ) were implanted bilater - ally into LMAN in three birds . To properly target the dialysis probes during surgery , LMAN was identiﬁed by antidromic activation from RA ( Ölveczky et al . 2005 ) . Both microdrive and dialysis probes were secured to the bird’s skull using dental cement . Reversible Inactivation of LMAN Reversible inactivation was achieved by infusing lidocaine ( 2 % ) , muscimol ( 0 . 1 mg / ml ) , GABA ( 100 mM ) , or tetrodotoxin ( TTX ; 5 (cid:1) M ) into microdialysis probes implanted into LMAN bilaterally . Unlike drug injections , microdialysis does not add volume to the brain ; rather , it works by allowing diffusion of the inactivating agent into the targeted area . The probes through which the drug was infused had cylindrical dialysis membranes ( 210 (cid:1) m in diameter , (cid:4) 600 (cid:1) m long ) allowing for diffusion of the drug into LMAN ( 50 - kDa cutoff ) . The probes for the two hemispheres were connected in series , and the drugs were infused with a syringe pump ( WPI ) connected to the probes through a ﬂuid swivel ( Instech ) on the commutator used for the electrophysiological recordings ( Crist Instruments ) and FEP tubing ( CMA Microdialysis ) . The joints between the inﬂow and outﬂow tubes and the probe were made using tubing adapters ( CMA Micro - dialysis ) . The ﬂow rate during drug infusion and washout was 2 – 4 ml / h . At other times saline was infused through the probes at 0 . 1 ml / h to prevent clogging of the outlet . Placement of the probes in LMAN was conﬁrmed by histology . We assessed the effect of probe pene - tration on LMAN function by comparing song variability before and after implantation of a microdialysis probe in two juvenile birds ( both 63 dph on the day of surgery ) that resumed singing the day after surgery . This comparison showed no reduction in vocal variability ( V ) as a consequence of probe implantation in either bird [ bird 1 : V (cid:1) 0 . 40 (cid:5) 0 . 11 before vs . V (cid:1) 0 . 39 (cid:5) 0 . 14 after implantation ; n (cid:1) 3 syllables ( mean (cid:5) SD ) ; bird 2 : V (cid:1) 0 . 39 (cid:5) 0 . 12 before vs . V (cid:1) 0 . 39 (cid:5) 0 . 07 after implantation ; n (cid:1) 4 syllables ] . Nevertheless , we cannot rule out the possibility that the probes in LMAN affect its function , but based on our analysis this effect is likely small . The inactiva - tion experiments were done in conjunction with microdrive record - ings . Although we were careful to minimize the weight of the implanted devices , with our current approach it was not feasible to carry out these experiments in animals younger than 60 dph . Although the earliest successful implant occurred at 52 dph ( the other birds used for this experiment were implanted at 57 and 65 dph , respectively ) , it usually took another week for birds to recover normal song output . Chronic Neural Recordings in RA Recordings were carried out using a motorized microdrive de - scribed previously ( Fee and Leonardo 2001 ) . Cells were isolated by searching for spontaneous spiking activity , and putative projection neurons were identiﬁed by their highly periodic ﬁring patterns and large spike widths ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ; Spiro et al . 1999 ) . We identiﬁed putative interneurons based on their low nonperiodic spon - taneous spiking activity and their narrow spike widths ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ; Spiro et al . 1999 ) . On the basis of these criteria , we recorded primarily projection neurons ( 146 / 150 neurons ) ; only 4 of 150 neurons ( (cid:4) 3 % ) were classiﬁed as putative interneurons . These were excluded from most of our analysis , and unless otherwise noted , reported quantities reﬂect only data from putative RA projection neurons . Neural and acoustic data were collected by custom - designed software written in MATLAB and LabView . For the cells in our data set , we recorded signals for many song motifs ( range : 11 – 483 motifs ) . Single - unit recordings were made in the same bird for days to weeks ( range : 1 – 48 days ) . The majority of recordings were made from birds that had identiﬁable sequences of syllables , allowing the alignment of the RA ﬁring patterns to repeated syllable sequences ( see Fig . 2 ) . In addition , we carried out recordings from three subsong birds and two adult birds with HVC - RA ﬁber tract transections , none of which had identiﬁable syllables . Unless otherwise noted , all data refer to record - ings made during undirected singing , i . e . , songs produced during social isolation ( Jarvis et al . 1998 ) . Transection of HVC Input to RA Bilateral transections of the HVC - to - RA ﬁber tract were made by incisions with an ophthalmic knife ( Sharpoint ) at three locations in each hemisphere ( (cid:4) 500 (cid:1) m posterior to HVC , between 1 . 5 and 3 . 5 mm lateral , 2 . 5 mm maximum depth ) . The effectiveness of this procedure in severing connectivity between HVC and RA was previ - ously documented using retrograde tracers ( Aronov et al . 2008 ) . Data Analysis Song analysis . Quantiﬁcation of acoustic variability across rendi - tions was done as by Ölveczky et al . ( 2005 ) , using the Sound Analysis Pro Software package ( Tchernichovski et al . 2000 ) . Brieﬂy , pairwise comparisons of the similarity of acoustic features of identiﬁed sylla - bles were made . This score ( S , ranging from 0 to 100 ) was converted , through a linear remapping , to a variability score ( V ) by the following formula : V (cid:2) S max (cid:3) (cid:1) S (cid:2) S max (cid:3) (cid:1) S min (cid:2) The quantity (cid:1) S min (cid:2) is the average similarity score of randomly chosen pairs of syllables from unrelated birds , which in our ﬁnch colony was measured to be 50 (cid:5) 12 ( mean (cid:5) SD ; n (cid:1) 200 pairwise comparisons ; comparisons were made across syllables of birds from different fathers ) . The similarity of identical syllables , S max , is 100 by deﬁnition of the similarity measure . Thus a variability score of 1 means that syllables are as different as two unrelated syllables , whereas a vari - ability score of 0 means that the syllables are identical . Error bars for V all denote SE . (cid:1) V (cid:2) denotes the average variability score across birds and syllables for a given condition . Subsong is deﬁned as song for which no syllables can be reliably identiﬁed from rendition to rendition . Song alignment . In seven birds , neurons were recorded at a sufﬁ - ciently advanced stage of plastic song that repeatable sequences of song syllables ( motifs ) could be identiﬁed ( 50 – 87 dph ) . This permit - 387 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ted the calculation of spike train statistics that require alignment of spike trains across song renditions , such as trial - to - trial variability and sparseness . The sequence of song syllables most frequently produced by each bird was determined , and motifs that matched this sequence were identiﬁed and time - aligned using the onset of one of the syllables , usually the second syllable in the sequence . Our song alignment algorithm initially segregated syllables automatically using a threshold crossing of the acoustic power . Each syllable was then manually labeled based on similarity of the spectral derivative to a representative template syllable . If ambiguity arose as to the identity of a syllable , the entire motif was discarded . In four birds , neurons were recorded during subsong or a sufﬁ - ciently early stage of plastic song that syllables or sequences of syllables could not be identiﬁed ( 43 – 49 dph for 3 birds , 53 dph for a 4th bird ) . In these neurons , trial - to - trial variability and sparseness were not calculated . Spike analysis . Spikes were sorted off - line using custom MATLAB software . All units included in the analysis had signal - to - noise ratios greater than 10 : 1 . Single - unit signals were veriﬁed by a spike refrac - tory period . Spikes were aligned to the chosen song motif . To account for the small trial - to - trial variability in song tempo , we used each syllable onset in the motif as an alignment point for the spike trains . Spike times between each alignment point were linearly stretched or compressed to match the corresponding intervals in a representative template motif ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ) . To compensate for inaccu - rate motif alignment , we introduced a small temporal shift ( from 0 to 15 ms in magnitude ) in the spike trains to maximize the correlation between the smoothed spike trains ( convolved with 8 - ms Gaussian function ) and the average motif - aligned ﬁring pattern of the cell . Spike train correlation . The precision of the song - aligned spike trains was measured using average pairwise correlation across all pairs of spike train for a given condition . Spike trains were converted into instantaneous ﬁring rates R ( t ) as follows : R (cid:3) t (cid:4) (cid:2) 1 t i (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) t i ; for t i (cid:5) t (cid:6) t i (cid:4) 1 , where t i is the i th spike . These instantaneous ﬁring rates were then convolved with a 8 - ms Gaussian function ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ) , yielding a smoothed ﬁring rate function r ( t ) . The correlation coefﬁ - cient ( CC ) was then calculated between these ﬁring rate functions for all pairs of spike trains as follows : CC (cid:2) 1 N pairs (cid:5) i N (cid:5) j (cid:7) i N CC ij , CC ij (cid:2) (cid:1) r ^ i (cid:3) t (cid:4) · r ^ j (cid:3) t (cid:4) (cid:2) t (cid:6) (cid:1) r ^ i (cid:3) t (cid:4) 2 (cid:2) t (cid:1) r ^ j (cid:3) t (cid:4) 2 (cid:2) t , where rˆ ( t ) is the mean - subtracted smoothed ﬁring rate function . Burstiness To quantify burstiness , we looked at the fraction of spikes con - tained within bursts ( instantaneous rate (cid:6) 150 Hz ) . To explore the effect of LMAN on high - frequency bursts in RA , we considered spikes for which the instantaneous ﬁring rate was above 400 Hz . Sparseness To quantify sparseness of a ﬁring pattern , we used the entropy method ( Lehky et al . 2005 ; Tolhurst et al . 2009 ) , which gives a measure of how selective neural activity is for speciﬁc times in the song . For each neuron we calculated the song - aligned rate histogram ( 3 - ms bins ) . Histograms were normalized to generate a time - varying probability spike - density function , p i , where the i th value indicates the normalized ﬁring probability for that time bin , such that (cid:5) 1 N p i (cid:2) 1 . We then computed the sparseness index ( SI ) as follows ( Lehky et al . 2005 ) : SI (cid:2) 1 (cid:4) (cid:5) i (cid:2) 1 N p i · log (cid:3) p i (cid:4) log (cid:3) N (cid:4) . This index is 1 ( maximal sparseness ) when the activity is restricted to a single time bin and 0 if the spikes are evenly distributed across the time bins . Postbout Suppression Postbout suppression for RA neurons was calculated as the median time to the ﬁrst spike after a song bout . Because song - related bursts sometimes extended (cid:4) 10 – 20 ms into the postbout period , spikes within the ﬁrst 30 ms after song termination were excluded . Song bout offsets were deﬁned by the presence of at least 1 s ofsilence with no song syllables or calls . For 4 of the 39 cells recorded during undi - rected singing in adult birds , we did not record for sufﬁciently long times after bout termination to calculate a median time to ﬁrst spike . These cells , which have a median time to ﬁrst spike of at least 600 ms , were not included in Fig . 6 . Thus our postbout suppression analysis in adult birds represents a lower bound for what is to be expected . Signiﬁcance To determine signiﬁcance of the trends we observed , we calculated the correlation coefﬁcient between the given measure ( e . g . , sparse - ness , ﬁring rate , etc . ) and age of the birds . The P value of the correlation is the probability of getting a correlation as large as the observed value by random chance , when the true correlation is zero . To assess the signiﬁcance of LMAN inactivation and age on various spike train metrics , we used Student’s t - test . Our threshold for signif - icance in both cases was P (cid:2) 0 . 05 . RESULTS In adult birds , the motor program underlying crystallized song is made up of highly stereotyped sequences of bursts in RA that are precisely timed - locked to the song ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ; Yu and Margoliash 1996 ) . To determine how RA neurons encode the more variable songs of juvenile birds and how the motor program develops throughout learning , we recorded from a total of 150 RA neurons from 11 birds throughout song development and into adulthood ( 44 – 160 dph ) . The recorded cells fell into two functional classes based on their spontaneous ﬁring patterns and spike shapes , consis - tent with previous classiﬁcation as putative projection neurons and interneurons ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ; Spiro et al . 1999 ) . In this article , we report on the 146 putative projection neurons ( subsong : n (cid:1) 44 cells , 4 birds , age range : 43 – 53 dph ; plastic song : n (cid:1) 63 cells , 7 birds , age range : 50 – 87 dph ; adult song : n (cid:1) 39 , 2 birds , age range : 91 – 160 dph ) . We also compared our data to previously published recordings of RA ﬁring patterns in older adult birds ( (cid:6) 200 dph ) singing directed songs to females ( n (cid:1) 23 cells , 3 birds ) ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ) . We do not include these data in the discussion of developmental trends ( see below ) , instead restricting our analysis to birds singing in the same social context ( i . e . , undirected song ) . RA Neurons Exhibit Increasing Burstiness During Song Development The ﬁring patterns of RA projection neurons in young birds with variable song were dramatically different from what has 388 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m been observed in adult birds ( Figs . 1 B and 2 ) ( Leonardo and Fee 2005 ; Yu and Margoliash 1996 ) . In subsong birds , RA neurons discharged sporadically and exhibited only occasional bursts ( (cid:6) 150 Hz instantaneous ﬁring rate ) , whereas in adult birds , almost all spikes discharged as part of bursts that reached considerably higher peak rates ( Fig . 1 B ) . These differences in ﬁring pattern were visible in the aggregation of short intervals in the interspike interval ( ISI ) distributions , reﬂecting in - creased burstiness ( Fig . 3 B ) . The fraction of spikes in bursts ( (cid:6) 150 Hz ) increased during development from 45 (cid:5) 14 % ( n (cid:1) 44 cells ) in subsong birds to 84 (cid:5) 11 % in adult birds ( (cid:6) 90 dph ; n (cid:1) 39 cells ) singing undirected song ( Fig . 3 C ) . The trend toward increased burstiness throughout the song learning phase ( 40 – 90 dph ) was highly signiﬁcant ( R (cid:1) 0 . 74 ; P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 12 ) . Emergence of Temporal Precision in RA Firing Patterns As the song becomes more stereotyped with learning ( Fig . 3 A ) , the underlying motor program in RA similarly becomes more precise . We quantiﬁed temporal precision in plastic song birds , from the time the birds sang recognizable syllable sequences ( motifs ) . Motif - aligned spike rasters were con - structed to visualize how song - related spike patterns change during development ( Fig . 2 ) , and the correlation of neural activity with song timing was analyzed in two ways . First , to quantify how spiking was distributed across the motif , we computed a sparseness index SI , where a value of 1 indicates a neuron whose activity was entirely restricted to one part of the motif and a value of 0 indicates a neuron that spiked evenly across it ( see METHODS ) . The SI increased during development from 0 . 083 (cid:5) 0 . 03 ( n (cid:1) 10 ) at 50 – 51 dph to 0 . 19 (cid:5) 0 . 05 in adult birds ( 90 – 160 dph ; n (cid:1) 39 ) singing undirected song ( Fig . 3 E ) , showing a signiﬁcant correlation with age during song development ( R (cid:1) 0 . 69 ; P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 10 ) . To quantify trial - to - trial variability in the ﬁring rate modu - lations across multiple motif renditions , we computed pairwise cross correlations ( CCs ) between RA ﬁring patterns during different motif renditions ( see METHODS ) . CCs increased from 0 . 22 (cid:5) 0 . 1 ( mean (cid:5) SD ; n (cid:1) 10 cells ) at 50 – 51 dph to 0 . 81 (cid:5) 0 . 04 in adult birds ( 90 – 160 dph ; n (cid:1) 39 ) singing undirected song ( Fig . 3 F ) . The correlation between age and song - aligned spike train variability during song development was highly signiﬁcant ( R (cid:1) 0 . 71 ; P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 11 ; Fig . 3 F ) . The developmental trends observed at the population level were also observed in individuals . In one bird , recordings were made over several weeks ( age range : 58 – 87 dph , n (cid:1) 39 cells ) , and the trend toward more bursty , sparse , and precise RA ﬁring patterns at later ages was highly signiﬁcant ( R (cid:1) 0 . 57 , P (cid:2) 0 . 0003 for burstiness ; R (cid:1) 0 . 52 , P (cid:2) 0 . 001 for sparseness ; R (cid:1) 0 . 50 , P (cid:2) 0 . 002 for precision ) . The average ﬁring rate of RA neurons during singing also showed signiﬁcant increase with age during learning ( R (cid:1) 0 . 52 ; P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 11 ) , almost doubling from 36 . 2 (cid:5) 22 . 8 Hz ( mean (cid:5) SD ; n (cid:1) 44 cells ) in subsong birds to 71 . 1 (cid:5) 25 . 0 Hz ( n (cid:1) 39 ) in adult bird singing undirected song . This suggests that the overall excitatory drive from RA projection neurons to down - Fig . 1 . Development of the robust nucleus of the arcopallium ( RA ) motor program in zebra ﬁnches . A : diagram showing the main pathways involved in song learning and song production . The motor pathway ( gray ) includes motor cortex analogs HVC and RA , whereas the anterior forebrain pathway ( AFP ; white ) , a basal ganglia thalamocortical circuit , consists of area X , the dorso - lateral anterior thalamic nucleus ( DLM ) , and the lateral magnocellular nucleus of the anterior nidopallium ( LMAN ) , which , in turn , projects to RA . Chronic single - unit recordings in RA were carried out throughout sensorimotor learn - ing and in adult birds . Syrinx , vocal organ ; nXIIts , tracheosyringeal portion of the hypoglossal nucleus . B : development of song and the underlying RA ﬁring patterns throughout song learning . Song spectrograms and corresponding raw traces of recorded RA neurons are shown at different developmental stages , subsong , plastic song , and adult song , in 3 different birds . 389 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m stream target areas , as measured by average ﬁring rates during singing , increases signiﬁcantly throughout learning ( Fig . 3 D ) . The trends seen in the maturation of the ﬁring patterns reveal the functional reorganization of the motor circuits that accom - panies song learning . To identify when the most signiﬁcant changes occur , we compared our statistical measures for four age groups qualitatively ranging from subsong , through plastic song , to young adult song : group I , 43 – 49 dph ( n (cid:1) 39 from 3 birds ) ; group II , 58 – 64 dph ( n (cid:1) 19 cells from 3 birds ) ; group III , 79 – 87 dph ( n (cid:1) 13 cells from 2 birds ) ; and group IV , 115 – 160 dph ( n (cid:1) 17 cells from 2 birds ) . The average statistics from neurons recorded in these age ranges are de - noted by red squares in Fig . 3 . There was a statistically signiﬁcant increase in burstiness from group I to group II ( P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 7 ) , from group II to group III ( P (cid:2) 0 . 01 ) , and from group III to group IV ( P (cid:2) 0 . 01 ) . Although the trend for the ﬁring rate was very signiﬁcant overall and doubled from subsong to early adult song , the incremental difference between adjacent devel - opmental time points only reached signiﬁcance when compar - ing group II with group III ( P (cid:2) 0 . 005 ) . For sparseness and precision measures , which are not quan - tiﬁed in subsong birds because they require alignment to song motifs , a slightly older age range was considered for group I ( 50 – 51 dph ; n (cid:1) 10 cells in 1 bird ) . Sparseness and precision increased signiﬁcantly from group I to group II ( P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 4 and P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 8 , respectively ) and also from group II to group III ( P (cid:2) 0 . 02 and P (cid:2) 0 . 05 , respectively ) . There was no statisti - cally signiﬁcant change for either of these metrics from group III to group IV . Together , our results show that although the most dramatic changes to the RA motor program occur in the Fig . 2 . Song - aligned ﬁring patterns in RA neurons change gradually during learning . As the song becomes less variable and more similar to the tutor , the ﬁring patterns in RA become more reproducible , sparse , and bursty . Raster plots show 5 representative RA projection neurons recorded at 5 differ - ent developmental time points . Each color represents a cell , and each row represents a rendition of the motif . Dark bars above the spike rasters indicate the beginning and end of identiﬁed syllables within each motif . For each developmental time point , the cells were recorded serially ( i . e . , not simultane - ously ) . dph , Days posthatch . 390 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ﬁrst few weeks of sensorimotor learning ( (cid:4) 40 – 60 dph ) , sig - niﬁcant maturation of the RA ﬁring patterns continues into adulthood . The neural correlate of song learning at the level of RA neurons can thus be described as a gradual change toward higher instantaneous ﬁring rates in sparser and more precisely time - locked bursts . Contribution of LMAN to RA Firing Patterns We next explored the extent to which variability in RA neurons is driven from LMAN , the nucleus mediating the output of the AFP to RA . LMAN is involved in subsong production and in inducing song variability in plastic and adult song ( Kao et al . 2005 ; Ölveczky et al . 2005 ) , but it is not known how LMAN activity shapes the ﬁring patterns in RA . To test the hypothesis that LMAN drives variability in RA spiking and to explore how it does so , we recorded the activity of RA neurons during singing in juvenile birds ﬁrst with LMAN intact and then with LMAN pharmacologically re - moved , leaving RA under the control of HVC , its other major input ( Fig . 1 A ) . We reasoned that comparing the ﬁring patterns of RA neurons with and without LMAN during singing would reveal how inputs from HVC and LMAN contribute to vari - ability in RA ﬁring patterns and , in turn , the song itself . To inactivate LMAN without disturbing the singing behav - ior or disrupting the neural recordings , we implanted microdi - alysis probes bilaterally into LMAN ( Stepanek and Doupe 2010 ) , allowing infusion of an inactivating agent . Because of its fast effects and quick reversal of action , most of our inactivations were done using lidocaine ( n (cid:1) 14 cells ) , but before settling on lidocaine as the optimal choice , we also used muscimol ( n (cid:1) 1 cell ) , GABA ( n (cid:1) 1 cell ) , and TTX ( n (cid:1) 3 cells ) . The effect on song variability using this method of inactivation was similar to that by bolus injections of TTX and muscimol into LMAN ( Ölveczky et al . 2005 ) , but reverse microdialysis afforded us signiﬁcantly improved temporal con - trol , achieving LMAN inactivation and a dramatic decrease in song variability in a matter of minutes without interfering with the bird’s motivation to sing ( Figs . 4 , A – C ) . We recorded singing - related neural activity both with and without LMAN pharmacologically inactivated for at least 12 motifs in each condition ( age range : 60 – 80 dph ) for 19 RA neurons ( 18 putative projection neurons and 1 putative interneuron , see METHODS ) in 3 birds . Figure 4 , D – F , shows three characteristic examples of how song - related RA ﬁring patterns in juvenile birds were affected by LMAN inactivation . The overall activity patterns of puta - tive RA projection neurons remained similar after LMAN inactivation as measured by the average correlation of the mean song - aligned ﬁring patterns with and without drug infu - sion ( R (cid:1) 0 . 92 (cid:5) 0 . 06 ) , suggesting that during the age range of our recordings ( 60 – 80 dph ) , the RA motor program is predominantly driven from HVC . We found that the decrease in song variability produced by LMAN inactivation was al - ways accompanied by a signiﬁcant increase in the pairwise correlation of the song - aligned spike trains of RA projection neurons ( 0 . 71 (cid:5) 0 . 2 with LMAN active vs . 0 . 89 (cid:5) 0 . 08 with LMAN inactivated ; P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 4 for all cells ; see Fig . 5 , A and B , for an example and C for population data ) . This correlation was signiﬁcantly higher in LMAN - inactivated plastic song birds than in adult birds ( with intact LMAN ) singing undirected song Fig . 3 . Song learning , characterized by a decrease in song variability , is accompanied by changes in the statistics of RA projection neuron ﬁring . A : acoustic variability as a function of age . Mean acoustic variability scores of readily identiﬁable syllables were calculated for 4 birds and averaged across birds . Shaded area denotes conﬁdence interval ( P (cid:2) 0 . 05 ) . B : interspike interval ( ISI ) distribution for birds at different ages throughout song development , corresponding roughly to subsong / early plastic song ( 43 – 49 dph ) , mid - plastic song ( 58 – 64 dph ) , late plastic song ( 79 – 87 dph ) , young adult song ( 115 – 160 dph ) , and older adult directed song ( 200 (cid:8) dph ) . All ISI distributions were smoothed with an 8 - ms square window . C : the fraction of spikes in bursts ( (cid:6) 150 Hz ) . D : average ﬁring rate during singing . E : sparseness index ( see METHODS ) . F : average pairwise correlation of song - aligned spike trains . Black circles represent cells ; red squares represent the average for different age groups described in B . ( For E and F , the ﬁrst point represents early plastic song at ages 50 – 51 dph ; see METHODS ) . 391 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ( 0 . 82 (cid:5) 0 . 04 ; n (cid:1) 17 cells from birds 115 – 160 dph ; P (cid:2) 0 . 005 ) but statistically similar to adult birds singing directed song ( 0 . 88 (cid:5) 0 . 07 ; n (cid:1) 23 cells ; P (cid:6) 0 . 8 ) . This is consistent with recent results showing that LMAN regulates social con - text - dependent changes in song variability ( Stepanek and Doupe 2010 ) . Moreover , for 15 of 18 projection neurons , the song - aligned spike trains recorded with LMAN active were signiﬁcantly ( P (cid:2) 0 . 01 ) less correlated with each other than they were with spike trains recorded with LMAN inactivated ( Fig . 5 C ) , im - plying that LMAN adds variability around a core motor pro - gram generated by the descending motor circuit . This effect was seen also at the behavioral level ( Fig . 5 B ) : the song with LMAN intact was more similar , on average , to the core song produced without LMAN active than to other renditions of the song with LMAN active . The stereotypy of the RA motor program after LMAN inactivation further suggests that HVC , the main premotor input to RA , provides a temporally precise input sequence to RA already early in song learning ( Hahnloser et al . 2002 ) . Although LMAN inactivations always increased the ste - reotypy of RA ﬁring patterns ( Fig . 5 C ) , there was a range of effects among the putative projection neurons , as measured by the difference in average pairwise correlation of the song - aligned spike trains before and during inactivation . This effect was strongly predicted ( R (cid:1) (cid:7) 0 . 97 ; P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 12 ) from the spike train correlation before inactivation ; i . e . , the more variable the spike trains were initially , the larger the Fig . 4 . Transient inactivation of LMAN decreases variability of RA activity patterns and vocal output . A : experimental setup . Recordings were made from RA neurons while LMAN was inactivated using reverse microdialysis ( see METHODS ) . B : behavioral effect on acoustic variability following infusion of GABA and lidocaine into the dialysis probes implanted bilaterally in LMAN . Each data point was calculated from 10 renditions of 4 identiﬁed syllables ( see METHODS ) in a single bird ( 73 and 74 dph for GABA and lidocaine , respectively ) . C : 8 consecutive renditions of a syllable before ( LMAN intact ) and during 2 % lidocaine infusion ( LMAN inactivated ) . D – F , top : song - aligned raster plots of spike trains of 2 representative RA projection neurons ( D and E ) and 1 interneuron ( F ) . Time advances from top to bottom ; red bar indicates recordings during LMAN inactivation . To better contrast the 2 conditions , the period of drug wash - in ( 0 – 20 min after start of infusion ) is not shown . Other than for the period of drug infusion , the shown spike trains were recorded during consecutive renditions of the song motif . Asterisks denote the start and end of the song motif to which the spike trains were aligned . Below the spike trains are the song - aligned histograms for the neurons . D – F , bottom : changes in the ISI distribution as a consequence of LMAN inactivation ( red line , LMAN inactivated ; blue line , LMAN intact ) . As is evident from the spike rasters above , LMAN can introduce high - frequency bursts into the RA ﬁring patterns , and thus LMAN inactivation shifts the distribution toward longer ISIs . Reduction in high - frequency bursts ( (cid:6) 400 Hz ) for the 3 cells shown was 43 , 21 , and 90 % , respectively . TTX , tetrodotoxin . 392 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m effect of LMAN inactivation ( Fig . 5 C ) . There was also a signiﬁcant anti - correlation of the effect of LMAN inactiva - tion with burstiness ( R (cid:1) (cid:7) 0 . 51 ; P (cid:2) 0 . 03 ) , ﬁring rate ( R (cid:1) (cid:7) 0 . 48 ; P (cid:2) 0 . 04 ) , and sparseness ( R (cid:1) (cid:7) 0 . 48 ; P (cid:2) 0 . 04 ) . Although the effect of LMAN inactivation showed a ten - dency to decrease with age , in our data set this trend did not reach signiﬁcance ( R (cid:1) (cid:7) 0 . 35 ; P (cid:1) 0 . 13 ) . Determining more explicit age - related effects of LMAN inactivations requires recordings from younger birds , something that our current methodology did not allow ( see METHODS ) . Thus the effect of LMAN inactivation on the song - aligned ﬁring patterns of RA projection neurons , as measured by an increase in the average pairwise spike train correlation , depended signiﬁcantly on the structure and statistics of the RA spike trains : neurons that were relatively less sparse , less bursty , and had lower ﬁring rate were most strongly affected by the variable input from LMAN . One way in which LMAN contributes to the variability was revealed by comparing the ISI distributions of RA projection neurons before and after LMAN inactivation . The small but signiﬁcant increase in the occurrence of short ISIs with LMAN active ( Fig . 4 , D – F , bottom , and Fig . 5 E ) suggests that LMAN acts to introduce variability into the motor program by adding high - frequency bursts to the activity patterns of RA neurons . The relative fraction of spikes in high - frequency bursts ( (cid:6) 400 Hz ) showed an average decrease of 22 (cid:5) 32 % after LMAN Fig . 5 . Effects of LMAN inactivation on the RA motor program and song . A : matrix of pairwise spike train cross - correlations across different renditions for the neuron represented in Fig . 4 D . Note the increased correlation after LMAN inactivation ( red bar ) . B : matrix of pairwise song similarity scores across differ - ent renditions , corresponding to the motifs in A . The bird sang throughout the drug wash - in period ( denoted by arrow ) , and the gradual shift toward more stereotypy can be seen in both the acoustic similarity and spike correla - tion . C : average spike train correlation for the RA cell population with and without LMAN active . Referencing the matrix in A , the graph depicts the average correlation in quadrant 1 vs . quadrant 2 for all neurons . D : pairwise correlation between spike trains in RA with LMAN intact and spike trains with LMAN silenced ( quadrant 3 in A ) is higher than the correlation between spike trains with LMAN intact ( quadrant 1 in A ) . E : the difference in ISI distribution across the population of pro - jection neurons ( n (cid:1) 18 cells ) with and with - out LMAN active reveals a net increase in short ISIs with LMAN activity . Shaded area denotes conﬁdence interval ( P (cid:2) 0 . 05 ) . ISI distributions were smoothed with an 8 - ms square window . F : average ﬁring rate for pro - jection neurons is similar with and without LMAN active . For C , D , and F , black data points denote the projection neurons in Fig 4 , the whereas the green data point represents the interneuron . Error bars denote SD . 393 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m inactivation ( range : (cid:7) 16 – 72 % ) . There was a signiﬁcant de - crease in high - frequency bursts for 9 of the 18 projection neurons and a small but signiﬁcant increase for 3 neurons . The contribution of LMAN input to RA was particularly visible in the ﬁring pattern of one putative interneuron , for which the average pairwise spike train CC went from 0 . 24 to 0 . 83 , and the fraction of spikes in high - frequency bursts ( (cid:6) 400 Hz ) decreased by 90 % after LMAN was inactivated ( Fig . 4 F ) . The interneuron , which also differed from the projection neurons in other ways ( Fig . 5 ) , was not included in the population anal - ysis . Even though LMAN provides direct excitatory input to RA neurons ( Mooney 1992 ) , average ﬁring rates of projection neurons were not consistently altered by silencing LMAN ( Fig . 5 F ) , showing , on average , a 0 . 2 % (cid:5) 6 . 0 % increase after LMAN inactivation ( range : (cid:7) 11 . 6 – 10 . 9 % ) . The ﬁring rate was only signiﬁcantly different ( P (cid:2) 0 . 05 ) for 6 of 18 cells , and even for those the trend was ambiguous , with 2 cells increasing and 4 decreasing their ﬁring rates when LMAN was inacti - vated . Although speculative , this suggests that the loss of excitatory LMAN input to RA projection neurons is counter - balanced by a decrease in the recurrent or feedforward inhibi - tion activated by LMAN inputs ( Spiro et al . 1999 ) , which could serve to keep the overall level of RA output constant irrespec - tive of LMAN activity . Contribution of HVC Input to RA Firing Patterns Bilateral HVC lesions or surgical transection of the HVC - to - RA pathway has been shown to eliminate normal adult song ( Aronov et al . 2008 ; Nottebohm et al . 1976 ) . However , adult birds with these manipulations produce vocalizations that closely re - semble normal subsong ( Aronov et al . 2008 ) . We reasoned that examining RA ﬁring patterns in the absence of HVC input would offer further insight into the respective contributions made by HVC and LMAN to RA ﬁring patterns . We recorded from RA neurons in adult birds that had the ﬁber pathway from HVC to RA surgically severed ( n (cid:1) 10 cells from 2 birds ; see METHODS ) and found the song - related RA ﬁring patterns to be similar to those recorded in normal subsong birds ( Fig . 6 ) , in terms of both the overall ISI distribution and the average ﬁring rate ( 36 . 2 (cid:5) 22 . 8 Hz for subsong birds vs . 34 . 1 (cid:5) 6 . 2 Hz for adult transected birds ; P (cid:6) 0 . 75 ) . However , the burstiness of RA neurons in the transected birds was even lower than for those recorded during subsong ( Aronov et al . 2008 ) ( 45 (cid:5) 14 % of spikes were in bursts for subsong birds vs . 24 (cid:5) 6 % for adult transected birds ; P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 4 ) , reﬂecting either an age - related difference in the effec - tiveness with which LMAN activity drives bursting in RA neurons or a contribution of HVC inputs to RA even during subsong . The transections revealed another surprising contribution of HVC to RA ﬁring patterns . RA neurons exhibit characteristic tonic spiking during nonsinging that in adult birds is sup - pressed at the end of song bouts ( Yu and Margoliash 1996 ) . We found that , in some neurons , this suppression lasts for close to a second , and on average , the median time from the bout offset to the occurrence of the ﬁrst spontaneous spike in young adult birds singing undirected song was 0 . 39 (cid:5) 0 . 19 s . Tran - section of the HVC - to - RA ﬁber tract in adult birds caused a dramatic shortening of the average time from bout offset to the occurrence of the ﬁrst spike ( median : 0 . 07 (cid:5) 0 . 04 s ; P (cid:2) 10 (cid:7) 5 compared with intact adult ) , reducing the duration of postbout suppression of spontaneous activity to levels similar to that seen in subsong birds ( median : 0 . 15 (cid:5) 0 . 15 s ; P (cid:6) 0 . 1 , transected vs . subsong ) . DISCUSSION This study was aimed at understanding how the motor program underlying a complex , learned motor sequence evolves through learning and how the behavioral variability underlying trial - and - error motor learning is represented and expressed in the brain . Our experiments focused on the motor representation in the primary motor cortex analog brain region RA of juvenile zebra ﬁnches and have revealed for the ﬁrst time the evolution of a complex acquired motor program throughout learning at the single - neuron level . We have shown that the sparse and precise motor program that underlies the stereotyped vocal performance of adult birds emerges and matures throughout the sensorimotor phase of song learning ( Fig . 2 ) . As learning progresses , the precision , burstiness , and sparseness of RA ﬁring increase ( Fig . 3 ) . Our results , describing the maturation of the motor program in RA , raise questions about the neural circuit mechanisms underlying these developmental changes . Synaptic reorganiza - tion at the HVC - to - RA synapse is known to occur as a consequence of learning ( Herrmann and Arnold 1991 ; Kittel - berger and Mooney 1999 ) and likely causes learning - related changes in RA ﬁring patterns . If indeed RA bursts are driven from HVC ( Hahnloser et al . 2002 ) , the reported increase in the strength of those synaptic inputs is likely to contribute to the trends we report . Previous studies ( Crandall et al . 2007 ; Day et al . 2008 ) have examined multiunit activity in HVC in juvenile zebra ﬁnches . These studies suggest that the trends in the ﬁring patterns observed in RA during learning may , at least to some degree , be caused by developmental changes in the premotor input from HVC . Whether the changes in the RA synaptic network and in HVC are driven by experience - dependent learning or whether they are under developmental control remains to be seen . Another interesting ﬁnding was that the ﬁring rate of RA neurons was largely unaffected by removing the excitatory input from LMAN , suggesting that the inhibitory and excit - atory networks in RA are well balanced to ensure that a change in LMAN input does not dramatically affect the overall motor output . The LMAN - dependent inhibition may come from RA interneurons ( the recording of 1 putative inhibitory interneuron showed a very signiﬁcant 24 % drop in ﬁring rate after LMAN inactivation ) . Balancing excitation and inhibition may be im - portant for song maintenance in adult birds : the structure of LMAN ﬁring depends on social context , with LMAN spike trains being considerably more bursty when the song is di - rected to a female than when it is undirected ( Kao et al . 2008 ) . Given that most of LMAN input is through N - methyl - D - aspartate ( NMDA ) - type glutamate receptors ( Stark and Perkel 1999 ) , a burstier LMAN input is likely to provide more excitatory drive . Having a self - regulating mechanism that can counter the social context - induced changes in excitation with proportional changes in inhibitory input to RA projection neurons would ensure that the overall RA drive to the muscles is similar in the two conditions . We further observed what appears to be a developmental increase in the inhibitory tone of RA neurons . Early in plastic 394 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m song , RA neurons tended to be active throughout the song ( Fig . 2 ) , without consistent song - locked periods of spiking inhibi - tion . As the song developed , RA ﬁring patterns were increas - ingly characterized by high - frequency bursts separated by periods of silence . The low probability of interburst spiking in adult birds during singing suggests that RA neurons may be strongly hyperpolarized during these periods . This inhibition appears to continue even after the song stops , as evidenced by a suppression of tonic activity for several hundred milliseconds after bout offset in adult birds ( Fig . 6 ) ( Yu and Margoliash 1996 ) . The singing - related inhibitory tone of RA neurons could be produced by slow inhibitory conductances , possibly mediated by the inhibitory network in RA ( Spiro et al . 1999 ) , or even more directly by the action of glutamatergic inputs from HVC . For example , a similar postbout spiking suppression in HVC ( Schmidt and Perkel 1998 ) has been attributed to activation of potassium currents by metabotropic glutamate receptors ( Dutar et al . 2000 ) . The dramatic reduction of postbout spike suppres - sion we observed following transection of the HVC - to - RA ﬁber tract suggests that excitatory drive from HVC mediates the inhibitory tone of RA neurons . Thus increased excitatory inputs to RA from HVC during development ( Kittelberger and Mooney 1999 ) could also gradually increase the inhibitory tone of RA neurons . Removing the descending HVC input to RA in adult birds resulted in RA ﬁring patterns and song output similar to that observed in subsong birds ( Fig . 6 ) , suggesting that the functional connections between LMAN and RA are not fundamentally altered during learning . Rather , it is the effectiveness by which LMAN drives variability in RA that changes . Such a decrease in LMAN’s ability to inﬂuence the RA motor program could be Fig . 6 . Firing patterns in RA projection neurons revert to a subsonglike state following the elimination of inputs from HVC . A : recording of a single neuron in RA ( black trace ) during undirected singing in an adult bird . B : recording of an RA neuron during undirected singing in an adult bird following complete bilateral transection of the HVC - to - RA ﬁber tract . C : ISI distributions of neurons recorded in intact adult birds , subsong - producing birds , and adult birds following transection . D : mean ﬁring rate of each neuron recorded in intact adult birds , subsong birds , and adult bird following transection . E : fraction of spikes contained in bursts ( (cid:6) 150 Hz instantaneous ﬁring rate ) . F : duration of spiking suppression after singing . Each data point is the median time of the ﬁrst spike after bout offset . 395 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m explained by the developmental increase in the inhibitory tone of RA neurons described above . Increased inhibition could selec - tively suppress the primarily NMDA - receptor - mediated LMAN synaptic inputs ( Mooney and Konishi 1991 ) due to the voltage dependence of NMDA receptors ( Nowak et al . 1984 ) . In contrast , this inhibition would have little effect on the dl - (cid:8) - amino - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - methylisoxazole propionic acid ( AMPA ) - receptor - me - diated HVC inputs ( Mooney and Konishi 1991 ; Stark and Perkel 1999 ) . Consistent with this idea , infusion of an NMDA - type glutamate receptor blocker ( APV ) into RA in plastic song birds has little effect on average song structure but largely abolishes song variability ( Ölveczky et al . 2005 ) . The role of inhibition in modulating LMAN - driven inputs to RA can be tested experimen - tally by recording and manipulating the membrane potential of RA neurons intracellularly during singing ( Long et al . 2010 ) . Developmentally increased excitatory drive from HVC to RA ( Kittelberger and Mooney 1999 ) may also reduce the effectiveness of LMAN input when an RA neuron is active . In older birds the strong excitatory input from HVC drives high - frequency bursts in RA , leaving little room for additional ﬁring rate modulation by LMAN . Thus the decreasing effectiveness of LMAN inputs during development could arise as a conse - quence of an increasing synaptic drive to RA from HVC , leaving RA neurons in older birds either too hyperpolarized or too saturated for LMAN inputs to have a signiﬁcant effect . Consistent with this hypothesis , small lesions of HVC result in increased LMAN - dependent song variability ( Thompson and Johnson 2007 ) , possibly as a direct consequence of a loss of excitatory drive from HVC to RA . The effectiveness of LMAN in driving song variability may also be under the control of neuromodulatory inputs to RA . Speciﬁcally , norepinephrine ( NE ) has been shown to diminish the efﬁcacy of LMAN inputs to RA neurons in vitro ( Perkel 1995 ) while increasing the signal - to - noise ratio of HVC inputs to RA ( Solis and Perkel 2006 ) , resulting in a reduced AFP inﬂuence on the motor pathway . This raises the possibility that the developmental reduction of LMAN - driven variability could be under neuromodulatory control . However , this idea is at odds with our results showing rapid restoration of LMAN’s effectiveness in generating variability in both song and RA ﬁring patterns following transection of the RA - projecting HVC ﬁbers in adult birds and with the observation that NE levels decrease with age ( Harding et al . 1998 ) . The extent to which the above - mentioned circuit mechanisms ( i . e . , neuromodula - tion and inhibitory tone of RA neurons ) contribute to the reduction in variability will require further examination . We found that , in older juvenile birds , LMAN acts to introduce variability into the RA ﬁring patterns without intro - ducing large changes in the average song - related ﬁring rate patterns of the projection neurons ( Fig . 4 ) . This observation may at ﬁrst appear to contradict recent results showing that LMAN biases vocal output in the direction of reduced error ( Andalman and Fee 2009 ) . Indeed , under the conditions in which these recordings were carried out , LMAN appears to introduce variability in RA neurons around a core motor program driven by HVC . We point out , however , that the large AFP bias found in the aforementioned study ( Andalman and Fee 2009 ) was observed during rapid learning induced by a conditional auditory feedback ( CAF ) learning paradigm . In that study , LMAN inactivation in the absence of CAF pro - duced no signiﬁcant change in the average acoustic structure of the song , suggesting that under normal learning conditions , AFP bias is small . That LMAN does not appear to drive large changes in the average ﬁring patterns of RA neurons in our data set is consistent with a small AFP bias . A test of the idea that LMAN drives consistent changes in the RA ﬁring patterns to bias vocal output would require measurements to be made during CAF or possibly during periods of rapid learning induced by tutor exposure ( Tchernichovski et al . 2001 ) . Our ﬁndings add mechanistic detail to the conceptual model suggested by recent studies examining the role of LMAN and HVC in song learning ( Aronov et al . 2008 ; Kao et al . 2005 ; Ölveczky et al . 2005 ) . Early in learning , the AFP drives highly variable patterns of activity in RA through LMAN , resulting in unstructured and variable subsong ( Aronov et al . 2008 ) . As HVC starts innervating RA at around day 35 posthatch ( Mooney , 1992 ) , this premotor input begins to drive stereo - typed sequences of bursts in RA , to which LMAN input adds variability . As learning proceeds , the inﬂuence of LMAN on RA is diminished and the control shifts to HVC , resulting in a progressively more stereotyped song . GRANTS This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants R01 DC009183 ( M . S . Fee ) and R01 NS66408 ( B . P . Ölveczky ) . Additional support was provided by the Damon Runyon Foundation and Charles King Trust Postdoctoral Fellowships ( J . H . Goldberg ) , the Klingenstein and McKnight Foundations ( B . P . Ölveczky ) , and the Hertz Foundation ( D . Aronov ) . DISCLOSURES No conﬂicts of interest , ﬁnancial or otherwise , are declared by the author ( s ) . REFERENCES Andalman AS , Fee MS . A basal ganglia - forebrain circuit in the songbird biases motor output to avoid vocal errors . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 12518 – 12523 , 2009 . Aronov D , Andalman AS , Fee MS . A specialized forebrain circuit for vocal babbling in the juvenile songbird . Science 320 : 630 – 634 , 2008 . Bottjer SW , Miesner EA , Arnold AP . Forebrain lesions disrupt development but not maintenance of song in passerine birds . Science 224 : 901 – 903 , 1984 . Crandall SR , Aoki N , Nick TA . Developmental modulation of the temporal relationship between brain , and behavior . J Neurophysiol 97 : 806 – 816 , 2007 . Day NF , Kinnischtzke AK , Adam M , Nick TA . Top - down regulation of plasticity in the birdsong system : “premotor” activity in the nucleus HVC predicts song variability better than it predicts song features . J Neurophysiol 100 : 2956 – 2965 , 2008 . Doya K , Sejnowski T . A novel reinforcement model of birdsong vocalization learning . In : Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 7 , edited by Tesauro G , Touretzky DS , Leen T . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1995 , p . xxi . Dutar P , Petrozzino JJ , Vu HM , Schmidt MF , Perkel DJ . Slow synaptic inhibition mediated by metabotropic glutamate receptor activation of GIRK channels . J Neurophysiol 84 : 2284 – 2290 , 2000 . Fee MS , Leonardo A . Miniature motorized microdrive , and commutator system for chronic neural recording in small animals . J Neurosci Methods 112 : 83 – 94 , 2001 . Hahnloser RH , Kozhevnikov AA , Fee MS . An ultra - sparse code underlies the generation of neural sequences in a songbird . Nature 419 : 65 – 70 , 2002 . Harding CF , Barclay SR , Waterman SA . Changes in catecholamine levels , and turnover rates in hypothalamic , vocal control , and auditory nuclei in male zebra ﬁnches during development . J Neurobiol 34 : 329 – 346 , 1998 . Herrmann K , Arnold AP . The development of afferent projections to the robust archistriatal nucleus in male zebra ﬁnches : a quantitative electron microscopic study . J Neurosci 11 : 2063 – 2074 , 1991 . Hessler NA , Doupe AJ . Singing - related neural activity in a dorsal forebrain - basal ganglia circuit of adult zebra ﬁnches . J Neurosci 19 : 10461 – 10481 , 1999 . 396 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Immelmann K . Song development in the zebra ﬁnch , and other etrilid ﬁnches . In : Bird Vocalizations , edited by Hinde RA . New York : Cambridge Uni - versity Press , 1969 , p . 61 – 74 . Jarvis ED , Scharff C , Grossman MR , Ramos JA , Nottebohm F . For whom the bird sings : context - dependent gene expression . Neuron 21 : 775 – 788 , 1998 . Kao MH , Doupe AJ , Brainard MS . Contributions of an avian basal ganglia - forebrain circuit to real - time modulation of song . Nature 433 : 638 – 643 , 2005 . Kao MH , Wright BD , Doupe AJ . Neurons in a forebrain nucleus required for vocal plasticity rapidly switch between precise ﬁring , and variable bursting depending on social context . J Neurosci 28 : 13232 – 13247 , 2008 . Kittelberger JM , Mooney R . Lesions of an avian forebrain nucleus that disrupt song development alter synaptic connectivity , and transmission in the vocal premotor pathway . J Neurosci 19 : 9385 – 9398 , 1999 . Konishi M . The role of auditory feedback in the control of vocalization in the white - crowned sparrow . Z Tierpsychol 22 : 770 – 783 , 1965 . Lehky SR , Sejnowski TJ , Desimone R . Selectivity , and sparseness in the responses of striate complex cells . Vision Res 45 : 57 – 73 , 2005 . Leonardo A , Fee MS . Ensemble coding of vocal control in birdsong . J Neurosci 25 : 652 – 661 , 2005 . Long MA , Fee MS . Using temperature to analyse temporal dynamics in the songbird motor pathway . Nature 456 : 189 – 194 , 2008 . Long MA , Jin DZ , Fee MS . Support for a synaptic chain model of neuronal sequence generation . Nature 468 : 394 – 399 , 2010 . Mooney R . Synaptic basis for developmental plasticity in a birdsong nucleus . J Neurosci 12 : 2464 – 2477 , 1992 . Mooney R , Konishi M . Two distinct inputs to an avian song nucleus activate different glutamate receptor subtypes on individual neurons . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 : 4075 – 4079 , 1991 . Nottebohm F , Stokes TM , Leonard CM . Central control of song in the canary , Serinus canarius . J Comp Neurol 165 : 457 – 486 , 1976 . Nottebohm F , Kelley DB , Paton JA . Connections of vocal control nuclei in the canary telencephalon . J Comp Neurol 207 : 344 – 357 , 1982 . Nowak L , Bregestovski P , Ascher P , Herbet A , Prochiantz A . Magnesium gates glutamate - activated channels in mouse central neurones . Nature 307 : 462 – 465 , 1984 . Ölveczky BP , Andalman AS , Fee MS . Vocal experimentation in the juvenile songbird requires a basal ganglia circuit . PLoS Biol 3 : e153 , 2005 . Perkel DJ . Effects of neuromodulators on excitatory synaptic transmission in nucleus RA of the zebra ﬁnch . Soc Neurosci Abstr 21 : 1995 . Scharff C , Nottebohm F . A comparative study of the behavioral deﬁcits following lesions of various parts of the zebra ﬁnch song system : implica - tions for vocal learning . J Neurosci 11 : 2896 – 2913 , 1991 . Schmidt MF , Perkel DJ . Slow synaptic inhibition in nucleus HVc of the adult zebra ﬁnch . J Neurosci 18 : 895 – 904 , 1998 . Solis MM , Perkel DJ . Noradrenergic modulation of activity in a vocal control nucleus in vitro . J Neurophysiol 95 : 2265 – 2276 , 2006 . Spiro JE , Dalva MB , Mooney R . Long - range inhibition within the zebra ﬁnch song nucleus RA can coordinate the ﬁring of multiple projection neurons . J Neurophysiol 81 : 3007 – 3020 , 1999 . Stark LL , Perkel DJ . Two - stage , input - speciﬁc synaptic maturation in a nucleus essential for vocal production in the zebra ﬁnch . J Neurosci 19 : 9107 – 9116 , 1999 . Stepanek L , Doupe AJ . Activity in a cortical - basal ganglia circuit for song is required for social context - dependent vocal variability . J Neurophysiol 104 : 2474 – 2486 , 2010 . Sutton RS , Barto AG . Reinforcement Learning : An Introduction . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1998 . Tchernichovski O , Mitra PP , Lints T , Nottebohm F . Dynamics of the vocal imitation process : how a zebra ﬁnch learns its song . Science 291 : 2564 – 2569 , 2001 . Tchernichovski O , Lints T , Mitra PP , Nottebohm F . Vocal imitation in zebra ﬁnches is inversely related to model abundance . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 12901 – 12904 , 1999 . Tchernichovski O , Nottebohm F , Ho CE , Pesaran B , Mitra PP . A proce - dure for an automated measurement of song similarity . Anim Behav 59 : 1167 – 1176 , 2000 . Thompson JA , Johnson F . HVC microlesions do not destabilize the vocal patterns of adult male zebra ﬁnches with prior ablation of LMAN . Dev Neurobiol 67 : 205 – 218 , 2006 . Tolhurst DJ , Smyth D , Thompson ID . The sparseness of neuronal responses in ferret primary visual cortex . J Neurosci 29 : 2355 – 2370 , 2009 . Tumer EC , Brainard MS . Performance variability enables adaptive plasticity of ‘crystallized’ adult birdsong . Nature 450 : 1240 – 1244 , 2007 . Vicario DS . Organization of the zebra ﬁnch song control system . II . Functional organization of outputs from nucleus robustus archistriatalis . J Comp Neurol 309 : 486 – 494 , 1991 . Vu ET , Mazurek ME , Kuo YC . Identiﬁcation of a forebrain motor program - ming network for the learned song of zebra ﬁnches . J Neurosci 14 : 6924 – 6934 , 1994 . Wild JM . Neural pathways for the control of birdsong production . J Neurobiol 33 : 653 – 670 , 1997 . Yu AC , Margoliash D . Temporal hierarchical control of singing in birds . Science 273 : 1871 – 1875 , 1996 . 397 LEARNING NEURAL CONTROL OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE J Neurophysiol • VOL 106 • JULY 2011 • www . jn . org on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j n . ph ys i o l og y . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m