The Nature and Origins of Misperceptions : Understanding False and Unsupported Beliefs about Politics D . J . Flynn Pgm . in Quantitative Social Science Dartmouth College d . j . ﬂynn @ dartmouth . edu Brendan Nyhan Dept . of Government Dartmouth College nyhan @ dartmouth . edu Jason Reiﬂer Dept . of Politics University of Exeter j . reiﬂer @ exeter . ac . uk Abstract Political misperceptions can distort public debate and undermine people’s ability to form meaningful opinions . Why do people often hold these false or unsupported beliefs and why is it sometimes so diﬃcult to convince them otherwise ? We argue that political misperceptions are typically rooted in directionally motivated reasoning , which limits the eﬀectiveness of corrective information about controversial issues and political ﬁgures . We discuss fac - tors known to aﬀect the prevalence of directionally motivated reasoning and assess strategies for accurately measuring misperceptions in surveys . Finally , we address the normative implications of misperceptions for democracy and suggest important topics for future research . This project has received funding from the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the Euro - pean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program ( grant agreement No 682758 ) . We thank Adam Berinsky , Daniel Diermeier , Jamie Druckman , Ben Page , Ethan Porter , Gaurav Sood , Joe Uscinski , attendees at the University of Michigan conference on How We Can Improve Health Science Communication , and especially the anonymous reviewers for useful suggestions and feedback . All remaining errors are of course our own . Scholars have long debated whether citizens are knowledgeable enough to partic - ipate meaningfully in politics . While standards of democratic competence vary ( e . g . , Lupia 2006 ; Druckman 2012 ) , empirical research in public opinion yields a relatively simple answer to the question of how much people typically know about politics : not very much ( e . g . , Delli Carpini and Keeter 1996 ) . However , the meaning and signiﬁcance of citizens’ inability to provide correct answers to factual survey questions can vary dramatically . Most notably , as Kuklinski et al . ( 2000 ) point out , there is an important dis - tinction between being un informed ( not having a belief about the correct answer to a factual question ) and being mis informed ( holding a false or unsupported be - lief about the answer ) . While scholars have long lamented public ignorance about politics , misperceptions ( i . e . , being misinformed ) may be an even greater concern . In particular , misperceptions can distort people’s opinions about some of the most consequential issues in politics , health , and medicine . Widespread evidence already exists of how misinformation has prevented human societies from recognizing envi - ronmental threats like climate change , embracing potentially valuable innovations such as genetically modiﬁed foods , and eﬀectively countering disease epidemics like HIV / AIDS . In the United States , misperceptions have featured prominently in some of the most salient policy debates of recent decades . Our goal in this article is to integrate the emerging literature on misperceptions into a more comprehensive theoretical framework . We ﬁrst provide our preferred deﬁnition of misperceptions and document the evidence of their prevalence . Sec - ond , we argue that political misperceptions are typically rooted in directionally motivated reasoning , which is consistent with both observational and experimen - tal evidence . As we note , however , there are signiﬁcant theoretical and empirical 1 gaps in our understanding of the mechanisms by which directional preferences af - fect factual beliefs and how that process varies across individuals and in diﬀerent contexts . Third , we discuss the limitations of current approaches to measuring misperceptions in surveys and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of possible alternatives . Fourth , we argue for devoting more attention to the role of elites and the media , who seem to play a critical role in creating and spreading misper - ceptions but have received relatively little scholarly attention to date . Finally , we discuss the normative signiﬁcance of misperceptions for democratic politics . Deﬁning misperceptions We begin by deﬁning misperceptions as factual beliefs that are false or contradict the best available evidence in the public domain . 1 These beliefs may originate in - ternally ( e . g . , as a result of cognitive biases or mistaken inferences ) or with external sources ( e . g . , media coverage ) . 2 Critically , some misperceptions are demonstrably false ( e . g . , “weapons of mass destruction were discovered in Iraq after the U . S . invasion in 2003” ) , while others are unsubstantiated and unsupported by available evidence ( e . g . , “Saddam Hussein hid or destroyed weapons of mass destruction before the U . S . invasion in 2003” ) . Misperceptions diﬀer from ignorance insofar as people often hold them with a high degree of certainty ( Kuklinski et al . 2000 ; cf . , Pasek , Sood , and Krosnick 2015 ) and consider themselves to be well - informed about the fact in question ( Nyhan 2010 ; Polikoﬀ 2015 ) . 3 Scholars who study false and unsupported beliefs have introduced a number 1 Of course , the validity of factual claims is continuous , not binary . We restrict our focus to claims that are false or contradict the best available evidence in the public domain because they are especially normatively troubling . 2 We discuss the causes of misperceptions and eﬀorts to correct them below . 3 We discuss measurement strategies for distinguishing misperceptions from ignorance below . 2 of related terms , such as interpretations , rumors , and conspiracy theories . It is useful to clarify at the outset how our deﬁnition relates to each of these terms . For instance , Gaines et al . ( 2007 ) discuss the “interpretation” of various facts related to the Iraq War . One such fact is the U . S . military’s failure to discover weapons of mass destruction ( WMD ) after the 2003 invasion of Iraq . While most respon - dents believe correctly that WMD were not found , Democrats and Republicans interpreted this fact diﬀerently : Democrats inferred that Saddam Hussein did not possess WMD immediately before the invasion , while Republicans inferred that the weapons had been moved , destroyed , or had not yet been discovered ( Gaines et al . 2007 , 962 – 965 ) . The latter interpretation is inconsistent with the best available evidence and we therefore deﬁne it as a misperception ( e . g . , Duelfer 2004 ) . Rumors and conspiracy theories are two related terms for claims that fail to meet widely agreed upon standards of evidence . DiFonzo and Bordia ( 2006 , 13 ) deﬁne rumors as “unveriﬁed and instrumentally relevant information statements in circulation that arise in contexts of ambiguity , danger , or potential threat and that function to help people make sense [ of ] and manage risk . ” One of the most distinctive feature of rumors is rapid social transmission ( DiFonzo and Bordia 2006 ; Berinsky 2015 ) . For example , rumors about Ebola circulated widely in West Africa during the 2014 outbreak ( Gidda 2014 ) . Conspiracy theories , on the other hand , refer to claims that seek “to explain some event or practice by reference to the machinations of powerful people , who attempt to conceal their role” ( Sunstein and Vermeule 2009 , 205 ) . They are distinctive insofar as they focus on the behavior of powerful people and may be rooted in stable psychological predispositions ( Uscinski and Parent 2014 ; Uscinski , Klofstad , and Atkinson 2016 ) . A prominent example of a conspiracy theory in contemporary American politics is the belief that the 3 September 11 attacks were an “inside job” aided or carried out by the government . When interpretations , rumors , and conspiracy theories like these are false or unsupported by the best available evidence , they can be usefully deﬁned and ana - lyzed as misperceptions ( though there are , of course , important diﬀerences between the concepts ) . 4 In particular , we argue that directional motivated reasoning is a useful framework for understanding each of these types of misperceptions . The prevalence and persistence of misperceptions By the deﬁnition provided above , misperceptions appear to be widespread ( e . g . , Ramsay et al . 2010 ) on issues ranging from the economy ( e . g . , Bartels 2002 ) to foreign policy ( e . g . , Kull , Ramsay , and Lewis 2003 ) . For instance , Flynn ( 2016 ) found that more than one in ﬁve Americans conﬁdently holds misperceptions about the largest holder of the U . S . debt , universal background checks , changes in debt and deﬁcits , the federal tax burden , and time limits on welfare beneﬁts . 5 Misperceptions are prevalent in a number of ongoing debates in politics , health , and science . In the recurring debate over gun control , for example , many citizens falsely believe that universal background checks are already mandated under exist - ing law ( Aronow and Miller 2016 ) . Similarly , a substantial number of Americans reject widespread evidence that earth’s climate is warming ( McCright and Dun - lap 2011 ) ; erroneously believe that some vaccines cause autism in healthy children ( Freed et al . 2010 ) ; and endorse misperceptions about the dangers of genetically modiﬁed foods that contradict the scientiﬁc consensus that they are safe to con - sume ( Entine 2015 ) . In some cases , misperceptions extend to the powers of political 4 Important caveat : Rumors and conspiracy theories can turn out to be true ! 5 Earlier surveys of beliefs about U . S . debt holders ( Thorson 2015b ) , gun background checks ( Aronow and Miller 2016 ) , and welfare beneﬁts ( Thorson 2015b ) reached similar conclusions . 4 oﬃces and institutions . For instance , Democrats claimed George W . Bush could have reduced gas prices despite the president’s lack of power over them , but were much less likely to state that Barack Obama could do so ( while Republicans shifted in the opposite direction , though to a lesser extent ; see Weiner and Clement 2012 ) . Perhaps more troubling , misperceptions often continue to inﬂuence policy de - bates after they have been debunked . For instance , Nyhan ( 2010 ) documents the role misinformation played in the 1993 – 1994 and 2009 – 2010 health reform debates . Opponents of the 1993 – 1994 reform claimed that the plan would prohibit patients from continuing to see their preferred doctor and prevent them from purchasing coverage outside the proposed system of managed competition . In 2009 – 2010 , op - ponents claimed that the proposed plan would establish “death panels” that would deny costly care to individual patients . Both these claims were widely debunked , but as Nyhan ( 2010 , 4 ) explains , they “distorted the national debate , misled mil - lions of Americans , and damaged the standing of both proposals before Congress . ” The death panel misperception , which persists today ( Nyhan 2014 ) , delayed Medi - care coverage of voluntary end - of - life consultations with doctors for years . After the misperception became widespread , the provision was removed from the Aﬀord - able Care Act . It was then proposed as a Medicare rule after the bill’s passage , but dropped again due to further controversy in 2011 ( Leonard 2015 ) . 6 Because studies in this ﬁeld have typically been conducted in the United States , one might be tempted to believe that misperceptions are a uniquely American problem . They are not . For instance , as Figure 1 shows , Europeans greatly over - estimate the number of foreign - born residents in their countries . Misperceptions like these are associated with anti - immigrant attitudes and policy preferences in 6 The provision was ﬁnally adopted via a Medicare rule change in 2015 ( Pear 2015 ) . 5 Figure 1 : European misperceptions of foreign - born populations Proportion of population that is foreign born : Perception vs . actual 0 % 8 % 16 % 24 % 32 % Hungary * Italy * France UK * Germany Denmark Sweden 16 % 10 % 12 % 13 % 12 % 9 % 5 % 21 % 14 % 22 % 23 % 26 % 30 % 16 % Perceived foreign born Actual foreign born Survey data from ESS ( 2014 ) and Ipsos MORI * ( 2013 ) . Foreign - born population data from Eurostat ( 2014 data ) . Europe ( Sides and Citrin 2007 , 491 - 492 ) , though this relationship has not been observed in the United States ( Hopkins , Sides , and Citrin N . d . ) . More recently , U . K . citizens were widely misinformed about several facts related to the debate over the U . K . ’s possible departure from the European Union ( “Brexit” ) , includ - ing the size of the immigrant population , U . K . payments to and receipts from the EU , EU administrative costs , and others ( Ipsos MORI 2016 ) . Misperceptions may also promote extremism and intergroup conﬂict in regions such as the Middle East ( Gentzkow and Shapiro 2004 ) . The eﬀects of misperceptions and corrective information How do these mistaken factual beliefs aﬀect public opinion ? Hochschild and Ein - stein ( 2015 ) provide a useful typology for understanding the possible eﬀects of misperceptions . They discuss four sorts of factual beliefs which vary along two 6 dimensions : whether they are correct or incorrect and whether they are associated with distinct political choices or actions . The result is a four - category typology , which consists of the active informed , inactive informed , active misinformed , and inactive misinformed . Of particular concern are the active misinformed : people who “hold incorrect ‘knowledge’ that is associated with distinctive involvement with the public arena” ( 11 ) . These are people whose opinions and behavior are diﬀerent from what we might observe if they held accurate beliefs . Correcting misperceptions could thus alter their political views or behavior . Unfortunately , research indicates that corrective information often fails to change the false or unsupported belief in question , especially when the targeted misper - ception is highly salient . 7 In some cases , corrections can make misperceptions worse ( Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2010 ; Nyhan , Reiﬂer , and Ubel 2013 ) . Even the release of President Obama’s long - form birth certiﬁcate had only a brief eﬀect on beliefs that he was not born in this country ( Nyhan 2012 ) . Moreover , people have dif - ﬁculty accurately updating their beliefs after ﬁnding out that information they previously accepted has been discredited ( Bullock 2007 ; Cobb , Nyhan , and Reiﬂer 2013 ; Thorson 2015a ) . Other research shows that reminders of social diﬀerence or cues about outgroup membership may also reduce the eﬀectiveness of corrections ( Garrett , Nisbet , and Lynch 2013 ) . Empirical claims do not appear to be strength - ened when delivered under oath ( Nyhan 2011 ) . Similarly , aﬃrming a truth is not necessarily more eﬀective than denying a false claim ( Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2013 ) . These ﬁndings help explain why belief in the most signiﬁcant misperceptions is often quite stable over time ( Nyhan 2012 ) . 7 The studies cited below almost exclusively consider lab and survey experiments . Results might of course diﬀer if these studies were conducted as ﬁeld experiments — an important consideration for future research ( Jerit , Barabas , and Cliﬀord 2013 ) . 7 However , there is room for guarded optimism , as other approaches have proved more eﬀective at addressing misperceptions . For example , corrective information may be more persuasive to skeptical groups when it originates from ideologically sympathetic sources ( Berinsky 2015 ) or is presented in graphical rather than tex - tual form ( Nyhan and Reiﬂer N . d . b ) . In addition , providing an alternate causal account for events has been found to be more eﬀective than simply refuting an unsupported claim ( Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2015a ) . Corrections from professional fact - checkers have also been shown to reduce misperceptions ( e . g . , Fridkin , Kenney , and Wintersieck 2015 ) , though their eﬀectiveness may vary based on the public proﬁle of the target politician and the salience of the claim in question . A related study by Bode and Vraga ( 2015 ) ﬁnds that exposure to disconﬁrming “related stories” on Facebook may also help limit the spread of misperceptions . Results are similarly mixed when we consider the eﬀects of corrective infor - mation on related policy opinions . Though some studies show facts can aﬀect opinions on issues like education spending ( Howell and West 2009 ) and the estate tax ( Sides 2016 ) , others ﬁnd that correct information does not aﬀect opinions on highly salient policy issues . For example , Kuklinski et al . ( 2000 ) ﬁnd that provid - ing respondents with extensive factual information about welfare and health care did not alter support on either issue ; Berinsky ( 2009 ) shows that giving people several types of factual information about the Iraq War ( e . g . , casualties and costs ) failed to aﬀect their opinions about the wisdom of the war ; and Hopkins , Sides , and Citrin ( N . d . ) show that correcting misperceptions about the size of immigrant populations does not increase support for immigration . These results suggest that political misperceptions may sometimes be a consequence of directional preferences 8 rather than a cause of issue or candidate opinions . 8 Finally , misperceptions can continue to aﬀect opinions even after being success - fully corrected . Early research on non - political topics showed remarkable evidence of “belief perseverance” or “a continued inﬂuence eﬀect” after initial information given to respondents was deﬁnitely debunked ( e . g . , Ross , Lepper , and Hubbard 1975 ; Wilkes and Leatherbarrow 1988 ) . Recent studies show that these eﬀects ex - tend to politics : Bullock ( 2007 ) , Nyhan and Reiﬂer ( 2015a ) , and Thorson ( 2015a ) all ﬁnd lingering eﬀects of smears and bogus claims on opinions of political ﬁgures and issues after they have been discredited . 9 These eﬀects can be exacerbated by directional preferences . Bullock ( 2007 ) and Thorson ( 2015a ) ﬁnd that the con - tinued inﬂuence of false information is in some cases greater among opposition partisans . Directionally motivated reasoning about facts The most useful framework for understanding misperceptions about politics comes from psychological research on motivated reasoning . In this section , we review what is known about directionally motivated reasoning , how its strength versus accuracy motivations might vary across contexts , and consider the mechanisms by 8 The question of whether misperceptions aﬀect opinions or vice versa resists easy general - ization . We discuss this issue further below , but note that misperceptions can have important consequences for policy debate and public attitudes even if correcting them does not change people’s opinions . 9 Cobb , Nyhan , and Reiﬂer ( 2013 ) observe an interesting asymmetry in testing for perseverance eﬀects on positive misinformation . While debunked negative information leaves lingering negative eﬀects , they ﬁnd that debunked positive information prompts an overcorrection in which people actually view the politician in question more negatively . 9 it might operate . 10 It is useful to begin by reviewing the psychology of directionally motivated reasoning . As Kunda ( 1990 ) explains , when people process information , diﬀer - ent goals may be activated , including directional goals ( trying to reach a desired conclusion ) and accuracy goals ( trying to process information as dispassionately as possible ) . In the context of political misperceptions , the term “motivated rea - soning” typically refers to directionally motivated reasoning , which is , arguably , the most common way that people process political stimuli ( Redlawsk 2002 ; Taber and Lodge 2006 ) . 11 Directionally motivated reasoning leads people to seek out in - formation that reinforces their preferences ( i . e . , conﬁrmation bias ) , counter - argue information that contradicts their preferences ( i . e . , disconﬁrmation bias ) , and view pro - attitudinal information as more convincing than counter - attitudinal informa - tion ( i . e . , prior attitude eﬀect ) ( Taber and Lodge 2006 , 757 ) . Two of the most common sources of directional motivated reasoning are par - tisanship ( Bolsen , Druckman , and Cook 2014 ) and prior issue opinions ( Taber and Lodge 2006 ; also see Mullinix 2016 ) . 12 Nonetheless , isolating the mecha - nisms underlying directional motivated reasoning poses a serious challenge ( see below as well as Bullock , Green , and Ha 2010 ) . Fortunately , directional motivated reasoning has numerous observable implications . First , it may lead to selective exposure , which occurs when people’s directional preferences inﬂuence their infor - 10 Of course , other theoretical approaches can provide useful insights . For instance , people may form false beliefs by making incorrect inferences from available information ( Prasad et al . 2009 ; Thorson 2015b ) —a process that is often shaped by cognitive biases ( Arceneaux 2012 ; Petersen 2015 ) . 11 Using the term “motivated reasoning” to describe directionally motivated reasoning is thus a slight oversimpliﬁcation : all information processing is motivated is some sense . 12 Other directional motivations are of course possible , including impression or behavioral mo - tivations ( Kunda 1990 ) . We focus on partisanship and issue opinions because they are most relevant to the political context . 10 mation consumption choices . For example , Democrats and Republicans exhibit markedly diﬀerent preferences for cable news programming ( e . g . , MSNBC vs . Fox ; Stroud 2008 ) . 13 Second , people may engage in motivated processing of the infor - mation they receive . More speciﬁcally , studies show we tend to accept and recall congenial factual information more frequently than uncongenial facts ( Jerit and Barabas 2012 ; Kahan , Dawson , Peters , and Slovic N . d . ) ; interpret facts in a belief - consistent manner ( Gaines et al . 2007 ) ; rationalize to maintain consistency with other beliefs they hold ( Lauderdale 2016 ) ; and counter - argue corrective informa - tion ( Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2010 ) . Finally , directional motivations may exacerbate the continued inﬂuence of false information even after it has been debunked ( Bullock 2007 ; Thorson 2015a ) . Isolating the eﬀects of directional motivations is diﬃcult because it requires a comparison to an unobserved counterfactual in which information processing oc - curred with accuracy or some other goal in mind . For instance , diﬀerent beliefs about an event between Democrats and Republicans could reﬂect directional mo - tivations , but could also be attributable to diﬀerent types of information exposure , diﬀerent priors , etc . The cleanest approach to estimating the inﬂuence of direc - tional motivations on information processing comes from what Kahan , Dawson , Peters , and Slovic ( N . d . ) call the “Politically Motivated Reasoning Paradigm , ” which isolates how people view the same evidence depending on its consistency with their directional preferences . A recent experiment by Kahan ( 2015b ) us - ing this approach helps show clearly just how powerfully directional motivations can shape information processing . In the experiment , participants were randomly 13 However , observational data from the real world suggest that the extent of selective exposure is more limited than many assume ( Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011 ; Bakshy , Messing , and Adamic 2015 ; Barber´a et al . 2015 ; Flaxman , Goel , and Rao 2016 ; Guess N . d . ) . 11 assigned to receive a table of outcome data that was labeled as either showing how a skin cream aﬀects a rash or how gun control aﬀects crime . The success of the intervention ( i . e . , skin cream , gun control ) was also randomly varied between respondents . When the table was presented as data about whether a skin cream helped a rash or not , there were no major diﬀerences in how people of diﬀerent ide - ological leanings interpreted the data . But when the data were instead presented as evidence about the eﬀectiveness of gun control , people’s interpretation of the re - sults became polarized by ideology . Similarly , Schaﬀner and Roche ( N . d . ) ﬁnd that Democrats and Republicans reacted very diﬀerently to news that the unemploy - ment rate fell below 8 % in fall 2012 . Democrats typically revised their estimates of unemployment downward , whereas many Republicans appeared to counter - argue the news , revising their estimates upwards instead . In sum , these studies show that people’s interpretation of factual information depends on whether the information reinforces or contradicts directional preferences . In politics , directional processes like these are often theorized to be rooted in aﬀect . According to the John Q . Public Model of information processing ( Lodge and Taber 2013 , ch . 2 ) , for instance , most political objects ( e . g . , candidates , issues ) are aﬀect - laden , and people update beliefs towards objects using their existing af - fective evaluations . When confronted with stimuli , aﬀective reactions occur prior to conscious awareness . For instance , evaluations of Barack Obama are shaped by one’s initial , instantaneous aﬀective reaction towards Obama . This general reac - tion then activates a series of related considerations in long - term memory , such as Obama’s partisanship , ideology , personality , and ( perhaps ) Obama - relevant mis - perceptions . In this sense , aﬀect could serve as as a mechanism of directionally motivated reasoning and thereby fuel misperceptions . This process may be espe - 12 cially driven by negative aﬀect toward out - party policies and ﬁgures ( Roush N . d . ) , who are often the target of misperceptions . 14 Another factor that may promote directionally motivated reasoning is identity threat . Political facts often implicate long - standing , personally important iden - tities such as partisanship ( Green , Palmquist , and Schickler 2004 ; Steele 1988 ) . If these facts are perceived as suﬃciently threatening to one’s identity or world - view , people may seek to resist them . 15 People may also feel social pressure to think and act in ways that are consistent with important group identities ( Sin - clair 2012 ; Kahan , Jamieson , Landrum , and Winneg N . d . ) . We know that humans are heavily inﬂuenced by their peers and social contacts ( e . g . , Gerber , Green , and Larimer 2008 ; Gerber and Rogers 2009 ; Paluck 2011 ; Meer 2011 ; Bollinger and Gillingham 2012 ; Bond et al . 2012 ; Kast , Meier , and Pomeranz 2012 ; Paluck and Shepherd 2012 ) . Under these conditions , the motivation driving reasoning could be expressly directional : reasoning ( perhaps unconsciously ) toward conclusions that reinforce existing loyalties rather than conclusions that objective observers might deem “correct . ” An alternative to directional motivations are accuracy motivations . People driven by accuracy goals collect and analyze available information with the goal of forming accurate factual beliefs , rather than beliefs that reinforce directional preferences . Reasoning motivated by accuracy goals may involve greater cognitive 14 An interesting alternative model of emotion’s role in motivated reasoning is provided by Redlawsk , Civettini , and Emmerson ( 2010 ) , who suggest that respondents who repeatedly en - counter disconﬁrming information in politics may reach an “aﬀective tipping point” at which they become increasingly anxious and willing to reconsider their views . More research is needed to investigate the conditions under which anxiety motivates open - mindedness ( see , e . g . , Marcus , Neuman , and MacKuen 2000 versus Ladd and Lenz 2008 , 2011 ) . 15 An implication of this model is that aﬃrming people’s self - worth in some other domain may reduce the extent to which people engage in worldview defense ( e . g . , Cohen , Aronson , and Steele 2000 ; Correll and Spencer 2004 ) . However , Nyhan and Reiﬂer ( N . d . b ) found suggestive but only partial empirical support for this conjecture . 13 elaboration , as people consider all available evidence in order to form accurate be - liefs ( Kunda 1990 , 481 ; but see Kahan , Dawson , Peters , and Slovic N . d . ) . Results from experimental studies suggest that inducements to form an accurate opinion can reduce or eliminate the eﬀects of directional motivations ( e . g . , Bolsen , Druck - man , and Cook 2014 ; cf . , Taber and Lodge 2006 ) . 16 Directional versus accuracy motivations To reiterate , accuracy and directional motivations aﬀect how people search for , evaluate , and incorporate information into their beliefs . As discussed above , when people are motivated by directional goals , information acquisition and processing are driven by the desire to reach or reinforce a speciﬁc conclusion . 17 By contrast , when people are motivated by accuracy goals , they search for and evaluate evi - dence in an even - handed manner in order to form a belief that reﬂects the true state of the world . It is important to note , however , that when people are mo - tivated by directional goals , accuracy primes delivered in experiments or surveys still generally result in observable behavior consistent with accuracy goals ( Red - lawsk 2002 ; Bolsen , Druckman , and Cook 2014 ; Bolsen and Druckman 2015 ; see also Druckman 2012 ) . These results have two key implications . First , directional goals are the de - fault in processing information at the individual level . Second , tendencies toward accuracy or directionally motivated processing are not immutable . The relative strength of directional and accuracy motivations can vary substantially between individuals and across contexts . The pressing question , then , becomes which con - 16 We consider other ways to promote accuracy motivations below . 17 Directional motivations may be unconscious ; studies such as Taber and Lodge ( 2006 ) and Berinsky ( N . d . ) ﬁnd evidence of persistent motivated reasoning even when participants are explicitly instructed to be evenhanded or to set aside their political preferences . 14 textual and individual level factors inﬂuence the tug - of - war between accuracy and directional motivations . We elaborate below with a pair of non - political examples . In some contexts , we would expect accuracy goals to be particularly strong rel - ative to directional goals . For example , when purchasing home appliances , people have relatively weak directional preferences ; they likely want to learn which refrig - erator is most convenient or eﬃcient or which dishwasher best washes and dries dishes . We would thus expect people to be relatively even - handed in their search for information and in how they evaluate the information they encounter . However , it is still possible to envision how how directional goals could aﬀect even mundane choices like these . Some people may have particularly strong brand preferences , which could inﬂuence their information search and evaluation process . More subtly , people may have ( unacknowledged ) preferences for lavish or frugal consumption that aﬀects whether people interpret the evidence as supporting purchasing a more or less expensive brand or model . While accuracy goals are dominant , there may still key individual variation in how these types of directional goals may creep in . Similarly , contextual factors may aﬀect the strength of directional cues by , for instance , varying the salience of brand preferences . 18 Contextual and individual diﬀerences can also aﬀect the relative strength of accuracy and directional motivations in situations where we expect directional motivations to be relatively stronger . Sports fandom provides a useful non - political analogy . An ardent supporter of a team likely employs diﬀerent standards of what counts as a foul or infraction depending on whether her team or the opposing team was responsible . Perceptions of what occurs on the ﬁeld are heavily inﬂuenced by 18 We of course acknowledge that brands are not uninformative ; they may convey some reputa - tional information about product reliability or quality . The discussion here is intended to focus on how brand preferences could produce directional biases in information processing to reinforce some preferred outcome ( e . g . , buying a Sub - Zero refrigerator ) . 15 what the fan would like to happen ( e . g . , Hastorf and Cantril 1954 ) . Nonetheless , we should still expect there to be both individual - and contextual - level diﬀerences in the relative balance of motivations . At the contextual level , the environment in which the fan watches the game ( e . g . , a home or away stadium , sports bar , friend’s house , etc . ) and with whom she watches the game ( e . g . , fellow fans , fans of the opposing team , etc . ) may inﬂuence the balance between accuracy and directional motivations and thus how fans perceive the game . At the same time , we should also expect individual - level diﬀerences in accuracy versus directional motivations depending on factors such as the extent to which fans identify with their preferred team . According to this line of thinking , aﬀectively - charged contexts like a game or match involving a preferred sports team should enhance directional goals , whereas less aﬀect - laden contexts like shopping for home appliances should favor accuracy goals . This account is broadly consistent with the observation that the most promi - nent misperceptions often concern some of the most controversial ( and therefore aﬀect - laden ) policy issues ( e . g . , the Aﬀordable Care Act ) and political ﬁgures ( e . g . , President Obama ) in American politics . These hot - button issues also appear to be where we are most likely to observe backﬁre eﬀects ( Redlawsk 2002 ; Gollust , Lantz , and Ubel 2009 ; Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2010 ; Nyhan , Reiﬂer , and Ubel 2013 ; Schaﬀner and Roche N . d . ) . By contrast , studies conducted on other issues that often feature less well - known misperceptions and more one - sided information treatments have typically not observed backﬁre eﬀects ( e . g . , Weeks 2015 ; Nyhan and Reiﬂer N . d . a ; Wood and Porter N . d . ; Hill N . d . ; Kim N . d . ) , suggesting that highly polarized re - sponses and backﬁre eﬀects may be more likely for highly salient misperceptions 16 when people receive conﬂicting cues . 19 Yet Redlawsk ( 2002 ) , Bolsen , Druckman , and Cook ( 2014 ) , and Bolsen and Druckman ( 2015 ) ﬁnd that under certain con - ditions accuracy motivations can weaken directional goals . Understanding when ( and why ) directional and accuracy goals take precedence over one another is a critically important avenue for future research . These diﬀering ﬁndings raise crucial questions about proper facts to consider in studying misperceptions . Numerous facts could be politicized . However , most are not . It is not surprising that studies of beliefs about non - politicized facts will therefore tend to show greater responsiveness to new or corrective information ( especially on matters that are diﬃcult to counter - argue , such as the true value of relatively obscure statistics ) than those that focus on the much smaller set of high - proﬁle misperceptions . Both types of beliefs are relevant to understanding how people reason about facts . It is important to recognize how the set of beliefs considered aﬀects the conclusions that we draw . Moderators of directionally motivated reasoning Given the importance of directionally motivated reasoning , understanding the individual - and contextual - level moderators that diminish or exacerbate direc - tionally motivated responses to political information and integrating these into a theoretical model is vital . We analyze several of the most important moderators identiﬁed in previous research below . 19 See also Guess and Coppock ( N . d . ) for a similar set of results on the eﬀects of information on issue opinions . 17 Contextual moderators We ﬁrst consider several important contextual moderators of directional motivated reasoning—that is , factors known to promote or attenuate the inﬂuence of direc - tional goals in information processing . 20 One important factor is polarization among party elites , which increases the salience of partisan motivations when evaluating information . Druckman , Peter - son , and Slothuus ( 2013 ) conducted two experiments to investigate the moderating role of elite partisan polarization on opinion formation towards immigration and drilling for oil and gas . Speciﬁcally , they exposed people to arguments for or against each policy proposal and randomized the degree of elite polarization on the issue : some participants read that Democrats and Republicans were both united but on opposite sides of the issue ( i . e . , high polarization ) , while others read that members of either party could be found on both sides of the issue ( i . e . , low polarization ) . The authors ﬁnd that polarization causes people to shift their opinions in the direction of co - partisan elites regardless of the types of arguments they read . These results suggest that elite polarization increases the importance of directional ( partisan ) motivations in opinion formation . Similarly , Levendusky ( 2010 ) provides experi - mental evidence that elite polarization increases citizens’ reliance on partisan cues ( a directional motivation ) in the opinion formation process across ﬁve issues . Partisan polarization eﬀects like these may be exacerbated by source eﬀects . In - group members are , for instance , more likely to be perceived as holding common interests ( Lupia and McCubbins 1998 ) and to be viewed warmly ( Iyengar , Sood , and Lelkes 2012 ) . Political arguments that are attributed to in - group sources are thus generally more persuasive than messages from outgroups ( O’Keefe 2002 ) . For 20 This list is of course not exhaustive , but hope it aids the ﬁeld in developing a more systematic understanding of the conditions under which directional and accuracy goals are strongest . 18 example , Slothuus and de Vreese ( 2010 , 636 – 637 ) show that the eﬀectiveness of frames regarding welfare and trade policy depends on the party to which the frames are attributed ; speciﬁcally , participants are more persuaded by frames from their own party than by identical frames from the opposing party ( also see Kam 2005 ; cf . , Bullock 2011 ) . Petersen et al . ( 2013 , 841 – 842 ) provide direct evidence that partisan cues aﬀect the extent to which people engage in eﬀortful processing of political arguments . They show that participants who disagreed with their party’s position took longer to consider the argument and form opinions than participants who agreed with their party’s position , suggesting that disagreeing with one’s party requires additional cognitive eﬀort . 21 Conversely , messages from in - group members or those providing evidence of consensus can be powerful factors in counteracting directional biases on politically charged issues . For instance , Nyhan and Reiﬂer ( 2013 ) and Berinsky ( 2015 ) pro - vide some evidence that corrective information from elites and media outlets who share a respondent’s ideology or partisanship might be more eﬀective than other sources . Similarly , Bolsen and Druckman ( 2015 ) and Lewandowsky , Gignac , and Vaughan ( 2013 ) ﬁnd that informing people about a scientiﬁc consensus can reduce directionally motivated reasoning , though other scholars question the eﬀectiveness of this approach , most notably on climate change ( e . g . , Kahan 2015a ) . An additional factor in the prevalence of directional motivated reasoning is salience . Speciﬁcally , directional motivations are likely to be stronger for highly salient political disputes and issues and when considering prominent and controver - sial political ﬁgures . Jerit and Barabas ( 2012 ) , for instance , document how issue 21 Even this study provides only indirect evidence of counter - arguing or other mechanisms of eﬀortful resistance to unwelcome information . Future research should seek to test presumed mechanisms directly when possible , though establishing the mediators of any such eﬀect is ex - tremely diﬃcult ( Bullock , Green , and Ha 2010 ) . 19 salience aﬀects the degree of partisan perceptual bias in learning political facts from media coverage . People are not only more likely to correctly answer survey questions about facts that reﬂect positively on their party , but this bias is exac - erbated on issues that received high levels of media coverage ( Jerit and Barabas 2012 , 675 – 679 ) . Variations in issue salience may also help explain the diﬀering levels of resistance to corrective information found in the studies described above — people’s willingness to engage in eﬀortful resistance may vary depending on whether the issue is well - known and salient . Individual - level moderators In addition to the contextual factors discussed above , individual - level factors also aﬀect the balance between accuracy and directional goals . We examine several important individual - level factors associated with directional motivations below . One of the most important moderators of directionally motivated reasoning is sophistication , including both political knowledge and education . Directionally motivated reasoning occurs most often with people who have relatively high levels of political knowledge ( Taber and Lodge 2006 ) . Nyhan , Reiﬂer , and Ubel ( 2013 ) ﬁnd that attempts to correct the “death panel” misperception backﬁre among respondents who feel very warmly towards Sarah Palin and who have high levels of political knowledge . Similarly , people with higher levels of knowledge may be better able to resist incongruent information and maintain alignment between their factual beliefs and predispositions ( e . g . , Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2012 ; Taber and Lodge 2006 ) . For instance , in the skin cream / gun control study described above , Kahan ( 2015b ) ﬁnd that polarization in interpretation of outcome data was greatest among the most numerate people . 20 These studies capture two possible mechanisms by which sophistication and education can lead to motivated reasoning : greater recognition of “what goes with what” ( Converse 1964 ) and greater ability to counter - argue incongruent informa - tion ( e . g . , Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2010 ) . These mechanisms have important implica - tions for our understanding of directionally motivated reasoning more generally . In particular , they suggest that directional motivated reasoning can operate via either systematic , eﬀortful information processing ( e . g . , Kahan , Landrum , Carpen - ter , Helft , and Jamieson N . d . ) or via heuristic , low - eﬀort information processing ( e . g . , Lodge and Taber 2013 ) . For instance , recognizing the signiﬁcance of a given fact for one’s directional preferences may lead people to quickly dismiss ( accept ) incongruent ( congruent ) information—a form of heuristic processing . On the other hand , using expertise to counter - argue incongruent messages requires greater cogni - tive eﬀort , which is associated with systematic information processing ( see Petersen et al . 2013 ) . The use of heuristic versus systematic directional motivated reason - ing is no doubt conditional . We point out both possibilities because it informs our consideration of motivated reasoning below . More controversially , some have argued that ideology may aﬀect the extent to which people engage in directionally motivated reasoning . Jost et al . ( 2003 ) and others have argued that political conservatism is associated with a tendency to - ward directionally motivated reasoning because its modest correlations with other constructs that might inﬂuence the relative strength of directional and accuracy goals . For example , political conservatives typically score lower on items assessing openness to experience on personality or values inventories . Instances of backﬁre eﬀects—where corrections result in a strengthening of political misperceptions— have been observed among conservatives ( Nyhan and Reiﬂer 2010 ; Nyhan , Reiﬂer , 21 and Ubel 2013 ) . However , the broader set of evidence suggests that directionally motivated reasoning is common among all humans . Much more evidence would be required to support the claim that particular ideological groups are more prone to directional reasoning because of their ideology . 22 For instance , it would be helpful construct and validate a scale ( or scales ) that measures individual - level diﬀerences in the strength of underlying accuracy and / or directional motivations . Third , certain psychological factors may attenuate the strength of directional motivated reasoning . Here we note three factors identiﬁed in recent research . First , Groenendyk ( 2013 ) argues that people are motivated to appear as “good citizens” who dispassionately evaluate information in the interest of forming accurate opin - ions . When such civic - minded motivations are primed , directional motivations become less salient , making people more willing to adjust important attitudes ( in - cluding partisan identiﬁcation ! ) in response to new information . Second , as Lavine , Johnston , and Steenbergen ( 2012 ) explain , partisans who are ambivalent—meaning they disagree with their party on one or more important issues—are less likely to engage in directional motivated reasoning . In addition , Kahan , Landrum , Carpen - ter , Helft , and Jamieson ( N . d . ) show that participants who are high in science curiosity are more willing to consider scientiﬁc information that contradicts their preferences on politicized scientiﬁc issues like climate change . Fourth , social category diﬀerences may contribute to directionally motivated misperceptions . For instance , Garrett , Nisbet , and Lynch ( 2013 ) ﬁnd that pre - senting people with background information that they ﬁnd culturally objection - able reduces the eﬀectiveness of subsequent corrections . Similarly , Kosloﬀ et al . 22 One of many inferential concerns that could be noted is that liberals and conservatives diﬀer on many relevant non - psychological dimensions , including the structure of their aﬃliated parties and media outlets — see , e . g . , Grossmann and Hopkins ( 2016 ) . 22 ( 2010 ) ﬁnd that reminding people of diﬀerences in racial identity or age from the presidential candidates in the 2008 election increased smear acceptance . These factors may have helped fuel widespread misperceptions about Barack Obama , such as the belief that he is Muslim or foreign - born , which are closely associated with measures of ethnocentrism and racial resentment among whites ( e . g . , Kam and Kinder 2012 ) . Measuring factual ( mis ) perceptions There is an important ongoing debate about best practices for measuring mis - perceptions in surveys . Much of the debate focuses on whether incorrect answers to factual survey questions are evidence of misperceptions . Questions like these represent fundamental epistemological concerns in survey research — are we cap - turing citizens’ genuine beliefs and attitudes or artifacts of the survey response process ? In this section , we consider existing research on measuring factual beliefs in surveys and assess the strengths and weaknesses of diﬀerent approaches . Studies that examine factual beliefs typically rely on survey questions that ask respondents to evaluate a statement or claim using some form of a Likert scale . For instance , respondents in a survey may be asked whether they agree or disagree with a statement such as “The murder rate in the United States is the highest it’s been in 45 years , ” a claim made by Donald Trump during the 2016 presidential campaign ( Lopez 2016b ) . Because the claim is false ( Federal Bureau of Investigation 2015 ) , the most accurate response is to disagree . But what does it mean if a person agrees with the statement ? Answering “agree” may mean that the subject fully endorses the claim that the murder rate in the United States is at its highest point in the past 45 years . However , “agree” could also be a way for 23 a respondent to reveal a belief that crime is higher today than at some point in the past or simply a purely expressive response signaling support for Trump . The latter explanation—that respondents are using their response to signal support for Donald Trump—is a form of expressive responding . 23 If expressive responding is common , then traditional closed - end survey questions likely overstate the extent and strength of people’s belief in misperceptions . Two recent studies have sought to assess the prevalence of expressive responding in people’s answers to factual survey questions . Speciﬁcally , Bullock et al . ( 2015 ) and Prior , Sood , and Khanna ( 2015 ) increase the cost of expressive responding by oﬀered monetary incentives for correct answers . Both studies ﬁnd that incentives reduce partisan polarization in measured factual beliefs . However , these studies do not clearly indicate that people intentionally suppress more accurate beliefs in favor of partisan cheerleading . If this account were correct , we would expect respondents to report more accurate beliefs when incentives were oﬀered . Instead , the studies ﬁnd only partial and inconsistent evidence of greater belief accuracy as a result of incentives . Providing incentives may at least in part cause people to answer in a more thoughtful or considered manner—Bullock et al . , for instance , ﬁnd more “don’t know” responses as a result of incentives in their second study—or to use diﬀerent heuristics that reduce the inﬂuence of directional motives without generally increasing accuracy . 24 In that sense , these studies oﬀer an important reminder that the relative strength of directional and accuracy motivations can vary dramatically depending on the context and incentives people face . 23 This is synonymous with partisan “cheerleading” ( e . g . , Gerber and Huber 2009 ) . 24 An alternate possibility is that polarization is reduced because respondents seek to provide answers that scholars would deﬁne as correct in order to be paid more . If this conjecture were true , what seems to be a reduction in expressive responding could instead reﬂect response bias induced by the incentives provided by researchers . 24 Importantly , the fact that people answer in a less partisan way when accu - racy incentives are high does not mean their answers under normal circumstances ( when accuracy incentives are lower ) are not reﬂective of their “true” belief — a concept that is ill - deﬁned in the context of public opinion . Though some passages in Bullock et al . ( 2015 ) suggest that people are choosing whether or not to report some belief they do not believe to be accurate , we contend that survey respon - dents are constructing responses to most factual survey questions from the top of their head . As on opinion surveys ( e . g . , Zaller 1992 ) , survey respondents who are asked a factual question must draw upon a set of considerations from memory and the question and construct an answer . 25 Though respondents likely have existing considerations to draw upon in answering questions about the most salient misper - ceptions , the responses that researchers receive will still change when the context of the question or the incentives facing the respondent change . This variation may be especially acute when the questions are diﬃcult . For instance , many of the fac - tual questions asked by Bullock et al . ( 2015 ) concern obscure quantitative values that almost no respondent could possibly answer from memory ( e . g . , the propor - tion of federal spending devoted to the military ) . As a result , few people have existing beliefs of any kind that they can either honestly report or misrepresent . Accordingly , their answers may be more sensitive to incentives , question format , etc . than questions probing other beliefs that people hold more strongly . In addition to monetary incentives , another approach to evaluating expressive responding is list experiments ( Kuklinski , Cobb , and Gilens 1997 ) , a framework that might reduce the incentive to engage in an expressive response and thereby reveal the proportion of respondents who are reporting their beliefs sincerely . Un - 25 Of course , one could imagine that such a process could itself be expressive . 25 fortunately , list experiments have low statistical power and are highly sensitive to design quirks and respondent compliance ( see Kramon and Weghorst 2012 for a review ) . As a result , numerous researchers report problems with using them in practice ( Gelman 2014 ) . Moreover , list experiments work best when the presumed misreporting eﬀect is unidirectional . With misperceptions , however , some respon - dents may overreport misperceptions as a form of partisan cheerleading and others could underreport due to social desirability concerns , creating oﬀsetting eﬀects that a list experiment cannot easily disentangle . The account provided above is consistent with evidence from Berinsky ( N . d . ) , who ﬁnds “little evidence of expressive responding on the question of whether Obama is a Muslim” by Republicans across four studies testing diﬀerent mea - surement approaches . These approaches included instructions asking people not to respond expressively , a design that provided a time - based incentive for respon - dents to say that they did not believe Obama is Muslim ; a list experiment ; and data comparing explicit survey responses with implicit associations between Obama and Islam . It is impossible to prove conclusively that the responses Berinsky observes are not expressive , but the data provide no clear evidence of such a pattern . In sum , we do not know of convincing evidence that misperceptions about highly salient facts are insincere . However , we fully acknowledge the possibil - ity that expressive motives may inﬂuence responses to factual survey questions . Assessing the extent to which reported misperceptions are sincere ( reﬂecting con - ﬁdence in an incorrect answer ) versus expressive ( intentionally and knowingly re - porting an incorrect answer to engage in partisan cheerleading ) remains an impor - tant topic for future research . It is critical to avoid framing this issue as binary — many people who hold misperceptions answer questions incorrectly with some , 26 but not total , conﬁdence and might respond diﬀerently under other circumstances . Moreover , as with any belief measured in a survey , some misperceptions may not be strongly held , especially those that concern more obscure issues and ﬁgures . Another measurement concern is that people may be primed by survey ques - tions to endorse beliefs they have never held . One way to evaluate this concern is to test placebo misperceptions — ﬁctional claims to which respondents could not have previously been exposed . For instance , a recent Chapman University survey found that 33 % of Americans believe that the U . S . government is covering up the ﬁctional “North Dakota crash” ( 2016 ) . However , this question was embedded in a series of questions about prominent conspiracy theories that may have made it seem more plausible . Other ﬁctional misperceptions have received lower levels of endorsement — for instance , Oliver and Wood ( 2014 ) ﬁnd only 17 % of people claimed to have heard of their invented conspiracy theory about mind control via ﬂuorescent bulbs and only 11 % endorsed it . These are of course non - beliefs , but they do often ap - pear to reﬂect related beliefs and attitudes held by the respondent . As Schuman and Presser ( 1980 ) put it , “Respondents make an educated ( though wrong ) guess as to what the obscure acts represent , then answer reasonably in their own terms about the constructed object . ” Such a response is not unreasonable given that the survey researcher has suggested by the construction of the question that the issue or claim in question is legitimate ( Schwarz 2014 , 35 ) . Moreover , it is not clear what the correct placebo benchmark is to compare with reported levels of “true” beliefs — some invented misperceptions or conspiracy theories sound more plausible than others ( compare , e . g . , the vague and plausible - sounding “North Dakota crash” in the Chapman University survey with the more outlandish claim of mind control via ﬂuorescent light bulbs tested in Oliver and Wood 2014 ) . 27 Any eﬀort to address concern about non - beliefs via more traditional survey questions also faces a diﬃcult measurement tradeoﬀ . Closed - end questions with - out don’t know options can overstate the proportion of people who strongly hold false or unsupported beliefs ( Luskin , Sood , and Blank N . d . ; Schuman and Presser 1980 ) . Similarly , Pasek , Sood , and Krosnick ( 2015 ) suggest that many false beliefs measured in surveys are not held with high levels of conﬁdence . An alternate ap - proach discussed by Luskin , Sood , and Blank ( N . d . ) is to oﬀer don’t know options on closed - end questions or to use open - ended questions instead . These approaches would presumably reduce the prevalence of expressions of belief that respondents do not hold strongly . However , they could also understate the proportion of people who hold false beliefs by , for instance , allowing people who are misinformed to in - dicate uncertainty rather than belief — a particular concern when the false belief may be subject to social desirability bias . People may prefer , for instance , to state that they do not know where President Obama was born than to deﬁnitively indi - cate a belief that he was born outside the U . S . It is also unclear how to arbitrate between the results of diﬀerent measurement approaches . The problem of mis - perceptions might seem less severe using open - ended questions and / or closed - end questions with don’t know options , but it is not clear which set of measurements is the correct one absent some external benchmark . Ultimately , the challenge facing the study of misperceptions — and the study of public opinion via surveys in general — is that there is no direct way to access people’s “true” pre - existing beliefs absent expressive motivations , a presumption that the respondent can and will answer the questions , and / or other universal aspects of the survey response process . Indeed , the notion of a “true belief” is ill - deﬁned given that models of survey response ( e . g . , Zaller 1992 ) suggest that 28 answers are typically constructed on the spot . It is therefore not clear to us that the alternate approaches described above would represent an improvement over the status quo , though we encourage future research on these topics . The role of elites and the media in misperceptions Understanding the nature and origins of misperceptions requires careful exam - ination of the actions of public ﬁgures and the media , who play a key role in disseminating false and unsupported information . However , little is known more generally about how elites exploit misinformation for strategic purposes or what eﬀects misleading media coverage has on public opinion . In politics , the literature on party position change and public opinion suggests that elites often play a key role in shaping voter issue positions . Carmines and Stimson ( 1989 ) and Layman et al . ( 2010 ) argue that activists help drive a process among elected oﬃcials that proceeds from the top down , prompting subsequent changes in policy preferences among party identiﬁers ( e . g . , Layman and Carsey 2002 ) . Using ANES panel data , Goren ( 2005 ) ﬁnds that when people face a conﬂict between their party identiﬁcation and issue positions , the resolution is more often a change in policy preference than partisanship . Similarly , Lenz ( 2012 ) argues that voters tend to adopt the policy positions of politicians they prefer rather than choosing the politician whose views best match their own — an argument that is consistent with the elite - driven model of public opinion presented in Zaller ( 1992 ) . This theoretical framework could be applied to understanding partisan and ide - ological belief change , which often fuels the misperceptions that are most salient and diﬃcult to correct . Under certain circumstances , politicians may not only change the positions they express but the factual claims that they make . Indeed , 29 these processes are often interrelated . Opposition to climate change mitigation is closely linked to denial of the scientiﬁc consensus , for example , though one can acknowledge global warming while , say , opposing the Kyoto Protocol ( e . g . , Inglis and Laﬀer 2008 ) . However , this outcome was not inevitable . The parties have adopted conﬂicting positions on many issues in recent years , but few others cen - ter on a salient misperception . More should thus be learned about the role of elites in belief politicization on climate change and other issues . Kahan , Jamieson , Landrum , and Winneg ( N . d . ) , for instance , show how framing Zika risks as conge - nial to the ideological viewpoints of either liberals or conservatives increased those group’s vulnerability to false information . Understanding the role of elites in belief polarization also has potentially impor - tant policy implications . For instance , promoting greater elite consensus on climate science might reduce misperceptions more eﬀectively than messages directed to the public . 26 Moreover , it might be more eﬀective to counter belief politicization before it becomes entrenched at the elite level on issues like the safety of vaccines , geneti - cally modiﬁed foods , and emergent technologies ( Bolsen and Druckman 2015 ; Ball 2014 ) where misperceptions circulate widely but elite polarization is limited . Another important macro - level factor in misperception belief is media cover - age , which shapes the ﬂow of false claims to the public both directly in its cover - age and indirectly via its inﬂuence on elite behavior . One particularly important question in this area is how changes in the media environment and evolving jour - nalistic norms aﬀect coverage of factual disputes . Recent decades have witnessed a dramatic increase in the number and type of news programs available to media 26 See also Gelpi , Feaver , and Reiﬂer ( 2009 , pp . 110 - 114 ) and Grieco et al . ( 2011 ) for research on how consensus aﬀects support for the use of military force ( though the consensus they consider may represent source eﬀects ) . 30 consumers . Prior ( 2007 , ch . 4 ) documents how the expansion of media choice has exacerbated inequalities in political knowledge . There is good reason to suspect that it could also aﬀect misperceptions . For instance , partisan media programs on cable television and talk radio often feature false and / or exaggerated claims about political opponents ( Levendusky 2013 ; Jamieson and Cappella 2010 ) . However , scholars know little about whether these programs actually increase misperceptions among consumers , many of whom are highly ideological and may already hold mis - perceptions . Past research has documented a correlation between partisan news consumption and misperceptions . For instance , Fox News viewership is positively associated with misperceptions about the Iraq War ( Kull , Ramsay , and Lewis 2003 ) and global warming ( Krosnick and MacInnis 2010 ) . However , these cross - sectional correlations do not necessarily demonstrate that Fox News viewership causes mis - perceptions . Experimental research is needed to determine whether partisan media actually increases misperceptions . 27 Another open question is whether partisan programming has indirect eﬀects that spill over into mainstream media , which of - ten have much larger audiences ( e . g . , Levendusky 2013 ; Jamieson and Cappella 2010 ) . Finally , researchers should seek to identify best practices for correcting misinformation on social media—a medium that permits rapid dissemination of misinformation and presents serious challenges to fact - checkers who are not accus - tomed to analyzing and responding to claims in real time . Journalistic norms also play a key role in media coverage of factual contro - versies . For instance , so - called “balanced” news reports that do not adequately represent the evidence in a policy or scientiﬁc debate are common and can con - tribute to misperceptions ( e . g . , Boykoﬀ and Boykoﬀ 2004 ; Boykoﬀ 2008 ; Malka 27 One potentially fruitful approach is to exploit the introduction of partisan news into a geo - graphic area ( e . g . , Hopkins and Ladd 2014 ) . 31 et al . 2009 ; Lawrence and Schafer 2012 ; Dixon and Clarke 2013 ) . 28 In other cases , the content of media coverage is not just balanced but actively misleading . For example , Jerit and Barabas ( 2006 ) document a host of misleading claims about the ﬁnancial status of Social Security and demonstrate experimentally that such claims cause people to become less accurate in their estimates of the program’s solvency ( 288 - 291 ) . Similarly , misleading coverage of crime ( especially among local news outlets ) may have contributed to widespread misperceptions that it is increasing over time ( Lopez 2016a ) . By contrast , other journalistic norms have the potential to help constrain elite behavior . Nyhan and Reiﬂer ( 2015b ) conducted a ﬁeld experiment in which they reminded a large sample of state legislators of the electoral and reputational risks posed by fact - checkers . They found that these reminders reduced the likelihood that legislators would make a claim that received a negative rating from PolitiFact or whose accuracy was questioned publicly . These ﬁndings underscore the importance of understanding the factors shaping media coverage . In a recent ﬁeld experiment , for instance , Graves , Nyhan , and Reiﬂer ( 2016 ) found that reporters provided more coverage of fact - checking when they were reminded of its status in the profession and the journalistic values it seeks to promote . By contrast , a message about audience demand for fact - checking had no signiﬁcant eﬀect . Further research is needed to determine the conditions under which media outlets are most likely to provide eﬀective coverage of factual disputes . Finally , it is necessary to study the actions of elites and the media to under - stand not only how misperceptions emerge , but which misperceptions emerge . This question is diﬃcult to address . As discussed above , the ﬁeld confronts the diﬃcult 28 Unfortunately , accurate coverage may not be enough — the public may resist accepting uncomfortable facts even when they receive substantial media coverage ( Jerit and Barabas 2012 ) . 32 issue of an undeﬁned denominator — there are a vast number of potential false or unsupported claims from which we only observe a highly selected sample that are made repeatedly and gain widespread adherence . Analyses of the correlates of these misperceptions are thus vulnerable to selection bias . Given that most factual beliefs are not polarized along partisan or ideological lines , understanding which ones become politicized is as important as documenting the process by which it takes place . For instance , certain types of claims may spread because they res - onate with people’s negative aﬀect toward the opposition party ( Roush N . d . ) or the perceived character weaknesses of a politician ( Cliﬀord N . d . ) . In trying to understand which misperceptions take hold , it is also important to consider the inﬂuence of natural cognitive limitations ( e . g . , Marsh , Cantor , and Brashier 2016 ) and the way in which elites may exploit these limitations . For instance , we instinctively process and accept information to which we are exposed and need to actively resist believing such information when it is false ( Gilbert , Tafarodi , and Malone 1993 ) . Similarly , we tend to believe that familiar information is likely to be true , which may lead us astray if false claims are widespread ( Schwarz et al . 2007 ) . Elite eﬀorts to promote bogus claims may exploit these tendencies . Why misperceptions matter for democracy The research discussed above raises broader normative questions . Previous debates over democratic competence focused overwhelmingly on the potential dangers of an un informed public . However , the prospect of widespread misperceptions calls many of this literature’s ﬁndings into question and raises new , important concerns about the quality of public opinion , representation , and policy - making in democratic politics . 33 We ﬁrst consider how misperceptions complicate two of the most common de - fenses of democratic competence : heuristics and aggregation . Lupia , McCubbins , and Popkin ( 2000 , 17 ) deﬁne heuristics as “common judgmental shortcuts that peo - ple use to draw complicated inferences from simple environmental cues . ” Several studies document instances of successful heuristic use . For instance , an inﬂuential study by Lupia ( 1994 ) shows that citizens can use interest group endorsements to compensate for their lack of knowledge about ballot initiatives . Of course , ques - tions remain about the frequency of heuristic use and citizens’ ability to interpret heuristics correctly ( Kuklinski and Quirk 2000 ; Lau and Redlawsk 2001 ) . Even when we set those issues aside , however , it is important to note that past research shows that heuristics are useful in contexts in which people likely recognize their lack of knowledge . Lupia’s ( 1994 ) experiment , for instance , shows that people use endorsement heuristics to help them vote on a highly complex issue — indeed , he calls complexity the “deﬁning characteristic” of ballot propositions ( page 63 ) . On other issues , however , many citizens hold misperceptions but believe themselves to be well - informed about the issue in question ( Nyhan 2010 ; Kuklinski et al . 1998 ) . This conﬁdently misinformed group may eschew heuristics and instead base their opinions on misperceptions . To be sure , people who are weakly conﬁdent in their misperceptions ( Pasek , Sood , and Krosnick 2015 ) may employ heuristics . However , heuristics themselves can be misleading . For example , Dancey and Sheagley ( 2013 ) show that party heuristics can mislead the most knowledgeable citizens when leg - islators vote in counter - stereotypical ways . In short , while heuristics may help overcome ignorance , they are less clearly helpful for assisting people in overcoming misperceptions . Another defense of democratic competence focuses on the aggregation of individual - 34 level preferences into collective public opinion . On this account , the process of statistical aggregation cancels out random errors in individual - level preferences , creating a more sensible indicator of public opinion at the macro level ( Page and Shapiro 1992 ) . As with heuristics , scholars continue to debate the usefulness of aggregation for overcoming ignorance ( e . g . , Caplan 2007 ; Kuklinski and Quirk 2000 ) . However , further grounds exist for skepticism . Perhaps the most obvious concern is the possibility of systematic misperceptions in the mass public , which violate the random error assumption underlying models of collective rationality ( see , e . g . , Page and Shapiro 1992 , 29 ) . For example , Americans tend to systemat - ically overestimate the number of immigrants in the country ( Hopkins , Sides , and Citrin N . d . ) and underestimate the share of federal income taxes coming from the top one percent of earners ( Flynn 2016 ) . If systematic misperceptions like these are common , aggregation will compound individual - level errors in public opinion rather than eliminating them . Beyond public opinion , misperceptions could also distort important aspects of representation . First , though elites may try to persuade uninformed constituents to support their position , they may be more reluctant to listen to or engage with citizens whom they perceive to be misinformed ( e . g . , Honda 2009 ) , reducing both legislative responsiveness and constituent exposure to corrective information . Mis - perceptions among politicians themselves about constituent opinion could also un - dermine policy responsiveness ( e . g . , Miller and Stokes 1963 ) . Indeed , Broockman and Skovron ( 2015 ) show that candidates for state legislative oﬃce are widely mis - informed about public opinion in their districts : the typical candidate substantially underestimates district support for universal health care and same - sex marriage . Finally , in some cases , misperceptions can distort policy debates and even af - 35 fect the content of legislation itself . As discussed above , the “death panel” mis - perception skewed the debate over the Aﬀordable Care Act not only by distorting public beliefs but by reducing public and media attention to other fact - based crit - icisms of the legislation . On other issues , politicians and their staﬀ may hold misperceptions that aﬀect their policy positions . For instance , Bolsen , Druckman , and Cook ( 2015 ) provide evidence of misperceptions among congressional staﬀers about global warming . Of course , the existence of a misperception among citizens or policymakers does not necessarily means that it aﬀects policy outcomes . Future research should therefore seek to trace the eﬀect of prominent misperceptions on policy debates using archival or historical data ( see , e . g . , Nyhan 2010 ) . Conclusion The evidence presented above suggests that misperceptions are widespread and that elites and the media play a key role in promoting these false and unsupported beliefs . In many cases , misperceptions appear to distort people’s opinions and behavior . Even when they do not have such eﬀects , these misperceptions can still have pernicious consequences for the factual basis of both political debate and public policy itself . Nonetheless , diﬃcult research questions remain . Three questions stand out as particularly important . First , scholars should seek to better understand the conditions under which directional motivations will predominate when assessing political information . To what extent will people respond to facts that contradict their prior attitudes or predispositions ? Conditions such as polarization , party cues , and others discussed above lead to misperceptions about some ( but certainly not all ) political facts . Clarifying the scope of these conditions is critical to under - 36 stand when misperceptions are likely to develop . Second , how can we best measure misperceptions to discourage expressive responding while avoiding underreporting and minimizing social desirability concerns ? Finally , the study of misperceptions must reduce its near - exclusive focus on the mass public and consider political elites and the media , who help determine which beliefs become politicized and when and how such a process takes place . If the conclusions reached so far are correct , however , the threat of mispercep - tions to democracy cannot be avoided , especially in the highly polarized world of contemporary American politics . Facts are always at least potentially vulnerable to directional motivated reasoning , especially when they are politicized by elites . The polarization that our politics must confront is thus not just over issues and public policy , but over reality itself . References Arceneaux , Kevin . 2012 . “Cognitive biases and the strength of political argu - ments . ” American Journal of Political Science 56 ( 2 ) : 271 – 285 . Aronow , Peter M . , and Benjamin T . Miller . 2016 . “Policy misperceptions and support for gun control legislation . ” Lancet 387 ( 10015 ) : 223 – 223 . Bakshy , Eytan , Solomon Messing , and Lada A . Adamic . 2015 . “Exposure to ideo - logically diverse news and opinion on Facebook . ” Science 348 ( 6239 ) : 1130 – 1132 . Ball , Molly . 2014 . “Want to Know If Your Food Is Genetically Mod - iﬁed ? ” The Atlantic , May 14 , 2014 . Downloaded June 13 , 2016 from http : / / www . theatlantic . com / politics / archive / 2014 / 05 / want - to - know - if - your - food - is - genetically - modified / 370812 / . 37 Barber´a , Pablo , John T . Jost , Jonathan Nagler , Joshua A . Tucker , and Richard Bonneau . 2015 . “Tweeting From Left to Right Is Online Political Communica - tion More Than an Echo Chamber ? ” Psychological Science 26 ( 10 ) : 1531 – 1542 . Bartels , Larry M . 2002 . “Beyond the running tally : Partisan bias in political perceptions . ” Political Behavior 24 ( 2 ) : 117 – 150 . Berinsky , Adam J . 2009 . In time of war : Understanding American public opinion from World War II to Iraq . University of Chicago Press . Berinsky , Adam J . 2015 . “Rumors and Health Care Reform : Experiments in Political Misinformation . ” British Journal of Political Science . Berinsky , Adam J . N . d . “Telling the Truth about Believing the Lies ? ” Unpublished manuscript . Bode , Leticia , and Emily K Vraga . 2015 . “In related news , that was wrong : The correction of misinformation through related stories functionality in social me - dia . ” Journal of Communication 65 ( 4 ) : 619 – 638 . Bollinger , Bryan , and Kenneth Gillingham . 2012 . “Peer eﬀects in the diﬀusion of solar photovoltaic panels . ” Marketing Science 31 ( 6 ) : 900 – 912 . Bolsen , Toby , and James N Druckman . 2015 . “Counteracting the politicization of science . ” Journal of Communication 65 ( 5 ) : 745 – 769 . Bolsen , Toby , James N . Druckman , and Fay Lomax Cook . 2014 . “The Inﬂuence of Partisan Motivated Reasoning on Public Opinion . ” Political Behavior 36 ( 2 ) : 235 – 262 . 38 Bolsen , Toby , James N . Druckman , and Fay Lomax Cook . 2015 . “Citizens’ , Sci - entists’ , and Policy Advisors’ Beliefs about Global Warming . ” Annals of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 658 ( March ) : 271 – 295 . Bond , Robert M . , Christopher J . Fariss , Jason J . Jones , Adam DI Kramer , Cameron Marlow , Jaime E . Settle , and James H . Fowler . 2012 . “A 61 - million - person experiment in social inﬂuence and political mobilization . ” Nature 489 ( 7415 ) : 295 – 298 . Boykoﬀ , Maxwell T . 2008 . “Lost in translation ? United States television news coverage of anthropogenic climate change , 1995 – 2004 . ” Climatic Change 86 ( 1 - 2 ) : 1 – 11 . Boykoﬀ , Maxwell T . , and Jules M . Boykoﬀ . 2004 . “Balance as bias : Global warm - ing and the US prestige press . ” Global environmental change 14 ( 2 ) : 125 – 136 . Broockman , David , and Christopher Skovron . 2015 . “What Politicians Believe About Their Constituents : Asymmetric Misperceptions and Prospects for Con - stituency Control . ” Unpublished manuscript . Bullock , John . 2007 . “Experiments on partisanship and public opinion : Party cues , false beliefs , and Bayesian updating . ” Ph . D . dissertation , Stanford University . Bullock , John G . 2011 . “Elite Inﬂuence on Public Opinion in an Informed Elec - torate . ” American Political Science Review 105 ( 3 ) : 496 – 515 . Bullock , John G . , Alan S . Gerber , Seth J . Hill , and Gregory A . Huber . 2015 . “Partisan Bias in Factual Beliefs about Politics . ” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 10 : 519 – 578 . 39 Bullock , John G . , Donald P . Green , and Shang E . Ha . 2010 . “Yes , but what’s the mechanism ? ( don’t expect an easy answer ) . ” Journal of personality and social psychology 98 ( 4 ) : 550 – 558 . Caplan , Bryan . 2007 . The Myth of the Rational Voter : Why Democracies Choose Bad Policies . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Carmines , Edward G . , and James A . Stimson . 1989 . Issue evolution : Race and the transformation of American politics . Princeton University Press . Chapman University Survey of American Fears . 2016 . “What Aren’t They Telling Us ? ” October 11 , 2016 . Downloaded October 26 , 2016 from https : / / blogs . chapman . edu / wilkinson / 2016 / 10 / 11 / what - arent - they - telling - us / . Cliﬀord , Scott . N . d . “Conﬁrming the Worst : Candidate Rumors and Character Trait Perceptions . ” Unpublished manuscript . Cobb , Michael D . , Brendan Nyhan , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2013 . “Beliefs Don’t Always Persevere : How Political Figures Are Punished When Positive Information about Them Is Discredited . ” Political Psychology 34 ( 3 ) : 307 – 326 . Cohen , Geoﬀrey L . , Joshua Aronson , and Claude M . Steele . 2000 . “When beliefs yield to evidence : Reducing biased evaluation by aﬃrming the self . ” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 26 ( 9 ) : 1151 – 1164 . Converse , Phillip E . 1964 . “The Nature of Belief Systems in Mass Publics . ” In Ideology and Discontent , ed . David E . Apter . New York : Free Press . Correll , Joshua , and Mark P . Spencer , Steven J . and Zanna . 2004 . “An aﬃrmed self and an open mind : Self - aﬃrmation and sensitivity to argument strength . ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 40 ( 3 ) : 350 – 356 . 40 Dancey , Logan , and Geoﬀrey Sheagley . 2013 . “Heuristics Behaving Badly : Party Cues and Voter Knowledge . ” American Journal of Political Science 57 ( 2 ) : 312 – 325 . Delli Carpini , Michael X . , and Scott Keeter . 1996 . What Americans Know about Politics and Why It Matters . New Haven : Yale University Press . DiFonzo , Nicholas , and Prashant Bordia . 2006 . Rumor Psychology : Social and Organizational Approaches . American Psychological Association . Dixon , Graham N . , and Christopher E . Clarke . 2013 . “Heightening uncertainty around certain science media coverage , false balance , and the autism - vaccine controversy . ” Science Communication 35 ( 3 ) : 358 – 382 . Druckman , James N . 2012 . “The politics of motivation . ” Critical Review 24 ( 2 ) : 199 – 216 . Druckman , James N . , Erik Peterson , and Rune Slothuus . 2013 . “How Elite Parti - san Polarization Aﬀects Public Opinion Formation . ” American Political Science Review 107 ( 1 ) : 57 - 79 . Duelfer , Charles . 2004 . Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq’s WMD . Central Intelligence Agency . Entine , Jon . 2015 . “AAAS Scientists : Consensus on GMO Safety Firmer Than For Human - Induced Climate Change . ” Huﬃngton Post , January 29 , 2015 . Down - loaded July 11 , 2016 from http : / / www . huffingtonpost . com / jon - entine / post _ 8915 _ b _ 6572130 . html . Federal Bureau of Investigation . 2015 . “Crime in the United States . ” Downloaded 41 from https : / / ucr . fbi . gov / crime - in - the - u . s / 2015 / crime - in - the - u . s . - 2015 / tables / table - 1 on October 24 , 2016 . Flaxman , Seth R . , Sharad Goel , and Justin M . Rao . 2016 . “Filter Bubbles , Echo Chambers , and Online News Consumption . ” Public Opinion Quarterly 80 ( Spe - cial issue ) : 298 – 320 . Flynn , D . J . 2016 . “The Scope and Correlates of Political Misperceptions in the Mass Public . ” Paper delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association , Philadelphia , September . Freed , Gary L . , Sarah J . Clark , Amy T . Butchart , Dianne C . Singer , and Matthew M . Davis . 2010 . “Parental vaccine safety concerns in 2009 . ” Pediatrics 125 ( 4 ) : 654 – 659 . Fridkin , Kim , Patrick J . Kenney , and Amanda Wintersieck . 2015 . “Liar , Liar , Pants on Fire : How Fact - Checking Inﬂuences Citizens’ Reactions to Negative Advertising . ” Political Communication 32 ( 1 ) : 127 – 151 . Gaines , Brian J . , James H . Kuklinski , Paul J . Quirk , Buddy Peyton , and Jay Verkuilen . 2007 . “Same facts , diﬀerent interpretations : Partisan motivation and opinion on Iraq . ” Journal of Politics 69 ( 4 ) : 957 – 974 . Garrett , R . Kelly , Erik C . Nisbet , and Emily K . Lynch . 2013 . “Undermining the corrective eﬀects of media - based political fact checking ? The role of contextual cues and na¨ıve theory . ” Journal of Communication 63 ( 4 ) : 617 – 637 . Gelman , Andrew . 2014 . “Thinking of doing a list experiment ? Here’s a list of reasons why you should think again . ” April 23 , 2014 . Down - 42 loaded October 27 , 2016 from http : / / andrewgelman . com / 2014 / 04 / 23 / thinking - list - experiment - heres - list - reasons - think / . Gelpi , Christopher , Peter D . Feaver , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2009 . Paying the hu - man costs of war : American public opinion and casualties in military conﬂicts . Princeton University Press . Gentzkow , Matthew A . , and Jesse M . Shapiro . 2004 . “Media , Education and Anti - Americanism in the Muslim World . ” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 ( 3 ) : 117 - 133 . Gentzkow , Matthew , and Jesse M Shapiro . 2011 . “Ideological Segregation Online and Oﬄine . ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 ( 4 ) : 1799 – 1839 . Gerber , Alan S . , Donald P . Green , and Christopher W . Larimer . 2008 . “Social pres - sure and voter turnout : Evidence from a large - scale ﬁeld experiment . ” American Political Science Review 102 ( 01 ) : 33 – 48 . Gerber , Alan S . , and Gregory A . Huber . 2009 . “Partisanship and Economic Be - havior : Do Partisan Diﬀerences in Economic Forecasts Predict Real Economic Behavior ? ” American Political Science Review 103 ( 3 ) : 407 – 426 . Gerber , Alan S . , and Todd Rogers . 2009 . “Descriptive social norms and motivation to vote : everybody’s voting and so should you . ” Journal of Politics 71 ( 01 ) : 178 – 191 . Gidda , Mirren . 2014 . “Fear and Rumors Fueling the Spread of Ebola . ” Time , Au - gust 12 , 2014 . Downloaded October 27 , 2016 from http : / / time . com / 3092855 / ebola - fear - rumors / . 43 Gilbert , Daniel T . , Romin W . Tafarodi , and Patrick S . Malone . 1993 . “You can’t not believe everything you read . ” Journal of personality and social psychology 65 ( 2 ) : 221 – 233 . Gollust , Sarah E . , Paula M . Lantz , and Peter A . Ubel . 2009 . “The polarizing eﬀect of news media messages about the social determinants of health . ” American Journal of Public Health 99 ( 12 ) : 2160 . Goren , Paul . 2005 . “Party identiﬁcation and core political values . ” American Jour - nal of Political Science 49 ( 4 ) : 881 – 896 . Graves , Lucas , Brendan Nyhan , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2016 . “Understanding Innova - tions in Journalistic Practice : A Field Experiment Examining Motivations for Fact - Checking . ” Journal of Communication 66 ( 1 ) : 102 – 138 . Green , Donald , Bradley Palmquist , and Eric Schickler . 2004 . Partisan Hearts and Minds : Political Parties and the Social Identities of Voters . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Grieco , Joseph M . , Christopher Gelpi , Jason Reiﬂer , and Peter D . Feaver . 2011 . “Let’s Get a Second Opinion : International Institutions and American Public Support for War . ” International Studies Quarterly 55 ( 2 ) : 563 – 583 . Groenendyk , Eric . 2013 . Competing Motives in the Partisan Mind : How Loy - alty and Responsiveness Shape Party Identiﬁcation and Democracy . New York : Oxford University Press . Grossmann , Matt , and David A . Hopkins . 2016 . Asymmetric Politics : Ideological Republicans and Group Interest Democrats . Oxford University Press . 44 Guess , Andrew , and Alexander Coppock . N . d . “The Exception , Not the Rule ? The Rarely Polarizing Eﬀect of Challenging Information . ” Unpublished manuscript . Guess , Andrew M . N . d . “Media Choice and Moderation : Evidence from Online Tracking Data . ” Unpublished manuscript . Hastorf , Albert H . , and Hadley Cantril . 1954 . “They saw a game : A case study . ” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 49 ( 1 ) : 129 – 134 . Hill , Seth J . N . d . “Learning Together Slowly : Bayesian Learning About Political Facts . ” Unpublished manuscript . Hochschild , Jennifer L . , and Katherine Levine Einstein . 2015 . Do Facts Matter ? Information and Misinformation in American Politics . Norman , OK : University of Oklahoma Press . Honda , Michael . 2009 . “Misinformation Makes Town Hall Meetings Tough . ” The Mercury News , September 8 , 2009 . Hopkins , Daniel J , John Sides , and Jack Citrin . N . d . “The Muted Consequences of Correct Information About Immigration . ” Unpublished manuscript . Hopkins , Daniel J . , and Jonathan M . Ladd . 2014 . “The Consequences of Broader Media Choice : Evidence from the Expansion of Fox News . ” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 9 ( 1 ) : 115 – 135 . Howell , William G . , and Martin R . West . 2009 . “Educating the Public . ” Education Next 9 ( 3 ) : 41 – 47 . Inglis , Bob , and Arthur B . Laﬀer . 2008 . “An Emissions Plan Conservatives Could Warm To . ” New York Times , December 27 , 2008 . 45 Ipsos MORI . 2016 . “The Perils of Perception and the EU : Public misperceptions about the EU and how it aﬀects life in the UK . ” Poll conducted May 27 - 30 , 2016 . Available at https : / / www . ipsos - mori . com / researchpublications / researcharchive / 3742 / The - Perils - of - Perception - and - the - EU . aspx . Iyengar , Shanto , Gaurav Sood , and Yphtach Lelkes . 2012 . “Aﬀect , Not Ideology : A Social Identity Perspective on Polarization . ” Public Opinion Quarterly 76 ( 3 ) : 405 - 431 . Jamieson , Kathleen Hall , and Joseph N . Cappella . 2010 . Echo Chamber : Rush Limbaugh and the Conservative Media Establishment . Oxford University Press . Jerit , Jennifer , and Jason Barabas . 2006 . “Bankrupt Rhetoric : How Misleading Information Aﬀects Knowledge about Social Security . ” Public Opinion Quarterly 70 ( 3 ) : 278 – 303 . Jerit , Jennifer , and Jason Barabas . 2012 . “Partisan perceptual bias and the infor - mation environment . ” Journal of Politics 74 ( 3 ) : 672 – 684 . Jerit , Jennifer , Jason Barabas , and Scott Cliﬀord . 2013 . “Comparing contem - poraneous laboratory and ﬁeld experiments on media eﬀects . ” Public Opinion Quarterly 77 ( 1 ) : 256 – 282 . Jost , John T . , Jack Glaser , Arie W . Kruglanski , and Frank J . Sulloway . 2003 . “Political Conservatism as Motivated Social Cognition . ” Psychological Bulletin 129 ( 3 ) : 339 – 375 . Kahan , Dan . 2015a . “Against “consensus messaging” . . . ” Cultural Cognition blog , June 10 , 2015 . Downloaded October 31 , 2016 from http : / / www . 46 culturalcognition . net / blog / 2015 / 6 / 10 / against - consensus - messaging . html . Kahan , Dan M . 2015b . “Climate - Science Communication and the Measurement Problem . ” Advances in Political Psychology 36 ( S1 ) : 1 – 43 . Kahan , Dan M . , Asheley Landrum , Katie Carpenter , Laura Helft , and Kath - leen Hall Jamieson . N . d . “Science Curiosity and Political Information Process - ing . ” Forthcoming , Advances in Political Psychology . Kahan , Dan M . , Erica Cantrell Dawson , Ellen Peters , and Paul Slovic . N . d . “Mo - tivated Numeracy and Enlightened Self - Government . ” Unpublished manuscript . Kahan , Dan M . , Kathleen Hall Jamieson , Asheley R Landrum , and Kenneth Win - neg . N . d . “Culturally Antagonistic Memes and the Zika Virus : An Experimental Test . ” Forthcoming , Journal of Risk Research . Kam , Cindy D . 2005 . “Who Toes the Party Line ? Cues , Values , and Individual Diﬀerences . ” Political Behavior 27 ( 2 ) : 163 – 182 . URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11109 - 005 - 1764 - y Kam , Cindy D . , and Donald R . Kinder . 2012 . “Ethnocentrism as a short - term force in the 2008 American presidential election . ” American Journal of Political Science 56 ( 2 ) : 326 – 340 . Kast , Felipe , Stephan Meier , and Dina Pomeranz . 2012 . “Under - savers anonymous : Evidence on self - help groups and peer pressure as a savings commitment device . ” Unpublished manuscript . Kim , Jin Woo . N . d . “The Force of the Better Evidence in Political Belief Updat - ing . ” Unpublished manuscript . 47 Kosloﬀ , Spee , Jeﬀ Greenberg , Toni Schmader , Mark Dechesne , and David Weise . 2010 . “Smearing the opposition : Implicit and explicit stigmatization of the 2008 US Presidential candidates and the current US President . ” Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : General 139 ( 3 ) : 383 – 398 . Kramon , Eric , and Keith R . Weghorst . 2012 . “Measuring Sensitive Attitudes in Developing Countries : Lessons from Implementing the List Experiment . ” The Political Methodologist 3 ( 2 ) : 14 – 24 . Krosnick , Jon A . , and Bo MacInnis . 2010 . “Frequent Viewers of Fox News Are Less Likely to Accept Scientists’ Views of Global Warming . ” Report for The Woods Institute for the Environment . Downloaded July 20 , 2014 from http : / / woods . stanford . edu / docs / surveys / Global - Warming - Fox - News . pdf . Kuklinski , James H . , Michael D . Cobb , and Martin Gilens . 1997 . “Racial Attitudes and the “New South” . ” Journal of Politics 59 ( 2 ) : 323 – 349 . Kuklinski , James H . , and Paul J . Quirk . 2000 . “Reconsidering the Rational Pub - lic : Cognition , Heuristics , and Mass Opinion . ” In Elements of Reason : Under - standing and Expanding the Limits of Political Rationality , ed . Arthur Lupia , Mathew D . McCubbins , and Samuel L . Popkin . London : Cambridge University Press . Kuklinski , James H . , Paul J . Quirk , David W . Schwieder , and Robert F . Rich . 1998 . “Just the Facts , Ma’am : Political Facts and Public Opinion . ” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 560 ( November ) : 143 – 154 . Kuklinski , James H . , Paul J . Quirk , Jennifer Jerit , David Schwieder , and Robert F . 48 Rich . 2000 . “Misinformation and the Currency of Democratic Citizenship . ” Journal of Politics 62 ( 3 ) : 790 – 816 . Kull , Steven , Clay Ramsay , and Evan Lewis . 2003 . “Misperceptions , the Media , and the Iraq War . ” Political Science Quarterly 118 ( 4 ) : 569 - 598 . Kunda , Ziva . 1990 . “The case for motivated reasoning . ” Psychological bulletin 108 ( 3 ) : 480 – 498 . Ladd , Jonathan McDonald , and Gabriel S . Lenz . 2008 . “Reassessing the role of anxiety in vote choice . ” Political Psychology 29 ( 2 ) : 275 – 296 . Ladd , Jonathan McDonald , and Gabriel S . Lenz . 2011 . “Does Anxiety Improve Voters’ Decision Making ? ” Political Psychology 32 ( 2 ) : 347 – 361 . Lau , Richard R . , and David P . Redlawsk . 2001 . “Advantages and disadvantages of cognitive heuristics in political decision making . ” American Journal of Political Science 45 ( 4 ) : 951 – 971 . Lauderdale , Benjamin E . 2016 . “Partisan Disagreements Arising from Rational - ization of Common Information . ” Political Science Research and Methods 4 ( 3 ) : 477 – 492 . Lavine , Howard G . , Christopher D . Johnston , and Marco R . Steenbergen . 2012 . The Ambivalent Partisan : How Critical Loyalty Promotes Democracy . New York : Cambridge University Press . Lawrence , Regina G . , and Matthew L . Schafer . 2012 . “Debunking Sarah Palin : Mainstream news coverage of ‘death panels’ . ” Journalism 13 ( 6 ) : 766 – 782 . 49 Layman , Geoﬀrey C , and Thomas M Carsey . 2002 . “Party polarization and ‘conﬂict extension’ in the American electorate . ” American Journal of Political Science 46 ( 4 ) : 786 – 802 . Layman , Geoﬀrey C . , Thomas M . Carsey , John C . Green , Richard Herrera , and Rosalynn Cooperman . 2010 . “Activists and Conﬂict Extension in American Party Politics . ” American Political Science Review 104 ( 2 ) : 324 – 346 . Lenz , Gabriel S . 2012 . Follow the leader ? How voters respond to politicians’ performance and policies . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Leonard , Kimberly . 2015 . “Is the ’Death Panel’ Debate Dead ? ” U . S . News & World Report , July 9 , 2015 . Levendusky , Matthew . 2013 . How Partisan Media Polarize America . University of Chicago Press . Levendusky , Matthew S . 2010 . “Clearer Cues , More Consistent Voters : A Beneﬁt of Elite Polarization . ” Political Behavior 32 ( 1 ) : 111 – 131 . Lewandowsky , Stephan , Gilles E Gignac , and Samuel Vaughan . 2013 . “The pivotal role of perceived scientiﬁc consensus in acceptance of science . ” Nature Climate Change 3 ( 4 ) : 399 – 404 . Lodge , Milton , and Charles S . Taber . 2013 . The Rationalizing Voter . Cambridge University Press . Lopez , German . 2016a . “Americans don’t know crime has plummeted . In fact , they think it’s gone up . ” Vox , October 10 , 2016 . Downloaded Octo - ber 27 , 2016 from http : / / www . vox . com / policy - and - politics / 2016 / 10 / 10 / 13226264 / us - crime - rate - poll . 50 Lopez , German . 2016b . “Trump : murder is at a 45 - year high . Actual statis - tics : that’s not remotely true . ” Vox , October 21 , 2016 . Downloaded from http : / / www . vox . com / 2016 / 10 / 12 / 13255466 / trump - murder - rate on October 24 , 2016 . Lupia , Arthur . 1994 . “Shortcuts Versus Encyclopedias : Information and Voting Behavior in California Insurance Reform Elections . ” American Political Science Review 88 ( 1 ) : 63 – 76 . Lupia , Arthur . 2006 . “How elitism undermines the study of voter competence . ” Critical Review 18 ( 1 - 3 ) : 217 – 232 . Lupia , Arthur , and Mathew D . McCubbins . 1998 . The Democratic Dilemma : Can Citizens Learn What They Need to Know ? New York : Cambridge University Press . Lupia , Arthur , Mathew D . McCubbins , and Samuel L . Popkin . 2000 . “Beyond Rationality : Reason and the Study of Politics . ” In Elements of Reason : Under - standing and Expanding the Limits of Political Rationality , ed . Arthur Lupia , Mathew D . McCubbins , and Samuel L . Popkin . London : Cambridge University Press . Luskin , Robert C . , Gaurav Sood , and Joshua Blank . N . d . “The Waters of Casablanca : Political Misinformation ( and Knowledge and Ignorance ) . ” Unpub - lished manuscript . Malka , Ariel , Jon A . Krosnick , Matthew Debell , Josh Pasek , and Daniel Schnei - der . 2009 . “Featuring Skeptics in News Media Stories About Global Warming 51 Reduces Public Beliefs in the Seriousness of Global Warming . ” Woods Institute for the Environment , Stanford University . Marcus , George E . , W . Russell Neuman , and Michael MacKuen . 2000 . Aﬀective intelligence and political judgment . University of Chicago Press . Marsh , Elizabeth J . , Allison D . Cantor , and Nadia M . Brashier . 2016 . “Believing that Humans Swallow Spiders in Their Sleep : False Beliefs as Side Eﬀects of the Processes that Support Accurate Knowledge . ” Psychology of Learning and Motivation 64 : 93 – 132 . McCright , Aaron M . , and Riley E . Dunlap . 2011 . “The politicization of climate change and polarization in the American public’s views of global warming , 2001 – 2010 . ” Sociological Quarterly 52 ( 2 ) : 155 – 194 . Meer , Jonathan . 2011 . “Brother , can you spare a dime ? Peer pressure in charitable solicitation . ” Journal of Public Economics 95 ( 7 ) : 926 – 941 . Miller , Warren E . , and Donald W . Stokes . 1963 . “Constituency Inﬂuence in Congress . ” American Political Science Review 57 : 45 – 56 . Mullinix , Kevin J . 2016 . “Partisanship and Preference Formation : Competing Mo - tivations , Elite Polarization , and Issue Importance . ” Political Behavior 38 ( 2 ) : 383 – 411 . Nyhan , Brendan . 2010 . “Why the ‘death panel’ myth won’t die : Misinformation in the health care reform debate . ” The Forum 8 ( 1 ) . Nyhan , Brendan . 2011 . “The limited eﬀects of testimony on political persuasion . ” Public Choice 148 ( 3 - 4 ) : 283 – 312 . 52 Nyhan , Brendan . 2012 . “New Surveys Show the Persistence of Mis - perceptions . ” Huﬃngton Post Pollster , July 30 , 2012 . Downloaded July 19 , 2014 from http : / / www . huffingtonpost . com / brendan - nyhan / new - surveys - show - the - pers _ b _ 1718794 . html . Nyhan , Brendan . 2014 . “Can We Have a Fact - Based Conversation About End - of - Life Planning ? ” New York Times , September 10 , 2014 . Down - loaded June 13 , 2016 from http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2014 / 09 / 11 / upshot / can - we - have - a - fact - based - conversation - about - end - of - life - planning . html . Nyhan , Brendan , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2010 . “When Corrections Fail : The persistence of political misperceptions . ” Political Behavior 32 ( 2 ) : 303 – 330 . Nyhan , Brendan , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2012 . “Misinformation and Fact - checking : Research Findings from Social Science . ” New America Foundation Media Policy Initiative Research Paper . Nyhan , Brendan , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2013 . “Which Corrections Work ? Research results and practice recommendations . ” New America Foundation Media Policy Initiative Research Paper . Nyhan , Brendan , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2015a . “Displacing misinformation about events : An experimental test of causal corrections . ” Journal of Experimental Political Science 2 ( 1 ) : 81 – 93 . Nyhan , Brendan , and Jason Reiﬂer . 2015b . “The Eﬀect of Fact - Checking on Elites : A Field Experiment on US State Legislators . ” American Journal of Political Science 59 ( 3 ) : 628 – 640 . 53 Nyhan , Brendan , and Jason Reiﬂer . N . d . a . “Do People Actually Learn From Fact - Checking ? Evidence from a longitudinal study during the 2014 campaign . ” Unpublished manuscript . Nyhan , Brendan , and Jason Reiﬂer . N . d . b . “The role of information deﬁcits and identity threat in the prevalence of misperceptions . ” Unpublished manuscript . Nyhan , Brendan , Jason Reiﬂer , and Peter A . Ubel . 2013 . “The hazards of correct - ing myths about health care reform . ” Medical Care 51 ( 2 ) : 127 – 132 . O’Keefe , Daniel J . 2002 . Persuasion . 2nd ed . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publica - tions . Oliver , J . Eric , and Thomas J . Wood . 2014 . “Conspiracy Theories and the Paranoid Style ( s ) of Mass Opinion . ” American Journal of Political Science . Page , Benjamin I . , and Robert Y . Shapiro . 1992 . The rational public : Fifty years of trends in Americans’ policy preferences . University of Chicago Press . Paluck , Elizabeth Levy . 2011 . “Peer pressure against prejudice : A high school ﬁeld experiment examining social network change . ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47 ( 2 ) : 350 – 358 . Paluck , Elizabeth Levy , and Hana Shepherd . 2012 . “The salience of social referents : A ﬁeld experiment on collective norms and harassment behavior in a school social network . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 103 ( 6 ) : 899 – 915 . Pasek , Josh , Gaurav Sood , and Jon A . Krosnick . 2015 . “Misinformed About the Aﬀordable Care Act ? Leveraging Certainty to Assess the Prevalence of Misper - ceptions . ” Journal of Communication 65 ( 4 ) : 660 – 673 . 54 Pear , Robert . 2015 . “New Medicare Rule Authorizes ‘End - of - Life’ Consultations . ” New York Times , October 30 , 2015 . Petersen , Michael Bang . 2015 . “Evolutionary Political Psychology : On the Origin and Structure of Heuristics and Biases in Politics . ” Political Psychology 36 ( S1 ) : 45 – 78 . Petersen , Michael Bang , Martin Skov , Søren Serritzlew , and Thomas Ramsøy . 2013 . “Motivated Reasoning and Political Parties : Evidence for Increased Pro - cessing in the Face of Party Cues . ” Political Behavior 35 ( 4 ) : 831 – 854 . Polikoﬀ , Morgan . 2015 . “The more people know about Common Core , the less they know about Common Core . ” September 8 , 2015 . Down - loaded July 11 , 2016 from https : / / morganpolikoff . com / 2015 / 09 / 08 / the - more - people - know - about - common - core - the - less - they - know - about - common - core / . Prasad , Monica , Andrew J Perrin , Kieran Bezila , Steve G Hoﬀman , Kate Kindle - berger , Kim Manturuk , and Ashleigh Smith Powers . 2009 . “‘There must be a reason’ : Osama , Saddam , and inferred justiﬁcation . ” Sociological Inquiry 79 ( 2 ) : 142 – 162 . Prior , Markus . 2007 . Post - broadcast democracy : How media choice increases in - equality in political involvement and polarizes elections . Cambridge University Press . Prior , Markus , Gaurav Sood , and Kabir Khanna . 2015 . “You Cannot be Serious : The Impact of Accuracy Incentives on Partisan Bias in Reports of Economic Perceptions . ” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 10 ( 4 ) : 489 – 518 . 55 Ramsay , Clay , Steven Kull , Evan Lewis , and Stefan Subias . 2010 . “Mis - information and the 2010 election : A study of the US electorate . ” Worldpublicopinion . org , December 2010 . Downloaded July 18 , 2014 from http : / / www . worldpublicopinion . org / pipa / pdf / dec10 / Misinformation _ Dec10 _ rpt . pdf . Redlawsk , David P . 2002 . “Hot Cognition or Cool Consideration ? Testing the Ef - fects of Motivated Reasoning on Political Decision Making . ” Journal of Politics 64 ( 4 ) : 1021 – 1044 . Redlawsk , David P . , Andrew J . W . Civettini , and Karen M . Emmerson . 2010 . “The aﬀective tipping point : Do motivated reasoners ever ‘get it’ ? ” Political Psychol - ogy 31 ( 4 ) : 563 – 593 . Ross , Lee , Mark R . Lepper , and Michael Hubbard . 1975 . “Perseverance in self - perception and social perception : Biased attributional processes in the debrieﬁng paradigm . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32 ( 5 ) : 880 – 892 . Roush , Carolyn E . N . d . “Believing the Worst : Out - Party Hostility and Receptive - ness to Political Misinformation . ” Unpublished manuscript . Schaﬀner , Brian F . , and Cameron Roche . N . d . “Misinformation and Motivated Reasoning : Responses to Economic News in a Politicized Environment . ” Forth - coming , Public Opinion Quarterly . Schuman , Howard , and Stanley Presser . 1980 . “Public opinion and public igno - rance : The ﬁne line between attitudes and nonattitudes . ” American Journal of Sociology 85 ( 5 ) : 1214 – 1225 . 56 Schwarz , Norbert . 2014 . Cognition and communication : Judgmental biases , re - search methods , and the logic of conversation . Psychology Press . Schwarz , Norbert , Lawrence J . Sanna , Ian Skurnik , and Carolyn Yoon . 2007 . “Metacognitive experiences and the intricacies of setting people straight : Im - plications for debiasing and public information campaigns . ” Advances in exper - imental social psychology 39 : 127 – 161 . Sides , John . 2016 . “Stories or Science ? Facts , Frames , and Policy Attitudes . ” American Politics Research 44 ( 3 ) : 387 – 414 . Sides , John , and Jack Citrin . 2007 . “European Opinion about Immigration : The Role of Identities , Interests and Information . ” British Journal of Political Science 37 ( 3 ) : 477 – 504 . Sinclair , Betsy . 2012 . The Social Citizen : Peer Networks and Political Behavior . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Slothuus , Rune , and Claes H . de Vreese . 2010 . “Political Parties , Motivated Rea - soning , and Issue Framing Eﬀects . ” Journal of Politics 72 ( 3 ) : 630 – 645 . Steele , Claude M . 1988 . “The psychology of self - aﬃrmation : Sustaining the in - tegrity of the self . ” Advances in experimental social psychology 21 : 261 – 302 . Stroud , Natalie Jomini . 2008 . “Media use and political predispositions : Revisiting the concept of selective exposure . ” Political Behavior 30 ( 3 ) : 341 – 366 . Sunstein , Cass R . , and Adrian Vermeule . 2009 . “Conspiracy theories : Causes and cures . ” Journal of Political Philosophy 17 ( 2 ) : 202 – 227 . 57 Taber , Charles S . , and Milton Lodge . 2006 . “Motivated Skepticism in the Evalua - tion of Political Beliefs . ” American Journal of Political Science 50 ( 3 ) : 755 – 769 . Thorson , Emily . 2015a . “Belief echoes : The persistent eﬀects of corrected misin - formation . ” Political Communication . Thorson , Emily . 2015b . “Identifying and Correcting Policy Misperceptions . ” Amer - ican Press Institute research report . Uscinski , Joseph E . , Casey Klofstad , and Matthew D . Atkinson . 2016 . “What Drives Conspiratorial Beliefs ? The Role of Informational Cues and Predisposi - tions . ” Political Research Quarterly 69 ( 1 ) : 57 – 71 . Uscinski , Joseph E . , and Joseph M . Parent . 2014 . American conspiracy theories . Oxford University Press . Weeks , Brian E . 2015 . “Emotions , partisanship , and misperceptions : How anger and anxiety moderate the eﬀect of partisan bias on susceptibility to political misinformation . ” Journal of Communication 65 ( 4 ) : 699 – 719 . Weiner , Rachel , and Scott Clement . 2012 . “Why Obama gets less blame than Bush for high gas prices . ” Washington Post , March 30 , 2012 . Downloaded October 27 , 2016 from https : / / web . archive . org / web / 20120528071226 / http : / / www . washingtonpost . com / blogs / the - fix / post / a - double - standard - on - gas - prices / 2012 / 03 / 29 / gIQAVMHRjS _ blog . html . Wilkes , A . L . , and M . Leatherbarrow . 1988 . “Editing episodic memory following the identiﬁcation of error . ” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 40 ( 2 ) : 361 – 387 . 58 Wood , Thomas , and Ethan Porter . N . d . “The elusive backﬁre eﬀect : mass atti - tudes’ steadfast factual adherence . ” Unpublished manuscript . Zaller , John . 1992 . The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion . Cambridge Univer - sity Press . 59