Real Options Analysis and Strategic Decision Making Author ( s ) : Edward H . Bowman and Gary T . Moskowitz Source : Organization Science , Vol . 12 , No . 6 ( Nov . - Dec . , 2001 ) , pp . 772 - 777 Published by : INFORMS Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3086047 Accessed : 06 / 07 / 2009 03 : 58 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = informs . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship . We work with the scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon , and to build a common research platform that promotes the discovery and use of these resources . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Organization Science . http : / / www . jstor . org Real Options Analysis and Strategic Decision Making Edward H . Bowman ( deceased ) formerly at The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania Gary T . Moskowitz Edwin L . Cox School of Business , Southern Methodist University , P . O . Box 750333 , Dallas , Texas 75275 - 0333 gmoskowi @ mail . cox . smu . edu Abstract The real options approach is frequently advocated as an ap - proach that offers a positive and radical reassessment of the value of risk and exploration . We examine a recent case where Merck used the real options approach to justify an investment in an R & D project . This case is used to highlight some of the problems associated with using real options . We note that the assumptions incorporated in most standard option valuation models can conflict with the conclusions reached by strategic analysis . As a result , users of real options models should un - derstand the quantitative aspects of these models , and may often need to create a customized model for each situation . The dif - ficulty of developing customized models may explain , in part , the limited use of the real options approach in strategic analysis . ( Real Options ; Decision Making ; Research and Development ; Strategic Analysis ) The investment decision represents a stylized description of the critical process by which organizations commit re - sources to future growth . Though such decisions are sub - ject to a variety of internal pressures ( see Cohen et al . 1972 ) , companies nevertheless portray the investment de - cision as the outcome of a formalized process that em - ploys explicit rules of valuation . It is unlikely that these rules are language games without real consequences ( Astley 1985 ) . Indeed , the teaching of financial methods is a pivotal component in the education of a MBA stu - dent . Organizational theories and financial theories of in - vestment valuation are rarely considered in tandem . Yet , they both have shared common treatments of risk as un - desirable . Traditional corporate finance theory suggests that firms should use a discounted cash flow model ( DCF ) ORGANIZATION SCIENCE , ? 2001 INFORMS Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 , pp . 772 - 777 to analyze capital allocation proposals . Under this ap - proach , the estimated cash flows from an investment pro - ject are discounted to their present value at a discount rate that reflects the market price of the project ' s risk . Higher systematic risk reduces the attractiveness of a project . If a proposal has a positive present value , then the project should be funded . Unfortunately , this approach does not properly account for the flexibility that may be present in a project . For example , managers can increase the size of a production operation in response to higher - than - expected levels of demand , or cut funding for a research project that is not inventing marketable products . This flexibility has value - a value that is not captured by the traditional DCF methodology . The real options approach has been suggested as a cap - ital budgeting and strategic decision - making tool because it explicitly accounts for the value of future flexibility ( Trigeorgis 1996 , Amram and Kulatilaka 1999 ) . Real op - tions models are based on the assumption that there is an underlying source of uncertainty , such as the price of a commodity or the outcome of a research project . Over time , the outcome of the underlying uncertainty is re - vealed , and managers can adjust their strategy accord - ingly . Despite the theoretical attractiveness of the real options approach , its use by managers appears to be limited . In some commodity - based operations , such as oil and mining , the real options approach appears to have gained some use by sophisticated companies ( Coy 1999 ) . In more stra - tegic contexts , however , options ' analytic techniques are less frequently used ( Copeland and Keenan 1998 , Lander and Pinches 1998 ) . In fact , when Merck & Co . , Inc . re - cently used the Black - Scholes option valuation model to assess a proposed investment , its use of this analytic tech - nique received attention in business publications , which 1047 - 7039 / 01 / 1206 / 0772 / $ 05 . 00 1526 - 5455 electronic ISSN EDWARD H . BOWMAN AND GARY T . MOSKOWITZ Real Options Analysis found this to be newsworthy ( e . g . , Nichols 1994 , Sender 1994 , Thackray 1995 ) . This article examines some of the practical organiza - tional issues associated with the use of real options anal - ysis . We note many of the practical difficulties managers face in using real options techniques in strategic decision making . We illustrate some of these problems using Merck ' s recent real options calculation as an example . This example shows how the results of strategic analysis can differ from the assumptions of a typical options model . As a result , the use of a standard options model in a strategic analysis could lead to poor strategic deci - sions . We conclude with a discussion of the role of op - tions analysis in strategic planning . Valuing a Strategic Real Option Strategy researchers have suggested that a number of cor - porate decisions can best be viewed through a strategic options lens ( Bowman and Hurry 1993 ) . These decisions include the termination of joint ventures ( Kogut 1991 ) , the management of multinational manufacturing networks ( Kogut and Kulatilaka 1994 ) , venture capital investments ( Hurry et al . 1992 ) , R & D programs ( Brealy and Myers 1981 , Chapter 29 , and see Mitchell and Hamilton 1987 for a managerial discussion ) , and some capital budgeting decisions ( Dixit and Pindyck 1994 ) . A common theme in all of these decisions is that they entail the use of a two - stage process : In the first stage , a small investment is made that gives the company the right to participate in the project ( i . e . , the company purchases the option ) . Some time later , when more information is known , the second stage occurs when the company faces a choice about mak - ing a larger investment in the project ( i . e . , the company exercises the option ) . For capital budgeting purposes , a real option must be analyzed multiple times . First , the company must decide if the real option should be purchased . The investment in the real option makes economic sense when the value of the option , as determined by an options valuation algo - rithm , exceeds the cost of the option . Later , if the com - pany has purchased the real option , it must decide if and when to exercise the real option . This second evaluation is based on the difference between the then - prevailing value of the project and the exercise price of the option ( this typically does not involve the use of options anal - ysis , except in the case of a multistaged option invest - ment ' ) . Real options analysis appears to present formidable problems for implementation . To demonstrate the feasi - ble use of the real options approach , and its associated problems , we utilize an example of an option analysis performed recently by Merck . The data in our example are based on information provided to us by Merck during several conversations we held with the finance personnel at the company who performed this analysis . The Project In the early 1990s , Merck used option analysis to evaluate a proposed business relationship with a small biotech - nology company ( Sender 1994 , Thackray 1995 ) . This proposed relationship was called Project Gamma . Merck wanted to enter a new line of business that required the acquisition of a new technology from a small biotech firm code - named Gamma . Gamma had patented its technology but had yet to develop any commercial applications from it . Merck had proposed licensing this technology with the hope that a new product could be developed therefrom . Merck estimated that , after licensing the technology , it would take another two years of research and develop - ment activities before any product would be ready . Be - cause of the preliminary nature of the technology , it was not certain that Merck could , in fact , develop a product , or , if a product were developed , what its commercial pos - sibilities would be . If , after two years , it appeared that the new product was commercially feasible , then Merck would need to construct a plant to produce the product and make the associated marketing , working capital , and other start - up expenditures . These start - up requirements could take another year to complete . Merck negotiated with Gamma to license the technol - ogy . Under the terms of the proposed agreement , Merck would pay Gamma a $ 2 million license fee over a three year period . In addition , Merck would pay royalties to Gamma if and when the product came to market . Merck had the option to terminate the agreement at any time if it was dissatisfied with the progress of the research . The proposed Gamma agreement resembles a call op - tion and can be analyzed using option analysis . It should be noted that this use of an option valuation technique creates the theoretical value of the option ; this theoretical value should be compared to the actual cost of the option , which equals the sum of the license fee plus the R & D cost . For a small upfront fee , Merck purchased the right to benefit from any increase in the value of Gamma ' s technology . However , if this technology failed to produce a commercially viable product , then Merck was under no obligation to build the plant and incur the start - up costs . Additionally , Merck expected the start - up costs to be in - dependent of the future value of the technology . Merck ' s Analysis To calculate the value of the option , Merck used the Black - Scholes model ( Black and Scholes 1973 ) , which requires values for five parameters . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 773 EDWARD H . BOWMAN AND GARY T . MOSKOWITZ Real Options Analysis The first is the stock price . For this project , Merck took the expected present value of the cash flows from the project ( i . e . , the DCF value ) , assuming that the technol - ogy is successful and the plant is built . It is this value that has the variation , or the probability distribution , associ - ated with it over the multiyear period . ( Please note that stock price does not refer to Merck ' s stock price ; instead , it refers to the value of the project . ) The calculation of the stock price excludes both ( a ) the cash flows for build - ing the plant and the associated start - up costs ( these costs are considered in the exercise price portion of the calcu - lation ) and ( b ) the upfront licensing and development costs ( these costs are considered in the cost of the option ) . The stock price calculation is based on Merck ' s best es - timate as to the cash flows which would be generated by the project . This discounted cash flow valuation was made using traditional - net present - value techniques . In addition to the base case scenario , a number of sensitivity cases were run based on different assumptions about the success of the project . The base - case stock price was $ 28 . 5 million ; the four sensitivity case stock prices were $ 22 . 5 , $ 18 , $ 15 . 8 , and $ 15 million , because of the use of a variety of less - favorable assumptions . The exercise price is the cost of building the plant and the associated start - up costs that would be incurred if the decision is made to commercialize the technology . Merck estimated that these costs would total $ 25 . 4 million . The time to expiration is based on the expected time to develop the product and build the factory . This was varied over two , three , and four years ; after four years , it was felt that competing products would enter the market , making entry by Merck unfeasible . The volatility is based on the annual standard deviation of returns for biotechnology stocks . These stocks appear to have a similar level of risk as Project Gamma . A vol - atility of 0 . 5 was used in the analysis and was provided by Merck ' s investment banker . The risk - free interest rate is based on the then - prevailing yield on two - to four - year Treasury bonds . An interest rate of 4 . 5 % was used in the calculation of the option value . Using these inputs , Merck calculated the Black - Scholes option value for the base case scenario and each of the sensitivity cases . Merck also examined the value of the option assuming that it was either a two - year , three - year , or four - year option . These 15 option values ( 5 cases X 3 expiration dates ) were compared to the cost of buy - ing the option , which is equal to the costs of licensing and developing the technology ( these upfront costs total an estimated $ 2 . 8 million ) . Table 1 shows this analysis . This analysis shows that the value of the option exceeds the cost of the option ( except in two cases ) , so Merck Table 1 Project Gamma Option Valuation Analysis Sensitivity Cases Base Case # 1 # 2 # 3 # 4 Common parameters : Stock price $ 28 . 5 $ 22 . 5 $ 18 . 0 $ 15 . 8 $ 15 . 0 Exercise price 25 . 4 25 . 4 25 . 4 25 . 4 25 . 4 Interest rate 4 . 5 % 4 . 5 % 4 . 5 % 4 . 5 % 4 . 5 % Volatility 50 . 0 % 50 . 0 % 50 . 0 % 50 . 0 % 50 . 0 % 2 Year time horizon cases : Option Value $ 10 . 1 $ 5 . 9 $ 3 . 4 $ 2 . 4 $ 2 . 1 Decision Invest Invest Invest Not invest Not invest 3 Year time horizon cases : Option Value $ 11 . 9 $ 7 . 6 $ 4 . 8 $ 3 . 6 $ 3 . 2 Decision Invest Invest Invest Invest Invest 4 Year time horizon cases : Option Value $ 13 . 5 $ 9 . 0 $ 6 . 0 $ 4 . 6 $ 4 . 2 Decision Invest Invest Invest Invest Invest Note . Investment decision is based on the value of the option relative to the $ 2 . 8 cost of purchasing the option . agreed to license the technology and begin working on its commercial development . For example , using the base case scenario and a three - year expiration date , Merck concluded that the Black - Scholes option value was $ 11 . 9 million , and the three - year sensitivity case Number 2 has a value of $ 4 . 8 million , both of which are far in excess of the $ 2 . 8 million cost of the option , leading to a decision to invest . Limitations of the Quantitative Approach to Real Options The user of a quantitative model to value strategic real options faces a number of implementation problems ( Lander and Pinches 1998 ) . These problems generally fall into three categories : finding a model whose assumptions match those of the project being analyzed , determining the inputs to this model , and being able to mathematically solve the option pricing algorithm . We examine the first two problems below . ( See Lander and Pinches 1998 for a discussion of tractability . ) Modeling Assumptions The usefulness of a real options approach to quantitative decision making depends on the extent to which the char - acteristics of the investment proposal being evaluated match the assumptions of the option valuation model be - ing used . The analogy between financial and real options ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 774 EDWARD H . BOWMAN AND GARY T . MOSKOWITZ Real Options Analysis is imperfect , making the use of financial option valuation models problematic for real options . Strategic options of - ten lack some ( and , perhaps many ) of the explicit features of exchange - traded options . These differences determine whether formal option valuation models ( such as the Black - Scholes model ) are useful for managerial decision making . In valuing strategic options , perhaps the most impor - tant assumption concerns the distribution of the under - lying stock price . In the Black - Scholes formula , the stock price is assumed to follow a lognormal distribution , with a constant level of volatility . Over time , the distribution of stock prices gets wider , as the path of potential stock prices increases exponentially at the high end and as - ymptotically approaches zero at the low end . ( Other op - tion pricing models are based on different stock price dis - tribution assumptions ; for example , a mean - reverting process is often used for natural resource - based options . ) The lognormal assumption may be inappropriate for a strategic option . Bollen ( 1999 ) notes that standard tech - niques for valuing real options typically ignore the prod - uct life cycle . For some products , such as semiconductors , the product life cycle has historically been quite short : Sales rise rapidly , and then fall rapidly as a new , better product takes over the market . Given this sales pattern , the standard lognormal distribution is inappropriate for a real options model . 2 In the Merck example , the use of the Black - Scholes model is problematic because of its embedded assump - tions about the distribution of future stock prices . The Black - Scholes model shows that the longer Merck could wait to exercise its option , the more valuable the option becomes ( see Table 1 ) . This increase in value is due to ( 1 ) the use of the lognormal stock price distribution as - sumption , under which the underlying stock price has more time to move to higher values , and ( 2 ) the present value of the exercise price is lower for a longer option . Under a strategic analysis , however , the longer Merck waits to exercise its option , the lower the value of the project . This is because the bulk of the value of the project comes from patent protection . Without the patent , Merck assumed that its competitors would be able to copy the product and drive economic rents down to zero . Because the patent has a fixed expiration date , the longer Merck waits to exercise the option ( by building the plant ) , the less time is left on the patent and the lower the overall economic value . Merck could have adjusted its use of the Black - Scholes model to account for the negative effects of having to wait longer to exercise the option . To do this , Merck would have had to create a separate set of inputs for their two - year , three - year , and four - year analyses . Instead of using the same initial stock price and exercise price for the two - year , three - year , and four - year options , Merck should have performed three separate calculations of the expected stock price assuming that the initial R & D took two years , three years , or four years ( the longer time ho - rizons would have had lower initial stock prices ) . Simi - larly , the exercise prices could be adjusted for the addi - tional inflation factors . These values could then be used with a separate Black - Scholes model for each time frame . Determining the Inputs The effective use of a quantitative model to value a po - tential strategic investment is limited by the need to cal - culate the model ' s inputs . If the inputs are improperly calculated , then the results from using the model will be incorrect . 3 In examining the Merck case , we note that the company faced a number of problems in determining the values of the model ' s inputs . Stock Price . For an exchange - traded option , the current and future stock prices are readily observable to the op - tion holder . These stock prices are meaningful to the op - tion holder in the sense that the option holder can readily buy or sell shares at this price to realize the profit from ( or to cut the loss on ) an option position . In contrast , for real options , the analogous stock price may be unknown and / or unactionable . For example , in the case of an option on a plot of vacant land , the developer does not have an active market to turn to for the current value of the land . Similarly , strategic options in the form of research proj - ects do not have a readily observable stock price , as the outcome of the research is unknown until the project is completed . The lack of a visible stock price may also make it difficult to draw conclusions about the appropri - ate course of action at the time of the option ' s expiration . To calculate the stock price , Merck used its best esti - mate of the project ' s net present value . Therefore , any errors made in the NPV calculation became errors in the option valuation calculation . A common approach to un - certainty when using discounted cash flow techniques is to create a set of sensitivity cases based on different pos - sible outcomes . As noted above , Merck created a base case and then a series of sensitivity cases based on a " what if something went wrong " reasoning . Interestingly , Merck did not produce a series of sensitivity cases assum - ing that things went better than expected . Also , Merck did not attempt to assess the likelihood of the different downside scenarios that it created . Volatility . Merck used the volatility of stocks with a similar risk profile as its input . For many strategic in - vestments , however , there are no publicly traded instru - ments whose risk profile matches that of the proposed ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOl . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 775 EDWARD H . BOWMAN AND GARY T . MOSKOWITZ Real Options Analysis investment . In general , it is becoming easier to find risk profile information . Amram and Kulatilaka ( 1999 ) note that the number of instruments traded on financial mar - kets has continually grown , increasing the chances that a suitable source of volatility ( and sometimes stock price ) information can be found . Time to Expiration . For strategic real options , there is often no set time to expiration . For example , a research project could be extended for a longer period of time , and an investment in a new product distribution system in - definitely retains the option to add additional products . As noted above , the interaction of the time to expiration and the stock price distribution assumptions can produce severe problems in the valuation of real options . Exercise Price . Option valuation models assume that the exercise price of the option is fixed in advance . If this is not the case , then the value of the option changes dra - matically . Many investments have some of the character - istics of real options but do not have a fixed exercise price . For example , Kogut ( 1991 ) suggested that partici - pating in a joint venture gives a firm an option to buy out its partner - a form of a call option . If the venture is suc - cessful , then one partner is likely to exercise this option and purchase the other partner ' s ownership interest . In most joint ventures , the price paid to buy out the partner ' s interest is based on the prevailing fair market value at the time of the buyout . In terms of valuation , this is not an option because the seller ( and not the call option holder ) gets the benefit of any price appreciation . Accordingly , it is inappropriate to use a standard stock option valuation model to evaluate the real option aspect of a joint venture agreement . In the Merck example , the company used the estimated expenditures for building the plant and incurring the as - sociated start - up costs as the exercise price . At the time of exercise , however , Merck will face a number of choices about how to commercialize the technology ( if the R & D is successful ) . For example , Merck could li - cense the technology to another firm , or choose to build a plant of small or large size , etc . These choices affect the calculation of the exercise price . The Role of Option Analysis in Strategic Planning The real options approach to strategic analysis presents planners with a dilemma . Options are a theoretically at - tractive way to think about the flexibility inherent in many investment proposals ; however , the use of the method - ology presents many practical difficulties , which can lead all but the most careful users to make erroneous conclu - sions . The complexity of the options approach can also make it difficult to find errors in the analysis , or overly ambitious assumptions used by optimistic project cham - pions . These practical difficulties may explain the limited use of real options analysis in strategic planning . One approach to solving the problem of misspecified option valuation models is to create a more advanced , customized option valuation algorithm that better matches the characteristics of the investment proposal . The design , development , and computational solution of these ad - vanced option models is often beyond the capabilities of corporate managers . Given the inherent difficulties in cre - ating and solving these models , it is not surprising that advanced real options models are seldom used in strategic decision making . The Merck example shows that the benefit of the real options approach was not simply the improved estima - tion . In fact , there are several technical objections to their estimation , ranging from their application of the Black - Scholes model without correcting for the shortfall in the equilibrium cash flows ( see Kogut and Kulatilaka 1994 for an applied analysis of this model ) to the reasonable - ness of a random walk process to the cash flows . It is important to remember that numerical results are unlikely to be very sensitive to reasonable mathematical specifi - cations of the cash flows ' dynamics . In unpublished es - timations , we found that linear specifications of the option generate values similar to those found by Merck ' s anal - ysis using the Black - Scholes formula ( available upon re - quest ) . Whereas small deviations are worth fortunes in financial markets , they are fairly inconsequential in prod - uct markets . This point echoes Bowman ' s ( 1963 ) finding that the value of many decision rules lies more in the requirement for consistency than in the perennial search for optimal - ity . In fact , the value of real options analysis is often found in the implications for project design rather than in the actual planning evaluation . For Merck , the key insight was to see the license as granting the right to exercise a future investment . Ordinarily , one might want to assign probabilities to good and bad investment scenarios and then take their mean values to estimate cash flows to un - derstand whether to buy the license . The option perspec - tive says that because the investment decision is contin - gent on buying the option , it is not reasonable to evaluate the license decision as if one must then make the future investment . Similarly , options analysis suggests the value of experimentation by breaking up the investment into a series of smaller sequential projects . A formal quantitative valuation model is just one part of the overall strategic planning and capital allocation ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 776 EDWARD H . BOWMAN AND GARY T . MOSKOWITZ Real Options Analysis process . When making these decisions , companies need to perform both financial and strategic analysis ( Myers 1984 ) . Multiple forms of analysis are advantageous be - cause the different methods act as a check on each other . For example , forecasting cash flows is notoriously diffi - cult , making it problematic to use a capital allocation sys - tem that relies solely on financial analysis . Similarly , stra - tegic analysis does not indicate whether the project offers a return that justifies its inherent risk . Within the quan - titative analysis step , strategic planners choose an appro - priate valuation tool ( e . g . , options or DCF ) that matches the investment proposal . Finally , we note that one potential advantage of using the real options analytic approach is that it might change the type of investment proposals that are reviewed . As Kogut and Kulatilaka ( 2001 ) note , an option perspective inverts the usual thinking about uncertainty absorption found in the organizational literature . If options are seen as a legitimate approach to analyzing proposals , then more option - like proposals may be considered . This in - crease can come from both a change in the types of new proposals that are generated ( i . e . , managers look for op - tions to invest in ) , and from rethinking nonoption pro - posals to convert them into options . For example , one company we spoke with indicated that its planners were asked to consider a major capital expenditure to purchase new tooling for some of the firm ' s factories . The planners converted this proposal into an option by suggesting that a pilot program be undertaken ; if successful , then all of the factories would receive the new tooling . Thus , an op - tions approach encourages experimentation and the proactive exploration of uncertainty . As more recent tra - ditional organizational theories argue , this engagement in exploration is indeed a revolution in thinking . Acknowledgments The author wishes to thank William Hamilton , Paul Kleindorfer , Arie Lewin , and Daniel Levinthal for their helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper , and Bruce Kogut for his help on its various drafts . Thanks are due to the Reginald H . Jones Center for financial support . Endnotes ' An example of a multistaged real option is the new drug development process . The drug company must decide whether to continue or aban - don a project after each of the many steps in the process , from initial R & D to preclinical testing to the later phases of testing ( Copeland et al . 1995 , Chapter 15 ) . 2Bollen ( 1999 ) derives an option valuation model that incorporates as - sumptions about a product life cycle . 3Colloquially , this is known as " garbage in , garbage out . " Accepted by Arie Lewin . References Amram , Martha , Nalin Kulatilaka . 1999 . Real Options : Managing Strategic Investment in an Uncertain World . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Astely , W . Graham . 1985 . Administrative science as socially con - structed truth . Admin . Sci . Quart . 30 ( 4 ) 497 - 513 . Black , Fischer , Myron Scholes . 1973 . The pricing of options and cor - porate liabilities . J . Political Econom . 81 ( May - June ) 637 - 659 . Bollen , Nicolas P . B . 1999 . Real options and product life cycles . Man - agement Sci . 45 ( 5 ) 670 - 684 . Bowman , Edward H . 1963 . Consistency and optimality in managerial decision making . Management Sci . 9 ( 2 ) 310 - 321 . - , Dileep Hurry . 1993 . Strategy through the option lens : An inte - grated view of resource investments and the incremental choice process . Acad . Management Rev . 18 ( 4 ) 760 - 782 . Brealey , Richard , Stewart Myers . 1981 . Principles of Corporate Fi - nance . McGraw - Hill Book Company , New York . Cohen , Michael D . , James G . March , Johan P . Olsen . 1972 . A garbage can model of organizational choice . Admin . Sci . Quart . 17 1 - 25 . Copeland , Thomas E . , Philip T . Keenan . 1998 . How much is flexibility worth ? Mckinsey Quart . 2 38 - 49 . - , Tim Koller , Jack Murrin . 1995 . Valuation : Measuring and Man - aging the Value of Companies , 2nd ed . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , New York . Coy , Peter . 1999 . Exploiting uncertainty : The " real options " revolution in decision making . Bus . Week . June 7 . pp . 118 - 124 . Dixit , Avinash K . , Robert S . Pindyck . 1994 . Investment Under Uncer - tainty . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Hurry , Dileep , Adam T . Miller , Edward H . Bowman . 1992 . Calls on high - technology : Japanese exploration of venture capital invest - ments in the United States . Strategic Management J . 13 ( 2 ) 85 - 101 . Kogut , Bruce . 1991 . Joint ventures and the option to expand and ac - quire . Management Sci . 37 ( 1 ) 19 - 33 . - , Nalin Kulatilaka . 1994 . Operating flexibility , global manufac - turing , and the option value of a multinational network . Manage - ment Sci . 40 ( 1 ) 123 - 139 . - - , - - . 2001 . Capabilities as real options . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 5 ) . Lander , Diane M . , George E . Pinches . 1998 . Challenges to the practical implementation of modeling and valuing real options . Quart . Rev . Econom . Finance 38 537 - 567 . Mitchell , C . R . , William F . Hamilton . 1987 . Managing R & D as a stra - tegic option . Res . Management 31 15 - 22 . Myers , Stewart C . 1984 . Finance theory and financial strategy . Inter - faces 14 ( 1 ) 126 - 137 . Nichols , Nancy A . 1994 . Scientific management at Merck : An inter - view with CFO Judy Lewent . Harvard Bus . Rev . 72 ( 1 ) 88 - 99 . Sender , Gary L . 1994 . Option analysis at Merck . Harvard Bus . Rev . 72 ( 1 ) 92 . Thackray , John . 1995 . A Merck case study . Planning Rev . 23 ( 3 ) 47 . Trigeorgis , Lenos . 1996 . Real Options : Managerial Flexibility and Strategy in Resource Allocation . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 777