Jointly published by AkadØmiai Kiad(cid:243) , Budapest Scientometrics , and Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht Vol . 58 , No . 1 ( 2003 ) 183(cid:150)189 Received March 24 , 2003 Address for correspondence : T IBOR B RAUN Information Science and Scientometrics Research Unit ( ISSRU ) P . O . Box 123 , 1443 Budapest , Hungary E - mail : braun @ helka . iif . hu 0138(cid:150)9130 / 2003 / US $ 20 . 00 Copyright ' 2003 AkadØmiai Kiad(cid:243) , Budapest All rights reserved Short communication A quantitative view on the coming of age of interdisciplinarity in the sciences 1980(cid:150)1999 T IBOR B RAUN , a , b A NDR ` S S CHUBERTa , c a Information Science and Scientometrics Research Unit ( ISSRU ) , Budapest ( Hungary ) b Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry , L . E(cid:246)tv(cid:246)s University , Budapes ( Hungary ) c Institute for Research Organization , Hungarian Academy of Sciences , Budapest ( Hungary ) A discipline is any comparatively self - contained and isolated domain of human experience which possesses its own community of experts , with distinctive components such as shared goals , concepts , facts , tacit skills and methodologies . Interdisciplinarity , on the other hand , is the bringing together of distinctive components of two or more disciplines in research or education , leading to new knowledge which would not be possible without this integration . Multidisciplinarity occurs when disciplines work side by side in distinct problems of aspects of a single problem . Interdisciplinarity occurs when disciplines intermesh , integrate and collaborate among themselves . 1 Many published attempts try to break down interdisciplinarity into compnents such as pluridisciplinarity , crossdisciplinarity , and even metadisciplinarity But these subdivisions throw little light on the theory and practice of interdisciplinarity . In academic discourse and practice , there are four realms to which the term (cid:147)interdisciplinarity(cid:148) is most commonly applied . Interdisciplinary knowledge involves familiarity with distinctive components of two or more disciplines . Interdisciplinary knowledge is a necessary , but not sufficient , condition for interdisciplinary research : combining distinctive components of two or more disciplines while searching or creating new knowledge , operational procedures , or artistic expressions . T . B RAUN , A . S CHUBERT : Interdisciplinarity in the sciences 184 Scientometrics 58 ( 2003 ) Interdisciplinary education merges distinctive components of two or more disciplines in a single program of instruction . Interdisciplinary theory takes interdisciplinary knowledge , research , or education as its main objects of study . The degree of interdisciplinarity in any realm may vary , of course . The degree of interdisciplinary integration is characterized according to four criteria : 1 (cid:127) the number of disciplines which are involved ; (cid:127) the degree of similarity between them ( e . g . , mathematics and physics are similar , molecular genetics and electronics are less similar ) ; (cid:127) the novelty and creativity involved in the combination , and (cid:127) the degree of integration . Interdisciplinarity evolves , too . What was interdisciplinary in the past , such as the integration between biology and physics , became a discipline ( e . g . , biophysics ) , with its own set of experts , conferences , journals , professional societies , committees , graduate courses and students , methods and even established professions ( in Germany and Canada , for instance , medical or chemical informatics are now in the undergraduate curriculum ) . Why is it important that multi / interdisciplinary research be pursued ? There are a host of reasons , but only two main ones are here mentioned . First , many research problems are inherently multi / interdisciplinary , and addressing only one or a few of the component disciplines will result in fragmented or perhaps misleading results due to neglect of discipline interdependencies . Further , there are multidisciplinary problems that require an integrated interdisciplinary approach . Even if all of the multiple component disciplines are addressed separately in a multidisciplinary approach , the final research product will not have the same quality as a unified research product resulting from an interdisciplinary study , especially if the interdependencies have strong non - linearities . Second , it is becoming increasingly evident that there are common underlying themes across many research fields . For example , the same equations are used to model phenomena in some very diverse disciplines , such as the modelling of chaotic behavior . Appropriate multi / interdisciplinary research and / or information transfer can allow findings and insights from one discipline to be extrapolated and exploited by another , perhaps very disparate , discipline . 2 The complex problems of interdisciplinarity have been amply discussed in many excellent recent monographs . 1 , 2 T . B RAUN , A . S CHUBERT : Interdisciplinarity in the sciences Scientometrics 58 ( 2003 ) 185 The explosion of knowledge which started in the Enlightenment and Industrial eras , and which continues at terrifying pace in our current Information Era ( the National Library of Medicine estimates that the published medical knowledge is doubling in size every four years ! ) , it is impossible to any single scientist to encompass anything larger than his or her minuscule field or specialty . The consequence is that as knowledge has exploded and fragmented , it has become possible for an individual to comprehend only a few of the fragments . To avoid drowning in the ever expanding ocean of knowledge , each of us typically grasps for one or two floating spars which we clutch as if our life depended on them and thereafter seldom look to the right or left . To look beyond one(cid:146)s own spar is to be overwhelmed by the ocean(cid:146)s magnitude : better to remain ignorant of all but our own tiny province . The study and analysis of interdisciplinarity can and has been done in many ways and form by using a plethora of methodologies . A very visible aspect can however be found in the literature . To get a quantitative sense of this , we have examined , by using the Science Citation Index ( Institute for Scientific Information , Philadelphia ) , the frequency with which the terms interdisciplinarity and multidisciplinarity crop up in the title of journal papers published across a comprehensive range of scientific disciplines . A rapid search has revealed that there were 2443 papers using these terms in the titles of papers published during the 1980 - 1999 period . This shows that these terms are quite frequent in the scientific literature . The total number of papers which appear in the different fields are shown ( by frequency ) in Table 1 . As visible in Table 2 , the leading usage of the terms ( inter - and multidisciplinarity ) is in the US but in the other countries they are also used quite frequently . Table 1 . The usage frequency of the terms inter - / multidisciplinarity in different science fields Field Frequency Life Science 2009 Physics 265 Chemistry 209 Egineering 268 Mathematics 22 T . B RAUN , A . S CHUBERT : Interdisciplinarity in the sciences 186 Scientometrics 58 ( 2003 ) Table 2 . The usage frequency of the terms inter - / multidisciplinarity in papers published from different countries INTER - MULTI - Rank Country # Papers Rank Country # Papers 1 USA 502 1 USA 695 2 Germany 172 2 England 134 3 England 43 3 France 81 4 Canada 32 4 Canada 78 5 Austria 27 5 Italy 51 6 Italy 25 6 Netherlands 47 7 Switzerland 23 7 Germany 37 8 France 20 8 Japan 29 9 Netherlands 14 9 Switzerland 29 10 Australia 13 10 New - Zealand 27 11 Israel 12 11 Australia 24 12 Russia 12 12 Sweden 22 13 Sweden 12 13 Israel 21 14 Belgium 7 14 Scotland 20 15 Spain 7 15 Belgium 19 Figure 1 . The growth of the usage of the terms interdisciplinarity and multidisciplinarity in the science literature 1980 - 1999 T . B RAUN , A . S CHUBERT : Interdisciplinarity in the sciences Scientometrics 58 ( 2003 ) 187 Figure 2 . The growth of the usage of the terms interdisciplinarity and multidisciplinarity in the science literature published in different countries Figure 3 . The growth of the usage of the terms interdisciplinarity and multidisciplinarity in the literature of different science fields T . B RAUN , A . S CHUBERT : Interdisciplinarity in the sciences 188 Scientometrics 58 ( 2003 ) Figure 4 . The exponential growth of the term inter - and multidisciplinarity in the title of science papers For a more comprehensive view we tried to have a view on the growth of the frequency of the terms during the last 20 years and have broken down those data ( presented in Figure 1 ) into the same growth data related to their national ( Figure 2 ) and science field ( Figure 3 ) distributions . On Figure 4 we have plotted the overall growth on a logarithmic scale . We consider very convincing the fact that as reflected in the literature of science , the growth of inter - and multidisciplinarity in the indicated period was truly exponential , with a doubling time of 7 years . As compared to the doubling time for the science journals 3 ( 15 - 20 years ) the growth rate found out here for inter / multidisciplinarity has to be taken seriously . All these results are heavily showing that interdisciplinarity and multidisciplinarity are increasingly diffusing and expanding within the sciences and that the way of using of and thinking according to them seems to become one of the main directions science and research strives to in the near future . T . B RAUN , A . S CHUBERT : Interdisciplinarity in the sciences Scientometrics 58 ( 2003 ) 189 This has been recently accentuated by Metzger and Zare 4 by asking to give increased attention to selecting and funding interdisciplinary research in the US . Their suggestion that interdisciplinary approaches be judged by specially constituted and selected evaluation panels should lessen the chance that high - quality interdisciplinary research and its achievers will be rejected by narrow evaluation of its components . References 1 . P . W EINGART , N . S TEHR , Practising Interdisciplinarity , University of Toronto Press , Toronto , 1999 . 2 . J . T . K LEIN , Interdisciplinarity : History , Theory and Practice , Detroit , MI , Wayne State University Press , 1990 . 3 . J . D . DE S OLLA P RICE , Little Science , Big Science , Columbia University Press , New York , London , 1963 . 4 . N . M ETZGER , N . Z ARE , Interdisciplinary research : From belief to reality , Science , 283 ( 1999 ) 642 .