MILANO , NOVEMBER 30 - DECEMBER 4 , 1992 171 Toward a Rhetoric of Informating Texts Stuart Moulthrop School of Literature , Communication , and Culture The Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , Georgia 30332 - 0165 , U . S . A . Abstract This paper begins by asking why hypertext researchers publish their work in print and compose their hypertexts from previously printed sources . It argues that these practices limit the development of hypertext rhetoric by privileging a discrete or granular model of discourse nodes as stable units connected by purely transitional links . The paper explores the limits of the node / link model , suggesting that links can take on certain properties of nodes and vice versa . Drawing on the phenomenological critique of rationalist mechanism developed by Winograd and Flores , the paper presents an alternative discourse model for hypertext which regards nodes and links in complementarily , as contingent structures subject to conceptual “breakdown . ” Applying this model to actual communication practices , the paper invokes Zuboff’s distinction between “automating” and “informating” applications of technology , outlining a rhetoric based on a constantly evolving textual structure in which object relations remain fluid . A new term is proposed , the informand , to designate the communal , interactive discursive space created by informating systems like hypertext and artificial realities . The paper concludes by urging experimentation with informating practices in hypertext , a move away from print models and toward all - electronic composition . Permission to copy without fee alt or part of this material is granted provided that copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright no - tice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requks a fee and / or specific permission . @ 1992 ACM O - 89791 - 547 - X / 92 / 0011 / 0171 / $ 1 . 50 1 Where are the hypertext ? At the first European Conference on Hypertext , the theorist and developer Mark Bernstein asked , where are the hyperfexts ? Then as now , one could point to a number of experimental ventures ; but important as they are , these examples do not sufficiently answer Bernstein’s challenge . If hypertext equals print in importance and utility , then its advocates should be able to adduce many practical applications in regular use , especially in technical fields . Yet relatively few substantial , long - term applications of hypertext have appeared so far . Hypertext has yet to become the primary medium in any commercial or intellectual community , Even in hypertext research and development itself , progress has been limited . Leaders in the field have produced groundbreaking hypertexts - on - hypertext , but major conferences and research organs do not yet accept hypertextual submissions . What you are now reading , after all , is a traditionally structured , linearly argumentative theoretical paper . Why is this so ? To ask a variant of Bernstein’s question : why isn’t this paper a hypertext ? This is a little like questioning the emperor’s fashion sense — dangerous , because such questions tend to breed . Corollaries here might include the following : Why does the hypertext research community publish its work in print ? Do we stay with this medium simply out of institutional inertia , or does print provide functionality that current hypertext systems do not ? Why would we want to write hyperdocuments instead of linear papers ? How would this shift in media affect audience , address , and message structure ; and how would these changes relate to our practices as a research community ? 172 ACM ECHT CONFERENCE These questions belong to the domain of hypertextual rhetoric — a field which is not very well prepared to address them . Much of the research in this area so far has assumed a close congruence between hypertext and print , generating rhetorics of “reform” which limit the new medium’s departures from earlier conventions [ 3 ; 23 ] . Present rhetorics assume an individual or one - to - many context of address rather than a collaborative social situation . They also also tend to regard texts as closed and definitive objects delivered in some static medium such as print . Neither of these emphases is very useful for hypertext . This paper proposes a new framework , a rhetoric oj informating texts , which acknowledges that both the discursive properties and the social implications of hypertext may differ substantially from those of print . Bolter [ 5 ] has demonstrated the importance of hypertext in the evolution of writing systems . Landow [ 17 ] has explored the convergence of hypertext with contemporary theories of interpretation . Both foresee large changes in the contexts for writing as hypermedia systems facilitate changes in authorship , publishing , and intellectual property . To evolve a rhetoric adequate to these changes , we need to extend Landow’s and Bolter’s analyses . Landow finds consonance between hypertext and poststructuralism , which approaches texts as dynamic , polyvocal networks of expression . A similar emphasis can be found in the cognitive theory of Winograd and Flores [ 32 ] , whose critique of rationalism in the design of information systems describes a tension between static and dynamic structures , formalizations and “breakdowns . ” This perspective has considerable value for an approach that differentiates electronic communication from older technologies . In exploring the social implications of this difference , Bolter relates the development of hypertext to a shift away from absolute hierarchies , especially in information work . In her ethnographic studies of management , Zuboff has explored this transformation extensively . Her discussion of “automating” and “informating” strategies in industry [ 35 ] provides an important link between the issues of hypertextual design raised by Bolter and their likely impact on the 21st - century workplace , particularly in the area of “industrial - strength hypermedia . ” These concepts suggest possibilities for new theoretical understandings of hypertext ; but since rhetoric is a practical field , its contributions cannot be limited to theory alone . The focus of this paper therefore remains Bernstein’s eminently pragmatic question : where are our hypertext ? 2 Here are the hypertext Like most academics and professionals , hypertext researchers depend on established channels of dissemination . We produce unified , monological discourses : research reports , theoretical papers , and books . We thus create an apparent inconsistency . How can we insist on the usefulness of hypertext while we communicate mainly in print ? Until recently it was possible to plead software and hardware constraints , but this disclaimer seems less plausible now that robust hypertext environments are readily available . A number of researchers regularly use hypertext systems in support of their printed work [ 4 ; 6 ; 21 ; 26 ] . More to the point , a large body of technical literature about hypertext is available in hypertextual form . To name three prime examples : the Guide envelope version of Nelson’s Literary Machines [ 24 ] , the Association for Computing Machinery’s Hyperfexf on Hyperfext [ 33 ] , and the ACM Hyperfexf Compendium [ 1 ] . To a certain extent , these projects answer Bernstein’s query . Researchers have produced at least the beginnings of a hypertextual literature , an experimental base from which conventions about form , procedures , and design will emerge . Yet in a sense the current generation of hypertexts - on - hy pertext provide only a partial response to the demand for practical implementations . They are hypertext , to be sure , but hypertext of only one fairly primitive kind . This type might be called the hypertext retro ~ it : as in the ACM Compendium , discourse appears first in print and is reprocessed into linked , electronic form . Thus the paper you are MILANO , NOVEMBER 30 - DECEMBER 4 , 1992 173 now reading is at least implicitly hypertextual ; indeed , all academic writing would be . Such traditional features as citations and footnotes are proto - hypertextual [ 181 . But print - hypertext conversions represent only one possibility . The Cornpendiu w , for instance , contains links and other navigational devices for intertextual movement , but these mechanisms were added as superstructure . Projects like this are irzcu nabu la or cradle works , reflecting the influence of both old and new media [ 22 ] . The history of writing teaches the enormous value of such transitional products ; but we must remember that they prefigure further developments . 3 Going Native In contrast to hypertext incunabula , we might propose a category of native hypertext : writings implemented electronically without first ( or ever ) appearing in print . Bolter’sWriting Space represents an interesting overture to this concept . To some extent Bolter’s work must still be considered an incunabulum since it exists in two modes , both a printed book and a Story space hypertext . But if we extend the logic of the project , it is easy to envision hypertext with no print companions , Some such documents already exist e . g . , the growing number of interactive fictions [ 8 ] , the “cognitive flexibility hypertext” developed by Spiro and Jehng [ 31 ] , and the award - winning instructional webs created in Intermedia [ 17 ] , According to one kind of hypertext theory , however , these texts do not differ significantly from the incunabula . At some level all hypertext , regardless of origin , are functional y identical to print texts . After all , Nelson’s original description of hypertext as “non - sequential writing” [ 25 ] makes little sense in absolute terms . Since we define consciousness in terms of linear time , “non - sequential” experience is inconceivable in anything but mystical terms . Nelson might more accurately have said nondeterminate , since the text he envisions allows writers and readers to substitute multiple alternative sequences for the fixed page order of books . But even a nondeterminate text must retain some kind of intelligible succession if it is to communicate . Just as a scrambled sentence is decodable only if individual words can still be recognized , so polyvalent discourses like hyperdocuments must maintain local coherence within some domain of structure [ 7 ] . We might call this level of basic coherence the grain of the hypertext : an atom of expression whose internal sequencing does not vary even though the context to which it belongs ( the order in which the reader encounters various granular bits ) may change with each reading . In considering granularity , we necessarily assume a dualistic view of hypertext structure according to which hypertext consist partly of transitions ( links which enact arrivat and departure ) and partly of stabilities ( passages of linear discourse or gestalt structures like graphics ) . Granularity complicates any attempt to differentiate native hypertext from incunabula . If hypertext is functionally identical to print within its grains , then retrofit projects might indeed fully realize hypertext’s technical potential . Man y prominent theorists seem to think this way . Yankelovich describes hypertext as “electronic libraries , ” and Bolter foresees electronic encyclopedias or hypertextual “great books” [ 5 ; 34 ] . These descriptions suggests that hypertext is less a writing than an indexing system : not a means of generating discourse but rather of managing information created in monolirtea media . Yet clearly hypertext’s utility extends beyond archiving and retrieval to knowledge transfer [ 11 ; 31 ] and the technology holds great potential for collaborative work [ 12 ] . To understand this potential , we need to revise the conceptual framework within which we discuss hypertext . The strongest impetus for this revision comes not from software designers or textual theorists but from communications prof . ionals . A team of information system engineers at Boeing Computer Services recently issued the following forecast and challenge : “Certainly hypermedia will continue to be an effective way of presenting static reference information . . . . But a larger role for hypermedia requires eliminating the distinction between authors and readers . We assume that all members of engineering teams will be able to create and access information in a shared , distributed environment” [ 20 ; see also 27 ] . Eliminating the distinction between authors and readers implies enormous social changes which the hypertext community has only begun to address . But our reticence in this area is not surprising : by limiting our practical involvement to incunabula , we have insulated ourselves from the transformations latent in hypertext . Even when installed in a 174 ACM ECHT CONFERENCE hypertextual web , an individual paper is still a recognizably singular expression . Its logic , argument , and rhetoric remain essentially unchanged from its print context . To address the challenges envisioned by the Boeing team we will need to alter our discursive practices ; and this change must be guided by a reconceived theoretical basis for hypertext . 4 Beyond granularity So long as we concentrate on a model featuring discrete nodes and links , there is no important difference between native hypertext and retrofitting . But the nodeflink model has notorious limitations , which may explain why much recent research discards it . Halasz quite early on called for node / link aggregates or “composites” to extend the functionality of hypertext [ 14 ] . DeRose [ 9 ] and Parunak [ 28 ] have both outlined taxonomies of link types as bases for implicit ( dynamically computed ) links . Recently developers have proposed discarding the nodellink scheme in favor of a set - based model of direct node intersections or “complex relations” where hypertext begin to resemble sophisticated databases [ 21 ] . To understand these emerging conceptions , we must adopt a new view of hypertextual structure . The granular hypertext model represents what Winograd and Flores call a “rationalistic” approach to communication . “In a complete rationalistic analysis of meaning , ” they note , “we would be able to explicate the meaning of each utterance by showing how it is built up systematically from smaller elements , each with its own determinate meaning” [ 321 . BY analogy we could understand the structure and function of a complex hyperdocument in terms of its discrete parts , the interactions of its nodes and links . Reacting against an immoderate technological optimism , Winograd and Flores urge a different view based on the philosophical traditions of hermeneutics and phenomenology . Though they do not reject mechanistic models , Winograd and Flores argue that these models cannot be designed as closed systems , but rather must be understood as dynamic , mutable , and rich in context . Winograd and Flores’s revised rationalism suggests a new approach to the basic properties of hypertext , beginning with a more complex relationship between nodes and links . In the granular theory of hypertext , links function as transit routes between containers of information . Yet the apparent gap between any two such containers ( the space traversed by the link ) may be every bit as important as the node itself . The link may take on properties of a symbol or signifier in its own right . This insight has been recognized by poststructuralist theorists such as Harpold and Landow [ 15 ; 17 ] as well as by more pragmatic forecasters such as Bolter and Drexler [ 5 ; 10 ] . By the same token , nodes may operate as something other than sites of stable meaning . Their granularity may come into question when they undergo what Winograd and Flores describe as “breakdown” or reversal of cognitive function [ 32 ] . Bolter has suggested that nodes and links exhibit an “oscillation” resembling that of particle and wave in modern physics . Nodes may have link - like properties and links may function in ways that approximate nodes . In the electronic version of Writing Space , Bolter highlights this effect . The illustration comes , appropriately enough , in a discussion of copyright : As long as you keep [ this ] text in the electronic medium , you may also change it as you see fit and hand the changes on to others . You may want to indicate that you have changed the text . On the other hand , you may not , but then your readers will probably falsely assume that the original author was responsible for the text you wrote . All readers should be aware that anything in the text may have been added by someone other than the original author . But of course , this caveat applies in a Borgesian way to the previous sentence as well . [ “Copyright III” ] In fact this whole passage was written by Bolrer , but since readers will not know this , the “Borgesian” paradox remains in effect . The warning about textual intrusions may be the work of an intruder — or was the warning about the warning added on ? Whatever the case , the message is clear : we can expect no clear divisions between original text and later emendations . This writing destabilizes itself as we read , suggesting that what appears to be unified discourse may in fact be deceptively complex . Strictly considered , this instability derives not from the hypertextuality of the writing but from the fact that it resides on a magnetic disk . Any electronic text might be tampered with in similar ways [ 29 ] . But this breakdown effect has special implications for hypertext . Bolter’s caveat asks us to reconsider the MILANO , NOVEMBER 30 - DECEMBER 4 , 1992 175 nature of his text within a matrix of hypertextual connections ; and in doing so we reach the limits of the granular approach to hypertext . According to a nodeflink conception , “Copyright III” represents a knot of linear coherence within the indeterminacy of Bolter’s text . But Bolter’s warning about textual intervention suggests that “Copyright III” is a composite of several writings , one by the “original author , ” but possibly also an undetermined number of others . Far from being an atom or grain of meaning , the node may itself contain implicit links to other bodies of discourse : the node reveals itself as a tissue of links . Much the same thing happens ( without the benefit of Bolter’s elegant demonstration ) when we discover a latent or unimplemented link in a hyperdocument , Suppose that , early in our exploration of a hypertextual user’s manual , we encounter a reference to a component called an “FMDT . ” We query the term as a link anchor , expecting a predefine link to a glossary or a set of specifications , but no such connection exists . Many nodes later , we come upon an exploded view of a “Frequency Modulated Differential Transducer ( FMDT ) ” whose structure and function match the part we read about earlier . If we have access to the authoring system , or if the reading module allows us to create personal links , we may return to the first place we encountered “FMDT” and link it to the exploded view , perhaps adding a note to serve as link anchor ( “SEE EXPLODED VIEW” ) . This action represents a conceptual breakdown in which the apparently stable discourse of the node suddenly reveals a gap or implicit transition . In pragmatic terms , it is also exactly the convergence of authorship and readership that the Boeing engineers fott ? . see . Even if our system did not allow such interventions , we would still recognize the text’s insufficiency y as implemented , which would lead us to question the formal closure of the node in question . There might be no actual link from “FMDT to the exploded view , but in our mentat construction — what the reading theorist Iser [ 16 ] calls our “virtual work” — we would construct one , The textual echo “FMDT thus serves as a latent link anchor , which means that the language of the node itself takes on link - like qualities , suggesting connections to other places in the text . The granularity or local coherence of the node breaks down . We no longer consider the node in its purely granular sense , as a discrete point on the intersection of specified line segments , but rather as part of a plenum of possible connections . Language has never needed hypertext in order to turn slippery , as any party to an oral agreement knows . But the striated , node - link model of hypertext does not accord well with this tendency , since it imposes a static and reductive architecture on expression . By embracing the possibility of oscillation or breakdown in basic hypertextual objects , we come closer to the goal Winograd and Flores set for information science building tools that correspond to actual human experience . If nothing else , the shift we have just outlined allows a crucial change of metaphors . In the striated model the hypertextual node is like a railroad terminus , a static location where paths converge and radiate . In our more complex or phenomenological conception , the hyperdocument is like a body of water over which various navigations are possible . Some of these passages are facilitated by clearly marked channels ( links as discrete objects ) while others are potential , capable of being carried out if the navigator chooses the right combination of wind and current ( computable and latent links ) and possesses the right vehicle ( software that allows such linking ) . This divergent approach is not meant to reconstruct hypertext as a bottomless gulf of ambiguities . It is intended instead to emphasize a productive tension between the multiplicity of language and the definitiveness of implemented structures . The phenomenological approach to hypertext does not displace the granular perspective ; it merely asserts its contingency or susceptibility to breakdown . The text of any given node in a hyperdocument must retain at least local coherence if it is to be intelligible . Likewise the connection of nodes , whether by scripted or implicit links , must conform to a discernible logic of arrivals and departures . True hypertext may be woven together out of many linear documents or collapsed down into a single one . But a hypertextual writing is always more than the simple sum of its parts . It is a network of actual and possible connections whose topology may be partly virtual ( realized in the mind of the reader ) , and is thus open to articulation . Some hypertext schemes may realize this potential better than others . 5 Automating and Informating Texts It remains to see what value these theoretical ideas may have for the practical concerns of rhetoric . How can the tension between simple 176 ACM ECHT CONFERENCE and complex conceptions of nodes and links help us understand the multi - user hypermedia systems now under development at Boeing and elsewhere ? Or to return to the particular focus of this paper , how can it guide our thinking about hypertext as a medium for our professional discourse ? Zuboff’s ethnographic work on industrial applications of information technology [ 351 affords a rich foundation for such inquiries [ 30 ] . Zuboff studied eight business sites that had recently introduced some form of computer mediation ( word processing , electronic mail , computer - aided manufacturing ) in order to automate their work . Automation , Zuboff observes , is an attempt to internalize a body of information . The expertise of workers is transferred into a mechanical system where it can be re - used without significant change . From an informational standpoint , automation aims to simplify work by eliminating , among other things , the need for continual training . But Zuboff discovered an opposite effect : “ [ automating ] technology simultaneously generates information about the underlying productive and administrative processes through which an organization accomplishes its work” [ 35 ] . Systems designed to internalize data actually create outflows . An insurance company , for instance , installs a word processing system whose design was guided by observations of actual workers . The acumen of the workers is assumed into the system as information . But the system monitors operator performance and work flow , giving back a readings on the same factors that went into its design . Instead of encapsulating information , this technology radiates it . Zuboff calls this output “informating” [ 35 ] . According to Zuboff , the informating potential of computer technology poses a challenge to managers . Supervisors in the insurance company might increase efficiency by sharing performance data with employees when formulating work plans . But managers can realize such gains only if they understand that informating systems are not closed loops but open networks . Information must circulate across levels of hierarchy instead of being concentrated at control points . Typists as well as supervisors need to read the keystroke data — a requirement fraught with social complications . If managers resist this change they lock themselves into automating strategies . Zuboff found many such failures in the companies she studied , cases where managers collected information for their eyes only . “In this context managers emphasize machine intelligence and managerial control over the knowledge base at the expense of developing knowledge in the operating work force . They use the technology as a fail - safe system to increase their sense of certainty and control over both production and organizational functions . Their experiences suggest that the traditional environment of imperative control is fatally flawed in its ability to adequately exploit the informating capacity of the new technology” [ 351 . The difference between informating and automating reflects a transformation of industry itself . Informating strategies emerge as businesses move beyond an emphasis on productive efficiency , where automation predominates , to an emphasis on innovation and competitive advantage in which manipulation of information can be as important as the production of material goods . Automating technologies extract productive value ( skill , technique , strength ) from human bodies , investing them in machines in order to make human labor superfluous . Informating technologies — for example electronic mail , bulletin boards , telecommunications networks , or distributed hypermedia systems — may also externalize workers’ activities . But they do not remove workers from decision loops . They represent instead a different application of information technology , one closer to Winograd and Flores’ vision of computers as tools for social interaction , or to Engelbart’s aim of augmenting communication . Automating technologies externalize the work of the body , producing as their ultimate object the robot ( a term which originally meant laborer ) . Informating technologies externalize the work of the mind or of language production , but in an important sense what they yield is not an object . Instead , informating technologies produce an intersection of objects and events , or as Winograd and Flores call it , a “conversation” [ 321 . This conversation will MILANO , NOVEMBER 30 - DECEMBER 4 , 1992 177 inevitably produce text ( or a text ) , meaning a stream of ASCII characters , a definable , granular network of nodes and links , or some other kind of data . We may print out a transcript of an e - mail conference or linearize a hypertext network as a series of conventional documents . But this output stage is only one aspect of informating work . While they are in operation , in the time between our decisions to compile or linearize , informating systems constitute texts in themselves — using text here as poststructuralist theorists define it : a “social space” of communication [ 2 ; 171 . This double sense of text both as object and event has considerable relevance for hypertext and its rhetoric . Parunak notes that “a hyperdocument can be viewed as an expert system whose inference engine is not a computer but a human being” [ 27 ] . We might consider hypertext , in other words , as a kind of AI where the J is you . Bringing human intelligence inside the artifice of information — as in the coordination system for distributed software that Winograd and Flores discuss [ 321 — represents a radical shift from automating to informating . In the classic artificial intelligence model , the system communicates with its user only at initial input and final output . But in collaborative hypermedia designs like those Parunak and the Boeing engineers propose , the system is always open , constantly conveying information both about its own function and about the content residing in it — a process that expands Zuboff’s notion of “informating” but still retains a strong affiliation . In this scheme the technological construct ( e - mail conference , software coordinator , hypermedia design system ) is not an autonomous producer of data but rather a site for information work that is itself composed of information , and which is constantly reconstituted by users’ interactions . It is a social “text” in the sense that a corporation or university is a text — an articulation of statements , relationships , intentions , and transactions . But where can we find these social texts in the real world , and what do they have to do with our search for hypertext ? These questions will be easier to answer once we can say exactly what we are looking for . We will extend Zuboff’s analysis by proposing a name for the discursive space created in the informating process : the informand , An informand is the dynamic network of statements and associations created when workers collaborate by means of informating systems . Examples of informants include drafts of multi - authored electronic documents , discussion threads in network mail , distributed software systems , and collaborative hypertext . Each example involves people acting as both sender and recipient , author and reader . It also involves an externalization of information which each participant can access and modify . This externalization may be expressed as an object , but the object is not the informand , which does not exist in distinction from the articulations or social events which generate it . An informand is always open to further articulations . It is a collection or network of objects in process . The informand applies to social relations the phenomenological approach to hypertext structure we considered earlier . Like the notion of breakdown or oscillation in nodes and links , it lets us understand relationships among authors , readers , texts and processes in a way that preserves dynamism and contextuality . Just as the phenomenological revision of hypertext objects lets us realize the importance of gaps , implications , and contexts , so the informand suggests an approach to hypertext interaction that is not defined by reductive representations . As we have seen , the emerging conditions of computer - mediated collaboration make such an approach particularly desirable . The most valuable sort of rhetoric we can construct for hypermedia may well be one that addresses the in formand : a rhetoric of informating texts . This insight has direct consequences for our use of hypertext in our own research . Our development of experimental hyperdocuments and hypertexts - on - hypertext should continue , but we will probably want to shift our efforts away from projects like the Cornpemiiurn or Writing Space ( or indeed interactive fictions ) in favor of new conceptions . The native hypertext that succeed the first generation of print / electronic hybrids might develop and indeed reside entirely in electronic networks . Discourse on hypertext could be conceived not as 178 ACM ECHT CONFERENCE a series of discrete presentations but as contributions to an ongoing conversation , much as in such existing informants as electronic mail systems . There is of course nothing new in these concepts : they more or less reiterate Nelson’s “2020 Vision” of operational Xanadu , or Drexler’s proposal for an international nanoscience network . But if we are going to explore complex , multi - user schemes for hypertext and hypermedia , we need to revise Nelson’s production schedule . In the next century , the Roaring ( or Informating ) Twenties may need to come a few decades early . The importance of a rhetoric of informating texts , like the importance of hypertext itself , is linked to the development of complex forms of machine - mediated social interaction . As the Boeing engineers remind us , the demands of industry require the rapid evolution of such technologies . Meanwhile theorists of artificial reality and system simulations are at work on complex schemes of virtual presence and software agency . One such theorist , Gelernter , has outlined the application of these systems to everyday life , envisioning “mirror worlds” — finely detailed representations of public data — in which users could inform themselves and transact business . “The Mirror World isn’t a mere information service , ” Gelernter writes , “It’s a place . You can ‘stroll around’ inside a Mirror World . You can meet and ( electronically ) converse with your friends , or random passers - by , chat with a policeman or a teacher or a politician , discover like - minded fellow citizens ; form some idea of the public mood” [ 13 ] . This is a powerful conception , because the mirror world represents artificial reality not as a disembodied fantasy but as a technologized version of the old neighborhood — cyberspace with a human face . As a social medium supporting linked electronic discourse , the Mirror World might be seen as a descendant of today’s ( or tomorrow’s ) hypertext . It is also undoubtedly an informand , a site for exchange of information derived from automated processes . Certainly the logic and rhetoric of the informand apply to artificial realities . Though it involves textual and even hypertextual representations , the mirror world is no more a text ( as object ) than is the stock exchange or the Presidential campaign . It is a text defined by its own transformations , a work always in process . To understand its complexities we may need not just a rhetoric of informating texts , but a sociology or anthropology of the informand . Ideas and technologies like Gelernter’s have enormous implications for our political , economic , and intellectual endeavors . As Zuboff notes : “An important technological innovation is not usefully thought of as a unitary cause eliciting a series of discrete effects . Instead , it can be seen as an alteration of the material horizon of our world , with transformative implications for both the contours and the interior texture of our lives” [ 35 ] . If we wish to understand these new contours of society and the self , we need to comprehend the interactions that are possible through informating texts . Hypertext is a logical place to begin . References [ 1 ] R . Atwcyn , cd . , Hyper ( ext Compendium , Association for Computing Machinery , 1991 . [ 2 ] R . Barthes , The Rustle of Language , Hill and Wang , 1986 . [ 3 ] M . Bernstein , The navigation problem reconsidered , in : E . Berk and J . Devlin , eds . , The HypertextlHypermedia Handbook , McGraw - Hill , 1991 , 54 - 77 . [ 4 ] M . Bernstein , J . Bolter , M . Joyce and E . Mylonas , Architectures for Volatile Hypertext , Hyper ( ext ’91 Proceedings , San Antonio , Texas , December 18 - 21 , 1991 , 243 - 61 . [ 5 ] J . Bolter , Writing Space : The Computer , Hypertext , and the History of Wri ( ing , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 1991 . [ 6 ] J . Bolter , Writing Space [ hyperdocument ] , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 1991 . [ 7 ] P . Carlson , The Rhetoric of Hypertext , Hypermedia , 2 ( 2 ) , 109 - 31 , 1990 . [ 8 ] R . Coover , The end of books , New York Times Book Review , June 21 , 1992 . 1 , 23 - 25 , 1992 . MILANO , NOVEMBER 30 - DECEMBER 4 , 1992 179 [ 9 ] S . DeRose , Expanding the notion of links , Hypertext ’89 Proceedings , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , November 5 - 8 , 1989 , 249 - 59 . [ 10 ] K . E . Drexler , Engines of Creation : The Coming Era of Nanotechnology , Anchor Books , 1987 . [ 11 ] D . Egan , M . Lesk , D . Ketchum , C . Lochbaum , J . Remde , M . Littman , and T . Landauer , Hypertext for the electronic library ? CORE sample results , Hypertext ’91 Proceedings . San Antonio , Texas , December 18 - 21 , 1991 , 299 - 313 . [ 12 ] D . Engelbart , Douglas , Knowledge - domain interoperability and an open hyperdocument system , in : E . Berk and J . Devlin , eds . , The HypertextlHypermedia Handbook , McGraw - Hill , 1991 , 397 - 415 , [ 13 ] D . Gelernter , Mirror Worlds : Or , the Day Software Puts the Universe in a Shoebox . . . How It Will Happen and What it Will Mean , Oxford University Press , 1992 . [ 14 ] F . G . Halasz , Frank G , Reflections on NoteCards : Seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems , Hypertext ’87 Proceedings . Chapel Hill , North Carolina , November 3 - 15 , 1987 , 345 - 67 . [ 15 ] T . Harpold , The contingencies of the hypertext link , Writing on the Edge , 2 ( 2 ) , 126 - 39 , 1991 . [ 16 ] W . Iser , The Act of Reading : A Theory of Aesthetic Response , Johns Hopkins University Press , 1978 . [ 17 ] G . P . Landow , Hypertext : The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology , Johns Hopkins University Press , 1992 . [ 18 ] G . P . Landow and P . Delany , Hypertext , hypermedia , and literary studies : The state of the art , in : P . Delany and G . Landow , eds . , Hypermedia and Literary Studies . MIT Press , 1991 , 3 - 50 . [ 19 ] G . P . Landow , Relationally encoded links and the rhetoric of hypertext , Hypertext ’87 Proceedings , Chapel Hill , North Carolina , November 13 - 15 , 1987 , 331 - 45 , [ 20 ] K . Malcolm , S . Poltrock , and D . Schuler , Industrial - strength hypermedia : requirements for a large engineering enterprise , Hypertext ’91 Proceedings , San Antonio , Texas , December 18 - 21 , 1991 , 13 - 25 . [ 21 ] C . Marshall , F . Halasz , R . Rogers , and W . Janssen , Aquanet : A hypertext tool to hold your ideas in place , Hypertext ’91 Proceedings , San Antonio , Texas , December 18 - 21 , 1991 , 261 - 77 . [ 22 ] J . G . McDaid , Breaking frames : Hyper - mass media , in : E , Berk and J . Devlin , eds . , The HypertextlHypermedia Handbook , McGraw - Hill , 1991 , 445 - 59 . [ 23 ] S . Moulthrop , Beyond the electronic book : A critique of hypertext rhetoric , Hypertext ’91 Proceedings , San Antonio , Texas , December 18 - 21 , 1991 , 291 - 99 . [ 24 ] T . H . Nelson , Literary Machines [ hyperdocument ] . Owl International , 1987 . [ 25 ] T . H . Nelson , Computer Lib / Dream Machines . Tempus Books , 1987 . [ 26 ] C . Neuwirth , Private communication , May 5 , 1992 . [ 27 ] H . Parunak , Toward industrial strength hypermedia , in : E . Berk and J . Devlin , eds . , The Hypertext / Hypermedia Handbook , McGraw - Hill , 1991 . 381 - 97 . [ 28 ] H . Parunak , Don’t link me in : Set based hypermedia for taxonomic reasoning Hypertext ’91 Proceedings , San Antonio , Texas , December 18 - 21 , 1991 , 233 - 43 . [ 29 ] M . Poster , The Mode of Information : Posts tructuralism and Social Context . U . Chicago Press , 1990 . [ 30 ] J . M . Slatin , Reading hypertext : Order and coherence in a new medium , College English , 52 ( 8 ) , 870 - 83 , 1990 . [ 31 ] R . Spiro and J . - C . Jehng , Cognitive flexibility and hypertext Theory and technology for the nonlinear and multidimensional traversal of complex subject matter , in : D . Nix and R . 180 ACM ECHT CONFERENCE Spiro , eds . Cognition , Education , and Multimedia : Exploring Ideas in High Technology , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 1990 , 163 - 205 . [ 32 ] T . Winograd and F . Flores . Understanding Computers and Cognition : A New Foundation for Design , Ablex , 1986 . [ 33 ] N . Yankelovich , cd . , Hypertext on Hypertext [ hyperdocument ] , Association for Computing Machinery , 1988 . [ 34 ] N . Yankelovich , From electronic books to electronic libraries : Revisiting ‘Reading and writing the electronic Book , ’ in : P . Delany and G . Landow , eds . , Hypermedia and Literary Studies . MIT Press , 1991 , 133 - 42 . [ 351 S . Zuboff , In the Age of the Smart Machine : The Future of Work and Power , Basic Books , 1988 .