Microsphere Sensors for Charactering Stress Fields Within Three - Dimensional Extracellular Matrix Xin Ding 1 , 2 # , Moxiao Li 2 # , Bo Cheng 1 , 2 , Zhao Wei 1 , 2 , Yuqing Dong 1 , 2 * , Feng Xu 1 , 2 * 1 The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of Education , School of Life Science and Technology , Xi ' an Jiaotong University , Xi ' an 710049 , P . R . China 2 Bioinspired Engineering and Biomechanics Center ( BEBC ) , Xi ' an Jiaotong University , Xi ' an 710049 , P . R . China # Authors contributed equally * Corresponding authors : fengxu @ mail . xjtu . edu . cn ; dongyuqing @ xjtu . edu . cn Abstract : Stress in the three - dimensional extracellular matrix is one of the key cues in regulating multiscale biological processes . Thus far , noticeable progress in methods and technologies ( e . g . , micropipette aspiration , AFM , and molecule probes ) has been made to quantify forces / stresses in cell microenvironment at different length scales . Among them , the microsphere sensor - based method ( MSS - based method ) has emerged as an advantageous approach over conventional techniques in quantifying stress in situ and in vivo at the cellular and supra - cellular scales . This method is implemented by seven sequential steps , including fabrication , modification , characterization , cell adhesion , imaging , displacement field extraction , and stress calculation . Precise control of each step and inter - tunning between steps can provide quantitative characterization of stress field . However , detailed procedural information associated with each step and process has been scattered . This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of MSS - based characterization of stress fields within 3D ECM , systematically summarizing the principles and research progresses . Firstly , the basic principles are introduced , and the specific experiment and calculation processes of the MSS - based method are presented in detail . Then , recent advances and applications of this method are summarized . Moreover , the selection of materials and techniques for the MSS - based method needs to be adjusted independently according to the research objectives and requirements ( e . g . , specific tissue , length scale , time scale and resolution ) . Finally , perspectives of the limitations and development trends of the MSS - based method are discussed . This specific and comprehensive review would provide a guideline for the widespread application of MSS - based method as an advantageous method for in situ and in vivo stress measurement over both cellular and supra - cellular scale within 3D ECM . Keywords : Cell microenvironment ; mechanical microenvironment ; in situ and in vivo ; quantitative characterization ; MSS - based method 1 . Introduction Mechanical stress within three - dimensional ( 3D ) extracellular matrix ( ECM ) plays essential roles in regulating cellular behaviors [ 1 - 4 ] , sculpting embryonic structures [ 5 - 7 ] , and affecting disease developments [ 8 , 9 ] . For example , in vitro studies have proven that stress affects the arrangement [ 1 ] , movement [ 2 ] , and differentiation [ 3 , 4 ] of cells . The uneven stress distribution guides tissue flow during embryonic development [ 5 - 7 ] and directional cell migrations during tissue regeneration and disease development ( termed as durotaxis ) [ 8 - 10 ] . Solid stress within 3D ECM can also play a crucial role in tumor occurrence and development [ 11 , 12 ] . Interestingly , though originally generated at molecular and subcellular scales [ 13 , 14 ] , the collective stress over cellular and supra - cellular scales can significantly affect the cell behaviors or even tissue properties . In addition , stress over these scales can reflect local comprehensive mechanical characteristics within 3D ECM , such as the cell - cell junction force , cell - ECM adhesion force , and the hydrostatic pressure inside and outside the cells [ 15 ] . Therefore , it is of great importance to characterize stress fields within 3D ECM in situ and in vivo over cellular and supra - cellular scales to understand their effects on the cell behaviors and tissue properties . Various techniques have been developed to measure force / stress within ECM for target objects at different scales [ 16 ] . For example , micropipette aspiration can measure the surface tension of single cells or cell aggregates [ 17 ] . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) [ 18 ] , optical tweezers [ 19 ] , and magnetic tweezers [ 20 ] are applied to measure the mechanical properties ( e . g . , elastic modulus ) of cells or tissues , cell - cell junction force , cell - ECM adhesion force over subcellular scale . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) based tension sensors [ 21 ] , molecule probes [ 22 ] , and DNA probes [ 23 ] have been developed to measure the tension of specific molecules in ECM . Besides these techniques that measure forces ranging from specific molecules to subcellular structures within ECM , traction force microscopy ( TFM ) partially makes up for force / stress measurement over the cellular and supra - cellular scales . It realizes quantitative in vitro measurement of stress in both two - dimensional ( 2D ) [ 24 - 26 ] and 3D ECM [ 27 , 28 ] by culturing cells or cell aggregates in hydrogel matrixes , but conspicuously , cannot achieve quantitative in situ and in vivo measurement of stress fields within 3D ECM [ 16 ] . Recently , microsphere sensors ( MSS ) have emerged and applied to fill the gap of in situ and in vivo stresses measurement within 3D ECM . The incompressible oil microscale droplets ( microdroplets ) were firstly applied to measure local anisotropic normal stress in 3D cell aggregates and live embryonic tissue by observing the microdroplets deformation [ 29 ] . However , the incompressibility of liquid drop makes it impossible to characterize the isotropic normal stress and shear stress . To address this , compressible elastic microscale hydrogels ( i . e . , microgels ) were used to measure the stress fields in 3D cell aggregates under external osmotic pressure [ 30 ] . Later , MSS - based method ( i . e . , microdroplet / microgel ) has been further improved by increasing the measurement precisions in a wide range [ 31 - 34 ] as well as the realizations of spatiotemporal stress measurement [ 35 , 36 ] . Such advances are believed to further promote the explanation of biomechanical mechanisms of biological processes [ 7 ] and expansion of applications in tissue engineering [ 37 ] , disease diagnosis [ 38 ] , and drug delivery [ 39 ] . Although there are review papers on the methods of force / stress measurement over different scales in living tissues [ 14 - 16 , 40 - 46 ] , they focused on summary and comparison of various methods and there is still a lack of review on MSS - based method . Thus , this review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of MSS - based method for the characterization of stress fields within 3D ECM , systematically summarizes the principles and research progresses . Firstly , the basic principles are introduced , and the differential experiment and calculation processes of the MSS - based method are presented in detail . Then , recent advances and applications of this method are summarized . Moreover , the selection of materials and techniques for the MSS - based method needs to be adjusted independently according to the research objectives and requirements ( e . g . , specific tissue , length scale , time scale and resolution ) . Finally , perspectives of the limitations and development trends of the MSS - based method are discussed . This specific and comprehensive review would provide a guideline for the widespread application of MSS - based method as an advantageous method for in situ and in vivo stress measurement over both cellular and supra - cellular scales within 3D ECM [ 30 , 35 ] . 2 . Principles of microsphere sensor - based stress measurement The deformation ( including volume change and shape distortion ) of an object can reflect its stress state . Therefore , the stress within 3D ECM can be deduced by measuring the deformation of injected microspheres which is due to forces exerted by surrounding objects ( i . e . , cells and ECM ) . Based on this , the general processes of MSS - based stress measurement within 3D ECM are shown as follow ( Fig . 1 ) : Firstly , microspheres are fabricated with the size similar to cells ( ) . Before injection into the tissue , the microspheres need to be surface modified for 10 ~ 20 μ m cell adhesion and labeled with fluorescent molecules for observing its deformation . With the combination of the deformation information and the characterized mechanical properties in vitro , the stress fields of the MSS can be calculated in situ and in vivo . Thus , through the whole process , both in vitro and in vivo stress fields within 3D ECM can be characterized . Based on the compositions and materials , MSS can be divided into liquid microdroplet sensors ( MDS ) and solid microgel sensors ( MGS ) . 2 . 1 Principle of microdroplet sensor - based method The most frequently used materials in MDS are fluorinated oil microdroplets . Fluorinated oil is an incompressible flowing liquid , and the oil microdroplets can only undergo shape distortion under stress from the initial spherical shape , without volume change . Thus , the MDS - based method can only measure the anisotropic component of the normal stress ( i . e . , anisotropic normal stress ) on the microdroplets , but not the isotropic normal stress and shear stress . Combining the surface shape ( local curvature ) of MDS after deformation with the interfacial tension between the MDS and the surrounding medium ( ECM ) , the local anisotropic normal stress fields surrounding the MDS within 3D ECM can be measured as [ 29 ] : ( 1 ) 1 ( , ) 2 ( , ) 2 ( ( , ) ) nn H H R          where is the anisotropic normal stress surrounding the MDS using angular spherical nn  coordinates ( and ) ; is the interfacial tension between the MDS and the surrounding    medium , which can be characterized in vitro ; is the anisotropic component of the local H  mean curvature of the MDS surface , which is equal to the difference between the local mean curvature and the initial curvature of the microdroplet ( 1 / R , R is the radii of the un - deformed MDS ) and can be obtained from images of MDS within 3D ECM . 2 . 2 Principle of microgel sensor - based method MGS made of biocompatible microgels display linear elastic mechanical properties under the small deformation ( strain below 10 % ) , which can be used to measure stress fields accurately within 3D ECM . The stress fields surrounding the MGS within 3D ECM can be obtained according to the constitutive equation in solid mechanics [ 31 ] : ( 2 ) 2 Tr ( ) G    σ ε ε I where and are the stress field and strain field surrounding the microgel sensor , σ ε respectively ; and are Lame parameters , which can be characterized in vitro . G  3 . Protocols for Microsphere sensor - based characterization of stress fields within 3D ECM MSS - based characterization of stress fields within 3D ECM involves a number of technologies and methods , all of which have their specific advantages for certain situations . This section introduces the processes and related techniques of MSS - based method , focusing on choosing suitable experimental techniques and calculation method to meet the requirement for specific conditions . 3 . 1 Material selection To quantitatively measure the stress fields within 3D ECM over cellular and supra - cellular scales in situ , the fabricated MSS should meet the property requirements as follow : ( 1 ) Good biocompatibility , which can be directly injected into the tissues and adhere to the cells without toxicity , irritation , and local inflammation . ( 2 ) Controllable size , which can be fabricated into microspheres with appropriate size ( close to cell size 10 - 20 μm ) to " mask " the existence of MSS in ECM and avoid fibrous capsule and other immune rejection [ 31 , 35 ] . ( 3 ) Adjustable mechanical properties . The interfacial tension of MDS or the stiffness of MGS should be in an appropriate range corresponding to the range of the stress to be measured within the ECM ( 10 Pa - 5 kPa ) , which enables the high measurement accuracy of the stress fields ( Table 1 ) . ( 4 ) Non - degradability , which ensures that the mechanical properties and shape of the MSS are relatively unchanged during long - term measurement . ( 5 ) Stability to other stimuli , which refers the deformation of the MSS is only affected by mechanical factors while other microenvironmental cues ( e . g . , temperature , light , and pH ) cannot cause the deformation of the MSS itself during the measurement . At present , MDS are usually fabricated by biocompatible fluorinated oil [ 7 , 29 , 47 ] , and MGS are fabricated by various solid hydrogels with good biocompatibility , including polyacrylamide ( PAA ) [ 30 , 32 , 33 , 35 , 36 , 48 ] , alginate [ 31 ] , polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) [ 49 ] , and polyethylene glycol diacrylate ( PEGDA ) [ 34 ] . All these hydrogels have appropriate mechanical properties . To be specific , surfactants can be added to the solution to change the interfacial tension of MDS [ 7 , 29 ] and the concentration of monomer and crosslinker in the precursor solution can be altered to ensure MGS with suitable stiffness [ 31 , 48 ] . The re - characterization of the MSS also shows that the mechanical properties of MSS itself have not changed , nor has it been degraded , after being injected into the tissue [ 31 , 35 ] . Moreover , environmental parameters such as temperature and pH do not affect the shape of the microsphere sensor [ 31 , 35 ] . 3 . 2 Fabrication methods Both MDS and MGS are fabricated by emulsification reaction , which typically refers to the mixture of two immiscible liquid phases ( i . e . , oil and water ) . Under external disturbance , the precursor solution ( dispersed phase ) can be distributed in the form of microdroplets in the other solution ( continuous phase ) . According to different biomaterials , the fabricated microdroplets can be used as MDS or crosslinked into MGS under suitable environmental conditions . A variety of emulsification reaction methods have already been used to fabricate MSS , including direct injection , stirred emulsion , microfluidic emulsion and membrane emulsification ( Fig . 2 , Table 2 ) [ 50 ] . The direct injection method fabricates microdroplets by injecting a minimal amount of the dispersed liquid phase directly into the continuous liquid phase ( e . g . , biological tissue ) ( Fig . 2a ) [ 7 ] . The size of the microdroplets can be adjusted by controlling the microsyringe diameter and injection pressure [ 29 ] . Direct injection method is suitable for experiments where only a minimal amount of microdroplets is needed , and the fabricated microdroplets can be used as sensors directly for stress measurement . Stirred emulsion method directly mixes and vortex two immiscible liquid phases to form microdroplets of various sizes ( Fig . 2b ) . This method is the most primitive and straightforward method to fabricate large amounts of microdroplets without any high - power equipment . However , the size distribution of the microdroplets generated by stirred emulsion affected by the vibration amplitude is uneven [ 29 , 30 , 35 ] . Microfluidic emulsion method based on the microchannels ( ) can control the fluid precisely . Two immiscible liquid phases are introduced into 10 - 100 μ m the microfluidic channel , respectively , in which the dispersed phase will be interrupted by the continuous phase at the flow - focusing junctions due to the shear force and liquid / liquid interfacial tension and finally generate microdroplets ( Fig . 2c ) . The uniform and size controllable microdroplets are fabricated in high throughput via adjusting the flow rate of two fluid phases [ 31 , 48 ] . Membrane emulsification method guides the dispersed liquid phase to pass through a porous glass membrane ( SPG - membrane ) with uniform pore size under pressure to generate microdroplets in the continuous liquid phase ( Fig . 2d ) . The microdroplets generated by membrane emulsification usually show mono - dispersity with high throughput [ 33 ] . This section mainly focuses on the fabrication methods of MSS in the experimental part of existing stress characterization researches . Additionally , there are some other microdroplet fabrication methods [ 50 ] ( e . g . , lithography , electrohydrodynamic spraying , etc . ) developed recently , which can also provide readers with choices according to their specific experimental needs . 3 . 3 Microsphere modification The fabricated microspheres require proper modifications to serve as eligible sensors to characterize the stress fields within 3D ECM . Particularly , the transmission of force / stress from the surrounding objects to the MSS is the basis of MSS - based method . Thus , the microspheres need to be modified with corresponding adhesion proteins to contact the surrounding cells and transmit stress . Furthermore , fluorescent modification of microsphere is also essential to optically capture its position and deformation information within ECM . 3 . 3 . 1 Adhesion modification Adhesion junctions between MSS and surrounding cells in tissue can be established by modifying the relevant adhesion proteins on the MSS surface as adhesion receptor ligands . These junctions are also important structures for the transmission of forces in the tissue , through which the surrounding cell - generated forces can be transmitted to MSS , resulting in the deformation of MSS . According to the junction modes between cells and surrounding cells / ECM under physiological condition in different tissues , corresponding adhesion proteins can be selected to modify microspheres so that the MSS can establish cell - ECM adhesions or cell - cell junctions with surrounding cells in the tissues [ 44 ] . For instance , RGD peptide ( Arg - Gly - Asp ) , which can be chemically coupled to the surface of microspheres , is commonly used to build integrin binding sites ( cell - ECM adhesion ) between MSS and surrounding cells [ 29 , 31 ] . In addition , collagen [ 35 ] , fibronectin [ 30 ] , and poly - L - lysine [ 48 ] are also used to modify the microgels surface to build cell - ECM adhesions . Additionally , Biotin - labeled mE - cadherin antibodies can be modified on the microsphere surface to build cadherin binding sites ( cell - cell junction sites ) between MSS and surrounding cells [ 29 ] . 3 . 3 . 2 Fluorescent modification Fluorescent modification of MSS is achieved by adding fluorescent molecules to the precursor solution or coupling fluorescent molecules on the surface of the fabricated microspheres . The fluorescent molecules can be embedded into MSS through either physical constraint or chemical coupling . Physical constraint requires that the size of the fluorescent molecules is larger than the pore size of the MSS to avoid the diffusion of fluorescent molecules into surrounding environment during measurement [ 30 , 31 , 34 ] , such as the dextran - FITC fluorescent molecules of large molecular weight in PAA MGS . Additionally , the chemical coupling realizes the fluorescent labeling by directly establishing a chemical bond between the fluorescent molecule and the MSS [ 29 , 31 , 35 , 51 ] or indirectly forming a complex between the fluorescent molecule and the adhesion protein [ 33 , 48 ] . 3 . 4 Characterization of mechanical properties of microsphere sensors The related mechanical properties of MSS are essential to the accurate stress fields calculations based on the deformation of the MSS , including the interfacial tension of the MDS and the elastic modulus and Poisson ' s ratio of the MGS . Here , we summarize a variety of methods for characterizing the mechanical properties of MSS in vitro , with particular focus on six methods commonly used in the MSS - based method ( Fig . 3 , Table 3 ) . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) ( Fig . 3a ) : AFM uses a cantilever with known stiffness to indent an object at a defined speed . The deformed object will exert a resist force on the cantilever , which can be measured through laser deflection on the cantilever tip . Then the mechanical properties of the object can be quantified by fitting the resist force - indentation curve to the Hertz contact model [ 18 ] . AFM - based indentation tests can be used to characterize the elastic modulus ( usually Young ' s modulus ) and Poisson ' s ratio of MSS . E  Osmotic pressure test ( Fig . 3b ) : Under the osmotic pressure of solution ( hydrostatic pressure ) , an object will be expanded or compressed for maintaining its spherical shape , and the bulk modulus of the object can be obtained according to the relationship between the osmotic K pressure and its volume change . Based on this , the osmotic pressure test can be used to characterize the bulk modulus of MGS directly by selecting different concentrations of dextran solution to quantitatively control the osmotic pressure . Real - time deformability cytometry ( RT - DC ) analysis ( Fig . 3c ) : In RT - DC analysis , the object passes through the narrow microfluidic channel at a speed of about 10 cm / s and deforms under the action of fluid force [ 48 ] . The elastic property of each object can be obtained quantitatively by analyzing its deformation information in this process . Thus RT - DC analysis can be used to characterize Young ' s modulus of MGS with high throughput . E Tensile test ( Fig . 3d ) : When an object with fluorescent particles is stretched in a uniaxial or biaxial direction , its shape change ( strain ) can be observed under the fluorescence microscopy . Then the Poisson ' s ratio of the object can be calculated according to Poisson ' s ratio = strain  ( vertical ) / strain ( tensile axis ) , and the Young ' s modulus of the object can also be obtained E from the stress - strain curve during this process . Tensile test can only be used to directly characterize the Poisson ' s ratio and elastic modulus of hydrogels in macroscopic ( HIM ) but not MGS due to the spherical shape of MGS . Rotary rheometer test ( Fig . 3e ) : Rotary rheometer applies a certain torque or strain to an object to make it produce shear motions , based on which the object ' s elasticity , viscosity , or viscoelasticity can be characterized at a certain temperature . Due to the large size and flat bottom of the probe , rotary rheometer test can only be used to directly characterize the mechanical properties of HIM but not MGS . The viscoelasticity of the HIM can be characterized through the test by outputting the elastic ( storage ) shear modulus and 1 G viscous ( loss ) shear modulus under different loading frequencies . 2 G Ring hanging method ( Du Nouy Ring Method ) ( Fig . 3f ) : In ring hanging test , a ring is placed below the interface of two immiscible liquid phases , and the interface is declined until it contacts the ring to generate a liquid film . Then continuously lower the interface to stretch the liquid film , while the increased force on the ring is recorded . The interfacial tension  between these two liquid phases can be obtained by analyzing the force on the ring and the distance between the ring and interface [ 52 ] . Additionally , the homogeneity of single MGS and uniformity between multiple MGS need to be characterized through refractive index analysis and size analysis , respectively , to ensure the same homogeneous mechanical properties of multiple MGS , which is critical for the application of microspheres as stress sensors [ 33 ] . 3 . 5 Microsphere injection and cell adhesion The modified MSS require appropriate methods to be injected into ECM and adhered to surrounding cells . In general , there are two ways for MSS injection : direct tissue mixing and microinjection . When the MSS is used in in vitro biological models ( cell aggregates or multicellular spheroids ) , they can be directly mixed with the cell suspension . In this way , the MSS will be directly embedded within 3D ECM after cell proliferation to form cell aggregates or multicellular spheroids . However , if the MSS are used in ex vivo or in vivo tissues such as the embryonic tissues , they need to be microinjected into the tissues . In the microinjection process , the solution with appropriate MSS density is injected into the target tissues by microsyringe with a capillary ( diameter ~ 10 μm ) . The volume of the solution injected into the tissues can be controlled by adjusting the injection pressure and time . No matter which method is adopted , the ratio of MSS to cells should be regulated according to the specific needs of the experiment . Too few MSS will reduce the measurement amount of stress fields , while too many MSS may lead to abnormal physiological activities of the tissues and excessive changes in the original stress fields in ECM , which may reduce the accuracy of measurements [ 35 ] . 3 . 6 Microsphere imaging and image processing The MSS will be deformed under stress fields within 3D ECM after microinjection , and their deformation information is crucial to the stress characterization . The deformation of MSS is determined by comparing two images of its deformed state and stress - free state ( original sphere , undeformed state ) . Hence , it is vital to select an appropriate method to obtain the image of MSS in undeformed state as reference . When the MSS is used to measure stresses in vitro , the undeformed state of the MSS is generally obtained by disrupting the cellular structures related to force generation and transmission , or lysing cells . For example , Blebbistatin and cytochalasin D can be used to inhibit myosin II activity and actin polymerization respectively , and sodium dodecyl sulfate can be used to cell lysing [ 29 ] . When the MSS is used to characterize stress fields ex vivo or in vivo such as in embryonic tissues , its initial state after microinjection into the tissue is usually selected as the undeformed state [ 31 ] , which may cause uncertainty and error of stress characterization due to the randomness of the selected time [ 32 ] . Both the images of deformed state and undeformed state of MSS need to be further processed to be used in stress calculation . Related image processing methods include deconvolution of these images , 3D reconstruction of MSS from 2D image stacks , and so on [ 29 , 33 , 34 ] . Different image processing methods should be used according to the corresponding experimental needs . 3 . 7 Extraction of displacement fields of microsphere sensors When the MDS is used to characterize stress fields within 3D ECM , only the local curvature of the deformed MDS surface is needed , which can be obtained by analyzing its 3D reconstruction shape ( Fig . 4a ) . Then the stress fields on the MDS surface , which represents the local stress fields surrounding the MDS within 3D ECM , can be calculated from Eq . ( 1 ) combined with the interfacial tension between the MDS and surrounding medium . However , the MGS - based characterization of stress fields is based on the stress - strain constitutive relation . Thus , it requires the following steps to realize the stress characterization within 3D ECM : ( a ) Extraction of displacement fields of the MGS from the images of its deformed state and undeformed state ; ( b ) Calculation of stress fields from the displacement fields according to the constitutive equation and geometric equation . A variety of calculation methods can be used to extract the displacement fields of MGS from the images of its deformed and undeformed state . We can categorize them as simplified axisymmetric displacement field , directly extraction of the real displacement field , indirectly derivation of real displacement field and hypothetical displacement field . In general , these approaches have their own advantages and limitations which are suitable for different specific experimental needs . Simplified axisymmetric displacement field . The displacement field of MGS can be simplified to an axisymmetric displacement field according to the stress characteristics within 3D ECM when only the local average stress surrounding the MGS requires to be measured ( Fig . 4b ) . For example , the deformed MGS have been fitted as spheres when the stress distribution pattern was studied in multicellular spheroids under external osmotic pressure [ 30 ] , and the relative volume change from undeformed state to deformed state was selected to calculate the local average stress . Moreover , the shape of the deformed MGS were simplified as ellipsoids when the stress distribution pattern was studied in multicellular spheroids under the physiological state [ 35 , 36 ] . Direct extraction of real displacement field . In this method , fluorescent nanoparticles are constraint into the MGS and their position changes observed before and after MGS deformation by particle tracking technique can directly provide the real displacement field inside the MGS with high accuracy ( Fig . 4c ) [ 31 ] . This method requires to ensure that the fluorescent nanoparticles do not slip inside the MGS , that is , the relative position changes of the fluorescent nanoparticles are only caused by the deformation of the MGS . This premise can be ensured by the fact that the pore size of the sodium alginate MGS ( ~ 5 nm ) is much smaller than the particle sizes of the fluorescent nanoparticles ( ~ 200 nm ) . Indirect derivation of real displacement field . Different from physically bound fluorescent nanoparticles , the commonly used fluorescent molecules can only provide the surface shape information of the MGS . However , the surface displacement field is not only determined by the shape of the MGS , because multiple displacement fields may lead to the same shape . To extract real displacement field of MGS from its shape , the mechanical principles ( such as equilibrium equation ) and specific boundary conditions can be combined ( Fig . 4d ) [ 33 , 34 ] . In the small strain linear elastic problem , the equilibrium condition of isotropic elastic continuum ( MGS ) can be expressed by displacement field : u ( 3 ) 2 ( ) ( ) 0 1 2 G G         u u where is shear elastic modulus and is Poisson ' s ratio of the MGS . Eq . ( 3 ) exhibits the G  mechanical principle that the real displacement field of MGS must satisfy , otherwise , the displacement field cannot exist . Based on this , the displacement fields which accord with Eq . ( 3 ) can be selected from the observed shape of the MGS , and the real displacement field of them can be further deduced through the specific boundary conditions . Hypothetical displacement field . In contrast to the extraction of the real displacement field , the displacement field of MGS can also be assumed to further calculate stress fields within 3D ECM ( Fig . 4e ) . For example , the displacement field of the deformed MGS can be assumed to have only radial displacement [ 32 ] . Hence , the assumed displacement field can be directly obtained from the shape of the deformed MGS . Although this assumption displacement field greatly reduces the difficulty of extraction , it will cause errors in the stress calculation due to the deviation between the assumed and real displacement field , especially when shear stress is calculated . After extracting displacement fields of the MGS , the strain fields of the MGS can be deduced according to the relationship between strain field and displacement field of an isotropic elastic continuum ( i . e . , geometric equation ) as follows : ( 4 ) T 1 = ( ) 2    ε u u where is the displacement field of the MGS , which can be obtained from images of the u MGS within 3D ECM . 3 . 8 Calculation of stress fields For the MDS , local anisotropic normal stresses distribution is calculated from the local curvature of the deformed MDS and the interfacial tension between the MDS and surrounding medium according to Eq . ( 1 ) . Moreover , when the MDS are partially embedded within ECM , both the anisotropic and isotropic normal stress can be measured [ 29 ] . A software STRESS of MDS - based characterization of stress fields has also been developed to realize the human - computer interaction that directly yielding stress results from the images of deformed MDS [ 53 ] . However , the stress measurements based on MGS still require appropriate methods to calculate the stress within ECM after the strain fields are obtained by using related methods in section 3 . 7 . These stress calculation methods include the calculations of the average stress of MGS , which aims to local average stress measurement based on the simplified axisymmetric displacement field , and the calculations of stress distribution on MGS , which aims to specific stress distribution measurement on MGS based on the real or assumed displacement field . Calculations of the average stress of MGS . Some methods can be used for the calculation of local average stress exerted on the MGS based on the simplified axisymmetric displacement fields and the mechanical properties of MGS . For example , the average hydrostatic stress can be measured by combining the volume change of MGS and its bulk modulus [ 30 ] . Moreover , K after fitting the MGS as ellipsoids in the multicellular spheroids and hydrogel cultures , the local average radial stress and axial stress exerted on MGS can be measured by using FEM [ 35 ] and theoretical calculations [ 36 ] , respectively . Additionally , MDS - based characterization of the average anisotropic normal stress within 3D ECM can also be carried out by similar methods . For example , the average anisotropic normal stress was calculated by fitting the fluorinated oil MDS with ellipsoids , combined with the interfacial tension of the MDS [ 7 ] . Calculations of stress distribution on MGS . Based on the mechanical properties of the MGS ( including elastic modulus and Poisson ' s ratio ) characterized in vitro , the stress distribution on MGS can be obtained according to the Eq . ( 2 ) after the extractions of the real or assumed displacement field on the MGS . In this way , the local stress fields of the MGS within 3D ECM are measured . 4 . Emerging applications of microsphere sensors for characterizing stress fields within 3D ECM Benefiting from the developments of material and physics science , the methods of MSS fabrication and stress calculation are sufficiently collected above . However , MSS - based characterization method as an emerging technique applied in stress measurement for biological research requires interdisciplinary background which drives up the entry threshold . Thus , some representative results by MSS - based method are significant for the followers to inspire many application fields although their research objects are independent indeed . In this section , we mainly highlight the representative results based on MSS - based method which have directive sense or breakthrough and then briefly introduce other relevant research progresses . In order to better classify and exhibit the results , we separated the MSS - based characterization of stress fields within 3D ECM in supra - cellular / tissue and cellular scales , respectively . 4 . 1 Characterization of spatiotemporal distribution pattern of stress fields within tissues A variety of biological phenomena ( e . g . , tissue flow , tissue structures sculptures , tissue arrangement ) often involve the uneven spatial distribution or change over time of stress fields within / between tissues . At this time , only the average stresses at different spatiotemporal points within tissues are needed . Thus , the MSS can be taken as a whole , and the local average stress can be obtained according to its average deformation . Then the method in section 3 . 7 can be used to simplify the deformation of the MSS , and the method in section 3 . 8 can be used to simplify the calculation the local average stress exerted on MSS within 3D ECM . The representative results and relevant research progresses are introduced as below ( Fig . 5 ) . It is firstly noteworthy that PAA MGS have been utilized to measure the spatial distribution of internal stress fields during spheroid formation ( physiological conditions ) ( Fig . 5a ) . The remarkable results demonstrated that only several cell layers at the spheroid surface were under tensile stress , while the spheroid is mainly under compressive stress . This spatial distribution pattern of stress fields exists in cell spheroids formed through the cell growth ( aggregates and single ) and is caused by differences in cell density and elongation ( or compression ) in different regions . The tensional " skin " generated through cell - driven mechanical compaction at the spheroid surface enables the spheroid stable under a compressive stress profile , and indicates that the formation process of tissues is crucial to their specific mechanobiological functions [ 35 ] . In this study , the deformed PAA MGS was fitted with an ellipsoid to characterize the average radial and circumferential stress locally . Especially , the established FEM of the spheroid in which the stiffness of the outer layer is 2 times higher than that of the inner layer , and the stress distribution pattern of FEM is consistent with the spheroid in the experiment . Except for the remarkable achievements presented above , some related advances to measure stress within tissues are also developed . For instance , the 40 μm fluorinated oil MDS were microinjected into the zebrafish embryos and applied to measure the endogenous stresses along the anteroposterior axis over cellular and supra - cellular scales . The results proved that the stresses at supra - cellular scale , rather than cell scale stresses , guide morphogenetic flows from the proliferation region to the mature region in the mesoderm [ 7 ] ( Fig . 5b ) . Moreover , the spatiotemporal distribution of the anisotropic normal stress fields in the mesenchymal cell aggregates was further studied by using MDS - based method , which shows considerably increase of stresses in temporal but not spatial during aggregates compaction and growth [ 47 ] ( Fig . 5c ) . Similarly , employing PAA MGS can also obtain the spatial distribution of isotropic normal stresses in spherical colon carcinoma cell spheroids under external osmotic pressure . The distribution pattern of stress fields in cell spheroids , with a stress rise towards the core , was connected with the anisotropic arrangement of cells by observing the arrangement directions of the cell centrosomes in the cell spheroids . Additionally , it is found that cells on the surface of spheroids changed from round to pear - shaped under the external osmotic pressure , acting as a stress shield , which leads to a rapid drop of stresses at the edge of the cell spheroids . However , the PAA MGS cannot be used to measure the stress fields within the cell spheroids under physiological conditions , which ( below 1 kPa ) is much lower than the applied osmotic pressure ( ~ 15 kPa ) , due to their large elastic modulus [ 27 ] ( Fig . 5d ) . Similar to the stresses measurement in multicellular spheroid cultures , MGS can also be used to measure the distribution pattern of stresses acting on tumor spheroids in the hydrogels as ECM [ 36 ] ( Fig . 5e ) . 4 . 2 Characterization of the stress variations surrounding the microsphere sensors Different from section 4 . 1 , the majority of cell behaviors ( e . g . , cell differentiation , migration , polarization , cell - cell and cell - ECM interactions ) often involve the uneven stress exertion pattern surrounding cells . At this time , it is necessary to characterize the stress variations surrounding the cells , that is , the stress distribution pattern generated and applied by the cells surrounding the MSS needs to be measured on each point of the MSS surface . Then the methods in section 3 . 7 can be used to obtain the precise displacement field of the MGS , and the method in section 3 . 8 can be used to calculate the accurate stress fields of the MGS . It is also necessary to obtain the curvature at each point on MDS surface for the MDS - based method . The representative results and relevant research progresses are introduced as below ( Fig . 6 ) . It should be highlighted at the beginning that the anisotropic normal stresses in the 3D mammary epithelial cell aggregates were firstly quantified as 3 . 4 kPa by directly mixing MDS and cells , which are more than two folds larger than stresses generated by cells of embryonic tooth mesenchyme , either within 3D cell aggregates or in living tooth mandible explants . Moreover , the maximum relative deformations of the microdroplets were found to be corresponded to the average cell sizes whether in the mammary epithelial cell aggregates or tooth mesenchymal cell aggregates , which indicates that the anisotropy in the cell aggregates occurs on the cellular scale [ 29 ] . This is also the first time that the MSS - based method has been proposed and applied to the stress characterization within 3D ECM ( Fig . 6a ) . Associated with the pioneer progress mentioned above , characterizing stress fields around microspheres in cellular scale becomes feasible . For example , the real displacement fields of MGS were extracted by binding fluorescent nanoparticles in sodium alginate MGS and tracking their position changes , which can help measure stresses accurately between living cell layers . To be specific , the average compression stresses are 570 Pa in cell layers and 360 Pa in tumor - repopulating cell spheroids . The stresses in zebrafish embryos at different growth stages were also measured , which found inhomogeneous spatiotemporal distributions of the local normal and shear stresses in the early - stage zebrafish embryos . The 3D compressive stresses are transmitted via intracellular actomyosin forces but not via mature focal adhesions , which was different from the cell aggregates in the 2D culture [ 31 ] ( Fig . 6b ) . Additionally , delineating the spatiotemporal distribution of local stress fields in the developing zebrafish embryos is also realized by assuming the MGS have only radial displacement fields . The results showed pulsatile compressive stress propagation in the developing neural rod in vivo [ 32 ] ( Fig . 6c ) . However , the hypothetical displacement field will cause large errors in the calculation of stress field , especially when the shear stress needs to be calculated . To deal with this problem , combining the relevant mechanical principles and the shape of the deformed MGS to indirectly extract the real displacement field on its surface is verified to be viable . On this basis , the subcellular stress patterns during phagocytic engulfment and T - cell immunological synapse were revealed . [ 33 ] ( Fig . 6d ) . Furthermore , in mouse 3T3 fibroblast cell aggregates , the stress fields were characterized with a novel calculation method which greatly reduces the time required for accurate stress characterization ( 1 - 2 min ) [ 34 ] ( Fig . 6e ) . To sum up , MSS - based method has already proved to be capable of characterizing stress within 3D ECM over supra - cellular and cellular scales , whether in vitro ( e . g . , cell aggregates ) or in vivo ( e . g . , embryos tissues ) . By MSS - based method , it can be concluded that stress fields are varying dynamically and subtly throughout the whole biological process . The MSS - based characterization of stress fields method helps to reveal the physical factors in regulating cell microenvironment . Particularly , MSS - based method now is still expected to develop widely to fill in the research vacancy of mechanobiology and biomechanics . 5 . Conclusion and future perspectives In recent years , stress over cellular and supra - cellular scales within 3D ECM has shown increasing importance to many significant cell / tissue activities . The stress characterization is highly critical for understanding the relationship between stress ( generated at molecule / subcellular scale ) and biological activities ( from cellular to tissue / organ scale ) . The appearance of the MSS - based method greatly makes up for the deficiency of in situ and in vivo stress fields characterization within 3D ECM , successfully revealing a variety of biological phenomena related to mechanical stress in living tissues . The MSS - based method can be applied both in vivo and in vitro conditions with the unique advantages in stress characterization over supra - cellular and cell scales . At supercellular ( and tissue ) scale , the MSS - based method can be used to characterize the spatial distribution pattern and temporal variation of the stress fields within ECM , which are closely related to common tissue activities such as maintaining tissue homeostasis [ 5 ] and driving cancer tissue development [ 54 - 56 ] . At cell scale , the MSS - based method can precisely characterize the surrounding stress variations of MSS to display the uneven sub - cellular stress distribution pattern around a single cell , which is related to many cell behaviors , including cell polarization and cell migration [ 57 , 58 ] . Later , MSS is equipped with functional materials ( e . g . , photosensitive , temperature - sensitive , or magnetic - sensitive materials ) to applied forces on surrounding cells or ECM , characterizing the local mechanical properties in tissues ( Fig . 7 ) . For example , by adding ferromagnetic fluid into fluorinated oil MDS , MDS can generate force or torque under external magnetic fields for measuring the local viscoelasticity ( Fig . 7a ) [ 59 ] and the mechanical integrity in vivo [ 7 ] . The temperature - sensitive hydrogel can also be used to actively exert force on the surroundings by changing its temperature , realizing the characterization of local mechanical properties in the cell spheroids ( Fig . 7c ) [ 60 ] . Noticeably , experimental processes and techniques for the MSS - based method are expected to be suitable based on different application conditions and research objectives . The adhesion modification of MSS should be adjusted accordingly to meet specific requirements [ 29 , 33 ] . For example , modifying PEG spacer on the MDS surface can prevent the non - specific interaction between MDS and cells , thus helping to measure the cell - generated forces transmitted by the specific adhesion junctions [ 29 ] . Then , the characterization method for measuring the mechanical properties of MSS in vitro needs to be chosen with consideration . Different measurement principles can result in distinguishing results and accuracies even with identical samples [ 48 , 61 ] . Also , the mechanical properties of MGS and HIM are different even with the same composition [ 35 ] , and the mechanical properties of MGS may change before and after modification [ 33 ] . Therefore , it is recommended to characterize the mechanical properties of modified MGS directly . In the calculation section , the undeformed state ( i . e . , reference images ) of the MSS may not be the same by different methods , leading to discrepant calculated stresses . For instance , the stress calculated with cell lysing as the reference state ( 567 Pa ) is lower than that with destroying actin cytoskeleton ( 642 Pa ) , indicating that the residual stress in the cytoskeleton may inhibit myosin activity [ 31 ] . Additionally , appropriate calculation methods of deducing the stress fields from MSS images should be flexibly applied to save the calculation difficulty and time while meeting the required accuracy . For example , the anisotropic normal stress distribution can be directly calculated from the shape of the deformed MDS [ 29 ] , by which the local isotropic normal stress and shear stress cannot be obtained . The simplified extraction of axisymmetric displacement fields can calculate the local average stress of MGS with reduced calculation difficulty and time but fails to get the stress variations surrounding the MGS [ 30 ] . Using the hypothetical radial displacement field can easily calculate the stress , but the result is inaccurate , especially with large errors when the local shear stress is measured [ 32 ] . Moreover , although the direct extraction of the real displacement field can accurately characterize stress fields , the addition of fluorescent nanoparticles can significantly increase the calculation difficulty and time [ 31 ] . The indirect derivation of the real displacement field ( e . g . , based on solid mechanics principles ) can simplify the calculation processes [ 33 ] , but it still requires accurate capture of the MGS shape and more calculations for higher accuracy . Although the MSS - based method can be used to quantitatively characterize stress fields within 3D ECM in situ and in vivo , there are still existing limitations that are eager to be solved . Firstly , this method relies heavily on fluorescence readout to extract the deformation information of MSS . Therefore , its resolution and precision are limited by the optical observation system to characterize thick objects ( over 100 μm ) such as in living animals . Furthermore , although near - infrared fluorescent dyes could partially solve the fluorescence penetration problem , their toxicity and low quantum production capacity greatly limit their use [ 62 - 64 ] . Additionally , MGS are all regarded as linear elastic materials to simplify the stress calculation , while MGS is viscoelastic or poroelastic , resulting in the inaccuracy of the stress calculation . Finally , the degradation of MSS cannot be fully neglected . The degradation of MSS ( such as sodium alginate ) will cause errors of stress characterization due to the change of their shape and mechanical properties , while the non - degradable MSS are not conducive to experiments in living animals . However , the pioneering potential of the MSS - based method outweighs these limitations ahead . There exist following directions for developing the MSS - based characterization of stress fields within 3D ECM . Firstly , the MSS - based method increasingly shows its further potential in analyzing internal stress fields within 3D ECM , which cause a variety of biological phenomena and problems , including morphogenetic flows in the mesoderm [ 7 ] . Secondly , it is still necessary to further develop related technologies such as the selection of biomaterials with better mechanical properties , the utilization of more accurate mechanical models ( e . g . , viscoelasticity , poroelasticity ) , as well as methods in the displacement field extraction and stress calculation . Thirdly , combing the MSS - based method with other methods can expand the ways of stress characterization within 3D ECM . For instance , the pore size of MGS will decrease under pressure because of its porous characteristics , which will prolong the diffusion time of small molecules through the MGS . Thus , the hydrostatic pressure within ECM can be characterized by monitoring the diffusion time of molecules through the compressed MGS [ 65 ] . Additionally , by coupling the FRET fluorescent probe to the MGS network , local deformations of MGS can be reported as fluorescence shifts [ 51 ] . Along with these opportunities , we expect to see the developments of new techniques for this MSS - based method , promoting and reshaping the understanding of life phenomena . Acknowledgement This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 11972280 , 11761161004 , 12002262 ) , the Key Research and Development Program of Shaanxi ( S2018 - FY - ZDGY - 0229 ) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation ( 2021M692570 ) . References [ 1 ] K . I . T . Kevin Parker , A . M . Y . Lepre Brock , C . Brangwynne , R . J . Mannix , N . Wang , E . Ostuni , N . A . Geisse , J . C . Adams , G . M . Whitesides , D . E . Ingber , Directional control of lamellipodia extension by constraining cell shape and orienting cell tractional forces , FASEB Journal 16 ( 10 ) ( 2002 ) 1195 - 1204 . [ 2 ] C . S . Chen , M . Mrksich , S . Huang , G . M . Whitesides , D . E . Ingber , Geometric control of cell life and death , Science 276 ( 5317 ) ( 1997 ) 1425 - 1428 . [ 3 ] A . J . Engler , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , D . E . Discher , Matrix Elasticity Directs Stem Cell Lineage Specification , Cell 126 ( 4 ) ( 2006 ) 677 - 689 . [ 4 ] X . Trepat , M . R . Wasserman , T . E . Angelini , E . Millet , D . A . Weitz , J . P . Butler , J . J . Fredberg , Physical forces during collective cell migration , Nature Physics 5 ( 6 ) ( 2009 ) 426 - 430 . [ 5 ] C . Guillot , T . Lecuit , Mechanics of epithelial tissue homeostasis and morphogenesis , Science 340 ( 6137 ) ( 2013 ) 1185 - 1189 . [ 6 ] C . P . Heisenberg , Y . Bellaïche , Forces in tissue morphogenesis and patterning , Cell 153 ( 5 ) ( 2013 ) 948 - 962 . [ 7 ] A . Mongera , P . Rowghanian , H . J . Gustafson , E . Shelton , D . A . Kealhofer , E . K . Carn , F . Serwane , A . A . Lucio , J . Giammona , O . Campàs , A fluid - to - solid jamming transition underlies vertebrate body axis elongation , Nature 561 ( 7723 ) ( 2018 ) 401 - 405 . [ 8 ] R . Sunyer , V . Conte , J . Escribano , A . Elosegui - Artola , A . Labernadie , L . Valon , D . Navajas , J . M . García - Aznar , J . J . Muñoz , P . Roca - Cusachs , Collective cell durotaxis emerges from long - range intercellular force transmission , Science 353 ( 6304 ) ( 2016 ) 1157 - 1161 . [ 9 ] E . G . Rens , R . M . Merks , Cell shape and durotaxis explained from cell - extracellular matrix forces and focal adhesion dynamics , Iscience 23 ( 9 ) ( 2020 ) 101488 . [ 10 ] J . Feng , H . Levine , X . Mao , L . M . Sander , Cell motility , contact guidance , and durotaxis , Soft matter 15 ( 24 ) ( 2019 ) 4856 - 4864 . [ 11 ] H . T . Nia , H . Liu , G . Seano , M . Datta , D . Jones , N . Rahbari , J . Incio , V . P . Chauhan , K . Jung , J . D . Martin , Solid stress and elastic energy as measures of tumour mechanopathology , Nature biomedical engineering 1 ( 1 ) ( 2016 ) 1 - 11 . [ 12 ] H . T . Nia , M . Datta , G . Seano , P . Huang , L . L . Munn , R . K . Jain , Quantifying solid stress and elastic energy from excised or in situ tumors , Nature protocols 13 ( 5 ) ( 2018 ) 1091 - 1105 . [ 13 ] T . Lecuit , P . F . Lenne , E . Munro , Force generation , transmission , and integration during cell and tissue morphogenesis , Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology , 2011 , pp . 157 - 184 . [ 14 ] M . Gardel , P . Oakes , Measuring cell mechanics , Colloquium Series on Quantitative Cell Biology , Morgan & Claypool Life Sciences , 2015 , pp . 1 - 75 . [ 15 ] O . Campàs , A toolbox to explore the mechanics of living embryonic tissues , Seminars in Cell and Developmental Biology 55 ( 2016 ) 119 - 130 . [ 16 ] M . Gómez - González , E . Latorre , M . Arroyo , X . Trepat , Measuring mechanical stress in living tissues , Nature Reviews Physics 2 ( 6 ) ( 2020 ) 300 - 317 . [ 17 ] K . Guevorkian , D . Gonzalez - Rodriguez , C . Carlier , S . Dufour , F . Brochard - Wyart , Mechanosensitive shivering of model tissues under controlled aspiration , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 ( 33 ) ( 2011 ) 13387 - 13392 . [ 18 ] M . Krieg , G . Fläschner , D . Alsteens , B . M . Gaub , W . H . Roos , G . J . L . Wuite , H . E . Gaub , C . Gerber , Y . F . Dufrêne , D . J . Müller , Atomic force microscopy - based mechanobiology , Nature Reviews Physics 1 ( 1 ) ( 2019 ) 41 - 57 . [ 19 ] K . Bambardekar , R . Clément , O . Blanc , C . Chardès , P . F . Lenne , Direct laser manipulation reveals the mechanics of cell contacts in vivo , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112 ( 5 ) ( 2015 ) 1416 - 1421 . [ 20 ] M . Tanase , N . Biais , M . Sheetz , Magnetic Tweezers in Cell Biology , Methods in Cell Biology , 2007 , pp . 473 - 493 . [ 21 ] C . Grashoff , B . D . Hoffman , M . D . Brenner , R . Zhou , M . Parsons , M . T . Yang , M . A . McLean , S . G . Sligar , C . S . Chen , T . Ha , M . A . Schwartz , Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics , Nature 466 ( 7303 ) ( 2010 ) 263 - 266 . [ 22 ] Y . Chen , M . B . O’Donoghue , Y . - F . Huang , H . Kang , J . A . Phillips , X . Chen , M . - C . Estevez , C . J . Yang , W . Tan , A surface energy transfer nanoruler for measuring binding site distances on live cell surfaces , Journal of the American Chemical Society 132 ( 46 ) ( 2010 ) 16559 - 16570 . [ 23 ] X . Wang , T . Ha , Defining single molecular forces required to activate integrin and notch signaling , Science 340 ( 6135 ) ( 2013 ) 991 - 994 . [ 24 ] A . K . Harris , P . Wild , D . Stopak , Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion , Science 208 ( 4440 ) ( 1980 ) 177 - 179 . [ 25 ] M . Dembo , Y . - L . Wang , Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts , Biophysical journal 76 ( 4 ) ( 1999 ) 2307 - 2316 . [ 26 ] J . P . Butler , I . M . Tolic - Nørrelykke , B . Fabry , J . J . Fredberg , Traction fields , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings , American Journal of Physiology - Cell Physiology 282 ( 3 ) ( 2002 ) C595 - C605 . [ 27 ] V . Gordon , M . Valentine , M . Gardel , D . Andor - Ardo , S . Dennison , A . Bogdanov , D . Weitz , T . Deisboeck , Measuring the mechanical stress induced by an expanding multicellular tumor system : a case study , Experimental cell research 289 ( 1 ) ( 2003 ) 58 - 66 . [ 28 ] W . R . Legant , J . S . Miller , B . L . Blakely , D . M . Cohen , G . M . Genin , C . S . Chen , Measurement of mechanical tractions exerted by cells in three - dimensional matrices , Nature methods 7 ( 12 ) ( 2010 ) 969 - U113 . [ 29 ] O . Campàs , T . Mammoto , S . Hasso , R . A . Sperling , D . O ' Connell , A . G . Bischof , R . Maas , D . A . Weitz , L . Mahadevan , D . E . Ingber , Quantifying cell - generated mechanical forces within living embryonic tissues , Nature Methods 11 ( 2 ) ( 2014 ) 183 - 189 . [ 30 ] M . E . Dolega , M . Delarue , F . Ingremeau , J . Prost , A . Delon , G . Cappello , Cell - like pressure sensors reveal increase of mechanical stress towards the core of multicellular spheroids under compression , Nature Communications 8 ( 2017 ) 14056 . [ 31 ] E . Mohagheghian , J . Luo , J . Chen , G . Chaudhary , J . Chen , J . Sun , R . H . Ewoldt , N . Wang , Quantifying compressive forces between living cell layers and within tissues using elastic round microgels , Nature Communications 9 ( 1 ) ( 2018 ) 1878 . [ 32 ] N . Träber , K . Uhlmann , S . Girardo , G . Kesavan , K . Wagner , J . Friedrichs , R . Goswami , K . Bai , M . Brand , C . Werner , D . Balzani , J . Guck , Polyacrylamide Bead Sensors for in vivo Quantification of Cell - Scale Stress in Zebrafish Development , Scientific Reports 9 ( 1 ) ( 2019 ) 17031 . [ 33 ] D . Vorselen , Y . Wang , M . M . de Jesus , P . K . Shah , M . J . Footer , M . Huse , W . Cai , J . A . Theriot , Microparticle traction force microscopy reveals subcellular force exertion patterns in immune cell – target interactions , Nature Communications 11 ( 1 ) ( 2020 ) 20 . [ 34 ] B . Kaytanlı , A . H . Khankhel , N . Cohen , M . T . Valentine , Rapid analysis of cell - generated forces within a multicellular aggregate using microsphere - based traction force microscopy , Soft Matter 16 ( 17 ) ( 2020 ) 4192 - 4199 . [ 35 ] W . Lee , N . Kalashnikov , S . Mok , R . Halaoui , E . Kuzmin , A . J . Putnam , S . Takayama , M . Park , L . McCaffrey , R . Zhao , Dispersible hydrogel force sensors reveal patterns of solid mechanical stress in multicellular spheroid cultures , Nature communications 10 ( 1 ) ( 2019 ) 1 - 14 . [ 36 ] A . V . Taubenberger , S . Girardo , N . Träber , E . Fischer‐Friedrich , M . Kräter , K . Wagner , T . Kurth , I . Richter , B . Haller , M . Binner , 3D microenvironment stiffness regulates tumor spheroid growth and mechanics via p21 and ROCK , Advanced Biosystems 3 ( 9 ) ( 2019 ) 1900128 . [ 37 ] C . F . Guimarães , L . Gasperini , A . P . Marques , R . L . Reis , The stiffness of living tissues and its implications for tissue engineering , Nature Reviews Materials 5 ( 5 ) ( 2020 ) 351 - 370 . [ 38 ] G . Griffon - Etienne , Y . Boucher , C . Brekken , H . D . Suit , R . K . Jain , Taxane - induced apoptosis decompresses blood vessels and lowers interstitial fluid pressure in solid tumors : clinical implications , Cancer research 59 ( 15 ) ( 1999 ) 3776 - 3782 . [ 39 ] Y . Zhang , J . Yu , H . N . Bomba , Y . Zhu , Z . Gu , Mechanical force - triggered drug delivery , Chemical reviews 116 ( 19 ) ( 2016 ) 12536 - 12563 . [ 40 ] M . L . Rodriguez , P . J . McGarry , N . J . Sniadecki , Review on cell mechanics : experimental and modeling approaches , Applied Mechanics Reviews 65 ( 6 ) ( 2013 ) 060801 . [ 41 ] W . J . Polacheck , C . S . Chen , Measuring cell - generated forces : a guide to the available tools , Nature methods 13 ( 5 ) ( 2016 ) 415 - 423 . [ 42 ] D . Pinheiro , Y . Bellaiche , Mechanical force - driven adherens junction remodeling and epithelial dynamics , Developmental cell 47 ( 1 ) ( 2018 ) 3 - 19 . [ 43 ] J . Zhang , N . C . Chada , C . A . Reinhart - King , Microscale interrogation of 3D tissue mechanics , Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology 7 ( 2019 ) 412 . [ 44 ] K . Sugimura , P . F . Lenne , F . Graner , Measuring forces and stresses in situ in living tissues , Development ( Cambridge ) 143 ( 2 ) ( 2016 ) 186 - 196 . [ 45 ] R . D . Mehlenbacher , R . Kolbl , A . Lay , J . A . Dionne , Nanomaterials for in vivo imaging of mechanical forces and electrical fields , Nature Reviews Materials 3 ( 2018 ) 17080 . [ 46 ] P . Roca - Cusachs , V . Conte , X . Trepat , Quantifying forces in cell biology , Nature Cell Biology 19 ( 7 ) ( 2017 ) 742 - 751 . [ 47 ] A . A . Lucio , A . Mongera , E . Shelton , R . Chen , A . M . Doyle , O . Campàs , Spatiotemporal variation of endogenous cell - generated stresses within 3D multicellular spheroids , Scientific Reports 7 ( 1 ) ( 2017 ) 12022 . [ 48 ] S . Girardo , N . Träber , K . Wagner , G . Cojoc , C . Herold , R . Goswami , R . Schlüßler , S . Abuhattum , A . Taubenberger , F . Reichel , D . Mokbel , M . Herbig , M . Schürmann , P . Müller , T . Heida , A . Jacobi , E . Ulbricht , J . Thiele , C . Werner , J . Guck , Standardized microgel beads as elastic cell mechanical probes , Journal of Materials Chemistry B 6 ( 39 ) ( 2018 ) 6245 - 6261 . [ 49 ] J . W . Neubauer , N . Hauck , M . J . Mannel , M . Seuss , A . Fery , J . Thiele , Mechanoresponsive Hydrogel Particles as a Platform for Three - Dimensional Force Sensing , ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 11 ( 29 ) ( 2019 ) 26307 - 26313 . [ 50 ] A . C . Daly , L . Riley , T . Segura , J . A . Burdick , Hydrogel microparticles for biomedical applications , Nature Reviews Materials 5 ( 1 ) ( 2020 ) 20 - 43 . [ 51 ] J . W . Neubauer , N . Hauck , M . J . Männel , M . Seuss , A . Fery , J . Thiele , Mechanoresponsive Hydrogel Particles as a Platform for Three - Dimensional Force Sensing , ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces 11 ( 29 ) ( 2019 ) 26307 - 26313 . [ 52 ] H . Belyadi , E . Fathi , F . Belyadi , Hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs : theories , operations , and economic analysis , Gulf Professional Publishing2019 . [ 53 ] B . Gross , E . Shelton , C . Gomez , O . Campàs , STRESS , an automated geometrical characterization of deformable particles for in vivo measurements of cell and tissue mechanical stresses , bioRxiv ( 2021 ) . [ 54 ] M . T . Janet , G . Cheng , J . A . Tyrrell , S . A . Wilcox - Adelman , Y . Boucher , R . K . Jain , L . L . Munn , Mechanical compression drives cancer cells toward invasive phenotype , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 ( 3 ) ( 2012 ) 911 - 916 . [ 55 ] C . M . Kraning - Rush , J . P . Califano , C . A . Reinhart - King , Cellular traction stresses increase with increasing metastatic potential , PloS one 7 ( 2 ) ( 2012 ) e32572 . [ 56 ] J . Lee , A . A . Abdeen , K . L . Wycislo , T . M . Fan , K . A . Kilian , Interfacial geometry dictates cancer cell tumorigenicity , Nature materials 15 ( 8 ) ( 2016 ) 856 - 862 . [ 57 ] K . A . Beningo , Y . - l . Wang , Fc - receptor - mediated phagocytosis is regulated by mechanical properties of the target , Journal of cell science 115 ( 4 ) ( 2002 ) 849 - 856 . [ 58 ] R . Basu , B . M . Whitlock , J . Husson , A . Le Floc’h , W . Jin , A . Oyler - Yaniv , F . Dotiwala , G . Giannone , C . Hivroz , N . Biais , Cytotoxic T cells use mechanical force to potentiate target cell killing , Cell 165 ( 1 ) ( 2016 ) 100 - 110 . [ 59 ] F . Serwane , A . Mongera , P . Rowghanian , D . A . Kealhofer , A . A . Lucio , Z . M . Hockenbery , O . Campàs , In vivo quantification of spatially varying mechanical properties in developing tissues , Nature Methods 14 ( 2 ) ( 2017 ) 181 - 186 . [ 60 ] S . Mok , S . Al Habyan , C . Ledoux , W . Lee , K . N . MacDonald , L . McCaffrey , C . Moraes , Mapping cellular - scale internal mechanics in 3D tissues with thermally responsive hydrogel probes , Nature communications 11 ( 1 ) ( 2020 ) 1 - 11 . [ 61 ] P . H . Wu , D . R . B . Aroush , A . Asnacios , W . C . Chen , M . E . Dokukin , B . L . Doss , P . Durand - Smet , A . Ekpenyong , J . Guck , N . V . Guz , P . A . Janmey , J . S . H . Lee , N . M . Moore , A . Ott , Y . C . Poh , R . Ros , M . Sander , I . Sokolov , J . R . Staunton , N . Wang , G . Whyte , D . Wirtz , A comparison of methods to assess cell mechanical properties , Nature Methods 15 ( 7 ) ( 2018 ) 491 - + . [ 62 ] V . Shanmugam , S . Selvakumar , C . - S . Yeh , Near - infrared light - responsive nanomaterials in cancer therapeutics , Chemical Society Reviews 43 ( 17 ) ( 2014 ) 6254 - 6287 . [ 63 ] Y . Dong , G . Jin , C . Ji , R . He , M . Lin , X . Zhao , A . Li , T . J . Lu , F . Xu , Non - invasive tracking of hydrogel degradation using upconversion nanoparticles , Acta biomaterialia 55 ( 2017 ) 410 - 419 . [ 64 ] Y . Dong , M . Lin , G . Jin , Y . I . Park , M . Qiu , Y . Zhao , H . Yang , A . Li , T . J . Lu , Fabrication of fluorescent composite hydrogel using in situ synthesis of upconversion nanoparticles , Nanotechnology 28 ( 17 ) ( 2017 ) 175702 . [ 65 ] F . Ingremeau , M . E . Dolega , J . Gallagher , I . Wang , G . Cappello , A . Delon , Optical sensing of mechanical pressure based on diffusion measurement in polyacrylamide cell - like barometers , Soft Matter 13 ( 23 ) ( 2017 ) 4210 - 4213 . Table 1 . Summary of materials used for fabricating microsphere sensors . Table 2 . Comparision of developed methods with detailed technical parameters for the fabrication of microsphere sensors . Table 3 . Summary of characterization methods on the mechanical properties of microsphere sensors . Figure 1 . Processes of microsphere sensor - based characterization of stress fields within three - dimensional extracellular matrix . Microsphere sensor ( MSS ) - based method includes the following steps : fabrication and modification of MSS ; characterization of mechanical properties of MSS ; injection and cell adhesion ; imaging and image processing of deformed and undeformed MSS ; extraction of displacement field and calculation of stress field . Figure 2 . Fabrication methods of microspheres . ( a ) Direct injection . Minimal amount of solution is injected into the biological tissue by microinjection equipment ( microsyringe ) and microdroplets are formed directly . ( b ) Stirred Emulsion . Microdroplets are formed by the oscillation of two immiscible liquids ( e . g . , water and oil ) . ( c ) Microfluidic emulsion . Microdroplets are fabricated based on microfluidic channels . ( d ) Membrane emulsification . Disperse phase liquid is pressed to cross a porous glass membrane and form microdroplets in the continuous phase liquid . Figure 3 . Characterization of mechanical properties of microsphere sensors . ( a ) Atomic force microscope . Microgel sensor ( MGS ) is deformed by a cantilever with known stiffness , and force and indentation depth are recorded to characterize the elastic modulus of MGS . ( b ) Osmotic pressure test . MGS are transferred from PBS to dextran , and the bulk modulus of MGS can be obtained by measuring the volume change of MGS and the osmotic pressure of the solution . ( c ) Real - time dynamic rheological ( RT - DC ) analysis . MGS is deformed when it passes through the microfluidic channel , and its elastic modulus can be characterized by measuring MGS deformation . ( d ) Tensile test . hydrogels in macroscopic ( HIM ) is stretched and its elastic modulus can be characterized by observing its deformation . ( e ) Rotational rheometer test . HIM is applied by a certain torque and the viscoelasticity of the HIM can be characterized through observing its responses . ( f ) Du Nouy Ring Method . The interface between oil and culture medium drops as the base is moved down , then a liquid film will form between the ring and interface , and the interface tension can be characterized by analyzing the film . Figure 4 . Extraction methods of displacement fields of microsphere sensors . ( a ) Curvature map extraction of microdroplet sensor ( MDS ) . The 2D image stacks of MDS are processed into a 3D construction , and then spline interpolated into a continuous shape , from which the mean curvature at each point of the microdroplet surface is obtained . ( b ) Simplified axisymmetric displacement field . The undeformed ( left ) and deformed ( mid ) microgel sensors ( MGS ) are simplified as spherical shapes and deformation ( right ) is obtained by comparison . ( c ) Direct extraction of real displacement field . Fluorescent nanoparticles are coupled into MGS , and the real displacement field of the MGS can be directly obtained by observing the position changes of fluorescent nanoparticles before ( treated by Latrunculin A , right ) and after ( untreated , left ) deformation . ( d ) Indirect derivation of real displacement field . The possible displacement fields obtained from the shape of MGS are selected by combining mechanical principles and specific boundary conditions ( target function ) , and finally the real displacement field is derived . ( e ) Hypothetical displacement field . The 2D image stacks of MGS are processed into a 3D construction and an assumed displacement field is directly obtained by assuming the MGS has only radial displacement , based on which a finite element model is constructed . Copyright with the permission of ref [ 29 - 33 ] . Figure 5 . Characterization of spatiotemporal distribution pattern of stress fields within tissues . ( a ) The deformation of microgel sensor ( MGS ) in tumor spheroids are classified into circumferential , radial and no orientation . The local average stresses of different positions ( edge , intermediate zone and core ) within spheroids exhibit distinct variation . ( b ) The microdroplet sensor ( MDS ) in zebrafish mesoderm are fitted with ellipsoids to obtain supra - cellular stress . Supra - cellular stress gradient exists in different positions of zebrafish mesoderm . ( c ) The curvature of MDS in tumor spheroids are analyzed to obtain the local anisotropic stress . The anisotropic stresses are related to the distance from the aggregate’s surface ( X ) . ( d ) the MGS are fitted with microspheres in the tumor spheroids . The pressure in the tumor spheroids decreases as the distance from the centre increases . ( e ) The MGS are distributed in the different positions of compliant hydrogel matrix around the growing tumor spheroid . The local radical stress and the aspect ratio of MGS is related to the distance from the tumor spheroid . Copyright with the permission of ref [ 7 , 30 , 35 , 36 , 47 ] . Figure 6 . Characterization of the stress variations surrounding the microsphere sensors . ( a ) The microdroplet sensor ( MDS ) are mixed in the mesenchymal and epithelial cell aggregates . Characterization of anisotropic normal stress variation in target cell aggregates . ( b ) microgel sensor ( MGS ) in multiple cell layers are imaged at 15 min and 90 min after treatment with Latrunculin A . Characterization of local stress fields at target time by using MGS - based method . ( c ) MGS in zebrafish embryo are deformed at 14 and 15 hours post fertilization ( hpf ) . Characterization of pressure ( normal stress ) surrounding MGS at 14 and 15 hpf . ( d ) MGS are deformed by T - cell during cytotoxic response . Characterization of subcellular stress ( normal traction force ) pattern of T - cell cytotoxic response . ( e ) MGS before cell lysis are imaged in multicellular aggregates . Rapid analysis of the uneven stress distribution maps of MGS . Copyright with the permission of ref [ 29 , 31 - 34 ] . Figure 7 . Characterization of mechanical properties of the extracellular microenvironment by microsphere sensors . ( a ) Ferrofluid microdroplet sensors are microinjected in blastomere cytoplasm , with ( On ) and without ( Off ) applied magnetic field . Mechanical properties ( elastic modulus and viscosity ) of both the blastomere cytoplasm ( blue ) and yolk cell ( orange ) . ( b ) Microgel sensors ( MGS ) are microinjected in the mammary fat pad and deformed when the temperature is below 37 ℃ . Comparison of residual elasticity within tumors as the cancer progresses towards metastasis ( day after injection ) . Copyright with the permission of ref [ 59 , 60 ] .