The interactions of different subsets of immune and non - immune cells at defined sites are required for the efficient function of the immune system . These dynamic cellular encounters depend on the ability of these cells to actively migrate to and within tissues . Chemokines have been established as key regulators of leukocyte trafficking . Although the expression of most chemokines is induced during infection and inflammation , some chemokines , including CC - chemokine ligand 19 ( CCL19 ) and CCL21 , are constitutively expressed and control cell movement during homeostasis 1 . CCL19 and CCL21 are the sole lig - ands for the CC - chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) , which is expressed by various subsets of immune cells 1 . CCR7 and its ligands are essentially involved in homing of various subpopulations of T cells and antigen - presenting dendritic cells ( DCs ) to the lymph nodes . Within lymph nodes , T cells establish close physical contacts with DCs , which allow their antigen - specific activation . Although it is well established that these interactions are necessary for the optimal initiation of protective immunity , recent evidence demonstrates that the CCR7 - dependent contacts of T cells and DCs are also essential for the induction of peripheral tolerance and the regulation of the immune response by CD4 + CD25 + regulatory T ( T Reg ) cells . Furthermore , a series of recent studies have shown that CCR7 is indispensable for the unperturbed thymic T - cell development and nega - tive selection of self - reactive T cells . On the basis of these recent discoveries , we discuss in this Review the steps of cellular motility that depend on the interaction of CCR7 with its ligands and how this molecular pathway contrib - utes to the development of immunity , its regulation , as well as peripheral and central tolerance . CCL19 and CCL21 and their receptor , CCR7 CCL19 and CCL21 are the only ligands for CCR7 . Unlike CCL19 , CCL21 has a uniquely long C - terminal tail containing 32 amino acids of which 12 are basic amino - acid residues 2 that allow avid binding to glyco - saminoglycans and other molecules . This binding may be required for efficient presentation of CCL21 on the surface of endothelial cells 2 – 4 and other cells 5 . Podoplanin , a proteoglycan expressed by lymphatic endothelial cells , reticular stromal cells and other cell types might specifically present CCL21 ( Ref . 6 ) , and the expression of podoplanin might regulate the availability of CCL21 at these sites . As a result of gene duplication , two mouse genes encode functional CCL21 variants . CCL21 - Leu , which contains a leucine at position 65 , is expressed in lym - phatic vessels of non - lymphoid organs such as the lung , colon , stomach , heart and skin , whereas CCL21 - Ser is expressed in lymphoid organs such as the thymus , lymph nodes and spleen . Interestingly , the human genome apparently only has the gene encoding CCL21 - Leu , but not the gene encoding CCL21 - Ser 7 . In paucity of lymph - node T cells ( plt / plt ) mice — a naturally occurring strain of mutant mice that carry an autosomal recessive mutation — a large gene locus that contains the genes encoding CCL19 and CCL21 - Ser has been deleted , leaving the gene that encodes CCL21 - Leu intact 7 – 9 . In human and mouse secondary lymphoid organs , CCL21 is produced by fibroblastic reticular cells of the T - cell - rich area and , in mice also , by high endothelial venules ( HEVs ) 10 . In non - inflamed lymph nodes , fibroblastic reticular cells seem to be the only source of CCL19 production in both humans and mice 11 . As human DCs * Institute of Immunology , Hannover Medical School ; 30625 Hannover , Germany . ‡ Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research , Vienna , Brunnerstrasse 59 , A‑1235 Vienna , Austria . Correspondence to R . F . e‑mail : foerster . reinhold @ mh‑hannover . de doi : 10 . 1038 / nri2297 Published online 1 April 2008 Regulatory T ( T Reg ) cell A naturally occurring subtype of regulatory T cell , which develops in the thymus and regulates self - reactive T cells in the periphery . T Reg cells are characterized by the expression of CD25 ( interleukin - 2 receptor α - chain ) and the transcription factor fOXP3 ( forkhead box P3 ) . CCR7 and its ligands : balancing immunity and tolerance Reinhold Förster * , Ana Clara Davalos‑Misslitz * and Antal Rot ‡ Abstract | A key feature of the immune system is its ability to induce protective immunity against pathogens while maintaining tolerance towards self and innocuous environmental antigens . Recent evidence suggests that by guiding cells to and within lymphoid organs , CC‑chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) essentially contributes to both immunity and tolerance . This receptor is involved in organizing thymic architecture and function , lymph‑node homing of naive and regulatory T cells via high endothelial venules , as well as steady state and inflammation‑induced lymph‑node‑bound migration of dendritic cells via afferent lymphatics . Here , we focus on the cellular and molecular mechanisms that enable CCR7 and its two ligands , CCL19 and CCL21 , to balance immunity and tolerance . R E V I E W S 362 | mAy 2008 | VOLUmE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2008 Nature Publishing Group Nature Reviews | Immunology Naive T cell Tethering and rolling CCR7 - mediated activation Arrest Transmigration rolling L - selectin PNAd α L β 2 - Integrin CCR7CCR7 ligand GAG ICAM1 or ICAM2 Transcellular Paracellular Endothelial cell Basement membrane Paucity of lymph - node T cells ( plt / plt ) mice A spontaneously occurring mutant strain that lost the expression of the CC - chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) - ligands CC - chemokine ligand ( CCL19 ) and the lymphoid tissue form of CCL21 ( CCL21 - Ser ) . Lack of these chemokines results in defective thymic architecture and function , as well as impaired migration of CCR7 - expressing T cells and dendritic cells into lymphoid organs , leading to their hypocellularity . Central memory T ( T CM ) cell A memory T - cell subpopulation that lacks immediate effector function but that expresses the lymph - node homing molecules L - selectin ( CD62L ) and CC - chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) . T cm cells rapidly develop the phenotype and function of effector T cells on antigen re - stimulation in lymphoid organs . can also produce CCL19 , it is possible that activated DCs that are recruited into lymph nodes under inflam - matory conditions may serve as an additional source of CCR7 ligands 12 . Similar to all chemokine receptors , CCR7 contains seven - transmembrane - spanning domains and medi - ates its signals through heterotrimeric G proteins and their downstream effectors . CCR7 is expressed by semi - mature and mature DCs 13 , thymocytes during defined stages of their development 14 ( see later ) , naive B and T cells 15 , 16 , T Reg cells 17 and a subpopulation of memory T cells known as central memory T ( T CM ) cells 16 . CCR7 is also expressed by different non - immune cells , most notably in various malignancies 18 . Despite their similar affinities to CCR7 , CCL19 and CCL21 induce different signalling effects through this receptor . CCL19 , but not CCL21 , effectively stimulates CCR7 phosphorylation and internalization 19 , 20 , leading to receptor desensitization . This implies that CCR7 - mediated cell responses to CCL19 may have a shorter time - span than responses to CCL21 . Also , CCL19 can desensitize the receptor towards subsequent responses to CCL21 ligation , but not vice versa . It is not yet clear how these differential signalling events may impinge on the complex cellular functions of CCR7 - bearing cells in the environments that contain both CCL19 and CCL21 . CCL19 and CCL21 , together with CCL25 , also bind with high affinity to another hepta - helical surface pro - tein , termed CC - X - chemokine receptor ( CCX - CKR ) 21 . CCX - CKR does not couple to characteristic G protein signalling pathways and was shown to internalize its ligands and scavenge 22 or possibly also transport them 23 , thereby acting as a chemokine ‘interceptor’ 1 . CCR7 regulates homing of immune cells CCR7 - mediated signals control the migration of immune cells to secondary lymphoid organs and sub - sequently their positioning within defined functional compartments . In this section we outline the contribu - tion of CCR7 to cell homing to the lymph nodes , spleen and Peyer’s patches and summarize the mechanisms characteristic for the migration of different cell subsets . T cells . most T cells , including naive T cells , T Cm cells and T Reg cells , enter the lymph nodes via the HEVs , probably following a programme of sequential steps of interaction and adhesion to endothelial cells ( BOX 1 ) . The importance of CCR7 in lymphocyte homing to the lymph nodes has been revealed by gene targeting ( BOX 2 ) . In CCR7 - deficient mice , lymph nodes and Peyer’s patches are largely devoid of T cells 24 . Following adoptive transfer into wild - type recipients , CCR7 - deficient T cells fail to home to the lymph nodes but are present in the spleen , where they accumulate in the red pulp and are entirely excluded from the lym - phoid white pulp . By contrast , CCR7 - deficient B cells can migrate both to the lymph nodes and the splenic white pulp 24 . Although CCR7 has been identified as a lymph - node homing receptor , evidence is accumu - lating that this receptor is also involved in lymphocyte recirculation . Following their emigration into peripheral Box 1 | The multi - step process of lymphocyte homing to lymph nodes Naive T cells emigrate from the blood to peripheral lymph nodes in a multistep process , consisting of tethering and rolling , CC‑chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) ‑ mediated activation , firm arrest and transendothelial migration . First , lymphocyte L‑selectin binds to peripheral‑node addressins ( PNAd ) , a group of sialomucins with sialyl‑Lewis X ‑related motifs that are present on high endothelial venules ( HEVs ) . This interaction allows for a fast but transient attachment of T cells to HEVs , which , owing to the lateral shear forces of blood flow , results in cell rolling . Next , rolling lymphocytes bind the CCR7 ligands CCL21 and / or CCL19 , which are immobilized by glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) on the luminal surface of HEVs 4 , 87 , 88 . CCR7‑mediated signals together with the shear force of blood flow induce conformational changes of α L β 2 ‑integrins on lymphocytes that allow the subsequent firm binding to intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) and ICAM2 . CCR7 signalling also activates α 4 β 7 ‑integrins , which bind to mucosal addressin cell‑adhesion molecule 1 ( MAdCAM ) that is expressed on HEVs in mesenteric lymph nodes and Peyer’s patches . At these two sites , tethering and rolling can also be mediated by transient binding of non‑activated α 4 ‑integrin to MAdCAM1 . Next , lymphocytes are thought to perform lateral locomotion on the endothelial surface followed by transendothelial migration , which is possibly induced by CCR7 ligands that are presented on either the luminal or abluminal surfaces of the HEVs . Potentially , lymphocytes choose between two routes of transendothelial migration , the paracellular ( migrating around endothelial cells ) and the transcellular ( piercing through the endothelial cytoplasm ) . This homing behaviour applies not only to naive T cells but also to regulatory T cells and a subpopulation of memory cells termed central memory T ( T CM ) cells , which are generated during an adaptive immune response . In contrast to effector cells , which express homing molecules that allow migration into peripheral sites , T CM cells express CCR7 and L‑selectin and continuously re‑circulate through lymph nodes , where they can respond to secondary antigen encounter and rapidly give rise to effector and memory T cells ( for a recent review , see Ref . 89 ) . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEWS | immunology VOLUmE 8 | mAy 2008 | 363 © 2008 Nature Publishing Group tissues , some T cells can reach lymph nodes by enter - ing the draining lymphatics , a step that also involves CCR7 ( RefS 25 , 26 ) . Dendritic cells . DCs reside as sentinels in the skin and mucous membranes , including the respiratory , alimen - tary and urogenital tracts 27 . Following activation by infec - tious or inflammatory insults , DCs undergo maturation that leads to profound changes in their antigen uptake , processing and presentation capabilities . DC maturation is characterized by the upregulated expression of mHC class II molecules and co - stimulatory molecules such as CD80 , CD83 and CD86 , as well as CCR7 ( RefS 12 , 28 – 30 ) . Little is known about the mechanisms that regulate the trafficking of mature DCs to the lymph nodes via the afferent lymphatics . Although gene targeting has shown that CCR7 is essential for DC mobilization , it is still not entirely clear where and how CCR7 and its ligands are involved in this process . Wild - type and CCR7 - deficient mice have similar numbers of DCs in their peripheral organs , indicating that CCR7 has no role in the recruitment of DC pro - genitors to the skin and mucosal surfaces . Conversely , Ccr7 – / – DCs fail to leave dermal tissue and migrate into the draining lymph nodes in response to in vivo mobi - lization stimuli , such as contact sensitization induced by fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) skin painting 24 . Furthermore , DCs differentiated from the bone marrow of CCR7 - deficient mice do not migrate to the draining lymph nodes following their subcutaneous injection or intra - tracheal instillation 13 , 31 , 32 . Important insights regarding the contribution of CCR7 to homeostatic DC trafficking have been obtained by analysing mice kept under specific pathogen - free or germ - free conditions . Whereas 2 – 4 % of all cells isolated from lymph nodes in wild - type mice are CD11c + mHC class II hi DCs , this population is missing in CCR7 - deficient mice 13 . Further detailed studies confirmed that the continuous inflammation - independent turnover of DCs from skin , intestine and lung depends on CCR7 ( RefS 31 , 33 – 35 ) . In vivo studies of DC migration revealed an impor - tant difference between plt / plt and Ccr7 – / – mice . As outlined earlier , plt / plt mice still express CCL21 - Leu in non - lymphoid organs , allowing for the mobilization of DCs in the periphery . Consequently , FITC skin paint - ing or the subcutaneous injection of wild - type DCs into plt / plt mice results in the mobilization of DCs to the draining lymph nodes 36 . However , in both cases , fewer DCs migrate to the draining lymph nodes in plt / plt mice compared with wild - type mice . Therefore , it seems likely that lymph - node - derived CCL19 and / or CCL21 - Ser may also be involved in driving DC migra - tion into the lymph node . It is also possible that these two chemokines are required for guiding DCs within the lymph node , from the subcapsular sinus to their final destination : the T - cell area . Recent evidence sug - gests that CCL19 and CCL21 might not only drive the migration of DCs but also more directly affect their ability to prime T cells . The exogenous addition of CCL19 to cell cultures of bone - marrow DCs induced their maturation , and , in DC – T - cell co - culture sys - tems , increased T - cell proliferation 37 . Also , it has been shown that CCR7 ligands increase the antigen uptake of mature DCs 38 . CCR7 in lymph - node homing and positioning Once naive T cells have entered the lymph node , they migrate on reticular stromal cells within the paracortical T - cell rich area in an apparently random ‘walk’ pattern of motion 39 . Two - photon microscopy has shown that CCL19 and CCL21 , expressed by reticular stromal cells 9 , 11 can influence the migration speed of naive T cells but not migration directional - ity 40 – 42 . Following adoptive transfer into wild - type mouse recipients , CCR7 - deficient T cells that entered the popliteal lymph node displayed a 30 % reduction in velocity , as well as a 50 % reduction of the motil - ity coefficient , representing the ability to move away from the starting point of movement . A comparable reduction was observed for naive wild - type T cells that Box 2 | Phenotype of CCR7 - deficient mice The main feature of CC‑chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) ‑deficient mice is the grossly altered micro‑architecture of their lymphoid organs . In CCR7‑deficient animals the medullary areas of the thymus are smaller but more numerous than in wild‑type mice and are occasionally misplaced to the outer rim of the organ 14 , 84 . The lymph nodes are lymphopaenic and deficient in CD11c + MHC class II hi dendritic cells ( DCs ) , whereas the structural organization of the paracortical areas of lymph nodes , the white pulp of the spleen and the Peyer’s patches is scrambled 24 . Additionally , CCR7‑deficient mice may infrequently lack defined lymph nodes 90 but , paradoxically , consistently develop ectopic lymphoid structures in mucosal sites such as the lungs , stomach and intestine . These lymphoid aggregates are highly organized with well segregated B‑ and T‑cell zones and high endothelial venules 59 , 66 , 69 . The cellular sequelae in Ccr7 – / – mice leading to the development of these tertiary lymphoid structures are not yet apparent . Conversely , the morphological changes in secondary lymphoid organs are clearly due to the non‑redundant role of CCR7 in homing and positioning of their lymphoid and non‑lymphoid cellular constituents 13 , 24 , 50 , 59 . CCR7‑deficient mice show impaired lymph‑node homing and positioning of naive , central memory and regulatory T cells , as well as a defect in migration of dendritic cells from the skin , intestinal lamina propria and lungs 31 , 33 . CCR7 expression and function is also required for thymocyte differentiation and maturation 14 , 67 , 68 , 84 . As a consequence of the multiple defects in lymphoid organ homing and positioning , the interactions of T‑cell subsets with different haematopoietic and non‑haematopoietic cells are perturbed in Ccr7 – / – mice , thereby preventing normal T‑cell development and function . Consequently , CCR7‑deficient mice , on one hand , display delayed induction of adaptive immune responses and , on the other hand , show impairment in central and peripheral tolerance and defective function of T Reg cells 31 , 33 , 46 , 50 , 68 . Ineffective tolerance to self antigens leads to the development of multi‑organ autoimmunity in CCR7‑deficient mice 66 , 67 . R E V I E W S 364 | mAy 2008 | VOLUmE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2008 Nature Publishing Group Immunoglobulin class switching A process in B cells by which the class of a secreted immunoglobulin is changed ( for example , from IgM to IgG ) without altering its antigen specificity . Contact hypersensitivity A form of delayed - type hypersensitivity ( type IV ) , in which T cells respond to antigens that are introduced through skin contact . This step requires dendritic - cell mobilization from the skin to the draining lymph nodes to prime the antigen - specific T cells . Severe combined immunodeficiency ( SCID ) mice Spontaneous mutant mice in which T and B cells are absent . SCID mice lack functional lymphocytes because they have a deficiency that impairs rearrangement of different immunoglobulin and T - cell receptor genes . Lack of T and B cells leads to defects in cell - mediated and humoral immune responses . had been adoptively transferred into plt / plt recipients . Remarkably , intravenous application of CCL21 could completely restore the intranodal migration velocity of T cells 40 . In vitro studies showed that in a shear - free environment , surface - immobilized CCL21 molecules induce integrin clustering but not activation , and that the resulting CCL21 - induced T - cell migration does not depend on integrin - mediated adhesion 43 . There is a notable dichotomy of chemokine - receptor usage within lymph nodes . CCR7 delivers signals that direct cells to the T - cell areas , whereas CXCR5 guides cells to B - cell follicles . Following activation , follicular B cells downregulate the CXCR5 and upregulate CCR7 ( Ref . 15 ) . This shift in chemokine - receptor expression allows for the transient mobilization of follicular B cells towards the T - cell zone , where activated B cells can receive help from CD4 + T helper ( T H ) cells . Likewise , at a later stage of the immune response , a small subpopu - lation of CD4 + CXCR5 + follicular T H cells is generated . These cells express low levels of CCR7 , allowing them to migrate into the B - cell follicles to provide help for anti - body production and immunoglobulin class switching 44 , 45 . Taken together , these results demonstrate that CCR7 represents an important lymph - node homing receptor for DCs , as well as for a defined subpopulation of T cells , and that CCR7 together with CXCR5 determines the positioning of immune cells in the functional microen - vironments of the secondary lymphoid organs . CCR7 in immunity and peripheral tolerance Immunity to pathogens and alloantigens . Considering the multifaceted effects of CCR7 and its ligands on immune cells and their concomitant importance for the organization of the paracortical areas of the lymph node , it was not surprising to see weak and delayed adaptive immunity in CCR7 - deficient mice following a single administration of a model antigen 24 . more refined studies have shown that although CCR7 - deficient mice develop normal antibody responses against replicating vesicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) or against high amounts of recombinant VSV glycoproteins , they mount largely impaired humoral immune responses when antigen levels are low . As DCs are not involved in generating VSV immunity , these data indicate that CCR7 - mediated interactions between B cells and T H cells are of particular relevance when antigen is sparse 46 . The need for CCR7 - mediated cell interactions can also be bypassed in other cases of adaptive immunity to pathogens . Accordingly , plt / plt mice as well as Ccr7 – / – mice mount neutralizing immune responses towards lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus , obviously due to antigen presentation at ectopic sites , including the splenic marginal zone and the superficial cortex of lymph nodes 47 , 48 . Similar effects may be responsible for the relative resistance of CCR7 - deficient mice towards infection with Listeria monocytogenes . In this model , the priming of naive but not memory mHC - class - Ia - restricted CD8 + T cells requires CCR7 , whereas naive mHC - class - Ib - restricted CD8 + T cells or mHC - class - II - restricted CD4 + T cells are less dependent on the pres - ence of this chemokine receptor 49 . It was also noted that following repeated systemic antigen administration of , for example , tetanus toxoid , full - blown humoral and cell - ular immunity also develops in Ccr7 – / – mice 50 . moreover , in chronic experimental models of contact hypersensitivity , autoimmune encephalitis and allergic asthma , as well as in an adoptive transfer model of inflammatory bowel disease in severe combined immunodeficiency ( SCID ) mice , the elicited immune responses and ensuing pathological changes develop in the absence of CCR7 or its ligands , albeit with delayed kinetics 50 – 53 . Although , as illustrated by these examples , the requirement for CCR7 expression in mounting an immune response against different pathogens and anti - gens may vary , evidence is emerging that some pathogens can exploit CCR7 and its ligands for their infection strat - egies . For example , CCL19 and CCL21 have been shown to increase the permissiveness of human resting memory CD4 + T cells to HIV - 1 infection 54 . Also , pathogens such as L . monocytogenes use the CCR7 - mediated migration of DCs to transfer to the draining lymph nodes , from where they can spread to other organs 55 . Cumulatively , these results imply that the requirement for CCR7 can be bypassed in immune reactions that are induced by copious amounts of antigens . Tolerance to environmental antigens . As outlined above , the continuous migration of DCs from the periphery represents an essential step for tolerance induction towards environmental or food antigens . DCs con - stantly sample self and foreign antigens while resid - ing in the periphery . Even in the absence of apparent inflammatory stimuli , these cells migrate towards afferent lymphatic vessels , albeit at low frequencies . The oak - leaf - shaped endothelial cells of the initial seg - ments of lymphatic vessels are not tightly connected to each other , but rather contain ‘buttons’ of adherens and tight junctions , which create overlapping flaps between endothelial cells 56 . It has been suggested that fluids enter the lymphatic circulation through the openings between these buttons 56 and it seems possi - ble that DCs take the same route , as cells of the initial lymphatic vessels express CCL21 . The origin and the underlying mechanisms of this spontaneous mobiliza - tion of DCs remain obscure . However , the migration of these so - called ‘semi - mature’ or ‘tolerogenic’ DCs via the afferent lymphatic vessels into the draining lymph nodes relies entirely on their expression of CCR7 ( Ref . 13 ) . Therefore , CCR7 - deficient mice were ideal to test the hypothesis that DC - mediated transport of harmless antigens is indeed necessary for the induction of peripheral tolerance . Feeding wild - type mice with the model antigen oval - bumin ( OVA ) results in the systemic non - responsiveness of these animals towards OVA when this antigen is re - applied subcutaneously or intravenously . microsurgical approaches identified the mesenteric lymph node as the place where the orally administered antigen is pre - sented to cognate T cells 33 . Oral tolerance could not be induced in CCR7 - deficient mice , possibly owing to the impaired migration of OVA - laden DCs from the lamina propria to the mesenteric lymph nodes 33 . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEWS | immunology VOLUmE 8 | mAy 2008 | 365 © 2008 Nature Publishing Group Further insights into the mechanisms of antigen trans - port that are required for tolerance induction came from studies in which antigen was delivered into the respira - tory tract by inhalation or intratracheal instillation . Under these experimental conditions , the transport of the fluoro - chrome - labelled antigen can be monitored in vivo and ex vivo ( fIG . 1 ) . Again , wild - type but not CCR7 - deficient mice entered a state of systemic non - responsiveness following exposure to OVA via the respiratory route 31 . Reporter T cells , which recognize defined epitopes of OVA , were adoptively transferred into wild - type and CCR7 - deficient mice . In wild - type recipients that received OVA aerosols , these cells showed abortive proliferation . By contrast , in Ccr7 – / – mice , the OVA aerosol had no effect on these T cells , which were neither deleted nor anergized and also failed to upregulate any activation marker . This was rather surprising as the lymph - node - resident DCs , which are also present in Ccr7 – / – mice , avidly took up solu - ble antigen draining from the lung , but obviously failed to present it to CD4 + or CD8 + T cells 31 . This defect in tolerance induction by aerogenic antigen in Ccr7 – / – mice could be overcome by the intratracheal adoptive transfer of immature wild - type bone - marrow - derived DCs before exposure to the OVA aerosol 31 . Taken together , these data indicate that DCs that reside at mucosal sites induce tolerance under homeostatic conditions by continuously sampling innocuous antigens and transporting them in a CCR7 - dependent manner to draining lymph nodes for efficient tolerogenic presentation to T cells . CCR7 in the development and function of T Reg cells . Another efficient mechanism of peripheral tolerance to self and foreign antigens involves the suppression of immunity by forkhead box P3 ( FOXP3 ) + CD4 + CD25 + regulatory T ( T Reg ) cells 57 . naturally occurring T Reg cells develop in the thymus in the absence of CCR7 . The total number of FOXP3 + T cells in the thymi of Ccr7 – / – mice is identical to that in wild - type mice 50 . Also , the in vitro suppressive activity of CCR7 - deficient T Reg cells is intact , as they are equipotent with their wild - type counterparts in inhibiting T - cell proliferation in vitro 50 , 58 , 59 . Conversely , the suppressive function of Ccr7 – / – T Reg cells in vivo is pro - foundly defective . This is primarily due to their inability to home to lymph nodes and position themselves within the T - cell zone 50 , 58 , 59 . Thus , the disrupted architecture of the T - cell zone observed in Ccr7 – / – mice extends also to defective positioning of T Reg cells . Because this region of the lymph node is the major site of T Reg - cell - mediated in vivo suppression , CCR7 and its ligands hold the key to T Reg - cell - mediated tolerance . The exact means of T Reg - cell suppressive activity within the lymph nodes remains contentious . It is very likely that different mechanistic principles cumulatively contribute to their function ( fIG . 2 ) . First , following CCR7 - mediated homing to the T - cell zone of the lymph node , T Reg cells proliferate and expand on contact with their cognate antigen 50 . Second , the CCR7 - dependent presence of T Reg cells in the lymph node during antigen recognition by T H cells results in reduced numbers of activated T H cells 50 . As demonstrated by the adoptive co - transfer of T - cell - receptor - transgenic T Reg cells and T H cells , this effect , in turn , has multiple facets . On one hand , T Reg cells suppress the concurrent antigen - induced proliferation of T H cells . On the other hand , T Reg cells actively reduce the number of T H cells in the lymph node by either interfering with their homing or inducing their apoptosis 50 . To this end , it is possible that T Reg cells and T H cells simply compete for T - cell homing and / or survival signals in lymph nodes . notably , CCR7 ligands can provide both homing and survival cues 11 . After being downregulated in the lymph node during an immune response 60 , CCR7 ligands may become too scarce to support homing and survival of all T cells that express CCR7 . Furthermore , wild - type but not CCR7 - deficient T Reg cells inhibit the antigen - induced activation and / or differentiation of T H cells 50 . Third , peripheral naive T cells may directly undergo differen - tiation into T Reg cells 61 , 62 . This conversion establishes the lymph node as an additional site , other than the thymus , where regulatory T - cell development may take place . All T Reg - cell silencing mechanisms mentioned here , regard - less of the targeting of DCs or T cells , take place in the T - cell zone of the lymph node , and are therefore inevi - tably dependent on the CCR7 - mediated lymph - node homing of the three major cellular components involved in suppression : T Reg cells , T H cells and DCs . However , it should be noted that , especially during inflammation , these cell populations might home to the lymph nodes using receptors other than CCR7 , and other antigen - presenting cells , such as B cells , might also contribute to the expansion and function of T Reg cells 63 . natural T Reg cells have been subdivided into two dif - ferent subpopulations based on their surface expression of CD103 : ‘naive - like’ T Reg cells are CD103 – and ‘effector - like’ T Reg cells are CD103 + ( Ref . 64 ) . naive - like T Reg cells act as suppressors in the lymph node , whereas effector - like T Reg cells have been shown to migrate to peripheral tissues , where they can contain T - cell - mediated inflam - mation . It was suggested that these two distinct T Reg - cell phenotypes represent two developmental stages of the same lineage 65 . Accordingly , T Reg - cells would emerge from the thymus as naive - like CCR7 + CD103 – cells . These cells would then need to home to the lymph nodes , by means of CCR7 , to undergo the switch to the effector - like phenotype , which is also accompanied by the upregulation of inflammatory chemokine receptors such as CCR2 , CCR4 and CCR6 . However , this hypoth - esis has been challenged by the finding that CD103 + effector - like T Reg cells predominate in CCR7 - deficient mice , suggesting that this T - cell phenotype can develop in the complete absence of CCR7 - dependent lymph - node homing 50 . yet , it is noteworthy that most of the CD103 + effector - like T Reg cells express CCR7 ( Ref . 58 ) and thus may use it to migrate to the lymph node where they receive putative signals required for their activation and subsequent suppressive function . In the absence of CCR7 - mediated lymph - node homing , CD103 + T Reg cells migrate to peripheral inflammatory lesions but are unable to suppress the pathological changes in , for example , the skin lesions of contact hypersensitivity 50 . The regulatory competence of CD103 + T Reg cells from Ccr7 – / – mice can be restored by their activation in vitro , which results in effective suppression of contact hypersensitivity after R E V I E W S 366 | mAy 2008 | VOLUmE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2008 Nature Publishing Group Nature Reviews | Immunology Basement membrane Alveolus Epithelialcell Goblet cell Bronchial DC Inhaled antigen Interstitial DC Activated T cell Blood vessel Precursor DC RegulatoryT cells Apoptoticcells HEV CCL21 B - cell follicle Bronchiallymph node Subcapsular sinus T - zone reticular cell CCR7 TCR Peptide – MHC complex Naive T cell Anergic T cells Medulla CCL21 CCL19 Mucus Afferent lymph vessel Figure 1 | CCR7 in the induction of tolerance to inhaled antigens . Dendritic cell ( DC ) precursors enter the lung via blood vessels and give rise to sessile interstitial and bronchial DCs . Inhaled antigens are taken up by bronchial DCs that are located below the basement membrane . Some DCs spontaneously upregulate CC‑chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) and migrate towards the initial segments of lymphatic vessels that express CC‑chemokine ligand 21 ( CCL21 ) . Following CCR7‑ mediated entry into the lymphatics , DCs are passively carried with the afferent lymph into the draining lymph node . Under experimental conditions , intratracheally applied DCs migrate from the bronchus and / or alveolus into afferent lymphatics . It is as yet unknown whether the migration of DCs from the subcapsular sinus into the T‑cell area of the bronchial lymph nodes depends on CCR7 . Within the lymph‑node paracortex , DCs present antigens to naive T cells , which enter the lymph node via the high endothelial venules ( HEVs ) . T cells randomly migrate on reticular cells , which express CCL19 and CCL21 . These chemokines enhance the velocity of T‑cell locomotion within the lymph node and thus increase the likelihood of their encounter with DCs presenting cognate antigen . T cells that recognize inhaled innocuous antigens either undergo apoptosis , become anergic or gain regulatory capacities . Some T cells that are present in the lung parenchyma also rely on CCR7 for their entry into the afferent lymphatics . TCR , T‑cell receptor . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEWS | immunology VOLUmE 8 | mAy 2008 | 367 © 2008 Nature Publishing Group Nature Reviews | Immunology HEV T - zone reticular cell TCR Peptide – MHC complex Naive T cell CCL21 CCL21 Afferent lymph vessel Antigen B - cell follicle T Reg cell DC Effector T cells Medulla a b d c e CCR7 Lymph node Sjögren’s syndrome An autoimmune disorder in which immune cells attack and destroy exocrine glands . The hallmarks of Sjögren’s syndrome are dry eyes and dry mouth . The disease is often associated with arthritis . adoptive transfer 58 . In conclusion , Ccr7 – / – mice have defective in vivo T Reg - cell function , which may also explain how experimental chronic immune reactions result in a more severe outcome in these animals than in their wild - type counterparts 50 . CCR7 , autoimmunity and lymphoid neogensis Recent studies have demonstrated that a lack of CCR7 is associated with the manifestation of spontaneous autoimmunity 66 , 67 . The autoimmune phenotype of CCR7 - deficient mice is characterized by lymphocyte infiltrates in several peripheral organs , as well as increased titres of circulating auto - antibodies against a multitude of tissue - specific antigens that lead to IgG deposition in renal glomeruli 66 , 67 . mechanistically , the autoimmunity that emerges in Ccr7 – / – mice might result from inef - ficient negative selection of autoreactive T cells in the thymus 67 , 68 ( see later ) , incomplete maintenance of peripheral tolerance 31 , 33 or defective function of T Reg cells 50 , 59 . Interestingly , CCR7 - deficient mice spontaneously develop organized tertiary lymphoid structures at mucosal sites such as the lung , stomach and colon 59 , 66 , 69 . Such lymphoid structures are frequently observed in lesions of Sjögren’s syndrome , rheumatoid arthritis and autoimmune thyroditis , and are thought to maintain local chronic autoimmune responses that favour dis - ease progression 70 . To what extent the ectopic lymphoid structures that are present in CCR7 - deficient mice contribute to the establishment and maintenance of autoimmunity is still unknown . Paradoxically , CCR7 has an ambivalent role in the development of tertiary lymphoid structures . On the one hand , lack of CCR7 signalling leads to spontaneous lymphoid neogenesis primarily in mucosal organs , which demonstrates that CCR7 is not required for this process . On the other hand , transgenic expression of CCR7L in the thyroid and pancreas , but not skin , leads to the formation of tertiary lymphoid structures 71 – 74 . Also , the ectopic Figure 2 | CCR7 in function of regulatory T cells . Virtually all naturally occurring forkhead box P3 ( FOXP3 ) + CD4 + CD25 + regulatory T ( T Reg ) cells in blood express CC‑chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) and use it to enter the lymph node via the high endothelial venules ( HEVs ) . On homing to the lymph node and migrating within paracortical lymph‑node areas , T Reg cells establish contacts with antigen‑laden dendritic cells ( DCs ) that have homed via the afferent lymphatics . Consequently T Reg cells proliferate and expand when presented with cognate antigen ( a ) ; interfere with the concurrent antigen‑induced proliferation of naive T helper ( T H ) cells ( b ) ; and actively reduce the number of effector cells and suppress their differentiation ( c ) . To exert these suppressive activities , T Reg cells may alternatively target DCs ( d ) or T cells ( b , c ) or both , whereas the means and mechanisms of suppression ( that is , the requirements for cell contacts or soluble mediators ) are not entirely clear . Upon homing to the lymph node and coming into contact with DCs , naive T cells may also undergo direct conversion into T Reg cells ( e ) in a process that requires low amounts of cognate antigen , low‑level co‑stimulation and interleukin‑10 or transforming growth factor‑ β , but not interleukin‑2 . R E V I E W S 368 | mAy 2008 | VOLUmE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2008 Nature Publishing Group Nature Reviews | Immunology Capsule Blood vessel BM - derived progenitor cell Subcapsularepithelium DN1 DN1 – DN2 DN2 DN3 DN4 cTEC mTEC SP SP SP CD69 – CCR7 – CCR7 + or CCR7 – CD69 + CCR7 + or CCR7 – CD69 + CD24 hi CCR7 – or CCR7 low CD69 + CD24 int CCR7 + CD69 – CD24 low CD62 hi CCR7 + DP DP DC Cortico – medullaryjunction Cortex Sub - capsularzone Medulla expression of CCL21 observed in autoimmunity and infection has been associated with the development of tertiary lymphoid structures in different organs 75 – 77 . CCR7 mediates this effect , as the formation of tertiary lymphoid structures is not observed in the thyroid of CCR7 - deficient mice that ectopically express CCL21 ( Ref . 78 ) . Similarly , lymphoid neogenesis is absent in the joints of CCR7 - deficient animals following induc - tion of antigen - induced arthritis 79 . The mechanisms by which the presence or absence of CCR7 can promote the formation of tertiary lymphoid structures remain to be clarified . CCR7 in thymus architecture and function The thymus is the key organ responsible for the main - tenance of the peripheral T - cell pool . In recent years , several studies have demonstrated that chemokine recep - tors , including CCR7 , and their ligands are important in coordinating migratory events into , within and out of the thymus 14 , 80 , 81 . During embryogenesis , CCL21 has been detected in the thymic primordium of embryonic day 11 . 5 ( E11 . 5 ) to E12 . 5 embryos , suggesting that this chemokine might be involved in the recruitment of fetal haematopoietic progenitors into the developing organ 82 , 83 . Supporting this idea , CCR7 - deficient mice and plt / plt mice have reduced numbers of thymocytes at E13 . 5 ( Ref . 83 ) . more recent data also demonstrate that mice that overex - press CCX - CKR ( the interceptor for CCL19 , CCL21 and CCL25 ) on thymic epithelial cells have reduced numbers of haematopoietic precursors in the thymic anlage 23 . In the adult thymus , the presence of CCL19 and CCL21 is not restricted to a given compartment , as they are detectable in the cortex and in the medulla 14 . Consequently , CCR7 ligands seem to be able to guide the migration of developing thymocytes through both thymic compartments ( fIG . 3 ) . Early progenitors lack CD4 and CD8 expression and are referred to as double negative ( Dn ) cells . CCR7 is prominently expressed by a CD44 hi CD25 int Dn subpopulation , which probably reflects a transitory state between Dn1 ( CD44 + CD25 – ) and Dn2 ( CD44 + CD25 + ) thymocytes ( termed Dn1 – Dn2 cells ) 14 . Approximately half of these cells express CCR7 , indicating that this receptor could be involved in the migration of cells outwards from the cortico – medullary junction . Accordingly , in the absence of CCR7 signalling , part of the Dn1 – Dn2 population undergoes developmental arrest at this transitional stage . However , it should be mentioned that at this early developmental stage , intrathymic precursors are still not committed to any particular T - cell lineage , and , there - fore , it remains unclear to what extent Dn1 – Dn2 cells actually contribute to the pool of developing T cells . A crucial role for CCR7 in the translocation of posi - tively selected CD4 + CD8 + double positive ( DP ) thymo - cytes from the cortex into the medulla has recently been suggested 84 . However , as only approximately 25 % of positively selected DP cells ( CD4 + CD8 + CD69 + ) express CCR7 ( Ref . 68 ) , it is still unclear to what degree positively selected thymocytes require CCR7 to transit from the cortex to the medulla . The most abundant expression of CCR7 is observed in single positive ( SP ) populations 14 , 68 , which are present at a high frequency in the medulla . Remarkably , the most immature CD4 + SP cell subpopulation ( CD4 + CD8 – CD24 hi CD69 + ) , which probably corresponds to cells undergoing negative selection , express no or only low levels of CCR7 . By contrast , cells that escape negative selection ( CD4 + CD8 – CD24 int CD69 + ) as well as mature cells ( CD4 + CD8 – CD24 – CD62L + ) express high amounts of CCR7 ( Ref . 68 ) . The expression of CCR7 by thymo - cytes at a late maturational stages could have a role in the retention of SP cells in the medulla while they complete functional maturation . Alternatively , CCR7 expres - sion could be involved in the positioning of mature Figure 3 | CCR7 in thymocyte migration . Bone‑marrow ( BM ) ‑derived thymocyte progenitors enter the adult thymus through the venules at the cortico – medullary junction . They lack CD4 and CD8 expression and are therefore termed double negative ( DN ) cells . DN1 thymocytes ( CD25 – CD44 hi ) differentiate in proximity to the site of thymic entry . Differentiation to the DN2 ( CD25 + CD44 hi ) stage occurs while cells migrate into the mid cortex . CC‑chemokine receptor 7 ( CCR7 ) may be involved in this migratory step , as its expression has been detected in some of the CD25 int CD44 hi ( DN1 – DN2 ) cells . DN3 thymocytes ( CD25 hi CD44 low ) differentiate during their migration from the mid to the outer cortex and accumulate in the subcapsular zone where they subsequently develop into DN4 cells ( CD25 – CD44 – ) . Transition from the DN to the double positive ( DP ) stage is accompanied by a reverse in the direction of migration , with DP thymocytes ( CD4 + CD8 + CD69 – ) travelling across the cortex towards the medulla . Positively selected DP cells ( CD4 + CD8 + CD69 + ) enter the medulla , where they complete maturation and give rise to CD4 + or CD8 + single positive ( SP ) cells . CCR7 is expressed by a small subpopulation of DP cells and may be involved in their migration from the cortex to the medulla . The most immature SP cells ( CD24 hi CD69 + ) represent the next developmental stage and express no or only very low levels of CCR7 . By contrast , CCR7 is highly expressed by SP CD24 int CD69 + cells and mature SP CD24 low CD69 – CD62 ligand ( CD62L ) hi cells that reside in the medulla . On these cells , CCR7 might provide a retention signal that allows these cells to complete maturation before being released into the periphery . During this journey , thymocytes interact with different subpopulations of resident cells such as dendritic cells ( DCs ) and cortical and medullary thymic epithelial cells ( cTECs and mTECs ) , enabling positive selection as well as the deletion of auto‑reactive thymocytes . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEWS | immunology VOLUmE 8 | mAy 2008 | 369 © 2008 Nature Publishing Group thymocytes near the blood vessels before they exit the thymus 80 . A direct role for CCR7 in thymic egress of mature thymocytes has been demonstrated for newborn mice only 85 . Presumably owing to impaired migration of thymocytes , Ccr7 – / – and plt / plt mice show altered thy - mus morphologies accompanied by reduced numbers of thymocytes and impaired T - cell development 14 , 84 . Interestingly , the thymus of mice deficient for CCL19 has a normal architecture and cellular composition 11 . This observation indicates that in contrast to peripheral lym - phoid organs , in which CCL19 and CCL21 exert differ - ent functions , the lack of CCL19 function in the thymus seems to be compensated by that of CCL21 . Disruption of thymus morphology is frequently associ - ated with the breakdown of central tolerance and develop - ment of autoimmunity 86 . As discussed above , the lack of CCR7 signalling during thymic development of T cells may also contribute to the manifestation of autoimmunity in plt / plt and CCR7 - deficient mice 66 , 67 . In line with this observation , defective negative selection has recently been demonstrated in CCR7 - deficient mice 68 . Conversely , it has been reported that negative selection of thymocytes is nor - mal in plt / plt mice 84 . This apparent discrepancy is prob - ably due to the use of different models to study negative selection . An important aspect to be considered is that the defective negative selection of CCR7 - deficient thymocytes correlates with impaired T - cell receptor stimulation 68 , sug - gesting that functions of the CCR7 – CCR7 ligands path - way other than guiding the migration of thymocytes may contribute to the maintenance of central tolerance . Future perspectives Here , we have drawn a picture of CCR7 function in which this receptor is crucially involved in efficient induc - tion of immune reactions as well as their silencing and regulation . most of the knowledge on the involvement of CCR7 in the development of immunity and tolerance is derived from mouse models , whereas the data on CCR7 function in humans is rather sparse . Fortunately , expres - sion patterns of CCR7 in mice and humans are similar , corroborating the use of mouse models for the in vivo investigations of this chemokine receptor pathway . The apparently ambiguous role of CCR7 and its ligands in shaping immunity makes it difficult to target these mol - ecules for therapeutic intervention in human immune - mediated diseases . However , the recently discovered contribution of CCR7 to the induction and maintenance of tolerance suggests new strategies to target CCR7 for breaking undesired immune tolerance , for example , to malignant tumours . Several types of malignancies express CCR7 and use it for their dissemination and survival . Thus , potential CCR7 - targeted cancer therapy might allow us to not only overcome immunological tumour tolerance but may also have direct tumoricidal effects as well as interfere with tumour metastasis through affer - ent lymphatic vessels . Future studies on CCR7 in human molecular medicine as well as more refined mouse mod - els of site - specific and inducible CCR7 and CCR7 - ligand knockout , knockdown and knock - in mice will benefit our understanding of this fundamental molecular pathway and the cellular responses driven by it . 1 . Rot , A . & von Andrian , U . H . Chemokines in innate and adaptive host defense : basic chemokinese grammar for immune cells . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 22 , 891 – 928 ( 2004 ) . 2 . Yoshida , R . et al . Secondary lymphoid - tissue chemokine is a functional ligand for the CC chemokine receptor CCR7 . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 7118 – 7122 ( 1998 ) . 3 . Gunn , M . D . et al . A chemokine expressed in lymphoid high endothelial venules promotes the adhesion and chemotaxis of naive T lymphocytes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 258 – 263 ( 1998 ) . 4 . Stein , J . V . et al . The CC chemokine thymus - derived chemotactic agent 4 ( TCA - 4 , secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine , 6Ckine , exodus - 2 ) triggers lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 - mediated arrest of rolling T lymphocytes in peripheral lymph node high endothelial venules . J . Exp . Med . 191 , 61 – 76 ( 2000 ) . 5 . Friedman , R . S . , Jacobelli , J . & Krummel , M . F . Surface - bound chemokines capture and prime T cells for synapse formation . Nature Immunol . 7 , 1101 – 1108 ( 2006 ) . 6 . Kerjaschki , D . Lymphatic neoangiogenesis in human neoplasia and transplantation as experiments of nature . BANTAO J . 4 , 60 – 61 ( 2006 ) . 7 . Vassileva , G . et al . The reduced expression of 6Ckine in the plt mouse results from the deletion of one of two 6Ckine genes . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1183 – 1188 ( 1999 ) . 8 . Nakano , H . & Gunn , M . D . Gene duplications at the chemokine locus on mouse chromosome 4 : multiple strain - specific haplotypes and the deletion of secondary lymphoid - organ chemokine and EBI - 1 ligand chemokine genes in the plt mutation . J . Immunol . 166 , 361 – 369 ( 2001 ) . 9 . Luther , S . A . , Tang , H . L . , Hyman , P . L . , Farr , A . G . & Cyster , J . G . Coexpression of the chemokines ELC and SLC by T zone stromal cells and deletion of the ELC gene in the plt / plt mouse . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 12694 – 12699 ( 2000 ) . 10 . Carlsen , H . S . , Haraldsen , G . , Brandtzaeg , P . & Baekkevold , E . S . Disparate lymphoid chemokine expression in mice and men : no evidence of CCL21 synthesis by human high endothelial venules . Blood 106 , 444 – 446 ( 2005 ) . 11 . Link , A . et al . Fibroblastic reticular cells in lymph nodes regulate the homeostasis of naive T cells . Nature Immunol . 8 , 1255 – 1265 ( 2007 ) . This study shows that fibroblast reticular cells support the intranodal migration of lymphocytes in peripheral lymph nodes . In agreement with this data , reference 41 demonstrates that a subtype of reticular cells express CCL19 , CCL21 and IL - 7 , which support the survival of lymphocytes migrating in the lymph node T - cell zone . 12 . Sallusto , F . et al . Distinct patterns and kinetics of chemokine production regulate dendritic cell function . Eur . J . Immunol . 29 , 1617 – 1625 ( 1999 ) . 13 . Ohl , L . et al . CCR7 governs skin dendritic cell migration under inflammatory and steady - state conditions . Immunity 21 , 279 – 288 ( 2004 ) . 14 . Misslitz , A . et al . Thymic T cell development and progenitor localization depend on CCR7 . J . Exp . Med . 200 , 481 – 491 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Reif , K . et al . Balanced responsiveness to chemoattractants from adjacent zones determines B - cell position . Nature 416 , 94 – 99 ( 2002 ) . 16 . Sallusto , F . , Lenig , D . , Förster , R . , Lipp , M . & Lanzavecchia , A . Two subsets of memory T lymphocytes with distinct homing potentials and effector functions . Nature 401 , 708 – 712 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Szanya , V . , Ermann , J . , Taylor , C . , Holness , C . & Fathman , C . G . The subpopulation of CD4 + CD25 + splenocytes that delays adoptive transfer of diabetes expresses L - selectin and high levels of CCR7 . J . Immunol . 169 , 2461 – 2465 ( 2002 ) . 18 . Shields , J . D . et al . Autologous chemotaxis as a mechanism of tumor cell homing to lymphatics via interstitial flow and autocrine CCR7 signaling . Cancer Cell 11 , 526 – 538 ( 2007 ) . 19 . Bardi , G . , Lipp , M . , Baggiolini , M . & Loetscher , P . The T cell chemokine receptor CCR7 is internalized on stimulation with ELC , but not with SLC . Eur . J . Immunol . 31 , 3291 – 3297 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Kohout , T . A . et al . Differential desensitization , receptor phosphorylation , β - arrestin recruitment , and ERK1 / 2 activation by the two endogenous ligands for the CC chemokine receptor 7 . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 23214 – 23222 ( 2004 ) . 21 . Gosling , J . et al . Cutting edge : identification of a novel chemokine receptor that binds dendritic cell - and T cell - active chemokines including ELC , SLC , and TECK . J . Immunol . 164 , 2851 – 2856 ( 2000 ) . 22 . Comerford , I . , Milasta , S . , Morrow , V . , Milligan , G . & Nibbs , R . The chemokine receptor CCX - CKR mediates effective scavenging of CCL19 in vitro . Eur . J . Immunol . 36 , 1904 – 1916 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Heinzel , K . , Benz , C . & Bleul , C . C . A silent chemokine receptor regulates steady - state leukocyte homing in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 8421 – 8426 ( 2007 ) . 24 . Förster , R . et al . CCR7 coordinates the primary immune response by establishing functional microenvironments in secondary lymphoid organs . Cell 99 , 23 – 33 ( 1999 ) . 25 . Debes , G . F . et al . Chemokine receptor CCR7 required for T lymphocyte exit from peripheral tissues . Nature Immunol . 6 , 889 – 894 ( 2005 ) . 26 . Bromley , S . K . , Thomas , S . Y . & Luster , A . D . Chemokine receptor CCR7 guides T cell exit from peripheral tissues and entry into afferent lymphatics . Nature Immunol . 6 , 895 – 901 ( 2005 ) . 27 . Banchereau , J . & Steinman , R . M . Dendritic cells and the control of immunity . Nature 392 , 245 – 252 ( 1998 ) . 28 . Dieu , M . C . et al . Selective recruitment of immature and mature dendritic cells by distinct chemokines expressed in different anatomic sites . J . Exp . Med . 188 , 373 – 386 ( 1998 ) . 29 . Sozzani , S . et al . Differential regulation of chemokine receptors during dendritic cell maturation : a model for their trafficking properties . J . Immunol . 161 , 1083 – 1086 ( 1998 ) . 30 . Yanagihara , S . , Komura , E . , Nagafune , J . , Watarai , H . & Yamaguchi , Y . EBI1 / CCR7 is a new member of dendritic cell chemokine receptor that is up - regulated upon maturation . J . Immunol . 161 , 3096 – 3102 ( 1998 ) . 31 . Hintzen , G . et al . Induction of tolerance to innocuous inhaled antigen relies on a CCR7 - dependent dendritic cell - mediated antigen transport to the bronchial lymph node . J . Immunol . 177 , 7346 – 7354 ( 2006 ) . R E V I E W S 370 | mAy 2008 | VOLUmE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2008 Nature Publishing Group 32 . Martín - Fontecha , A . et al . Regulation of dendritic cell migration to the draining lymph node : impact on T lymphocyte traffic and priming . J . Exp . Med . 198 , 615 – 621 ( 2003 ) . This reference demonstrates that DCs have to express CCR7 to migrate from the skin to peripheral lymph nodes under inflammatory conditions , and reference 13 shows that CCR7 is also indispensable for DC migration in non - inflammatory , steady - state situations . 33 . Worbs , T . et al . Oral tolerance originates in the intestinal immune system and relies on antigen carriage by dendritic cells . J . Exp . Med . 203 , 519 – 527 ( 2006 ) . This reference and reference 31 show that CCR7 - dependent migration of antigen - carrying DCs into the draining lymph nodes is required for the induction of tolerance to ingested and inhaled antigens . 34 . Johansson - Lindbom , B . et al . Functional specialization of gut CD103 + dendritic cells in the regulation of tissue - selective T cell homing . J . Exp . Med . 202 , 1063 – 1073 ( 2005 ) . 35 . Jang , M . H . et al . CCR7 is critically important for migration of dendritic cells in intestinal lamina propria to mesenteric lymph nodes . J . Immunol . 176 , 803 – 810 ( 2006 ) . 36 . Gunn , M . D . et al . Mice lacking expression of secondary lymphoid organ chemokine have defects in lymphocyte homing and dendritic cell localization . J . Exp . Med . 189 , 451 – 460 ( 1999 ) . 37 . Marsland , B . J . et al . CCL19 and CCL21 induce a potent proinflammatory differentiation program in licensed dendritic cells . Immunity 22 , 493 – 505 ( 2005 ) . 38 . Yanagawa , Y . & Onoe , K . CCR7 ligands induce rapid endocytosis in mature dendritic cells with concomitant up - regulation of Cdc42 and Rac activities . Blood 101 , 4923 – 4929 ( 2003 ) . 39 . Bajenoff , M . et al . Stromal cell networks regulate lymphocyte entry , migration , and territoriality in lymph nodes . Immunity 25 , 989 – 1001 ( 2006 ) . 40 . Worbs , T . , Mempel , T . R . , Boelter , J . , von Andrian , U . H . & Förster , R . CCR7 - ligands stimulate the intranodal motility of T lymphocytes in vivo . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 489 – 495 ( 2007 ) . References 40 – 42 demonstrate that CCR7 influences the motility of lymphocytes in lymph nodes . In addition , reference 43 shows that , in the absence of shear forces , lymph - node chemokines promote T - cell motility without triggering firm integrin adhesiveness . 41 . Okada , T . & Cyster , J . G . CC chemokine receptor 7 contributes to Gi - dependent T cell motility in the lymph node . J . Immunol . 178 , 2973 – 2978 ( 2007 ) . 42 . Huang , J . H . et al . Requirements for T lymphocyte migration in explanted lymph nodes . J . Immunol . 178 , 7747 – 7755 ( 2007 ) . 43 . Woolf , E . et al . Lymph node chemokines promote sustained T lymphocyte motility without triggering stable integrin adhesiveness in the absence of shear forces . Nature Immunol . 8 , 1076 – 1085 ( 2007 ) . 44 . Hardtke , S . , Ohl , L . & Förster , R . Balanced expression of CXCR5 and CCR7 on follicular T helper cells determines their transient positioning to lymph node follicles and is essential for efficient B - cell help . Blood 106 , 1924 – 1931 ( 2005 ) . 45 . Arnold , C . N . , Campbell , D . J . , Lipp , M . & Butcher , E . C . The germinal center response is impaired in the absence of T cell - expressed CXCR5 . Eur . J . Immunol . 37 , 100 – 109 ( 2007 ) . 46 . Scandella , E . et al . Dendritic cell - independent B cell activation during acute virus infection : a role for early CCR7 - driven B – T helper cell collaboration . J . Immunol . 178 , 1468 – 1476 ( 2007 ) . 47 . Junt , T . et al . Antiviral immune responses in the absence of organized lymphoid T cell zones in plt / plt mice . J . Immunol . 168 , 6032 – 6040 ( 2002 ) . 48 . Junt , T . et al . Impact of CCR7 on priming and distribution of antiviral effector and memory CTL . J . Immunol . 173 , 6684 – 6693 ( 2004 ) . 49 . Kursar , M . et al . Differential requirements for the chemokine receptor CCR7 in T cell activation during Listeria monocytogenes infection . J . Exp . Med . 201 , 1447 – 1457 ( 2005 ) . 50 . Schneider , M . A . , Meingassner , J . G . , Lipp , M . , Moore , H . D . & Rot , A . CCR7 is required for the in vivo function of CD4 + CD25 + regulatory T cells . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 735 – 745 ( 2007 ) . This study , along with reference 59 , demonstrates that CCR7 is required for the migration of T Reg cells into lymph nodes and that this homing is essential for the unimpaired function of T Reg cells . 51 . Pahuja , A . et al . Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis develops in CC chemokine receptor 7 - deficient mice with altered T - cell responses . Scand . J . Immunol . 64 , 361 – 369 ( 2006 ) . 52 . Mori , S . et al . Mice lacking expression of the chemokines CCL21 - ser and CCL19 ( plt mice ) demonstrate delayed but enhanced T cell immune responses . J . Exp . Med . 193 , 207 – 218 ( 2001 ) . 53 . Grinnan , D . et al . Enhanced allergen - induced airway inflammation in paucity of lymph node T cell ( plt ) mutant mice . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 118 , 1234 – 1241 ( 2006 ) . 54 . Saleh , S . et al . CCR7 ligands CCL19 and CCL21 increase permissiveness of resting memory CD4 + T - cells to HIV - 1 infection : a novel model of HIV - 1 latency . Blood 110 , 4161 – 4164 ( 2007 ) . 55 . Pron , B . et al . Dendritic cells are early cellular targets of Listeria monocytogenes after intestinal delivery and are involved in bacterial spread in the host . Cell . Microbiol . 3 , 331 – 340 ( 2001 ) . 56 . Baluk , P . et al . Functionally specialized junctions between endothelial cells of lymphatic vessels . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 2349 – 2362 ( 2007 ) . 57 . Sakaguchi , S . Naturally arising Foxp3 - expressing CD25 + CD4 + regulatory T cells in immunological tolerance to self and non - self . Nature Immunol . 6 , 345 – 352 ( 2005 ) . 58 . Menning , A . et al . Distinctive role of CCR7 in migration and functional activity of naive - and effector / memory - like Treg subsets . Eur . J . Immunol . 37 , 1575 – 1583 ( 2007 ) . 59 . Kocks , J . R . , Davalos - Misslitz , A . C . , Hintzen , G . , Ohl , L . & Förster , R . Regulatory T cells interfere with the development of bronchus - associated lymphoid tissue . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 723 – 734 ( 2007 ) . 60 . Mueller , S . N . et al . Regulation of homeostatic chemokine expression and cell trafficking during immune responses . Science 317 , 670 – 674 ( 2007 ) . 61 . Kretschmer , K . et al . Inducing and expanding regulatory T cell populations by foreign antigen . Nature Immunol . 6 , 1219 – 1227 ( 2005 ) . 62 . Liang , S . et al . Conversion of CD4 + CD25 - – cells into CD4 + CD25 + regulatory T cells in vivo requires B7 costimulation , but not the thymus . J . Exp . Med . 201 , 127 – 137 ( 2005 ) . 63 . Mann , M . K . , Maresz , K . , Shriver , L . P . , Tan , Y . & Dittel , B . N . B cell regulation of CD4 + CD25 + T regulatory cells and IL - 10 via B7 is essential for recovery from experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis . J . Immunol . 178 , 3447 – 3456 ( 2007 ) . 64 . Huehn , J . et al . Developmental stage , phenotype , and migration distinguish naive - and effector / memory - like CD4 + regulatory T cells . J . Exp . Med . 199 , 303 – 313 ( 2004 ) . 65 . Lee , J . H . , Kang , S . G . & Kim , C . H . FoxP3 + T cells undergo conventional first switch to lymphoid tissue homing receptors in thymus but accelerated second switch to nonlymphoid tissue homing receptors in secondary lymphoid tissues . J . Immunol . 178 , 301 – 311 ( 2007 ) . 66 . Davalos - Misslitz , A . C . et al . Generalized multi - organ autoimmunity in CCR7 - deficient mice . Eur . J . Immunol . 37 , 613 – 622 ( 2007 ) . References 66 – 68 demonstrate that establishment of central tolerance is impaired in the absence of CCR7 signalling , and that CCR7 - deficient mice develop autoimmunity . 67 . Kurobe , H . et al . CCR7 - dependent cortex - to - medulla migration of positively selected thymocytes is essential for establishing central tolerance . Immunity 24 , 165 – 177 ( 2006 ) . 68 . Davalos - Misslitz , A . C . , Worbs , T . , Willenzon , S . , Bernhardt , G . & Förster , R . Impaired responsiveness to TCR stimulation and defective negative selection of thymocytes in CCR7 - deficient mice . Blood 110 , 4351 – 4359 ( 2007 ) . 69 . Hoepken , U . E . et al . CCR7 deficiency causes ectopic lymphoid neogenesis and disturbed mucosal tissue integrity . Blood 109 , 886 – 895 ( 2006 ) . 70 . Aloisi , F . & Pujol - Borrell , R . Lymphoid neogenesis in chronic inflammatory diseases . Nature Rev . Immunol . 6 , 205 – 217 ( 2006 ) . 71 . Fan , L . , Reilly , C . R . , Luo , Y . , Dorf , M . E . & Lo , D . Cutting edge : ectopic expression of the chemokine TCA4 / SLC is sufficient to trigger lymphoid neogenesis . J . Immunol . 164 , 3955 – 3959 ( 2000 ) . 72 . Luther , S . A . et al . Differing activities of homeostatic chemokines CCL19 , CCL21 , and CXCL12 in lymphocyte and dendritic cell recruitment and lymphoid neogenesis . J . Immunol . 169 , 424 – 433 ( 2002 ) . 73 . Martin , A . P . et al . A novel model for lymphocytic infiltration of the thyroid gland generated by transgenic expression of the CC chemokine CCL21 . J . Immunol . 173 , 4791 – 4798 ( 2004 ) . 74 . Chen , S . C . et al . Ectopic expression of the murine chemokines CCL21a and CCL21b induces the formation of lymph node - like structures in pancreas , but not skin , of transgenic mice . J . Immunol . 168 , 1001 – 1008 ( 2002 ) . 75 . Grant , A . J . et al . Hepatic expression of secondary lymphoid chemokine ( CCL21 ) promotes the development of portal - associated lymphoid tissue in chronic inflammatory liver disease . Am . J . Pathol . 160 , 1445 – 1455 ( 2002 ) . 76 . Christopherson , K . W . , Hood , A . F . , Travers , J . B . , Ramsey , H . & Hromas , R . A . Endothelial induction of the T - cell chemokine CCL21 in T - cell autoimmune diseases . Blood 101 , 801 – 806 ( 2003 ) . 77 . Weninger , W . et al . Naive T cell recruitment to nonlymphoid tissues : a role for endothelium - expressed CC chemokine ligand 21 in autoimmune disease and lymphoid neogenesis . J . Immunol . 170 , 4638 – 4648 ( 2003 ) . 78 . Marinkovic , T . et al . Interaction of mature CD3 + CD4 + T cells with dendritic cells triggers the development of tertiary lymphoid structures in the thyroid . J . Clin . Invest . 116 , 2622 – 2632 ( 2006 ) . 79 . Wengner , A . M . et al . CXCR5 - and CCR7 - dependent lymphoid neogenesis in a murine model of chronic antigen - induced arthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 56 , 3271 – 3283 ( 2007 ) . 80 . Petrie , H . T . Cell migration and the control of post - natal T - cell lymphopoiesis in the thymus . Nature Rev . Immunol . 3 , 859 – 866 ( 2003 ) . 81 . Takahama , Y . Journey through the thymus : stromal guides for T - cell development and selection . Nature Rev . Immunol . 6 , 127 – 135 ( 2006 ) . 82 . Bleul , C . C . & Boehm , T . Chemokines define distinct microenvironments in the developing thymus . Eur . J . Immunol . 30 , 3371 – 3379 ( 2000 ) . 83 . Liu , C . et al . The role of CCL21 in recruitment of T - precursor cells to fetal thymi . Blood 105 , 31 – 39 ( 2005 ) . 84 . Ueno , T . et al . CCR7 signals are essential for cortex – medulla migration of developing thymocytes . J . Exp . Med . 200 , 493 – 505 ( 2004 ) . 85 . Ueno , T . et al . Role for CCR7 ligands in the emigration of newly generated T lymphocytes from the neonatal thymus . Immunity 16 , 205 – 218 ( 2002 ) . 86 . Hogquist , K . A . , Baldwin , T . A . & Jameson , S . C . Central tolerance : learning self - control in the thymus . Nature Rev . Immunol . 5 , 772 – 782 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Baekkevold , E . S . et al . The CCR7 ligand ELC ( CCL19 ) is transcytosed in high endothelial venules and mediates T cell recruitment . J . Exp . Med . 193 , 1105 – 1112 ( 2001 ) . 88 . Warnock , R . A . et al . The role of chemokines in the microenvironmental control of T versus B cell arrest in Peyer’s patch high endothelial venules . J . Exp . Med . 191 , 77 – 88 ( 2000 ) . 89 . Ley , K . , Laudanna , C . , Cybulsky , M . I . & Nourshargh , S . Getting to the site of inflammation : the leukocyte adhesion cascade updated . Nature Rev . Immunol . 7 , 678 – 689 ( 2007 ) . 90 . Ohl , L . et al . Cooperating mechanisms of CXCR5 and CCR7 in development and organization of secondary lymphoid organs . J . Exp . Med . 197 , 1199 – 1204 ( 2003 ) . Acknowledgements We thank T . Worbs and G . Bernhardt for valuable sugges - tions on this manuscript . A . R . is supported by the EU 6th Framework Program collaborative grant INNOCHEM ( LSHB - CT - 2005 - 518167 ) . R . F . is supported by grants from the German Research Foundation ( DFG SFB621 - A1 , DFG SFB587 - B3 , DFG SFB566 - A14 , DFG SFB738 - B5 ) . We regret that , owing to space limitations , we could not always ade - quately quote the work of our colleagues contributing to the field reviewed here . DATABASES Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene CCL19 | CCL21 | CCR7 FURTHER INFORMATION Reinhold Förster’s homepage : http : / / www99 . mh‑hannover . de / institute / immunologie / All links ARe ACTive in The online pdf R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEWS | immunology VOLUmE 8 | mAy 2008 | 371 © 2008 Nature Publishing Group