RESEARCH ARTICLE Twenty years of gender equality research : A scoping review based on a new semantic indicatorr Paola Belingheri 1 ☯ , Filippo Chiarello 1 ☯ , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon ID 2 , 3 ☯ * , Paola Rovelli ID 4 ☯ 1 Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Energia , dei Sistemi , del Territorio e delle Costruzioni , Universit à degli Studi di Pisa , Largo L . Lazzarino , Pisa , Italy , 2 Departmentof Engineering , Universityof Perugia , Perugia , Italy , 3 Departmentof Management , Kozminski University , Warsaw , Poland , 4 Faculty of Economicsand Management , Centre for Family BusinessManagement , Free Universityof Bozen - Bolzano , Bozen - Bolzano , Italy ☯ These authors contributed equallyto this work . * andrea . fronzetticolladon @ unipg . it Abstract Gender equality is a major problem that places women at a disadvantage thereby stymieing economic growth and societal advancement . In the last two decades , extensive research has been conducted on gender related issues , studying both their antecedents and conse - quences . However , existing literature reviews fail to provide a comprehensive and clear pic - ture of what has been studied so far , which could guide scholars in their future research . Our paper offers a scoping review of a large portion of the research that has been published over the last 22 years , on gender equality and related issues , with a specific focus on business and economics studies . Combining innovative methods drawn from both network analysis and text mining , we provide a synthesis of 15 , 465 scientific articles . We identify 27 main research topics , we measure their relevance from a semantic point of view and the relation - ships among them , highlighting the importance of each topic in the overall gender discourse . We find that prominent research topics mostly relate to women in the workforce – e . g . , con - cerning compensation , role , education , decision - making and career progression . However , some of them are losing momentum , and some other research trends – for example related to female entrepreneurship , leadership and participation in the board of directors – are on the rise . Besides introducing a novel methodology to review broad literature streams , our paper offers a map of the main gender - research trends and presents the most popular and the emerging themes , as well as their intersections , outlining important avenues for future research . Introduction The persistent gender inequalities that currently exist across the developed and developing world are receiving increasing attention from economists , policymakers , and the general PLOS ONE PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 1 / 27 a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111 OPEN ACCESS Citation : BelingheriP , Chiarello F , Fronzetti ColladonA , Rovelli P ( 2021 ) Twenty years of gender equalityresearch : A scoping review based on a new semanticindicatorr . PLoS ONE 16 ( 9 ) : e0256474 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 Editor : Elisa Ughetto , Politecnicodi Torino , ITALY Received : June 25 , 2021 Accepted : August6 , 2021 Published : September 21 , 2021 Copyright : © 2021Belingheri et al . This is an open access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproductionin any medium , provided the original authorand source are credited . Data Availability Statement : All relevantdata are withinthe manuscriptand its supporting informationfiles . The only exception is the text of the abstracts ( over 15 , 000 ) that we have downloaded from Scopus . These abstracts can be retrieved fromScopus , butwe do nothave permissionto redistributethem . Funding : P . B and F . C . : Grantof the Departmentof Energy , Systems , Territoryand Construction of the University ofPisa ( DESTEC ) for the project “Measuring GenderBias with SemanticAnalysis : The Development of an Assessment Tool and its public [ e . g . , 1 – 3 ] . Economic studies have indicated that women’s education and entry into the workforce contributes to social and economic well - being [ e . g . , 4 , 5 ] , while their exclusion from the labor market and from managerial positions has an impact on overall labor productivity and income per capita [ 6 , 7 ] . The United Nations selected gender equality , with an emphasis on female education , as part of the Millennium Development Goals [ 8 ] , and gender equality at - large as one of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ) to be achieved by 2030 [ 9 ] . These latter objectives involve not only developing nations , but rather all countries , to achieve economic , social and environmental well - being . As is the case with many SDGs , gender equality is still far from being achieved and persists across education , access to opportunities , or presence in decision - making positions [ 7 , 10 , 11 ] . As we enter the last decade for the SDGs’ implementation , and while we are battling a global health pandemic , effective and efficient action becomes paramount to reach this ambitious goal . Scholars have dedicated a massive effort towards understanding gender equality , its deter - minants , its consequences for women and society , and the appropriate actions and policies to advance women’s equality . Many topics have been covered , ranging from women’s education and human capital [ 12 , 13 ] and their role in society [ e . g . , 14 , 15 ] , to their appointment in firms’ top ranked positions [ e . g . , 16 , 17 ] and performance implications [ e . g . , 18 , 19 ] . Despite some attempts , extant literature reviews provide a narrow view on these issues , restricted to specific topics – e . g . , female students’ presence in STEM fields [ 20 ] , educational gender inequal - ity [ 5 ] , the gender pay gap [ 21 ] , the glass ceiling effect [ 22 ] , leadership [ 23 ] , entrepreneurship [ 24 ] , women’s presence on the board of directors [ 25 , 26 ] , diversity management [ 27 ] , gender stereotypes in advertisement [ 28 ] , or specific professions [ 29 ] . A comprehensive view on gen - der - related research , taking stock of key findings and under - studied topics is thus lacking . Extant literature has also highlighted that gender issues , and their economic and social ram - ifications , are complex topics that involve a large number of possible antecedents and out - comes [ 7 ] . Indeed , gender equality actions are most effective when implemented in unison with other SDGs ( e . g . , with SDG 8 , see [ 30 ] ) in a synergetic perspective [ 10 ] . Many bodies of literature ( e . g . , business , economics , development studies , sociology and psychology ) approach the problem of achieving gender equality from different perspectives – often addressing specific and narrow aspects . This sometimes leads to a lack of clarity about how different issues , cir - cumstances , and solutions may be related in precipitating or mitigating gender inequality or its effects . As the number of papers grows at an increasing pace , this issue is exacerbated and there is a need to step back and survey the body of gender equality literature as a whole . There is also a need to examine synergies between different topics and approaches , as well as gaps in our understanding of how different problems and solutions work together . Considering the important topic of women’s economic and social empowerment , this paper aims to fill this gap by answering the following research question : what are the most relevant findings in the litera - ture on gender equality and how do they relate to each other ? To do so , we conduct a scoping review [ 31 ] , providing a synthesis of 15 , 465 articles dealing with gender equity related issues published in the last twenty - two years , covering both the peri - ods of the MDGs and the SDGs ( i . e . , 2000 to mid 2021 ) in all the journals indexed in the Aca - demic Journal Guide’s 2018 ranking of business and economics journals . Given the huge amount of research conducted on the topic , we adopt an innovative methodology , which relies on social network analysis and text mining . These techniques are increasingly adopted when surveying large bodies of text . Recently , they were applied to perform analysis of online gender communication differences [ 32 ] and gender behaviors in online technology communities [ 33 ] , to identify and classify sexual harassment instances in academia [ 34 ] , and to evaluate the gen - der inclusivity of disaster management policies [ 35 ] . PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 2 / 27 Applicationin the EuropeanSpaceIndustry . P . B . , F . C . , A . F . C . , P . R . : Grantof the Italian Associationof Management Engineering ( AiIG ) , “Misure di sostegno ai soci giovaniAiIG” 2020 , for the project “Gender EqualityThrough Data Intelligence ( GEDI ) ” . F . C . : EU project ASSETs + Project ( Alliance for Strategic Skills addressing Emerging Technologies in Defence ) EAC / A03 / 2018 - Erasmus + programme , Sector SkillsAlliances , Lot3 : Sector Skills Alliance for implementing a new strategic approach ( Blueprint ) to sectoralcooperation on skills G . A . NUMBER : 612678 - EPP - 1 - 2019 - 1 - IT - EPPKA2 - SSA - B . Competinginterests : The authorshave declared that no competinginterestsexist . Applied to the title , abstracts and keywords of the articles in our sample , this methodology allows us to identify a set of 27 recurrent topics within which we automatically classify the papers . Introducing additional novelty , by means of the Semantic Brand Score ( SBS ) indicator [ 36 ] and the SBS BI app [ 37 ] , we assess the importance of each topic in the overall gender equality discourse and its relationships with the other topics , as well as trends over time , with a more accurate description than that offered by traditional literature reviews relying solely on the number of papers presented in each topic . This methodology , applied to gender equality research spanning the past twenty - two years , enables two key contributions . First , we extract the main message that each document is con - veying and how this is connected to other themes in literature , providing a rich picture of the topics that are at the center of the discourse , as well as of the emerging topics . Second , by examining the semantic relationship between topics and how tightly their discourses are linked , we can identify the key relationships and connections between different topics . This semi - automatic methodology is also highly reproducible with minimum effort . This literature review is organized as follows . In the next section , we present how we selected relevant papers and how we analyzed them through text mining and social network analysis . We then illustrate the importance of 27 selected research topics , measured by means of the SBS indicator . In the results section , we present an overview of the literature based on the SBS results – followed by an in - depth narrative analysis of the top 10 topics ( i . e . , those with the highest SBS ) and their connections . Subsequently , we highlight a series of under - studied connections between the topics where there is potential for future research . Through this anal - ysis , we build a map of the main gender - research trends in the last twenty - two years – present - ing the most popular themes . We conclude by highlighting key areas on which research should focused in the future . Methods Our aim is to map a broad topic , gender equality research , that has been approached through a host of different angles and through different disciplines . Scoping reviews are the most appro - priate as they provide the freedom to map different themes and identify literature gaps , thereby guiding the recommendation of new research agendas [ 38 ] . Several practical approaches have been proposed to identify and assess the underlying top - ics of a specific field using big data [ 39 – 41 ] , but many of them fail without proper paper retrieval and text preprocessing . This is specifically true for a research field such as the gender - related one , which comprises the work of scholars from different backgrounds . In this section , we illustrate a novel approach for the analysis of scientific ( gender - related ) papers that relies on methods and tools of social network analysis and text mining . Our procedure has four main steps : ( 1 ) data collection , ( 2 ) text preprocessing , ( 3 ) keywords extraction and classifica - tion , and ( 4 ) evaluation of semantic importance and image . Data collection In this study , we analyze 22 years of literature on gender - related research . Following estab - lished practice for scoping reviews [ 42 ] , our data collection consisted of two main steps , which we summarize here below . Firstly , we retrieved from the Scopus database all the articles written in English that con - tained the term “gender” in their title , abstract or keywords and were published in a journal listed in the Academic Journal Guide 2018 ranking of the Chartered Association of Business Schools ( CABS ) ( https : / / charteredabs . org / wp - content / uploads / 2018 / 03 / AJG2018 - Methodology . pdf ) , considering the time period from Jan 2000 to May 2021 . We PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 3 / 27 used this information considering that abstracts , titles and keywords represent the most infor - mative part of a paper , while using the full - text would increase the signal - to - noise ratio for information extraction . Indeed , these textual elements already demonstrated to be reliable sources of information for the task of domain lexicon extraction [ 43 , 44 ] . We chose Scopus as source of literature because of its popularity , its update rate , and because it offers an API to ease the querying process . Indeed , while it does not allow to retrieve the full text of scientific articles , the Scopus API offers access to titles , abstracts , citation information and metadata for all its indexed scholarly journals . Moreover , we decided to focus on the journals listed in the AJG 2018 ranking because we were interested in reviewing business and economics related gender studies only . The AJG is indeed widely used by universities and business schools as a reference point for journal and research rigor and quality . This first step , executed in June 2021 , returned more than 55 , 000 papers . In the second step – because a look at the papers showed very sparse results , many of which were not in line with the topic of this literature review ( e . g . , papers dealing with health care or medical issues , where the word gender indicates the gender of the patients ) – we applied further inclusion criteria to make the sample more focused on the topic of this literature review ( i . e . , women’s gender equality issues ) . Specifically , we only retained those papers mentioning , in their title and / or abstract , both gender - related keywords ( e . g . , daughter , female , mother ) and keywords referring to bias and equality issues ( e . g . , equality , bias , diversity , inclusion ) . After text pre - processing ( see next section ) , keywords were first identified from a frequency - weighted list of words found in the titles , abstracts and keywords in the initial list of papers , extracted through text mining ( following the same approach as [ 43 ] ) . They were selected by two of the co - authors independently , following respectively a bottom up and a top - down approach . The bottom - up approach consisted of examining the words found in the frequency - weighted list and classifying those related to gender and equality . The top - down approach con - sisted in searching in the word list for notable gender and equality - related words . Table 1 reports the sets of keywords we considered , together with some examples of words that were used to search for their presence in the dataset ( a full list is provided in the S1 Text ) . At end of this second step , we obtained a final sample of 15 , 465 relevant papers . Text processing and keyword extraction Text preprocessing aims at structuring text into a form that can be analyzed by statistical mod - els . In the present section , we describe the preprocessing steps we applied to paper titles and abstracts , which , as explained below , partially follow a standard text preprocessing pipeline [ 45 ] . These activities have been performed using the R package udpipe [ 46 ] . The first step is n - gram extraction ( i . e . , a sequence of words from a given text sample ) to identify which n - grams are important in the analysis , since domain - specific lexicons are often composed by bi - grams and tri - grams [ 47 ] . Multi - word extraction is usually implemented with statistics and linguistic rules , thus using the statistical properties of n - grams or machine learn - ing approaches [ 48 ] . However , for the present paper , we used Scopus metadata in order to have a more effective and efficient n - grams collection approach [ 49 ] . We used the keywords of each paper in order to tag n - grams with their associated keywords automatically . Using this greedy approach , it was possible to collect all the keywords listed by the authors of the papers . From this list , we extracted only keywords composed by two , three and four words , we removed all the acronyms and rare keywords ( i . e . , appearing in less than 1 % of papers ) , and we clustered keywords showing a high orthographic similarity – measured using a Levenshtein distance [ 50 ] lower than 2 , considering these groups of keywords as representing same con - cepts , but expressed with different spelling . After tagging the n - grams in the abstracts , we PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 4 / 27 followed a common data preparation pipeline that consists of the following steps : ( i ) tokeniza - tion , that splits the text into tokens ( i . e . , single words and previously tagged multi - words ) ; ( ii ) removal of stop - words ( i . e . those words that add little meaning to the text , usually being very common and short functional words – such as “and” , “or” , or “of” ) ; ( iii ) parts - of - speech tag - ging , that is providing information concerning the morphological role of a word and its mor - phosyntactic context ( e . g . , if the token is a determiner , the next token is a noun or an adjective with very high confidence , [ 51 ] ) ; and ( iv ) lemmatization , which consists in substituting each word with its dictionary form ( or lemma ) . The output of the latter step allows grouping together the inflected forms of a word . For example , the verbs “am” , “are” , and “is” have the shared lemma “be” , or the nouns “cat” and “cats” both share the lemma “cat” . We preferred lemmatization over stemming [ 52 ] in order to obtain more interpretable results . In addition , we identified a further set of keywords ( with respect to those listed in the “key - words” field ) by applying a series of automatic words unification and removal steps , as sug - gested in past research [ 53 , 54 ] . We removed : sparse terms ( i . e . , occurring in less than 0 . 1 % of all documents ) , common terms ( i . e . , occurring in more than 10 % of all documents ) and retained only nouns and adjectives . It is relevant to notice that no document was lost due to these steps . We then used the TF - IDF function [ 55 ] to produce a new list of keywords . We additionally tested other approaches for the identification and clustering of keywords – such as TextRank [ 56 ] or Latent Dirichlet Allocation [ 57 ] – without obtaining more informative results . Classification of research topics To guide the literature analysis , two experts met regularly to examine the sample of collected papers and to identify the main topics and trends in gender research . Initially , they conducted Table 1 . Examples of keywords used to identify gender - related papers relevant for the aim of the literature review . Keyword set Examples of searched words Gender Bride bride Daughter daughter , daughterhood Female female � , femaling Femini feminist , feminism , femininity Girl girl Lady lady , ladies Maid maid Mother mother , maternal , maternity Queen queen Widow widow Wife wife , wives Woman woman , women Equality Bias bias , biases , biased Diversity diversity , diverse Empower empower , empowering , empowerment Equality inequality , equality , discrimination Equity equity , inequity , inequities Homeworking homeworker , householder , homemaking Inclusion barrier , inclusion , inclusive Quota quota Stereotype stereotype , stereotyping , stereotyped https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 . t001 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 5 / 27 brainstorming sessions on the topics they expected to find , due to their knowledge of the litera - ture . This led to an initial list of topics . Subsequently , the experts worked independently , also supported by the keywords in paper titles and abstracts extracted with the procedure described above . Considering all this information , each expert identified and clustered relevant keywords into topics . At the end of the process , the two assignments were compared and exhibited a 92 % agreement . Another meeting was held to discuss discordant cases and reach a consensus . This resulted in a list of 27 topics , briefly introduced in Table 2 and subsequently detailed in the following sections . Evaluation of semantic importance Working on the lemmatized corpus of the 15 , 465 papers included in our sample , we proceeded with the evaluation of semantic importance trends for each topic and with the analysis of their connections and prevalent textual associations . To this aim , we used the Semantic Brand Score indicator [ 36 ] , calculated through the SBS BI webapp [ 37 ] that also produced a brand image report for each topic . For this study we relied on the computing resources of the ENEA / CRESCO infrastructure [ 58 ] . The Semantic Brand Score ( SBS ) is a measure of semantic importance that combines meth - ods of social network analysis and text mining . It is usually applied for the analysis of ( big ) Table 2 . List of selected topics . Topic Short Description Behavior Behavioral aspects related to gender Board of directors Women in boards of directors Career Progression Women’s promotion and career advancement Compensation Salary and rewards in relation to employment Culture Ideas , customs and social behaviors , including bias and stereotypes Decision - making The decision - making process Education Primary , secondary and tertiary education Empowerment Authority , power and self - confidence Entrepreneurship Women starting their own enterprises Family Women’s relationship with family and family obligations , wok - life balance Feminine Female characteristics Governance The governance structures of firms and society Hiring Appointing women to positions within the workforce Human Capital The intellectual capital resulting from education and social capital Leadership Leadership skills and leadership positions Management Managerial practices and processes Masculine Male characteristics Network Networking dynamics as they relate to women Organization The organization of firms Parenting The act of raising children and its implications Performance Measuring the work output of individuals , teams and organizations Personality Traits and individual characteristics of women Politics Policies and regulations , women in politics Reputation How women are viewed by their colleagues , peers and society Role The roles covered by women in the workforce Sustainability Women’s relation to sustainability and social responsibility Well - Being Psychological , personal , and social welfare of women https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 . t002 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 6 / 27 textual data to evaluate the importance of one or more brands , names , words , or sets of key - words [ 36 ] . Indeed , the concept of “brand” is intended in a flexible way and goes beyond prod - ucts or commercial brands . In this study , we evaluate the SBS time - trends of the keywords defining the research topics discussed in the previous section . Semantic importance comprises the three dimensions of topic prevalence , diversity and connectivity . Prevalence measures how frequently a research topic is used in the discourse . The more a topic is mentioned by scientific articles , the more the research community will be aware of it , with possible increase of future studies ; this construct is partly related to that of brand awareness [ 59 ] . This effect is even stron - ger , considering that we are analyzing the title , abstract and keywords of the papers , i . e . the parts that have the highest visibility . A very important characteristic of the SBS is that it consid - ers the relationships among words in a text . Topic importance is not just a matter of how fre - quently a topic is mentioned , but also of the associations a topic has in the text . Specifically , texts are transformed into networks of co - occurring words , and relationships are studied through social network analysis [ 60 ] . This step is necessary to calculate the other two dimen - sions of our semantic importance indicator . Accordingly , a social network of words is gener - ated for each time period considered in the analysis – i . e . , a graph made of n nodes ( words ) and E edges weighted by co - occurrence frequency , with W being the set of edge weights . The key - words representing each topic were clustered into single nodes . The construct of diversity relates to that of brand image [ 59 ] , in the sense that it considers the richness and distinctiveness of textual ( topic ) associations . Considering the above - men - tioned networks , we calculated diversity using the distinctiveness centrality metric – as in the formula presented by Fronzetti Colladon and Naldi [ 61 ] . Lastly , connectivity was measured as the weighted betweenness centrality [ 62 , 63 ] of each research topic node . We used the formula presented by Wasserman and Faust [ 60 ] . The dimension of connectivity represents the “brokerage power” of each research topic – i . e . , how much it can serve as a bridge to connect other terms ( and ultimately topics ) in the discourse [ 36 ] . The SBS is the final composite indicator obtained by summing the standardized scores of prevalence , diversity and connectivity . Standardization was carried out considering all the words in the corpus , for each specific timeframe . This methodology , applied to a large and heterogeneous body of text , enables to automati - cally identify two important sets of information that add value to the literature review . Firstly , the relevance of each topic in literature is measured through a composite indicator of semantic importance , rather than simply looking at word frequencies . This provides a much richer pic - ture of the topics that are at the center of the discourse , as well as of the topics that are emerg - ing in the literature . Secondly , it enables to examine the extent of the semantic relationship between topics , looking at how tightly their discourses are linked . In a field such as gender equality , where many topics are closely linked to each other and present overlaps in issues and solutions , this methodology offers a novel perspective with respect to traditional literature reviews . In addition , it ensures reproducibility over time and the possibility to semi - automati - cally update the analysis , as new papers become available . Results Overview of main topics In terms of descriptive textual statistics , our corpus is made of 15 , 465 text documents , consist - ing of a total of 2 , 685 , 893 lemmatized tokens ( words ) and 32 , 279 types . As a result , the type - token ratio is 1 . 2 % . The number of hapaxes is 12 , 141 , with a hapax - token ratio of 37 . 61 % . PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 7 / 27 Fig 1 shows the list of 27 topics by decreasing SBS . The most researched topic is compensa - tion , exceeding all others in prevalence , diversity , and connectivity . This means it is not only mentioned more often than other topics , but it is also connected to a greater number of other topics and is central to the discourse on gender equality . The next four topics are , in order of SBS , role , education , decision - making , and career progression . These topics , except for educa - tion , all concern women in the workforce . Between these first five topics and the following ones there is a clear drop in SBS scores . In particular , the topics that follow have a lower con - nectivity than the first five . They are hiring , performance , behavior , organization , and human capital . Again , except for behavior and human capital , the other three topics are purely related to women in the workforce . After another drop - off , the following topics deal prevalently with women in society . This trend highlights that research on gender in business journals has so far mainly paid attention to the conditions that women experience in business contexts , while also devoting some attention to women in society . Fig 2 shows the SBS time series of the top 10 topics . While there has been a general increase in the number of Scopus - indexed publications in the last decade , we notice that some SBS trends remain steady , or even decrease . In particular , we observe that the main topic of the last Fig 1 . Topic importance ( SBS ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 . g001 Fig 2 . SBS time series of the top 10 topics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 . g002 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 8 / 27 twenty - two years , compensation , is losing momentum . Since 2016 , it has been surpassed by decision - making , education and role , which may indicate that literature is increasingly attempt - ing to identify root causes of compensation inequalities . Moreover , in the last two years , the topics of hiring , performance , and organization are experiencing the largest importance increase . Fig 3 shows the SBS time trends of the remaining 17 topics ( i . e . , those not in the top 10 ) . As we can see from the graph , there are some that maintain a steady trend – such as reputation , management , networks and governance , which also seem to have little importance . More rele - vant topics with average stationary trends ( except for the last two years ) are culture , family , and parenting . The feminine topic is among the most important here , and one of those that exhibit the larger variations over time ( similarly to leadership ) . On the other hand , the are some topics that , even if not among the most important , show increasing SBS trends ; there - fore , they could be considered as emerging topics and could become popular in the near future . These are entrepreneurship , leadership , board of directors , and sustainability . These emerging topics are also interesting to anticipate future trends in gender equality research that are conducive to overall equality in society . In addition to the SBS score of the different topics , the network of terms they are associated to enables to gauge the extent to which their images ( textual associations ) overlap or differ ( Fig 4 ) . Fig 3 . SBS time series of the other topics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 . g003 Fig 4 . Topic similarity . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 . g004 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 9 / 27 There is a central cluster of topics with high similarity , which are all connected with women in the workforce . The cluster includes topics such as organization , decision - making , perfor - mance , hiring , human capital , education and compensation . In addition , the topic of well - being is found within this cluster , suggesting that women’s equality in the workforce is associated to well - being considerations . The emerging topics of entrepreneurship and leadership are also closely connected with each other , possibly implying that leadership is a much - researched quality in female entrepreneurship . Topics that are relatively more distant include personality , politics , feminine , empowerment , management , board of directors , reputation , governance , par - enting , masculine and network . The following sections describe the top 10 topics and their main associations in literature ( see Table 3 ) , while providing a brief overview of the emerging topics . Compensation . The topic of compensation is related to the topics of role , hiring , educa - tion and career progression , however , also sees a very high association with the words gap and inequality . Indeed , a well - known debate in degrowth economics centers around whether and how to adequately compensate women for their childbearing , childrearing , caregiver and household work [ e . g . , 30 ] . Even in paid work , women continue being offered lower compensations than their male counterparts who have the same job or cover the same role [ 64 – 67 ] . This severe inequality has been widely studied by scholars over the last twenty - two years . Dealing with this topic , some Table 3 . Top associations . Topic Top associations ( other topics in bold ) Behavior social , work , Role , differences , related , Decision - making , child , positive , group , individual , self , influence , relationship , stereotype , health , inequality , change , Education , student , participant , Career Progression , Human Capital , experience , Performance , Parenting , intention CareerProgression Role , inequality , difference , Decision - making , work , social , equity , Hiring , Education , Organization , Performance , level , Compensation , development , policy , examine , role , self , experience , Leadership , support , Human Capital , individual , Family , perceive , academic , differences Compensation gap , Role , difference , inequality , Hiring , Education , work , increase , higher , lower , market , less , labor , household , low , Career Progression , age , time , high , labour , attention , discrimination , change , country , individual , status Decision Making Career Progression , Performance , social , work , Role , Organization , inequality , household , group , policy , Human Capital , process , Behavior , health , Hiring , level , role , individual , Compensation , Education , equity , Leadership , stereotype , different , Politics , change Education age , inequality , level , Compensation , study , social , health , gap , status , equity , student , Human Capital , Career Progression , child , Hiring , school , economic , policy , work , Parenting , experience , higher , access , household , Decision - making , development Hiring Role , work , Career Progression , Education , discrimination , level , Decision - making , time , Human Capital , gap , sector , Performance , market , social , increase , status , Organization , policy , inequality , experience , differences , lower , equity , high , data , satisfaction , Human Capital Education , Role , work , Decision - making , social , Hiring , Career Progression , Performance , self , Behavior , health , Compensation , Leadership , student , Organization , group , child , individual , development , age , differences , lack , gap , focus , change Organization work , Role , Career Progression , inequality , Decision - making , Leadership , social , diversity , policy , level , change , Performance , employee , individual , Hiring , equity , Culture , practice , value , Human Capital , management , structure , discrimination , Behavior , Governance Performance Role , Decision - making , Career Progression , stereotype , work , Compensation , Hiring , Organization , Human Capital , self , impact , social , Education , Behavior , difference , high , firm , threat , student , inequality , role , Board of directors , increase , relationship , experience Role Compensation , Career Progression , work , Hiring , Performance , Organization , firm , Board of directors , Behavior , social , Decision - making , role , Human Capital , employee , less , increase , experience , traditional , Leadership , stereotype , sector , Entrepreneurship , business , gap , group , data https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 . t003 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 10 / 27 specific roles have been addressed . Specifically , research highlighted differences in compensa - tion between female and male CEOs [ e . g . , 68 ] , top executives [ e . g . , 69 ] , and boards’ directors [ e . g . , 70 ] . Scholars investigated the determinants of these gaps , such as the gender composition of the board [ e . g . , 71 – 73 ] or women’s individual characteristics [ e . g . , 71 , 74 ] . Among these individual characteristics , education plays a relevant role [ 75 ] . Education is indeed presented as the solution for women , not only to achieve top executive roles , but also to reduce wage inequality [ e . g . , 76 , 77 ] . Past research has highlighted education influences on gender wage gaps , specifically referring to gender differences in skills [ e . g . , 78 ] , college majors [ e . g . , 79 ] , and college selectivity [ e . g . , 80 ] . Finally , the wage gap issue is strictly interrelated with hiring – e . g . , looking at whether being a mother affects hiring and compensation [ e . g . , 65 , 81 ] or relating compensation to unemploy - ment [ e . g . , 82 ] – and career progression – for instance looking at meritocracy [ 83 , 84 ] or the char - acteristics of the boss for whom women work [ e . g . , 85 ] . Role . The roles covered by women have been deeply investigated . Scholars have focused on the role of women in their families and the society as a whole [ e . g . , 14 , 15 ] , and , more widely , in business contexts [ e . g . , 18 , 81 ] . Indeed , despite still lagging behind their male coun - terparts [ e . g . , 86 , 87 ] , in the last decade there has been an increase in top ranked positions achieved by women [ e . g . , 88 , 89 ] . Following this phenomenon , scholars have posed greater attention towards the presence of women in the board of directors [ e . g . , 16 , 18 , 90 , 91 ] , given the increasing pressure to appoint female directors that firms , especially listed ones , have expe - rienced . Other scholars have focused on the presence of women covering the role of CEO [ e . g . , 17 , 92 ] or being part of the top management team [ e . g . , 93 ] . Irrespectively of the level of analy - sis , all these studies tried to uncover the antecedents of women’s presence among top managers [ e . g . , 92 , 94 ] and the consequences of having a them involved in the firm’s decision - making – e . g . , on performance [ e . g . , 19 , 95 , 96 ] , risk [ e . g . , 97 , 98 ] , and corporate social responsibility [ e . g . , 99 , 100 ] . Besides studying the difficulties and discriminations faced by women in getting a job [ 81 , 101 ] , and , more specifically in the hiring , appointment , or career progression to these apical roles [ e . g . , 70 , 83 ] , the majority of research of women’s roles dealt with compensation issues . Specifically , scholars highlight the pay - gap that still exists between women and men , both in general [ e . g . , 64 , 65 ] , as well as referring to boards’ directors [ e . g . , 70 , 102 ] , CEOs and execu - tives [ e . g . , 69 , 103 , 104 ] . Finally , other scholars focused on the behavior of women when dealing with business . In this sense , particular attention has been paid to leadership and entrepreneurial behaviors . The former quite overlaps with dealing with the roles mentioned above , but also includes aspects such as leaders being stereotyped as masculine [ e . g . , 105 ] , the need for greater exposure to female leaders to reduce biases [ e . g . , 106 ] , or female leaders acting as queen bees [ e . g . , 107 ] . Regarding entrepreneurship , scholars mainly investigated women’s entrepreneurial entry [ e . g . , 108 , 109 ] , differences between female and male entrepreneurs in the evaluations and funding received from investors [ e . g . , 110 , 111 ] , and their performance gap [ e . g . , 112 , 113 ] . Education . Education has long been recognized as key to social advancement and eco - nomic stability [ 114 ] , for job progression and also a barrier to gender equality , especially in STEM - related fields . Research on education and gender equality is mostly linked with the top - ics of compensation , human capital , career progression , hiring , parenting and decision - making . Education contributes to a higher human capital [ 115 ] and constitutes an investment on the part of women towards their future . In this context , literature points to the gender gap in educational attainment , and the consequences for women from a social , economic , personal and professional standpoint . Women are found to have less access to formal education and information , especially in emerging countries , which in turn may cause them to lose social and PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 11 / 27 economic opportunities [ e . g . , 12 , 116 – 119 ] . Education in local and rural communities is also paramount to communicate the benefits of female empowerment , contributing to overall socie - tal well - being [ e . g . , 120 ] . Once women access education , the image they have of the world and their place in society ( i . e . , habitus ) affects their education performance [ 13 ] and is passed on to their children . These situations reinforce gender stereotypes , which become self - fulfilling prophecies that may nega - tively affect female students’ performance by lowering their confidence and heightening their anxiety [ 121 , 122 ] . Besides formal education , also the information that women are exposed to on a daily basis contributes to their human capital . Digital inequalities , for instance , stems from men spending more time online and acquiring higher digital skills than women [ 123 ] . Education is also a factor that should boost employability of candidates and thus hiring , career progression and compensation , however the relationship between these factors is not straightforward [ 115 ] . First , educational choices ( decision - making ) are influenced by variables such as self - efficacy and the presence of barriers , irrespectively of the career opportunities they offer , especially in STEM [ 124 ] . This brings additional difficulties to women’s enrollment and persistence in scientific and technical fields of study due to stereotypes and biases [ 125 , 126 ] . Moreover , access to education does not automatically translate into job opportunities for women and minority groups [ 127 , 128 ] or into female access to managerial positions [ 129 ] . Finally , parenting is reported as an antecedent of education [ e . g . , 130 ] , with much of the lit - erature focusing on the role of parents’ education on the opportunities afforded to children to enroll in education [ 131 – 134 ] and the role of parenting in their offspring’s perception of study fields and attitudes towards learning [ 135 – 138 ] . Parental education is also a predictor of the other related topics , namely human capital and compensation [ 139 ] . Decision - making . This literature mainly points to the fact that women are thought to make decisions differently than men . Women have indeed different priorities , such as they care more about people’s well - being , working with people or helping others , rather than maxi - mizing their personal ( or their firm’s ) gain [ 140 ] . In other words , women typically present more communal than agentic behaviors , which are instead more frequent among men [ 141 ] . These different attitude , behavior and preferences in turn affect the decisions they make [ e . g . , 142 ] and the decision - making of the firm in which they work [ e . g . , 143 ] . At the individual level , gender affects , for instance , career aspirations [ e . g . , 144 ] and choices [ e . g . , 142 , 145 ] , or the decision of creating a venture [ e . g . , 108 , 109 , 146 ] . Moreover , in every - day life , women and men make different decisions regarding partners [ e . g . , 147 ] , childcare [ e . g . , 148 ] , education [ e . g . , 149 ] , attention to the environment [ e . g . , 150 ] and politics [ e . g . , 151 ] . At the firm level , scholars highlighted , for example , how the presence of women in the board affects corporate decisions [ e . g . , 152 , 153 ] , that female CEOs are more conservative in accounting decisions [ e . g . , 154 ] , or that female CFOs tend to make more conservative deci - sions regarding the firm’s financial reporting [ e . g . , 155 ] . Nevertheless , firm level research also investigated decisions that , influenced by gender bias , affect women , such as those pertaining hiring [ e . g . , 156 , 157 ] , compensation [ e . g . , 73 , 158 ] , or the empowerment of women once appointed [ 159 ] . Career progression . Once women have entered the workforce , the key aspect to achieve gender equality becomes career progression , including efforts toward overcoming the glass ceil - ing . Indeed , according to the SBS analysis , career progression is highly related to words such as work , social issues and equality . The topic with which it has the highest semantic overlap is role , followed by decision - making , hiring , education , compensation , leadership , human capital , and family . PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 12 / 27 Career progression implies an advancement in the hierarchical ladder of the firm , assigning managerial roles to women . Coherently , much of the literature has focused on identifying rationales for a greater female participation in the top management team and board of direc - tors [ e . g . , 95 ] as well as the best criteria to ensure that the decision - makers promote the most valuable employees irrespectively of their individual characteristics , such as gender [ e . g . , 84 ] . The link between career progression , role and compensation is often provided in practice by performance appraisal exercises , frequently rooted in a culture of meritocracy that guides bonuses , salary increases and promotions . However , performance appraisals can actually mask gender - biased decisions where women are held to higher standards than their male colleagues [ e . g . , 83 , 84 , 95 , 160 , 161 ] . Women often have less opportunities to gain leadership experience and are less visible than their male colleagues , which constitute barriers to career advancement [ e . g . , 162 ] . Therefore , transparency and accountability , together with procedures that discour - age discretionary choices , are paramount to achieve a fair career progression [ e . g . , 84 ] , together with the relaxation of strict job boundaries in favor of cross - functional and self - directed tasks [ e . g . , 163 ] . In addition , a series of stereotypes about the type of leadership characteristics that are required for top management positions , which fit better with typical male and agentic attri - butes , are another key barrier to career advancement for women [ e . g . , 92 , 160 ] . Hiring . Hiring is the entrance gateway for women into the workforce . Therefore , it is related to other workforce topics such as compensation , role , career progression , decision - mak - ing , human capital , performance , organization and education . A first stream of literature focuses on the process leading up to candidates’ job applications , demonstrating that bias exists before positions are even opened , and it is perpetuated both by men and women through networking and gatekeeping practices [ e . g . , 164 , 165 ] . The hiring process itself is also subject to biases [ 166 ] , for example gender - congruity bias that leads to men being preferred candidates in male - dominated sectors [ e . g . , 167 ] , women being hired in positions with higher risk of failure [ e . g . , 168 ] and limited transparency and accountability afforded by written processes and procedures [ e . g . , 164 ] that all contribute to ascriptive inequality . In addition , providing incentives for evaluators to hire women may actu - ally work to this end ; however , this is not the case when supporting female candidates endan - gers higher - ranking male ones [ 169 ] . Another interesting perspective , instead , looks at top management teams’ composition and the effects on hiring practices , indicating that firms with more women in top management are less likely to lay off staff [ e . g . , 152 ] . Performance . Several scholars posed their attention towards women’s performance , its consequences [ e . g . , 170 , 171 ] and the implications of having women in decision - making posi - tions [ e . g . , 18 , 19 ] . At the individual level , research focused on differences in educational and academic perfor - mance between women and men , especially referring to the gender gap in STEM fields [ e . g . , 171 ] . The presence of stereotype threats – that is the expectation that the members of a social group ( e . g . , women ) “must deal with the possibility of being judged or treated stereotypically , or of doing something that would confirm the stereotype” [ 172 ] – affects women’s interested in STEM [ e . g . , 173 ] , as well as their cognitive ability tests , penalizing them [ e . g . , 174 ] . A stronger gender identification enhances this gap [ e . g . , 175 ] , whereas mentoring and role models can be used as solutions to this problem [ e . g . , 121 ] . Despite the negative effect of stereotype threats on girls’ performance [ 176 ] , female and male students perform equally in mathematics and related subjects [ e . g . , 177 ] . Moreover , while individuals’ performance at school and university generally affects their achievements and the field in which they end up working , evidence reveals that performance in math or other scientific subjects does not explain why fewer PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 13 / 27 women enter STEM working fields ; rather this gap depends on other aspects , such as culture , past working experiences , or self - efficacy [ e . g . , 170 ] . Finally , scholars have highlighted the penalization that women face for their positive performance , for instance when they succeed in traditionally male areas [ e . g . , 178 ] . This penalization is explained by the violation of gender - stereotypic prescriptions [ e . g . , 179 , 180 ] , that is having women well performing in agentic areas , which are typical associated to men . Performance penalization can thus be overcome by clearly conveying communal characteristics and behaviors [ 178 ] . Evidence has been provided on how the involvement of women in boards of directors and decision - making positions affects firms’ performance . Nevertheless , results are mixed , with some studies showing positive effects on financial [ 19 , 181 , 182 ] and corporate social perfor - mance [ 99 , 182 , 183 ] . Other studies maintain a negative association [ e . g . , 18 ] , and other again mixed [ e . g . , 184 ] or non - significant association [ e . g . , 185 ] . Also with respect to the presence of a female CEO , mixed results emerged so far , with some researches demonstrating a positive effect on firm’s performance [ e . g . , 96 , 186 ] , while other obtaining only a limited evidence of this relationship [ e . g . , 103 ] or a negative one [ e . g . , 187 ] . Finally , some studies have investigated whether and how women’s performance affects their hiring [ e . g . , 101 ] and career progression [ e . g . , 83 , 160 ] . For instance , academic perfor - mance leads to different returns in hiring for women and men . Specifically , high - achieving men are called back significantly more often than high - achieving women , which are penalized when they have a major in mathematics ; this result depends on employers’ gendered standards for applicants [ e . g . , 101 ] . Once appointed , performance ratings are more strongly related to promotions for women than men , and promoted women typically show higher past perfor - mance ratings than those of promoted men . This suggesting that women are subject to stricter standards for promotion [ e . g . , 160 ] . Behavior . Behavioral aspects related to gender follow two main streams of literature . The first examines female personality and behavior in the workplace , and their alignment with cul - tural expectations or stereotypes [ e . g . , 188 ] as well as their impacts on equality . There is a com - mon bias that depicts women as less agentic than males . Certain characteristics , such as those more congruent with male behaviors – e . g . , self - promotion [ e . g . , 189 ] , negotiation skills [ e . g . , 190 ] and general agentic behavior [ e . g . , 191 ] – , are less accepted in women . However , charac - teristics such as individualism in women have been found to promote greater gender equality in society [ 192 ] . In addition , behaviors such as display of emotions [ e . g . , 193 ] , which are ste - reotypically female , work against women’s acceptance in the workplace , requiring women to carefully moderate their behavior to avoid exclusion . A counter - intuitive result is that women and minorities , which are more marginalized in the workplace , tend to be better problem - solv - ers in innovation competitions due to their different knowledge bases [ 194 ] . The other side of the coin is examined in a parallel literature stream on behavior towards women in the workplace . As a result of biases , prejudices and stereotypes , women may experi - ence adverse behavior from their colleagues , such as incivility and harassment , which under - mine their well - being [ e . g . , 195 , 196 ] . Biases that go beyond gender , such as for overweight people , are also more strongly applied to women [ 197 ] . Organization . The role of women and gender bias in organizations has been studied from different perspectives , which mirror those presented in detail in the following sections . Specifi - cally , most research highlighted the stereotypical view of leaders [ e . g . , 105 ] and the roles played by women within firms , for instance referring to presence in the board of directors [ e . g . , 18 , 90 , 91 ] , appointment as CEOs [ e . g . , 16 ] , or top executives [ e . g . , 93 ] . Scholars have investigated antecedents and consequences of the presence of women in these apical roles . On the one side they looked at hiring and career progression [ e . g . , 83 , 92 , 160 , 168 , 198 ] , finding women typically disadvantaged with respect to their male counterparts . On PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 14 / 27 the other side , they studied women’s leadership styles and influence on the firm’s decision - making [ e . g . , 152 , 154 , 155 , 199 ] , with implications for performance [ e . g . , 18 , 19 , 96 ] . Human capital . Human capital is a transverse topic that touches upon many different aspects of female gender equality . As such , it has the most associations with other topics , start - ing with education as mentioned above , with career - related topics such as role , decision - mak - ing , hiring , career progression , performance , compensation , leadership and organization . Another topic with which there is a close connection is behavior . In general , human capital is approached both from the education standpoint but also from the perspective of social capital . The behavioral aspect in human capital comprises research related to gender differences for example in cultural and religious beliefs that influence women’s attitudes and perceptions towards STEM subjects [ 142 , 200 – 202 ] , towards employment [ 203 ] or towards environmental issues [ 150 , 204 ] . These cultural differences also emerge in the context of globalization which may accelerate gender equality in the workforce [ 205 , 206 ] . Gender differences also appear in behaviors such as motivation [ 207 ] , and in negotiation [ 190 ] , and have repercussions on wom - en’s decision - making related to their careers . The so - called gender equality paradox sees women in countries with lower gender equality more likely to pursue studies and careers in STEM fields , whereas the gap in STEM enrollment widens as countries achieve greater equality in society [ 171 ] . Career progression is modeled by literature as a choice - process where personal preferences , culture and decision - making affect the chosen path and the outcomes . Some literature high - lights how women tend to self - select into different professions than men , often due to stereo - types rather than actual ability to perform in these professions [ 142 , 144 ] . These stereotypes also affect the perceptions of female performance or the amount of human capital required to equal male performance [ 110 , 193 , 208 ] , particularly for mothers [ 81 ] . It is therefore often assumed that women are better suited to less visible and less leadership - oriented roles [ 209 ] . Women also express differing preferences towards work - family balance , which affect whether and how they pursue human capital gains [ 210 ] , and ultimately their career progression and salary . On the other hand , men are often unaware of gendered processes and behaviors that they carry forward in their interactions and decision - making [ 211 , 212 ] . Therefore , initiatives aimed at increasing managers’ human capital – by raising awareness of gender disparities in their organizations and engaging them in diversity promotion – are essential steps to counter gender bias and segregation [ 213 ] . Emerging topics : Leadership and entrepreneurship Among the emerging topics , the most pervasive one is women reaching leadership positions in the workforce and in society . This is still a rare occurrence for two main types of factors , on the one hand , bias and discrimination make it harder for women to access leadership positions [ e . g . , 214 – 216 ] , on the other hand , the competitive nature and high pressure associated with leadership positions , coupled with the lack of women currently represented , reduce women’s desire to achieve them [ e . g . , 209 , 217 ] . Women are more effective leaders when they have access to education , resources and a diverse environment with representation [ e . g . , 218 , 219 ] . One sector where there is potential for women to carve out a leadership role is entrepreneur - ship . Although at the start of the millennium the discourse on entrepreneurship was found to be “discriminatory , gender - biased , ethnocentrically determined and ideologically controlled” [ 220 ] , an increasing body of literature is studying how to stimulate female entrepreneurship as an alternative pathway to wealth , leadership and empowerment [ e . g . , 221 ] . Many barriers exist for women to access entrepreneurship , including the institutional and legal environment , social and cultural factors , access to knowledge and resources , and individual behavior [ e . g . , PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 15 / 27 222 , 223 ] . Education has been found to raise women’s entrepreneurial intentions [ e . g . , 224 ] , although this effect is smaller than for men [ e . g . , 109 ] . In addition , increasing self - efficacy and risk - taking behavior constitute important success factors [ e . g . , 225 ] . Finally , the topic of sustainability is worth mentioning , as it is the primary objective of the SDGs and is closely associated with societal well - being . As society grapples with the effects of climate change and increasing depletion of natural resources , a narrative has emerged on women and their greater link to the environment [ 226 ] . Studies in developed countries have found some support for women leaders’ attention to sustainability issues in firms [ e . g . , 227 – 229 ] , and smaller resource consumption by women [ 230 ] . At the same time , women will likely be more affected by the consequences of climate change [ e . g . , 230 ] but often lack the decision - making power to influence local decision - making on resource management and environmen - tal policies [ e . g . , 231 ] . Research gaps and conclusions Research on gender equality has advanced rapidly in the past decades , with a steady increase in publications , both in mainstream topics related to women in education and the workforce , and in emerging topics . Through a novel approach combining methods of text mining and social network analysis , we examined a comprehensive body of literature comprising 15 , 465 papers published between 2000 and mid 2021 on topics related to gender equality . We identi - fied a set of 27 topics addressed by the literature and examined their connections . At the highest level of abstraction , it is worth noting that papers abound on the identifica - tion of issues related to gender inequalities and imbalances in the workforce and in society . Lit - erature has thoroughly examined the ( unconscious ) biases , barriers , stereotypes , and discriminatory behaviors that women are facing as a result of their gender . Instead , there are much fewer papers that discuss or demonstrate effective solutions to overcome gender bias [ e . g . , 121 , 143 , 145 , 163 , 194 , 213 , 232 ] . This is partly due to the relative ease in studying the sta - tus quo , as opposed to studying changes in the status quo . However , we observed a shift in the more recent years towards solution seeking in this domain , which we strongly encourage future researchers to focus on . In the future , we may focus on collecting and mapping pro - active contributions to gender studies , using additional Natural Language Processing tech - niques , able to measure the sentiment of scientific papers [ 43 ] . All of the mainstream topics identified in our literature review are closely related , and there is a wealth of insights looking at the intersection between issues such as education and career progression or human capital and role . However , emerging topics are worthy of being furtherly explored . It would be interesting to see more work on the topic of female entrepreneurship , exploring aspects such as education , personality , governance , management and leadership . For instance , how can education support female entrepreneurship ? How can self - efficacy and risk - taking behaviors be taught or enhanced ? What are the differences in managerial and gover - nance styles of female entrepreneurs ? Which personality traits are associated with successful entrepreneurs ? Which traits are preferred by venture capitalists and funding bodies ? The emerging topic of sustainability also deserves further attention , as our society struggles with climate change and its consequences . It would be interesting to see more research on the intersection between sustainability and entrepreneurship , looking at how female entrepreneurs are tackling sustainability issues , examining both their business models and their company governance . In addition , scholars are suggested to dig deeper into the relationship between family values and behaviors . Moreover , it would be relevant to understand how women’s networks ( social capital ) , or the composition and structure of social networks involving both women and men , enable PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 16 / 27 them to increase their remuneration and reach top corporate positions , participate in key deci - sion - making bodies , and have a voice in communities . Furthermore , the achievement of gen - der equality might significantly change firm networks and ecosystems , with important implications for their performance and survival . Similarly , research at the nexus of ( corporate ) governance , career progression , compensation and female empowerment could yield useful insights – for example discussing how enterprises , institutions and countries are managed and the impact for women and other minorities . Are there specific governance structures that favor diversity and inclusion ? Lastly , we foresee an emerging stream of research pertaining how the spread of the COVID - 19 pandemic challenged women , especially in the workforce , by making gender biases more evident . For our analysis , we considered a set of 15 , 465 articles downloaded from the Scopus data - base ( which is the largest abstract and citation database of peer - reviewed literature ) . As we were interested in reviewing business and economics related gender studies , we only consid - ered those papers published in journals listed in the Academic Journal Guide ( AJG ) 2018 rank - ing of the Chartered Association of Business Schools ( CABS ) . All the journals listed in this ranking are also indexed by Scopus . Therefore , looking at a single database ( i . e . , Scopus ) should not be considered a limitation of our study . However , future research could consider different databases and inclusion criteria . With our literature review , we offer researchers a comprehensive map of major gender - related research trends over the past twenty - two years . This can serve as a lens to look to the future , contributing to the achievement of SDG5 . Researchers may use our study as a starting point to identify key themes addressed in the literature . In addition , our methodological approach – based on the use of the Semantic Brand Score and its webapp – could support schol - ars interested in reviewing other areas of research . Supporting information S1 Text . Keywords used for paper selection . ( PDF ) Acknowledgments The computing resources and the related technical support used for this work have been pro - vided by CRESCO / ENEAGRID High Performance Computing infrastructure and its staff . CRESCO / ENEAGRID High Performance Computing infrastructure is funded by ENEA , the Italian National Agency for New Technologies , Energy and Sustainable Economic Develop - ment and by Italian and European research programmes ( see http : / / www . cresco . enea . it / english for information ) . Author Contributions Conceptualization : Paola Belingheri , Filippo Chiarello , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon , Paola Rovelli . Data curation : Filippo Chiarello , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon . Formal analysis : Paola Belingheri , Filippo Chiarello , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon , Paola Rovelli . Funding acquisition : Paola Belingheri , Filippo Chiarello , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon , Paola Rovelli . PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 17 / 27 Methodology : Filippo Chiarello , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon . Software : Andrea Fronzetti Colladon . Visualization : Paola Belingheri , Filippo Chiarello , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon . Writing – original draft : Paola Belingheri , Filippo Chiarello , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon , Paola Rovelli . Writing – review & editing : Paola Belingheri , Filippo Chiarello , Andrea Fronzetti Colladon , Paola Rovelli . References 1 . Amirkhanyan H , Krawczyk MW , Wilamowski M . Gender inequalityand nationalgendergaps in over - confidence . PLOS ONE . 2021 ; 16 ( 4 ) : e0249459 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0249459 PMID : 33857186 2 . Fisher B , NaidooR . The geographyof genderinequality . PLOS ONE . 2016 ; 11 ( 3 ) : e0145778 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0145778 PMID : 26930356 3 . Stoet G , Geary DC . A simplifiedapproachto measuring national genderinequality . PLOS ONE . 2019 ; 14 ( 1 ) : e0205349 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0205349PMID : 30605478 4 . Maceira HM . Economic benefits of genderequality in the EU . Intereconomics . 2017 ; 52 ( 3 ) : 178 – 83 5 . MinasyanA , Zenker J , Klasen S , Vollmer S . Educationalgendergaps and economicgrowth : A sys - tematic review and meta - regression analysis . World Development . 2019 ; 122 : 199 – 217 6 . Esteve - Volart B . Gender discrimination and growth : theory and evidencefrom India . LondonSchoolof Economics and Political Science2004 . 7 . CuberesD , Teignier M . Gender inequalityand economicgrowth : A critical review . Journal of Interna - tional Development . 2014 ; 26 ( 2 ) : 260 – 76 8 . Abu - GhaidaD , Klasen S . The costs of missing the Millennium Development Goal on genderequity . World Development . 2004 ; 32 ( 7 ) : 1075 – 107 9 . UN . Transforming our world : The 2030 Agendafor SustainableDevelopment . GeneralAssembley70 Session ; 2015 . 10 . Asadikia A , Rajabifard A , KalantariM . Systematic prioritisationof SDGs : Machinelearningapproach . World Development . 2020 11 . Nature . Get the SustainableDevelopment Goals back on track . Nature . 2020 ; 577 ( January 2 ) : 7 – 8 12 . Deressa TT , HassanRM , RinglerC , Alemu T , Yesuf M . Determinants of farmers’ choice of adaptation methods to climate change in the Nile Basin of Ethiopia . Global Environmental Change . 2009 ; 19 ( 2 ) : 248 – 55 13 . Dumais SA . Culturalcapital , gender , and school success : The role of habitus . Sociology of Education . 2002 ; 75 ( 1 ) : 44 – 68 14 . Kamin T , VezovnikA . Slovenia’s socialist superwoman : feedingthe family , nourishing the nation . Faminist Review . 2017 ; 117 ( 1 ) : 79 – 96 15 . Kang M , Park HJ , Park J . Teachers as good mothers , mothers as good teachers : Functional and ideo - logicalwork – familyalignmentin the South Korean teaching profession . Gender , Work and Organiza - tion . 2020 ; 27 ( 3 ) : 395 – 413 16 . Smith N , Parrotta P . Why so few women on boards of directors ? Empirical evidencefrom danish com - panies in 1998 – 2010 . Journal of BusinessEthics . 2018 ; 147 ( 2 ) : 445 – 67 17 . Smith N , Smith V , Verner M . Why are so few femalespromotedinto CEO and vice presidentpositions ? Danishempiricalevidence , 1997 – 2007 . ILR Review . 2013 ; 66 ( 2 ) : 380 – 408 18 . Adams RB , Ferreira D . Women in the boardroomand their impact on governance and performance . Journal of FinancialEconomics . 2009 ; 94 ( 2 ) : 291 – 309 19 . CampbellK , Mı´nguez - Vera A . Gender diversity in the boardroomand firm financialperformance . Jour - nal of BusinessEthics . 2008 ; 83 ( 3 ) : 435 – 51 20 . Yazilitas D , SvenssonJ , de Vries G , Saharso S . Genderedstudy choice : A literature review . A review of theory and researchinto the unequalrepresentation of male and female students in mathematics , science , and technology . Educational Researchand Evaluation . 2013 ; 19 ( 6 ) : 525 – 45 21 . Bishu SG , Alkadry MG . A systematic review of the genderpay gap and factors that predict it . Adminis - tration & Society . 2017 ; 49 ( 1 ) : 65 – 104 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 18 / 27 22 . Jackson JF , O’CallaghanEM . What do we know about glass ceilingeffects ? A taxonomy and critical review to inform highereducationresearch . Researchin HigherEducation . 2009 ; 50 ( 5 ) : 460 – 82 23 . Bark ASH , Escartı´n J , van Dick R . Gender and leadershipin Spain : A systematic review of some key aspects . Sex Roles . 2014 ; 70 ( 11 – 12 ) : 522 – 37 24 . Prashar S , Vijay TS , Parsad C . Women entrepreneurshipin India : a review of barriersand motivational factors . InternationalJournal of Entrepreneurshipand InnovationManagement . 2018 ; 22 ( 3 ) : 206 – 19 25 . Terjesen S , Sealy R , Singh V . Women directors on corporate boards : A review and researchagenda . CorporateGovernance : An InternationalReview . 2009 ; 17 ( 3 ) : 320 – 37 26 . Kirsch A . The gendercomposition of corporate boards : A review and research agenda . The Leader - ship Quarterly . 2018 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 346 – 64 27 . Ko¨llen T . Diversity management : A critical review and agendafor the future . Journal of Management Inquiry . 2019 28 . Grau SL , Zotos YC . Gender stereotypes in advertising : a review of current research . International Journal of Advertising . 2016 ; 35 ( 5 ) : 761 – 70 29 . Ahuja MK . Women in the information technology profession : A literaturereview , synthesis and research agenda . EuropeanJournalof Information Systems . 2002 ; 11 ( 1 ) : 20 – 34 30 . Rai SM , Brown BD , RuwanpuraKN . SDG 8 : Decent work and economicgrowth - Agenderedanalysis . World Development . 2019 ; 113 : 368 – 80 31 . Tricco AC , LillieE , Zarin W , O’Brien KK , Colquhoun H , Levac D , et al . PRISMA extensionfor scoping reviews ( PRISMA - ScR ) : checklist and explanation . Annals of Internal Medicine . 2018 ; 169 ( 7 ) : 467 – 73 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7326 / M18 - 0850PMID : 30178033 32 . Teso E , Olmedilla M , Martı´nez - TorresMR , Toral SL . Application of text miningtechniques to the analy - sis of discoursein eWOM communications from a genderperspective . Technological Forecastingand Social Change . 2018 ; 129 : 131 – 42 33 . Sun B , Mao H , Yin C . Male and female users’ differences in onlinetechnology community basedon text mining . Frontiers in Psychology . 2020 ; 11 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2020 . 00806 PMID : 32528342 34 . Karami A , White CN , Ford K , Swan S , SpinelMY . Unwantedadvancesin highereducation : Uncover - ing sexual harassment experiencesin academiawith text mining . Information Processing & Manage - ment . 2020 ; 57 ( 1 ) : 102167 35 . Hasan MR , NasreenM , Chowdhury MA . Gender - inclusivedisaster management policy in Bangla - desh : A content analysisof nationaland international regulatoryframeworks . InternationalJournal of Disaster Risk Reduction . 2019 ; 41 : 101324 36 . Fronzetti ColladonA . The Semantic Brand Score . Journalof BusinessResearch . 2018 ; 88 : 150 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2018 . 03 . 026 37 . Fronzetti ColladonA , Grippa F . Brand intelligenceanalytics . In : Przegalinska A , Grippa F , Gloor PA , editors . DigitalTransformation of Collaboration . Cham , Switzerland : SpringerNature Switzerland ; 2020 . p . 125 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0233276 PMID : 32442196 38 . Munn Z , Peters MDJ , Stern C , Tufanaru C , McArthur A , Aromataris E . Systematic review or scoping review ? Guidance for authors when choosingbetweena systematic or scopingreview approach . BMC Medical Research Methodology . 2018 ; 18 ( 143 ) : 1 – 7 39 . Griffiths TL , Steyvers M , editors . Findingscientific topics . Nationalacademy of Sciences ; 2004 . 40 . Mimno D , WallachH , Talley E , Leenders M , McCallum A , editors . Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models . 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in NaturalLanguageProcessing ; 2011 . 41 . Wang C , Blei DM , editors . Collaborative topic modelingfor recommending scientific articles . 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledgediscovery and data mining2011 . 42 . Arksey H , O’MalleyL . Scopingstudies : towards a methodological framework . InternationalJournalof Social ResearchMethodology . 2005 ; 8 ( 1 ) : 19 – 32 43 . ChiarelloF , Belingheri P , Bonaccorsi G , Martini M , Fantoni G . Value creation in emerging technologies through text mining : The case of blockchain . TechnologyAnalysis & Strategic Management . 2021 44 . Mazzei D , ChiarelloF , Fantoni G . Analyzingsocial robotics research with natural languageprocessing techniques . CognitiveComputation . 2020 45 . Feinerer I . An introductionto text miningin R . R News . 2008 ; 8 : 19 – 22 46 . Straka M , Strakova´ J , editors . Tokenizing , pos tagging , lemmatizing and parsing ud 2 . 0 with udpipe . CoNLL 2017 Shared Task : Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Universal Dependencies ; 2017 . 47 . Siddiqi S , Sharan A . Keywordand keyphraseextraction techniques : a literature review . Journalof Computer Applications . 2015 ; 109 ( 2 ) PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 19 / 27 48 . Newman D , KoiladaN , Lau JH , BaldwinT , editors . Bayesiantext segmentation for index term identifi - cation and keyphraseextraction . COLING 2012 ; 2012 . 49 . Lu Y , Li , R . , Wen K , Lu Z , editors . Automatic keyword extraction for scientific literatures using refer - ences . 2014 IEEE InternationalConference on InnovativeDesignand Manufacturing ( ICIDM ) ; 2014 . 50 . YujianL , Bo L . A normalizedLevenshtein distancemetric . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and MachineIntelligence . 2007 ; 29 ( 6 ) : 1091 – 5 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TPAMI . 2007 . 1078PMID : 17431306 51 . CollobertR , Weston J , Bottou L , Karlen M , Kavukcuoglu K , Kuksa P . Naturallanguageprocessing ( almost ) from scratch . Journal of MachineLearningResearch . 2011 ; 12 : 493 – 2537 52 . Singh J , Gupta V . An efficient corpus - based stemmer . CognitiveComputation . 2017 ; 9 ( 5 ) : 671 – 88 53 . ChiarelloF , TrivelliL , Bonaccorsi A , Fantoni G . Extracting and mappingindustry 4 . 0 technologies using wikipedia . Computersin Industry . 2018 ; 100 : 244 – 57 54 . Trivelli L , ApicellaA , Chiarello F , Rana R , Fantoni G , TarabellaA . From precisionagricultureto Indus - try 4 . 0 . British Food Journal . 2019 ; 121 ( 1730 – 1743 ) 55 . RoellekeT , Wang J , editors . TF - IDF uncovered . 31st AnnualInternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Researchand Development in Information Retrieval—SIGIR ‘08 ; 2008 . 56 . MihalceaR , Tarau P , editors . TextRank : Bringingorder into text . 2004 Conference on Empirical Meth - ods in NaturalLanguageProcessing ; 2004 . 57 . Blei D . Probabilistictopic models . Communications of the ACM . 2012 ; 55 ( 4 ) : 77 – 84 58 . IannoneF , Ambrosino F , Bracco G , De Rosa M , Funel A , Guarnieri G , et al . , editors . CRESCO ENEA HPC clusters : A workingexampleof a multifabricGPFS Spectrum Scale layout . 2019 International Conferenceon High Performance Computing & Simulation ( HPCS ) ; 2019 . 59 . Keller KL . Conceptualizing , measuring , and managing customer - based brand equity . Journal of Mar - keting . 1993 ; 57 ( 1 ) : 1 – 22 60 . Wasserman S , Faust K . Social network analysis : Methods and applications : CambridgeUniversity Press ; 1994 . 61 . Fronzetti ColladonA , NaldiM . Distinctiveness centrality in social networks . PLOS ONE . 2020 ; 15 ( 5 ) : e0233276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0233276 PMID : 32442196 62 . Brandes U . A faster algorithmfor betweenness centrality . Journal of MathematicalSociology . 2001 ; 25 ( 2 ) : 163 – 77 63 . Freeman LC . Centralityin social networks conceptualclarification . Social Networks . 1979 ; 1 ( 3 ) : 215 – 39 64 . Blau FD , KahnLM . The genderwagegap : Extent , trends , and explanations . Journalof EconomicLiter - ature . 2017 ; 55 ( 3 ) : 789 – 865 65 . Budig MJ , EnglandP . The wage penalty for motherhood . AmericanSociologicalReview . 2001 ; 66 ( 2 ) : 204 – 25 66 . Bertrand M , Hallock KF . The gendergap in top corporate jobs . ILR Review . 2001 ; 55 ( 1 ) : 3 – 21 67 . Segovia - Pe´rez M , Castro Nu´ ñ ez RB , Santero Sa´nchez R , LagunaSa´nchez P . Being a woman in an ICT job : an analysisof the genderpay gap and discrimination in Spain . New Technology , Work and Employment . 2020 ; 35 ( 1 ) : 20 – 39 68 . Owen AL , Temesvary J . CEO compensation , pay inequality , and the genderdiversity of bank board of directors . FinanceResearchLetters . 2019 ; 30 : 276 – 9 69 . Geiler P , Renneboog L . Are female top managersreally paid less ? Journal of Corporate Finance . 2015 ; 35 : 345 – 69 70 . Gregory - Smith I , Main BG , O’Reilly CA III . Appointments , pay and performance in UK boardrooms by gender . The Economic Journal . 2014 ; 124 ( 574 ) : F109 – F28 71 . Carter ME , Franco F , Gine M . Executive genderpay gaps : The roles of female risk aversion and board representation . Contemporary Accounting Research . 2017 ; 34 ( 2 ) : 1232 – 64 72 . Ahamed MM , Wen J , Gupta N . Does board compositionaffect the genderpay gap ? Economics Let - ters . 2019 ; 184 73 . Cook A , IngersollAR , Glass C . Gender gaps at the top : Does board compositionaffect executive com - pensation ? Human Relations . 2019 ; 72 ( 8 ) : 1292 – 314 74 . EnglandP , Bearak J , Budig MJ , HodgesMJ . Do highly paid , highlyskilled women experiencethe larg - est motherhood penalty ? AmericanSociological Review . 2016 ; 81 ( 6 ) : 1161 – 89 75 . Bobbitt - Zeher D . The genderincome gap and the role of education . Sociologyof Education . 2007 ; 80 ( 1 ) : 1 – 22 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 20 / 27 76 . Gill AM , Leigh DE . Community collegeenrollment , collegemajor , and the genderwage gap . ILR Review . 2000 ; 54 ( 1 ) : 163 – 81 77 . Loury LD . The genderearningsgap amongcollege - educated workers . ILR Review . 1997 ; 50 ( 4 ) : 580 – 93 78 . Farkas G , EnglandP , VicknairK , KilbourneBS . Cognitiveskill , skill demandsof jobs , and earnings among youngEuropeanAmerican , African American , and Mexican American workers . Social Forces . 1997 ; 75 ( 3 ) : 913 – 38 79 . Bradley KJ . The incorporation of women into highereducation : Paradoxical outcomes ? Sociologyof Education . 2000 ; 73 ( 1 ) : 1 – 18 80 . Davies S , Guppy N . Fields of study , collegeselectivity , and student inequalitiesin highereducation . Social Forces . 1997 ; 75 ( 4 ) : 1417 – 38 81 . Correll SJ , Benard S , Paik I . Getting a job : Is there a motherhood penalty ? American Journalof Sociol - ogy . 2007 ; 112 ( 5 ) : 1297 – 338 82 . Olivetti C , PetrongoloB . Unequalpay or unequalemployment ? A cross - country analysisof gender gaps . Journal of Labor Economics . 2008 ; 26 ( 4 ) : 621 – 54 83 . CastillaEJ . Gender , race , and meritocracy in organizational careers . American Journalof Sociology . 2008 ; 113 ( 6 ) : 1479 – 526 84 . CastillaEJ , Benard S . The paradoxof meritocracy in organizations . Administrative ScienceQuarterly . 2010 ; 55 ( 4 ) : 543 – 676 85 . Cohen PN , Huffman ML . Working for the woman ? Female managersand the genderwage gap . Amer - ican Sociological Review . 2007 ; 72 ( 5 ) : 681 – 704 86 . Joshi A , Son J , Roh H . When can women close the gap ? A meta - analytic test of sex differences in per - formance and rewards . Academy of Management Journal . 2015 ; 58 ( 5 ) : 1516 – 45 87 . Dezso¨ CL , Ross DG , Uribe J . Is there an implicit quota on women in top management ? A large - sample statistical analysis . Strategic Management Journal . 2016 ; 37 ( 1 ) : 98 – 115 88 . Bao S , FainshmidtS , Nair A , Vracheva V . Women in upper echelonsof management , tenure and legal risk . British Journalof Management . 2014 ; 25 ( 2 ) : 388 – 405 89 . Perryman AA , FernandoGD , Tripathy A . Do genderdifferences persist ? An examination of gender diversity on firm performance , risk , and executive compensation . Journal of BusinessResearch . 2016 ; 69 ( 2 ) : 579 – 86 90 . Terjesen S , AguileraRV , Lorenz R . Legislatinga woman’sseat on the board : Institutional factors driv - ing genderquotas for boardsof directors . Journalof BusinessEthics . 2015 ; 128 ( 2 ) : 233 – 51 91 . Terjesen S , Singh V . Female presenceon corporate boards : A multi - country study of environmental context . Journal of BusinessEthics . 2008 ; 83 ( 1 ) : 55 – 63 92 . Oakley JG . Gender - based barriers to senior management positions : Understanding the scarcity of female CEOs . Journal of BusinessEthics . 2000 ; 27 ( 4 ) : 321 – 34 93 . AnderssonFW , JohanssonD , KarlssonJ , LodefalkM , PoldahlA . Female top management in family firms and non - family firms : Evidencefrom total populationdata . International Journal of Entrepreneur - ship and Small Business . 2018 ; 35 ( 3 ) : 303 – 26 94 . Nekhili M , Gatfaoui H . Are demographicattributes and firm characteristics drivers of genderdiversity ? Investigatingwomen’s positionson French boards of directors . Journal of BusinessEthics . 2013 ; 118 ( 2 ) : 227 – 49 95 . Carter DA , D’SouzaF , Simkins BJ , SimpsonWG . The genderand ethnic diversity of US boards and board committees and firm financialperformance . Corporate Governance : An InternationalReview . 2010 ; 18 ( 5 ) : 396 – 414 96 . Khan WA , Vieito JP . CEO genderand firm performance . Journal of Economics and Business . 2013 ; 67 : 55 – 66 97 . Sila V , Gonzalez A , Hagendorff J . Women on board : Does boardroomgenderdiversity affect firm risk ? Journal of Corporate Finance . 2016 ; 36 : 26 – 53 98 . Palvia A , Va¨ha¨maa E , Va¨ha¨maa S . Are female CEOs and chairwomen more conservative and risk averse ? Evidencefrom the bankingindustry duringthe financialcrisis . Journalof BusinessEthics . 2015 ; 131 ( 1 ) : 577 – 94 99 . BouloutaI . Hiddenconnections : The link betweenboard genderdiversity and corporate social perfor - mance . Journal of BusinessEthics . 2013 ; 113 : 185 – 97 100 . Nekhili M , Nagati H , Chtioui T , Nekhili A . Gender - diverse board and the relevanceof voluntary CSR reporting . InternationalReviewof FinancialAnalysis . 2017 ; 50 : 81 – 100 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 21 / 27 101 . Quadlin N . The mark of a woman’srecord : Gender and academicperformance in hiring . American SociologicalReview . 2018 ; 83 ( 2 ) : 331 – 60 102 . Baixauli - Soler JS , Lucas - PerezME , Martin - Ugedo JF , Minguez - Vera A , Sanchez - Marin G . Executive directors’ compensation and monitoring : the influenceof genderdiversity on Spanishboards . Journal of BusinessEconomics and Management . 2016 ; 17 ( 6 ) : 1133 – 54 103 . Lam KC , McGuinness PB , Vieito JP . CEO gender , executive compensation and firm performance in Chinese - listed enterprises . Pacific - Basin Finance Journal . 2013 ; 21 ( 1 ) : 1136 – 59 104 . Gupta VK , Mortal SC , Guo X . Revisitingthe gendergap in CEO compensation : Replicationand exten - sion of Hill , Upadhyay , and Beekun’s ( 2015 ) work on CEO genderpay gap . Strategic Management Journal . 2018 ; 39 ( 7 ) : 2036 – 50 105 . KoenigAM , Eagly AH , Mitchell AA , Ristikari T . Are leaderstereotypes masculine ? A meta - analysis of three research paradigms . Psychological Bulletin . 2011 ; 137 ( 4 ) : 616 – 42 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0023557PMID : 21639606 106 . Beaman L , Chattopadhyay R , Duflo E , Pande R , Topalova P . Powerfulwomen : does exposure reduce bias ? Quarterly Journal of Economics . 2009 ; 124 ( 4 ) : 1497 – 540 107 . Derks B , Van Laar C , Ellemers N . The queen bee phenomenon : Why women leaders distancethem - selves from junior women . The LeadershipQuarterly . 2016 ; 27 ( 3 ) : 456 – 69 108 . Gupta VK , Turban DB , Wasti SA , Sikdar A . The role of genderstereotypes in perceptions of entrepre - neurs and intentionsto become an entrepreneur . Entrepreneurship , Theory and Practice . 2009 ; 33 ( 2 ) : 397 – 417 109 . Westhead P , Solesvik MZ . Entrepreneurship educationand entrepreneurialintention : Do female stu - dents benefit ? InternationalSmall BusinessJournal . 2016 ; 34 ( 8 ) : 979 – 1003 110 . Kanze D , Huang L , ConleyMA , HigginsET . We ask men to win and women not to lose : Closingthe gendergap in startup funding . Academy of Management Journal . 2018 ; 61 ( 2 ) : 586 – 614 111 . BalachandraL , Briggs T , EddlestonK , Brush C . Don’t pitch like a girl ! : how genderstereotypesinflu - ence investor decisions . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice . 2019 ; 43 ( 1 ) : 116 – 37 112 . Marlow S , McAdam M . Gender and entrepreneurship : Advancing debate and challengingmyths ; exploringthe mystery of the under - performing female entrepreneur . InternationalJournalof Entrepre - neurial Behavior & Research . 2013 ; 19 ( 1 ) : 114 – 24 113 . Artz B . Gender and entrepreneurial success : evidencefrom survey data . AppliedEconomicsLetters . 2017 ; 24 ( 3 ) : 163 – 6 114 . SuspitsynaT . Highereducationfor economicadvancementand engaged citizenship : An analysisof the US Department of Educationdiscourse . Journal of Higher Education . 2012 ; 83 ( 1 ) : 49 – 72 115 . Jacobs JA . Gender inequalityand higher education . AnnualReviewof Sociology . 1996 ; 22 ( 1 ) : 153 – 85 116 . Jewkes R , Levin J , Penn - Kekana L . Risk factors for domestic violence : findings from a South African cross - sectional study . SocialScience & Medicine . 2002 ; 55 ( 9 ) : 1603 – 17 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0277 - 9536 ( 01 ) 00294 - 5 PMID : 12297246 117 . Levison D , Moe KS , Knaul FM . Youth educationand work in Mexico . World Development . 2001 ; 29 ( 1 ) : 167 – 88 118 . Aterido R , Beck T , IacovoneL . Access to financein Sub - SaharanAfrica : Is there a gendergap ? World Development . 2013 ; 47 : 102 – 20 119 . Sraboni E , MalapitHJ , Quisumbing AR , Ahmed AU . Women’s empowerment in agriculture : What role for food security in Bangladesh ? World Development . 2014 ; 61 : 11 – 52 120 . Adams T , Gerber JD , Amacker M . Constraintsand opportunities in genderrelations : Sugarcaneout - grower schemes in Malawi . World Development . 2019 ; 122 : 282 – 94 121 . Good C , Aronson J , Inzlicht M . Improvingadolescents’ standardized test performance : An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat . Journal of AppliedDevelopment Psychology . 2003 ; 24 ( 6 ) : 645 – 62 122 . Rydell RJ , McConnellAR , Beilock SL . Multiplesocial identities and stereotype threat : imbalance , accessibility , and working memory . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology . 2009 ; 96 ( 5 ) : 949 – 66 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0014846PMID : 19379029 123 . Hargittai E . Whose space ? Differencesamong users and non - usersof social network sites . Journal of Computer - mediated Communication . 2007 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 276 – 97 124 . Lent RW , Lopez AM Jr , LopezFG , Sheu HB . Socialcognitivecareer theory and the prediction of inter - ests and choice goals in the computingdisciplines . Journal of VocationalBehavior . 2008 ; 73 ( 1 ) : 52 – 62 125 . Miller D , MinichilliA , Corbetta G . Is family leadershipalwaysbeneficial ? Strategic Management Jour - nal . 2013 ; 34 ( 5 ) : 553 – 71 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 22 / 27 126 . Master A , Cheryan S , Meltzoff AN . Computing whether she belongs : Stereotypes undermine girls’ interest and sense of belongingin computer science . Journal of Educational Psychology . 2016 ; 108 ( 3 ) : 424 – 37 127 . Pitman T , Roberts L , Bennett D , RichardsonS . An Australianstudy of graduate outcomes for disad - vantagedstudents . Journal of Further and HigherEducation . 2019 ; 43 ( 1 ) : 45 – 57 128 . Chamarbagwala R . Economicliberalization and wage inequalityin India . World Development . 2006 ; 34 ( 12 ) : 1997 – 2015 129 . Bertrand M , Black SE , Jensen S , Lleras - MuneyA . Breakingthe glass ceiling ? The effect of board quo - tas on female labourmarket outcomes in Norway . Review of Economics Studies . 2019 ; 86 ( 1 ) : 191 – 238 130 . Azam M , KingdonGG . Are girls the fairer sex in India ? Revisiting intra - household allocation of educa - tion expenditure . World Development . 2013 ; 42 : 143 – 64 131 . Mutua K , Dimitrov DM . Predictionof school enrolment of childrenwith intellectualdisabilities in Kenya : The role of parents’ expectations , beliefs , and education . InternationalJournal of Disability , Develop - ment and Education . 2001 ; 48 ( 2 ) : 179 – 91 132 . LiddellC , Barrett L , Henzi P . Parentalinvestment in schooling : Evidence from a subsistence farming community in South Africa . InternationalJournalof Psychology . 2003 ; 38 ( 1 ) : 54 – 63 133 . Yueh L . Parentalinvestment in children’s human capitalin urban China . Applied Economics . 2006 ; 38 ( 18 ) : 2089 – 111 134 . Garcı´a - Aracil A , Winter C . Gender and ethnicity differentialsin school attainment and labor market earningsin Ecuador . World Development . 2006 ; 34 ( 2 ) : 289 – 307 135 . Ojeda L , Flores LY . The influence of gender , generationlevel , parents’ educationlevel , and perceived barriers on the educationalaspirations of Mexican American high school students . CareerDevelop - ment Quarterly . 2008 ; 57 ( 1 ) : 84 – 95 136 . GundersonEA , Ramirez G , Levine SC , BeilockSL . New directionsfor research on the role of parents and teachers in the development of gender - related math attitudes : Responseto commentaries . Sex Roles . 2012 ; 66 ( 3 – 4 ) : 191 – 6 137 . Sorariutta A , Silve´n M . Quality of both parents’ cognitiveguidance and quantity of early childhoodedu - cation : Influenceson pre - mathematical development . British Journalof EducationalPsychology . 2018 ; 88 ( 2 ) : 192 – 215 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / bjep . 12217PMID : 29574680 138 . Van der Vleuten M , Jaspers E , Maas I , van der Lippe T . Intergenerational transmission of genderseg - regation : How parents’ occupational field affects genderdifferencesin field of study choices . British EducationalResearchJournal . 2018 ; 44 ( 2 ) : 294 – 318 139 . DelaneyL , Harmon C , RedmondC . Parental education , grade attainment and earningsexpectations among universitystudents . Economics of Education Review . 2011 ; 30 ( 6 ) : 1136 – 52 140 . Daymont TN , AndrisaniPJ . Job preferences , collegemajor , and the gendergap in earnings . Journal of Human Resources . 1984 ; 19 ( 3 ) : 408 – 28 141 . Williams JE , Best DL . Measuring sex stereotypes : A multination study , Rev : Sage Publications , Inc ; 1990 . 142 . Correll SJ . Gender and the career choice process : The role of biased self - assessments . American Journal of Sociology . 2001 ; 106 ( 6 ) : 1691 – 730 143 . Kanadlı SB , Torchia M , GabaldonP . Increasingwomen’s contribution on board decisionmaking : The importance of chairpersonleadership efficacy and board openness . EuropeanManagement Journal . 2018 ; 36 ( 1 ) : 91 – 104 144 . Correll SJ . Constraintsinto preferences : Gender , status , and emergingcareer aspirations . American SociologicalReview . 2004 ; 69 ( 1 ) : 93 – 113 145 . Falco LD , Summers JJ . Improvingcareer decisionself - efficacy and STEM self - efficacy in high school girls : Evaluationof an intervention . Journal of Career Development . 2019 ; 46 ( 1 ) : 62 – 76 146 . Roper S , Scott JM . Perceivedfinancialbarriers and the start - up decision : An econometric analysisof genderdifferencesusing GEM data . InternationalSmall BusinessJournal . 2009 ; 27 ( 2 ) : 149 – 71 147 . Hitsch GJ , Hortac¸su A , Ariely D . What makes you click ? —Mate preferences in onlinedating . Quantita - tive Marketingand Economics . 2010 ; 8 ( 4 ) : 393 – 427 148 . Craig L , MullanK . How mothers and fathers share childcare : A cross - national time - use comparison . American Sociological Review . 2011 ; 76 ( 6 ) : 834 – 61 149 . Lo¨rz M , Mu¨hleck K . Gender differences in highereducationfrom a life course perspective : transitions and social inequality betweenenrolmentand first post - doc position . HigherEducation . 2019 ; 77 ( 3 ) : 381 – 402 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 23 / 27 150 . Chekima B , Wafa SAWSK , Igau OA , Chekima S , Sondoh SL Jr . Examining green consumerismmoti - vational drivers : does premiumprice and demographics matter to green purchasing ? Journal of CleanerProduction . 2016 ; 112 : 3436 – 50 151 . BolzendahlC , Brooks C . Women’s politicalrepresentation and welfarestate spending in 12 capitalist democracies . SocialForces . 2007 ; 85 ( 4 ) : 1509 – 34 152 . Matsa DA , Miller AR . A female style in corporate leadership ? Evidencefrom quotas . AmericanEco - nomic Journal : AppliedEconomics . 2013 ; 5 ( 3 ) : 136 – 69 153 . Fernandez - Feijoo B , Romero S , Ruiz - Blanco S . Women on boards : do they affect sustainability report - ing ? CorporateSocial Responsibility and Environmental Management . 2014 ; 21 ( 6 ) : 351 – 64 154 . Ho SS , Li AY , Tam K , ZhangF . CEO gender , ethicalleadership , and accountingconservatism . Journal of BusinessEthics . 2015 ; 127 ( 2 ) : 351 – 70 155 . Francis B , HasanI , Park JC , Wu Q . Gender differences in financialreportingdecisionmaking : Evi - dence from accountingconservatism . Contemporary Accounting Research . 2015 ; 32 ( 3 ) : 1285 – 318 156 . Cho Y , Park J , Han SJ , Ho Y . A woman CEO ? You’d better think twice ! Career Development Interna - tional . 2019 ; 24 ( 1 ) : 91 – 108 157 . Carrasco A , Francoeur C , LabelleR , Laffarga J , Ruiz - BarbadilloE . Appointingwomen to boards : Is there a cultural bias ? Journalof BusinessEthics . 2015 ; 129 ( 2 ) : 429 – 44 158 . Price CR . Gender , competition , and managerial decisions . Management Science . 2012 ; 58 ( 1 ) : 114 – 22 159 . Yan W , SchiehllE , Muller - Kahle MI . Human and relationalcapitalbehindthe structural power of CEOs in Chineselisted firms . Asia Pacific Journal of Management . 2019 ; 36 ( 3 ) : 715 – 43 160 . Lyness KS , HeilmanME . When fit is fundamental : performance evaluations and promotions of upper - level female and male managers . Journal of Applied Psychology . 2006 ; 91 ( 4 ) : 777 – 85 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 91 . 4 . 777 PMID : 16834505 161 . HeilmanME , WallenAS , Fuchs D , Tamkins MM . Penaltiesfor success : reactions to women who suc - ceed at male gender - typedtasks . Journal of AppliedPsychology . 2004 ; 89 ( 3 ) : 416 – 27 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 89 . 3 . 416 PMID : 15161402 162 . WellingtonS , Kropf MB , Gerkovich PR . What’s holdingwomen back ? HarvardBusinessReview . 2003 ; 81 ( 6 ) : 18 – 163 . Kalev A . Crackingthe glass cages ? Restructuring and ascriptiveinequality at work . AmericanJournal of Sociology . 2009 ; 114 ( 6 ) : 1591 – 643 164 . Van den Brink M , BenschopY , Jansen W . Transparencyin academicrecruitment : a problematic tool for genderequality ? Organization Studies . 2010 ; 31 ( 11 ) : 1459 – 83 165 . Milkman KL , Akinola M , ChughD . What happensbefore ? A field experimentexploring how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the pathway into organizations . Journal of AppliedPsychol - ogy . 2015 ; 100 ( 6 ) : 1678 – 712https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / apl0000022PMID : 25867167 166 . Hardy JH III , Tey KS , Cyrus - LaiW , Martell RF , Olstad A , UhlmannEL . Bias in context : Small biases in hiring evaluations have big consequences . Journal of Management . 2020 167 . Koch AJ , D’MelloSD , Sackett PR . A meta - analysis of genderstereotypesand bias in experimental simulations of employment decisionmaking . Journalof AppliedPsychology . 2015 ; 100 ( 1 ) : 128 – 61 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0036734PMID : 24865576 168 . Haslam SA , Ryan MK . The road to the glass cliff : Differences in the perceivedsuitabilityof men and women for leadershippositionsin succeedingand failing organizations . The LeadershipQuarterly . 2008 ; 19 ( 5 ) : 530 – 46 169 . Lee LM , Waddell GR . Diversity and the timing of preferencein hiring decisions . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization . 2021 ; 184 : 432 – 59 170 . CheryanS , Ziegler SA , Montoya AK , Jiang L . Why are some STEM fields more genderbalanced than others ? Psychological Bulletin . 2017 ; 143 ( 1 ) : 1 – 35 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / bul0000052PMID : 27732018 171 . Stoet G , Geary DC . The gender - equality paradoxin science , technology , engineering , and mathemat - ics education . Psychological Science . 2018 ; 29 ( 4 ) : 581 – 93 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797617741719 PMID : 29442575 172 . Steele CM , Aronson J . Stereotype threat and the test performance of academically successful African Americans . In : Jencks C , PhillipsM , editors . The Black – White test score gap . Washington , DC : Brookings ; 1998 . p . 401 – 27 173 . Shapiro JR , Williams AM . The role of stereotype threats in undermininggirls’ and women’s perfor - mance and interest in STEM fields . Sex Roles . 2012 ; 66 ( 3 – 4 ) : 175 – 83 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 24 / 27 174 . NguyenHHD , Ryan AM . Does stereotype threat affect test performance of minoritiesand women ? A meta - analysis of experimental evidence . Journalof AppliedPsychology . 2008 ; 93 ( 6 ) : 1314 – 34 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0012702 PMID : 19025250 175 . Schmader T . Gender identification moderates stereotype threat effects on women’s math perfor - mance . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology . 2002 ; 38 ( 2 ) : 194 – 201 176 . Flore PC , Wicherts JM . Does stereotypethreat influenceperformance of girls in stereotypeddomains ? A meta - analysis . Journalof School Psychology . 2015 ; 53 ( 1 ) : 25 – 44 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsp . 2014 . 10 . 002 PMID : 25636259 177 . LindbergSM , Hyde JS , Petersen JL , Linn MC . New trends in genderand mathematics performance : A meta - analysis . Psychological Bulletin . 2010 ; 136 ( 6 ) : 1123 – 35 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0021276 PMID : 21038941 178 . HeilmanME , Okimoto TG . Why are women penalizedfor success at male tasks ? The impliedcommu - nality deficit . Journal of AppliedPsychology . 2007 ; 92 ( 1 ) : 81 – 92 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 92 . 1 . 81 PMID : 17227153 179 . Burgess D , BorgidaE . Who women are , who women shouldbe : Descriptiveand prescriptivegender stereotyping in sex discrimination . Psychology , Public Policy , and Law . 1999 ; 5 ( 3 ) : 665 – 92 180 . Eagly AH , Karau SJ . Role congruity theory of prejudicetoward female leaders . Psychological Review . 2002 ; 109 ( 3 ) : 573 – 98 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295x . 109 . 3 . 573 PMID : 12088246 181 . Reguera - Alvarado N , de Fuentes P , Laffarga J . Does board genderdiversity influencefinancialperfor - mance ? Evidence from Spain . Journal of BusinessEthics . 2017 ; 141 ( 2 ) : 337 – 50 182 . Isidro H , Sobral M . The effects of women on corporate boardson firm value , financialperformance , and ethical and social compliance . Journalof BusinessEthics . 2015 ; 132 ( 1 ) : 1 – 19 183 . McGuinness PB , Vieito JP , Wang M . The role of board genderand foreign ownershipin the CSR per - formance of Chineselisted firms . Journal of Corporate Finance . 2017 ; 42 : 75 – 99 184 . AbdullahSN , Ismail KNIK , Nachum L . Does having women on boardscreate value ? The impact of societal perceptions and corporate governance in emergingmarkets . Strategic Management Journal . 2016 ; 37 ( 3 ) : 466 – 76 185 . ChappleL , Humphrey JE . Does board genderdiversity have a financialimpact ? Evidenceusing stock portfolio performance . Journal of BusinessEthics . 2014 ; 122 ( 4 ) : 709 – 23 186 . Martı´n - UgedoJF , Mı´nguez - Vera A , Palma - Martos L . Female CEOs , returns and risk in Spanishpub - lishingfirms . EuropeanManagement Review . 2018 ; 15 ( 1 ) : 111 – 20 187 . JadiyappaN , Jyothi P , SireeshaB , HickmanLE . CEO gender , firm performance and agency costs : evidencefrom India . Journalof Economic Studies . 2019 ; 46 ( 2 ) : 482 – 95 188 . Costa PT Jr , Terracciano A , McCrae RR . Gender differences in personality traits across cultures : robust and surprising findings . Journal of Personalityand SocialPsychology . 2001 ; 81 ( 2 ) : 322 – 31 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 81 . 2 . 322 PMID : 11519935 189 . Moss - Racusin CA , RudmanLA . Disruptions in women’sself - promotion : The backlashavoidance model . Psychologyof Women Quarterly . 2010 ; 34 ( 2 ) : 186 – 202 190 . Kray LJ , Thompson L , Galinsky A . Battle of the sexes : genderstereotype confirmation and reactance in negotiations . Journal of Personalityand Social Psychology . 2001 ; 80 ( 6 ) : 942 – 58 PMID : 11414376 191 . RudmanLA , Glick P . Prescriptive genderstereotypesand backlashtoward agenticwomen . Journalof Social Issues . 2001 ; 57 ( 4 ) : 743 – 62 192 . Davis LS , WilliamsonCR . Does individualism promote genderequality ? World Development . 2019 ; 123 : 104627 193 . Brescoll VL , UhlmannEL . Can an angry woman get ahead ? Status conferral , gender , and expression of emotion in the workplace . Psychological Science . 2008 ; 19 ( 3 ) : 268 – 75 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2008 . 02079 . x PMID : 18315800 194 . JeppesenLB , LakhaniKR . Marginalityand problem - solvingeffectivenessin broadcastsearch . Organi - zation Science . 2010 ; 21 ( 5 ) : 1016 – 33 195 . Raver JL , Nishii LH . Once , twice , or three times as harmful ? Ethnic harassment , genderharassment , and generalizedworkplaceharassment . Journal of AppliedPsychology . 2010 ; 95 ( 2 ) : 236 – 54 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0018377 PMID : 20230066 196 . Cortina LM , Kabat - Farr D , LeskinenEA , Huerta M , Magley VJ . Selectiveincivilityas modern discrimi - nation in organizations : Evidenceand impact . Journal of Management . 2013 ; 39 ( 6 ) : 1579 – 605 197 . RoehlingMV , RoehlingPV , Pichler S . The relationshipbetweenbody weight and perceivedweight - related employmentdiscrimination : The role of sex and race . Journal of Vocational Behavior . 2007 ; 71 ( 2 ) : 300 – 18 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 25 / 27 198 . Kossek EE , Su R , Wu L . “Opting out” or “pushedout” ? Integratingperspectives on women’s career equality for genderinclusionand interventions . Journal of Management . 2017 ; 43 ( 1 ) : 228 – 54 199 . VinkenburgCJ , Van Engen ML , Eagly AH , Johannesen - Schmidt MC . An explorationof stereotypical beliefs about leadership styles : Is transformationalleadershipa route to women’spromotion ? The LeadershipQuarterly . 2011 ; 22 ( 1 ) : 10 – 21 200 . Ceci SJ , Ginther DK , Kahn S , Williams WM . Women in academic science : A changing landscape . Psy - chologicalSciencein the Public Interest . 2014 ; 15 ( 3 ) : 75 – 141 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1529100614541236 PMID : 26172066 201 . Zafar B . Collegemajor choice and the gendergap . Journal of Human Resources . 2013 ; 48 ( 3 ) : 545 – 95 202 . Walton GM , Logel C , Peach JM , Spencer SJ , Zanna MP . Two brief interventions to mitigate a “chilly climate” transform women’sexperience , relationships , and achievementin engineering . Journal of EducationalPsychology . 2015 ; 107 ( 2 ) : 468 – 85 203 . Miles R . Employmentand unemployment in Jordan : The importance of the gendersystem . World Development . 2002 ; 30 ( 3 ) : 413 – 27 204 . Vicente - MolinaMA , Ferna´ndez - SainzA , Izagirre - OlaizolaJ . Does gendermake a difference in pro - environmental behavior ? The case of the BasqueCountry University students . Journal of CleanerPro - duction . 2018 ; 176 : 89 – 98 205 . BraunsteinE . Engendering foreign direct investment : Family structure , labor markets and international capital mobility . World Development . 2000 ; 28 ( 7 ) : 1157 – 72 206 . Chen Z , Ge Y , Lai H , Wan C . Globalization and genderwage inequality in China . World Development . 2013 ; 44 : 256 – 66 207 . Meece JL , Glienke BB , Burg S . Gender and motivation . Journal of School Psychology . 2006 ; 44 ( 5 ) : 351 – 73 208 . Aguinis H , Ji YH , Joo H . Gender productivity gap among star performers in STEM and other scientific fields . Journal of AppliedPsychology . 2018 ; 103 ( 12 ) : 1283 – 306https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / apl0000331 PMID : 30024197 209 . Morley L . Lost leaders : Women in the globalacademy . Higher Education Research & Development . 2014 ; 33 ( 1 ) : 114 – 28 210 . Hakim C . Women , careers , and work - life preferences . British Journal of Guidance & Counselling . 2006 ; 34 ( 3 ) : 279 – 94 211 . CampbellC , MacPhailC . Peer education , genderand the development of critical consciousness : Par - ticipatory HIV prevention by South African youth . Social Science & Medicine . 2002 ; 55 ( 2 ) : 331 – 45 212 . Bird SR . Unsettlinguniversities’ incongruous , genderedbureaucratic structures : A case - study approach . Gender , Work and Organization . 2011 ; 18 ( 2 ) : 202 – 30 213 . Dobbin F , Schrage D , Kalev A . Rage against the iron cage : The varied effects of bureaucraticperson - nel reforms on diversity . AmericalSociological Review . 2015 ; 80 ( 5 ) : 1014 – 44 214 . Brescoll VL . Leadingwith their hearts ? How genderstereotypes of emotionlead to biased evaluations of female leaders . The Leadership Quarterly . 2016 ; 27 ( 3 ) : 415 – 28 215 . Becker J , Ayman R , KorabikK . Discrepanciesin self / subordinates’perceptionsof leadership behavior : Leader’sgender , organizational context , and leader’sself - monitoring . Group & Organization Manage - ment . 2002 ; 27 ( 2 ) : 226 – 44 216 . Sczesny S , KuhnenU . Meta - cognition about biological sex and gender - stereotypic physicalappear - ance : Consequences for the assessment of leadershipcompetence . Personalityand Social Psychol - ogy Bulletin . 2004 ; 30 ( 1 ) : 13 – 21 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0146167203258831 PMID : 15030639 217 . Lucas JW . Status processes and the institutionalization of women as leaders . AmericalSociological Review . 2003 ; 68 ( 3 ) : 464 – 80 218 . DeschaineJE , Schaffer MA . Strengtheningthe role of public health nurse leaders in policy develop - ment . Policy , Politics , & NursingPractice . 2003 ; 4 ( 4 ) : 266 – 74 219 . Leicht C , de Moura GR , Crisp RJ . Contestinggenderstereotypes stimulates generalizedfairness in the selectionof leaders . The LeadershipQuarterly . 2014 ; 25 ( 5 ) : 1025 – 39 220 . Ogbor JO . Mythicizingand reification in entrepreneurial discourse : Ideology - critique of entrepreneurial studies . Journal of Management Studies . 2000 ; 37 ( 5 ) : 605 – 35 221 . AlkhaledS , BerglundK . ‘And now I’m free’ : Women’s empowerment and emancipation through entre - preneurshipin Saudi ArabiaandSweden . Entrepreneurship & RegionalDevelopment . 2018 ; 30 ( 7 ) : 877 – 900 222 . DanishAY , Smith HL . Female entrepreneurship in Saudi Arabia : Opportunities and challenges . Inter - nationalJournal of Gender and Entrepreneurship . 2012 ; 4 ( 3 ) : 216 – 35 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 26 / 27 223 . MovahediR , Yaghoubi - Farani A . Analysis of the barriers and limitationsfor the development of rural women’s entrepreneurship . InternationalJournal of Entrepreneurshipand Small Business . 2012 ; 15 ( 4 ) : 469 – 87 224 . Roomi MA , HarrisonP . Behindthe veil : Women - only entrepreneurship trainingin Pakistan . Interna - tional Journal of Gender and Entrepreneurship . 2010 ; 2 ( 2 ) : 150 – 72 225 . JavadianG , Singh RP . Examining successful Iranian women entrepreneurs : An exploratory study . Gender in Management : An InternationalJournal . 2012 ; 27 ( 3 ) : 148 – 64 226 . Goebel A . Women and sustainability : What kind of theory do we need ? CanadianWoman Studies . 2003 ; 23 ( 1 ) : 77 – 84 227 . La¨msa¨ AM , Vehkapera¨ M , Puttonen T , PesonenHL . Effect of businesseducationon women and men students’ attitudes on corporate responsibility in society . Journalof BusinessEthics . 2008 ; 82 ( 1 ) : 45 – 58 228 . GalbreathJ . Are there gender - related influenceson corporate sustainability ? A study of women on boards of directors . Journal of Management and Organization . 2011 ; 17 ( 1 ) : 17 – 38 229 . Glass C , Cook A , IngersollAR . Do women leaders promote sustainability ? Analyzingthe effect of cor - porate governance compositionon environmental performance . BusinessStrategy and the Environ - ment . 2016 ; 25 ( 7 ) : 495 – 511 230 . Arora - Jonsson S . Virtue and vulnerability : Discourses on women , genderand climate change . Global Environmental Change . 2011 ; 21 ( 2 ) : 744 – 51 231 . Agarwal B . Conceptualising environmental collectiveaction : Why gendermatters . Cambridge Journal of Economics . 2000 ; 24 ( 3 ) : 283 – 310 232 . Edison StevensonJ , Orr E . We interviewed 57 female CEOs to find out how more women can get to the top . HarvardBusinessReview . 2017 PLOS ONE Twenty years of genderequalityresearch : A scopingreview based on a new semantic indicator PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0256474 September 21 , 2021 27 / 27