Force - producing ADP state of myosin bound to actin Sarah F . Wulf a , Virginie Ropars b , Setsuko Fujita - Becker a , Marco Oster a , Goetz Hofhaus a , Leonardo G . Trabuco c , Olena Pylypenko b , H . Lee Sweeney d , 1 , Anne M . Houdusse b , 1 , and Rasmus R . Schröder a , 1 a Cryo Electron Microscopy , CellNetworks , BioQuant , Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany ; b Structural Motility , Institut Curie , Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University , CNRS , UMR 144 , F - 75005 , Paris , France ; c Protein Evolution , CellNetworks , BioQuant , Universität Heidelberg , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany ; and d Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics , University of Florida College of Medicine , Gainesville , FL 32610 Edited by Ronald D . Vale , Howard Hughes Medical Institute and University of California , San Francisco , CA , and approved February 9 , 2016 ( received for review August 20 , 2015 ) Molecular motors produce force when they interact with their cellular tracks . For myosin motors , the primary force - generating state has MgADP tightly bound , whereas myosin is strongly bound to actin . We have generated an 8 - Å cryoEM reconstruction of this state for myosin V and used molecular dynamics flexed fitting for model building . We compare this state to the subsequent state on actin ( Rigor ) . The ADP - bound structure reveals that the actin - binding cleft is closed , even though MgADP is tightly bound . This state is accomplished by a previously unseen conformation of the β - sheet underlying the nucleotide pocket . The transition from the force - gen - erating ADP state to Rigor requires a 9 . 5° rotation of the myosin lever arm , coupled to a β - sheet rearrangement . Thus , the structure reveals the detailed rearrangements underlying myosin force generation as well as the basis of strain - dependent ADP release that is essential for processive myosins , such as myosin V . molecular motor | force generation | transducer | myosin V T he actin - based molecular motor , myosin , generates force and movement via a series of structural transitions when bound to filamentous actin ( F - actin ) . Among these structural states , the most important contribution to force production comes from the myosin ADP states that bind strongly to actin . Release of ADP from the motor is rapidly followed by MgATP binding , which then leads to myosin dissociation from actin . Once the dissociation occurs , my - osin can undergo a structural change that allows it to prime its mechanical element ( known as the lever arm ; Fig . 1 ) and hydrolyze ATP . Myosin rebinding to actin triggers release of phosphate and reentry into the force - generating states on actin . Thus , force is produced by MgADP - bound states of myosin bound to actin . In the absence of strain , a strong - binding MgADP state bound to actin can exist for varying durations , depending on the type of myosin . Myosins that are designed to spend the majority of their catalytic cycle bound to actin in force - generating states in the ab - sence of load , such as myosin V a , primarily occupy a state that is characterized by having both a high affinity for MgADP and a high affinity for actin . The myosin motor cycle is summarized in Fig . 1 . By not rapidly releasing MgADP , the myosin motors can dwell in a force - generating state on actin that cannot be detached from actin by ATP binding . This is the primary force - generating state for all myosins , and its lifetime on actin is prolonged under load ( for a review , see ref . 1 ) . Although the nucleotide - free myosin V X - ray structure ( 2 ) ( Rigor - like state ) provides an atomic level model for the actomy - osin state that is formed after ADP is released , and to which ATP can rapidly bind ( 2 ) , we only have low - resolution EM reconstruc - tions of myosin bound to actin in a MgADP state . Visualization of this state at the EM level was first performed for smooth muscle myosin II ( 3 ) and provided the first structural evidence that the myosin lever arm swings as the motor progresses through its actin - bound , force - generating states . It was postulated at the time that the swing associated with ADP release was important because it provides a mechanism for load to prolong the force - generating states by preventing lever arm swing and thus release of ADP . Many lines of evidence for a variety of different myosins have subsequently provided support for this view ( 4 – 10 ) . So far , we have little insight into what structural changes within the myosin motor can allow myosin to bind to actin and MgADP both with high affinity . When the first structure of myosin in a Rigor - like state was obtained ( 2 ) , the structural basis for the long - known reciprocal nature of either strong actin or strong nucleotide binding became immediately evident ( 11 ) . These insights have been con - firmed with the highest - resolution actomyosin Rigor EM maps that have been published afterward ( 12 , 13 ) . Strong binding to actin re - quires closure of the major cleft between the subdomains of the myosin motor to form a strong actin - binding interface , which in turn results in a relative movement of the subdomains of the myosin motor that contain the nucleotide - binding elements , Switch I and the P - loop . This movement places Switch I too far from the P - loop to coordinate the MgADP , leading to ADP release . The central question that will identify the means by which myosin motors can tune the duration of their force - generating states on actin is : How can myosin achieve both strong actin and strong nucleotide binding ? The region of the myosin motor that is primarily responsible for communicating the closure of the actin - binding cleft to the nucle - otide - binding elements has been termed the “ transducer ” ( 11 ) . The transducer consists of a seven - stranded β - sheet , together with as - sociated loops and connecting elements , as shown in Fig . S1 A . The initial description of the Rigor - like state reveals that the transducer region undergoes a major rearrangement when the myosin binds Significance The force - generating state of myosin bound to actin is a key state in the chemomechanical cycle of this motor , but the structural details of the force - generating state are unknown . CryoEM structures of myosin V bound to actin with and with - out nucleotide reveal a previously unidentified conformation of elements associated with nucleotide binding and , most im - portantly , of the β - sheet that controls the position of nucleotide - binding elements . These specific structural features explain how myosin can bind strongly to both actin and MgADP , allowing force to be developed . Thus , this structure provides fundamental insights into how myosin works . It also provides insights into how strain may prevent release of MgADP , which is a critical property for the cellular roles of many myosins , including myosin V . Author contributions : H . L . S . , A . M . H . , and R . R . S . designed research ; S . F . W . , V . R . , S . F . - B . , M . O . , G . H . , L . G . T . , O . P . , H . L . S . , A . M . H . , andR . R . S . performedresearch ; S . F . W . , V . R . , S . F . - B . , M . O . , G . H . , L . G . T . , O . P . , H . L . S . , A . M . H . , andR . R . S . analyzeddata ; andS . F . W . , V . R . , S . F . - B . , H . L . S . , A . M . H . , and R . R . S . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . Freely available online through the PNAS open access option . Data deposition : The atomic coordinates and structure factors of the Prepowerstroke structure has been deposited in the Protein Data Bank , www . pdb . org ( PDB ID code 4ZG4 ) . ThecryoEM - reconstructed3DdensitymapshavebeendepositintheEMDatabank , www . emdatabank . org [ accession nos . 31288 ( Rigor ) and 31289 ( Strong - ADP ) ] . 1 To whom correspondence may be addressed . Email : anne . houdusse @ curie . fr , Lsweeney @ ufl . edu , or rasmus . schroeder @ bioquant . uni - heidelberg . de . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1516598113 / - / DCSupplemental . E1844 – E1852 | PNAS | Published online March 14 , 2016 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1516598113 strongly to actin , compared with the structures of nucleotide - bound myosin in the absence of actin . This change in transducer con - formation with twisting of the β - sheet results in the relative movement of the Upper 50 - KDa ( U50 ) and N - terminal sub - domains and their associated nucleotide - binding elements ( Switch I and P - loop , respectively ) , leading to loss of nucleotide binding . It has been shown that the duration of the MgADP - bound state can be altered ( tuned ) by changes in the transducer element known as Loop 1 ( 14 – 17 ) . Thus , there likely is a spe - cific conformation of the transducer that is responsible for the strong actin - binding , strong MgADP - binding state and that is central to myosin force production . To obtain new structural insights into the nature of the motor changes associated with the strong ADP - binding state of myosin on actin , it is necessary to have myosin bound to actin under condi - tions of saturating ADP and Mg 2 + . Unlike the nucleotide - free state of myosin , which explores the actin - bound state conformation ( Rigor ) even in the absence of actin , the presence of Mg 2 + - bound nucleotide leads to the population primarily of weak actin - binding states if no actin is present . However , in the presence of actin , a strong binding state will form . Because actin – myosin cocrystals have not yet proven possible to generate , only high - resolution cryoEM studies can examine this fundamental myosin structure . We performed and herein present such a study using the myosin V a motor with lever arm truncated after the first light - chain binding site , i . e . , first IQ motif . We trapped the motor on F - actin either in the absence of nucleotide ( Rigor ) , for which a high - resolution X - ray structure ( 2 ) [ Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) ID code 1OE9 ] provides a good initial model ; or in the Strong - MgADP binding state ( Strong - ADP ) , for which no high - resolution X - ray structure is yet available . We generated EM reconstructions at about 7 - to 9 - Å resolution and used Molecular Dynamics flexible fitting ( MDFF ) to generate molecular models . From the differences of these three molecular models , we can define what structural changes allow myosin to maintain MgADP binding while strongly bound to actin , thus allowing myosin to dwell in a force - generating state on actin . We also provide a new X - ray structure of myosin V in the Pre - powerstroke state ( PPS ) that allows determination of the amplitude of the swing for myosin V , and we compare this structure with published single - molecule data of the myosin V stroke ( 18 ) . Results Rigor State of the Myosin V Motor . We first generated a cryoEM density map of the nucleotide free ( Rigor ) state of myosin on actin using the myosin V a motor truncated after its first IQ motif , to which we had bound an essential light chain ( ELC ) , as we had previously done to generate a high - resolution structure of the motor in the absence of actin ( 2 ) ( PDB ID code 1OE9 ) . Because this X - ray structure corresponds to a Rigor - like state of the myosin motor , we used the structure as a starting point for MDFF ( 19 ) . The resulting fit is depicted in Fig . 2 and Movie S1 ( also see Methods ) . Note that a similar fit is obtained when MDFF is performed starting from the Post - Rigor conformation of the myosin head ( PDB ID code 1W7J ) , which indicates that the resolution of the map is sufficient to provide a robust model of the Rigor state ( Fig . S2 ) . The F - actin model used as the starting point to fit the map was obtained from Fujii et al . ( 20 ) ( PDB ID code 3MFP ) and after MDFF refinement , the final model is very close to the F - actin model described recently at ∼ 4 - Å resolution ( 21 ) [ root - mean - square deviation ( rmsd ) of two actin that bind to myosin is 1 . 3 Å for 718 C α atoms ( residues 8 – 366 ) ; also see Fig . S3 ] . The overall rmsd for the myosin V motor bound to F - actin compared with the unbound X - ray Rigor structure ( 2 ) ( PDB ID code 1OE9 ) is also very small : 0 . 9 Å for 608 C α atoms of the motor domain ( Figs . S1 B and S2 B and Movie S2 ) . The fit of the model into the electron density also indicates that no major changes are observed between the free and actin - bound nucleotide - free motor , and thus the X - ray atomic resolution structure provides a good model for the state that binds strongly to actin in the absence of nucleotide . In the crystal , the packing selects a position for the lever arm that differs slightly from the average unstrained position found in EM . This confirms that the pliant region ( Fig . S1 B ) found after the first three turns of the long helix at the junction between the converter and the light chain - binding region ( 22 ) is a source of compliance in the Rigor state . The converter position is indeed not different in the X - ray and the EM structure , but variability in the position of the lever arm after the pliant region could explain the observed slightly weaker density for the IQ / ELC compared with the rest of the motor and the actin filament . The resolution and quality of the cryoEM density map is sufficient to recognize density for the C - terminal part of Loop 2 at the actin interface ( Fig . 3 B and Fig . S4 ) . There has been some controversy about the role of this loop for binding to F - actin in Rigor ( 12 , 13 , 23 ) . Here , the C - terminal basic residues of this loop seem to be in po - sition to interact with D24 , D25 of subdomain 1 of F - actin . The actin interface between myosin V and F - actin is otherwise quite similar to that described for myosin II bound to F - actin ( 12 ) and similar to that formed with the nucleotide - free myosin I bound to F - actin ( 13 ) ( Fig . S5 ) . There is , however , a difference in the overall orientation of the motor domain for the myosin I model compared with either myosin II or myosin V , that could result from differences in either the actin interface , or the conformation of these myosins in the Rigor state . Higher - resolution data are required to understand how these dif - ferences arise . Currently , it is not clear whether in addition to limi - tation of the resolution , these differences also reflect variations in the sequence of the actin - binding loops or differences also within the motor domain and the way the cleft is closed . When comparing the myosin Rigor conformation in myosin II ( 12 ) and myosin V ( this study ) , the cleft closure is similar but the conformation of Loop 2 is quite different . This Loop 2 confor - mation results in different interactions with F - actin and conse - quently in a different position of the U50 subdomain in the two actomyosin models , including positioning of the Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy ( HCM ) and Loop 4 surface loops in contact with F - actin ( Fig . S5 ) . The overall position of myosin on the Fig . 1 . Actomyosin ATPase cycle . Scheme of the myosin motor domain with its subdomains [ U50 , L50 , N - terminal ( dark gray ) , converter ( green ) ] and its in - teraction with F - actin along the ATPase cycle . The strong - binding ADP state is the only state that exhibits high affinity for both actin and nucleotide . Wulf et al . PNAS | Published online March 14 , 2016 | E1845 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S surface of F - actin in the myosin I model ( 13 ) ( PDB ID code 4A7L ) differs substantially from either the myosin II or the myosin V models , with important differences in the possible contacts at the actin interface . However , the resolution is still too low for all these models to constrain sufficiently the actin - binding loops and the actin conformation , particularly , for subdomain - 2 of actin . Higher - resolution data are thus needed to describe the in - terface of various myosins bound to F - actin and to appreciate how variable the contacts are among different myosin classes . Strong - MgADP State of the Myosin V a Motor . Having shown that the motor domain of myosin V a in the actin – myosin Rigor map are well fit by the high - resolution X - ray structure , we next generated a cryoEM density map of the strongly bound MgADP state using 50 μ M ADP and 12 mM free Mg 2 + . It has previously been shown that Mg 2 + dissociates before ADP from myosin V a ( 11 , 24 ) , as well as from other myosins ( 25 , 26 ) , and thus the steady state distribution between the motor conformation that binds ADP strongly and the conformation that binds ADP weakly ( 11 ) can be driven toward the Strong - MgADP binding state by simply in - creasing the free Mg 2 + concentration ( 11 , 24 ) . Based on our previous work ( 24 ) , 12 mM Mg 2 + will drive the mass action ratio toward the myosin Strong - MgADP state to the full extent possible . The resulting cryoEM density map is shown in Fig . 2 B and Movie S3 . The map demonstrates that the lever arm has rotated ∼ 9 . 5° compared with its Rigor position . This amount of lever arm swing being associated with the transition from a strong - MgADP binding state to the state that rapidly releases ADP is consistent with single - molecule studies of myosin V a ( 26 ) , as well as with a previously published , low - resolution cryoEM map ( 27 ) . Before comparing the MgADP myosin V a map to the Rigor map in detail , it is illustrative to consider the local resolution of the maps . We used the real space analysis applying the ResMap algorithm ( 28 ) to our reconstructions . Fig . 3 illustrates the res - olution and the quality of the maps . Although global measures , such as Fourier shell correlation ( FSC ) , may give an indication on the overall resolution ( cf . Fig . S6 ) , it is obvious that the azi - muthal error in alignment will lower resolution at higher radius for highly extended and flattened objects ( such as the helical decorated actin ) . A local resolution estimate is shown in Fig . 3 A , where Rigor ( Fig . 3 A , Upper ) and ADP ( Fig . 3 A , Lower ) re - constructions are surface - colored according to resolution . From these maps , we can conclude that the resolution of the actin backbone is better than 7 Å , whereas light chains are not better than at 9 – 10 Å . It is important to note that the myosin motor domain is resolved at about 7 – 8 Å , which is clearly enough to resolve α - helices . This is interestingly also sufficient to describe the conformation of the HCM loop and part of Loop 2 that contribute to the myosin actin - binding interface ( Fig . 3 B ) . Even though part of Loop 2 is more disordered ( lack of continuous density ) , the helices connecting the loop to the motor domain are partially resolved . ResMap indicates a lower local resolution as expected for highly flexible ( HCM ) and probably disordered loops ( Loop 2 ) . The quality of the maps is particularly well il - lustrated by the well - defined density for the β - sheets , which at this resolution ( 7 – 8 Å according to ResMap ) , is shown as a continuous sheet without resolved strands . Comparison of this sheet is shown for both the Rigor and ADP states in Fig . 3 C and Movie S4 . Importantly , a difference in the orientation and twist of the β - sheet is clearly indicated by the cryoEM maps . Another observation when comparing the MgADP myosin V a map to the Rigor map is the striking difference between the helical parameters of the reconstruction for F - actin decorated with my - osin V a bound to MgADP and either F - actin alone ( 20 ) , F - actin bound to tropomyosin ( 21 ) , F - actin bound to tropomyosin and myosin I ( 13 ) , or F - actin bound to myosin V a in the absence of nucleotide ( this study ; Methods and Fig . S3 E ) . To verify that the differences of the helical parameters are statistically significant , we divided each set of data into six subsets , which were processed independently ( Methods ) . This difference again indicates that strong F - actin - binding states of different myosins can interact Fig . 2 . CryoEM image of actomyosin and reconstructed 3D density maps of actomyosin in the ADP and Rigor states , both with a fitted atomic model . ( A ) Image acquired by transmission electron cryoEM of F - actin decorated with myosin V a motor domains with truncated lever arm , in the nucleotide - free Rigor state . The defocus value is 1 . 7 μ m , and the value in the Inset is 5 μ m . ( B ) The reconstructed density maps show a ∼ 10° difference in the lever arm position , as highlighted in the Inset , with the ADP map in orange . The protein backbones of the atomic models obtained by MDFF are shown in ribbon representation for six actin subunits ( light blue in ADP ; light yellow in Rigor ) and four myosin motor domains ( bright yellow in ADP ; blue in Rigor ) . Also see Movies S1 and S3 . E1846 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1516598113 Wulf et al . differently with F - actin . Moreover , myosin V a must influence the actin filament conformation when myosin V a adopts the high F - actin affinity strong - MgADP state ( Fig . 1 ) , and the actin confor - mation must somehow differ in the Rigor state . These differences at the actin – myosin interface in the strong - MgADP state compared to the Rigor state cannot be resolved at our current resolution . To interpret the Strong - MgADP map on the molecular level of myosin , we generated a MDFF model , which was independent of the starting models ( Methods ) . Comparison of the Strong - MgADP and Rigor maps ( Fig . 4 A and Fig . S7 ) shows that in both Rigor and Strong - MgADP , the actin - binding cleft is closed , as would be expected for the major force - generating state , which must bind strongly to actin . The differences in the motor and in F - actin at and near their binding interface between Rigor and Strong - ADP are small ; however , a comprehensive analysis of this interface will require data at atomic resolution . In contrast , there are larger and unambiguous differences in the maps in the region surrounding the nucleotide - binding site and the structural ele - ments involved in directing the lever arm . Comparison of the structures shows clear evidence for occupation of the active site with nucleotide in this Strong - ADP state , as well as for a dif - ference in the position of the P - loop compared with that found in the Rigor state ( Fig . 4 B and C and Movie S5 ) . The position of the nucleotide - binding elements indicates that the nucleotide is coordinated in a novel way compared with the previous Post - Rigor and weak ADP - binding Rigor - like ( PDB ID code 1W7I ) Fig . 3 . Resolution assessment of the Rigor and ADP state reconstructions , examples of details , and differences in the maps . ( A ) Surface coloring of the reconstructions [ Rigor ( Upper ) ; ADP state ( Lower ) ] according to local resolution , as determined by ResMap ( 28 ) . Color coding is as follows : dark blue , better than 7 Å ; cyan , better than 8 Å ; green , better than 9 Å ; and yellow , better than 10 Å . As expected for helical objects , their azimuthal alignment error results in lower resolution at a higher radius . Note the 7 - to 8 - Å resolution of actin and the myosin motor domain , which is an ideal starting point for the MDFF . ( B ) Detail of the HCM loop ( green circle ) and Loop 2 ( yellow circle ) . Whereas for the HCM loop , a complete density is observed , Loop 2 density is observed only for its starting and ending α - helices at the surface of the myosin motor domain . ResMap assigns the local resolution as less than 15 Å ( gray surface ) . ( C ) Detail of the density of the Rigor and ADP reconstructions for the transducer β - sheet ( red circle ) . Looking down the β - sheet across the strands , one can see a layer of density , which is clearly tilted between the Rigor ( blue ) and ADP ( yellow ) states . Also see Movie S4 . Wulf et al . PNAS | Published online March 14 , 2016 | E1847 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S structures ( 11 ) . Compared with the Rigor conformation ( 2 ) , Switch I and the P - loop are closer to allow interactions with MgADP by both loops . However , the active site conformation also differs greatly from that found in the Post - Rigor state ( 11 ) ( PDB ID code 1W7J ) , which corresponds to a myosin state of low affinity for actin ( Fig . 4 B ) . Although our data show that the MgADP site results from an intermediate , previously unseen position of the nucleotide - binding elements that allow specific ADP coordination in this strongly bound state to F - actin with full cleft closure , atomic resolution will be necessary to describe the details of the ADP coordination in this structural state . From this first description of the Strong - MgADP state of myosin on actin , we conclude that the description does not support models in which a strained conformation of the motor within its subdomains would be necessary to promote cleft clo - sure while allowing formation of a fully formed active site con - figuration , as found when ATP and ADP · P i are bound to the Post - Rigor state or PPS of the motor . The map indicates instead Fig . 4 . Comparison of myosin models in Rigor and ADP state ( from cryoEM maps of Actomyosin ) , with X - ray myosin structures in either Weak - ADP or Post - Rigor state . ( A ) The myosin models ( blue , Rigor state ; orange , ADP state with yellow nucleotide ) asfound in the complexwith F - actin ( threeactin subunits in yellow ) show large deviations distal from actin . ( B ) Zoom into the nucleotide - binding site . On the left , coordination of the nucleotide in Strong - ADP state compared with the Rigor conformation ( light gray ) . Note the light gray P - loop rigor conformation that is found remote from Switch I . In Strong - ADP ( color ) , both Switch I and P - loop arepositioned to participate in ADP coordination . Onthe right , coordinationof ADP in thelow - actin affinity Post - Rigor structure ( 11 ) ( color , PDBID code1W7J , with superimposed N - terminal subdomain ) differs greatly compared with that in the Strong - ADP state ( light gray ) . Also see Fig . S8 . ( C and D ) Nucleotide - binding site densities andfitofmyosin models ( ADPstickmodelin yellow ) . ( C ) Density of theADPstate . ( D ) Rigordensity . Thedensities aredepth - cued andclippedtoemphasize the shape of the active site . Note that in the ADP state , the density indicates full occupancy of nucleotide , but it does not in Rigor . Note also that the map density supports the position of the P - loop being different in the two structural states . Also see Movie S5 . E1848 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1516598113 Wulf et al . that the active site is in a previously unseen , intermediate con - formation that allows the active site to bind specifically MgADP , but not MgATP or MgADP · P i . As shown in Fig . 4 A and Fig . S7 , our structures demonstrate that whereas the U50 and L50 subdomains on either side of the cleft are in a similar position in Rigor and Strong - ADP structures , there are significant differences in the position of the N - terminal subdomain and the converter . Compared with Rigor , an rmsd of 1 . 130 Å was calculated for 579 C α atoms of the MD for the Strong - ADP state . Close to the active site , at the border between the U50 and N - terminal subdomains , a large shift ( 1 . 8 Å ) is found in the position of the HF helix that follows the P - loop ( Fig . S8 C ) , as well as a change in the Loop 1 element of the trans - ducer ( Fig . S8 A ) . In fact , the overall conformation of the central β - sheet differs in Strong - ADP and Rigor states ( Fig . 3 C , Fig . S9 , and Movies S6 and S7 ) , leading to the repositioning of the N - terminal subdomain compared with the U50 subdomain , which are directly linked to the changes in the active site conforma - tion . It is clear that the transducer conformation found in this Strong - MgADP actomyosin structure differs greatly from that found in states of the motor detached from actin and with MgATP bound [ Post - Rigor ( 11 ) ( PDB ID code 1W7J ) , Fig . S8 B and C ; or Prepowerstroke ( see Myosin V Powerstroke on Actin ) ] . This rearrangement of the transducer corresponds to changes in the overall orientation of the N - terminal subdomain that also af - fects the position of the SH1 helix that interacts with this sub - domain ( Fig . S7 ) . Changes in the SH1 helix and in the relay combine to produce a 9 . 5° further rotation of the lever arm during this ADP releasing transition ( Fig . 5 A ) to the end of powerstroke , Rigor lever arm position . Myosin V Powerstroke on Actin . The angular change of the light chain region of myosin V density maps of 9 . 5° toward the plus end of the actin filament in the Rigor ( apo ) conformation vs . the ADP - bound state represents the final swing of the myosin V powerstroke asso - ciated with ADP release . Single - molecule experiments have esti - mated this swing to be ∼ 5 nm at the end of the 6 - IQ – containing lever arm ( 18 ) . By modeling the 6 - IQ lever arm onto our 1 - IQ structures based on interpreting the density maps , we would estimate a lever arm swing of ∼ 4 . 5 nm , thus — considering fitting errors and the un - certainty of the pivot point and lever arm length — our finding is consistent to what was measured in single - molecule studies ( Fig . 5 C ) . The entire myosin V powerstroke is estimated to be much larger ( ∼ 25 nm ) than the swing associated with ADP release and is generally considered to begin with the docking of the PPS state on actin . However , we have recently suggested that the true powerstroke on actin is initiated when a different conformation of the motor domain , which we refer as the phosphate release ( P i R ) state ( 29 ) , forms following the rearrangement of the PPS upon actin binding . It appears that this rearrangement may in - volve a small movement of the lever arm . There were no available high - resolution structures of myosin V in either PPS or the P i R state to attempt to estimate the power - stroke , so we attempted crystallization of the three mammalian isoforms of myosin V in the presence of ADP and vanadate to obtain an atomic resolution structure of the myosin V PPS . We successfully obtained crystals of myosin V c in the PPS with a characteristic primed lever arm ( Fig . 5 B and Methods ) . This structure is very similar to structures of the myosin II ( 30 , 31 ) ( PDB ID codes 1BR1 and 1QVI ) , myosin VI ( 32 ) ( PDB ID code 2V26 ) , or myosin I ( 33 ) ( PDB ID code 4BYF ) in the PPS for all aspects of subdomain position , transducer , or active site conformation ( Fig . S10 ) . The exact orientation and position of the converter varies , however , among these myosins in this PPS conformation , and myosin V is much closer to myosin II than myosin I or myosin VI . Assuming docking of this PPS via the L50 and U50 sub - domains loops , a comparison of the lever arm orientation with that found for the Strong - ADP and Rigor structures of myosin V is possible . This comparison leads to a swing of the lever arm of 58° from PPS to Strong - ADP , corresponding to a 24 - nm move - ment at the end of the 6 - IQ lever arm . Compared with the Rigor position , a 67° swing of the lever arm from the PPS position would lead to a 27 - nm displacement at the end of the 6IQ lever arm ( Fig . 5 C and Movie S8 ) . Discussion This study reveals the nature of the rearrangements required within the myosin motor to maintain high - affinity binding to MgADP after the actin - binding cleft has closed to form a strong actin – myosin interface . These rearrangements mostly occur within the transducer and result in positions of the subdomains compat - ible with both strong actin binding ( cleft closure ) and strong ADP binding ( previously unseen active site conformation ) . The con - nectivity between the transducer and the lever arm underlies the strain dependence of MgADP release by myosin and thus how myosin motors generate and bear force . The equilibrium and rates of transition between the Strong - ADP and the Rigor states vary greatly among different myosin isoforms and predominantly determine how long a myosin motor can remain bound to actin in the absence of load . This kinetic tuning must be achieved by structural differences in the regions that we have seen to change in our Strong - ADP structure as well as regions involved in stabilizing the lever arm position . As noted in the Introduction , the Loop 1 sequence is highly variable between different myosins and has been shown to tune the release rate of ADP ( 14 – 17 ) . Our structures show that the Loop 1 conformation alters in the transition from Strong - ADP to Rigor . Thus , different sequences likely favor one conformation over the other , or promote the transition from the ADP - bound conformation to the Rigor conformation , providing a structural basis for this kinetic tuning . The lever arm swing predicted by the movement of the light chain bound to the first IQ motif of myosin V when comparing the Rigor map to the ADP map is in reasonable agreement to the value measured in the optical trap ( 4 . 5 vs . 5 nm ) . The full pow - erstroke extrapolated from the myosin V PPS structure that we crystallized is also comparable ( 27 vs . 25 nm ) to what has been measured ( 18 ) . It is possible that our slightly larger extrapolated swing is attributable to the initial movement that is produced in the transition from the PPS to the phosphate release state on actin ( P i R state ) , which we have proposed forms the initial stereospecific interface with actin and thus represents the true beginning of the powerstroke ( 29 ) . Note that the PPS cannot be the true beginning of the powerstroke on actin , because its interaction is weak , non – stereo - specific and likely not well - constrained . Nonetheless , the prestroke lever arm position modeled using our PPS structure in - dicates that the first force - producing state on actin is likely to be similar to the model in Fig . 5 C to produce a ∼ 20 + 5 - nm stroke . We propose that the initiation of the powerstroke on actin would fol - low docking of the PPS and would be part of a very rapid transition that would form the P i R state , with only a small change in the lever arm position on F - actin . This transition would precede P i release , which in turn is necessary to initiate ( and essentially gates ) the powerstroke on actin . We propose that , although both myosin V ( this study ) and myosin VI ( 29 ) have a small lever arm move - ment during the transition to the P i R state upon F - actin attach - ment , it is possible that other myosin classes will demonstrate differing amounts of lever arm rotation coupled to P i release , as means of tuning of their strain sensitivity . The Strong - ADP state must be a long - lived state for motors that need to dwell on actin sufficiently long to permit processive movement on F - actin or to allow anchoring to the actin cyto - skeleton . Our study illustrates the central role of the transducer in controlling the lifetime of the Strong - ADP state . The adaptability of the conformation of the transducer has previously been reported for other states of the motor seen in high - resolution structures ( 1 ) . What the Strong - ADP structure demonstrates here Wulf et al . PNAS | Published online March 14 , 2016 | E1849 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S is that there is no need for additional deformation within the L50 , U50 , and N - terminal subdomains to create a myosin state that binds both ADP and actin strongly . It remains to be depicted , however , how these and other regions of the motor participate in controlling the strain - dependent ADP release transition , as was demonstrated for the N - terminal extension of myosin 1b ( 34 ) . Which regions of the actin - bound motor can accommodate force applied in the opposite direction of the swing , and what detailed conformational changes result , remains to be determined . Thus , higher - resolution structures of motors under strain will be required to fully understand strain dependence and force production by my - osin motors . For myosins , such as myosin V , that function in a cell as two - headed , processive motors , the length of processive runs ( 35 – 38 ) and the initiation of processive runs ( 37 , 38 ) are both enhanced by “ gating ” of the heads . For a two - headed molecule with both heads simultaneously attached to actin , gating refers to the fact that a lead head is essentially stalled in an ADP state strongly bound to actin , until the rear head is detached from actin by binding MgATP ( 39 , 40 ) . This gating is attributable to the strain dependence of MgADP release . Although we do not know whether some of the subdomains of myosin may be deformed by strain , our Strong - MgADP actomy - osin structure clearly reveals that strain must prevent the rear - rangement of the β - sheet from the Strong - MgADP conformation to the Rigor conformation , based on the data presented in Results . Preventing this rearrangement is thus the basis of gating . Methods Sample Preparation for Structural Studies . The chicken myosin V a MD - 1IQ construct with a C - terminal Flag tag ( encoding DYKDDDDK ) and with an ELC bound to the lever arm was produced using the baculovirus expression system , as previously reported ( 2 ) . Recombinant DNA of human myosin V c was generated to express a truncated myosin construct containing the motor domain of this myosin using the baculovirus expression system . A C - terminal truncation was made corresponding to D754 ( MD ) with a Flag tag appended via a glycine to the N terminus to facilitate purification . This construct was used to create recombinant baculovirus for expression in Sf9 cell lines , as previously described ( 41 ) . The expressed myosin molecule was purified as previously described ( 15 ) . Directly before grid preparation for the electron microscopy concentrated G - actin from rabbitskeletalmuscle frozenin liquid nitrogen wasfirst diluted in 5mMHepesbuffer ( pH7 . 5 ) andthenpolymerizedatroomtemperaturefor ∼ 4h in 5 mM imidazole buffer ( pH 7 . 0 ) containing 12 mM MgCl 2 and 100 mM KCl . For filament stability , phalloidin has been added . The resulting F - actin solution was further diluted to a concentration of 0 . 25 μ M in 5 mM imidazole buffer , which reduced salt concentration at the same time , and sonicated for 5 min to shorten filaments to minimize the probability of the filaments ends being adhered to the carbon support film of the grid . For the Rigor state , myosin V was treated with Apyrase to remove ADP , then concentrated , drop - frozen , and stored at − 80 °C in a buffer containing 4 mM EDTA , 10 mM KCl , and 10 mM imidazole ( pH 7 . 0 ) . Before application , the myosin V suspension was diluted to a concentration of 5 μ M using 4 mM EDTA , 10 mM KCl , and 5 mM imidazole ( pH 7 . 0 ) as buffer . For the strong - binding ADP state , concentrated and stored myosin V in a buffer system of 12 mM MgCl 2 , 50 μ M MgADP , 5 mM KCl , and 5 mM imidazole ( pH 7 . 0 ) was diluted to 3 μ M using the same buffer system . Grid Preparation and CryoEM . F - actin solution ( 2 μ L ) was applied onto a holey carbon molybdenum grid ( R0 . 6 / 1 ; Quantifoil ) , which was freshly glow - dis - charged in a nitrogen – oxygen atmosphere ( Solarus Model 950 ; Gatan ) . After 2 min , 2 μ L of myosin solution was added and incubated for 2 min , followed by 3 - s blotting with Whatman paper no . 1 [ blot force parameter , setting at − 25 ( a . u . ) ] , and plunging into liquid ethane using a fully automated vitrifi - cation device ( Vitrobot Mark IV ; FEI ) . Fig . 5 . Change within the N - terminal subdomain , consequences for the lever arm , PPS and extrapolated full length , two - step powerstroke . ( A ) The N - terminal and lever arm changes upon ADP release from ADP state ( opa - que ) to Rigor ( transparent ) resulting from a rigid body rotational movement connected to the differences in transducer conformation ( yellow , relay ; red , SH1 helix ) . Also see Movie S7 . ( B ) Large converter and lever arm swing from PPS ( myosin V c , opaque ) to Rigor ( transparent ) . Also see Movie S8 . ( C ) Docking of the full - length myosin V six IQ lever arm ( 67 ) ( PDB ID code 2DFS ) by superimposing the converter and the first IQ motif . We extrapolate a two - step powerstroke with a larger first step [ PPS ( green ) to ADP ( orange ) state ] , which is greatly influenced by the docking of the PPS to actin and thus exhibits larger inaccuracies than the second step [ ADP to Rigor state ( blue ) ] . The lever arm was assumed to stay as a rigid body . E1850 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1516598113 Wulf et al . In Rigor preparations , the final concentrations were 0 . 125 μ M F - actin , 2 . 5 μ M myosin V , and 10 mM KCl and , additionally from the actin stock solution , 0 . 43 μ M residual ATP and 0 . 042 mM MgCl 2 . ThefreemagnesiumionsshouldbechelatedbyEDTA . Theactin - to - myosin ratio was 1 : 20 . For the Strong - ADP state , the final concentrations were 0 . 125 μ M F - actin , 1 . 5 μ M myosin V , 5 mM KCl , and 0 . 43 μ M ATP and , from the actin stock solution , 48 . 75 μ M MgADP and 11 . 85 mM MgCl 2 , resulting in an actin - to - myosin ratio of 1 : 12 . The final protein concentrations were adjusted empirically to obtain full decoration , low background of uncomplexed protein , and a low number of filament cross - overs . Because kinetics of myosin V strongly depend on magne - sium concentration ( 24 ) , we expect that we obtained pure structural states . Screening for optimal protein concentrations and blotting conditions was performed using a Zeiss Energy Filtering Transmission Electron Microscope 923 transmission electron microscope operated at a voltage of 200 kV . Finally , the datasets were acquired using an FEI Titan Krios transmission electron microscope equipped with a Gatan GIF Quantum postcolumn energy filter and a field emission gun operated at 200 kV . Using an energy filter slit width of 10 eV centered around the zero - loss position to remove inelastically scatteredelectronsoflargerenergyloss , imageswererecordedin “ Nano - probe ” mode by a 2 , 000 by 2 , 000 pixel Gatan UltraScan 1000 CCD camera under minimal dose conditions at liquid nitrogen specimen temperature , a magnifi - cation of ∼ 107 , 000 × , a defocus ranging from 1 . 0 to 2 . 5 μ m , and an electron dose of ∼ 15 e – / Å 2 . The Leginon system ( 42 ) was used for semiautomated data acquisition . To optimize the yield of good images , the automation was ad - justed to allow for manual positioning of acquisition targets , which became necessary because of the deliberately chosenlow filament density and the small detection area of the camera . The subunit axial translation between actin monomers [ 27 . 5 Å , well determined by fiber diffraction ( 43 ) ] was used to cal - ibrate the pixel size to 1 . 31 Å per pixel . All images were twofold binned , with a resulting size per pixel of 2 . 62 Å for the image processing . Crystallization and Structure Determination . Crystals of myosin V c in the PPS were obtained with the MD construct using the hanging - drop , vapor - diffusion method . Spontaneous nucleation occurred at 277 K with equal amounts of reservoir solution containing 10 % ( wt / vol ) PEG8k , 50 mM MES ( pH 6 . 5 ) , and 1 % DMSO and stock solution of the protein [ 13 mg · mL − 1 in 10 mM Hepes ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 80 mM NaCl , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM NaN 3 , 2 mM Mg 2 + ADP , and 2 mM van - adate ] . The best crystals were obtained using seeding approaches . Before freezing , crystals were transferred stepwise into a final stabilization solution containing 27 % ( vol / vol ) ethylene glycol as cryoprotectant . X - ray datasets were collected at 100 K at the SOLEIL Proxima - 1 beamline . The PPS crystal diffracted up to 2 . 4 - Å resolution ( Table S1 ) and belonged to the monoclinic space group P2 1 with two molecules of myosin V c in the asymmetric unit . The images of the dataset were processed and integrated with the program XDS ( 44 ) . The myosin V c MD PPS was solved by molecular replacement with the Dictyostelium myosin II model in the PPS ( 45 ) ( PDB ID code 1VOM ) using the program Phaser ( 46 ) . Refinement was performed using Coot ( 47 ) and BUSTER ( 48 ) or PHENIX ( 49 ) . The final statistics are presented in Table S1 . Image Processing and Three - Dimensional Reconstruction . CryoEM images of the helical filaments were analyzed and processed based on single - particle methods using the iterative helical real - space reconstruction method ( 50 , 51 ) and the software packages SPIDER ( 52 ) , EMAN2 ( 53 ) , and SPARX ( 54 ) . To ensure good decoration and ice quality , all 14 , 505 images were manually inspected using the image assessor from Appion ( 55 ) . A strongly defocused version of each image was displayed at the same time , which had been ac - quired after each image using a defocus of 5 μ m and thus enabled an im - proved assessment of the decoration quality . Only 3 , 725 images of 8 , 887 were used for further processing of the Rigor state and 3 , 602 images of 5 , 618 for processing of the ADP state . For each image , the defocus and astigmatism were determined by using the contrast transfer function ( CTF ) estimation of CTFFIND3 ( 56 ) . SPIDER was used for manual selection of the filaments . Using a box size of 301 pixels and a step size of 30 pixels along the filament axis , 90 , 634 quadratic segments were boxed from 4 , 852 Rigor fil - aments and 84 , 983 segments from 4 , 211 filaments of the ADP state , which corresponded to ∼ 380 , 000 asymmetric subunits for the Rigor state and to ∼ 350 , 000 asymmetric subunits for the ADP state . Following the CTF correc - tion scheme described by Sachse et al . ( 57 ) , the filament segments were corrected by convolution with the determined CTF , resulting in a phase - corrected and amplitude - weighted stack of segments for each structural state , which was then used for alignment and reconstruction . We used the sxihrsr module implemented in SPARX for helical refinement and reconstruction with a noisy cylinder as the initial reference volume , which was created by assigning random angles to the aligned segments . To verify the statistical significance of the obtained helical parameters ( height - repeat z and azimuthal angle θ ) , each dataset ( Rigor , ADP state ) was divided in six subsets , which were processed independently . From the resulting pa - rameter fits , we calculated for Rigor : z = ( 27 . 48 ± 0 . 05 Å ) , θ = ( − 167 . 4 ± 0 . 01° ) ; and for the ADP state : z = ( 27 . 48 ± 0 . 07 Å ) , θ = − 167 . 14° ( no error determination possible , because all six subgroups ended up at the identical helical angle ) . From these results , we conclude that ( i ) the iterative re - construction approach is extremely sensitive to the helical parameters and ( ii ) the helical parameters in our datasets are very uniform . Reference pro - jections were included up to ± 18° tilt out of the projection plane , sampled every 1° . Finally , the symmetry parameters converged to a subunit axial translation of 27 . 5 Å and an azimuthal rotation of − 167 . 4° for the Rigor state and − 167 . 1° for the ADP state . To correct the amplitudes , the final 3D reconstructions were deconvoluted by their respective sum of the squared 3D CTFs ( 57 ) . Accounting for the structure factor decay in Fourier space , the B - factors were determined using the program EM - BFACTOR ( 58 , 59 ) , and contrast was restored by applying a negative B - factor of − 347 Å 2 for the Rigor state and − 327 Å 2 for the ADP state , respectively . For resolution es - timation , the reconstructed densities were masked using a Gaussian edge to reduce artifacts at the ends of the helices . The FSC analysis indicates that both density maps have a resolution of ∼ 8 Å . The myosin motor domain and actin in Rigor state have a resolution of 8 . 9 / 7 . 6 Å at FSC ( 0 . 5 / 0 . 143 ) ( 59 , 60 ) and in ADP state 8 . 7 / 8 . 0 Å at FSC ( 0 . 5 / 0 . 143 ) . Both densities exhibit a reso - lution gradient with less well - resolved density for the light chain region and highest resolution of 7 . 2 Å ( FSC 0 . 143 criterion ) for actin alone ( estimated by creating regions of interest by masking ) . Fig . S6 shows the actual FSCs cal - culated for the different models and parts of the reconstructed densities . This level of resolution is sufficient for resolving α - helices and most of their connecting loops ( cf . Movies S1 – S3 ) , which is an ideal starting point for model fitting with MDFF ( compare EM Structural Model : Building and Refinement ) . However , the observed loss in resolution at higher radius is coupled to a lower density of thelight chain region . Such a specificsignal loss of the light chains was observed before ( 61 ) and can be interpreted as either partially reduced occu - pancy of the IQ motif by the light chain or a certain flexibility of the lever arm after a compliant region of the C - terminal α - helix ( Fig . S1 B ) . To avoid artifacts of “ missing ” density during MDFF , this faulty density level needs to be corrected by filtering the reconstructed density with an inverse Fermi - filter outside the radius of the compliant region and the light chain . The filter is adjusted such that the resulting density can accommodate the volume of the molecular model in - cluding the light chain at one cutoff setting ( Fig . 2 B and Movies S1 – S3 ) . EM Structural Model : Building and Refinement . The model building of the ADP stateandRigor was donebyMD simulationsthat allowflexiblefittingof atomic structures into the reconstructed densities . Homology and ab initio modeling using ROSETTA ( 62 ) and the “ Automatic PSF Builder ” feature of the program VMD ( 63 ) were used to complete the nucleotide - free and ADP - containing myosin V structures [ Rigor - like ( 2 ) , PDB ID code 1OE9 ; Weak - ADP state ( 11 ) , PDB ID code 1W7I ] . Initially , six actin and myosin monomers were rigid body - docked into the density maps using colores in SITUS ( 64 ) , with the F - actin structure from Fujii et al . ( 20 ) ( PDB ID code 3MFP ) taken as initial actin model . Myosin crystal structure ( 2 ) PDB ID code 1OE9 was used as initial model for the Rigor state and PDB ID code 1W7I for the ADP state . The combined structure of actin and myosin molecules was then flexible fitted using MDFF ( 19 ) and NAMD ( 65 ) . Simulations were performed both in vacuo and with explicit solvent under stereochemical restraints of the secondary structure until the rmsd between the initial and final structures converged to a stable value . After calculating a tra - jectory of 3 ns in vacuo using symmetry restraints that maintain a symmetric structurefor the myosin molecules , theresulting structures were embeddedin a solvation box and neutralizedusing NaCl ions . An additional 2 ns wassimulated in explicit solvent using periodic boundary conditions . Loop 2 was modeled ab initio and included in the solvent simulations . The final structures were ana - lyzed in VMD and Chimera ( 66 ) . The individual actins and myosins did not converge to one single final structure , because boundary effects on the two ends of the reconstructed density along the F - actin filament and also cutoff density for myosins affect the flexed fitting . We therefore interpreted only the innermost actin monomers and their bound myosins , where no effects of density boundaries were observed . Part of the software used in our study was obtained under public licenses : NAMD was developed by the Theoretical and Computational Biophysics Group in the Beckman Institutefor Advanced Scienceand Technology attheUniversity of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign ( www . ks . uiuc . edu / Research / vmd and www . ks . uiuc . edu / Research / namd ) . UCSF Chimera was developed by the Resource for Biocomputing , Visualization , and Informatics at the University of California , San Francisco . MD solvent simulations were performed on the computational resource bwUniCluster . Wulf et al . PNAS | Published online March 14 , 2016 | E1851 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Xiaoyan Liu for the expression and purification of the protein for structural studies . We thank Pierre Legrand and Andy Thompson , as well as the beamline scientists of PROXIMA1 ( SOLEIL synchrotron ) , for excellent support during data collection . V . R . was supported by a fellowship from the Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer . A . M . H . was supported by the CNRS and by Grants ANR - 2010 - BLAN - 1504 - 01 and ANR - 13 - BSV8 - 0019 - 01 , the Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer , and Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer subvention fixe . H . L . S . was supported by National Institutes of Health / National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders Grant DC009100 . The A . M . H . team is part of Labex CelTisPhyBio 11 - LBX - 0038 , which is part of the IDEX PSL ( ANR - 10 - IDEX - 0001 - 02 PSL ) . S . F . W . and R . R . S . acknowledge the generous use of the bwUniCluster as well as the BioQuant compute clusters and large - scale data storage facility . The R . R . S . group is part of the Cluster of Excellence “ CellNetworks ” ( Exc 81 ) at the Uni - versität Heidelberg . The Resource for Biocomputing , Visualization , and Infor - matics at the University of California , San Francisco , is supported by the National Institutes of Health ( National Institute for General Medical Sciences Grant P41 - GM103311 ) . The computational resource bwUniCluster is funded by the Ministry of Science , Research and Arts and the Universities of the State of Baden - Wuerttemberg , Germany , within the framework program bwHPC . 1 . Sweeney HL , Houdusse A ( 2010 ) Structural and functional insights into the Myosin motor mechanism . Annu Rev Biophys 39 : 539 – 557 . 2 . Coureux PD , et al . ( 2003 ) A structural state of the myosin V motor without bound nucleotide . Nature 425 ( 6956 ) : 419 – 423 . 3 . Whittaker M , et al . ( 1995 ) A 35 - A movement of smooth muscle myosin on ADP re - lease . Nature 378 ( 6558 ) : 748 – 751 . 4 . Kovács M , Thirumurugan K , Knight PJ , Sellers JR ( 2007 ) Load - dependent mechanism of nonmuscle myosin 2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 ( 24 ) : 9994 – 9999 . 5 . Takagi Y , Homsher EE , Goldman YE , Shuman H ( 2006 ) Force generation in single con - ventional actomyosin complexes under high dynamic load . Biophys J 90 ( 4 ) : 1295 – 1307 . 6 . Taylor KA , et al . ( 1999 ) Tomographic 3D reconstruction of quick - frozen , Ca 2 + - acti - vated contracting insect flight muscle . Cell 99 ( 4 ) : 421 – 431 . 7 . Tyska MJ , et al . ( 1999 ) Two heads of myosin are better than one for generating force and motion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 ( 8 ) : 4402 – 4407 . 8 . Veigel C , Schmitz S , Wang F , Sellers JR ( 2005 ) Load - dependent kinetics of myosin - V can explain its high processivity . Nat Cell Biol 7 ( 9 ) : 861 – 869 . 9 . WalkerML , etal . ( 2000 ) Two - headedbindingofaprocessivemyosintoF - actin . Nature 405 ( 6788 ) : 804 – 807 . 10 . LaaksoJM , LewisJH , ShumanH , OstapEM ( 2008 ) MyosinIcanactasamolecularforce sensor . Science 321 ( 5885 ) : 133 – 136 . 11 . Coureux PD , Sweeney HL , Houdusse A ( 2004 ) Three myosin V structures delineate essential features of chemo - mechanical transduction . EMBO J 23 ( 23 ) : 4527 – 4537 . 12 . Lorenz M , Holmes KC ( 2010 ) The actin - myosin interface . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 ( 28 ) : 12529 – 12534 . 13 . Behrmann E , et al . ( 2012 ) Structure of the rigor actin - tropomyosin - myosin complex . Cell 150 ( 2 ) : 327 – 338 . 14 . Spudich JA ( 1994 ) How molecular motors work . Nature 372 ( 6506 ) : 515 – 518 . 15 . Sweeney HL , et al . ( 1998 ) Kinetic tuning of myosin via a flexible loop adjacent to the nucleotide binding pocket . J Biol Chem 273 ( 11 ) : 6262 – 6270 . 16 . Murphy CT , Spudich JA ( 1998 ) Dictyostelium myosin 25 - 50K loop substitutions spe - cifically affect ADP release rates . Biochemistry 37 ( 19 ) : 6738 – 6744 . 17 . Kurzawa - GoertzSE , Perreault - MicaleCL , TrybusKM , Szent - GyörgyiAG , GeevesMA ( 1998 ) Loop I can modulate ADP affinity , ATPase activity , and motility of different scallop my - osins . Transient kinetic analysis of S1 isoforms . Biochemistry 37 ( 20 ) : 7517 – 7525 . 18 . Veigel C , Wang F , Bartoo ML , Sellers JR , Molloy JE ( 2002 ) The gated gait of the processive molecular motor , myosin V . Nat Cell Biol 4 ( 1 ) : 59 – 65 . 19 . Trabuco LG , et al . ( 2008 ) Flexible fitting of atomic structures into electron microscopy maps using molecular dynamics . Structure 16 ( 5 ) : 673 – 683 . 20 . Fujii T , Iwane AH , Yanagida T , Namba K ( 2010 ) Direct visualization of secondary structures of F - actin by electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 467 ( 7316 ) : 724 – 728 . 21 . von der Ecken J , et al . ( 2015 ) Structure of the F - actin - tropomyosin complex . Nature 519 ( 7541 ) : 114 – 117 . 22 . HoudusseA , Szent - GyorgyiAG , CohenC ( 2000 ) Threeconformationalstatesofscallop myosin S1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 ( 21 ) : 11238 – 11243 . 23 . Holmes KC , Schroder RR , Sweeney HL , Houdusse A ( 2004 ) The structure of the Rigor complex and its implications for the power stroke . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 359 ( 1452 ) : 1819 – 1828 . 24 . Rosenfeld SS , Houdusse A , Sweeney HL ( 2005 ) Magnesium regulates ADP dissociation from myosin V . J Biol Chem 280 ( 7 ) : 6072 – 6079 . 25 . Fujita - Becker S , et al . ( 2005 ) Changes in Mg 2 + ion concentration and heavy chain phos - phorylation regulate the motoractivity of a class I myosin . J Biol Chem 280 ( 7 ) : 6064 – 6071 . 26 . ChizhovI , HartmannFK , HundtN , TsiavaliarisG ( 2013 ) Globalfitanalysisofmyosin - 5b motilityrevealsthermodynamicsofMg2 + - sensitiveacto - myosin - ADPstates . PLoSOne 8 ( 5 ) : e64797 . 27 . Volkmann N , et al . ( 2005 ) The structural basis of myosin V processive movement as revealed by electron cryomicroscopy . Mol Cell 19 ( 5 ) : 595 – 605 . 28 . Kucukelbir A , Sigworth FJ , Tagare HD ( 2014 ) Quantifying the local resolution of cryo - EM density maps . Nat Methods 11 ( 1 ) : 63 – 65 . 29 . Llinas P , et al . ( 2015 ) How actin initiates the motor activity of Myosin . Dev Cell 33 ( 4 ) : 401 – 412 . 30 . Dominguez R , Freyzon Y , Trybus KM , Cohen C ( 1998 ) Crystal structure of a vertebrate smooth muscle myosin motor domain and its complex with the essential light chain : Visualization of the pre - power stroke state . Cell 94 ( 5 ) : 559 – 571 . 31 . Gourinath S , et al . ( 2003 ) Crystal structure of scallop Myosin s1 in the pre - power stroke state to 2 . 6 a resolution : Flexibility and function in the head . Structure 11 ( 12 ) : 1621 – 1627 . 32 . Ménétrey J , Llinas P , Mukherjea M , Sweeney HL , Houdusse A ( 2007 ) The structural basis for the large powerstroke of myosin VI . Cell 131 ( 2 ) : 300 – 308 . 33 . Münnich S , Taft MH , Manstein DJ ( 2014 ) Crystal structure of human myosin 1c – the motorin GLUT4exocytosis : ImplicationsforCa 2 + regulationand14 - 3 - 3binding . JMol Biol 426 ( 10 ) : 2070 – 2081 . 34 . Shuman H , et al . ( 2014 ) A vertebrate myosin - I structure reveals unique insights into myosin mechanochemical tuning . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 ( 6 ) : 2116 – 2121 . 35 . Sakamoto T , et al . ( 2003 ) Neck length and processivity of myosin V . J Biol Chem 278 ( 31 ) : 29201 – 29207 . 36 . Dunn AR , Chuan P , Bryant Z , Spudich JA ( 2010 ) Contribution of the myosin VI tail domain to processive stepping and intramolecular tension sensing . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 ( 17 ) : 7746 – 7750 . 37 . Clayton JE , et al . ( 2014 ) Fission yeast tropomyosin specifies directed transport of myosin - V along actin cables . Mol Biol Cell 25 ( 1 ) : 66 – 75 . 38 . Pylypenko O , et al . ( 2015 ) Myosin VI deafness mutation prevents the initiation of processive runs on actin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 ( 11 ) : E1201 – E1209 . 39 . Rosenfeld SS , Sweeney HL ( 2004 ) A model of myosin V processivity . J Biol Chem 279 ( 38 ) : 40100 – 40111 . 40 . Sakamoto T , Webb MR , Forgacs E , White HD , Sellers JR ( 2008 ) Direct observation of the mechanochemical coupling in myosin Va during processive movement . Nature 455 ( 7209 ) : 128 – 132 . 41 . De La Cruz EM , Wells AL , Rosenfeld SS , Ostap EM , Sweeney HL ( 1999 ) The kinetic mechanism of myosin V . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 ( 24 ) : 13726 – 13731 . 42 . Suloway C , et al . ( 2005 ) Automated molecular microscopy : The new Leginon system . J Struct Biol 151 ( 1 ) : 41 – 60 . 43 . Squire JM , Knupp C ( 2005 ) X - ray diffraction studies of muscle and the crossbridge cycle . Adv Protein Chem 71 : 195 – 255 . 44 . Kabsch W ( 2010 ) Integration , scaling , space - group assignment and post - refinement . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66 ( Pt 2 ) : 133 – 144 . 45 . Smith CA , Rayment I ( 1996 ) X - ray structure of the magnesium ( II ) . ADP . vanadate complex of the Dictyostelium discoideum myosin motor domain to 1 . 9 A resolution . Biochemistry 35 ( 17 ) : 5404 – 5417 . 46 . McCoyAJ , etal . ( 2007 ) Phasercrystallographicsoftware . JApplCryst 40 ( Pt4 ) : 658 – 674 . 47 . Emsley P , Lohkamp B , Scott WG , Cowtan K ( 2010 ) Features and development of Coot . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66 ( Pt 4 ) : 486 – 501 . 48 . Bricogne G , et al . ( 2014 ) BUSTER Version 2 . 10 . 1 ( Global Phasing , Cambridge , UK ) . 49 . Afonine PV , et al . ( 2012 ) Towards automated crystallographic structure refinement with phenix . refine . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 68 ( Pt 4 ) : 352 – 367 . 50 . Egelman EH ( 2000 ) A robust algorithm for the reconstruction of helical filaments using single - particle methods . Ultramicroscopy 85 ( 4 ) : 225 – 234 . 51 . Behrmann E , et al . ( 2012 ) Real - space processing of helical filaments in SPARX . J Struct Biol 177 ( 2 ) : 302 – 313 . 52 . Frank J , et al . ( 1996 ) SPIDER and WEB : Processing and visualization of images in 3D electron microscopy and related fields . J Struct Biol 116 ( 1 ) : 190 – 199 . 53 . Tang G , et al . ( 2007 ) EMAN2 : An extensible image processing suite for electron mi - croscopy . J Struct Biol 157 ( 1 ) : 38 – 46 . 54 . Hohn M , et al . ( 2007 ) SPARX , a new environment for Cryo - EM image processing . J Struct Biol 157 ( 1 ) : 47 – 55 . 55 . Lander GC , et al . ( 2009 ) Appion : An integrated , database - driven pipeline to facilitate EM image processing . J Struct Biol 166 ( 1 ) : 95 – 102 . 56 . MindellJA , GrigorieffN ( 2003 ) Accuratedeterminationoflocaldefocusandspecimen tilt in electron microscopy . J Struct Biol 142 ( 3 ) : 334 – 347 . 57 . Sachse C , et al . ( 2007 ) High - resolution electron microscopy of helical specimens : A fresh look at tobacco mosaic virus . J Mol Biol 371 ( 3 ) : 812 – 835 . 58 . Fernández JJ , Luque D , Castón JR , Carrascosa JL ( 2008 ) Sharpening high resolution information in single particle electron cryomicroscopy . J Struct Biol 164 ( 1 ) : 170 – 175 . 59 . Rosenthal PB , Henderson R ( 2003 ) Optimal determination of particle orientation , absolute hand , and contrast loss in single - particle electron cryomicroscopy . J Mol Biol 333 ( 4 ) : 721 – 745 . 60 . Penczek PA ( 2010 ) Resolution measures in molecular electron microscopy . Methods Enzymol 482 : 73 – 100 . 61 . HolmesKC , AngertI , KullFJ , JahnW , SchröderRR ( 2003 ) Electroncryo - microscopyshows how strong binding of myosin to actin releases nucleotide . Nature 425 ( 6956 ) : 423 – 427 . 62 . Das R , Baker D ( 2008 ) Macromolecular modeling with rosetta . Annu Rev Biochem 77 : 363 – 382 . 63 . Humphrey W , Dalke A , Schulten K ( 1996 ) VMD : Visual molecular dynamics . J Mol Graph 14 ( 1 ) : 33 – 38 , 27 – 28 . 64 . Wriggers W , Milligan RA , McCammon JA ( 1999 ) Situs : A package for docking crystal structuresintolow - resolutionmapsfromelectronmicroscopy . JStructBiol 125 ( 2 - 3 ) : 185 – 195 . 65 . Phillips JC , et al . ( 2005 ) Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD . J Comput Chem 26 ( 16 ) : 1781 – 1802 . 66 . Pettersen EF , et al . ( 2004 ) UCSF Chimera – a visualization system for exploratory re - search and analysis . J Comput Chem 25 ( 13 ) : 1605 – 1612 . 67 . Liu J , Taylor DW , Krementsova EB , Trybus KM , Taylor KA ( 2006 ) Three - dimensional structure of the myosin V inhibited state by cryoelectron tomography . Nature 442 ( 7099 ) : 208 – 211 . 68 . McGough A , Pope B , Chiu W , Weeds A ( 1997 ) Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : Implications for actin filament dynamics and cellular function . J Cell Biol 138 ( 4 ) : 771 – 781 . E1852 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1516598113 Wulf et al .