Information Services & Use 28 ( 2008 ) 109 – 112 109 DOI 10 . 3233 / ISU - 2008 - 0568 IOS Press Peer review in scholarly journals : Perspective of the scholarly community – Results from an international study Mark Ware Mark Ware Consulting , UK E - mail : mark @ markwareconsulting . com This summary is extracted from the report of the same title published by the Publishing Research Council ( PRC ) and reproduced here by kind permission of the PRC . The full report and a shorter edited version can be found on the PRC website at http : / / www . publishingresearch . net / PeerReview . htm . Peer review is seen as an essential component of scholarly communication , the mechanism that facil - itates the publication of primary research in academic journals . Although sometimes thought of as an essential part of the journal , it is only since the second world war that peer review has been institution - alised in the form we know it today . More recently it has come under criticism on a number of fronts : it has been said that it is unreliable , unfair and fails to validate or authenticate ; that it is unstandardised and idiosyncratic ; that its secrecy leads to irresponsibility on the part of reviewers ; that it stiﬂes innovation ; that it causes delay in publication ; and so on . Perhaps the strongest criticism is that there is a lack of evidence that peer review actually works , and a lack of evidence to indicate whether the documented failings are rare exceptions or the tip of an iceberg . The survey reported here does not attempt directly to address the question of whether or not peer review works , but instead looks in detail at the experiences and perceptions of a large group of mostly senior authors , reviewers and editors ( there is of course considerable overlap between these groups ) . Respondents were spread by region and by ﬁeld of research broadly in line with the universe of authors publishing in the journals in the Thomson Scientiﬁc database , which covers the leading peer reviewed journals . The survey presents its ﬁndings in two broad areas : attitudes to peer review and current prac - tices in peer review . Attitudes to peer review 1 . Peer review is widely supported . The overwhelming majority ( 93 % ) disagree that peer review is unnecessary . The large majority ( 85 % ) agreed that peer review greatly helps scientiﬁc communi - cation and most ( 83 % ) believe that without peer review there would be no control . 2 . Peer review improves the quality of the published paper . Researchers overwhelmingly ( 90 % ) said the main area of effectiveness of peer review was in improving the quality of the published paper . In their own experience as authors , 89 % said that peer review had improved their last published paper , both in terms of the language or presentation but also in terms of correcting scientiﬁc errors . 0167 - 5265 / 08 / $ 17 . 00 © 2008 – IOS Press and Publishing Research Consortium . All rights reserved 110 M . Ware / PRC peer review survey : Executive summary 3 . There is a desire for improvement . While the majority ( 64 % ) of academics declared themselves satisﬁed with the current system of peer review used by journals ( and just 12 % dissatisﬁed ) , they were divided on whether the current system is the best that can be achieved , with 36 % disagreeing and 32 % agreeing . There was a very similar division on whether peer review needs a complete overhaul . There was evidence that peer review is too slow ( 38 % were dissatisﬁed with peer review times ) and that reviewers are overloaded ( see # 13 below ) . 4 . Double - blind review was preferred . Changes to peer review in recent years ( such as the growth of double - blind review , and the introduction of open and post - publication review ) have attempted to improve the system . Asked which of the four peer review types was their most preferred option , there was a preference for double - blind review , with 56 % selecting this , followed by 25 % for single - blind , 13 % for open and 5 % for post - publication review . Open peer review was an active discouragement for many reviewers , with 47 % saying that disclosing their name to the author would make them less likely to review . 5 . Double - blind review was seen as the most effective . Of the four types of peer review discussed , double - blind review had the most respondents ( 71 % ) who perceived it to be effective , followed ( in declining order ) by single - blind ( 52 % ) , post - publication ( 37 % ) and open peer review ( 26 % ) . Respondents did not have personal experience of all types of review and tended to rate more highly the systems they had experienced . It is notable , though , that although 37 % of respondents said that post - publication review was effective , only 8 % had had experience of it as authors . 6 . Double - blind review faces some fundamental objections . Double - blind review was primarily sup - ported because of its perceived objectivity and fairness . Many respondents , including some of those supporting double - blind review , did however point out that there were great difﬁculties in operating it in practice because it was frequently too easy to identify authors from their references , type of work or other internal clues . 7 . Post - publication review was seen as a useful supplement to formal peer review . In terms of re - cent developments facilitated by technology advances , some 37 % thought that post - publication review was effective but only 5 % preferred it over other approaches . It is clear that this was be - cause researchers tended to see it as a useful supplement to formal peer review rather than a replacement for it ( 53 % agreed compared to 23 % disagreeing ) . Interestingly , they saw this use - fulness despite a clear view that it tends to encourage instant reactions and discourage thoughtful review . 8 . No support for replacing peer review with metrics . There was strong opposition to replacing peer review with post - publication ratings or usage or citation statistics to identify good papers , with only 5 – 7 % of respondents supporting these approaches . 9 . Mixed support for review of authors’ data . A majority of reviewers ( 63 % ) and editors ( 68 % ) say that it is desirable in principle to review authors’ data . Perhaps surprisingly , a majority of reviewers ( albeit a small one , 51 % ) said that they would be prepared to review authors’ data themselves , compared to only 19 % who disagreed . This was despite 40 % of reviewers ( and 45 % of editors ) saying that it was unrealistic to expect peer reviewers to review authors’ data . Given that many reviewers also reported being overloaded , we wonder , however , whether they would still be as willing when it actually came to examine the data . 10 . Limited support for payment for reviewers . Respondents were divided on whether reviewers should be paid , with 35 % in favour and 40 % against payment . A majority , however , supported the proposition that payment would make the cost of publishing too expensive ( 52 % for , 18 % against ) and the large majority of reviewers ( 91 % ) said that they reviewed to play their part as a member of the academic community . M . Ware / PRC peer review survey : Executive summary 111 Current practices in peer review 11 . Single - blind review was the most commonly experienced . The average respondent had pub - lished 60 papers in their career to date , suggesting they were fairly experienced and productive researchers , and 8 papers in the last 24 months . As authors , respondents’ experience of peer re - view was mainly of single - blind reviewing ( 84 % said they had experienced this kind of review ) , followed at some distance by double - blind reviewing ( 44 % ) . Less than a quarter ( 22 % ) reported experience of open peer review , while experience of post - publication review was limited to 8 % of respondents . 12 . Longer review times was a cause of dissatisfaction . Authors said the peer review of their last published paper took an average of 80 days . They were evenly balanced on whether or not this was satisfactory . There was a clear correlation between the reported time taken for peer review and the author’s satisfaction : 67 % were satisﬁed provided the time was under 30 days , but this dropped to 10 % for 3 – 6 months , and to 9 % for longer than 6 months . 13 . The most productive reviewers were overloaded . Some 90 % of authors were also reviewers , act - ing regularly for about 3 . 5 journals and a further 4 . 2 journals occasionally . They reported review - ing an average of 8 papers in the last 12 months , compared to the maximum of 9 that they said they were prepared to review . Active reviewers , deﬁned as those doing 6 or more reviews in the last 12 months , completed an average of 14 reviews per year , nearly twice the overall ﬁgure . This means that although Active reviewers make up 44 % of all reviewers , they are responsible for 79 % of all reviews . So when this group reports it is over - loaded – doing 14 reviews per year compared to their preferred maximum of 13 – there is clearly a problem . 14 . About 20 % of invitations to review are declined . As well as completing 8 reviews per year , the average reviewer declined about 2 invitations to review , mainly because of a lack of time . Active reviewers , despite doing more reviews , if anything decline slightly fewer invitations proportion - ately . 15 . The average review takes 5 hours and is completed in 3 – 4 weeks . Reviewers say that they took about 24 days ( elapsed time ) to complete their last review , with 85 % reporting that they took 30 days or less . They spent a median 5 hours ( mean 9 hours ) per review . 16 . Altruistic reasons for reviewing were preferred over self - interested ones . Substantially the most popular given was “playing your part as a member of the academic community” . Self - interested reasons such as “to enhance your reputation or further your career” or “to increase the chance of being offered a role in the journal’s editorial team” were much less frequently advanced . 17 . The average acceptance rate was 50 % . Editors reported that the average acceptance rate for their journals was about 50 % , which is consistent with other studies . About 20 % are rejected prior to review ( either because of poor quality ( 13 % ) or being out of scope ( 8 % ) ) and another 30 % are rejected following review . Of the 50 % accepted , 40 % are accepted subject to revision . Acceptance rates were lower in humanities and social sciences , and higher in physical sciences / engineering journals . 18 . Use of online submissions systems . Three quarters of editors ( 76 % ) reported that their journal used an online manuscript submission and tracking system . Their use was most common in life sciences ( 85 % ) and least common in humanities and social sciences ( 51 % ) . 19 . Access to journals literature . Some 69 % of respondents described their access to the journals liter - ature as good or excellent , with 7 % describing it as poor or very poor . This probably represents an improvement in overall access compared to the CIBER 2004 survey [ 1 ] , which reported 61 % with 112 M . Ware / PRC peer review survey : Executive summary good / excellent and 10 % poor / very poor ( though a different geographical distribution of responses makes direct comparison difﬁcult ) . The survey thus paints a picture of academics committed to peer review , with the vast majority be - lieving that it helps scientiﬁc communication and in particular that it improves the quality of published papers . They are willing to play their part in carrying out review , though it is worrying that the most productive reviewers appear to be overloaded . Many of them are in fact willing to go further than at present and take on responsibility for reviewing authors’ data . Within this picture of overall satisfaction there are , however , some sizeable pockets of discontent . This discontent does not always translate into support for alternative methods of peer review ; in fact some of those most positive about the beneﬁts of peer review were also the most supportive of post - publication review . Overall , there was substantial minority support for post - publication review as a supplement to formal peer review , but much less support for open review as an alternative to blinded review . Reference [ 1 ] I . Rowlands , D . Nicholas and P . Huntingdon , Scholarly Communication in the Digital Age : What Do Authors Want ? , Centre for Information Behaviour ( CIBER ) , 2004 .