DiAna , an ImageJ tool for object - based 3D co - localization and distance analysis ( A ) Jean - François Gilles , ( B ) Marc Dos Santos , ( C ) Thomas Boudier , ( B ) Nicolas Heck and ( A ) Susanne Bolte Sorbonne Universités , UPMC Univ Paris 06 , CNRS Institut de Biologie Paris Seine ( IBPS ) , 75005 Paris , France ( A ) Core Facility ( B ) Neurosciences Paris Seine ( C ) Bioinformatics Institute , Agency for Science , Technology and Research ( A * STAR ) , Singapore Email : susanne . bolte @ upmc . fr Keywords : Image segmentation , image co - localization , fluorescence microscopy , spatial analysis , 3D imaging Many biological studies depend on the analysis of the distribution and spatial relationship between biomarkers in a cell or tissue . Various methods , from immunodetection to transgene - driven expression of fluorescent proteins , allow to observe positive cells in whole specimen or tissue sections at the histological level , or to detect protein sub - cellular localization at the cellular level . The 3D - organization and relationship of these biomarkers can be investigated using fluorescence microscopy techniques that allow optical sectioning , such as confocal microscopy or multiphoton microscopy , and should be combined with appropriate image analysis methods . Biologists often seek at associating the spatial overlap of pairs of biomolecules in a cell or in a sub - cellular compartment by the means of co - localization analysis , which is an indispensable tool before inferring biological interaction and drawing functional conclusions . Co - localization analysis has become an extensive field of research , it has been extensively reviewed and a plethora of open - source tools exist for the cell biologist [ 1 , 2 ] . Besides , the cell biologist might be interested in further associations of neighboring structures , such as the proximity of two markers . We provide a tool that includes a thorough object based co - localisation analysis , which is combined with the possibility to analyse further spatial relationships between sub - cellular structures , such as proximity . In our approach , we guide the user to obtain segmented images to quantify his data . We created a ImageJ - based tool , DiAna ( D istance An alysis ) that provides different possibilities for spatial analysis , object colocalisation , distances between the two populations of object and statistics on each object [ 3 ] . With DiAna , we furthermore introduce an original method , which allows for estimating the statistical significance of object co - localization . In addition to result tables , we introduce an ROI selector to navigate through images and the possibility to save them . DiAna thus offers a complete and intuitive 3D image analysis tool for biologists . [ 1 ] Bolte S and Cordelieres FF ( 2006 ) J Microsc 224 ( Pt 3 ) : 213 - 32 , [ 2 ] Cordelières FP and Bolte S ( 2014 ) Methods Cell Biol . 2014 ; 123 : 395 - 408 , [ 3 ] Gilles JF et al . , ( 2016 ) Methods , pii : S1046 - 2023 ( 16 ) 30464 - 9