ORIGINAL PAPER A systematized theory of creative concept generation in design : ﬁrst - order and high - order concept generation Toshiharu Taura • Yukari Nagai Received : 28 February 2011 / Revised : 19 January 2013 / Accepted : 19 January 2013 / Published online : 6 March 2013 (cid:2) Springer - Verlag London 2013 Abstract This paper aims to develop asystematized theory on the thinking process at the ‘very early stage of design . ’ Here , ‘very’ is used to exaggerate the beginning of design , which includes the time just prior to or the precise beginning of the so - called conceptual design . First , concept generation is segregated into two phases—the problem - driven phase and the inner sense - driven phase . With regard to theoretical approach , the concept generation process is discussed by comparing metaphor , abduction , and general design theory from the perspective of similarities and dissimilarities . In addition , property mapping , concept blending , and concept integration in thematic relation are explained methodolog - ically . So far , these theories and methods have been dis - cussed independently , and the relations amongthem have not been clariﬁed . As a result , it was found that the concept generation process could be categorized into two types : ﬁrst - order concept generation and high - order concept genera - tion . Furthermore , it was shown that high - order concept generation is related to the inner sense - driven phase , whereas ﬁrst - order concept generation is related to the problem - driven phase . Keywords Design (cid:2) Design theory (cid:2) Concept generation (cid:2) Similarity and dissimilarity 1 Introduction In this paper , we attempt to clarify the essential phenom - enon in the ‘very’ early stage of design , which occurs before or at the early stage of the so - called conceptual design , on the basis of our previous discourse ( Nagai and Taura 2009 ; Taura and Nagai 2010 ) . Design typically involves two phases : the conception of a mental plan , followed by the creation of forms . The former phase is generally termed conceptual design . In engineering design , conceptual design has been considered an ‘early stage of design’ in a systematic approach ( Pahl and Beitz 1984 ) . In this approach , schematic descriptions of a mechanism are important at the early stage to initialize the ﬂow of the design process . Further , methods for a systematic approach have been developed to determine the relations between a mechanism and functions ( Jones 1970 , 1984 ; March 1984 ; Suh 1990 ) . In these processes , origi - nality as well as rationality is required . Creative techniques for systematic design such as checklist methods ( Archer 1984 ) —for example , the attribute listing method ( Brinkk - emper 1996 ) , which was developed in the early 1930s ( originally introduced by P . C . Crawford ) based on the decomposition of the problem—as well as network mod - elling methods—for example , the option graph method ( Luckman 1984 ) based on the linkages of the elements in a ﬂow diagram—were adopted in order to ﬁnd new solutions . Brainstorming ( Osborn 1957 ) became a popular method to facilitate the ideations and was introduced to ﬁnd new solutions ( Vidal et al . 2004 ; Yang 2009 ) . In addition , other general creativity support techniques were proposed to strengthen the originality by providing new ways of seeing a situation . Synectics ( Gordon 1961 ) was a famous exam - ple of an operational theory for the conscious use of the psychological mechanisms of creative activity , particularly T . Taura ( & ) Organization of Advanced Science and Technology , Kobe University , 1 - 1 Rokkodai , Nada - ku , Kobe 657 - 8501 , Japan e - mail : taura @ kobe - u . ac . jp Y . Nagai School of Knowledge Science , Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology , 1 - 1 Asahidai , Nomi , Ishikawa 923 - 1292 , Japan 123 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 013 - 0152 - 6 with regard to the roles of metaphor in the creative process . Later , the roles of metaphor provided a computational cognitive model of analogy ( Boden 1998 ; Hofstadter 1995 ; Holyoak and Thagard 1995 ) , such as Copycat ( Hofstadter 1993 , 2001 ) . Empirically , analogy is viewed as a creative strategy for shifting the manner in which a situation is seen and is thought to be an effective stimulus for design ( Dorst and Cross 2001 ; Goldschmidt 2001 ; Howard et al . 2010 ) . For developing multiple viewpoints on seeing situations , ﬂexibility was focused on , and lateral thinking ( de Bono 2009 ) was introduced as an effective creative thinking technique that is related to a ﬂexibility - developing skill . This was further developed into the ‘Six Thinking Hats’ ( de Bono 1999 ) tool for human decision - making . In order to obtain the meta - level skill of seeing a situation , not only human thinking , but also the need for ‘learning by doing’ was highlighted from the viewpoint of practice . In the framework of learning in practice theory , the skill of reﬂection was introduced as an effective method to develop the creativity of ‘practitioners’ ( Scho¨n 1983 , 1987 ) . Although most of the studies mentioned above focused on the phases during which an initial idea or speciﬁcation is generated , further attempts in this regard will be successful in developing a theory in a systematized matter so that the generative process lying behind mysterious phenomena can be explained and a substantial methodology can be derived . This paper aims to develop a systematized theory on the thinking process at the ‘very early stage of design . ’ Here , ‘very’ is used to exaggerate the beginning of design , which includes the time just prior to or the precise beginning of the so - called conceptual design . We use the term concept in order to capture the very early stage of design in a general manner , and we call the ‘very early stage of design’ the process of concept generation . In this paper , ‘concept’ is deﬁned as that which refers to the ﬁgure of an object as well as other representations , such as attributes or functions of the object , which existed , is existing , or might exist in the human mind as well as in the real world . This deﬁnition is in line with previous consid - erations in the ﬁeld of design study ( Hatchuel and Weil 2009 ; Hatchuel et al . 2004 ; Kroll et al . 2001 ; Mafﬁn 1998 ; Pugh 1991 ; Shai et al . 2009 ) . Here , ‘ﬁgure’ implies the notion of an image as well as a physical shape , and ‘object’ involves not only a physical object , but also a non - physical object : software , music , and so on . We assume that a new concept is not generated from nothing . This declaration involves two meanings : the existence of the basis for generating a new concept and the generation of a new concept by referring to some existing concepts that lie either in the real world or in a designer’s mind . However , we do not deny that a new concept might be generated suddenly in a designer’s mind with no forewarning or basis . We do not discuss this type of concept generation in this paper owing to the difﬁculty in understanding these phenomena . The discussion in this paper proceeds as follows . First , as a framework , the process of concept generation is classiﬁed into two phases—the problem - driven phase and inner sense - driven phase —derived from two factors : the basis of the concept generation and the ability that enables the concept generation to proceed in Sect . 2 . Next , a theory for concept generation is systematized from the viewpoint of recognition of the similarity and dissimilarity between the concepts in Sect . 3 . As a result , it is shown that concept generation can be categorized into the following two types : ﬁrst - order concept generation and high - order concept generation . Furthermore , it is found that high - order con - cept generation is related to the inner sense - driven phase , whereas ﬁrst - order concept generation is related to the problem - driven phase in Sect . 5 . With regard to theoretical approach , the concept gen - eration process is discussed by comparing metaphor , abduction , and general design theory ( GDT ) ( Yoshikawa 1981 ) . In addition , property mapping , concept blending , and concept integration in thematic relation are explained methodologically . So far , these theories and methods have been discussed independently , and the relations among them have not been clariﬁed . Although some of them have been addressed in a previous study of ours ( Nagai and Taura 2009 ) , this paper systematizes the relations among them more precisely , using the framework of ﬁrst - order concept generation and high - order concept generation introduced herein . 2 Phases of concept generation To specify what concept generation is , we classify the process of concept generation into two phases—the prob - lem - driven phase and the inner sense - driven phase — derived from two factors : the basis of the concept gener - ation and the ability that enables the concept generation to proceed . 2 . 1 Problem - driven phase We call a gap that exists between a goal of an object and its existing situation a problem , and deﬁne the problem - driven phase as the process of developing a new concept ( solu - tion ) on the basis of the ‘problem . ’ In certain situations , there are obvious goals that need to be achieved , such as ﬁnding solutions for natural disasters . Similarly , in cases where we need to meet customers’ explicit requirements , it is also easy to set goals . In the problem - driven phase , the new concept ( solution ) can usually be obtained by analyzing the ‘problem . ’ Through these deﬁnitions and 186 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 123 considerations , we can deduce that the basis of the concept is a ‘problem’ ( the gap between a goal and an existing situation ) and that the ability that enables this phase to drive is that of ‘analyzing . ’ 2 . 2 Inner sense - driven phase The inner sense - driven phase is deﬁned as the process of developing a new concept on the basis of the ‘inner sense . ’ Although the role of the ‘inner sense’ in design has been pointed out in previous research ( Hatchuel and Weil 2009 ; Shai et al . 2009 ) , further research on this aspect will aid in understanding and systematizing concept generation . Here , inner sense is that which involves ‘inner criteria’ and ‘intrinsic motivation’ and can be the basis on which a new concept is generated by referring to existing concepts . ‘Inner criteria’ is that which is explicitly or implicitly underlying in the designer’s mind and guides the process of concept generation ( Taura and Nagai 2012 ) . ‘Intrinsic motivation’ is explained as follows ( Liberman 2003 ) : When intrinsically motivated , people perform an activity for its own sake , usually because they derive pleasure from being engaged in it ( for example , a person may enjoy playing music ) and perform these activities with no expectation of a tangible external reward . People typically report greater enjoyment and satisfaction when performing an activity for which they are intrinsically , rather than extrinsically , motivated . Intrinsic motivation is typically associated with greater commitment to the activity ( e . g . , greater chances of spontaneous resumption after an inter - ruption ) . In addition , it has been suggested that intrinsic motivation enhances creativity . Intrinsic motivation refers to doing an activity for the inherent satisfaction of the activity itself ( Ryan and Deci 2000 ) and has been reported to produce highly creative work by those who have a strong intrinsic motivation to engage in an activity ( Amabile 1996 ) . In the very early stage of design , one of the typical processes is the composition of elements , because the way in which we create products differs from the process of creation in the natural world . It is a well - known fact that such a composition of elements is observed in the human recognition process ( Finke et al . 1992 ) . In this paper , the term ‘composing’ is used to incorporate the notion of ‘inner sense’ as well as the meaning given above , whereas the term ‘synthesis’ is used in its well - known sense as a notion opposed to ‘analysis . ’ The ability of ‘composing’ is also effective in the problem - driven phase ; however , we believe this ability features in the inner sense - driven phase . Table 1 summarizes the two phases of concept generation described above . The relationship between the two phases is illustrated in Fig . 1 . In the actual design process , these two phases do not work independently ; instead , they realize the design process complementarily . In the design process , which is modelled in the framework of the so - called problem - solving process ( Pahl and Beitz 1984 ) , a new concept through which the given goal is achieved is generated by analyzing the gap between the goal and the current situation ; moreover , it is achieved by creating a new solution or decomposing the problem on the basis of the designer’s inner sense . On the other hand , even if the design is captured as an activity of the artist , its very early stage can also be understood to comprise the two phases , where focus is placed on the inner sense - driven phase . In the very early stage of art - like design , a new concept is thought to be generated from the designer’s inner sense , followed by ﬁtting it into the situation by analyzing the gap between the emergent vague concept and the current situation . 3 Classiﬁcation of the concept generation process In this section , we attempt to develop a systematized theory for concept generation by referring to the models of met - aphor , abduction , and general design theory ( GDT ) , espe - cially from the viewpoint of recognition of the similarity and dissimilarity between the concepts . In addition , prop - erty mapping , concept blending , and concept integration in thematic relation are explained methodologically . As a result , it is shown that concept generation can be catego - rized into the following two types : ﬁrst - order concept generation and high - order concept generation . 3 . 1 Abstract concept versus entity concept Generating a new concept by combining multiple concepts is a sophisticated activity ( Rothenberg 1979 ; Sternberg and Lubert 1999 ; Ward et al . 1997 ) . For example , if we knew Table 1 The two phases of concept generation with two factors : the basis and ability of concept generation Phase of concept generation Basis Ability Problem - driven Problem Analyzing Inner sense - driven Inner sense Composing Fig . 1 The two phases in concept generation Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 187 123 the two concepts of ‘‘snow’’ and ‘‘car , ’’ we could derive new concepts from them such as ‘‘white steam locomo - tive , ’’ ‘‘yellow steam locomotive , ’’ ‘‘white post box , ’’ and ‘‘yellow post box . ’’ This process of concept generation comprises the following three steps : obtaining more gen - eral concepts , such as ‘‘white colored objects’’ and ‘‘moving objects , ’’ combining them , such as ‘‘moving object with a white color’’ and ‘‘non - moving object whose color is not white’’ ; and generating a new concept by specifying the combined general concepts . By performing these steps , we could then generate new concepts . In this paper , such a general concept , obtained by extracting par - ticular properties ( function , attribute , etc . ) of objects , is deﬁned as an abstract concept , by referring to the general design theory ( GDT ) ( Yoshikawa 1981 ) . For example , ‘‘white’’ is a description of an abstract concept regarding the attribute of ‘snow . ’ On the other hand , an entity concept is deﬁned as a concept regarding an object itself . For example , ‘‘snow’’ is a description of an entity concept . In this paper , the entity concept or abstract concept of aaa is described as ‘‘aaa . ’’ Using set theory , the entity concept is modelled as an element and the abstract concept is modelled as a class ( subset of elements ) , since the entity concept , which has the same attribute or function ( abstract concept ) , can be gathered in the subset of the abstract concept ( Fig . 2 ) . The question now to be addressed is which type of concept—abstract or entity—should be discussed . When we identify the purpose of concept generation to be the generation of a new entity concept ( product ) , we need to discuss the entity concept ; however , when we identify the purpose of concept generation to be the generation of a new attribute or function , we must discuss the abstract concept . In this paper , we primarily discuss the entity concept because the object of design is considered an entity . However , at the same time , we take the abstract concept into account since the abstract concept plays the important role of generating the entity concept ; in addition , the abstract concept itself can be a purpose for concept gen - eration . In this paper , what is referred to as ‘concept’ is the entity concept . 3 . 2 First - order concept generation process based on the similarity - recognition process A metaphor is a rhetorical ﬁgure representing one concept by way of another concept , which is considered similar to the concept to be represented . The roles of metaphors have also been investigated in design ( Bucciarelli 2002 ; D’Souza 2010 ; Goldschmidt and Litan Sever 2011 ; Hey et al . 2008 ; Wang and Chan 2010 ) . If A is a concept to be represented and B is a concept to be assimilated to , the relationship between A and B is expressed as ‘A is B . ’ For instance , let us consider the expression ‘she is a goddess . ’ In this case , the common features between ‘she’ and ‘goddess’ are implicitly repre - sented ( Fig . 3 ) . Both ‘she’ and ‘goddess’ belong to the same abstract concept , which was formed from the com - monality between ‘she’ and ‘goddess , ’ for example , ‘‘beauty . ’’ Metaphors are often used in design . For example , Fig . 4 is an illustration of a famous chair called the Swan Chair . This chair was created by the Danish designer Arne Jac - obsen for a hotel and it has remained very popular . As its name conveys , the Swan Chair is a chair that approximates the ﬁgure of swan in order to convey the quality of a swan ( e . g . , elegance ) and can be represented by the framework for a metaphor such as ‘the chair is a swan . ’ Although it sounds similar to the previous sentence ( ‘she is a goddess’ ) , Fig . 2 Entity concept and abstract concept Fig . 3 Structure of a metaphor Fig . 4 Swan Chair ( sketched by the author ) 188 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 123 the roles present in the metaphors are different . When a person expresses ‘she is a goddess , ’ she already exists ; in contrast , the sentence ‘the chair is a swan’ presents a more complicated situation . If a person says this when he or she looks at the chair ( Fig . 5 ) , it refers to an existing chair in the same vein as ‘she is a goddess . ’ On the other hand , if a person says this while he or she is designing the chair , then the chair is a concept that does not yet exist in the real world . In this situation , ‘the new chair that is to be designed is a swan , ’ is a more suitable expression . In such a case , the similarity ( implicit common features ; for example , elegant shape ) between the chair ( which does not yet exist but will be designed ) and a swan plays an important role . On the basis of the above considerations , we can say that , in the design process using metaphors , a new concept will be generated , which will be similar to the concept to be assimilated to . A new concept of a chair is generated ( referring to a swan or imitating a swan ) on the basis of the similarity between the chair to be designed and a swan . In our previous study , the process of generating a new concept was investigated using the example of ‘snow tomato’ ( Nagai and Taura 2009 ) . In this paper , we also discuss the nature of concept generation using this exam - ple . From the ‘snow tomato , ’ it is easy to generate the new concept of ‘‘white tomato , ’’ wherein the property of color is the focus . The generation process of this new concept can be explained using the metaphor framework , such as ‘the tomato to be designed is snow . ’ This representation involves the notion that ‘‘tomato’’ is related to the concept of ‘‘snow’’ ; both concepts are not closely related to each other in the usual way . On the other hand , concept generation can be discussed within the framework of reasoning types : deduction , induction , and abduction . The ﬁndings of previous studies indicated that abduction is the most adequate representa - tion of the characteristics of design ( Coyne et al . 1987 ) . This is because design is understood to be the process of developing a hypothesis . In this paper , we show that the two explanations ( metaphor and abduction ) result in the same meaning . The process of concept generation for a Swan Chair can also be formulated as a process of abduction ( Fig . 6 ) . This formulation can be understood as follows . Formula ( 1 ) shows that the abstract concept ( subset ) of ‘‘swan’’ is included in the abstract concept ( subset ) ‘‘elegant shape . ’’ Formula ( 2 ) shows that ‘‘chair to be designed’’ ( element ) belongs to the abstract concept ( subset ) ‘‘elegant shape . ’’ Consequently , ‘‘chair to be designed’’ and the abstract concept of ‘‘swan’’ are connected by formula ( 3 ) , whereas ‘‘chair to be designed’’ does not belong to ‘‘swan . ’’ To be accurate , the element in this formula should be an existing object and should be extended to a non - existing object . However , this formulation can be interpreted as the process in which ‘‘chair to be designed’’ is related to ‘‘swan’’ because of the common property of ‘‘elegant shape . ’’ The two concepts are connected on the basis of a similar property ; in other words , a novel concept is generated such that a similar property is preserved . This explanation involves nearly the same structure as that of a metaphor Fig . 5 The two types of metaphor in design Fig . 6 The concept generation process by abduction Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 189 123 ( the slight difference is owing to the type of concept ‘‘swan’’ : an entity concept in a metaphor and an abstract concept in abduction . Actually , the description of an object can be an abstract concept as well as an entity concept . For example , ‘‘car’’ can be an abstract concept that contains vehicles that involve the properties of ‘car’ as well as an entity concept ) . From the above discussion , one ﬁnds that , in the very early stage of the design process , which is explained as abduction or metaphor , either a new concept is related to an existing concept ( although these are not related to each other in the usual way ) owing to some similarity between them , or a new concept is generated such that the similarity is preserved . This relation can be called ‘grouping . ’ ‘‘Swan Chair’’ ( a new concept ) and ‘‘swan’’ are in the same group . ‘‘White tomato’’ ( a new design ) and ‘‘snow’’ are in the same group . On the basis of the grouping process , a new chair or a new tomato is designed . The above discussion is consistent with Ito’s ( 1997 ) discourse . He explained that the features of tacit knowl - edge , proposed by Polanyi ( 1966 ) , and abduction are based on a process of synecdoche , which is the basic operation of metaphor or grouping . In addition , the KJ method and other models of concept generation are types of groupings based on the similarity - recognition process ( Ohiwa et al . 1990 ; Scupin 1997 ) . Although metaphors and abduction seem to be appar - ently different processes , we explained above that both processes have the same nature ; that is , they are grouping processes based on the similarity - recognition process . On the basis of the considerations discussed in this section , we deﬁne the abstract concept generated by focusing on a similar property ( function or attribute ) as a ﬁrst - order abstract concept , and the ﬁrst - order concept generation as the process of generating a new concept on the basis of the ﬁrst - order abstract concept . In ﬁrst - order concept generation , a new concept is generated by mapping a common property ( ﬁrst - order abstract concep t ) to an existing concept . For example , the new concept of ‘‘Swan Chair’’ by Jacobsen was generated by transferring the shape of ‘‘swan’’ to the shape of an existing chair . The new concept of ‘‘white tomato’’ is generated by transferring the color of ‘‘snow’’ ( white ) to the color of ‘‘tomato . ’’ This transferring process is called property mapping . Hereafter , the existing concept and the concept whose property is mapped to the existing concept are called base concepts in order to ensure consistency with the other processes in this paper , although the former is conventionally called the ‘target domain’ and the latter the ‘source domain . ’ In property mapping , various properties ( similarities ) may be transferred from the base concept , in addition to the salient property that is ﬁrst focused , as addressed in previous discourses on metaphor ( Black 1979 ; Indurkhya 2006 , 2007 ; Lakoff and Johnson 1980 ; Turbayne 1962 ) . As a conclusion to this section , generating a new con - cept using metaphors or abduction is understood to be property mapping based on the similarity - recognition process . However , a ﬁrst - order concept generation is use - ful only to create a subspecies of an existing product , since it cannot extend beyond the category of the existing product . For example , in the case of ‘‘Swan Chair , ’’ a new concept belonging to the category beyond the chair cannot be generated when a creative chair is expected to be generated . Another important issue to be identiﬁed is that property mapping is effective for only explaining the concept gen - eration in an ‘ex post facto’ manner . For example , in the case of ‘‘Swan Chair , ’’ the issue of how or why a swan was chosen remains unanswered . Generally , swans have noth - ing to do with chairs . We describe this difﬁcult issue in a later section of this paper . 3 . 3 Higher - order concept generation process based on the dissimilarity - recognition process We would like to discuss another method for generating a new concept . Let us consider the example of a ‘snow tomato’ again . By using property mapping of ﬁrst - order concept generation , we can obtain the new concept of ‘‘white tomato . ’’ However , the generated concept is a kind of ‘tomato’ and is not a concept beyond the category of ‘tomato . ’ On the other hand , if we perform the following steps of operating multiple abstract concepts as mentioned in Sect . 3 . 1 , a new concept of ‘‘powdered ketchup , ’’ which is like powdered cheese and is thought to extend beyond the categories of ‘tomato’ and ‘snow , ’ can be generated : we obtain the abstract concepts of ‘‘ﬂavoring’’ and ‘‘snowﬂake’’ from ‘‘tomato’’ and ‘‘snow , ’’ respectively , and combine them to acquire ‘‘ﬂavoring with snowﬂake , ’’ thus generating the new concept of ‘‘powdered ketchup’’ by specifying the abstract concept of ‘‘ﬂavoring with snow - ﬂake . ’’ By performing these steps , we could then generate another class of new concepts rather than ﬁrst - order con - cept generation . On the basis of the above considerations , we deﬁne the abstract concept generated by combining multiple abstract concepts ( hereafter , the entity concepts from which these abstract concepts are generated are also referred to as base concepts ) as a high - order abstract concept , and the high - order concept generation as the process of generating a new concept on the basis of the high - order abstract concept ( Fig . 7 ) . Here , the relationship between the properties is crucial in determining whether the generated concept may extend beyond the existing categories . With regard to the example of ‘snow tomato , ’ when the property of ‘‘red’’ of tomato is 190 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 123 replaced with the property of ‘‘white’’ of ‘‘snow , ’’ then the concept of ‘‘white tomato’’ is obtained . In this case , the relation between ‘‘white’’ and ‘‘red’’ is called an ‘alignable difference’ and pointed out to be related to ‘similarity’ in the ﬁeld of cognitive science ( Markman and Wisniewski 1997 ; Wilkenfeld and Ward 2001 ) . In property mapping , these alignable properties are replaced . On the other hand , in the case of ‘‘powdered ketchup , ’’ the relationship between the extracted properties of ‘‘ﬂavoring’’ and ‘‘snowﬂake’’ is called a ‘non - alignable difference’ and considered to be a kind of ‘dissimilarity . ’ In this case , ‘‘ﬂavoring’’ and ‘‘snowﬂake’’ cannot be replaced since they do not align in the same dimension . The above considerations suggest that a high - order concept generation is understood to have its basis on the dissimilarity - recognition process . In other words , the dis - similarity plays an important role in generating an ‘inno - vative’ concept that extends beyond the existing categories . High - order abstract concepts are classiﬁed into two types . Generally , in the relation between concepts , it has been revealed that there are two types of relations—taxo - nomical and thematic ( Shoben and Gagne 1997 ) . The former is a relation that represents a physical resemblance between the concepts , and the latter represents the relation between the concepts through a thematic scene . With respect to the example of an ‘apple’ and an ‘orange , ’ the relation that focuses on the shape ( round ) is a taxonomical relation . On the other hand , with respect to the example of an ‘apple’ and a ‘knife , ’ the relation that focuses on the scene in which ‘apple is cut by a knife’ is a thematic relation . According to the former relation , high - order abstract concepts can be interpreted as abstract concepts involving an innovative concept that inherits partial properties from both the two base concepts but is different from the two base concepts . We deﬁne the concept generation based on this process as concept blending , echoing Fauconnier’s discourse . In the cognitive linguistic study , Fauconnier ( 1994 ) proposes ‘the blended’ space on the basis of his mental space theory . In conceptual blending , two input concepts yield a third concept , which inherits partial fea - tures from the input concepts and has emergent features of its own ( Fauconnier and Turner 2002 ) . The concept of ‘‘powdered ketchup’’ is an example of concept blending . This new concept is understood to be generated by blending the different properties of snow ( abstract concept : snowﬂake ) and tomato ( abstract concept : ﬂavoring ) . On the other hand , according to the latter relation between the two base concepts , high - order abstract con - cepts can be interpreted as abstract concepts involving an innovative concept that is generated from the thematic scenes ( situations , roles , etc . ) of the base concepts . We deﬁne the concept generation based on the thematic rela - tion as concept integration in thematic relation . In design , the outcomes ( the designed products ) must be meaningful to people . Therefore , the designer must carefully consider not only the attributes of the designed product ( shape , material , etc . ) , but also its function and interface ; in other words , careful consideration of the human aspect is important . Accordingly , integration of the base concepts in the thematic relation is expected to play an important role in concept generation . With respect to the example of a ‘snow tomato , ’ the new concept of ‘‘refrigerator that can humidify the food in it’’ is generated from the scene where ‘‘tomato’’ is stored in ‘‘snow . ’’ The notion of combining multiple abstract concepts on the basis of the dissimilarity - recognition process of high - order concept generation mentioned above is shared with GDT . In GDT , AXIOM 3 is strongly related to the manipulation of multiple abstract concepts . ( AXIOM 3 ) ( Axiom of operation ) The set of abstract concepts is a topology of the set of the entity concept . Fig . 7 High - order concept generation Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 191 123 Here , ‘topology’ refers to mathematical topology and has the following properties . 1 . The entire entity concept , that is , the universal set of the entity concept , is an abstract concept . Inversely , the null set of the entity concept is an abstract concept . 2 . By deﬁnition , an abstract concept is a subset of the entity - concept set . The intersection of the subset and that of another abstract concept is also an abstract concept . 3 . A union of abstract concepts is also an abstract concept . AXIOM 3 gives high operability to the abstract con - cepts . AXIOM 3 makes it possible to represent and reﬁne requirements and determine and revise the design solution as addressed by Yoshikawa ( 1981 ) . Regarding the role of topology in design , further discussion has been conducted ( Braha and Reich 2003 ; Reich 1995 ; Tomiyama and Yos - hikawa 1987 ) . In the context of this paper , the argument that a new abstract concept is obtained as the intersection of two abstract concepts is considered to be similar to the process in the high - order concept generation . In GDT ( Yoshikawa 1981 ) , some theorems have been deduced , one of them being Theorem 1 , which we introduce here . ( Theorem 1 ) The ideal knowledge is the Hausdorff’s space . This theorem is deduced from the fact that ideal knowledge is deﬁned as a knowledge in which all the elements of the entity set are known and in which each element can be described by abstract concepts without ambiguity ( Yoshikawa 1981 ) . Here , a Hausdorff space is a separated space , which implies the notion of differentia - tion . In the ideal knowledge , concept generation is explained as a process to discover abstract or entity con - cepts that implicitly exist in the human mind . From this discussion , we infer that GDT , which operates on the concept of mathematical topology and deﬁnes the ideal knowledge as a separated space , is strongly related with the notion of high - order concept generation , which yields the process of combining multiple abstract concepts on the basis of dissimilarity recognition . Now , we would like to discuss the characteristics of high - order concept generation in a critical way . As men - tioned above , high - order concept generation is expected to generate an ‘innovative’ new concept , which extends beyond the existing categories . However , we must note that the type of concept generation is not absolutely determined owing to the newly generated concept itself ; instead , it is relatively dependent on the base concepts from which the new concept has stemmed . For example , in the case of ‘snow tomato , ’ the new concept of ‘‘powdered ketchup’’ can be obtained by property mapping , where the prop - erty of ‘‘powdered’’ is transferred to ‘‘ketchup’’ when ‘‘powdered cheese’’ and ‘‘ketchup’’ are recognized as the base concepts . Moreover , the new concept of a ‘‘refriger - ator that can humidify the food in it’’ can also be obtained by property mapping , where the property of ‘‘humidifying’’ is transferred to ‘‘refrigerator’’ when ‘‘humidiﬁer’’ and ‘‘refrigerator’’ are recognized as the base concepts . Accordingly , perhaps one may misunderstand concept blending or concept integration in thematic relation as an extension of property mapping . Indeed , property mapping , concept blending , and con - cept integration in thematic relation can be identiﬁed as the same process for ﬁnding the intersection of abstract con - cepts in set theory , while the difference among them results in the interpretation of the intersection . However , the meanings of the two processes ( ﬁrst - order concept gener - ation and high - order concept generation ) are quite differ - ent . The generated concepts differ as to whether they should be a subspecies of the existing product or may extend beyond the existing category , and whether they are based on the similarity - recognition process ( which denotes that concepts belong to the same abstract concept ) or dis - similarity - recognition process ( which denotes that concepts belong to different abstract concepts ) . That is , high - order concept generation is expected to generate concepts that may extend beyond an existing category on the basis of the dissimilarity - recognition process , whereas ﬁrst - order con - cept generation is thought to generate concepts that are subspecies of an existing product on the basis of the sim - ilarity - recognition process . The relation between these processes is illustrated in Fig . 8 . Fig . 8 Relationship between similarity and dissimilarity in the concept generation process 192 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 123 On the other hand , in the same way as property map - ping , the model of operating multiple abstract concepts is also effective for explaining concept generation , through only in an ‘ex post facto’ manner . We can conﬁrm the feasibility of operating the abstract concepts only from the prearranged base concepts or describe concept generation as a high - order concept generation in an ‘ex post facto’ manner ; further , it is impossible to answer the question ‘why were those speciﬁc base concepts focused on from the beginning ? ’ We describe this issue in the following section . 4 How to select the appropriate base concept for concept generation In the previous sections , questions on how we select the appropriate concept to be related before the property mapping ( ﬁrst - order concept generation ) and how we select the appropriate base concepts before the process of manipulating multiple abstract concepts ( high - order con - cept generation ) remain unanswered . In this section , we discuss these issues . First , we discuss the property mapping ( ﬁrst - order concept generation ) . In the property mapping , the concept to be related is assumed to be identiﬁed by analyzing the properties of an existing concept . For example , it is imagined that the idea of a Swan Chair might have emerged during the designer’s experience of looking at a swan—that is , a designer who had seriously thought about the problems of existing chairs ( elegant shape ) back then . The designer is assumed to have noticed the shape of the ‘swan’ while he was searching for an elegant shape . Accordingly , in the property mapping ( ﬁrst - order concept generation ) , a cue for identifying the concept that is to be related is thought to be obtained in the process of analyzing the existing problem . In other words , the base concepts should be selected such that the problem can be solved . We have implemented this idea into our functional reasoning method ( Sakaguchi et al . 2011 ) . Next , we discuss concept blending and concept inte - gration in thematic relation ( high - order concept genera - tion ) . During the process of concept generation , we often make decisions that can be evaluated only after the process has progressed for a while . Taura ( 2008 ) calls this issue a ‘back - and - forth issue , ’ claims that the back - and - forth issue can be converted into a spatial problem under certain conditions , and veriﬁes the method by applying it to the function decomposition process in design . In some studies on design , such as GDT and the C – K Theory ( Braha and Reich 2003 ; Reich 1995 ; Shai et al . 2009 ) , the design process is deﬁned as a mapping between the function space and the attribute space . To effectively search for a design solution , it is necessary to determine an appropriate attri - bute space , in particular , to determine the classes ( subsets of entity concepts ) that are used to describe the attributes . However , when beginning the design process , the attribute space has not yet been determined , as it is impossible to evaluate what kind of attribute space is effective without searching for the design solution . Therefore , this is a back - and - forth issue . With regard to this issue , it is expected that the introduction of a metric into the design space and the ‘preservation of the similarity’ between the function space and attribute space afford an effective design solution search while this is imperfect in the usual way ( Taura and Yoshikawa 1992 ) . That is , if two concepts are close to each other in the attribute space , under the condition that the same concepts are close to each other in the function space , the design solution search may be successful ( Fig . 9 ) . This rule is valid only when the design solution is searched for using a neighborhood search method . These ﬁndings can be applied to the issue of how to select the base concepts . The method is to form a space to select the base concepts , so that the base concepts which are similar or dissimilar in the space where the base con - cepts are searched , are also similar or dissimilar in the space where a new concept , generated from the same base concepts , is evaluated . Regarding the process where a new concept is generated from base concepts , the following ﬁndings were obtained . 1 . In the case where the distance between the base concepts is high , the designed outcome with a high score for originality is obtained ( Taura et al . 2005 ) . 2 . In the case where the base concepts are ones from which many other concepts can be associated , the designed outcome with a high score for originality is obtained ( Nagai and Taura 2006a ) . By accumulating further ﬁndings , it is possible to form an appropriate space for selecting the high - potential base concepts so as to generate a new concept with higher originality . Fig . 9 Similarity conservation between two spaces Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 193 123 5 Relationship between the phases of concept generation and the types of concept generation As described above , an important part of property mapping ( ﬁrst - order concept generation ) is situated in the analysis of existing products . This consideration indicates that property mapping is closely tied to the problem - driven phase . Indeed , many cases of property mapping through problem analysis have been reported . For example , in the case of ‘snow tomato , ’ the new concept of ‘‘powdered ketchup’’ can be obtained by property mapping when the ‘‘powdered cheese’’ and ‘‘ketchup’’ are the base concepts ; this property mapping can be understood to be tied to the problem analysis : bottled ketchup is not easily handled . Moreover , the new concept of a ‘‘refrigerator that can humidify the food in it’’ can be obtained by property mapping when the ‘‘humidiﬁer’’ and ‘‘refrigerator’’ are the base concepts ; this property mapping can be understood to be tied to the problem analysis : a refrigerator dries up the food inside it . Furthermore , an interesting case was reported wherein a subject in an experimental study ana - lyzed a problem during a design task through the use of mapping . The idea of a structure that involves opening and shutting was inspired by the rotation of a garage door and mapped into part of a stationery design ( Ball and Chris - tensen 2009 ; Christensen and Schunn 2007 ) . In concept blending and concept integration in thematic relation ( high - order concept generation ) , the process of composing an assembly of elements ( properties , etc . ) is essential . This suggests that high - order concept generation involves the notion of ‘composing’ . There may be an uncountable number of composing processes for selecting the appropriate base concepts , extracting the properties from the base concept , combining the abstract concepts , and elaborating on a more speciﬁc new concept from the obtained abstract concept . To perform these composing processes appropriately , the designer’s inner sense seems to play an important role . If the new concept can be obtained only by analyzing the current situation , ﬁrst - order concept generation had better be used . A motivation for employing high - order concept generation may be derived from the designer’s wish to pursue a more innovative concept that is beyond the existing categories . These con - siderations indicate that high - order concept generation is closely related to the inner sense - driven phase , which involves the notion of ‘composing’ with the inner sense of a designer for pursuing an ideal , since extending beyond the existing categories is assumed to share a common notion with pursuing an ideal . From the above considerations , the relationships between the phases of concept generation and types of concept generation are summarized in Table 2 . However , this relationship is not identiﬁed exclusively . For example , even in ﬁrst - order concept generation , the inner sense - driven phase is included in it as its element since the property mapping cannot be completed by only analyzing the situation . For instance , in order to ﬁnd an appropriate base concept , a designer’s inner sense is thought also to play an important role . 6 Discussion 6 . 1 Relevance of the classiﬁcation of concept generation process We have conducted an experiment to investigate the creative features of concept generation in design ( Nagai and Taura 2009 ) . In the experiment , the subjects were requested to perform the following tasks : interpret a novel noun – noun phrase ( interpretation task ) , design a new idea from the same phrase ( design task ) . In the design task , two nouns were considered as the two base concepts , and the subjects were requested to give some words , which explained the newly designed ideas . Accordingly , the design task is considered to involve two phases : the concept generation phase in which concepts represented as some set of words are generated from the base con - cepts , and the implementation phase , in which the gen - erated concepts are implemented into more speciﬁed images with shapes . The new ideas designed by combin - ing the base concepts are illustrated in Figs . 10 and 11 . The new idea illustrated in Fig . 10 was obtained from ‘desk elevator’ ( ‘‘desk’’ and ‘‘elevator’’ ) and was descri - bed by a subject as ‘A table that can be modiﬁed by exchanging the top surface with the upper and lower levels . It is structured such that each level can have a different use : for dining , computer work , reading a book , and so on . This type of table is useful for those who would not like to use the same table for computer work and dining , for example , but who do not have sufﬁcient space for two tables’ ( this idea was judged as property Table 2 Relationship between the phases of concept generation , types of concept generation , and the recognition process Phases of concept generation Type of concept generation Recognition process Problem - driven phase Property mapping ( ﬁrst - order ) Similarity Inner sense - driven phase Concept blending and concept integration in thematic relation ( high - order ) Dissimilarity 194 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 123 mapping ) . In this idea , the words enumerated ( concepts generated ) by the subjects to explain the designed idea were ‘‘button , ’’ ‘‘ﬂat , ’’ ‘‘reading , ’’ ‘‘change , ’’ ‘‘level , ’’ ‘‘switch , ’’ ‘‘dining , ’’ ‘‘up and down , ’’ ‘‘lunch box , ’’ ‘‘interior design , ’’ and ‘‘personal computer . ’’ The new concept illustrated in Fig . 11 was obtained from ‘ship guitar’ ( ‘‘ship’’ and ‘‘guitar’’ ) and described by the subject as ‘A guitar that is played by a wave . The string of the guitar is plucked by the driving force of the boat and the waves of the water , resulting in a sound’ ( this idea was judged as concept blending ) . In this idea , the words enumerated ( concepts generated ) by the subjects were ‘‘leisure , ’’ ‘‘live broadcast , ’’ ‘‘reaction , ’’ ‘‘sport , ’’ ‘‘excit - ing , ’’ and ‘‘resonance . ’’ Fig . 10 Example of a newly generated concept through property mapping Fig . 11 Example of a newly generated concept through concept blending Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 195 123 We analyzed the concept generation by comparing it to the linguistic interpretation process , from the viewpoint of recognition types ( ‘commonality , ’ ‘alignable difference , ’ and ‘non - alignable difference’ ) . The results revealed that the main factors in concept generation are concept blending and ‘non - alignable dif - ference . ’ This result gives a certain relevance to the clas - siﬁcation of concept generation processes ( ﬁrst - order concept generation and high - order concept generation ) , because the characteristics of high - order concept genera - tion ( concept blending and the notion of dissimilarity ) are distinguished . 6 . 2 Meanings of high - order concept generation processes Although high - order concept generation has been consid - ered essential to concept generation , it is difﬁcult to detect it independently in conventional design activity . A reason for this is assumed to be that its strong point—its ability to generate a new concept that extends beyond the existing categories—is also its weak point in conventional design . Various ideas that extend beyond the existing categories can be obtained by concept blending or concept integration in thematic relation ; however , this method alone is not applicable to conventional design because we cannot pre - dict the category of the ideas to be obtained in advance . When we design a chair using a conventional design , the result of the design must be a chair . If this is the case , how is high - order concept generation expected to contribute to real - world design ? We would like to note the ﬁnding that the expansion of the thought space during the very early stage of design leads to a highly creative designed outcome ( Nagai and Taura 2006b ) . An important role of high - order concept generation is to expand the thought space on the basis of a designer’s inner sense , at the very early stage of the design process . This role is expected to contribute to the highly innovative design , which aims to create a highly innovative product extending beyond the existing category of products . This role is also expected to contribute to the conventional design in order to widen the designer’s viewpoints , so that the thought space is expanded at the very early stage of design even though the generated wide viewpoints are not directly related to the designed outcomes . 6 . 3 Reconsideration of GDT from the viewpoint of high - order concept generation processes In this section , we reconsider general design theory ( GDT ) from the viewpoint of high - order concept generation . The design theory , GDT ( Yoshikawa 1981 ) , aims to simulta - neously clarify the human ability to design in a scientiﬁc manner and to improve the production of practical knowledge of design methodologies . The theory’s foun - dation is based on mathematical topology . It adopts an axiomatic approach . As shown in Sect . 3 . 3 , the most essential axiom , axiom 3 , hypothesizes that design knowledge is a topology . However , these theoretical dis - cussions solely apply to ideal knowledge . The term , ideal knowledge , refers to a type of knowledge in which all elements of the entity set are known , and in which each element can be described by abstract concepts without ambiguity . Yoshikawa ( 1981 ) stated , ‘This is not the case for real knowledge that designers possess . ’ He proposed four models of real knowledge . Three of these models are based on the assumption that the function and attribute spaces are Euclidean . A mathematical equation can be used to describe the correspondence between these two spaces . The fourth model is based on the assumption that there exists a method that can be used to ﬁnd the directed series of points that will converge into the solutions . We focus on the fourth model because it can be difﬁcult to describe the function space in a Euclidean space at the very early stage of design . The fourth model is known as the Paradigm model . It can be explained in the following manner . Given speciﬁcation T ¼ T 1 \ T 2 \ T 3 . . . T n ; assume that a solution , s 1 , is proposed that satisﬁes s 1 2 T s 1 ð Þ ¼ T 1 \ T 2 \ . . . T k \ T k þ 1 \ T k þ 2 \ . . . T n : Here , T is a class ( subset of elements ) and s is an element in set theory . In this case , s 1 satisﬁes only a part of the speciﬁcation . Then , assume the next proposal , s 2 , is obtained by the synthesis of the two concepts : T ( s 1 ) and T K ? 1 . s 2 2 T s 2 ð Þ ¼ T 1 \ T 2 \ . . . T k \ T k þ 1 \ T k þ 2 \ . . . T n : This proposal also satisﬁes only a part of the speciﬁcation . However , it represents an improvement over s 1 . In this case , the move from s 1 to s 2 will satisfy the characteristics of a directed series of points . An example of the Paradigm model is shown in Fig . 12 . Here , a new animal that can run fast , peep , and swim fast can be designed by the synthesis of the body of a dog , the beak of a bird , and the webbed feet of a frog . Coherently , the movement shown in Fig . 12 can be modelled in set theory . See Fig . 13 for a graphic repre - sentation ( Taura and Yoshikawa 1992 ) . Figure 13 demonstrates that the Paradigm model graphically represents a process that can be used to ﬁnd the intersection of abstract concepts in set theory . Here , a question arises : Is the Paradigm model a process that involves ﬁrst - order concept generation or high - order concept generation ? Let us reexamine the example shown in Fig . 13 . In the ﬁrst step of this example , ‘‘dird’’ is obtained by combining ‘‘bird’’ that peeps and ‘‘dog’’ that 196 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 123 runs fast . This combination process can be considered a ﬁrst - order concept generation because the process involves property mapping . That is , a property of ‘‘peeps’’ is transferred to ‘‘dog’’ by the replacement of each animal’s head . The above discussion suggests that GDT does not involve high - order concept generation for real knowledge . Yet , GDT does have implications for ideal knowledge . Why does this occur ? We believe the essential reason lies in the deﬁnition of design . In GDT , the deﬁnition of ‘design’ states , ‘Designing is a mapping of a point in the function space onto a point in the attribute space’ ( Def . 13 ) . Further , the speciﬁcation described in the function space is considered an input to the design process . This view of design implies that GDT recognizes the design process as a problem - driven phase based on the framework discussed in Sect . 2 . Actually , in the example shown in Fig . 12 , the speciﬁcation of ‘a new animal that can run fast , peep , and swim fast’ is provided ; the difference between the speci - ﬁcation and the current solution serves as the ‘basis’ that Fig . 12 A graphic example of the Paradigm model Fig . 13 Paradigm model portrayed in set theory Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 197 123 can be used to improve the solution . This is nothing other than a ‘problem - solving process . ’ However , as noted above , GDT implies the notion of ‘dissimilarity’ that may potentially explain real design knowledge from the viewpoint of high - order concept generation . Further discussion and extension would help establish a mathematically rigorous theory for high - order concept generation . 7 Conclusions In this paper , we attempted to clarify—systematically and theoretically—the ‘very’ early stage of design , which is called concept generation . As a result , it was found that the concept generation can be categorized into two types : ﬁrst - order concept genera - tion and high - order concept generation : ﬁrst - order concept generation comprises property mapping and high - order concept generation comprises concept blending and con - cept integrating in thematic relation . Furthermore , it was shown that high - order concept generation is related to the inner sense - driven phase , whereas ﬁrst - order concept generation is related to the problem - driven phase . References Amabile TM ( 1996 ) Creativity in context : update to the social psychology of creativity . Westview Press , New York Archer LB ( 1984 ) Systematic method for designers . In : Cross N ( ed ) Developments in design methodology . Wiley , Chichester , UK , pp 57 – 82 Ball LJ , Christensen BT ( 2009 ) Analogical reasoning and mental simulation in design—two strategies linked to uncertainty resolution . Des Stud 30 : 169 – 186 Black M ( 1979 ) More about metaphor . In : Ortony A ( ed ) Metaphor and thought . Cambridge University Press , New York Boden MA ( 1998 ) Creativity and artiﬁcial intelligence . Artif Intell 103 ( 1 – 2 ) : 347 – 356 Braha D , Reich Y ( 2003 ) Topological structures for modeling engineering design processes . Res Eng Des 14 ( 4 ) : 185 – 199 Brinkkemper S ( 1996 ) Method engineering : engineering of informa - tion systems development methods and tools . Inf Softw Tech 38 ( 4 ) : 275 – 280 Bucciarelli LL ( 2002 ) Between thought and object in engineering design . Des Stud 23 ( 3 ) : 219 – 231 Christensen BT , Schunn CD ( 2007 ) The relationship of analogical distance to analogical function and pre - inventive structure : the case of engineering design . Mem Cognit 35 ( 1 ) : 29 – 38 Coyne RD , Rosenman MA , Radford AD , Gero JS ( 1987 ) Innovation and creativity in knowledge - based CAD . In : Gero JS ( ed ) Expert systems in computer - aided design . North - Holland , Amsterdam , pp 435 – 465 D’Souza NS ( 2010 ) The metaphor of an ensemble : design creativity as skill integration . Design Creativity 2010 . Springer , London , pp 281 – 289 de Bono E ( 1999 ) Six thinking hats . Back bay books by little . Brown and Co . , New York de Bono E ( 2009 ) Lateral thinking : a textbook of creativity . Penguin Books , London , UK Dorst K , Cross N ( 2001 ) Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of problem – solution . Des Stud 22 ( 5 ) : 425 – 437 Fauconnier G ( 1994 ) Mental spaces . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK Fauconnier G , Turner M ( 2002 ) The way we think . Basic Books , New York Finke RA , Ward TB , Smith SM ( 1992 ) Creative cognition . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA Goldschmidt G ( 2001 ) Visual analogy—a strategy for design reasoning and learning . In : Eastman C , Newstetter W , McCrac - ken M ( eds ) Design knowing and learning : cognition in design education . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp 199 – 220 Goldschmidt G , Litan Sever A ( 2011 ) Inspiring design ideas with texts . Des Stud 32 ( 2 ) : 139 – 155 Gordon WJJ ( 1961 ) Synectics . Harper & Row , New York Hatchuel A , Weil B ( 2009 ) C - K design theory : an advanced formulation . Res Eng Des 19 ( 4 ) : 181 – 192 Hatchuel A , Le Masson P , Weil B ( 2004 ) C - K theory in practice : lessons from industrial applications . In : Marjanovic D ( ed ) Proceedings of the 8th international design conference DESIGN 2004 . Dubrovnik , Croatia , pp 245 – 257 Hey J , Linsey J , Agogino AM , Wood KL ( 2008 ) Analogies and metaphors in creative design . Int J Eng 24 ( 2 ) : 283 – 294 Hofstadter D ( 1993 ) How could a copycat ever be creative ? AAAI Tech Rep SS 93 ( 1 ) : 1 – 10 Hofstadter D ( 1995 ) Fluid concepts and creative analogies : computer models of the fundamental mechanisms of thought . Basic Books , New York Hofstadter D ( 2001 ) Analogy as the core of cognition . In : Gentner D , Holyoak K , Kokinov B ( eds ) The analogical mind : perspectives from cognitive science . The MIT Press / Bradford Book , Cam - bridge , MA , pp 499 – 538 Holyoak KJ , Thagard R ( 1995 ) Mental leaps : analogy in creative thought . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA Howard T , Dekoninck EA , Culley J ( 2010 ) The use of creative stimuli at early stages of industrial product innovation . Res Eng Des 21 ( 4 ) : 263 – 274 Indurkhya B ( 2006 ) Emergent representations , interaction theory and the cognitive force of metaphor . New Ideas Psychol 24 : 133 – 162 Indurkhya B ( 2007 ) Rationality and reasoning with metaphors . New Ideas Psychol 25 : 16 – 36 Ito M ( 1997 ) Tacit knowledge and knowledge emergence . In : Taura T , Koyama T , Ito M ( eds ) , Yoshikawa H ( supervising ed ) The nature of technological knowledge . Tokyo University Press , Tokyo , pp 113 – 134 ( in Japanese ) Jones JC ( 1970 ) Design methods : seeds of human futures . Wiley , London Jones JC ( 1984 ) A method of systematic design . In : Cross N ( ed ) Developments in design methodology . Wiley , New York , pp 9 – 31 Kroll E , Condoor S , Jansson DG ( 2001 ) Innovative conceptual design : theory and application of parameter analysis . Cambridge University Press , UK Lakoff J , Johnson M ( 1980 ) Metaphors we live . University of Chicago Press , Chicago Liberman N ( 2003 ) Motivation . In : Nadel L ( ed ) Encyclopedia of cognitive science 3 . Nature Publishing Group , London , pp 103 – 111 Luckman J ( 1984 ) An approach to the management of design . Developments in design methodology . Wiley , London Mafﬁn D ( 1998 ) Engineering design models : context , theory and practice . J Eng Des 9 ( 4 ) : 315 – 327 198 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 123 March L ( 1984 ) The logic of design . In : Cross N ( ed ) Developments in design methodology . Wiley , New York , pp 265 – 276 Markman AB , Wisniewski EJ ( 1997 ) Similar and different : the differentiation of basic - level categories . J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cognit 35 : 54 – 70 Nagai Y , Taura T ( 2006a ) Role of action concepts in creative design process . In : Kim YS ( ed ) Proceedings of international design research symposium . Seoul , South Korea , pp 257 – 267 Nagai Y , Taura T ( 2006b ) Formal description of concept - synthesizing process for creative design . In : Gero JS ( ed ) Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on design computing and cognition . Springer , Berlin , pp 443 – 460 Nagai Y , Taura T ( 2009 ) Concept blending and dissimilarity : factors for creative concept generation process . Des Stud 30 ( 6 ) : 648 – 675 Ohiwa H , Kawai K , Koyama M ( 1990 ) Idea processor and the KJ method . J Inf Process 13 ( 1 ) : 44 – 48 Osborn AF ( 1957 ) Applied imagination : principles and procedures of creative problem solving . Charles Scribner’s Sons , New York Pahl G , Beitz W ( 1984 ) Engineering design—a systematic approach . Springer , London Polanyi M ( 1966 ) The tacit dimension . Routledge & Kegan Paul , London Pugh S ( 1991 ) Total design : integrated methods for successful product engineering . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA Reich Y ( 1995 ) A critical review of general design theory . Res Eng Des 7 ( 1 ) : 1 – 18 Rothenberg A ( 1979 ) The emerging goddess : the creative process in art , science , and other ﬁelds . University of Chicago Press , Chicago Ryan R , Deci E ( 2000 ) Self - determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation , social development , and well - being . J Am Psychol 55 ( 1 ) : 68 – 78 Sakaguchi S , Tsumaya A , Yamamoto E , Taura T ( 2011 ) A method for selecting base functions for function blending in order to design functions . In : Proceedings of 18th international conference on engineering design , vol 2 . Copenhagen , pp 73 – 86 Scho¨n DA ( 1983 ) The reﬂective practitioner : how professionals think in action . Temple Smith , London Scho¨n DA ( 1987 ) Educating the reﬂective practitioner : toward a new design for teaching and learning in the professions . Jossey - Bass , San Francisco , CA Scupin R ( 1997 ) The KJ method : a technique for analyzing data derived from Japanese ethnology . Hum Organ 56 ( 2 ) : 233 – 237 Shai O , Reich Y , Hatchuel A , Subrahmanian E ( 2009 ) Creativity theories and scientiﬁc discovery : a study of C – K theory and infused design . In : Proceedings of international conference on engineering design . Stanford , CA Shoben EJ , Gagne CL ( 1997 ) Thematic relation and the creation of combined concepts . In : Ward TB , Smith SM , Vaid J ( eds ) Creative thought . American Psychological Association , Wash - ington , DC , pp 31 – 50 Sternberg RJ , Lubert TI ( 1999 ) Handbook of creativity . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK Suh NP ( 1990 ) The principles of design . Oxford University Press , New York Taura T ( 2008 ) A solution to the back and forth problem in the design space forming process—a method to convert time issue to space issue . Artifact 2 ( 1 ) : 27 – 35 Taura T , Nagai Y ( 2010 ) Concept generation and creativity in design . Cogn Stud Bull Japanese Cogn Sci Soc 17 ( 1 ) : 66 – 82 ( in Japanese ) Taura T , Nagai Y ( 2012 ) Concept generation for design creativity—a systematized theory and methodology . Springer , London Taura T , Yoshikawa H ( 1992 ) A metric space for intelligent CAD . Intelligent computer aided design . In : Proceedings of the IFIP WG5 . 2 working conference on intelligent CAD 91 . North - Holland , Amsterdam , pp 133 – 157 Taura T , Nagai Y , Tanaka S ( 2005 ) Design space blending—a key for creative design . In : Proceeding of the 15th international confer - ence on engineering design ICED 05 . Melbourne , Australia , on CD - ROM Tomiyama T , Yoshikawa H ( 1987 ) Extended general design theory . In : Yoshikawa H , Warman E ( eds ) Design theory for CAD . North - Holland , Amsterdam , pp 95 – 130 Turbayne CM ( 1962 ) The myth of metaphor . Yale University Press , New Haven Vidal R , Mulet E , Go´mez - Senent E ( 2004 ) Effectiveness of the means of expression in creative problem - solving in design groups . J Eng Des 15 : 285 – 298 Wang HH , Chan JH ( 2010 ) An approach to measuring metaphoricity of creative design . Design creativity 2010 . Springer , London , pp 89 – 97 Ward TM , Smith SM , Vaid J ( 1997 ) Creative thought : an investiga - tion of conceptual structures and processes . APA , Washington Wilkenfeld MJ , Ward TB ( 2001 ) Similarity and emergence in conceptual combination . J Mem Lang 45 ( 1 ) : 21 – 38 Yang MC ( 2009 ) Observations on concept generation and sketching in engineering design . Res Eng Des 20 ( 1 ) : 1 – 11 Yoshikawa H ( 1981 ) General design theory and a CAD system . In : Sata T , Warman E ( eds ) Proceedings of the IFIP WG5 . 2 – 5 . 3 Working conference on man - machine communication in CAD / CAM . North - Holland , Amsterdam , pp 35 – 57 Res Eng Design ( 2013 ) 24 : 185 – 199 199 123