Nanomechanics of vimentin intermediate ﬁlament networks Sarah K € oster , ab Yi - Chia Lin , b Harald Herrmann c and David A . Weitz * b Received 6th January 2010 , Accepted 25th February 2010 First published as an Advance Article on the web 11th March 2010 DOI : 10 . 1039 / c000113a Intermediate ﬁlaments are one of three classes of ﬁbrous proteins in the cytoskeleton of eukaryotes , the others being actin ﬁlaments and microtubules . The dense ﬁlamentous networks and bundles provide important mechanical stability for the cell . Here we directly measure both the structure and mechanical properties of an in vitro model system for intermediate ﬁlaments reconstituted from puriﬁed vimentin protein at 1 mg mL ! 1 . We show that the mesh size is on the order of 1 m m , a value that is preserved upon addition of divalent ions . These ions act as effective cross - linkers , further stiffening the network . Introduction The physical properties and mechanics of animal cells are controlled mainly by three types of ﬁlament systems : actin ﬁlaments , microtubules and intermediate ﬁlaments ( IFs ) . In addition , numerous associated binding proteins are essential , particularly for the actin networks . Moreover , both actin ﬁla - ments and microtubules serve as tracks for molecular motors , which help to determine the structure and mechanical properties of cells . Actins and tubulins , the constituents of actin ﬁlaments and microtubules , respectively , are globular proteins , and they are highly conserved in eukaryotic cells . In contrast , IF proteins are ﬁbrous polypeptides coded for by a large gene family , whose members exhibit relatively little primary sequence identity but a distinctly conserved structural plan . Notably , even within the same organism different cell types express different types and amounts of the respective proteins . 1 One of the most abundant IF proteins is vimentin , which is found in cells of mesenchymal origin such as ﬁbroblasts , endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells . In these cells , vimentin forms cytoplasmic networks that are believed to contribute to the mechanical stability of the cell . 2 The physical attributes of cells are inﬂuenced by numerous compo - nents and parameters ; thus investigation of puriﬁed in vitro networks is a valuable tool for a better understanding of the material properties of biopolymer networks in living cells . 3 – 6 Bulk studies employing tensile tests 7 and bulk rheology 8 show a Young’s modulus of 7 MPa . The network stiffness increases considerably upon addition of divalent ions such as magnesium ( Mg 2 + ) , calcium ( Ca 2 + ) and zinc ( Zn 2 + ) ; similar behavior is found upon addition of trivalent and tetravalent ions . Interestingly , these rheological studies suggest that multivalent ions act as effective cross - linkers by analogy to actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) in actin networks . 8 The persistence length and the Young’s modulus of vimentin ﬁlaments and the mesh size of vimentin networks have been determined from bulk rheological measurements by ﬁtting the data to a model that assumes an entropic origin of the elasticity . However , the microscale structure may sensitively inﬂuence local mechanical properties and it is therefore important to directly probe both structure and rheology on the length scale of the expected mesh size . Unfortunately , a direct measurement of the microstructure of vimentin networks as well as its dependence on ion concentration and cross - linking is still largely missing . Such measurements would complement the bulk studies and conﬁrm the validity of their interpretation in determining the micro - mechanical properties of biopolymer networks . Moreover investigations on all levels would provide a complete picture of the structure , dynamics , and mechanics of cytoskeletal protein networks . Here we directly probe the mesh size and heterogeneity of reconstituted vimentin networks by monitoring the thermal motion of microspheres with diameters on the order of the mesh size . In addition , we use larger probe particles to measure the rheological properties , using microrheology . Our results are in very good agreement with recent bulk rheology measurements . Furthermore , our data provide direct evidence that Mg 2 + ions at low concentration act as effective cross - linkers in the network , with little change in network structure . Moreover , the measured mesh size is in good agreement with theoretical expectations based on a geometric estimate of the networks structure and bulk measurements of the modulus . Results and discussion Measuring the thermally induced motion of probe particles within the IF network provides two different classes of infor - mation , probing both the structure and the mechanics of the network . Depending on the ratio of mesh size of the protein network and the diameter of the microspheres , the microspheres can either move within the network or are immobilized and trapped . The particles that move within the network provide a measure of the mesh size and heterogeneity of the network structure , while particles that remain locally trapped provide a measure of the rheological properties of the network . We therefore choose microspheres whose sizes span the expected range of the mesh size . Assuming a simple ‘‘cubic’’ model for the network , the mesh size , x , in micrometres can be calculated 9 a Courant Research Centre Nano - Spectroscopy and X - Ray Imaging , University of G € ottingen , Friedrich - Hund - Platz 1 , 37077 G € ottingen , Germany b Department of Physics and School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA , 02138 , USA . E - mail : weitz @ seas . harvard . edu c German Cancer Research Center ( DKFZ ) , B065 , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280 , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany 1910 | Soft Matter , 2010 , 6 , 1910 – 1914 This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 PAPER www . rsc . org / softmatter | Soft Matter from the molecular weight ( M w ¼ 53 kDa ) , the concentration ( c ¼ 1 mg mL ! 1 ) of vimentin , and the number of ( 32 ) monomers per unit length ﬁlament ( ULF , # 45 nm ) : x ¼ 0 . 45 $ c ! 1 / 2 ¼ 0 . 45 m m ( 1 ) We therefore record x – y tracks of individual microspheres with diameters d ¼ 0 . 5 , 1 , and 2 m m , and show representative examples in Fig . 1 . The ﬁrst set of experiments is performed with pure vimentin networks and no additional ions ( Fig . 1a ) . In this case , we ﬁnd that the largest microspheres ( d ¼ 2 m m , black ) are indeed trapped in the network and can only move within a restricted microenvironment . By contrast , the smaller micro - spheres ( d ¼ 1 m m , red , and d ¼ 0 . 5 m m , blue ) show a strikingly different behavior : some of them are still constrained and move within the conﬁning mesh of the network ( right hand side of Fig . 1a ) . Others , however , move in one distinct microenviron - ment but eventually jump to another , where they continue their motion . From this behavior we conclude that the microspheres are small enough to slip through the entangled ﬁlaments that form the network and probe separate microenvironments . Similar behavior is observed for entangled actin networks . 10 To further study the behavior of the microspheres in entangled vimentin networks , we plot the averaged mean - squared displacements ( MSDs ) for each set of microspheres in Fig . 1c . Each curve shown represents an average of up to thousands of individual datasets , where several trajectories may belong to each microsphere in the ﬁeld of view . Only tracks that are at least ten steps long are included in the averaging . We used two different frequencies to record the data , 1000 Hz and 20 Hz , and calcu - lated the MSDs for each set . The data match together quite well without any scaling , as shown in Fig . 1 . The dashed and dotted lines in Fig . 1c show the one - dimensional MSDs for micro - spheres in buffer , performed as a control experiment . From the slope of the data from these control experiments the diffusion constant D can be determined : D x ( s ) 2 ¼ 2 D s ( 2 ) Here , s is the lag time between two data points and x is the corresponding particle position . We ﬁnd the values for D to be consistent with the Stokes – Einstein equation assuming the viscosity of the buffer to be h water ¼ 1 mPa s : h ¼ k B T 3 p Dd ( 3 ) where d is the diameter of the sphere , k B is Boltzman’s constant and T is the temperature . The microscopy images of the 2 m m diameter beads are not as clear as those of the smaller beads , making the particle tracking less precise and leading to an increased noise ﬂoor . This effect is clearly seen in the data for the 2 m m diameter beads in buffer at lowest frequencies , where the data saturate at about 10 ! 2 m m 2 , as shown by the dotted black line in Fig . 1c . The data for the microspheres in aqueous buffer exhibit diffusive Brownian motion as described by eqn ( 2 ) . By contrast , the MSDs of microspheres in entangled vimentin networks ( solid lines and open circles in Fig . 1c ) exhibit subdiffusive behavior : D x ( s ) 2 ¼ 2 D s b ( 4 ) with b < 1 . In the case of entangled actin networks such a diffu - sive exponent less than one can result from the power - law distribution of times between the jumps of the microspheres between different microenvironments . 10 Given the apparent jumps in the individual tracks ( Fig . 1a ) it is very likely that the subdiffusive MSDs shown here result from a similar effect . For actin networks , numerous speciﬁc cross - linkers , or actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) exist and their inﬂuence on network mechanics has been studied extensively . By contrast , only few such cross - linkers have been identiﬁed for IFs . It thus remains an open question how cellular IF networks can provide such remarkable strength and stability . Recently , results of bulk rheology studies have suggested that divalent ions such as Mg 2 + act as effective cross - linkers in networks of vimentin and neu - roﬁlaments . 8 To directly test this ﬁnding on a microscopic level , we perform a set of experiments with the same microsphere sizes but with 2 mM MgCl 2 added to the protein solution during assembly . In this case , the molar ratio of Mg 2 + ions and vimentin monomers is R ¼ c Mg / c ¼ 105 . This value sets the distance between cross - links . By analogy to Fig . 1a , we show represen - tative y ( x ) tracks in vimentin networks with Mg 2 + added in Fig . 1b . The concentration of Mg 2 + used here is much lower than Fig . 1 ( a ) Individual y – x tracks for microspheres in vimentin , with diameters of 0 . 5 m m ( top , blue ) , 1 m m ( center , red ) , 2 m m ( bottom , black ) . The smaller microspheres ‘‘jump’’ between different microenvironments while the largest microspheres are caged in the network . ( b ) Individual tracks for microspheres in vimentin with 2 mM Mg 2 + ( color code as in ( a ) ) . Only the smallest microspheres show considerable movement in the network while the 1 and 2 m m diameter microspheres are caged and move very little . ( c ) Mean - squared displacement of microspheres ( color code as in ( a ) ) in buffer ( dashed and dotted lines ) and in entangled vimentin ( 1 mg mL ! 1 ) networks ( solid lines and open circles ) . In vimentin networks the microspheres show sub - diffusive behavior . ( d ) Mean - squared displacement of microspheres color code as in ( a ) in buffer ( dashed and dotted lines ) and in cross - linked vimentin ( 1 mg mL ! 1 protein with 2 mM Mg 2 + , R ¼ 105 ) networks ( solid lines and open circles ) . This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 Soft Matter , 2010 , 6 , 1910 – 1914 | 1911 concentrations commonly used for counter ion condensation of negatively charged biopolymers . For example , actin shows distinct bundling upon addition of about 80 mM Ca 2 + . 11 The smallest microspheres , with diameter 0 . 5 m m , show the same movement whether or not there is Mg 2 + present , including the jumps between microenvironments . This is also apparent in the corresponding MSD ( blue solid line and open circles in Fig . 1d ) . By contrast , however , the larger microspheres ( 1 and 2 m m diameter ) do not show any jumps between microenvironments and appear to be more highly trapped and thus conﬁned within the networks with added Mg 2 + than in entangled networks as it is apparent in the much smaller volumes they explore during the total time they are recorded . This is reﬂected by the plateau reached by their MSDs for larger s , shown in Fig . 1d . From these plateau values of the 1 and 2 m m diameter beads , the elastic modulus can be estimated : G 0 z 2 k B T d h D x 2 i ( 5 ) We obtain a value of about 0 . 7 Pa from the 1 m m diameter beads , which is in good agreement with the results from bulk rheology measurements . The 2 m m diameter beads are more constraint by the network ; however , the data for them are obscured by the noise ﬂoor . Smaller beads are not suitable for measuring the rheology of the vimentin network , since they are not trapped by the mesh of the network and therefore do not probe the elastic properties of the material . The same holds true for the beads which are embedded in entangled vimentin networks and small enough to slip through the ﬁlaments . Instead , we can estimate the mesh size of the network from the motion of these particles . In Fig . 1d we see that in the networks with added Mg 2 + the 0 . 5 m m beads are not trapped in the mesh work as they do not reach a plateau level even for large lag times s . In the networks without Mg 2 + ( see Fig . 1c ) only the largest beads are weakly trapped and we can use the MSD curves of the 0 . 5 and 1 m m diameter beads to estimate the mesh size . By adding the square root of the MSD to the microsphere diameter we obtain values between 1 . 2 and 1 . 5 m m ; these values very likely represent upper bounds as the beads are most probably trapped in the largest pore spaces . Thus , given the uncertainty of these measurements , these estimates are in reasonable agreement with the calculated value of 0 . 45 m m and the value of 0 . 175 m m to 0 . 6 m m determined from bulk rheology measurements . 8 , 12 Bulk rheology data 8 suggest that the elasticity of IF networks is very similar to that of actin networks , with the Mg 2 + ions acting in the same way as do rigid cross - linking actin - binding proteins such as scruin . 13 Such networks are well described by an entropic spring model which assumes that thermal ﬂuctuations of indi - vidual ﬁlaments are pulled out upon application of an external shear . 8 An important assumption of this model is that the network deformation is afﬁne . To conﬁrm this , we probe microscopic deformation by directly imaging the microscale strain ﬁeld of sheared networks and measure the resulting degree of non - afﬁnity . We form a network in a shear cell , apply strain , and then image ﬂuorescent , 2 m m diameter particles embedded in the network . These particles are large enough to ensure that they are trapped within the network , and allow us to probe the non - afﬁnity of the network at length scales down to roughly their size . We probe networks with vimentin concentrations of 3 and 4 mg mL ! 1 without Mg 2 + and with added Mg 2 + at a molar ration of R ¼ 134 . We use a higher vimentin concentration for these experiments than for the microrheology study , because the particles are not completely trapped in 1 mg mL ! 1 networks as determined from the data shown in Fig . 1 . By increasing the vimentin concentration we ensure that the microspheres are completely trapped ; thus , the deviation of the actual particle position from that expected for an afﬁne deformation is larger than the noise level . We track positions of particles y at height z at each applied strain g . The particle displacement in the shear direction D y is linear with height z ( data not shown ) . The degree of non - afﬁnity is deﬁned as N ( r ) ¼ h r 2 D q 2 i / g 2 , where we average over all pairs of particles separated by r , g is the applied strain and r D q corresponds to the deviation of the separation from the strictly afﬁne motion . 14 , 15 We ﬁnd that the value of N ( r , g ) ranges between 10 ! 2 and 10 which is similar to values observed for actin networks cross - linked by scruin ; this suggests that the strain in vimentin networks is predominantly afﬁne at these concentra - tions , just as it is for actin networks . 14 In addition , the overall behavior is similar to that observed for actin networks cross - linked with scruin . In both cases we observe a weak increase of N with r , as seen in Fig . 2a for the vimentin networks . The increase is described by N ( r ) ¼ r a , a < 2 , again by analogy with the actin data this suggests that the network is rather ﬂexible . 14 Moreover , N is nearly independent of the applied strain at a ﬁxed r , as seen in Fig . 2b . Here , this is expected for small strains , 15 since the deviation of each particle from its ideal displacement under a uniform shear is itself proportional to the strain . Inter - estingly , we observe such strain - independence of N ( r ) for strains up to # 1 . 3 . We observe that the network deformation becomes more afﬁne at higher c and slightly more afﬁne at higher R , as indicated by the decrease in N ; this is analogous to the behavior of actin networks cross - linked by scruin . 14 These observations add further evidence to support our assumption that the elasticity of vimentin networks is due to afﬁne stretching of the ﬁlaments . Fig . 2 Shear deformation of vimentin networks is afﬁne . ( a ) Degree of non - afﬁnity , N , plotted against the distance r between the particles at a ﬁxed strain g . ( b ) N plotted against the strain g at a ﬁxed distance r between the particles . Legends : c denotes the concentration of vimentin in mg mL ! 1 , R denotes the molar ratio of Mg 2 + ions and vimentin monomers . 1912 | Soft Matter , 2010 , 6 , 1910 – 1914 This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 In addition to analyzing the averaged MSDs we investigate the heterogeneity of the vimentin networks by studying the distri - bution of the MSDs of individual microspheres . A typical example is shown in Fig . 3a for 1 m m diameter microspheres in an entangled network without added Mg 2 + . The thick solid line shows the averaged MSD as plotted in Fig . 1c . We evaluate all sufﬁciently long MSDs for individual particles at a lag time of 10 s and normalize these values by the number of individual measurements and by the mean value at s ¼ 10 s , to allow us to compare the results . Histograms are shown in Fig . 3b for parti - cles in buffer , in Fig . 3c for an entangled vimentin network and in Fig . 3d for a vimentin network cross - linked with the addition of 2 mM Mg 2 + . The statistical spread in the data for particles in buffer is larger than that for particles in the vimentin networks . This implies that the network structure is rather homogeneous . Furthermore , the distributions of the MSDs in vimentin networks with and without Mg 2 + are virtually the same , con - ﬁrming that the addition of Mg 2 + during assembly of vimentin into ﬁlaments and networks does not affect the assembly process itself , but instead only cross - links the network . This has also been conﬁrmed by electron microscopy images ( not shown ) . Interestingly , cross - linked actin networks are rather homoge - neous at relatively high values of R but become more heteroge - neous as R is decreased . 16 The behavior of vimentin networks at even lower values of R has not yet been investigated . Experimental Human vimentin protein is expressed in Escherichia coli ( E . coli ) bacteria and puriﬁed from inclusion bodies . 17 The protein is stored at ! 80 % C in 8 M urea , 5 mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM DTT , and 10 mM methyl ammonium chloride ( MAC ) . The purity of the protein is veriﬁed by SDS - page electrophoresis . Before use in the experiments , the protein is dialyzed , using membranes of 50 kDa cut - off , into 5 mM Tris ( pH 8 . 4 ) , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , and 1 mM DTT ( dialysis buffer ) in a stepwise manner ( 6 , 4 , and 2 M urea ) . The protein concentration is determined by a Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) as a standard . Microspheres ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) with diameters 0 . 5 , 1 , and 2 m m are coated with PLL ( 20 ) - g [ 3 . 5 ] - PEG ( 2 ) ( SuSos , Zurich , Switzerland ) to prevent adsorption of the IF proteins . We test the success of the coating of the microspheres by embedding them in assembled ﬁbrin networks , which has a strong propensity for adsorption . Microspheres that are still motile are considered to be well coated . As an additional test , we add ﬂuorescent BSA to the coated microspheres and verify that no protein adsorbs . A drift - free sample chamber is assembled using microscope cover slips as bottom and top , with a silicone gasket spacer having a diameter of 9 mm and a depth of 0 . 5 mm ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . The cell is sealed with high - viscosity vacuum grease . The protein solution is mixed with assembly buffer ( 10 $ buffer : 200 mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 0 ) and 1 . 6 M NaCl ) , dialysis buffer , microspheres ( 0 . 5 , 1 , or 2 m m diameter , Invi - trogen ) , and , when needed , MgCl 2 $ 6H 2 O to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mg mL ! 1 vimentin , 1 $ assembly buffer , and 2 mM Mg 2 + ( R ¼ 105 ) , when needed . The microsphere concentration is adjusted to ensure that they do not inﬂuence one another’s motion . We pipette 40 m L of this solution into the sample chamber , seal with vacuum grease , and place it on the micro - scope , where it is equilibrated for 1 h before the measurements are started . For each microsphere size , a control measurement in buffer with no protein present is performed prior to measure - ments in the protein networks . For the non - afﬁnity measurements under shear , vimentin networks at 3 and 4 mg mL ! 1 are assembled in a similar manner . Images ( 576 $ 576 pixels ) are recorded with an inverted microscope ( Leica , Wetzlar , Germany ) equipped with a 40 $ and a 63 $ objective , both with long working distances . The frame rates are 1000 Hz and 20 Hz . We focus on the mid - plane of the sample chamber to avoid wall effects . Fluorescence images are recorded with a confocal microscope ( Zeiss LSM 510 , Jena , Germany ) equipped with a 60 $ water immersion objective at 488 nm laser excitation . Data analysis is performed using IDL and Matlab code to track the individual microspheres and calculate the mean - squared displacements ( MSDs ) and the y ( x ) values . In brief , the images are inverted to obtain bright microspheres on a dark background and are band - passed to reduce pixel noise and long - wavelength image variations . The particle positions are deter - mined ﬁrst to pixel accuracy and then to sub - pixel accuracy . The MSDs of individual particles are calculated and then averaged . Care is taken to avoid drift in the data ; in cases of obvious drift , the steady motion is removed in the analysis . Conclusions We study the structure and mechanical properties of vimentin IF networks using microspheres of different diameters . We measure their thermal motion and calculate their average MSD . By using bead sizes smaller than the mesh size of the network , we probe the average mesh size . By using bead sizes larger than the mesh Fig . 3 ( a ) Individual MSDs for microspheres in vimentin networks ( shown here for 1 m m microspheres in entangled network ) ; ( b – d ) distri - bution of the MSD at 10 s for ( b ) microspheres in buffer , ( c ) microspheres in entangled vimentin network and ( d ) microspheres in cross - linked vimentin network . This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 Soft Matter , 2010 , 6 , 1910 – 1914 | 1913 size , we determine the network viscoelastic modulus . In addition , we subject the networks to an external shear strain and measure the degree of non - afﬁnity of the deformation . We ﬁnd that the microspheres in the networks with no added Mg 2 + continue to move , albeit with subdiffusive motion as compared to microspheres in buffer . When comparing MSDs of individual microspheres we observe some spread in the ampli - tudes but no change in the overall behavior for the individual microspheres . Similar to entangled actin networks , the sub - diffusive motion may have its origin in jumping of the micro - spheres between adjacent microenvironments . When Mg 2 + is added , microspheres with a diameter $ 1 m m are fully trapped . Addition of Mg 2 + ions leads to cross - linking of vimentin networks , 8 consistent with these observations . By contrast , beads with a diameter of 0 . 5 m m move subdiffusively similar to those in networks formed without Mg 2 + . We use the motion of these beads , and the trapping of the larger beads to directly estimate the mesh size on the network . The mesh size so determined is # 1 m m , which is in reasonable agreement with estimates based on the concentration of vimentin assuming a cubic lattice model , and to estimates based on the elasticity of the network as determined from bulk rheology data . 8 Interestingly , the cross - linking process does not change the structure of the network nor does the addition of divalent cations interfere with ﬁlament assembly and network formation . However , addition of Mg 2 + at concentrations much lower than that needed for non - speciﬁc bundling by divalent cations leads to cross - linking of the vimentin networks in a manner similar to the cross - linking of actin networks by ABPs such as scruin or HMM . Acknowledgements The IDL code used in this study was written by John Cocker , David Grier and Eric Weeks ( for download see http : / / www . physics . emory . edu / # weeks / idl / ) . We would like to thank Norbert M € ucke , Tatjana Wedig , Louise Jawerth , Karen Kasza , Eliza Morris and Johannes Sutter for fruitful discussions and technical assistance . SK was supported by grants from the DFG , within the framework of the Excellence Initiative , the SFB 755 and KO 3572 / 1 ; HH was funded by DFG grants HE 1853 . This work was supported by the NSF ( DMR - 0602684 and DBI - 0649865 ) , the Harvard MRSEC ( DMR - 0820484 ) . Notes and references 1 H . Herrmann and U . Aebi , Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 2004 , 73 , 749 . 2 H . Herrmann , S . V . Strelkov , P . Burkhard and U . Aebi , J . Clin . Invest . , 2009 , 119 , 1772 . 3 C . Storm , J . J . Pastore , F . C . MacKintosh , T . C . Lubensky and P . A . Janmey , Nature , 2005 , 435 , 191 . 4 O . Lieleg , M . M . A . E . Claessens , C . Heussinger , E . Frey and A . R . Bausch , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 2007 , 99 , 088102 . 5 B . Schnurr , F . Gittes , F . C . MacKintosh and C . F . Schmidt , Macromolecules , 1997 , 30 , 7781 . 6 M . Schopferer , H . B € ar , B . Hochstein , S . Sharma , N . M € ucke , H . Herrmann and N . Willenbacher , J . Mol . Biol . , 2009 , 388 , 133 . 7 D . S . Fudge , K . H . Gardner , V . T . Forsyth , C . Riekel and J . M . Gosline , Biophys . J . , 2003 , 85 , 2015 . 8 Y . - C . Lin , N . Y . Yao , C . P . Broedersz , H . Herrmann , F . C . MacKintosh and D . A . Weitz , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 2010 , 104 , 058101 . 9 C . F . Schmidt , M . Baermann , G . Isenberg and E . Sackmann , Macromolecules , 1989 , 22 , 3638 . 10 I . Y . Wong , M . L . Gardel , D . R . Reichman , E . R . Weeks , M . T . Valentine , A . R . Bausch and D . A . Weitz , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 2004 , 92 , 178101 . 11 G . C . L . Wong , A . Lin , J . - X . Tang , Y . Li , P . A . Janmey and C . R . Saﬁnya , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 2003 , 91 , 018103 . 12 M . Schopferer , H . B € ar , B . Hochstein , S . Sharma , N . M € ucke , H . Herrmann and N . Willenbacher , J . Mol . Biol . , 2009 , 388 , 133 . 13 M . L . Gardel , J . H . Shin , F . C . MacKintosh , L . Mahadevan , P . Matsudaira and D . A . Weitz , Science , 2004 , 304 , 1301 . 14 J . Liu , G . H . Koenderink , K . E . Kasza , F . C . MacKintosh and D . A . Weitz , Phys . Rev . Lett . , 2007 , 98 , 198304 . 15 D . A . Head , A . J . Levine and F . C . MacKintosh , Phys . Rev . E : Stat . , Nonlinear , Soft Matter Phys . , 2003 , 68 , 061907 . 16 Y . Luan , O . Lieleg , B . Wagner and A . R . Bausch , Biophys . J . , 2008 , 94 , 688 . 17 H . Herrmann , I . Hoffmann and W . W . Franke , J . Mol . Biol . , 1992 , 223 , 637 . 1914 | Soft Matter , 2010 , 6 , 1910 – 1914 This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010