Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being : A Mixed - Method Study Among Hybrid Workers in Japan Wataru Akahori NTT Social Informatics Laboratories Yokosuka , Japan wataru . akahori . cd @ hco . ntt . co . jp Naomi Yamashita NTT Communication Science Labs Keihanna , Japan naomiy @ acm . org Jack Jamieson NTT Communication Science Labs Keihanna , Japan jack @ jackjamieson . net Momoko Nakatani Tokyo Institute of Technology Meguro , Japan nakatani . m . ad @ m . titech . ac . jp Ryo Hashimoto NTT Social Informatics Laboratories Yokosuka , Japan ryou . hashimoto . dr @ hco . ntt . co . jp Masahiro Watanabe NTT Social Informatics Laboratories Yokosuka , Japan masahiro . watanabe . xd @ hco . ntt . co . jp ABSTRACT Previous studies have suggested that organizational social norms can positively afect employee well - being . However , such social norms have not been well developed during the post - COVID - 19 transition to hybrid work , which combines ofce and remote work , and it is unclear how employees’ perceptions of social norms for hybrid work afect their well - being . In this study , we investigated the impact of social norms for hybrid work on the well - being of hybrid workers living in Japan through a mixed - method approach consisting of an online survey ( n = 212 ) and semi - structured inter - views ( n = 20 ) . The results indicate that hybrid workers who feel subject to strong social norms have lower well - being . Conversely , those who are more willing to conform to social norms have higher well - being . Given our fndings , we discuss implications for the de - sign of systems to help hybrid workers conform to organizational social norms and to improve their well - being . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI . KEYWORDS Hybrid Work , Well - Being , Social Norms ACM Reference Format : Wataru Akahori , Naomi Yamashita , Jack Jamieson , Momoko Nakatani , Ryo Hashimoto , and Masahiro Watanabe . 2023 . Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being : A Mixed - Method Study Among Hybrid Workers in Japan . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581383 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9421 - 5 / 23 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581383 1 INTRODUCTION After COVID - 19 was characterized as a pandemic [ 105 ] , lockdown measures and social distancing policies were introduced worldwide , which accelerated the global trend of remote work [ 51 , 71 ] . Recent studies have shown ample evidence that during the COVID - 19 pandemic , remote workers sufered from social isolation , work - family confict , and overwork [ 4 , 93 ] , which negatively impact their well - being ( e . g . , anxiety , depression , and burnout ) [ 13 , 51 , 63 , 67 , 71 , 79 ] . With the spread of COVID - 19 increasingly under control , many employees can return to the ofce while maintaining the fexibility of working from home as needed . This pattern of “working part of the time in the ofce and part time from somewhere else” [ 95 , p . 8 ] is referred to as hybrid work . So far , fexibility and autonomy have made hybrid work more popular with many employees than ofce - only or remote - only work arrangements [ 9 , 11 ] . One chal - lenging aspect of the shift to hybrid work models is an upending of previously established social norms about work . Social norms are shared beliefs about what sort of behavior is acceptable among members of a group [ 20 ] . They are related to well - being in several ways . Following norms can facilitate a feeling of group member - ship , which is positively associated with well - being [ 31 , 60 , 66 ] . Further , norms can moderate the impact of crises on well - being by motivating behaviors that impact life satisfaction [ 42 ] . In light of this situation , there is a need to work toward orga - nizational social norms that moderate the negative relationship between changes in work practices induced by COVID - 19 and em - ployee well - being [ 51 ] . Motivated by previous research , this study focuses on two main aspects of social norms that contribute to em - ployee well - being . The frst is the strength of social norms , i . e . , the diference between tight cultures with restrictive rules and strong monitoring and sanctioning systems , and loose cultures which are more lax . Tight cultures can facilitate cooperation and coordination and have helped groups survive high - threat situations ( e . g . , food scarcity , natural disasters , and contagious diseases ) throughout his - tory [ 33 , 35 , 81 ] . In the present context , the uncertainty caused by the COVID - 19 pandemic has been shown to be associated with poor employee well - being [ 97 ] , and therefore a tight culture may relieve pandemic - related stress and improve well - being by providing guid - ance about what to do [ 34 , 35 ] . On the other hand , strong norms CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Wataru Akahori , et al . can have a negative efect on well - being by reducing personal au - tonomy [ 96 , 103 ] . The second signifcant aspect is conformity to social norms , i . e . , person - culture ft . Person - culture ft is generally evaluated by the similarity between the values of the individual and those of the organization or group [ 74 ] . Previous studies showed that a good person - culture ft is associated with positive employee attitudes [ 1 , 53 , 54 , 74 ] and psychological well - being [ 31 ] . Despite the importance of organizational social norms to em - ployee well - being , few researchers have investigated the impact of social norms on employee well - being as work practices transition to hybrid work . Especially during this transition , the best practices for hybrid work are not yet known , and many organizations have not yet fully developed social norms for hybrid work . In addition , remote workers have less opportunity to observe the behavior of their colleagues , which can inhibit the formation of social norms . Under such circumstances , the judgment of what behavior is de - sirable or not is uncertain , and it is unclear how an employee’s perception of social norms afects his / her well - being . Specifcally , there is a lack of understanding on how the strength of norms perceived by hybrid workers afects their well - being when norms are not well developed , as well as how hybrid workers attempt to conform to social norms and how this afects their well - being . To date , prior research in the feld of HCI and CSCW about social norms has largely focused on the management of online commu - nities [ 5 , 16 , 50 , 70 , 85 , 92 ] , and few studies have focused on social norms in the management of workplaces . It has also been pointed out that traditional productivity - oriented technology can create stress and anxiety for employees . For example , Leshed and Sengers found that while productivity tools fulfll the American users’ desire to comply with their cultural identity of being busy people , they also create sufering by exacerbating conficts around busyness and other life priorities [ 58 ] . This points to the need to design technolo - gies that take into account social factors such as social pressures and peer expectations [ 18 ] . Hence , the main objective of our research is to investigate how hybrid workers’ experiences of social norms for hybrid work af - fect their well - being . Specifcally , we aim to answer the following research questions ( RQs ) . ( 1 ) RQ1 . To what extent does daily afective well - being change in response to work arrangements in hybrid work ? We ask this question to get an overall picture of hybrid workers’ day - to - day well - being when working from home as compared to working at the ofce , because this could infuence how they respond to social norms that push for particular work arrangements . We then proceed to the following questions . ( 2 ) RQ2a . To what extent do hybrid workers’ perceptions of the strength of social norms for hybrid work afect their well - being ? ( 3 ) RQ2b . To what extent does their willingness to conform to social norms for hybrid work afect their well - being ? ( 4 ) RQ3 . How do hybrid workers perceive and navigate the relationship between social norms for hybrid work and their well - being ? To understand hybrid workers’ daily work styles and examine their attitudes toward social norms and these norms’ relationship to well - being , we conducted a three - week series of online surveys and semi - structured interviews with hybrid workers living in Japan . The contributions of this work are as follows . We fnd that hy - brid workers who feel subject to strong social norms have lower well - being . Conversely , a willingness to conform to social norms is associated with higher well - being . Given these results , we empha - size the need for organizations to manage social norms to support hybrid workers’ well - being . Finally , we discuss the design implica - tions for the technology according to the concept of social norms in hybrid work settings . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 COVID - 19 , remote work , and well - being Even before COVID - 19 , numerous studies assessed the efective - ness of remote work and found that it is associated with several benefts , including autonomy and fexibility on when and where to work [ 4 , 52 , 93 , 106 ] . Because of these benefts , remote work has been shown to increase employees’ job satisfaction [ 4 , 17 , 32 , 38 , 99 ] , organizational commitment [ 17 , 37 , 44 ] , positive emotions [ 17 , 99 ] , and work engagement [ 23 , 65 ] as well as to reduce stress [ 23 , 32 ] , turnover intentions [ 37 ] , and work - family confict [ 4 , 23 , 32 ] . On the other hand , previous studies have also discussed negative im - pacts of remote work on well - being [ 4 , 17 , 21 ] . For example , remote work has disadvantages such as social isolation and lack of support , which are associated with negative emotions [ 10 , 93 ] . Ultimately , the relationship between remote work and well - being is shaped by a variety of factors , such as ergonomic factors , man - agement factors , and demographics [ 10 , 21 ] . Specifcally , positive well - being among remote workers is associated with higher levels of fexibility [ 39 , 90 , 96 ] and autonomy [ 38 , 39 , 98 ] . One reason is that working from home , with its greater fexibility and autonomy , promotes work - life balance by reducing commuting time and al - lowing employees to adjust the location and timing of their own work [ 10 , 21 ] . Well - being is further moderated by the amount of remote work , with those who work more than 2 . 5 remote workdays per week having reduced work - family confict but worse relation - ships with colleagues [ 32 ] . Furthermore , well - being outcomes are worse among those who have a low - quality supervisor relation - ship [ 32 ] . Finally , men ( particularly those with children ) have higher well - being during remote work than women [ 41 ] . A series of recent studies have also indicated that the change in work style caused by the COVID - 19 pandemic had a negative associ - ation with employee well - being [ 13 , 51 , 63 , 67 , 71 , 79 ] . For example , one study found that during the pandemic , workers’ well - being was impaired by high stress levels , the absence of a daily routine , and a lack of social contacts [ 83 ] . In addition , remote workers during the pandemic have faced challenges related to a high number of meetings , overwork , and physical and mental health issues [ 14 ] . Ultimately , however , the extent to which switching to remote work has positive or negative efects on well - being seems to vary across contexts , as a variety of factors come into play [ 72 ] . In light of these studies , the relationship between remote work and well - being may have changed since the COVID - 19 pandemic . For example , pre - pandemic remote - workers often worked from home according to their preferences , but during the pandemic , many employees were forced to work from home regardless of whether Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany they wanted to [ 51 ] . Another challenge to generalizing based on previous studies is that remote and hybrid work arrangements have become much more common since the pandemic started . Although many studies have investigated the relationship be - tween the COVID - 19 pandemic and employee well - being , only a few have focused on hybrid work [ 95 ] . For example , according to a survey ( n = 475 ) and interviews ( n = 12 ) with Chinese hybrid work - ers , factors that attracted them to working in the ofce included a better workplace setup , in - person meetings , social engagement with colleagues , and working on specifc tasks in the ofce [ 102 ] . On the other hand , factors that attracted them to working from home included reduced commute time , the necessity of family care , more focus time , reduced health risks , and weather [ 102 ] . Moreover , it was reported that employees perceived higher productivity in hy - brid work as compared to full - time ofce work prior to COVID - 19 , with many employees preferring a hybrid work arrangement [ 102 ] . Other research showed that full - time remote workers and hybrid workers who work one to two remote workdays per week have lower well - being in workplace relationships than employees who do not work remotely at all [ 47 ] . This research suggests that oc - casional remote work ( less than one day per week ) is preferable from the aspect of well - being in workplace relationships [ 47 ] . Al - though several studies have focused on hybrid work during the COVID - 19 recovery , most have focused on factors that are related to individuals’ work styles - the experiences of hybrid workers and best practices for hybrid work are still insufciently explored . Finally , COVID - 19 has already been infuencing HCI research in the area of work . Cho et al . [ 18 ] analyzed data collected on subreddits related to working from home and found challenges in adapting to remote work , managing work - life boundaries , and reconstructing the home’s sense of place . Lu et al . [ 61 ] interviewed remote workers to identify opportunities for supporting informal communication , such as how to best indicate when one is available or not available to chat , and how to convey authenticity . Yang et al . [ 107 ] found that remote workers tend to perceive their weakly connected ties as less engaged and less worthy of collaboration . Based on their results , they identifed opportunities for helping remote workers maintain awareness of weak ties . For example , they suggested that digital footprints left in shared public workspaces help enhance social awareness of remote weak ties . While these studies investigate design opportunities and psycho - social efects related to remote work , hybrid work demands specifc consideration since it involves fexible switching between ofce and remote work . In our research , we focus on how individual workers are positioned within an organization’s overall work style , and we examine how social norms for hybrid work , which are still developing after the COVID - 19 pandemic , afect employee well - being . 2 . 2 Social norms and well - being Previous studies have demonstrated that social norms have the power to motivate behavior in a wide range of settings , including recycling [ 84 ] , littering [ 20 , 48 ] , environmental conservation pro - grams [ 40 ] , and alcohol consumption [ 80 ] . The seminal work of Cialdini et al . [ 20 ] introduced two types of social norms : the injunc - tive norm ( a perception of what should be generally approved or disapproved by others ) , and the descriptive norm ( a perception of what others generally do ) . For example , in a littering situation , the perception that trash should be thrown in the trash can is an injunc - tive norm , while the perception that most people throw trash in the trash can is a descriptive norm . As people transition to hybrid work during the COVID - 19 recovery , organizational social norms about what forms of hybrid work are appropriate or inappropriate are still developing , and judgments about what behavior is acceptable or unacceptable are also uncertain . According to prior research , the less confdent a person is in the adequacy of his / her actions and judgments , the more likely the person is to act according to his / her perceived social norms , i . e . , according to the social pressure to perform or not perform a certain behavior [ 2 , 91 ] . Thus , hybrid workers may focus on and be infuenced by their perceptions of injunctive and descriptive norms in the organization to determine their work arrangements . Social norms not only afect employees’ decision - making and behavior but can also afect their well - being . One factor of so - cial norms that infuences employee well - being is their strength . Gelfand et al . [ 34 ] defned the tightness - looseness of a culture as “the strength of social norms and degree of sanctioning within so - cieties” ( p . 6 ) . The tightness of a culture refects many strongly enforced rules and little tolerance for deviance [ 45 ] . Tight groups have been shown to cooperate much faster under threat and to have higher survival rates than loose groups [ 33 , 35 , 81 ] . In addi - tion , employees’ perception of uncertainty has been shown to be associated with negative well - being [ 97 ] , and tight groups may be better able to cope with uncertainty by referring to many clear social norms [ 34 , 35 ] . Altogether , these fndings suggest that the strength of social norms for hybrid work positively associates with employee well - being . On the other hand , fexible work arrangements have been shown to be positively related to employee well - being through autonomy [ 96 ] , but strict rules on hybrid work may have a negative impact on employee well - being because they undermine fexibility and autonomy . For example , monitoring has been shown to in - crease remote workers’ degree of work - home interference , thereby undermining their well - being [ 100 ] . Another factor of social norms that infuences employee well - being is conformity to social norms . O’Reilly et al . [ 74 ] noted that “congruency between an individual’s values and those of an orga - nization may be at the crux of person - culture ft” ( p . 492 ) . Person - culture ft has been shown to be positively related to employees’ job satisfaction [ 1 , 53 , 54 , 74 ] , and commitment [ 53 , 54 , 74 ] , and negatively related to their turnover intentions [ 53 , 54 , 74 ] . Fulmer et al . [ 31 ] also showed that culture amplifes positive efects on self - esteem and subjective well - being when a person’s personality matches the prevailing personality in that culture . Altogether , these fndings suggest that conformity to the social norms for hybrid work positively associates with employee well - being . Yet , such positive efects on well - being may not be possible in hybrid environments where organizational social norms are not well developed , because it is difcult to conform to unclear norms . In particular , employees working remotely have less opportunity to observe the behavior of others , making it difcult for them to recognize and conform to social norms [ 19 ] . In light of these studies , social norms for hybrid work may pro - vide clues to addressing organizational issues related to employee well - being . Hybrid work is often fexible in that workers make CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Wataru Akahori , et al . their own decisions about how many and which days to work from home or at the ofce . Without formal rules , social norms will likely strongly shape these decisions . Hence , there is a need to understand how employees’ perceptions of social norms afect hybrid workers’ well - being . To our knowledge , no prior studies have examined the relationship between social norms for hybrid work and employee well - being . We thus contribute to this literature by investigating the impact of such social norms on employee well - being and deriving implications for the development of social norms for hybrid work . 3 METHOD To answer our RQs , we conducted a mixed - methods study of Japan - ese hybrid workers in February and March 2022 , which included a series of online surveys ( a screening survey , daily surveys for three weeks , and a follow - up survey ) and follow - up interviews . The screening survey aimed to select participants for the study , the daily survey aimed to obtain participants’ daily afective well - being , and the follow - up survey aimed to obtain participants’ perceptions of social norms and overall well - being . The follow - up interview aimed to add depth to the survey fndings and to further understand how the participants navigated the relationship between social norms and their well - being . The participants were awarded a 5 , 000 - JPY ( approximately 43 USD at that time ) Amazon gift certifcate for completing the screen - ing and follow - up surveys and an additional 6 , 000 - JPY ( approxi - mately 52 USD at that time ) Amazon gift certifcate for a follow - up interview . The study was reviewed and approved by our institu - tion’s ethics board . 3 . 1 Surveys 3 . 1 . 1 Participants . The participants were recruited through an online marketing company . The target population was limited to hybrid workers living in Japan who were between 18 and 64 years old . Moreover , as we focused on how individual workers were po - sitioned within an organization’s overall work style , we targeted those who belonged to a team . Here , we defned a team as a group of people who work on a common project or goal on a daily basis and share the same ofce space when they come to work . Furthermore , because hybrid work practices and experiences are expected to sta - bilize over time , we targeted those who had been working remotely at least one to four days a week for at least three months . Finally , to target workers for whom hybrid work arrangements can easily be implemented , the workers’ occupations were limited to com - pany employees , public ofcials , faculty members , and non - proft organization staf . A total of 250 respondents participated in the survey ; respon - dents were excluded from the analysis if they did not provide at least one daily response for each type of day ( i . e . , ofce workday , remote workday , and day of ) or did not complete the follow - up survey . After application of this exclusion criterion , the analysis included 212 respondents . The participants are described in Table 1 . 3 . 1 . 2 Procedure . Each participant was briefed on the study’s in - tent and completed a screening survey . The screening survey asked about demographic information , the frequency of remote work , and experience with hybrid work . The participants were then sent a daily survey via an SMS link at 19 : 00 for 21 days . The daily survey asked about their work location , perceptions of other employees , and afective well - being on that day . They also received a reminder message at 20 : 00 and were able to respond until noon the following day . Finally , on day 22 , after the last day of the three - week daily survey , the participants received a follow - up survey . The follow - up survey asked about their perceptions of the strengths of injunctive and descriptive norms , their willingness to conform to those norms , and their overall well - being , which was characterized as a multidi - mensional construct [ 15 , 86 ] . During the 21 - day survey , although not all participants answered every day , 212 participants responded 1176 times on ofce workdays ( mean = 5 . 55 , SD = 3 . 08 , median = 5 , min . = 1 , max . = 15 ) , 1493 times on remote workdays ( mean = 7 . 04 , SD = 2 . 97 , median = 7 , min . = 1 , max . = 13 ) , and 1490 times on days of ( mean = 7 . 03 , SD = 1 . 41 , median = 7 , min . = 3 , max . = 15 ) . 3 . 1 . 3 Measures . To answer RQ1 , RQ2a , and RQ2b , a scale on em - ployees’ afective well - being was included in the daily survey , and scales on employees’ perceptions of the strength of injunctive and descriptive norms , their willingness to follow those norms , and em - ployees’ overall well - being were included in the follow - up survey . The supplemental material provides the survey details . Expected frequency of remote work . Because the way hybrid work should be done depends on the team , we asked what the frequency of remote work is expected within the team . To measure this expected frequency of remote work , the participants responded to the statement “My team members think that I should work under the following work arrangements” by choosing one of the following options : “Come to the ofce every day , ” “Work remotely less than one day a week , ” “Work remotely 1 - 2 days a week , ” “Work remotely 3 - 4 days a week , ” or “Work remotely every day . ” Strengths of injunctive and descriptive norms . To assess the participants’ perceptions of the strengths of social norms for hybrid work ( RQ2a ) , we adapted questions from Ajzen’s sample questionnaire [ 3 ] . To measure the strength of injunctive norms , the participants responded to the statement “How strongly do your team members think that you ‘should follow’ the work arrange - ments you selected in [ the question on expected frequency of re - mote work ] ? ” on a 7 - point Likert scale . To measure the strength of descriptive norms , they responded to the statement “Most of my team members all come to the ofce with a similar frequency” on a 7 - point Likert scale . Willingness to conform to injunctive and descriptive norms . To assess the participants’ willingness to conform to social norms for hybrid work ( RQ2b ) , we again adapted questions from Ajzen’s sample questionnaire [ 3 ] . To measure their willingness to conform to injunctive norms , the participants responded to the statement “I want to come to the ofce as often as my team members expect me to” on a 7 - point Likert scale . To measure their willingness to conform to descriptive norms , they responded to the statement “I want to come to the ofce around as often as other team members do” on a 7 - point Likert scale . Overall well - being . To measure the participants’ overall well - being ( RQ2a and RQ2b ) , we used the workplace PERMA profler with 23 items [ 49 ] . This measure is based on the fve factors of the PERMA model ( positive emotion , engagement , relationships , meaning , accomplishment ) in the workplace . Much of the research on workplace well - being has addressed separate elements , and Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 1 : Summary of participants’ information . Attribute Range Sample size 18 - 24 5 ( 2 . 4 % ) 25 - 34 50 ( 23 . 6 % ) Age 35 - 44 58 ( 27 . 4 % ) 45 - 54 62 ( 29 . 2 % ) 55 - 64 37 ( 17 . 5 % ) Gender Male Female 126 ( 59 . 4 % ) 86 ( 40 . 6 % ) Role General employee Managerial employee Operator , executive Others a 158 ( 74 . 5 % ) 38 ( 17 . 9 % ) 6 ( 2 . 8 % ) 10 ( 4 . 7 % ) Job category Planning , public relations Sales Manufacturing , production Procurement , purchasing Production control , quality control Technology , research & development General afairs , human resources Accounting , fnance Information system division Others 18 ( 8 . 5 % ) 59 ( 27 . 8 % ) 7 ( 3 . 3 % ) 4 ( 1 . 9 % ) 9 ( 4 . 2 % ) 25 ( 11 . 8 % ) 33 ( 15 . 6 % ) 16 ( 7 . 5 % ) 24 ( 11 . 3 % ) 17 ( 8 . 0 % ) 1 - 2 days a week 123 ( 58 . 0 % ) Frequency of remote work 3 - 4 days a week 89 ( 42 . 0 % ) Note : a : public ofcial , faculty member , non - proft organization staf . this measure is one of the few that captures multidimensional el - ements of workplace well - being [ 25 ] . The PERMA profler has demonstrated acceptable psychometric properties in assessments conducted with large international samples [ 15 ] . The participants responded to all items on an 11 - point Likert scale ( 0 to 10 ) . The overall well - being at work was calculated as the average of the scores on 15 items related to the PERMA model’s fve factors and one item related to happiness [ 49 ] . Daily afective well - being . To measure the participants’ daily afective well - being ( RQ1 , RQ2a , and RQ2b ) , we used the short - form Daniels fve - factor measure of afective well - being ( D - FAW ) [ 82 ] . Compared to the Positive and Negative Afect Schedule ( PANAS ) [ 104 ] , the most widely used scale for afective well - being , the short - form D - FAW is occupation - specifc , has a higher coverage of low - activation items , and has a higher representation of anger / aggression terms and fatigue [ 82 ] . The short - form D - FAW uses 10 adjectives to describe the positive and negative axes of fve factors : anxiety - comfort ( AC ) , displeasure - pleasure ( DP ) , bored - enthusiastic ( BE ) , tiredness - vigor ( TV ) , and angry - placid ( AP ) . The short - form D - FAW questions were included in the daily survey : the participants re - sponded to all items on a 6 - point Likert scale to determine whether they had felt these emotions during the day today . The daily afec - tive well - being was calculated by averaging the scores for the ten items . The fve items related to negative emotions were reverse - scored , so that higher scores meant greater well - being . Then , for each participant , the scores on ofce workdays , remote workdays , and days of were calculated as the average daily afective well - being scores . 3 . 2 Follow - up interviews To add depth to the survey fndings and further understand how the participants navigated the relationship between social norms and their well - being ( RQ3 ) , 20 randomly selected participants were interviewed among those who responded to the daily survey on at least 14 out of 21 days and agreed to participate in a follow - up interview . Table 2 summarizes their information . The interviews were conducted remotely via video calls in March 2022 . Each interview lasted approximately 60 minutes . The inter - views were semi - structured and asked about the participants’ per - ceptions of social norms for hybrid work and their well - being . The supplemental material provides the details of the interview guide . The interviews were conducted in Japanese , recorded , and tran - scribed . The interview transcripts were analyzed by thematic analy - sis [ 12 ] . After immersion by reading the transcripts , the frst author performed an open coding phase on all the transcripts by using the analytical software MaxQDA . The frst author performed an inductive thematic analysis during this coding phase by grouping the relevant codes into themes . The themes derived from the anal - ysis were regularly presented to the other authors for discussion CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Wataru Akahori , et al . Table 2 : Summary of interview participants’ information . ID Gender Age Role Job category Frequency of remote work P1 Male 25 - 34 employee Planning , public relations 3 - 4 days a week P2 Female 35 - 44 employee Planning , public relations 1 - 2 days a week P3 Male 35 - 44 employee General afairs , human resources 3 - 4 days a week P4 Male 55 - 64 employee Sales 1 - 2 days a week P5 Male 45 - 54 employee Technology , research & development 1 - 2 days a week P6 Male 25 - 34 employee Accounting , fnance 1 - 2 days a week P7 Male 55 - 64 employee Production control , quality control 1 - 2 days a week P8 Female 35 - 44 employee General afairs , human resources 1 - 2 days a week P9 Female 55 - 64 employee Planning , public relations 3 - 4 days a week P10 Male 35 - 44 manager Technology , research & development 3 - 4 days a week P11 Female 25 - 34 employee General afairs , human resources 3 - 4 days a week P12 Female 25 - 34 employee General afairs , human resources 1 - 2 days a week P13 Female 45 - 54 employee General afairs , human resources 1 - 2 days a week P14 Male 25 - 34 employee Technology , research & development 3 - 4 days a week P15 Female 18 - 24 employee Sales 1 - 2 days a week P16 Male 55 - 64 manager Manufacturing , production 3 - 4 days a week P17 Female 45 - 54 employee Sales 1 - 2 days a week P18 Male 45 - 54 manager Planning , public relations 3 - 4 days a week P19 Female 18 - 24 employee Sales 1 - 2 days a week P20 Male 45 - 54 manager Technology , research & development 1 - 2 days a week to confrm their validity . All authors then refned the codes and themes in an iterative and collaborative process . 4 RESULTS This section is divided into three parts . We start with the partic - ipants’ daily work status and its impact on their well - being as reported in the daily surveys ( RQ1 ) . We then report the results of a multiple regression analysis , which examined the relationships between the participants’ perception of social norms and their well - being ( RQ2a and RQ2b ) . Finally , we present the fndings from our semi - structured interviews , which helped us better understand how the participants navigated workplace norms ( RQ3 ) . 4 . 1 Relationship between daily afective well - being and work arrangements ( RQ1 ) First , we report quantitative measures about daily afective well - being on days with diferent work arrangements . Then , we draw from the participant interviews to identify common threats to well - being when working remotely and when working at the ofce . This provides necessary context for understanding how workers are afected by and navigate social norms for hybrid work . 4 . 1 . 1 One - way ANOVA comparison of daily afective well - being subscales . To address RQ1 , we asked the participants to complete a daily survey about their afective well - being on ofce workdays , remote workdays , and days of . By averaging each daily afective well - being subscale , we found that certain subscales varied de - pending on the work arrangement . Figure 1 shows boxplots , with outliers ( indicated by dots ) , of the fve subscales of afective well - being for each type of day . In the fgure , subscale scores that were signifcantly diferent among working arrangements according to a post - hoc test ( Tukey’s HSD test ) are denoted by * ( p < . 05 ) , * * ( p < . 01 ) , and * * * ( p < . 001 ) . A one - way ANOVA was conducted to examine whether the scores on the afective well - being subscales difered across the three work arrangements . The results showed that the diferences in the anxiety - comfort ( AC ) , displeasure - pleasure ( DP ) , bored - enthusiastic ( BE ) , tiredness - vigor ( TV ) , and angry - placid ( AP ) scores between groups were all signifcant at a 0 . 1 % signifcance level ( AC :  ( 2 , 633 ) = 9 . 51 ,  < . 001 ; DP :  ( 2 , 633 ) = 25 . 87 ,  < . 001 ; BE :  ( 2 , 633 ) = 7 . 24 ,  < . 001 ; TV :  ( 2 , 633 ) = 13 . 12 ,  < . 001 ; AP :  ( 2 , 633 ) = 62 . 12 ,  < . 001 ) . Multiple comparisons were conducted for the fve scores by using Tukey’s HSD test at a 5 % signifcance level . The participants reported signifcantly higher levels of comfort , plea - sure , vigor , and placidity on days of as compared to workdays . In general , well - being scores were not dramatically diferent between ofce workdays and remote workdays , but the participants reported signifcantly higher levels of enthusiasm on ofce workdays than on remote workdays ; conversely , they reported signifcantly lower levels of placidity on ofce workdays than on remote workdays . 4 . 1 . 2 Mixed efects on ofice - day well - being . According to the follow - up interviews , some participants reported feeling tenser when they were in the ofce than when they worked remotely . For example , several participants noted that they were more concerned about the eyes of others and that their voices would be heard by others in the ofce . “When I come to work , I feel tense . I am tense when I come to work , or rather , I work hard . Also , I feel that I am being watched , so I am tense” ( P05 ) . “I have a rather loud voice , so I usually annoy those around me when I talk . I guess that’s why I feel more at Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany * * * * * * NS . 1 2 3 4 5 6 Day off Office work Remote work Work arrangement A n x i e t y − C o m f o r t ( A C ) * * * * * * NS . 1 2 3 4 5 6 Day off Office work Remote work Work arrangement D i s p l ea s u r e − P l ea s u r e ( D P ) * * * NS . * 1 2 3 4 5 6 Day off Office work Remote work Work arrangement B o r ed − E n t hu s i a s t i c ( BE ) * * * * * * NS . 1 2 3 4 5 6 Day off Office work Remote work Work arrangement T i r edne ss − V i go r ( T V ) * * * * * * * 1 2 3 4 5 6 Day off Office work Remote work Work arrangement A ng r y − P l a c i d ( A P ) Figure 1 : One - way ANOVA comparison for fve daily afective well - being subscales across ofce workdays , remote workdays , and days of . Outliers are indicated by dots , and signifcant diferences are denoted by asterisks ( * * * : p < . 001 ; * * : p < . 01 ; * : p < . 05 ) . ease when I work remotely because I don’t bother people around me . Even if I speak the same way in the ofce , my loud voice can be heard by others or bother them” ( P16 ) . Moreover , some participants noted diferent efects of the pres - ence of other people’s eyes . For example , several felt less relaxed by the presence of others’ eyes , while others felt more focused . “The ease of relaxing is better at home . Since the space is private and closed of , I am free to do whatever I want , including dressing up . In an ofce , I am exposed to society , so I can’t be as free as I would like” ( P16 ) . “When I come to work , I am seen by others so that I may feel rather tense and more focused on my work” ( P18 ) . These explanations provide insight into the lower level of placid - ity and higher level of enthusiasm on ofce workdays , reported above . Although this was a small efect averaged across all par - ticipants in Figure 1 , the interview quotations suggest that these diferences are quite meaningful on an individual scale . There were also a few comments regarding environmental fac - tors afecting well - being on ofce workdays . In the team to which P15 belonged , team members followed a system whereby teams were divided into several groups and each group was assigned days to come to the ofce , to limit the number of people coming to the of - fce each day . In P15’s team , these groups were randomly assigned so those who had come to the ofce together on previous days would be in diferent groups . P15 noted that a specifed day makes ofce workdays valuable because of the ability to communicate with various coworkers . “I am pleased that our team has this system . I think it is very nice to be able to communicate with various people because it is a situation where it is not easy to have a chance to talk to each other . We also go out for lunch with everyone on the same team” ( P15 ) . This quote indicates that sharing the same space and commu - nicating in person is one factor that positively afects ofce - day well - being . 4 . 2 Efect of social norms on well - being ( RQ2a , RQ2b ) 4 . 2 . 1 Regression analysis . To answer RQ2a and RQ2b , we con - ducted a hierarchical multiple regression analysis with overall well - being , ofce - day well - being , and remote - day well - being as dependent variables , age , gender , and role as control variables , and CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Wataru Akahori , et al . fve aspects of injunctive and descriptive norms as predictor vari - ables . Table 3 lists the correlations of the independent and predictor variables , and Table 4 lists the regression analysis results . The possi - bility of multicollinearity was examined by calculating the variance infation factor ( VIF ) . The highest VIF was 2 . 01 , indicating that multicollinearity was unlikely to infuence the analysis . The analysis shows that , in terms of the diference between the coefcients of determination for steps 1 and 2 , model 1 with overall well - being as the dependent variable was signifcant at the 0 . 1 % level , and model 2 with ofce - day well - being as the dependent vari - able was signifcant at the 1 % level . For model 1 , the F test for the coefcient of determination for the total equation was signifcant at the 0 . 1 % level (  ( 10 , 201 ) = 5 . 20 ,  < . 001 ) . This model shows that overall well - being was positively associated with membership in the role groups operator , executive (  = 2 . 06 ,  < . 01 ) and others ( consist - ing of public ofcials , faculty members , and non - proft organization staf ) (  = 1 . 14 ,  < . 05 ) . Further , overall well - being was negatively associated with strength of injunctive norms (  = − 0 . 19 ,  < . 05 ) and positively associated with willingness to conform to injunctive norms (  = 0 . 32 ,  < . 001 ) . For model 2 , the F test for the coefcient of determination for the total equation was signifcant at the 0 . 1 % level (  ( 10 , 201 ) = 3 . 72 ,  < . 001 ) . Two variables were positively associated with ofce - day well - being : the role group operator , exec - utive (  = 0 . 87 ,  < . 01 ) and willingness to conform to descriptive norms (  = 0 . 11 ,  < . 01 ) . Lastly , for model 3 , the F test for the coefcient of determination for the total equation was signifcant at the 5 % level (  ( 10 , 201 ) = 2 . 24 ,  < . 05 ) . Remote - day well - being was positively associated with age (  = 0 . 09 ,  < . 05 ) and the role group operator , executive (  = 0 . 59 ,  < . 05 ) . In summary , it appears that the perceived strength of injunc - tive norms regarding hybrid work was negatively associated with employee well - being , whereas a greater willingness to conform to injunctive norms was positively associated with employee well - being . Moreover , regarding ofce workdays , a greater willingness to conform to descriptive norms for hybrid work appears to associate with employee well - being positively . 4 . 2 . 2 Preferences for flexibility and autonomy . In the follow - up interviews , some participants expressed a preference for fexibility and autonomy with regard to hybrid work , which may help explain some of the negative association between strong injunctive norms on well - being : “I don’t like to be told to stay home , come to work , or take time of . I don’t like to be restricted in this way , and I think it is good that I can make my own choices” ( P20 ) . Specifcally , some participants associated fexibility with having control over their work - life balance : “Rather than being tightly bound by rules , I can set my work schedule and easily maintain a good balance between work and private life , which I think is good for me” ( P06 ) . Although these comments were not limited to norms , but also expressed a desire for fexibility with regard to rules , they demon - strate a general desire to make one’s own decisions about when and where to work . This provides insight into the fnding that injunctive norm strength was negatively associated with overall well - being . 4 . 2 . 3 Suspicion and fear surrounding remote work . Several partici - pants stated in the follow - up interview that they were concerned that their team members would question them about not doing their jobs while working remotely . For example , P08 felt frustrated that others could not tell he was busy working remotely : “For example , there are times when I receive an e - mail , and I am too busy to respond right away . If I am at work , I feel as if everyone understands that I am in a complicated situation , whether they know it or not , so I don’t feel too constrained by the fact that I can’t respond immediately . On the other hand , if I am working at home , no one knows about this difcult situation , and I wonder what they will think of me for not being able to respond” ( P08 ) . This demonstrates concern about being judged by one’s coworkers because many aspects of one’s work , particularly difculties , are not visible when working remotely . Indeed , this concern was not unfounded , as illustrated by com - ments from several participants who expressed precisely this type of suspicion toward other team members who work remotely : “There is a sort of progress chart , and since my workload is quite heavy , I probably won’t be suspected by team members of not doing my work . On the other hand , there are times when I suspect other team members , “You haven’t progressed at all , did you really do your work today ? ”” ( P17 ) . “If I don’t hear from someone for 10 to 15 minutes , I don’t assume that he or she is not working . However , there are frequent cases when I don’t hear from someone for an hour or two . At this time , I wonder if this person is really working or sleeping” ( P11 ) . These quotes show that some employees were concerned and anxious about how others viewed them , even when working re - motely . A common theme in these comments is the lack of visibility of one’s work when working remotely . Some participants were sus - picious of colleagues because they could not view evidence of their progress , and conversely , P08 expressed concern that colleagues might erroneously think that a lack of visible progress indicated a lack of efort because they could not see how difcult some tasks are . This raises awareness of colleagues’ work activities as an important theme to which we will return in this paper’s Discussion . In addition , being concerned about others’ evaluations can lead to behavior that matches that of others , i . e . , being willing to follow a descriptive norm . Thus , people who are particularly concerned about how others view them are likely to have a high intention to follow descriptive norms in general , including norms about hybrid work patterns . In remarking on suspicions toward people working remotely , participants highlighted that it is difcult to see what remote colleagues are doing when not at the ofce . This ofers a potential explanation for the association in Table 4 between willing - ness to conform to the descriptive norms and ofce - day well - being : People who want to conform to descriptive norms about hybrid work may have higher well - being on ofce - days because being Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 3 : Mean ( M ) , standard deviation ( SD ) , range ( R ) , and correlations for the independent and predictor variables . Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 Overall well - being 2 Ofce - day well - being 0 . 65 * * * 3 Remote - day well - being 0 . 61 * * * 0 . 84 * * * 4 Expected frequency of remote work 0 . 09 0 . 03 0 . 00 5 Strength of INs - 0 . 02 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 06 0 . 13 6 Willingness to conform to INs 0 . 31 * * * 0 . 19 * * 0 . 17 * 0 . 07 0 . 30 * * * 7 Strength of DNs 0 . 07 0 . 04 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 28 * * * 0 . 25 * * * 8 Willingness to conform to DNs 0 . 21 * * 0 . 23 * * * 0 . 16 * 0 . 07 0 . 29 * * * 0 . 53 * * * 0 . 58 * * * M 5 . 85 3 . 91 3 . 90 3 . 42 4 . 57 4 . 57 4 . 67 4 . 17 SD 1 . 80 0 . 71 0 . 68 0 . 79 1 . 43 1 . 53 1 . 65 1 . 77 R 0 - 10 1 - 6 1 - 6 1 - 5 1 - 7 1 - 7 1 - 7 1 - 7 Note : * * * : p < . 001 ; * * : p < . 01 ; * : p < . 05 ; IN : injunctive norm ; DN : descriptive norm . Table 4 : Predictors of overall well - being ( model 1 ) , ofce - day well - being ( model 2 ) , and remote - day well - being ( model 3 ) . Model 1 Overall well - being Coef . SE Δ  2 Model 2 Ofce - day well - being Coef . SE Δ  2 Model 3 Remote - day well - being Coef . SE Δ  2 Step1 ( Intercept ) Age Gender Male ( reference ) Female Role General employee ( reference ) Managerial employee Operator , executive Others a Step2 ( Intercept ) Age Gender Male ( reference ) Female Role General employee ( reference ) Managerial employee Operator , executive Others a Expected frequency of remote work Strength of INs Willingness to conform to INs Strength of DNs Willingness to conform to DNs 4 . 95 * * * 0 . 23 * - 0 . 18 0 . 41 2 . 24 * * 1 . 16 * 3 . 65 * * * 0 . 18 - 0 . 31 0 . 24 2 . 06 * * 1 . 14 * 0 . 18 - 0 . 19 * 0 . 32 * * * - 0 . 02 0 . 11 0 . 41 0 . 12 0 . 25 0 . 34 0 . 72 0 . 57 0 . 76 0 . 11 0 . 24 0 . 33 0 . 69 0 . 54 0 . 15 0 . 09 0 . 09 0 . 09 0 . 09 0 . 10 * * * 3 . 58 * * * 0 . 09 - 0 . 04 0 . 11 0 . 90 * * 0 . 36 3 . 38 * * * 0 . 08 - 0 . 06 0 . 06 0 . 87 * * 0 . 37 0 . 02 - 0 . 05 0 . 04 - 0 . 04 0 . 11 * * 0 . 16 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 13 0 . 29 0 . 22 0 . 31 0 . 04 0 . 10 0 . 13 0 . 28 0 . 22 0 . 06 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 07 * * 3 . 53 * * * 0 . 10 * 0 . 02 0 . 02 0 . 63 * 0 . 11 3 . 47 * * * 0 . 09 * - 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 0 . 59 * 0 . 12 0 . 00 - 0 . 05 0 . 05 - 0 . 03 0 . 07 0 . 16 0 . 04 0 . 10 0 . 13 0 . 28 0 . 22 0 . 31 0 . 04 0 . 10 0 . 13 0 . 28 0 . 22 0 . 06 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 05  2 for total equation 0 . 21 0 . 16 0 . 10 Note : * * * : p < . 001 ; * * : p < . 01 ; * : p < . 05 ; SE : standard error ; IN : injunctive norm ; DN : descriptive norm ; a : public ofcial , faculty member , non - proft organization staf . around their colleagues in person allows them to demonstrate con - formity to descriptive norms more generally . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Wataru Akahori , et al . 4 . 3 Navigation of social norms ( RQ3 ) 4 . 3 . 1 Dificulties in making decisions about when and where to work . When we asked whether there were any penalties for violating the injunctive norms , none of the interview participants were directly subject to penalties , such as a lower assessment or a pay cut . How - ever , some participants were concerned about penalties that were not explicitly stated but existed implicitly as injunctive norms . For example , P06’s workplace has a super fextime system that allows employees to work at least one hour between 6 : 00 a . m . and 10 : 00 p . m . as long as they meet the minimum working hours per month . P06 stated that according to this system , it should not be a problem to come to work and leave immediately , but that it was difcult because of the implicit injunctive norms : “There is a working system [ for super fextime ] that only some people use . Since only some people are using the system , there is a question as to whether it is appropriate to use that system . A few say that everyone should not use that system or that it is difcult to use . [ . . . ] There is a system in place , but there is an unspoken consensus that it should not be used very often . I have some doubts about this situation” ( P06 ) . As another example of being bound by injunctive norms and anxious to defy them , P15 , a new hire , expressed some resistance to making her own decisions about working remotely : “Honestly , it depends on how long you’ve been with the company , and I still have a tough time telling my boss about my preference . I can’t tell my boss because I’m still not used to the company , and I’m afraid that telling my boss that I want to be home on a day when I can come to work might turn him of” ( P15 ) . These quotes indicate that some participants had difculties making decisions about when and where to work due to implicit injunctive norms formed in their workplace . Even though the com - panies did not impose penalties for violating the injunctive norms , participants seemed reluctant to defy those norms . 4 . 3 . 2 Strategies for handling ambiguous and opaque aspects of hy - brid work . In some cases , participants expressed frustration that the shift to remote work had not been accompanied by corresponding shifts in policies : “For example , there is no such thing as a tightly orga - nized evaluation system , a management system with tools , or a change in the evaluation system . Therefore , I have doubts about the opacity of such a company , and this faltering has occurred since the start of remote working” ( P12 ) . Similarly , P05 asserted that their company relied too much on vague “recommendations” which led to ambiguity : “Since I am only the leader of a team of 8 people , I think the company’s upper management should set the rules more clearly . I don’t think it is a good idea to use a vague term like “recommendation” in Japanese , as if it can be done in any way depending on the recipient” ( P05 ) . However , we also observed other participants taking advantage of fexible schedules in order to accommodate each other’s needs . For example , P09 noted that she talks with her team members to coordinate their ofce workdays so that they do not have to come to work on days when they have personal commitments ( e . g . , their children’s lessons ) . Other participants noted that their choice of ofce workdays was afected by their team members’ schedules , for the sake of completing tasks involving collaboration : “For example , if I have to do a common task with a team member , I may be concerned about who is or is not going to the ofce . For example , if we have to carry things as a team , I may be concerned about who is or is not at the ofce , so in that sense , my team member’s arrival at the ofce afects me” ( P01 ) . These examples demonstrate ad hoc cooperation in order to be considerate toward each other’s personal lives and to coordinate work tasks . Thus , although ambiguity was a problem for some , there are occasions where it allowed worker - driven coordination . Another area where ambiguity posed a challenge was in re - mote work activities being properly recognized among colleagues . Unlike the evaluation criteria when working in the ofce , some participants’ evaluation criteria for remote work was based only on fnal deliverables . This led to a lack of clarity when it came to how coworkers understood each other’s labor . As was identifed in Section 4 . 2 . 3 , this contributed to stress among some workers who worried that their colleagues might be skeptical that they were working hard . Under such circumstances , these participants implemented strate - gies to gain recognition in ways other than work deliverables so they would not be perceived as slacking of while working remotely . For example , P11 assessed whether team members were doing their jobs by how quickly they replied , and in turn , he made sure to reply as quickly as possible to avoid the perception that he was not doing his job . Others talked about strategies to get higher ratings by writing detailed daily reports . “For remote workers , a daily report is submitted to the company , which includes a daily morning temperature measurement and a log of what time you worked and what you did today . This report is not necessary if I come to the ofce . I try to write down all the details in the daily log that says what I did today at home” ( P13 ) . These examples point to strategies used by some participants to improve the visibility of their work in order to gain proper recogni - tion . 5 DISCUSSION 5 . 1 Daily afective well - being according to work arrangements First , RQ1 examined the well - being of hybrid workers according to their work arrangements . Our results showed that daily afec - tive well - being difered signifcantly depending on the working arrangement . First , hybrid workers were more comfortable , pleas - ant , vigorous , and placid on their days of than on workdays . Second , hybrid workers were more enthusiastic on ofce workdays than on Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany days of and remote workdays . Third , hybrid workers were more placid on remote workdays than on ofce workdays . Whereas previous studies indicated that remote workdays are better than ofce workdays in terms of job satisfaction [ 99 ] , work engagement [ 23 ] and stress [ 23 ] , our results show mixed efects . Contrary to Delanoeije and Verbruggen’s fnding that work engage - ment was higher on remote workdays than on ofce workdays [ 23 ] and Wang et al . ’s report that employees were attracted to working from home because of more time to focus [ 102 ] , our results showed that employees were more enthusiastic about ofce workdays than remote workdays . However , our results also showed that they were more placid on remote workdays than ofce workdays . We specu - late that this might be related to reduced stress on remote workdays , which corresponds to fndings in prior work [ 23 ] . According to the interview results , the tendency to be both more enthusiastic and more irritable on ofce workdays as compared to remote workdays may be related to the presence of team members . When employees come to the ofce , they seem to feel more pres - sure to work hard than on remote workdays and to feel anxiety about being overheard by those around them . This corresponds to comments indicating that the presence of surrounding gazes in the ofce makes it difcult to relax but easier to get more moti - vated . On the other hand , the lack of others’ gazes when working remotely seems to make it easier to relax . Thus , proximity or dis - tance from team members seems to be one of the main infuences on enthusiasm and placidity . Another factor that may have led to diferent results from pre - vious studies is the infuence of culture . According to Markus and Kitayama , Asian cultures emphasize “attending to others , ftting in , and harmonious interdependence with them” and “American culture neither assumes nor values such an overt connectedness among individuals” [ 64 , p . 224 ] . Thus , compared to Eastern peo - ple , Western people may be less afected by the presence of others and have diferent daily afective well - being according to work arrangements . 5 . 2 Relationship between social norms and employee well - being RQ2a and RQ2b asked about the impact of social norms for hybrid work on employee well - being , focusing on the strength of norms and willingness to conform to norms . The results showed that norm strength and willingness to conform were associated with employee well - being as follows . First , the willingness to conform to injunctive norms was positively associated with overall well - being . Second , the strength of injunctive norms was negatively associated with overall well - being . Third , the willingness to conform to descrip - tive norms was positively associated with well - being during ofce workdays . The result of a positive relationship between conformity to social norms and well - being agrees well with a previous fnding that the person - culture ft amplifes well - being [ 31 ] . Furthermore , the negative relationship between the strength of injunctive norms and well - being was consistent with a previous study showing that monitoring undermines employee well - being [ 100 ] . According to the interview results , the negative relationship be - tween the strength of injunctive norms and overall well - being may be related to respondents’ preferences for fexibility and autonomy . Past research has found that perceptions that one’s workplace sup - ports workers’ autonomy are correlated with positive afect and job satisfaction [ 87 ] and better psychological health [ 36 ] . Flexibility and autonomy provide remote workers with the advantages of orga - nizing work tasks according to their preferences and coordinating work and non - work activities , which is associated with better well - being , motivation , and performance [ 76 , 96 ] . Multiple studies about post - COVID - 19 hybrid work have found that workers increasingly want and beneft from autonomy , since the ability to control their work - life balance can improve well - being [ 89 , 102 ] . For example , a recent study of hybrid and remote workers found that those who feel autonomy over their workspace and schedule are more likely to enjoy working from home [ 18 ] . However , increased autonomy is not a panacea for work satisfaction . The same study also found that workers with high autonomy can experience difculty man - aging boundaries between work and home . We observed similar difculties , particularly that ambiguity about what was expected from colleagues contributed to worker frustration and difculty making decisions about when and how often to go to the ofce . For example , P15 stated that it was difcult for her to exercise fexibility because she was afraid of her supervisor’s reaction . Also , P05 stated that he would like more precise rules instead of using the vague term “recommendation . ” Accordingly , rules and norms that are too strict may lower well - being by reducing employee fexibility and autonomy , however high autonomy may also contribute to stress by tasking workers with making decisions that were previously oth - ers’ responsibility . We posit that the presence of strong injunctive norms , if not accompanied by clear rules or accompanying descrip - tive norms , can lead to the worst of both worlds , where workers feel pressure to conform to an expectation by their coworkers but lack guidance ( through rules or other peoples’ examples ) about how to meet this expectation or navigate conficting demands . The positive relationship between conformity to descriptive norms and well - being on ofce workdays may be related to sus - picion and fear surrounding remote work . The interview results suggested that people working remotely are more likely to be sus - pected of slacking of and to be concerned about this suspicion . Those with such anxiety may have higher well - being on ofce workdays because they are more willing to conform to descriptive norms and are more likely to conform to descriptive norms in the ofce . In other words , on ofce workdays , it is easier for people who want to do the same thing as their colleagues to observe other mem - bers’ behavior and thus be reassured that their behavior matches . On the other hand , those who do not want to conform to descriptive norms may be more comfortable on remote workdays because they do not have to worry about what others think of them . 5 . 3 Implications for managing social norms at work RQ3 investigated how hybrid workers perceive and navigate the relationship between social norms for hybrid work and their well - being . According to the interview results , participants navigated considerable ambiguity when it came to when and how often they should work at the ofce compared to working remotely . While some were frustrated by the lack of clarity , others took advantage CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Wataru Akahori , et al . of the resulting fexibility to coordinate with their colleagues in ways that seem to contribute to their well - being . Furthermore , the interview results revealed strategies for increasing the visibility of remote work processes , to assure colleagues that one is working hard . Below , we ofer implications about how to build upon these strategies to manage social norms positively impacting well - being . 5 . 3 . 1 Design implications . One important dimension of our fnd - ings was a lack of shared awareness among colleagues . A signifcant body of HCI research has focused on addressing exactly this chal - lenge [ e . g . , 26 , 27 , 43 , 57 , 78 ] . Much of this work has focused on facilitating collaborative performance [ 56 , 59 , 62 ] , rather than on how awareness among work colleagues could improve well - being . The results of the present study suggest that increasing mutual awareness among colleagues may address two types of threats to hybrid workers’ well - being . First , participants’ stress was exacer - bated by colleagues’ suspicions about their remote productivity , and these suspicions were rooted in the fact that work conducted outside the workplace is often lacking in visibility . Second , increas - ing awareness among colleagues may make it easier to support accurate descriptive norms , since participants could observe col - league’s work practices frst - hand . Leveraging descriptive norms may be valuable because , although strong injunctive norms about hybrid work were associated with poor well - being , descriptive norm strength had no such negative association . Furthermore , ofce - day well - being was higher for those with high willingness to conform to descriptive norms , which may be because physical co - presence at the ofce makes it easier to demon - strate such conformity to one’s peers . However , the corollary is also true , that people who lack willingness to follow descriptive norms had worse well - being when at the ofce . Indeed , many par - ticipants described feeling watched by others when at the ofce . For those people , bringing the gaze of others’ eyes into their remote workplace ( their home ) is likely to increase stress . Therefore , orga - nizations may seek to increase awareness among hybrid - working colleagues , but should avoid approaches that may negatively impact employee well - being . Many organizations have turned to digital monitoring [ 55 ] , which does not require active efort from workers , but which has negative efects on job attitudes and anxiety [ 46 , 75 ] . By contrast , workplace messaging apps like Slack aford workers control about what to share and with whom , but burden users with expectations for frequent messaging and immediate replies [ 108 ] . This leads to a challenge : How can organizations increase shared awareness among employees in diferent locations , without undue burden and without invasive monitoring that can increase stress ? Further , given that attitudes about monitoring and sharing informa - tion varied among our study participants , a one - size - fts - all solution is less appropriate than tools that can be tailored to workers’ needs . To address this challenge , we present two illustrative proposals . The frst describes an approach for manual , deliberate information sharing without imposing a high burden . The second explores pos - sibilities for increasing awareness passively , while giving workers the ability to control the scope of automated disclosures . In both proposals , we speculate about ways to extend existing HCI research to support awareness among colleagues and cultivate descriptive norms , in order to address threats to well - being identifed during this study . Ritualization of information sharing among colleagues . Our frst proposal is to ritualize a simple form of information shar - ing among workers . Rituals are routines that are imbued with meaning - making , and which often contribute to the construction of shared identities [ 30 ] . Participating in shared rituals has been found to positively associate with well - being in family [ 22 , 29 ] , community [ 88 ] , and workplace [ 68 ] contexts . Further , rituals and routines have been identifed as important tools for managing work - life boundaries during remote work , and for establishing a sense of place during the disruptive transition to remote work amid the COVID - 19 pandemic [ 18 ] . Our results suggest that hybrid work - ers can experience an even more disruptive transition , since the boundaries between work and home are not consistent day - to - day . Like Cho et al . , [ 18 ] , we see Highlight Matome [ 7 ] as a productive example of using simple rituals to support worker well - being . Avra - hami et al . [ 7 ] found that workers who spent about 30 seconds each day using Highlight Matome to write down a daily highlight expe - rienced increased engagement , dedication , and positivity toward their jobs . We observed some participants in our study ( e . g . , P13 ) recording daily work logs to increase the visibility of their work , however these logs were a mandated form of work tracking rather than a tool for refection , like Highlight Matome . We posit that ex - tending a highlight - focused logging tool with sharing features could contribute to a shared ritual through which descriptive norms could be communicated among colleagues . Crucially , the design should be carefully engineered to avoid devolving into an accountability or productivity tracking tool . This could be accomplished by prompt - ing users with examples that emphasize work - life balance ( e . g . , highlights about completing a work task should co - exist with high - lights about exercising , socializing , or achieving personal goals ) , limiting the frequency of sharing ( e . g . , record private highlights ev - ery day , and share a single highlight once a week ) , and considering making sharing anonymous ( to reduce self - presentation pressure ) . Automatic information sharing during collaborative work . Our second proposal builds on prior HCI research about automated information sharing during collaborative work . One of the most successful areas in collaborative computing is collaborative docu - ment editing , where users’ edits and activities are passively shared with one another through revision logs [ e . g . , 56 , 101 ] . However , in contemporary work , a single task could involve many diferent applications [ 73 ] , suggesting a need to share information extend - ing across multiple applications simultaneously . Researchers have explored screen - sharing during collaborations [ e . g . , 94 ] , which is a promising approach for some types of collaboration , although potentially invasive in others . A less invasive model could be to share logs , such as excerpts of Web browser histories , histories of revisions to selected documents , and meeting schedules . For this proposal to serve workers’ well - being , it is important that they feel in control of what they share and with whom . To facilitate con - trol without demanding laborious fltering of information streams , Mozilla’s Multi - Account Containers tool 1 is a useful design infu - ence . It prevents platforms from tracking one’s activity across the web by containing specifc online accounts to color - coded Browser tabs . In the present - case , workers could open applications they want to share within color - coded virtual workspaces with customizable 1 https : / / addons . mozilla . org / en - US / frefox / addon / multi - account - containers / Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany sharing settings . If workers were given sufcient control over what they share and with whom , this is a potential direction for passively increasing awareness without subjecting workers to surveillance . Proposed benefts . These proposals aim to serve participants’ preferences for fexibility and autonomy , while cultivating routine information sharing . Workers who use such systems could engender reciprocal trust with their colleagues , which is promising because trust is a predictor of health [ 8 ] . Ultimately , making colleagues’ practices more visible to one another could facilitate the formation of more accurate descriptive norms , which could lead to fexibility and transparency about the appropriateness of various work styles . Particularly , in workplaces where diverse work styles are equally viable paths to success , observing others’ varied practices could contribute to looser injunctive norms , since there would be less reason to believe that any one approach should be followed by anyone . While there is a need for further research about supporting well - being in hybrid work , we ofer these proposals as potential paths to well - being , by increasing clarity about how to navigate new and changing work structures . 5 . 3 . 2 Management implications . The results of this study showed that the strength of injunctive norms is associated with lower over - all well - being , while willingness to conform to injunctive norms is associated with higher overall well - being . This suggests that it is important to carefully adjust the strength and quality of injunctive norms to facilitate willingness to conform . For example , it may be helpful to set specifc behavioral expectations to facilitate confor - mity without relying on harsh penalties or punitive rules . Prior research has suggested that in online communities where it is dif - fcult to impose sanctions on rule - breakers , the provision of clear , detailed behavioral expectations makes it easier for newcomers to conform to a community’s injunctive norms [ 70 ] . In this study , a few interview participants reported that they would like clearer policies regarding hybrid work . One reason for this seems to be that , even though participants did not identify formal penalties for violat - ing implicit norms , they frequently faced negative judgments from coworkers . Thus , clearer rules and evaluation mechanisms could make it easier for workers with diferent work styles to demonstrate productivity to their colleagues . In this case , more clarity in formal organizational structures could facilitate looser injunctive norms among coworkers because colleagues’ informal judgments would play a smaller role . In addition , employers should consider why some employees do not want to conform to injunctive norms . Subjective norms are less likely to lead to their prescribed behavior if the perceived costs of that behavior are high [ 24 ] . Thus , organizations should seek to identify and remove barriers in order to make it easier for workers to engage in the desired behavior . In some cases , the costs of re - moving barriers may be high , or there may be benefts to tolerating non - conformity . In such instances , organizations should consider loosening injunctive norms rather than focusing on compliance . For example , prior work has found gender diferences in prefer - ences and experiences related to working at home versus working in - person [ 28 ] and argued that fexible remote - work options could help balance gender gaps in hours worked and wages [ 6 ] . In such cases , mandating conformity to a one - size - fts - all system could harm well - being . Similarly , we observed cases where , in the absence of frm rules , workers coordinated their schedules together to accommodate each other’s personal needs and to facilitate cooperative work . These represent opportunities where workers may be capable of coordi - nating parts of their own work without top - down rules or pressure invoked through strong injunctive norms . We posit that this sort of fexibility could improve well - being if it allows workers to develop patterns that ft their individual needs , as well as the needs of their teammates . Furthermore , if properly nurtured by organizations , it could be possible for this sort of worker - driven coordination to co - alesce into descriptive norms that encourage consideration among colleagues as well as efcient scheduling of in - person collaboration . 5 . 4 Limitations Because our data were collected only in Japan , there are some constraints on the generalizability to diferent countries and cul - tures . For example , national diferences in cultural tightness may afect social norms for hybrid work . Moreover , while the percentage of full - time employees in Japan who have a second job is low at 5 . 9 % [ 69 ] , in countries with many employees who work second jobs , membership in multiple organizations may impact social norms . In the future , the impact of such cultural tightness and multiple orga - nizational afliations on the relationship between social norms for hybrid work and employee well - being should be carefully explored . Additionally , because our data relate to the ongoing COVID - 19 pandemic , our results may be biased by the impact of COVID - 19 infections and social distancing policies . Specifcally , we collected our data during February and March 2022 , when pre - emergency measures to address the sixth wave of COVID - 19 were announced at various locations in Japan . It is possible that the Japanese public was relatively nervous about COVID - 19 during this period and that social norms for hybrid work subsequently changed as the number of COVID - 19 cases declined . Further follow - up and longitudinal studies will be needed to address this issue . Third , this study relies on self - report measures , which can cause common method biases [ 77 ] . Although we adopted subjective mea - sures in our study because people’s perception has a major impact on their well - being , objective measures are also important . In the future , for example , objective measures of well - being ( e . g . , health status ) could be collected in addition to subjective measures . Further , an ethnographic approach would help us gain a more comprehen - sive understanding of how social norms afect employee well - being . 6 CONCLUSION Although previous research suggests that organizational social norms play an important role in employee well - being , we still know little about their efect on well - being during the transition to hybrid work , when social norms are not yet fully formed . In this paper , we examined relationships between hybrid - workers’ well - being and social norms about how often and when they should work remotely compared to at the workplace . In general , hybrid workers’ well - being was negatively impacted by strong social norms , but many also described feeling anxious about how others see them when the norms were loose . Additionally , those who were more willing to conform to social norms about their hybrid work sched - ule generally had higher well - being . To accommodate this situation , CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Wataru Akahori , et al . some tried to coordinate and generate new norms that aligned with their values and needs . Based on these results , we made recom - mendations for managing the strength of workplace norms and for increasing collaborative awareness in ways that could lead to more accurate descriptive norms , without subjecting workers to constant monitoring or burden . This research contributes knowledge toward the development of technologies and management approaches that can help in forming new norms to reduce negative impacts of hy - brid work arrangements on employee well - being while maintaining benefts such as fexibility and autonomy . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Bryan Adkins and David Caldwell . 2004 . Firm or subgroup cul - ture : where does ftting in matter most ? Journal of Organiza - tional Behavior 25 , 8 ( 2004 ) , 969 – 978 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / job . 291 arXiv : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / job . 291 [ 2 ] Icek Ajzen . 1991 . The theory of planned behavior . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 50 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 179 – 211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0749 - 5978 ( 91 ) 90020 - T Theories of Cognitive Self - Regulation . [ 3 ] Icek Ajzen . 2006 . Constructing a theory of planned behavior questionnaire . https : / / people . umass . edu / aizen / pdf / tpb . measurement . pdf [ 4 ] Tammy D . Allen , Timothy D . Golden , and Kristen M . Shockley . 2015 . How Efective Is Telecommuting ? Assessing the Status of Our Scientifc Findings . Psychological Science in the Public Interest 16 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 40 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1529100615593273 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1529100615593273 PMID : 26403188 . [ 5 ] Kimberley R . Allison , Kay Bussey , and Naomi Sweller . 2019 . ’I’m Going to Hell for Laughing at This’ : Norms , Humour , and the Neutralisation of Aggression in Online Communities . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Article 152 ( nov 2019 ) , 25 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359254 [ 6 ] Melanie Arntz , Sarra Ben Yahmed , and Francesco Berlingieri . 2020 . Working from Home and COVID - 19 : The Chances and Risks for Gender Gaps . Intereco - nomics 55 , 6 ( 01 Nov 2020 ) , 381 – 386 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10272 - 020 - 0938 - 5 [ 7 ] Daniel Avrahami , Kristin Williams , Matthew L . Lee , Nami Tokunaga , Yulius Tjahjadi , and Jennifer Marlow . 2020 . Celebrating Everyday Success : Improving Engagement and Motivation Using a System for Recording Daily Highlights . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376369 [ 8 ] John C . Barefoot , Kimberly E . Maynard , Jean C . Beckham , Beverly H . Brummett , Karen Hooker , and Ilene C . Siegler . 1998 . Trust , Health , and Longevity . Journal of Behavioral Medicine 21 , 6 ( 01 Dec 1998 ) , 517 – 526 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1018792528008 [ 9 ] Jose Maria Barrero , Nicholas Bloom , and Steven J Davis . 2021 . Why Working from Home Will Stick . Working Paper 28731 . National Bureau of Economic Research . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3386 / w28731 [ 10 ] Julia L O Beckel and Gwenith G Fisher . 2022 . Telework and Worker Health and Well - Being : A Review and Recommendations for Research and Practice . Int J Environ Res Public Health 19 , 7 ( March 2022 ) . [ 11 ] Nicholas Bloom , Paul Mizen , and Shivani Taneja . 2021 . Returning to the ofce will be hard . https : / / voxeu . org / article / returning - ofce - will - be - hard [ 12 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa arXiv : https : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 13 ] Jenna Butler , Mary Czerwinski , Shamsi Iqbal , Sonia Jafe , Kate Nowak , Emily Peloquin , and Longqi Yang . 2021 . Personal Productivity and Well - being - Chapter 2 of the 2021 New Future of Work report . Microsoft , Chapter 2 , 18 – 36 . https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / publication / personal - productivity - and - well - being - chapter - 2 - of - the - 2021 - new - future - of - work - report / [ 14 ] Jenna Butler and Sonia Jafe . 2021 . Challenges and Gratitude : A Diary Study of Software Engineers Working From Home During Covid - 19 Pandemic . In ICSE SEIP . https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / publication / challenges - and - gratitude - a - diary - study - of - software - engineers - working - from - home - during - covid - 19 - pandemic / [ 15 ] Julie Butler and Margaret Kern . 2016 . The PERMA - Profler : A brief multidimen - sional measure of fourishing . International Journal of Wellbeing 6 , 3 ( 10 2016 ) , 1 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5502 / ijw . v6i3 . 526 [ 16 ] Stevie Chancellor , Andrea Hu , and Munmun De Choudhury . 2018 . Norms Matter : Contrasting Social Support Around Behavior Change in Online Weight Loss Communities . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174240 [ 17 ] Maria Charalampous , Christine A . Grant , Carlo Tramontano , and Evie Michai - lidis . 2019 . Systematically reviewing remote e - workers’ well - being at work : a multidimensional approach . European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 28 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 51 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1359432X . 2018 . 1541886 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1359432X . 2018 . 1541886 [ 18 ] Janghee Cho , Samuel Beck , and Stephen Voida . 2022 . Topophilia , Placemaking , and Boundary Work : Exploring the Psycho - Social Impact of the COVID - 19 Work - From - Home Experience . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 6 , GROUP , Article 24 ( jan 2022 ) , 33 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3492843 [ 19 ] Robert B Cialdini and Noah J Goldstein . 2004 . Social infuence : compliance and conformity . Annu Rev Psychol 55 ( 2004 ) , 591 – 621 . [ 20 ] Robert B Cialdini , Raymond R Reno , and Carl A Kallgren . 1990 . A focus theory of normative conduct : Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 58 , 6 ( 1990 ) , 1015 – 1026 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 58 . 6 . 1015 [ 21 ] J O Crawford , L MacCalman , and C A Jackson . 2011 . The health and well - being of remote and mobile workers . Occup Med ( Lond ) 61 , 6 ( Sept . 2011 ) , 385 – 394 . [ 22 ] Carla Crespo , Magdalena Kielpikowski , Jan Pryor , and Paul E . Jose . 2011 . Family rituals in New Zealand families : Links to family cohesion and adolescents’ well - being . Journal of Family Psychology 25 ( 2011 ) , 184 – 193 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0023113 [ 23 ] Joni Delanoeije and Marijke Verbruggen . 2020 . Between - person and within - person efects of telework : a quasi - feld experiment . European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 29 , 6 ( 2020 ) , 795 – 808 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1359432X . 2020 . 1774557 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1359432X . 2020 . 1774557 [ 24 ] Andreas Diekmann and Peter Preisendörfer . 2003 . Green and Greenback : The Behavioral Efects of Environmental Attitudes in Low - Cost and High - Cost Situations . Rationality and Society 15 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 441 – 472 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1043463103154002 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1043463103154002 [ 25 ] Scott I . Donaldson and Stewart I . Donaldson . 2020 . The Positive Functioning at Work Scale : Psychometric Assessment , Validation , and Measurement Invariance . Journal of Well - Being Assessment 4 , 2 ( 01 Jul 2020 ) , 181 – 215 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s41543 - 020 - 00033 - 1 [ 26 ] Paul Dourish and Victoria Bellotti . 1992 . Awareness and Coordination in Shared Workspaces . In Proceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CSCW ’92 ) . Association for Com - puting Machinery , 107 – 114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 143457 . 143468 [ 27 ] Paul Dourish and Sara Bly . 1992 . Portholes : Supporting Awareness in a Dis - tributed Work Group . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Monterey , California , USA ) ( CHI ’92 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 541 – 547 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 142750 . 142982 [ 28 ] Kimberly A . Eddleston and Jay Mulki . 2017 . Toward Understanding Remote Workers’ Management of Work – Family Boundaries : The Com - plexity of Workplace Embeddedness . Group & Organization Manage - ment 42 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 346 – 387 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1059601115619548 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1059601115619548 [ 29 ] Barbara H . Fiese , Kimberly P . Foley , and Mary Spagnola . 2006 . Rou - tine and ritual elements in family mealtimes : Contexts for child well - being and family identity . New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development 2006 , 111 ( 2006 ) , 67 – 89 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cd . 156 arXiv : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / cd . 156 [ 30 ] Barbara H . Fiese , Thomas J . Tomcho , Michael Douglas , Kimberly Josephs , Scott Poltrock , and Tim Baker . 2002 . A review of 50 years of research on naturally occurring family routines and rituals : Cause for celebration ? Journal of Family Psychology 16 ( 2002 ) , 381 – 390 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0893 - 3200 . 16 . 4 . 381 [ 31 ] C . Ashley Fulmer , Michele J . Gelfand , Arie W . Kruglanski , Chu Kim - Prieto , Ed Diener , Antonio Pierro , and E . Tory Higgins . 2010 . On “Feeling Right” in Cul - tural Contexts : How Person - Culture Match Afects Self - Esteem and Subjective Well - Being . Psychological Science 21 , 11 ( 2010 ) , 1563 – 1569 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797610384742 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797610384742 PMID : 20876880 . [ 32 ] Ravi S . Gajendran and David A . Harrison . 2007 . The good , the bad , and the unknown about telecommuting : Meta - analysis of psychological mediators and individual consequences . Journal of Applied Psychology 92 , 6 ( 2007 ) , 1524 – 1541 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 92 . 6 . 1524 [ 33 ] Michele J Gelfand , Joshua Conrad Jackson , Xinyue Pan , Dana Nau , Dylan Pieper , Emmy Denison , Munqith Dagher , Paul A M Van Lange , Chi - Yue Chiu , and Mo Wang . 2021 . The relationship between cultural tightness – looseness and COVID - 19 cases and deaths : a global analysis . The Lancet Planetary Health 5 , 3 ( 2021 ) , e135 – e144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S2542 - 5196 ( 20 ) 30301 - 6 [ 34 ] Michele J . Gelfand , Lisa H . Nishii , and Jana L . Raver . 2006 . On the nature and importance of cultural tightness - looseness . Journal of Applied Psychology 91 , 6 ( 2006 ) , 1225 – 1244 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 91 . 6 . 1225 [ 35 ] Michele J . Gelfand , Jana L . Raver , Lisa Nishii , Lisa M . Leslie , Janetta Lun , Beng Chong Lim , Lili Duan , Assaf Almaliach , Soon Ang , Jakobina Arnadot - tir , Zeynep Aycan , Klaus Boehnke , Pawel Boski , Rosa Cabecinhas , Darius Chan , Jagdeep Chhokar , Alessia D’Amato , Montse Ferrer , Iris C . Fischlmayr , Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Ronald Fischer , Marta Fülöp , James Georgas , Emiko S . Kashima , Yoshishima Kashima , Kibum Kim , Alain Lempereur , Patricia Marquez , Rozhan Othman , Bert Overlaet , Penny Panagiotopoulou , Karl Peltzer , Lorena R . Perez - Florizno , Larisa Ponomarenko , Anu Realo , Vidar Schei , Manfred Schmitt , Peter B . Smith , Nazar Soomro , Erna Szabo , Nalinee Taveesin , Midori Toyama , Ev - ert Van de Vliert , Naharika Vohra , Colleen Ward , and Susumu Yamaguchi . 2011 . Diferences Between Tight and Loose Cultures : A 33 - Nation Study . Science 332 , 6033 ( 2011 ) , 1100 – 1104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1197754 arXiv : https : / / www . science . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 1126 / science . 1197754 [ 36 ] Nicolas Gillet , Marylène Gagné , Séverine Sauvagère , and Evelyne Fouquereau . 2013 . The role of supervisor autonomy support , organizational support , and autonomous and controlled motivation in predicting employees’ satisfaction and turnover intentions . European Journal of Work and Organizational Psy - chology 22 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 450 – 460 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1359432X . 2012 . 665228 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1359432X . 2012 . 665228 [ 37 ] Timothy D . Golden . 2006 . Avoiding depletion in virtual work : Telework and the intervening impact of work exhaustion on commitment and turnover intentions . Journal of Vocational Behavior 69 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 176 – 187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jvb . 2006 . 02 . 003 [ 38 ] Timothy D . Golden and John F . Veiga . 2005 . The Impact of Extent of Telecom - muting on Job Satisfaction : Resolving Inconsistent Findings . Journal of Man - agement 31 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 301 – 318 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0149206304271768 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0149206304271768 [ 39 ] Timothy D . Golden , John F . Veiga , and Zeki Simsek . 2006 . Telecommuting’s diferential impact on work - family confict : Is there no place like home ? Journal of Applied Psychology 91 , 6 ( 2006 ) , 1340 – 1350 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 91 . 6 . 1340 [ 40 ] Noah J . Goldstein , Robert B . Cialdini , and Vladas Griskevicius . 2008 . A Room with a Viewpoint : Using Social Norms to Motivate Environmental Conservation in Hotels . Journal of Consumer Research 35 , 3 ( 03 2008 ) , 472 – 482 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 586910 arXiv : https : / / academic . oup . com / jcr / article - pdf / 35 / 3 / 472 / 5251693 / 35 - 3 - 472 . pdf [ 41 ] Melissa Graham , Victoria Weale , Katrina A Lambert , Natasha Kinsman , Rwth Stuckey , and Jodi Oakman . 2021 . Working at Home : The Impacts of COVID 19 on Health , Family - Work - Life Confict , Gender , and Parental Responsibilities . J Occup Environ Med 63 , 11 ( Nov . 2021 ) , 938 – 943 . [ 42 ] Louise Grogan and Katerina Koka . 2013 . Economic crises and wellbeing : Social norms and home production . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 92 ( 2013 ) , 241 – 258 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jebo . 2013 . 05 . 007 [ 43 ] Carl Gutwin and Saul Greenberg . 1999 . The Efects of Workspace Awareness Support on the Usability of Real - Time Distributed Groupware . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 6 , 3 ( Sept . 1999 ) , 243 – 281 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 329693 . 329696 [ 44 ] Brittany Harker Martin and Rhiannon MacDonnell . 2012 . Is telework efective for organizations ? Management Research Review 35 , 7 ( 01 Jan 2012 ) , 602 – 616 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 01409171211238820 [ 45 ] Jesse R . Harrington and Michele J . Gelfand . 2014 . Tightness – looseness across the 50 united states . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences 111 , 22 ( 2014 ) , 7990 – 7995 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1317937111 arXiv : https : / / www . pnas . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1317937111 [ 46 ] Debora Jeske and Alecia M . Santuzzi . 2015 . Monitoring what and how : psy - chological implications of electronic performance monitoring . New Technology , Work and Employment 30 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 62 – 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ntwe . 12039 arXiv : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1111 / ntwe . 12039 [ 47 ] Marta Juchnowicz and Hanna Kinowska . 2021 . Employee Well - Being and Digital Work during the COVID - 19 Pandemic . Information 12 , 8 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / info12080293 [ 48 ] Carl A . Kallgren , Raymond R . Reno , and Robert B . Cialdini . 2000 . A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct : When Norms Do and Do not Afect Behavior . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 26 , 8 ( 2000 ) , 1002 – 1012 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 01461672002610009 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 01461672002610009 [ 49 ] Margaret L Kern . 2014 . The Workplace PERMA Profler . https : / / www . peggykern . org / uploads / 5 / 6 / 6 / 7 / 56678211 / workplace _ perma _ profler _ 102014 . pdf [ 50 ] Charles Kiene , Andrés Monroy - Hernández , and Benjamin Mako Hill . 2016 . Surviving an “Eternal September” : How an Online Community Managed a Surge of Newcomers . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1152 – 1156 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858356 [ 51 ] Kevin M . Knifn , Jayanth Narayanan , Frederik Anseel , John Antonakis , Susan P . Ashford , Arnold B . Bakker , Peter Bamberger , Hari Bapuji , Devasheesh P . Bhave , Virginia K . Choi , Stephanie J . Creary , Evangelia Demerouti , Francis J . Flynn , Michele J . Gelfand , Lindred L . Greer , Gary Johns , Selin Kesebir , Peter G . Klein , Sun Young Lee , Hakan Ozcelik , Jennifer Louise Petriglieri , Nancy P . Rothbard , Cort W . Rudolph , Jason D . Shaw , Nina Sirola , Connie R . Wanberg , Ashley Whillans , Michael P . Wilmot , and Mark van Vugt . 2021 . COVID - 19 and the workplace : Implications , issues , and insights for future research and action . American Psychologist 76 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 63 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / amp0000716 [ 52 ] Ellen Ernst Kossek , Brenda A . Lautsch , and Susan C . Eaton . 2006 . Telecommuting , control , and boundary management : Correlates of policy use and practice , job control , and work – family efectiveness . Journal of Vocational Behavior 68 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 347 – 367 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jvb . 2005 . 07 . 002 [ 53 ] AMY L . KRISTOF . 1996 . PERSON - ORGANIZATION FIT : AN IN - TEGRATIVE REVIEW OF ITS CONCEPTUALIZATIONS , MEA - SUREMENT , AND IMPLICATIONS . Personnel Psychology 49 , 1 ( 1996 ) , 1 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1744 - 6570 . 1996 . tb01790 . x arXiv : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1111 / j . 1744 - 6570 . 1996 . tb01790 . x [ 54 ] AMY L . KRISTOF - BROWN , RYAN D . ZIMMERMAN , and ERIN C . JOHNSON . 2005 . CONSEQUENCES OF INDIVIDUALS’ FIT AT WORK : A META - ANALYSIS OF PERSON – JOB , PERSON – ORGANIZATION , PERSON – GROUP , AND PERSON – SUPERVISOR FIT . Personnel Psychology 58 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 281 – 342 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1744 - 6570 . 2005 . 00672 . x arXiv : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1111 / j . 1744 - 6570 . 2005 . 00672 . x [ 55 ] Kristell Leduc . 2020 . Employee monitoring and surveillance : The challenges of digitalisation - Luxembourg . Publications Ofce of the European Union , Luxembourg . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2806 / 424580 [ 56 ] Cheuk Yin Phipson Lee , Zhuohao Zhang , Jaylin Herskovitz , JooYoung Seo , and Anhong Guo . 2022 . CollabAlly : Accessible Collaboration Awareness in Document Editing . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Associa - tion for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 596 , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517635 [ 57 ] Min Kyung Lee and Leila Takayama . 2011 . " Now , i Have a Body " : Uses and Social Norms for Mobile Remote Presence in the Workplace . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 33 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1978950 [ 58 ] Gilly Leshed and Phoebe Sengers . 2011 . " I Lie to Myself That i Have Freedom in My Own Schedule " : Productivity Tools and Experiences of Busyness . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 905 – 914 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979077 [ 59 ] Jerry Li , Mia Manavalan , Sarah D’Angelo , and Darren Gergle . 2016 . Designing Shared Gaze Awareness for Remote Collaboration . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion ( San Francisco , California , USA ) ( CSCW ’16 Companion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 325 – 328 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818052 . 2869097 [ 60 ] Gabrielle Lindsay - Smith , Grant O’Sullivan , Rochelle Eime , Jack Harvey , and Jannique G . Z . van Ufelen . 2018 . A mixed methods case study exploring the impact of membership of a multi - activity , multicentre community group on social wellbeing of older adults . BMC Geriatrics 18 , 1 ( 24 Sep 2018 ) , 226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12877 - 018 - 0913 - 1 [ 61 ] Lu Liu , Harm van Essen , and Berry Eggen . 2022 . An Exploratory Study of How to Design Interventions to Support Informal Communication in Remote Work . In Nordic Human - Computer Interaction Conference ( Aarhus , Denmark ) ( NordiCHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 53 , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3546155 . 3546673 [ 62 ] Gustavo Lopez and Luis A . Guerrero . 2017 . Awareness Supporting Technologies Used in Collaborative Systems : A Systematic Literature Review . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( Portland , Oregon , USA ) ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 808 – 820 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998281 [ 63 ] Lucrezia Ginevra Lulli , Gabriele Giorgi , Caterina Pandolf , Giulia Foti , Geor - gia Libera Finstad , Giulio Arcangeli , and Nicola Mucci . 2021 . Identifying Psy - chosocial Risks and Protective Measures for Workers & rsquo ; Mental Wellbeing at the Time of COVID - 19 : A Narrative Review . Sustainability 13 , 24 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su132413869 [ 64 ] Hazel R . Markus and Shinobu Kitayama . 1991 . Culture and the self : Implications for cognition , emotion , and motivation . Psychological Review 98 ( 1991 ) , 224 – 253 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 98 . 2 . 224 [ 65 ] Aline D . Masuda , Claudia Holtschlag , and Jessica M . Nicklin . 2017 . Why the availability of telecommuting matters . Career Development International 22 , 2 ( 01 Jan 2017 ) , 200 – 219 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / CDI - 05 - 2016 - 0064 [ 66 ] Kathleen G . McNeill , Annelise Kerr , and Kenneth I . Mavor . 2014 . Identity and norms : the role of group membership in medical student wellbeing . Perspectives on Medical Education 3 , 2 ( 01 Apr 2014 ) , 101 – 112 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40037 - 013 - 0102 - z [ 67 ] Inês Mendonça , Franz Coelho , Paulo Ferrajão , and Ana Maria Abreu . 2022 . Telework and Mental Health during COVID - 19 . International Journal of En - vironmental Research and Public Health 19 , 5 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijerph19052602 CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Wataru Akahori , et al . [ 68 ] Jessica R . Methot , Emily H . Rosado - Solomon , Patrick E . Downes , and Al - lison S . Gabriel . 2021 . Ofce Chitchat as a Social Ritual : The Uplifting Yet Distracting Efects of Daily Small Talk at Work . Academy of Manage - ment Journal 64 , 5 ( 2021 ) , 1445 – 1471 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2018 . 1474 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2018 . 1474 [ 69 ] Ministry of Health , Labour and Welfare . 2020 . Details of the actual situation relating to the sideline and dual employment , etc . https : / / www . mhlw . go . jp / content / 11201250 / 000660780 . pdf [ 70 ] Jonathan T . Morgan and Anna Filippova . 2018 . ’Welcome’ Changes ? Descriptive and Injunctive Norms in a Wikipedia Sub - Community . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW , Article 52 ( nov 2018 ) , 26 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274321 [ 71 ] Soyeon Mun , Yoosun Moon , Hayeseul Kim , and Namhee Kim . 2022 . Current Discussions on Employees and Organizations During the COVID - 19 Pandemic : A Systematic Literature Review . Frontiers in Psychology 13 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2022 . 848778 [ 72 ] Katja Möhring , Elias Naumann , Maximiliane Reifenscheid , Alexander Wenz , Tobias Rettig , Ulrich Krieger , Sabine Friedel , Marina Finkel , Carina Cornesse , and Annelies G . Blom . 2021 . The COVID - 19 pandemic and subjective well - being : longitudinal evidence on satisfaction with work and family . European Societies 23 , sup1 ( 2021 ) , S601 – S617 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14616696 . 2020 . 1833066 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14616696 . 2020 . 1833066 [ 73 ] Midas Nouwens and Clemens Nylandsted Klokmose . 2018 . The Application and Its Consequences for Non - Standard Knowledge Work . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173973 [ 74 ] Charles A . O’Reilly , Jennifer Chatman , and David F . Caldwell . 1991 . PEO - PLE AND ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE : A PROFILE COMPARISON AP - PROACH TO ASSESSING PERSON - ORGANIZATION FIT . Academy of Management Journal 34 , 3 ( 1991 ) , 487 – 516 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / 256404 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / 256404 [ 75 ] Sharon K . Parker , Caroline Knight , and Anita C . Keller . 2020 . Remote Managers Are Having Trust Issues . Harvard Business Review ( 30 July 2020 ) . [ 76 ] Sharon K . Parker . 2014 . Beyond Motivation : Job and Work Design for De - velopment , Health , Ambidexterity , and More . Annual Review of Psychology 65 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 661 – 691 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 010213 - 115208 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 010213 - 115208 PMID : 24016276 . [ 77 ] Philip M . Podsakof , Scott B . MacKenzie , Jeong - Yeon Lee , and Nathan P . Pod - sakof . 2003 . Common method biases in behavioral research : A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies . Journal of Applied Psychology 88 ( 2003 ) , 879 – 903 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 88 . 5 . 879 [ 78 ] Irene Rae , Bilge Mutlu , and Leila Takayama . 2014 . Bodies in Motion : Mobility , Presence , and Task Awareness in Telepresence . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2153 – 2162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557047 [ 79 ] Paul Ralph , Sebastian Baltes , Gianisa Adisaputri , Richard Torkar , Vladimir Ko - valenko , Marcos Kalinowski , Nicole Novielli , Shin Yoo , Xavier Devroey , Xin Tan , Minghui Zhou , Burak Turhan , Rashina Hoda , Hideaki Hata , Gregorio Robles , Amin Milani Fard , and Rana Alkadhi . 2020 . Pandemic programming : How COVID - 19 afects software developers and how their organizations can help . Empir Softw Eng 25 , 6 ( Sept . 2020 ) , 4927 – 4961 . [ 80 ] Rajiv N . Rimal and Kevin Real . 2005 . How Behaviors are Infuenced by Per - ceived Norms : A Test of the Theory of Normative Social Behavior . Communica - tion Research 32 , 3 ( 2005 ) , 389 – 414 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0093650205275385 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0093650205275385 [ 81 ] Patrick Roos , Michele Gelfand , Dana Nau , and Janetta Lun . 2015 . Societal threat and cultural variation in the strength of social norms : An evolutionary basis . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 129 ( 2015 ) , 14 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2015 . 01 . 003 SI : Social Norms and Cultural Dynamics . [ 82 ] Emma Russell and Kevin Daniels . 2018 . Measuring afective well - being at work using short - form scales : Implications for afective structures and participant instructions . Human Relations 71 , 11 ( 2018 ) , 1478 – 1507 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0018726717751034 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0018726717751034 PMID : 30270934 . [ 83 ] Daniel Russo , Paul H . P . Hanel , Seraphina Altnickel , and Niels van Berkel . 2021 . Predictors of well - being and productivity among software professionals during the COVID - 19 pandemic – a longitudinal study . Empirical Software Engineering 26 , 4 ( 28 Apr 2021 ) , 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10664 - 021 - 09945 - 9 [ 84 ] P . Wesley Schultz . 1999 . Changing behavior with normative feedback inter - ventions : A feld experiment on curbside recycling . Basic and Applied Social Psychology 21 , 1 ( 1999 ) , 25 – 36 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / 15324839951036533 [ 85 ] Joseph Seering , Robert Kraut , and Laura Dabbish . 2017 . Shaping Pro and Anti - Social Behavior on Twitch Through Moderation and Example - Setting . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooper - ative Work and Social Computing ( Portland , Oregon , USA ) ( CSCW ’17 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 111 – 125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998277 [ 86 ] Martin E . P . Seligman . 2011 . Flourish : A visionary new understanding of happiness and well - being . Free Press , New York , NY , US . xii , 349 – xii , 349 pages . [ 87 ] Gavin R . Slemp , Margaret L . Kern , and Dianne A . Vella - Brodrick . 2015 . Work - place Well - Being : The Role of Job Crafting and Autonomy Support . Psychology of Well - Being 5 , 1 ( 25 Aug 2015 ) , 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s13612 - 015 - 0034 - y [ 88 ] Khushbeen Kaur Sohi , Purnima Singh , and Krutika Bopanna . 2018 . Ritual Participation , Sense of Community , and Social Well - Being : A Study of Seva in the Sikh Community . Journal of Religion and Health 57 , 6 ( 01 Dec 2018 ) , 2066 – 2078 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10943 - 017 - 0424 - y [ 89 ] Danijela Sokolic . 2022 . Remote work and hybrid work organizations . Economic and social development : Book of proceedings ( 2022 ) , 202 – 213 . [ 90 ] Mafalda Sousa - Uva , António Sousa - Uva , Marta Mello e Sampayo , and Florentino Serranheira . 2021 . Telework during the COVID - 19 epidemic in Portugal and determinants of job satisfaction : a cross - sectional study . BMC Public Health 21 , 1 ( 06 Dec 2021 ) , 2217 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12889 - 021 - 12295 - 2 [ 91 ] Mark Srite and Elena Karahanna . 2006 . The Role of Espoused National Cultural Values in Technology Acceptance . MIS Quarterly 30 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 679 – 704 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 25148745 [ 92 ] Abhay Sukumaran , Stephanie Vezich , Melanie McHugh , and Cliford Nass . 2011 . Normative Infuences on Thoughtful Online Participation . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3401 – 3410 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979450 [ 93 ] Aida Isabel Tavares . 2017 . Telework and health efects review . International Journal of Healthcare 3 ( 07 2017 ) , 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5430 / ijh . v3n2p30 [ 94 ] Kimberly Tee , Saul Greenberg , and Carl Gutwin . 2006 . Providing Artifact Awareness to a Distributed Group through Screen Sharing . In Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( Banf , Alberta , Canada ) ( CSCW ’06 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 99 – 108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180891 [ 95 ] Jaime Teevan , Nancy Baym , Jenna Butler , Brent Hecht , Sonia Jafe , Kate Nowak , Abigail Sellen , Longqi Yang , Marcus Ash , Kagonya Awori , Mia Bruch , Piali Choudhury , Adam Coleman , Scott Counts , Shiraz Cupala , Mary Czerwinski , Ed Doran , Elizabeth Fetterolf , Mar Gonzalez Franco , Kunal Gupta , Aaron L Halfaker , Constance Hadley , Brian Houck , Kori Inkpen , Shamsi Iqbal , Eric Knudsen , Stacey Levine , Siân Lindley , Jennifer Neville , Jacki O’Neill , Rick Pollak , Victor Poznanski , Sean Rintel , Neha Parikh Shah , Siddharth Suri , Adam D . Troy , and Mengting Wan . 2022 . Microsoft New Future of Work Report 2022 . Technical Report MSR - TR - 2022 - 3 . Microsoft . https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / publication / microsoft - new - future - of - work - report - 2022 / [ 96 ] Claartje L . ter Hoeven and Ward van Zoonen . 2015 . Flexible work designs and employee well - being : examining the efects of resources and demands . New Technology , Work and Employment 30 , 3 ( 2015 ) , 237 – 255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ntwe . 12052 arXiv : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1111 / ntwe . 12052 [ 97 ] Muhammad Usman , Jin Cheng , Usman Ghani , Habib Gul , and Waheed Ullah Shah . 2021 . Social support and perceived uncertainties during COVID - 19 : Consequences for employees’ wellbeing . Current Psychology ( 23 Sep 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12144 - 021 - 02293 - 3 [ 98 ] Tinne Vander Elst , Ronny Verhoogen , Maarten Sercu , Anja Van den Broeck , Elf Baillien , and Lode Godderis . 2017 . Not Extent of Telecommuting , But Job Characteristics as Proximal Predictors of Work - Related Well - Being . J Occup Environ Med 59 , 10 ( Oct . 2017 ) , e180 – e186 . [ 99 ] Ronald P . Vega , Amanda J . Anderson , and Seth A . Kaplan . 2015 . A Within - Person Examination of the Efects of Telework . Journal of Business and Psychology 30 , 2 ( 01 Jun 2015 ) , 313 – 323 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10869 - 014 - 9359 - 4 [ 100 ] Bin Wang , Yukun Liu , Jing Qian , and Sharon K . Parker . 2021 . Achieving Efective Remote Working During the COVID - 19 Pan - demic : A Work Design Perspective . Applied Psychology 70 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 16 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / apps . 12290 arXiv : https : / / iaap - journals . onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1111 / apps . 12290 [ 101 ] Dakuo Wang , Haodan Tan , and Tun Lu . 2017 . Why Users Do Not Want to Write Together When They Are Writing Together : Users’ Rationales for Today’s Collaborative Writing Practices . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 1 , CSCW , Article 107 ( dec 2017 ) , 18 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134742 [ 102 ] Yun Wang , Ying Liu , Weiwei Cui , John Tang , Haidong Zhang , Doug Walston , and Dongmei Zhang . 2021 . Returning to the Ofce During the COVID - 19 Pandemic Recovery : Early Indicators from China . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI EA ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 417 , 6 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3451685 [ 103 ] Peter Warr and Karina Nielsen . 2018 . Wellbeing and work performance . Hand - book of well - being . Salt Lake City , UT : DEF Publishers ( 2018 ) . [ 104 ] David Watson , Lee Anna Clark , and Auke Tellegen . 1988 . Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative afect : The PANAS scales . Impacts of the Strength and Conformity of Social Norms on Well - Being Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54 , 6 ( 1988 ) , 1063 – 1070 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 54 . 6 . 1063 [ 105 ] WHO . 2020 . Rolling updates on coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) . https : / / www . who . int / emergencies / diseases / novel - coronavirus - 2019 / events - as - they - happen [ 106 ] Burkhard Wörtler , Nico W . Van Yperen , and Dick P . H . Barelds . 2021 . Do blended working arrangements enhance organizational attractiveness and organizational citizenship behaviour intentions ? An individual difer - ence perspective . European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychol - ogy 30 , 4 ( 2021 ) , 581 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1359432X . 2020 . 1844663 CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1359432X . 2020 . 1844663 [ 107 ] Chi - Lan Yang , Naomi Yamashita , Hideaki Kuzuoka , Hao - Chuan Wang , and Eureka Foong . 2022 . Distance Matters to Weak Ties : Exploring How Work - ers Perceive Their Strongly - and Weakly - Connected Collaborators in Remote Workplaces . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 6 , GROUP , Article 44 ( jan 2022 ) , 26 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3492863 [ 108 ] Amy X . Zhang and Justin Cranshaw . 2018 . Making Sense of Group Chat through Collaborative Tagging and Summarization . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW , Article 196 ( nov 2018 ) , 27 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274465