A RT I C L E S NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 483 Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin – dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport Hong Cao 1 , 4 , Shaun Weller 1 , 4 , James D . Orth 2 , Jing Chen 1 , Bing Huang 1 , Ji - Long Chen 3 , Mark Stamnes 3 and Mark A . McNiven 1 , 2 , 5 Cortactin is an actin - binding protein that has recently been implicated in endocytosis . It binds directly to dynamin - 2 ( Dyn2 ) , a large GTPase that mediates the formation of vesicles from the plasma membrane and the Golgi . Here we show that cortactin associates with the Golgi to regulate the actin - and Dyn2 - dependent transport of cargo . Cortactin antibodies stain the Golgi apparatus , labelling peripheral buds and vesicles that are associated with the cisternae . Notably , in vitro or intact - cell experiments show that activation of Arf1 mediates the recruitment of actin , cortactin and Dyn2 to Golgi membranes . Furthermore , selective disruption of the cortactin – Dyn2 interaction significantly reduces the levels of Dyn2 at the Golgi and blocks the transit of nascent proteins from the trans - Golgi network , resulting in swollen and distended cisternae . These findings support the idea of an Arf1 - activated recruitment of an actin , cortactin and Dyn2 complex that is essential for Golgi function . The Golgi apparatus has a characteristic morphology of multiple stacked cisternae through which secretory proteins transit . This dis - tinctive organization is dynamic ; the Golgi changes shape , tubulates and vesiculates during the secretory process or in response to specific cellular functions such as mitosis and cell migration . It is believed that a complex cytoskeletal meshwork of actin - and microtubule - associated proteins , in concert with membrane coat proteins and lipid - modifying enzymes , are responsible for these dynamic properties 1 , 2 . In particular , a group of actin - binding proteins such as spectrin / ankyrin 3 , Abp1 ( ref . 4 ) , small GTPases including Cdc42 and Arf1 ( refs 5 – 7 ) , and non - conven - tional myosins I , II and V 8 , are believed to establish a dynamic scaffold upon which the Golgi is organized . Whereas disruption of this actin - based scaffold by drug treatment is known to induce profound effects on Golgi organization 9 , 10 , it is unclear how the cell might regulate the Golgi – actin meshwork to facilitate vesicle formation during secretion , or fragmentation during mitosis . Recently , we observed that the actin - binding protein cortactin — nor - mally implicated in cell ruffling and motility — is an important com - ponent of the endocytic vesiculation machinery of epithelial cells 11 . Cortactin has been shown to bind directly to the proline - rich domain ( PRD ) of Dyn2 via its Src - homology domain 3 ( SH3 ) 12 . The conventional dynamin family is known to assemble into complex polymers and hydro - lyse GTP to constrict and sever membranes 13 – 15 in a variety of vesicle transport pathways , including the scission of caveolae and clathrin - coated pits , late endosome - to - Golgi transport , and secretory vesicle formation from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) 16 , 17 . Thus , the physical interaction between a structural protein that remodels actin in response to Src kinase phosphorylation , and a membrane - associated contractile polymer , is likely to provide an important functional link between actin organiza - tion and membrane dynamics 18 – 20 . Indeed , a mechanistic link between these proteins was established through an inhibition of cortactin function that resulted in a marked reduction of receptor - mediated endocytosis 11 and growth - factor - induced dorsal membrane ruffling 21 . Because cortactin binds Dyn2 , and because this interaction has been shown to function in regulating actin - associated membrane transport events 11 , 22 , we tested whether cortactin might also work in synergy with Dyn2 to support the transit of protein through and from the Golgi . The findings in this study implicate a cortactin – Dyn2 complex to be an important component of the Golgi compartment , in which it associates with actin in an Arf1 - dependent fashion and supports the transit of nascent proteins . RESULTS Cortactin is at the trans - Golgi network In previous studies , we characterized several polyclonal antibodies raised against conserved and distinct functional domains of cortactin 11 that stained the lamellipodia and clathrin pits of cultured cells ( Fig . 1a ) . In addition to membrane labelling , we observed a striking perinuclear 1 Center for Basic Research in Digestive Diseases and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , Minnesota 55905 , USA . 2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , 1642D Guggenheim Building , Mayo Clinic , 200 First Street SW , Rochester , MN 55905 , USA . 3 Department of Physiology and Biophysics , University of Iowa College of Medicine , Iowa City , Iowa 52242 , USA . 4 These authors contributed equally to this work . 5 Correspondence should be addressed to M . A . M . ( e - mail : mcniven . mark @ mayo . edu ) Published online : 10 April 2005 ; DOI : 10 . 1038 / ncb1246 print ncb1246 . indd 483 print ncb1246 . indd 483 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 16 : 50 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 16 : 50 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 484 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 A RT I C L E S staining by all three of these antibodies . The same cells were co - stained for the trans - Golgi protein TGN38 ( Fig . 1b , d – f ) or other Golgi marker proteins , including p115 and mannosidase ( data not shown ) . All three cortactin antibodies produced similar stains to that of TGN38 . This Golgi localization was also found for full - length cortactin that had been tagged with red fluorescent protein ( Cort – RFP ) ( Fig . 1c , c ´ ) . To provide a higher - resolution analysis of cortactin localization to the Golgi , we performed immunoelectron microscopy . There was substan - tially more cortactin antibody labelling on Golgi membranes ( fivefold ) compared with other endomembrane structures , such as mitochondria , within the same photographic field ( Fig . 2f ) . The distribution of anti - cortactin gold particles was predominantly at the tips and buds of indi - vidual Golgi cisternae and along tubular – vesicular structures extending from either the cis - or trans - face ( Fig . 2 ) . This localization indicates that cortactin is not restricted to a specific Golgi domain but might func - tion at multiple vesiculation sites within the organelle . Because cortac - tin and Dyn2 directly interact , we tested for an intimate colocalization of these proteins at the Golgi . A monoclonal antibody to dynamin ( Hudy - 1 ) showed significant labelling around the Golgi cisternae ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S1a ) , similar to the labelling observed with the two cortactin antibodies ( Fig . 2 ) . When double immunogold labelling of frozen sections with both Hudy - 1 and cortactin antibodies was performed , a substantial colocalization of 5 - nm ( Dyn2 ) and 10 - nm ( cortactin ) gold particles could be seen at Golgi - associated vesiculation sites ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S1b , c ) . Cortactin recruitment to Golgi membranes is Arf1 - dependent We tested whether cortactin might also associate with isolated Golgi - enriched membranes . By adapting previously described methods 23 , we obtained highly enriched Golgi membranes from rat liver ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S2a ) . As expected , cortactin was found in the post - nuclear supernatant ( PNS ) fraction , consistent with a cytosolic and cytoskeletal localization that has been well documented by others 24 . Notably , there was no decrease in the cortactin protein level , leading to cortactin - enriched Golgi membranes . To further confirm that cortactin associates with Golgi membranes , we performed an immunoisolation of Golgi stacks from the Golgi - enriched membrane fraction . Supramagnetic beads coated with an antibody specific for either TGN38 or cortactin , isolated Golgi membranes with equal efficacy , as indicated by electron microscopy ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S2b , c ) . In contrast , beads that were coated with the anti - rabbit IgG antibody ( linker ) alone did not isolate Golgi - like mem - branes ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S2d ) . Biochemical charac - terization of the membranes that associated with the TGN38 or cortactin antibody - coated beads showed a substantial enrichment of mannosi - dase - II ( MannII ; see Supplementary Information , Fig . S2e ) . To provide insight into the mechanism of cortactin recruitment to Golgi membranes , we utilized isolated Golgi preparations for an in vitro protein recruitment assay 7 . Recruitment of both cortactin and Dyn2 was markedly increased ( greater than ninefold ) to Golgi membranes in the presence of 25 µ M GTP - γ S ( Fig . 3 ) . Addition of the actin depolymerizing drug latrunculin A ( 3 µ M ) to the assay prevented the GTP - γ S - induced assembly of actin on these membranes in addition to reducing Dyn2 and cortactin recruitment ( Fig . 3a ) . Because GTP - γ S stimulates Arf1 - depend - ent assembly of actin on Golgi membranes 7 , we tested whether brefeldin A ( BFA ) might prevent recruitment of actin , cortactin and Dyn2 . As shown in Fig . 3a , BFA almost completely prevented the recruitment of all three to the Golgi membranes . To test further the role of Arf1 in the recruitment of actin , cortactin and Dyn2 , recombinant Arf1 protein was first loaded with GTP - γ S before incubation with Golgi membranes . BFA toxin had only a marginal effect on GTP - γ S preloaded Arf1 - binding to Golgi membranes and subsequent cortactin and dynamin recruitment Cortactin AB3 * * C - Tyr * * SH3 * * SH3 Actin - binding a c c´ b b´ d d´ e f Clone 9 Clone 9 Clone 9 Acinar Acinar Anti - cortactin ( AB3 ) Cortactin B − RFP TGN38 TGN38 Anti - cortactin ( C - Tyr ) TGN38 Anti - cortactin ( SH3 ) / TGN38 Anti - cortactin ( C - Tyr ) / TGN38 YY Y Figure 1 Immunofluorescence staining of cultured epithelial cells reveals a localization of cortactin to the Golgi . ( a ) The diagram depicts the different domains of cortactin , and the asterisks mark the three different epitope regions of cortactin that are used for the generation of the specific antibodies utilized in this study . ( b – f ) Immunofluorescence staining of Clone 9 cells and acinar cells with antibodies specific to : the third F - actin - binding site ( AB3 ) of cortactin ( b ) , C - terminal tyrosines ( C - Tyr ) that are phosphorylated by Src kinases ( d , f ) , and the SH3 domain that binds the PRD of Dyn2 ( e ) . Double staining of these cells with an antibody to a trans - Golgi network protein ( TGN38 ) shows a significant colocalization ( arrows ) with cortactin ( b , b´ , d , d´ , e , f ) . Cortactin antibody staining is also found in the ruffle and at endocytic pits ( arrowhead ) , which are both known sites of cortactin function . As an alternative to antibody staining , cortactin B – RFP was expressed in Clone 9 cells ( c ) then fixed and co - stained with an antibody to TGN38 ( c´ ) . A nearly exact colocalization between the expressed tagged cortactin protein and the TGN38 antigen can be seen . Scale bars , 10 µ m . print ncb1246 . indd 484 print ncb1246 . indd 484 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 16 : 55 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 16 : 55 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 485 A RT I C L E S ( Fig . 3b , lanes 3 and 4 ) . To compliment the in vitro recruitment assays , we tested the effects of actin disassembly and Arf1 inhibition on cortactin and dynamin association with the Golgi in intact cultured cells . Cells were treated with 1 µ M cytochalasin D and stained with antibodies to cort - actin ( Fig . 3c – e ) and Golgi marker proteins ( Fig . 3c´ – e´ ) . Cytochalasin treatment did not induce a gross disruption of the Golgi but did induce a marked redistribution of cortactin from the Golgi to punctate cytoplas - mic spots . Cells were also treated with 2 µ M BFA and , remarkably , within just 1 – 2 min , both the Dyn2 ( Fig . 3f ) and cortactin distribution ( Fig . 3g , h ) became diffuse , as though they were no longer associated with Golgi cisternae ( compare to 0 min time period ; Fig . 3c ) . By 15 min post - BFA treatment , the cortactin labelling was more diffuse ( Fig . 3h ) , coinciding with the Golgi - to - endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) resorption ( Fig . 3h´ ) . Reagents that are specific to the interactive SH3 and PRD domains of cortactin and Dyn2 , respectively , were applied to cultured cells to test whether the Golgi association of one component could be disrupted by preventing a physical interaction with its partner . These probes included two cortactin antibodies ( C - Tyr and AB3 ) , a peptide derived from the SH3 domain of cortactin , and exogenously expressed cortactin and Dyn2 truncation mutants . First , cells were transfected to express truncated forms of cortactin lacking 50 amino acids of the SH3 domain ( Cort ∆ SH3 ) . Cells expressing truncated cortactin consistently showed substantial levels of cortactin staining on Golgi membranes ( Fig . 4a , b ) whereas , in contrast , Dyn2 staining of the Golgi was significantly reduced ( Fig . 4a´ , b´ ) . Second , cells were microinjected with a synthetic 24 - amino - acid SH3 cortactin peptide , allowed to recover for 4 h , then fixed and stained for Dyn2 . We predicted that this peptide would pro - vide a block between the cortactin and Dyn2 tail domains , as verified by in vitro blot overlay assays ( data not shown ) . Whereas cells that were injected with a buffer alone or a control kinesin peptide had normal Dyn2 distributions and little effect on Golgi morphology , cells that had been injected with the cortactin peptide showed a marked decrease in Golgi - associated Dyn2 ( Fig . 4c ) . Golgi morphology was maintained in the peptide - injected cells as well . In some transfected or injected cells , the Dyn2 staining at clathrin - coated pits was also slightly reduced . This was expected because cortactin and Dyn2 also function together at these endocytic sites 11 . Third , purified antibodies to the actin - binding domain ( AB3 ) or carboxy - terminal tyrosine phosphorylation sites ( C - Tyr ) of cortactin were also microinjected . As shown in Fig . 4d , d´ , e , e´ , these antibodies had substantial effects on the levels of Golgi - associated Dyn2 . Scoring showed that over 90 % of all cells that were injected with either peptide or purified antibody showed a marked reduction of Golgi - asso - ciated Dyn2 staining compared with controls . Cells expressing a truncated Dyn2 that lacked the last 124 amino acids ( which encode the PRD ; Dyn2 ∆ PRD ) showed more diffuse Dyn2 localization and greatly reduced levels of Golgi - associated Dyn2 ( Fig . 4f ) . In contrast , cortactin association with the Golgi appeared unchanged ( Fig . 4f´ ) . In reciprocal experiments , cells that were trans - fected to express only the 124 - amino - acid Dyn2 - PRD tagged to GFP ( Fig . 4g ) , or a Myc - tagged PRD ( Fig . 4h ) , showed a striking labelling of Golgi cisternae , as confirmed by co - staining with a Golgi marker antibody to giantin ( Fig . 4g´ , h´ ) . Cortactin is essential for transit of nascent cargo through the TGN Because cortactin resides at the Golgi ( Figs 1 and 2 ; see Supplementary Information , Figs S1 and S2 ) and is actively recruited to Golgi membranes — where it associates with Dyn2 via an SH3 / PRD domain interaction ( Fig . 4 ) — in an Arf1 - and actin - dependent manner ( Fig . 3 ) , we examined how dis - rupting this cortactin – Dyn2 association would affect the transit of nascent proteins through the Golgi . First , we utilized a GFP - tagged , temperature - sensitive ( ts ) variant of the vesicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) G protein ( VSV - G - ts – GFP ) , which is retained in the ER at the restrictive temperature of 40 °C . Within 15 min of shifting to a permissive temperature , the VSV - G - ts – GFP protein was exiting the ER and accumulating in the ER Golgi intermediate compartment ( ERGIC ) and Golgi compartments ( Fig . 5b ) as confirmed by co - staining with compartment - specific marker antibodies ( data not shown ) . a d e f b c GS GS GS GS GS 2 . 5 2 . 0 1 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 5 0 Golgi M N o . o f p a r t i c l e s p e r µ m o f m e m b r a n e Figure 2 Cortactin is in intimate contact with Golgi - associated buds and vesicles . ( a – e ) Electron micrographs of Clone 9 cells that have been incubated with primary antibodies to two distinct cortactin domains , C - Tyr ( a – c ) and AB3 ( d , e ) , and labelled with a gold - conjugated secondary antibody . Arrowheads indicate cortactin labelling of the peripheral buds of Golgi stacks , which is seen frequently , whereas arrows indicate labelling of peripheral Golgi buds and vesicles at both the cis and trans sides . Little gold labelling is observed on the Golgi stacks proper ( GS ) . ( f ) A total of 20 distinct Golgi fields were examined to determine the number of gold particles labelling either Golgi or mitochondrial membranes ( M ) . The average number of gold particles along each micrometre of membrane within the two distinct structures was calculated . There was , on average , fivefold more particles for each micrometre of Golgi membrane than of mitochondria membrane . Error bars denote s . d . Scale bars , 100 nm . print ncb1246 . indd 485 print ncb1246 . indd 485 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 16 : 58 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 16 : 58 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 486 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 A RT I C L E S By 60 – 120 min , the protein had been transported through the TGN to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 5c , d ) . In marked contrast to cells that express full - length cortactin protein , cells expressing truncated cortactins — Cort ∆ SH3 ( Fig . 5e – h ) or Cort ∆ Y ( data not shown ) , a more extensive C - terminal trun - cation that lacked 125 amino acids — showed normal ER - to - Golgi protein transport kinetics but exhibited a significant retention of VSV - G at the TGN by 60 – 120 min . Fluorescence quantification confirmed that cells expressing cortactin mutants exhibited a 2 . 5 - to 3 - fold increase in VSV - G protein at the Golgi region ( Fig . 5i ) . Cells expressing Dyn2 ∆ PRD also had a substantial retention of VSV - G protein at the Golgi region , showing a transport inhibi - tion similar to that of the cortactin deletions . Assessment of VSV - G glycoprotein transit from the ER to Golgi can be achieved by analysing for sensitivity to endoglycosidase H ( endo - H ) processing . The two asparagine - linked oligosaccharide chains of newly synthesized , ER - localized VSV - G can be cleaved through endo - H activity , resulting in an observable lower molecular weight form of VSV - G 25 . Density quantification of the protein bands that were obtained from cells after per - missive temperature shifts showed that cells expressing different cortactins appeared to have the same kinetics of VSV - G maturation ( Fig . 5j ) . To pursue a second method of disrupting cortactin , cells were micro - injected with the same peptide and antibody reagents as were utilized in Fig . 4 to disrupt the cortactin – Dyn2 interaction . We observed a marked Figure 3 Binding of cortactin and dynamin to isolated Golgi membranes is dependent upon Arf1 - activated actin recruitment . ( a ) Western blot analysis of an in vitro Golgi - binding assay was used to determine what factors are required for recruitment of cortactin and dynamin proteins to Golgi membranes . With GTP - γ S in the assay , there was a marked increase in Golgi membrane - bound cortactin and dynamin . However , inclusion of either BFA , to inhibit Arf1 activity , or the actin - filament - disrupting drug latrunculin A ( Lat A ; 3 µ M ) resulted in a marked inhibition of actin , cortactin and dynamin recruitment to these membranes . The recovery of membranes after the assay period was assessed by blotting for the Golgi resident protein MannII . ( b ) To test further the role of Arf1 in the GTP - dependent recruitment , the same assay was performed with , or without , added Arf1 protein ‘preloaded’ with GTP and in the presence or absence of BFA . As in a , there was a substantial recruitment of the complex to Golgi membranes , and the inclusion of BFA prevented this recruitment . Whereas the inclusion of preloaded Arf1 - GTP ( b ; lane 3 ) to the assay had the same positive effect on complex recruitment as the addition of GTP - γ S ( a ; lane 2 ) , the action of preloading the Arf1 before assay addition negated the inhibitory effects of BFA on recruitment ( compare a , lane 3 with b , lanes 3 and 4 ) . For cellular studies , rat fibroblasts were treated with 0 . 5 µ M of cytochalasin D for 30 min , fixed and double stained for cortactin ( c – e ) and TGN38 ( c´ – e´ ) . Whereas cytochalasin treatment induced some modest disorganization of the Golgi apparatus in cells , cortactin localization to the Golgi ( arrows ) was altered and appeared as dispersed , peripheral puncta ( d , e ) . BFA treatment ( 20 µ M ) of Clone 9 cells induced a rapid loss of both cortactin and Dyn2 from the Golgi after just 1 – 2 min despite the fact that Golgi structure appeared normal by TGN38 staining ; compare control cells ( c , c´ ; arrowheads indicate colocalization ) with BFA cells treated for 1 – 2 min ( f , g ) . ( h ) By 15 min post - treatment the Golgi had completely dispersed , leaving a diffuse perinuclear region of cortactin . Scale bar , 10 µ m . a c d e f g h f´ g´ h´ c´ d´ e´ b GTP - γ s − + + + BFA Lat A Arf1 - GTP − − + + BFA BFA Cortactin Hudy - 1 BFA 1 − 2 min´ BFA 1 − 2 min BFA 1 − 2 min BFA 1 − 2 min BFA 15 min´ BFA 15 min TGN38 TGN38 TGN38 TGN38 TGN38 TGN38 Cortactin Cortactin Cortactin Cortactin Cytochalasin D Cytochalasin D Cytochalasin D Cytochalasin D Cortactin Dynamin Actin Cortactin Dynamin Arf1 Mannll print ncb1246 . indd 486 print ncb1246 . indd 486 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 01 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 01 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 487 A RT I C L E S and reproducible retention of nascent VSV - G at the perinuclear region , similar to that observed with the dominant - negative inhibition . All three reagents induced a near threefold cytoplasmic accumulation and reten - tion of VSV - G — compared with buffer alone , with an MxA antibody , or with heat - inactivated cortactin antibody — when injected into cells ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S3 ) . Whereas control injected cells or cells injected with cortactin SH3 peptide had little affect on Golgi morphology , 25 – 30 % of cells injected with cortactin antibody did show a vesiculated Golgi . Although this vesiculation does not account for the marked block of VSV - G protein in injected cells , it does further implicate cortactin in Golgi function and structure . To assess the effects of cortactin inhibition on a second secretory pathway , we utilized GFP - tagged mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor ( M6PR – GFP ) that cycles between the TGN and the late endosomal compartment 26 , 27 . Expression of M6PR – GFP produced the predicted perinuclear distribution of fluorescent protein situated in the Golgi and around the peripheral membrane of the late endosome , as indi - cated by co - labelling with rhodamine - labelled dextran ( Rh - dextran ) ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S4a , b ) . When the transit of this protein from the TGN was blocked by exposure to a temperature of 20 ºC for 2 h , then released and monitored by fluorescence microscopy , nascent protein appeared to be transported from the TGN into a more peripheral endosomal compartment ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S4c – f ) . Cells expressing truncated cortactin showed a significant retention of nascent M6PR – GFP protein in a tight perinuclear bolus after release of the temperature block , with only modest levels reach - ing late endosomal compartments ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S4g – j ) identified by Rh - dextran ( data not shown ) . Because an uninterrupted flow of membrane between the plasma membrane and the Golgi is essential to maintain normal endocytic - and a a´ b b´ f f´ g g´ h h´ c c´ d d´ e e´ * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Cort ∆ SH3 - pCR3 . 1 Cort ∆ SH3 - pCR3 . 1 Injection SH3 peptide Injection cortactin ( C - Tyr ) Ab Injection cortactin ( C - Tyr ) Ab Injection cortactin ( AB3 ) Ab Injection cortactin ( AB3 ) Ab Injection SH3 peptide Dyn2 ∆ PRD − GFP Dyn2 - PRD − GFP Dyn2 - PRD - pcDNA3 . 1 Anti - Myc Anti - cortactin ( 4F11 ) Anti - cortactin ( C - Tyr ) Anti - cortactin ( C - Tyr ) Giantin Giantin Anti - Dyn2 Hudy - 1 Hudy - 1 Hudy - 1 Hudy - 1 Hudy - 1 Hudy - 1 Hudy - 1 Figure 4 Disruption of cortactin function reduces Dyn2 recruitment to the Golgi apparatus . ( a , b ) Immunofluorescence images of Clone 9 cells expressing Cort ∆ SH3 ( asterisks ) resulted in a significant loss of Golgi - localized dynamin , noted by Dyn2 ( a´ ) and Hudy - 1 staining ( b´ ) . ( c – e ) Microinjection of either a 24 - amino - acid peptide derived from the cortactin SH3 domain ( c , c´ ) , or purified polyclonal antibodies ( d , d´ , e , e´ ) to distinct regions of cortactin ( C - Tyr and AB3 ) also induced a marked reduction in Dyn2 associated with the Golgi . Injected cells are marked with an asterisk and Golgi regions are marked with arrowheads . ( f ) To test whether the PRD domain of Dyn2 helps in targeting to the Golgi , a Dyn2 ∆ PRD – GFP was expressed in cells ( asterisk ) and appeared as diffuse fluorescence . ( f´ ) Staining of cells for cortactin that express Dyn2 ∆ PRD – GFP showed a significant pool of cortactin that was still able to associate with Golgi membranes . ( g , h ) The PRD domain of Dyn2 alone , when labelled with either GFP ( g ) or a Myc tag ( h ) , localized convincingly to Golgi membranes when expressed in Clone 9 cells . Golgi localization of the tagged PRD was confirmed by co - staining for the Golgi resident protein giantin ( g´ , h´ ) . Scale bar , 10 µ m . print ncb1246 . indd 487 print ncb1246 . indd 487 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 03 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 03 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 488 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 A RT I C L E S secretory - based vesicle traffic , we asked whether disrupting the endocytic process through the expression of truncated cortactin protein might have an indirect effect on the exit of protein from the Golgi . This question is relevant based on the fact that we have recently implicated a role for cort - actin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis in epithelial cells 11 . To address this , we expressed dominant - negative Eps15 , a clathrin adaptor that is essential for clathrin - mediated endocytosis 28 . Truncated Eps15 , when expressed in cells , significantly attenuated transferrin internalization by up to 80 % com - pared with cells expressing wild - type Eps15 , but had no measurable effect on transit of the VSV - G – GFP protein from the Golgi to the cell surface ( data not shown ) . To resolve the membranous compartments in which the nascent viral protein was retained upon cortactin inhibition , we performed correlative electron microscopy on cells coexpressing VSV - G - ts – GFP and either full - length cortactin or deletion mutants , to discern the morphology a b c d e i j f g h 40 ˚C 32 ˚C , 15 min 32 ˚C , 60 min 32 ˚C , 120 min Cyclohexamide w t c o r t ac t i n C o r t ∆ S H 3 wt cortactin Cort ∆ Y Cort ∆ SH3 Dyn2 ∆ PRD 250 200 150 100 50 0 t = 0 min t = 15 min t = 60 min t = 120 min F l u o r e s ce n ce i n t e n s i t y wt - cortactin Cort ∆ Y 0 15 min 1 h 2 h 0 15 min 1 h 2 h Endo - H R Endo - H S VSV - G 80 60 40 20 00 30 60 90 120 150 E n d o - H r e s i s t a n t ( % ) wt cortactinCort ∆ Y Time ( min ) Figure 5 VSV - G - ts – GFP that is transported from the ER accumulates in the Golgi of cells expressing truncated cortactin proteins . ( a – h ) Fluorescence micrographs of cultured BHK - 21 cells co - transfected with plasmids encoding the secretory marker protein VSV - G - ts – GFP and wild - type ( wt ) cortactin or truncated Cort ∆ SH3 , Cort ∆ Y or Dyn2 ∆ PRD . Co - transfected BHK - 21 cells expressing either wild - type ( a – d ) or mutant ( e – h ) cortactin following a 16 - h recovery period at 40 ºC . The VSV - G - ts – GFP protein is distributed in a diffuse pattern throughout the cytoplasm , consistent with retention in the ER . Following a 15 - min incubation at the permissive temperature ( 32 ºC ) , both wild - type ( b ) and mutant cells ( f ) have transported nascent VSV - G - ts – GFP to a Golgi - like perinuclear compartment ( arrows ) . ( c , d ) With increased incubation times at the permissive temperature ( 60 or 120 min ) , cells expressing wild - type cortactin transported most , if not all , of the nascent VSV - G - ts – GFP out of the perinuclear region to the cell surface . ( g , h ) During this same time period , cells expressing mutant cortactin retained the viral protein in a perinuclear region , even after 120 min ( h ) . Circles denote standardized areas of quantification in which fluorescence intensities were measured for each time point ( i ) . Scale bar , 10 µ m . A similar retention of VSV - G - ts – GFP protein was seen at the 60 - and 120 - min time points in cells expressing Cort ∆ SH3 , Cort ∆ Y or Dyn2 ∆ PRD . ( i ) The histogram shows the average intensity for at least 40 cells within a given time point after the permissive temperature switch , from two separate experiments . ( j ) BHK - 21 cells co - transfected with VSV - G - ts – GFP and wild - type cortactin or truncated Cort ∆ Y were temperature - shifted as in a – i . VSV - G protein was then processed using endo - H glycosidase to assess maturation from an endo - H - sensitive ( endo - H S ) ER - localized form to an endo - H resistant ( endo - H R ) form , consistent with transport to the cis - / medial - Golgi compartments . Densitometric analysis of the two molecular weight forms of VSV - G protein indicates that the VSV - G maturation was nearly identical for cells expressing either form of cortactin protein , indicating no effect on ER - to - Golgi transport . Error bars denote the standard error of the mean . print ncb1246 . indd 488 print ncb1246 . indd 488 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 06 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 06 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 489 A RT I C L E S of Golgi membranes after the 60 - min permissive temperature switch . Cells that expressed wild - type cortactin exhibited normal Golgi morphologies at all time points ( Fig . 6a ) . However , cells that expressed truncated cortactin possessed swollen and distended Golgi cisternae ( Fig . 6b , c ) but no other obvious ultrastructural defects , which correlated well with the fluorescence images of distended VSV - G – GFP - containing Golgi tubules ( Fig . 5g , h ) . To confirm that VSV - G transport to the plasma membrane had been blocked , we measured the levels of VSV - G that were accessible to cell - surface biotinylation after the release of the temperature block in cortac - tin - transfected cells ( Fig . 7a ) . For cells expressing full - length cortactin , the amount of biotinylated VSV - G gradually increased , with a substantial amount of labelling after 2 h post temperature shift ( Fig . 7a ) . In the cells expressing truncated cortactin , we observed a threefold reduction in the amount of cell - surface VSV - G 2 h after the permissive temperature shift . Dyn2 ∆ PRD - expressing cells also had a threefold reduction in the amount of cell - surface VSV - G protein 2 h after the permissive temperature shift ( Fig . 7b ) , nearly identical to that of Cort ∆ Y - expressing cells ( Fig . 7c ) . DISCUSSION In this study , we have provided extensive evidence for association of the actin - binding protein cortactin with the Golgi apparatus , where it par - ticipates in the transit of cargo from this organelle in cultured epithelial cells . In a recent report , we observed that cortactin has an essential role in the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles at the plasma membrane during receptor - mediated endocytosis of a variety of receptor – ligand complexes 11 . In this previous study , we observed a striking localization of cortactin both at the plasma membrane and at a perinuclear compart - ment reminiscent of the Golgi complex . To confirm the association of cortactin with the Golgi , we utilized standard morphological methods using a variety of immunological and molecular reagents . Depending on the cells or reagents used , we observed varying levels of cortactin at the Golgi . Whereas secretory cells such as the pancreatic acinar cell show few actin / cortactin - rich peripheral ruffles ( Fig . 1d ) , Clone 9 cells do show substantial labelling for cortactin at the periphery ( Fig . 1c , e ) and on endocytic structures . To define the role of cortactin in Golgi function , we tested whether the expression of a truncated cortactin protein in living cells might disrupt the normal processing and transport of a viral glycoprotein through the secretory pathway . Cells expressing VSV - G - ts – GFP and either full - length cortactin or truncated cortactin proteins that lack the Dyn2 interac - tive SH3 domain , show graphic differences in the transport of VSV - G . Expression of truncated cortactin resulted in increased ( threefold ) amounts of VSV - G protein accumulating in a perinuclear compartment ( Fig . 5 ) . By using colocalization with Golgi markers ( data not shown ) and through conventional electron microscopy , which showed swollen , distended cisternae that reside at one pole of each Golgi stack ( Fig . 6 ) , we conclude that this compartment represents the Golgi apparatus . There were no additional distended membranous organelles observed in these transfected cells , suggesting a specific disruption of Golgi traffic as opposed to other cell structures . Tracking the glycosylation matura - tion of VSV - G protein through the secretory pathway ( Fig . 5 ) gave results that were consistent with normal ER - to - Golgi transit of viral protein in both wild - type and truncated cortactin - expressing cells . In contrast , cells expressing truncated cortactin show a three - to fourfold reduction in surface biotinylation of VSV - G protein in comparison with wild - type cells after a 2 - h time shift to the permissive temperature ( Fig . 7 ) . This reduction in VSV - G protein that is exposed to the plasma membrane indicates a significant , focused disruption in the transport of nascent protein from the TGN to the plasma membrane . These biochemical findings closely parallel the morphological , fluorescence timecourse of VSV - G – GFP transit from the ER to the cell surface . The reduction of VSV - G protein at the plasma membrane , induced by truncated cortactin , also correlated with the appearance of swollen Golgi cisternae that could account for the bolus of VSV - G protein exiting the ER and retarded transport to the cell surface . These findings support the concept that cortactin is an important functional component of the Golgi . It is currently unclear whether cortactin participates in single or mul - tiple vesicle transport mechanisms from the Golgi . Because cortactin is in intimate association with endocytic - based clathrin - coated pits at the cell surface 11 , one might predict a similar clathrin - based function at the TGN . Although double staining of cells with antibodies to both clathrin heavy chain and cortactin show a general colocalization at the Golgi , we were unable to resolve whether individual clathrin - coated buds at the TGN were preferentially associated with cortactin . Transport of VSV - G a b c Figure 6 BHK - 21 cells expressing Cort ∆ SH3 accumulate large amounts of nascent VSV - G protein and show large , distended Golgi cisternae . ( a – c ) Electron micrographs of cells expressing VSV - G protein and Cort ∆ SH3 shifted to the permissive temperature for 60 min , as described in Fig . 5 . ( a ) A control cell showing normal Golgi morphology of finely stacked cisternae ( arrow ) . ( b , c ) In contrast , cells expressing the mutant Cort ∆ SH3 protein show grossly bloated and distended Golgi stacks ( arrowheads ) , suggesting a massive retention of secretory cargo . Scale bar , 200 nm . print ncb1246 . indd 489 print ncb1246 . indd 489 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 07 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 07 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 490 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 A RT I C L E S from the TGN is mediated by a class of poorly characterized , non - clath - rin - coated vesicles and tubules , although the M6PR , also affected by cortactin mutants ( see Supplementary Information , Fig . S4 ) , is believed to be transported in a clathrin - dependent manner between the TGN and the late endosome 26 . Thus , it seems that cortactin function is required for both clathrin - dependent and - independent cargos , as previously observed for Dyn2 ( ref . 29 ) . What roles might cortactin perform at the Golgi ? A particularly impor - tant contribution of Arf1 activation now seems to be the recruitment of cortactin and Dyn2 to the Golgi – actin scaffold ; combined biochemical and morphological observations show a GTP and Arf1 requirement for cortactin and Dyn2 . We altered the interactive domains of both cortactin and Dyn2 in an attempt to disrupt colocalization of these partners to the Golgi in intact cells . As shown in Fig . 4 , by using a variety of differ - ent approaches ( expression of truncated proteins , and microinjection of peptides or cortactin antibodies ) the recruitment of Dyn2 , but not cort - actin , to the Golgi was altered markedly . We consistently observed that whereas alterations of the Dyn2 protein had no effect on cortactin locali - zation to the Golgi , truncations of the Dyn2 - interacting SH3 domain of cortactin markedly reduced the levels of Golgi - associated Dyn2 . Equally striking was the observation that Dyn2 - PRD alone was targeted to the Golgi ( Fig . 4 ) . Notably , expression of the interaction - deficient truncated Dyn2 and cortactin proteins affected the kinetics and efficacy of nascent VSV - G protein transit from the TGN to the cell surface ( Figs 5 – 7 ) . How the expression of a truncated Dyn2 protein might affect Golgi function is unclear because this mutant protein fails to target to the Golgi proper . The mechanism by which dominant negatives affect any cellular proc - ess is not fully understood , although it is assumed that truncated Dyn2 is competent to assemble into polymers with endogenous Dyn2 and / or interact with other important cofactors via other domains . The obser - vation that Golgi function is inhibited by a Dyn2 ∆ PRD that does not bind cortactin or target to the Golgi is consistent with the premise of this study . The findings presented here implicate cortactin as an essential component of a complex and dynamic Golgi matrix that is composed of a variety of actin - associated proteins such as specific spectrins 30 , Abp1 ( ref . 4 ) , the small GTPases Arf1 ( ref . 7 ) and Cdc42 ( ref . 31 ) , force - gener - ating enzymes such as myosins I , II and V , as well as cytoplasmic dynein and dynamin 8 . Several studies from this laboratory 29 , 32 , and others 33 , have demonstrated a role for Dyn2 function in the formation of nascent secretory vesicles , although the mechanism by which this GTPase associ - ates with the TGN has not been defined . This study provides important insights into this recruitment process . Cortactin binds directly to Arp2 / 3 and neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) , and stabilizes actin branching while promoting the formation of new actin filament branches 34 , 35 . Although this study has not directly demonstrated that Dyn2 – cortactin forms a complex with actin to regulate actin dynamics at the Golgi proper , the data supporting the concept that these proteins interact in a functional complex is substantial . Cortactin is a known actin - binding protein and has been shown to interact directly with the Arp2 / 3 – N - WASP complex to stabilize actin filament branching 34 , 35 . We have observed that immunoprecipitation of dynamin from cell extracts results in a substantial co - recruitment of cortactin , Arp2 / 3 , N - WASP and Rac , but not Cdc42 or Rho 21 . Finally , the biochemical experiments described in this study using BFA and latrunculin A , as well as morpho - logical experiments with BFA and cytochalasin D , all support the idea that Arf - induced actin assembly is required for recruitment of cortactin and dynamin to the Golgi . Whether or not these observations reflect a direct interaction between the three proteins , or additional accessory compo - nents , the findings are consistent with the concept of a complex . We are currently designing studies to test whether cortactin phosphorylation might have substantial influence in the remodelling of the Golgi – actin matrix , particularly in response to specific cellular processes such as regu - lated secretion , mitosis and / or cell migration . METHODS Antibodies and reagents . Antibodies that specifically recognize cortactin were devel - oped in rabbits and affinity purified as previously described 11 . The epitope regions for the three antibodies correspond to the third actin - binding domain ( AB3 ) , the carboxyl terminus tyrosine residues ( C - Tyr ) , as well as an epitope within the SH3 domain of cortactin ( see Fig . 1a ) . Monoclonal anti - mannosidase - II ( MannII ) was purchased from BABCO ( Richmond , CA ) . The anti - dynamin monoclonal antibody ( Hudy - 1 ) and a b c wt cortactin Cort ∆ Y 0 45 min 1 h 2 h 0 45 min 1 h 2 h wt Dyn2 Dyn2 ∆ PRD 0 45 min 1 h 2 h 0 45 min 1 h 2 h Biotin VSV - G Biotin VSV - G wt cortactin Cort ∆ Y Dyn2 ∆ PRD 4 3 2 1 0 R e l a t i v e d e n s i t o m e t r y un i t s 0 45 min 1 h 2 h Figure 7 Expression of truncated cortactin and dynamin blocks the movement of VSV - G protein from the TGN to the cell surface . Cell - surface biotinylation was performed on BHK - 21 cells expressing wild - type cortactin , Cort ∆ Y or Dyn2 ∆ PRD along with VSV - G - ts – GFP . The nascent VSV - G protein was allowed to be transported for the indicated time ( described in Fig . 5 ) , followed by surface labelling and immunoprecipitation of total VSV - G . ( a ) Biotinylated VSV - G protein is shown above the correlating amount of total VSV - G protein obtained in each immunoprecipitation . Note the increase of cell - surface - bound , biotin - labelled VSV - G at 2 h within wild - type cortactin cells . There was a significant decrease in the amount of cell - surface VSV - G protein within cells expressing Cort ∆ Y . ( b ) A correlating decrease in cell - surface biotinylated VSV - G protein for cells expressing Dyn2 ∆ PRD at 2 h when compared with cells expressing wild - type Dyn2 . ( c ) A minimum of three separate experiments was performed , and the relative amount of biotin - labelled VSV - G was compared with the total VSV - G obtained from cells incubated for the specified time . The histogram shows the average biotin signal for isolated VSV - G , with error bars designating the standard error of the mean . print ncb1246 . indd 490 print ncb1246 . indd 490 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 09 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 09 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 491 A RT I C L E S monoclonal anti - cortactin antibody ( 4F11 ) were purchased from Upstate Biotechnology ( Lake Placid , NY ) . The Dyn2 and pan - dynamin ( MC63 ) antibodies have been described previously 36 , 37 . The TGN38 polyclonal antibody used in the immunoisolations and for immunofluorescence was generated to an epitope within the cytosolic C terminus 32 . The following antibodies were gifts : monoclonal anti - TGN38 from K . E . Howell , University of Colorado School of Medicine ; giantin antibody from M . A . De Matteis , Consorzio Mario Negri Sud ; the polyclonal MannII antibody ( used on isolated Golgi mem - branes ) from M . Farquhar , University of California at San Diego . AlexaFluor - 488 - and AlexaFluor - 594 - conjugated goat anti - rabbit or anti - mouse secondary antibodies were from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . Latrunculin A and cytochalasin D compounds were from Calbiochem ( San Diego , CA ) . All other chemicals and reagents were from Sigma ( St Louis , MO ) unless otherwise stated . Plasmid construction . Wild - type cortactin expression constructs have been described previously 11 . Oligonucleotide primers specific for cortactin trun - cation were designed using the cortactin cDNA sequence from Genbank ( accession number AF054619 ) . Primers designed for cortactin ∆ SH3 / ∆ Y are : Cort ∆ SH3 , 3 ′ - ATCAGGGCGATGGCTGTGATGCCCAGGT and Cort ∆ Y , 3 ′ - ATGATGGGGCTGGATGGTGGTCT , using the cortactin 5 ′ primer 11 as the paired primer for amplification . Primers designed for the amplification of dynamin PRD domain were : Dyn2 - PRD , 5 ′ - ATGCCTGTGCCCCCACCTGTCGATGATAC and the Dyn2 3 ′ primer described previously 38 . The Dyn2 ∆ PRD expression construct was made as described previously 12 . Amplification products were subcloned into the pDsRed - N 1 red fluorescent protein ( RFP ) and pEGFP - N 1 green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) expression vectors ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) . Dyn2 ( aa ) ∆ PRD – GFP plasmids were generated as described previously 12 . The temperature sensitive VSV - G plasmid was a gift from J . Lippincott - Schwartz ( NIH , Bethesda , MD ) and is in the pEGFP - N 1 vector ( Clontech ) . For full - length Eps15 cDNA , we designed a pair of degenerate primers : Eps15 , 5 ′ - ATGGCTGCGGCRGCCCAGCTCTCYCTGACA and Eps15 , 3 ′ - CCCATGCTCAYAGGTAGTTTGATRCAC using rat cDNA for a template . Eps15 mutants ( ∆ EH2 and ∆ EH3 ) were designed using the Eps15 5 ′ primer along with Eps15m 3 ′ ( CTTCTGATTTTCAGACTTTACAGCCCATGG ) to amplify the amino terminus of Eps15 , and Eps15m 5 ′ ( GTCTGAAAATCAGAAGTTAATAAAA GGCATTG ) with Eps15 3 ′ to amplify the C - terminal end of Eps15 ( without EH2 and EH3 domains ) . Then we used the Eps15 N - and C - terminal fragments as a template for Eps15 full - length primers to obtain the Eps15 mutants ( ∆ EH2 and ∆ EH3 ) . To amplify full - length mouse M6PR we used the following primers : M6PR , 5 ′ - GTTTTCCCGTGACACAATGTTCCCCTTCTC and M6PR , 3 ′ - TTTGGTT TGGGGACTGAAGAGGTGGCTAGA with mouse liver cDNA as a template . Cell culture and transfection . BHK - 21 cells , ( ATCC CCL - 10 , Rockville , MD ) were maintained in Eagle’s minimum essential medium containing Earle’s balanced salts and supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum , 2 mM l - glutamine , 100 U ml − 1 penicillin and 100 µg ml − 1 streptomycin . Clone 9 cells ( ATCC CRL - 1439 , Rockville , MD ) were maintained in Ham’s F - 12K medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( GIBCO BRL ) and antibiotics . Pancreatic acinar cells were isolated from six - day - old rat pups as described previously 39 . All cells were kept in a 5 % CO 2 / 95 % air incubator at 37 °C unless otherwise stated . Cells were transiently transfected using the Lipofectamine Plus Reagent kit ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy . For immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy , cells were grown on coverslips for 1 – 2 days and prepared as described previously 38 . Cells were viewed with an Axiovert 35 epifluorescence microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) and imaged with an Orca II CCD cam - era ( Hamamatsu , Bridgewater , NJ ) . Alternatively , cells were analysed using a Zeiss LSM - 310 or 510 laser confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) . Electron Microscopy . For transmission electron microscopy , cells and subcellular frac - tions were prepared as described previously 36 , 37 . BHK - 21 cells coexpressing wild - type cortactin , Cort ∆ SH3 or Cort ∆ Y along with VSV - G – GFP were documented by fluores - cence and phase microscopy to obtain correlative electron microscopic sections . Subcellular fractionation and immunoisolation . Enriched Golgi membrane frac - tions were isolated from rat liver using a modification of previously used methods 23 essentially as described in ref . 37 . Rats were anaesthetized with pentobarbital and the whole liver removed . The isolated liver was rinsed twice with HEPES buffer ( 25 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 2 ; 5 mM MgCl 2 ; 1 mM EDTA ; and Complete ( Roche , Indianapolis , IN ) protease inhibitors ) that contained 0 . 5 M sucrose . Next , the liver was homogenized in 2 volumes of HEPES 0 . 5 M sucrose with a polytron ( Brinkmann , Westbury , NY ) and centrifuged at 600 g to obtain a post - nuclear supernatant ( PNS ) . The PNS was layered over 12 ml of a 1 . 3 M sucrose cushion and spun at 105 , 000 g for 60 min . The 0 . 5 M / 1 . 3 M sucrose interface was collected and adjusted to1 . 1 M sucrose and layered over a second discontinuous sucrose gradient comprising 1 . 4 , 1 . 3 and 1 . 25 M sucrose . This gradient was then overlaid with 0 . 5 M sucrose and cen - trifuged at 90 , 000 g for 90 min . The 0 . 5 M / 1 . 1 M sucrose interface was collected as the Leelavathi Golgi fraction . The mixed Golgi fraction was then adjusted to 0 . 5 M sucrose and overlaid on a 1 . 25 M sucrose cushion and centrifuged at 10 , 000 g for 30 min . The flocculent interface material was collected as the Golgi stack fraction . This Golgi stack fraction was processed for electron microscopic analysis , and pro - teins in this fraction were detected using standard immunoblotting techniques . Immunoisolation of Golgi membranes from the Golgi stack fraction was essentially performed as described previously 37 . Goat anti - rabbit secondary anti - bodies ( Biodesign International , Kennebunkport , ME ) were linked to tosylated , supramagnetic beads ( Dynal , Lake Success , NY ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . These linker antibody - coated beads were used alone as a control , or were labelled with either the cortactin AB3 antibody or a polyclonal TGN38 antibody . Coated beads were then incubated for 16 – 18 h at 4 °C on a rotator with the Golgi stack fraction ( 30 – 60 µg Golgi stack protein per mg of labelled bead ) . Beads were then washed three times and the isolated fractions analysed by immunoblotting or transmission electron microscopy . In vitro Golgi - binding assay . The Golgi - binding assay was performed using previ - ously described methods 7 for the Golgi membrane ‘float up’ assay . The reactions were performed in 1 - ml volumes containing 25 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 2 ) , 2 . 5 mM magnesium acetate , 15 mM potassium chloride , 0 . 2 M sucrose , 0 . 2 mg of Golgi membranes , 1 mg of bovine brain cytosol , and an ATP regenerating system . Reactions were supple - mented with GTP - γ S and latrunculin A where indicated . The 1 ml reaction mixture was incubated for 20 min at 37 °C followed by a membrane collection spun at 15 , 000 g for 30 min at 4 °C . Pelleted membranes were then suspended in 50 µ L of 45 % ( w / w ) sucrose in HK buffer ( 25 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 2 ; 25 mM KCL ) . The resuspended mem - branes were next placed in an ultracentrifugation tube and overlaid with 125 µ L of 35 % sucrose in HK buffer , followed by an additional 25 µ L of 15 % sucrose in HK buffer . The step gradient was spun at 445 , 000 g in a TLA - 100 rotor ( Beckman Instruments , Palo Alto , CA ) for 30 min . A 130 - µ l sample containing the Golgi membranes was then removed from the top of the gradient and diluted to 500 µ l total volume with TE buffer ( 10 mM Tris , 1 mM EDTA ) . The Golgi membranes were then pelleted and resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer and analysed by immunoblot . Activated , recombinant , myristoylated Arf1 was prepared and used as described previously 4 . When included in the Golgi - binding assay , the protein was pre - loaded with GTP - γ S and used at a concentration of 0 . 03 mg ml − 1 . Microinjection antibodies and peptides . Clone 9 cells were cultured on 22 - mm 2 coverslips for 24 h . Injected antibodies were diluted to a concentration range of 5 – 10 µ g µ l − 1 in microinjection buffer ( 10 mM KH 2 PO 4 , pH 7 . 2 ; 75 mM KCL ) . Three different solutions were used for control injections , and included injection buffer alone , heat - inactivated cortactin C - Tyr antibody , and an irrelevant anti - body to a dynamin family member ( MxA ) that is not expressed in resting cells . Injected peptides were used at a concentration of 100 µ M in microinjection buffer along with rhodamine - or FITC - labelled dextran ( 400 µ M ) to serve as an indica - tor . In this study , we used a peptide ( YDYQAAGDDEISFDPDDVITNIEM ) that was homologous to a 24 - amino - acid region within the SH3 domain of cortactin . A peptide derived from a 22 - amino - acid region of the kinesin motor protein ( QKKLSGKLYLBDLAGSEKVSKTGAEGT ) was used as a control for the cortac - tin - SH3 peptide injection experiments . Cells were fixed following microinjection and processed for immunofluorescence after a 4 – 6 - h recovery . VSV - G and M6PR transport assays . Cells were transiently transfected with con - structs encoding for a temperature - sensitive viral VSV - G - ts – GFP glycoprotein along with either Cort ∆ SH3 , Cort ∆ Y , Dyn2 ∆ PRD , or a dominant - negative Eps15 encoding construct . The temperature - sensitive form of the VSV - G protein is retained in the ER at a restrictive temperature of 40 °C . Once cells expressing this protein are shifted to the permissive temperature ( 32 °C ) , the protein is then trans - ported through the synthetic pathway to the Golgi and subsequently to the plasma membrane . After transfection , cells were cultured at 40 °C for 16 h . For some of the transport assays , we microinjected antibodies and peptide to block VSV - G - ts – GFP secretion from Golgi to the plasma membrane . Thirty minutes before a print ncb1246 . indd 491 print ncb1246 . indd 491 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 11 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 11 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 492 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2005 A RT I C L E S temperature shift from 40 °C to 32 °C , 100 µg ml − 1 cyclohexamide was added to each dish , following previously described methods 40 . Cells were subsequently fixed at 15 , 60 or 120 min after being shifted to 32 °C , and processed for fluorescence microscopy 32 , 37 . Images for quantification were acquired using a cooled CCD cam - era ( Photometrics SenSys , Tuscon , AZ ) driven by the image acquisition program Metamorph ( Universal Imaging , West Chester , PA ) . Images of VSV - G – GFP in wild - type or mutant Cort ∆ SH3 - , Cort ∆ Y - and Eps15 - expressing cells were taken at full resolution ( 1 , 400 × 1 , 000 ) using the same acquisition settings ( exposure time , 3 s ; 12 - bit greyscale ) . The fluorescence intensity within a standardized perinuclear region was measured using IPLab ( Scanalytics , Fairfax , VA ) . For detection of M6PR transport from the Golgi to endosomes , cells were transiently transfected with M6PR – GFP along with either wild - type or mutant ( ∆ Y ) cortactin in BHK - 21 cells for 16 h . Cells were then shifted to 20 ºC for 2 h to block M6PR – GFP in the Golgi compartment . Following the 20 °C Golgi block , 100 µg ml − 1 cyclohexamide was added to each dish for 30 min before the 37 °C induced release of M6PR – GFP . Cells were subsequently fixed at 15 , 30 or 60 min after being shifted to 37 °C and processed for fluorescence microscopy . Assay of ER – Golgi transport through endo - H processing . An adaptation of previ - ously described methods 41 was used to assess the transport of nascent VSV - G glyco - protein from the ER to cis - Golgi compartments by endo - H glycosidase processing . In short , cells were transiently transfected with VSV - G - ts – GFP along with either wild - type cortactin or Cort ∆ Y constructs . After a 20 - h incubation at 40 °C , the cells were treated with cyclohexamide and then shifted to a 32 °C incubation temperature for varying amounts of time . After the desired permissive temperature incubation period , the cells were placed on ice and collected by scraping into chilled PBS buffer followed by a brief centrifugation . The cell pellets were then resuspended in 20 µ l of a buffer containing 0 . 3 % SDS and 0 . 1 M sodium acetate followed by complete lysis with two half - second sonication pulses . The protein amount in each sample was quantified and then supplemented with 0 . 4 µ l of β - mercaptoethanol before heat - ing at 100 °C for 5 min . Equivalent protein amounts from each sample were then diluted with 40 µ l of 0 . 1 M sodium acetate ( pH 5 . 6 ) and then supplemented with three milliunits of endo - H enzyme ( Roche ) . The samples were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h and then analysed by standard immunoblotting techniques for molecular weight shifts in VSV - G - ts – GFP , indicative of glycosidase processing . Detection of cell - surface VSV - G protein . Previously described methods 42 were used for the detection of cell - surface VSV - G protein after transient transfection of BHK - 21 cells with VSV - G - ts – GFP and either wild - type cortactin , Cort ∆ Y or Dyn2 ∆ PRD . The cells were shifted into appropriate temperatures to facilitate transport , and then a cell - surface biotinylation was performed by incubating the cells with 0 . 5 mg ml − 1 sulfo - NHS - LC - biotin ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) in chilled PBS and final quenching with 50 mM ammonium chloride in PBS . Cells were lysed with 1 % Triton X - 100 in 50 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 5 ) and 150 mM NaCl , and total VSV - G – GFP protein was immunoprecipitated . Isolated VSV - G protein was then analysed by SDS – PAGE . Biotinylated VSV - G – GFP protein was detected using horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated streptoavidin ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) . BIND identifiers . Two BIND identifiers ( www . bind . ca ) are associated with this manuscript : 228330 and 228331 . Note : Supplementary Information is available on the Nature Cell Biology website ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health ( DK56647 ) to M . A . M . COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Received 30 November 2004 ; accepted 09 March 2005 Published online at http : / / www . nature . com / naturecellbiology . 1 . Stamnes , M . Regulating the actin cytoskeleton during vesicular transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 428 – 433 ( 2002 ) . 2 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Cytoskeletal proteins and Golgi dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 52 – 59 ( 1998 ) . 3 . De Matteis , M . A . & Morrow , J . S . The role of ankyrin and spectrin in membrane trans - port and domain formation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 542 – 549 ( 1998 ) . 4 . Fucini , R . V . , Chen , J . L . , Sharma , C . , Kessels , M . M . & Stamnes , M . Golgi vesicle proteins are linked to the assembly of an actin complex defined by mAbp1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 621 – 631 ( 2002 ) . 5 . Musch , A . , Cohen , D . , Kreitzer , G . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . cdc42 regulates the exit of apical and basolateral proteins from the trans - Golgi network . EMBO J . 20 , 2171 – 2179 ( 2001 ) . 6 . Luna , A . et al . Regulation of protein transport from the Golgi complex to the endoplas - mic reticulum by CDC42 and N - WASP . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 866 – 879 ( 2002 ) . 7 . Fucini , R . V . et al . Activated ADP - ribosylation factor assembles distinct pools of actin on golgi membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 18824 – 18829 ( 2000 ) . 8 . Allan , V . J . , Thompson , H . M . & McNiven , M . A . Motoring around the Golgi . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , E236 – E242 ( 2002 ) . 9 . di Campli , A . et al . Morphological changes in the Golgi complex correlate with actin cytoskeleton rearrangements . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 43 , 334 – 348 ( 1999 ) . 10 . Valderrama , F . et al . Actin microfilaments are essential for the cytological positioning and morphology of the Golgi complex . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 76 , 9 – 17 ( 1998 ) . 11 . Cao , H . et al . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 ( 2003 ) . 12 . McNiven , M . A . et al . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 187 – 198 ( 2000 ) . 13 . Sweitzer , S . M . & Hinshaw , J . E . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 ( 1998 ) . 14 . Hinshaw , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mecha - nism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 ( 1995 ) . 15 . McNiven , M . A . Dynamin : a molecular motor with pinchase action . Cell 94 , 151 – 154 ( 1998 ) . 16 . Hinshaw , J . E . Dynamin and its role in membrane fission . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 483 – 519 ( 2000 ) . 17 . McNiven , M . A . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . & Yoon , Y . The dynamin family of mechanoen - zymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 115 – 120 ( 2000 ) . 18 . Orth , J . D . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 ( 2003 ) . 19 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . & Kelly , R . B . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 ( 2000 ) . 20 . Schafer , D . A . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dynamics during endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 76 – 81 ( 2002 ) . 21 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 – 1096 ( 2003 ) . 22 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 167 – 172 ( 2002 ) . 23 . Leelavathi , D . E . , Estes , L . W . , Feingold , D . S . & Lombardi , B . Isolation of a Golgi - rich fraction from rat liver . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 211 , 124 – 138 ( 1970 ) . 24 . Weed , S . A . , Du , Y . & Parsons , J . T . Translocation of cortactin to the cell periphery is mediated by the small GTPase Rac1 . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2433 – 2443 ( 1998 ) . 25 . Schwaninger , R . , Plutner , H . , Davidson , H . W . , Pind , S . & Balch , W . E . Transport of protein between endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi compartments in semiintact cells . Methods Enzymol . 219 , 110 – 124 ( 1992 ) . 26 . Brown , W . J . , Goodhouse , J . & Farquhar , M . G . Mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors for lysosomal enzymes cycle between the Golgi complex and endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 1235 – 1247 ( 1986 ) . 27 . Matovcik , L . M . , Goodhouse , J . & Farquhar , M . G . The recycling itinerary of the 46 kDa mannose 6 - phosphate receptor — Golgi to late endosomes — coincides with that of the 215 kDa M6PR . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 53 , 203 – 211 ( 1990 ) . 28 . Benmerah , A . , Bayrou , M . , Cerf - Bensussan , N . & Dautry - Varsat , A . Inhibition of clathrin - coated pit assembly by an Eps15 mutant . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1303 – 1311 ( 1999 ) . 29 . Jones , S . M . , Howell , K . E . , Henley , J . R . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . Role of dynamin in the formation of transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . Science 279 , 573 – 577 ( 1998 ) . 30 . De Matteis , M . A . & Morrow , J . S . Spectrin tethers and mesh in the biosynthetic path - way . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2331 – 2343 ( 2000 ) . 31 . Erickson , J . W . , Zhang , C . , Kahn , R . A . , Evans , T . & Cerione , R . A . Mammalian Cdc42 is a brefeldin A - sensitive component of the Golgi apparatus . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 26850 – 26854 ( 1996 ) . 32 . Cao , H . , Thompson , H . M . , Krueger , E . W . & McNiven , M . A . Disruption of Golgi struc - ture and function in mammalian cells expressing a mutant dynamin . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 1993 – 2002 ( 2000 ) . 33 . Maier , O . , Knoblich , M . & Westermann , P . Dynamin II binds to the trans - Golgi network . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 223 , 229 – 233 ( 1996 ) . 34 . Weaver , A . M . et al . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 ( 2001 ) . 35 . Weaver , A . M . et al . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 ( 2002 ) . 36 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin - mediated inter - nalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 ( 1998 ) . 37 . Henley , J . R . & McNiven , M . A . Association of a dynamin - like protein with the Golgi apparatus in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 761 – 775 ( 1996 ) . 38 . Cao , H . , Garcia , F . & McNiven , M . A . Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2595 – 2609 ( 1998 ) . 39 . Anderson , K . L . & McNiven , M . A . Vesicle dynamics during regulated secretion in a novel pancreatic acinar cell in vitro model . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 66 , 25 – 38 ( 1995 ) . 40 . Toomre , D . , Keller , P . , White , J . , Olivo , J . C . & Simons , K . Dual - color visualization of trans - Golgi network to plasma membrane traffic along microtubules in living cells . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 21 – 33 ( 1999 ) . 41 . Davidson , H . W . & Balch , W . E . Differential inhibition of multiple vesicular transport steps between the endoplasmic reticulum and trans - Golgi network . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 4216 – 4226 ( 1993 ) . 42 . Nishimura , N . , Plutner , H . , Hahn , K . & Balch , W . E . The delta subunit of AP - 3 is required for efficient transport of VSV - G from the trans - Golgi network to the cell surface . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 6755 – 6760 ( 2002 ) . print ncb1246 . indd 492 print ncb1246 . indd 492 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 15 pm 12 / 4 / 05 3 : 17 : 15 pm Nature PublishingGroup © 2005 S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N WWW . NATURE . COM / NATURECELLBIOLOGY 1 Figure S1 Dyn2 and cortactin co - localize to Golgi buds and peripheral vesicles at the trans - and cis - face by immuno - electron microscopy . ( a ) Immuno - gold labeling of Clone 9 cells with the monoclonal dynamin antibody HUDY1 . As with the cortactin labeling in Fig . 2 , Dyn2 associates predominantly with the budding tips of the Golgi stacks ( arrow head ) and nascent vesicles at the cis - and trans - Golgi ( arrows ) . ( b , c ) Double immuno - gold labeling of Clone 9 cells with both the HUDY1 dynamin antibody ( small 5nM gold ) and the C - Tyr cortactin antibody ( large 10nm gold ) . Both sized gold particles can be seen in close association at the tips of cisternae ( arrow heads ) and peripheral Golgi vesicles ( arrows ) . Again , only modest labeling of the stacks ( GS ) is observed . Bars = 100nm © 2005 Nature Publishing Group S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N 2 WWW . NATURE . COM / NATURECELLBIOLOGY Figure S2 Cortactin is a component of isolated Golgi membranes . An electron micrograph of sub - cellular fractions derived from rat liver that are highly enriched in Golgi membranes ( a ) . Standard TEM fixation shows numerous Golgi stacks ( arrows ) and vesicles . Immuno - blot analysis of the isolated Golgi preparations shown in ( a ) probed with antibodies for mannosidase - II ( MannII ) and cortactin ( Cort ) ( a , inset ) . Fractions , at increasing stages of enrichment , include a post - nuclear supernatant ( PNS ) and Lelavathi Golgi fractions to obtain the final Golgi stack ( Gs ) membrane pool . ( b and c ) Electron micrographs of cortactin antibody - coated beads following incubation with a rat liver sub - cellular fraction containing Golgi membranes . Intact Golgi cisternae are attached to the beads ( arrows ) as are lipid - rich Golgi membrane secretory vesicles ( arrowheads ) . ( d ) An electron micrograph of beads coated with linker antibody alone following an incubation with the identical membrane pool as in b and c . Golgi membranes were absent from these beads indicating the specificity of Golgi components isolated with cortactin antibody coated beads . ( e ) Immuno - blot for the Golgi resident marker MannII , the trans - Golgi network resident protein TGN38 , and cortactin on protein derived from isolated membranes using beads coated with antibodies specific for TGN38 or cortactin ( Cort ) . Beads coated with either TGN38 or cortactin antibodies were equally efficacious in isolating Golgi membranes as demonstrated by similar levels of MannII protein . These isolated membranes obtained from beads coated with either TGN38 or cortactin antibodies each contained a pool of cortactin and TGN38 protein . The fraction from which the immuno - isolations were performed is represented by the Golgi stack ( Gs ) input lane . © 2005 Nature Publishing Group S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N WWW . NATURE . COM / NATURECELLBIOLOGY 3 Figure S3 Injection of cortactin reagents also induces a retention of nascent VSV - G protein . To provide a second method to test for cortactin function in protein transit through the Golgi , cultured BHK - 21 cells were transfected to express VSV - G - GFP , then microinjected with either cortactin antibodies or the SH3 cortactin peptide utilized in Fig . 4 . Following a recovery period , injected cells were released from a temperature block to allow transit of nascent protein from the Golgi . While control buffer - injected cells displayed normal transit of protein from the Golgi to the plasma membrane ( a ) , both cortactin antibodies ( b - d ) and the cortactin SH3 peptide ( e ) induced a 3 - fold retention ( f ) of VSV - G - GFP at the perinuclear region . Error bars denote the standard error of the mean . Micrograph bar = 10 µ m © 2005 Nature Publishing Group S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N 4 WWW . NATURE . COM / NATURECELLBIOLOGY Figure S4 Disruption of cortactin function alters traffic of the M6PR from the Golgi to the late endosome / lysosome . ( a , b ) Cultured BHK - 21 cells were transfected to express M6PR - GFP as an alternative secretory marker to VSV - G - GFP ( Fig . 5 ) . Following 16 hrs post - transfection , cells were incubated at 20 °C for 2hrs to accumulate nascent M6PR - GFP in the TGN compartment , then warmed to 37 °C for 15 minutes in the presence of Rh - dextran to label late endosomal compartments . During this temperature shift nascent M6PR - GFP was transported from the Golgi to the late endosome and could be resolved as bright rings around the dextran - containing compartment ( a , a’ , b , b’ ) . ( a” , b” ) Higher magnification images of boxed areas show bright M6PR - GFP around the endosome membrane ( arrows ) . ( c - j ) Disruption of Golgi to endosome traffic by truncated cortactin . BHK - 21 cells expressing wt ( c - f ) or mutant - truncated ( g - j ) cortactin were co - transfected with M6PR - GFP for 16 hrs and allowed to accumulate nascent protein at the perinuclear area at 20 °C for 2 hrs ( c , g ) . Alleviation of the temp block by shifting the cells to 37 °C ( d - f , h - j ) stimulated the traffic of nascent protein from the TGN to a more peripheral endosomal distribution in cells expressing wt cortactin protein ( d - f ) while mutant cells retained a compacted bolus of M6PR - GFP at the Golgi ( g - j ) consistent to mutant cells expressing VSV - G - GFP . The M6PR - GFP cargo trapped within the Golgi compartment was measured as in Fig . 5 using a standardized area ( k ) . Error bars denote the standard error of the mean . Micrograph bars = 10µ m . © 2005 Nature Publishing Group