“ Where ’ s Farah ? ” : Knowledge silos and information fusion by distributed collaborating teams Stephen C . Hayne & Lucy J . Troup & Sara A . McComb Published online : 5 October 2010 # Springer Science + Business Media , LLC 2010 Abstract The Cognitively - Based Rapid Assessment Methodology ( C - RAM ) system manages multiple - user interactions as users work with multiple information sources . Further , it allows users to view , exchange , organize , and combine the information available and it facilitates group decision - making . Three - member teams , randomly assigned in either the ( a ) view others ’ whiteboards or ( b ) cannot view others ’ whiteboards conditions , completed an intelligence analysis and mission planning task . Each team member was given access to a virtual whiteboard populated with decision cards ( DCards ) containing intelligence information constrained to a specific area of expertise . DCards can be assessed ( rated ) for decision impact and importance and team members have access to all DCards regardless of experimental condition . Team members who can view their teammates ’ whiteboards during collaborative activities achieve significantly higher per - formance . When compared to teams unable to view others ’ whiteboards , they move their own DCards less frequently , add fewer additional DCards to their own whiteboards , and rate others ’ DCards less frequently . Additionally , rating one ’ s own DCards is the only process positively related team performance . Keywords Collaboration . Knowledge management . Shared cognition . Decision making 1 Introduction Terrorism Informatics has been defined as “ the application of advanced methodologies and information fusion and analysis techniques to acquire , integrate , process , analyze , and manage the diversity of terrorism - related information for national / international and homeland security - related applications ” ( Chen et al . 2008 ) . While the study of terrorism requires multi - source data integrated with a variety of techniques , e . g . data mining , image and video processing and language translation , at some point the human analyst must be involved in order to apply sensemaking and judgment ( Weick 1995 ) . The essence of the analyst ’ s information assessment is the process of distinguishing signals from noise and possibly detecting patterns ( Klein 1993 ) . In the military , intelligence analysts are constantly searching for signals that might suggest an adversary ’ s intentions . In each case , the analyst must hunt through a quantity of data , searching for meaningful patterns within the preponderance of noise ( Klein et al . 2006a , b ) . In most contexts , the content domain and volume of data available is too much for an individual analyst to consider . In these cases , it becomes necessary to divide the work and collaborate in a team . This implies information sharing , but simply sharing information is not enough ( Ellis 2009 ) . We advocate that analyst collaboration must be supported with a specific interaction model where the software systems are S . C . Hayne ( * ) College of Business , Colorado State University , Fort Collins , CO , USA e - mail : stephen . hayne @ colostate . edu L . J . Troup Department of Psychology , Colorado State University , Fort Collins , CO , USA e - mail : Lucy . Troup @ colostate . edu S . A . McComb Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering , Texas A & M University , College Station , TX , USA e - mail : mccomb @ tamu . edu Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10796 - 010 - 9274 - 9 well - aligned to the cognitive abilities of individuals and teams . The Cognitively - Based Rapid Assessment Methodology ( C - RAM , see Fig . 1 and description in a later section ) and system was developed to support analyst collaboration on multi - source data ( Hayne and Smith 2007 ) . C - RAM , as imple - mented , provides both textual and visual methods for viewing these data and allows analysts to organize the information using different presentation modalities ( articulatory - loop and visio - spatial ) . These separate presentations support the col - lection and fusion of information differentiating C - RAM from many other collaborative systems ( Yen et al . 2006 ) and are particularly appropriate for terrorism informatics . In this paper , we describe a study of the cognitive , collaborative and adaptive properties of this distributed socio - technical system of humans and computers when representing uncertain and subjective information in an effort to improve collaborative information assessment . Specifically , we report the results of allowing analysts to view each other ’ s whiteboards as they work on a task where the team tries to determine if an individual is in fact a terrorist , and then find that individual ’ s specific location . 2 Prior research 2 . 1 Terrorism informatics Terrorism is a difficult research area because terrorists activities are global and often disconnected along timelines , not to mention that it sometimes cannot be distinguished Fig . 1 C - RAM system whiteboard 90 Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 from other forms of violence ( Silke 2004 ; Schmid 2004 ) . Determining which group is responsible for an act , whether a claim is credible or what the motives were , become incredibly difficult tasks ( Ellis 2009 ; Mickolus 2002 ) . Many terrorist groups have moved to a networked structure because the highly decentralized structures allow for more autonomy and fluid decision - making . Since only small parts of these networks are revealed through difficult to trace financial transactions , snippets of communication , or third - hand rumors , analysts find them very difficult to visualize and they “ require new methods and tools to help them make sense of such a complex threat environment ” ( ibid . , page 143 ) . C - RAM is a new method with an associated tool and is not only based on cognitive theory , but as implemented , provides a solution for case management by allowing multiple working theories , or hypotheses to exist at any one time . Within each hypothesis , multiple information items exist that are either supportive or not supportive , and are denoted by an assessment ( a tuple representing the belief , uncertainty , or disbelief ) given by the analyst . These situational assessments are aggregated using a belief algebra and drive “ consensus ” both algebraically and visually ( Hayne et al . 2005 ) . In order to combat terrorism , organizational learning models and theory need to inform the design of terrorism informatics systems ( Trujillo and Jackson 2008 ) . Terrorist groups are learning and so must we . As such , C - RAM conforms to the model of information acquisition , distribution , interpretation and storage , where “ members of a group develop new knowledge about their activities and the outcomes they are generating , share it among group members , incorporate the new knowledge into the routines of the group , and preserve this knowledge ” ( ibid . , page 177 ) . 2 . 2 Working memory One of the goals of the C - RAM system is to provide enhancement of existing cognitive processing . In particular , the creation of a mechanism by which storage , organization and retrieval of large amounts of information can be facilitated . In any team information processing task requiring the dissemination of shared information , this needs to be achieved at both the individual and team level . Providing a cognitive workspace that affords individual and team cognitive effort support is crucial to support the information management and decision making processes implicated in terrorism informatics . Central to the C - RAM system is the notion that the result of an individual ’ s cognition can be represented on a central workspace . This provides a representation that can be equated to the cognitive process required to make an informed decision , specifically attentional and memory processes . C - RAM attempts to drive a central workspace that is somewhat representative of Working Memory ( Baddeley and Hitch 1974 ; Baddeley 1992 , 1998 ; Baddeley et al . 2001 ) . Working memory is considered a central mechanism by which information is held and processed before either being disposed of or consolidated for future retrieval ( Baddeley and Hitch 1974 ; Baddeley 1992 , 1998 ; Baddeley et al . 2001 ) . It is a relatively temporary or “ short - term ” repre - sentation that allows information being processed to be buffered , and , if relevant passed on to more permanent storage for later retrieval . How information is represented in working memory is a crucial aspect of human information processing . It has been demonstrated that humans create cognitive structures in memory , called “ chunks , ” where many related pieces of data are aggregated ( Chase and Simon 1973 ; Simon 1974 ) . The use of these cognitive structures is vital for encoding domain knowledge , pattern - recognition of situations , and selective search techniques for retrieval ( Gobet and Simon 1998 ) . Once those long - term memories are “ active ” in working memory , it also takes some ongoing effort to keep them active . These efforts are expended by the cognitive processor , and are generally referred to as “ attention ” of which humans have a finite amount ( Wickens 1984 ; Wickens and Liu 1988 ) . Attention can be consciously directed to a variety of tasks , such as retrieving memories from long - term storage , maintaining memories in short - term storage , directing sensory activities ( e . g . looking or listening carefully ) , and controlling motor processes . We have difficulty dividing attention among several tasks , or attending to all the data provided by our senses ( Broadbent 1958 ; Treisman 1969 ) . As a result , we often do not perceive most of the information that is available to us ( Lavie 1995 ) . As Nobel Laureate Herb Simon has said , “ a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention ” ( Varian 1995 ) . We concentrate on working memory in this paper because it is limited to two separate stores of relatively small capacity ( Baddeley 1992 , 1998 ; Baddeley et al . 2001 ) . Baddeley ’ s ( ibid ) terminology has been generally adopted as the standard ; he refers to these separate resources as “ visio - spatial ” and “ articulatory - loop ” memory . While Chase and Simon ( ibid ) adopted Miller ’ s ( 1956 ) estimate for the size of each working memory store as about 7±2 items , more recently , the size of the visio - spatial store has been estimated as a maximum of 4 items ( Zhang and Simon 1985 ; Gobet and Clarkson 2004 ; Gobet and Simon 2000 ) . As they show , these limitations are additive ; it is possible to simultaneously hold about 4 items in visio - spatial memory while holding approximately 7 items in articulatory - loop memory . One goal of C - RAM is to facilitate this process by allowing cognitive processing in individuals and Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 91 teams to be “ distributed ” , and therefore increase task performance ( more items can be “ held ” in memory ) . Distributed Cognition is an extension of the underlying human construct of Working Memory where we think of cognitive processing as being a part of a wider “ distributed ” cognitive system ( Hutchins 1991 , 1995 ) . Distributed cognition in relation to C - RAM suggests that the cognitive processing of a team would be distributed across a variety of cognitive sub systems , which would enable teams of individuals to share and disseminate information more effectively . 2 . 3 Transactive memory systems To achieve the benefits of collective recall , the individual group members require a system for encoding , storing , retrieving , and communicating with the group . This system has been called a transactive memory system or TMS ( Wegner 1987 ) and supports the management of knowledge silos ( Brandon and Hollingshead 2004 ) . TMS includes the cognitive abilities of the individuals as well as meta - memory , that is , the beliefs that the members have about their memories . Thus , the members of a group have access to the collective memory by virtue of knowing which person knows which information . By having a shared awareness of who knows what information , cognitive load is reduced because each individual only has to remember “ who knows what ” in the team and not the information itself . Greater access to expertise can be achieved , and there is less redundancy of effort ( Wegner et al . 1991 ) . Mohammed and Dumville ( 2001 ) point out that developing a transactive memory system reduces the rehashing of shared information and allows for the pooling of unshared information , a result that is contrary to Stasser et al . ( 1995 ) . 2 . 4 Team recognition primed decision making In order to integrate these concepts into a process model , Hayne et al . ( 2002 ) proposed their Team Recognition Primed Decision Making model ( Team RPD in Fig . 2 ) . They adapted Klein ’ s ( 1993 ) model of individual decision - makers to capture how chunking structures in transactive memory systems might be utilized to compensate for cognitive limitations in a group decision - making situation . Klein ’ s model emphasizes situation assessment through pattern recognition ( using recall from memory ) . Hayne et al . ( 2005 ) showed that teams perform essentially the same steps as individuals . Specifically , they assess the situation , share these situation assessments among members , and the individual team members select a response by adapting a strategy from their previous experience or by creating a new response ( plan ) . Finally , they execute their plan , and observe the results . Hayne et al . ’ s ( ibid ) empirical research has shown that teams using a simple “ chunk ” tool to communicate and come to consensus about which pattern they faced during situation assessment , leads to better team processes and performance . Note that situation assessment and response selection occur within the individual , whereas situation sharing , communication and execution occur among the individual team members ( see Fig . 2 ) . Individuals use an internal cognitive process to perform situation assessment , but must use an external process when collaborating with the team . The stimulating structures used in situation sharing , may also trigger internal cognitive processes . Finally , when acting as a team executing the response , individuals make incremental actions that feedback to the team . This should lead to explicit awareness of a variety of constructs such as the notion of “ Team ” , “ Task ” and “ Goals ” ( Salas and Fiore 2004 ) . Kaempf et al . ( 1996 ) found that individual experts spent most of their time scanning the environment and developing their situation assessments . Relatively little time was spent selecting and implementing responses . If the situation assessment task has the same relative importance for teams as for individuals , then the initial focus for team decision support should be directed towards the development of tools to support collective situation assessment . For individual members , these tools should be designed to reduce the cognitive effort required , attend to the highest priority tasks , and remember the most important features of the task environment . For the team , we suggest these tools should facilitate sharing of assessments through placement of public representations . Public representations have been studied before in other contexts ( including distributed cognition ) . Interestingly , Grassé ( 1959 ) coined the term stigmergy , referring to a class of mechanisms , or stimulating structures , that mediate animal - animal interactions . The concept has been used to explain the emergence , regulation , and control of collective activities of social insects ( Susi and Ziemke 2001 ) . Social insects exhibit a coordination paradox : they seem to be cooperating in an organized way . However , when looking at any individual insect , they appear to be working independently as though they were not involved in any collective task . The explanation of the paradox provided by stigmergy is that the insects interact indirectly by placing stimulating structures in their environments . These stimulating Pattern Sharing ResponseSelection SituationAssessment Execution Team Individual Stimulating Structure ( Cognitive Chunk ) Fig . 2 TEAM recognition - primed decision making 92 Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 structures trigger specific actions in other individuals ( Theraulaz and Bonabeau 1999 ) . Stigmergy appears to be the ultimate example of reduction of cognitive effort because social insects , having essentially no cognitive capability , are able to perform complex collaborative tasks . We advocate that this concept can be applied to human teams ( i . e . , when a stimulating structure is placed in the external environment by an individual , other team members can interpret it and take appropriate action , without the need for specific communication or coordination ) . Stigmergy in this form is complementary to distributed cognition . 2 . 5 C - RAM C - RAM is both a methodology and software implementation that embeds the concepts from TeamRPD , where teams will rapidly assess situations and share information patterns while making decisions . C - RAM follows a long line of group software research which has progressed somewhat independently along two parallel tracks : Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) and Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) . DeSanctis and Gallupe ( 1987 ) defined GDSS as an “ interactive ” computer - based system that facilitates the solution of unstructured problems by a set of decision - makers working together as a group ” . Tasks commonly supported by GDSS systems include : brainstorming , idea organization , voting , total quality management , and communications . CSCW is defined by Ellis et al . ( 1991 ) as ‘“ computer - based systems that support two or more users engaged in a common task ( or goal ) and that provide an interface to a shared environment . ” CSCW applications include : concurrent programming , shared video , real - time drawing and whiteboarding , collaborative writing , telepresence , and awareness . These technologies can also be called Computer Mediated Communication ( Siegal et al . 1986 ) and Group Support Systems ( Jessup and Valacich 1993 ) . Pendergast and Hayne ( 1999 ) suggested using Group - ware ( Johnson - Lenz and Johnson - Lenz 1982 ) , and extending it to include the dimensions of “ communication ( pushing or pulling information ) , collaboration ( shared information leading to shared understanding ) , coordination ( delegation of task , sequential sign - offs , etc . ) , and control ( management of conflict ) … groupware implies a certain level of control that might otherwise be imposed by the group participants themselves ” ( page 312 ) . There have been many CSCW whiteboard systems devel - oped ( for examples see Stefik et al . 1987 ; Ishii and Miyake 1991 ; Kobayashi and Ishii 1993 ; Hayne and Pendergast 1995 ; Hayne and Ram 1995 ; Roseman and Greenberg 1996 ) . More recently , Keel ( 2007 ) has proposed putting cards on a whiteboard and having software agents make inferences about their placement , however in C - RAM , human analysts make inferences about their placement and their assessments . The visio - spatial component of C - RAM is a virtual “ whiteboard ” where evidence items can be manipulated and compared against other team member ’ s assessments and evidence organization . An easy way to conceptualize the whiteboard is to think of arranging note cards on a playing table . Cards can be added , stacked , overlapped , arranged by certain criteria , or removed from the table entirely . Similarly , each information item ( here called a Decision Card , or DCard ) can be arranged on the whiteboard in a similar fashion . For example , an analyst who specializes in satellite imagery can view relevant information and rate the importance of that information in regard to a particular hypothesis . Analysts assess the value of a DCard by adjusting their level of belief , disbelief , and uncertainty that the information contributes to the current situation . The analyst can also rate the trust placed in the source of the information . The result is mapped to a DCODE impact / importance value ( Fleming 2003 , 2008 ) , which is graphically depicted on the DCard ( the red , green or yellow bars shown on the DCards in Fig . 1 ) . DCODE assessments have previously been shown to provide superior decision - making capability with individuals in an information assessment task ( Hayne and Smith 2007 ) . The important difference between analysts using C - RAM to model their knowledge versus analysts meeting face - to - face to discussion their knowledge , is that C - RAM forces them to represent their knowledge in a stimulating structure ( DCard ) . Thus , team members are not constrained to merely discussing “ common ” knowledge , but can look at a team member ’ s whiteboard and focus on the knowledge that they do not hold in common which is intended to mitigate the effect previously reported ( Dennis 1996 ; Stasser et al . 1995 ; Stasser et al . 2000 ; Wittenbaum and Stasser 1996 ) . This focus is further directed if the DCard is assessed using DCODE , because their colleague will know where to look in the knowledge space ( or silo ) . We suggest that together , these mechanisms act to self - synchronize the team and enhance collaboration and decision - making . We investigate the effects of these C - RAM features on team performance and collaboration by utilizing an existing scenario developed for analysis of team performance by Warner et al . ( 2008 ) . The scenario was integrated into C - RAM and the effects on “ team ” intelligence of sharing whiteboards versus restricted access to each other ’ s white - board were studied . Where team members have full access to each other ’ s individual assessments represented by their “ whiteboards ” , we expect that overall performance on the task dictated by the scenario will be enhanced . As such , we have developed the following hypotheses : H1 . Shared whiteboard access will lead to an increase in team communication in the intelligence task . Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 93 H2 . Shared whiteboard access will lead to an increase in the volume of team processes required to gather information and create knowledge in the intelligence task . H3 . Shared whiteboard access will lead to an increase in team performance in the intelligence task . H4 . Increases in the number of team processes required to gather information and create knowledge will be related to increases in team performance in the intelligence task . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Apparatus and materials The C - RAM system was designed and created by 21st Century Systems International in partnership with a major university . It is a bespoke software tool developed for the collection , fusion , sharing , and detection of patterns in information used by intelligence analysts to address hypotheses about given situations . As previously stated , the software enables analysts within specific domains to view , sort , rate and share information pertaining to those specific domains . C - RAM can manage multiple whiteboards for multiple tasks . There are four types of whiteboards : private , shared , public , and complete : & A private whiteboard is a whiteboard only viewable / editable by one analyst . & A shared whiteboard is viewable / editable by multiple analysts . Shared whiteboards are created when an analyst invites one or more others into a new white - board . A private whiteboard can be copied into a shared workspace at any time . & A public whiteboard is viewable by all team members and editable by the original owners who published it . A public whiteboard is created after the private or shared whiteboard has been vetted and accepted by the analyst ( s ) working on it , and is another separate copy of the private / shared whiteboard . & A “ complete ” whiteboard is the agreed upon overview of the hypotheses as a whole , usually vetted by the person responsible for the hypothesis and may be edited by any team member . Complete whiteboards may also be made viewable to those outside the team . For this experiment , we restrict the whiteboards to just private and shared . The articulatory - loop component of C - RAM is a threaded discussion / chat tool linked to each whiteboard task . Users can carry on text discussions while observing and manipulating their whiteboard . This software runs in a browser and was viewed using Dell computers , running Vista ( IE 7 ) , with two 21 - inch Viewsonic monitors . The browser with C - RAM was full - screen on the left - hand monitor with chat implemented ( on the right monitor ) to allow team members to communicate with each other while executing the task . The task was developed by Warner et al . ( 2008 ) and is an event - based , multi - dimensional , multi - domain scenario with embedded information uncertainty and cognitive overload called “ The Special Operations Reconnaissance Scenario ( SOR ) : Intelligence Analysis and Mission Planning ” ( see Appendix 1 ) . It was designed specifically to empirically investigate the processes of team collaboration . The information from the scenario was uploaded into the C - RAM system to form the basis of the intelligence investigated by our analysts . Each one of the pieces of information described in the Appendix was converted to a DCard in C - RAM and put into the relevant team member ’ s whiteboard . DCards are “ owned ” by the role ( or knowledge silo ) they are initially assigned to , even though all DCards are available in the common data store . As shown in the Human - Intelligence Analyst ’ s whiteboard in Fig . 1 , each DCard is a visio - spatial summary ( reduced ) representation of the underlying information item . Users double - click a DCard to open the source document in a viewer for reading . Analysts can add other analysts ’ DCards to their white - board ( remember that they start out with their “ own ” DCards ) , organize the DCards in their whiteboard , and can rate their own ( or other analysts ’ ) DCards using DCODE . 3 . 2 Design An independent measures design was employed to allow us to make direct comparisons between a condition where analysts were able to use C - RAM to its fullest potential in regard to sharing and viewing another analyst ’ s intelligence and manipulations of that information , to a condition where they were isolated and unable to make comparisons to their team members . Due to the problem solving nature of the task dictated by the pre - loaded scenario it was envisaged that carry over effects from the prior exposure would have a significant effect on the task outcome . Therefore a between subjects design was preferred . 3 . 3 Participants Participants were recruited from the a major university ’ s participant pool . Recruitment took place according to regulations set by the University Institutional Review Board , Human Subjects Committee . Participants were compensated with course credit towards their degree . Forty four Male and Female participants were recruited in total , all with normal or corrected to normal vision , ranging 94 Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 from 19 – 36 years in age . The majority of the participants were Female ( 71 % ) with an average age of 19 . 6 years , with low previous experience with each other . No significant differences in participant demographics exists between treatments . 3 . 4 Procedure The aim of the study was to create teams of analysts who would complete two tasks using the C - RAM system . Participants were randomly allocated to teams of three . On arrival at the Collaboration and Cognition laboratory , participants were randomly allocated to one of two team treatments ; Team Condition A ( Viewing Other WB ) where full access was given to the C - RAM system and analysts could freely access other team members shared whiteboards ( 5 teams ) , or Team Condition B ( No Viewing Other WB ) where analysts were only able to view their own private whiteboards ( 6 teams ) . Two teams of 2 persons each and 7 individuals who participated due to attendance shortfalls were not included in this analysis . In both conditions , participants were further randomly assigned one of three possible roles : Satellite Intelligence , Human Intelligence , or Additional Intelligence . The relevant information cards were then made available to each of these roles . In both conditions , team members could at anytime add additional intelligence cards from the complete inventory , to include information from other analysts “ pools ” of intelligence . Participants were not “ encouraged ” to use C - RAM in any particular way ( e . g . while they were told how to rate a DCard , they were not told that they should ) . The laboratory was set up so that team members could not see or talk to each other . They were informed that to communicate with each other , they could utilize the shared whiteboard function ( Condition A ) and / or the chat function ( Conditions A & B ) . A standardized set of instructions were read , introducing the experiment ; specifically the scenario that they were encountering , along with C - RAM training . After the training phases , participants were informed that they had 45 minutes for the Task 1 hypothesis : “ Is Farrah associated with Al Qaida ? ” After completion of this phase , a team response was recorded and the second task began . Task 2 involved the team making a decision : “ Locate Farrah in a particular place , at a certain time . ” Teams were allocated 20 minutes to complete Task 2 . After this task was complete , team responses were recorded . Participants were then debriefed and dismissed . 3 . 5 Measures Team performance Teams either provided an answer to the three questions / instructions associated with the two Task hypotheses or indicated that they did not know . Correct answers were scored 1 point , incorrect answers were scored 2 points , and do not know answers were scored 3 points . The team performance score was calculated by summing the team ’ s score for the three questions and subtracting the sum from 10 . This reverse coding was done to transform the performance score to a 7 point scale where 7 was the best performance ( i . e . , all three responses were correct ) and 1 was the worst performance ( i . e . , the team did not know how to respond to all three requests for information ) . Team processes To assess the processes team members used to gather information and create knowledge , a log of all actions executed during interactions with C - RAM was recorded and time stamped . The logs were analyzed to gather the number of occurrences of the process events of interest . Specifically , information access is measured as ( 1 ) the number of source documents team members view from their own DCards , ( 2 ) the number of source documents team members view from others ’ DCards , and ( 3 ) the number of DCards a team member adds to her / his white - board . Knowledge creation is measured as ( 1 ) the number of DCard movements in the whiteboard , ( 2 ) the number of ratings team members make to their own DCards , and ( 3 ) the number of ratings team members make to others ’ DCards . Controls For the regression analyses , we controlled for treatment condition ( 1 = view other WB and 2 = no view other WB ) and the amount of previous experience the team members had with each other ( 1 = no previous experience with my teammates to 6 = worked on several projects with both teammates ) . 4 Results Data was collated and analyzed in terms of overall team performance . To begin , we compared team processes and performance across conditions . We then regressed team performance onto the processes . The results of the analyses are described below . 4 . 1 Communication comparison In Hypothesis 1 , we predict that communication will increase when team members have shared whiteboard access . To test this hypothesis , analyses of the chat logs were conducted . Initial comparisons between treatments for the amount of chat generated within a team suggests that teams able to view each other ’ s whiteboards had more discussion with a mean of 167 . 2 lines , whereas not viewing Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 95 other whiteboards had a mean of 86 . 3 lines ( t = 2 . 57 , p < . 02 ) . Thus , Hypothesis 1 is supported . 4 . 2 Team processes comparison Our second hypothesis suggests that team processes and performance will improve when team members have shared whiteboard access . To test this hypothesis , all user actions were logged ( with millesecond timestamps ) and analyzed . ANOVA results for differences between the means for some user actions were significant , albeit in the opposite direction of what was hypothesized . As seen in Table 1 , Own DCard Moves ( F = 5 . 01 , p < . 0325 ) , Number of DCards Added ( F = 5 . 35 , p < . 028 ) , and Others DCards Rated ( F = 4 . 78 , p < . 035 ) occurred significantly more often in the cases where team members did not have access to their teammates ’ white - boards . Thus , Hypothesis 2 is not supported . 4 . 3 Team performance comparison ANOVA was performed on the data to ascertain if team performance was better when team members have shared access to each others ’ whiteboards ( Hypothesis 3 ) . In comparing teams between treatments ( viewing other team members ’ whiteboards , or not ) , a significant difference between the two types of treatments was found ( F = 51 . 45 , p < . 0001 ) . Specifically , teams that could view each others ’ whiteboards achieved significantly higher perfor - mance ( M = 6 . 4 , SD = . 51 ) than teams without access ( M = 4 . 8 , SD = . 71 ) , thereby supporting Hypothesis 3 . 4 . 4 Regression results Hypothesis 4 states that team performance will be positively related to the volume of team processes undertaken by the team to gather information and create knowledge . We ran two regression analyses to test the effects of information access ( see Table 2 ) and knowledge creation ( see Table 3 ) on team performance , respectively . The results indicate that rating one ’ s own DCards is positively related to team performance . Viewing one ’ s own source information , adding new DCards , and reorganizing one ’ s own DCards are all negatively related to team performance . Prior experience with team members positively affected performance . Thus , Hypothesis 4 received partial support . 5 Discussion and conclusions The goals for this study were to evaluate the C - RAM system for managing multiple user interactions as they work with multiple information sources , both visually and textually . In particular , the effectiveness of the whiteboard function within the system for sharing and disseminating information . In summary , being able to view other analysts ’ white - boards leads to significantly higher performance on the SOR task . Every single team in this treatment was able to discover that Farah was associated with Al - Queda . Further - more , these teams often accurately determined Farah ’ s location at a given time . Teams unable to view each other ’ s whiteboards were able to do this less than half of the time . We suggest that the explicit partition of DCards to analyst whiteboards ( knowledge silos ) , lead to explicit support of transactive memory ( Wegner 1987 ; Brandon and Hollings - head 2004 ) . Because team members could look at their teammates ’ whiteboards , they knew exactly “ who had what ” information . Regression analysis also clearly showed that rating one ’ s own DCards has a positive effect on team performance . When others view your whiteboard , they see the DCODE ratings on the DCards and are able to quickly ( cognitively efficiently ) determine which DCards to focus on . In terms of process measures , teams that could not view each other ’ s whiteboards were more likely to undertake information gathering and knowledge creation processes contrary to our hypothesis . For example , team members more often added and moved DCards within their white - board . This follows from TeamRPD because if “ I can ’ t see your whiteboard ( and your DCards ) , I will seek out more information when building situational awareness in order to accomplish the task . ” In other words , the teams without Process Viewing Other WBs ( Mean ) No Viewing Other WBs ( Mean ) Statistics Own Whiteboard Views 13 . 1 10 . 9 F = 1 . 19 , p < . 284 Own DCard Moves 116 . 5 164 . 4 F = 5 . 01 , p < . 0325 * Own Source Views 20 . 2 18 . 7 F = 0 . 14 , p < . 707 Own DCards Rated 3 . 7 4 . 3 F = 0 . 31 , p < . 579 DCards Added 10 . 1 15 . 6 F = 5 . 35 , p < . 028 * Others ’ Source Views 21 . 0 23 . 4 F = 0 . 54 , p < . 46 Others ’ DCards Rated 1 . 5 3 . 4 F = 4 . 78 , p < . 035 * Table 1 Pro - cess data comparisons 96 Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 shared access need to undertake more information gathering and knowledge creation processes than their counterparts who had shared access . But , adding DCards to one ’ s whiteboard is cognitively expensive and difficult since these DCards are more chunks to manage and remember ( Chase and Simon 1973 ; Zhang and Simon 1985 ; Gobet and Clarkson 2004 ; Gobet and Simon 2000 ) . The extra DCards have to be moved around an analyst ’ s existing DCards , perhaps disrupting their original organization . This takes even more cognitive resources away from the task . Clearly , our results show that such cognitive load may be eased when access is shared , possibly because information gathering and knowledge creation can be accomplished implicitly by looking at teammates ’ workspace . When these DCards are added to a whiteboard , individuals are more likely to rate the added DCard ( s ) than are team members who can view each other ’ s whiteboards . We suggest that analysts rated the DCards added to their whiteboard more often than their “ own ” DCards because they were attempting to communicate with each other using the DCODE public representation or stimulating structure . Rating the DCard may draw attention to it , i . e . stigmergy ( Grassé1959 ) and stimulating structures ( Hayne et al . 2005 ; Theraulaz and Bonabeau 1999 ) , thus leading to increased distributed cognition ( Hutchins 1991 , 1995 ) . Similarly , continually organizing the orientation of the DCards on the whiteboard distracts the individual ’ s attention from the task ( Doclos and McCarthy 2006 ) . It is interesting to note , however , that viewing one ’ s source information is negatively correlated with performance because this is not what would be expected . Knowing more about the information represented by the DCard should lead to better decision making . It is possible that continued re - reading of this content is related to the extra cards added to the whiteboard because team members can ’ t hold all this information in working memory . The use of Chat was different between treatments . When viewing other analysts ’ whiteboards , participants interacted more . Being able to see that other people didn ’ t have the same information on their whiteboards appears to prompt users to engage in discussion . We suggest that when analysts didn ’ t know what was on others ’ whiteboards , they didn ’ t know what to share . This result is counter to Stasser et al . ( 1995 ) , where experts did not share relevant information that was not in common . It is possible that by being able to view another ’ s whiteboard , the analyst is able to “ know who knows what ” and thus can detect what those other analysts don ’ t know , and share it . Because the knowledge chunks that represent distributed cognition are embedded on an individual ’ s whiteboard , there is enough information to suggest that the knowledge available between team members is explicit . This enables individuals to confidently focus on their own silo . In other words , “ I know enough about what you know to know what you know and to know that you don ’ t know what I know . This allows me to focus on what I know . ” Rummaging for the relevant bits of information about terrorist activities from the myriad of representations and channels is a daunting task for any team , much less an individual analyst . C - RAM is a powerful tool that facilitates team situation assessment through cognitive alignment of distributed and shared chunk representations . Standardized β Statistics Model F = 22 . 0 , p < . 0001 * R 2 = 0 . 80 Treatment Condition − 0 . 66 t = − 7 . 20 , p < . 0001 * Previous Experience with Teammates 0 . 20 t = 2 . 27 , p = . 03 * Own Source Views − 0 . 24 t = − 2 . 47 , p = . 02 * Others ’ Source Views − 0 . 17 t = − 1 . 36 , p = . 18 DCards Added − 0 . 21 t = − 1 . 71 , p = . 10 * Table 2 Information access regression results Standardized β Statistics Model F = 19 . 47 , p < . 0001 * R 2 = 0 . 78 Treatment Condition − 0 . 73 t = − 7 . 54 , p < . 0001 * Previous Experience with Teammates 0 . 23 t = 2 . 33 , p = . 03 * Own DCard Moves − 0 . 27 t = − 2 . 73 , p = . 01 * Own DCards Rated 0 . 17 t = 1 . 7 , p = . 10 * Others ’ DCards Rated − 0 . 05 t = − 0 . 54 , p = . 59 Table 3 Knowledge creation regression results Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 97 Future research might include some measures of basic cognitive performance , for example working memory capacity . We also suggest examining the organizational structure of individual whiteboards , because the way the DCards are represented may affect shared cognition ( Cannon - Bowers and Salas 2001 ) . 5 . 1 Limitations The normal concerns regarding the use of students as subjects could be viewed as a limitation of the study ( external validity ) . However , we feel that basic cognitive processes and limitations apply across all populations . Another possible weakness of this study is that the intelligence analysis experimental task may be consid - ered too simple . But , by having 50 different pieces of information in either image or text form with differing levels of revealed information , and only chat communi - cation , our pilot studies demonstrated that the task had enough complexity to be challenging within a two hour time block . Thus , the task required effortful cognition of the sort that is typical of many naturalistic domains . Further , we are confident that we simulated an appropri - ate naturalistic decision making environment through the use of properly aligned incentives . The groups in this study were ad - hoc , yet they exhibited spirited , cohesive , collective identity during de - briefing . Acknowledgements This research is partially supported by Dr . Mike Letsky at the Office of Naval Research . Appendix 1 : The following text was taken from Warner et al . ( 2008 ) and describes the SOR “ In developing the SOR scenario an assessment was made of the types of cognitive tasks and decisions that were involved in intelligence analysis and mission planning . The assessment started with using Pirolli ’ s ( 2005 ) unclassified cognitive task analysis for intelligence analyst together with the advice Pirolli obtained from intelligence analysts at the Naval Postgraduate School . The results of this analysis were integrated with results from St . John et al . ( 2006 ) unclassified SLATE scenario . All this information was reviewed by Lt . Ford , an intelligence officer at the Mission Support Center , Naval Amphibious Base , Coronado . Updates were made to the types of tasks , information and decisions required by intelligence analyst and mission planners , which served as the foundation for the SOR scenario . ” ( page 8 , ibid ) “ All the information used for storyboarding was taken from unclassified open sources . In addition , all names were changed to reflect fictitious names along with dates . All photos were also changed , using photoshop , so that all pictures are fictitious . … The text of the SOR scenario was written around a story of “ Denkapsa Farah ” . The story starts May 26 , 2006 where local intelligence indicates that an al - Qaeda element is reforming in the town of Disisabad in Eastern Afghanistan . This group may be attempting to strike a deal with a local , coalition - supported warlord , Denkapsa Farah . The overall instructions to the scenario problem solving team was : “ Based on the intelligence provided , work together as quickly and accurately as possible as a team to : ( 1 ) Determine if Farah has an association with al - Qaeda ( Task 1 — 1 . 5 hour ) ( 2 ) Determine Farah location at a specific time ( Task 2 — 30 minutes ) ” ( page 9 , ibid ) “ The mission statement above provides the team members with the tasks they are to complete . The general background is a brief history of both the characters in the scenario and real events ( such as the September 11 attacks ) and people ( Bin Laden ) . The other three sections of the scenario are Human Intelligence , Satellite Intelligence , and Additional Intelligence . Team members are required to share their information with their teammates to accomplish the task . Human intelligence information One member of the team is assigned the Human Intelligence portion of the scenario . The information provided to this team member involves such intelligence as hand drawn maps , written notes , banking transactions , phone records , and informant information . There are 15 individual pieces of human intelligence . Satellite intelligence information Another team member is responsible for the Satellite imagery in the scenario and has the satellite photos associated with each task . The photos depict buildings from a bird ’ s eye view as well as close - up with heavier detail and geographical information . There are 25 satellite images . Additional intelligence information The third team member will receive additional intelligence from the scenario . All other pieces of information not included in the first two categories have been placed into the “ additional intelli - gence ” group ( i . e . , maps , photographs , open source information , and tapped phone conversations ) . There are 10 additional pieces of information . ” ( pages 10 – 11 , ibid ) References Baddeley , A . ( 1992 ) . Working memory . Science , 255 ( 5044 ) , 556 – 559 . Baddeley , A . ( 1998 ) . Recent developments in working memory . Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 8 ( 2 ) , 234 – 238 . 98 Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 Baddeley , A . D . , & Hitch , G . J . L . ( 1974 ) . Working memory . In G . A . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation : advances in research and theory , vol . 8 ( pp . 47 – 89 ) . New York : Academic . Baddeley , A . , Chincotta , D . , & Adlam , A . ( 2001 ) . Working memory and the control of action : evidence from task switching . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 130 , 641 – 657 . Brandon , D . , & Hollingshead , A . ( 2004 ) . Transactive memory systems in organizations : matching tasks , expertise , and people . Organization Science , 15 ( 6 ) , 633 – 644 . Broadbent , D . E . ( 1958 ) . Perception and communication . London : Pergammon . Cannon - Bowers , J . A . , & Salas , E . ( 2001 ) . Reflections on shared cognition . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 22 , 195 – 202 . Chase , W . G . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . Perception in chess . Cognitive Psychology , 4 ( 1 ) , 55 – 81 . Chen , H . , Reid , E . , Sinai , J . , Silke , A . , & Ganor , B . ( 2008 ) . Terrorism informatics : knowledge management and data mining for homeland security . New York , NY : Springer Science , p . xv . Dennis , A . ( 1996 ) . Information exchange and use in group decision making : you can lead a group to information but you can ’ t make it think . MIS Quarterly , 20 ( 4 ) , 433 – 455 . DeSanctis , G . , & Gallupe , B . ( 1987 ) . A foundation for the study of group decision support systems . Management Science , 33 ( 5 ) , 589 – 609 . Doclos , F . , & McCarthy , G . ( 2006 ) . Brain systems mediating cognitive interference by emotional distraction . Journal of Neuroscience , 26 ( 7 ) , 2072 – 2079 . Ellis , J . ( 2009 ) . Countering terrorism with knowledge . In H . Chen , E . Reid , J . Sinai , A . Silke , B . Ganor ( eds ) Terrorism informatics . Springer . Ellis , S . , Gibbs , J . , & Rein , G . ( 1991 ) . GroupWare : some issues and experiences . Communications of the ACM , 34 ( 1 ) , 38 – 58 . Fleming , R . A . ( 2003 ) . Information exchange and display in asynchronous C2 group decision making ? SPAWAR Systems Center , San Diego ; The 8th Intl C2 Research and Tech Symposium ( ICCRTS ) . Fleming , R . A . ( 2008 ) . DCODE : A tool for knowledge transfer , conflict resolution and consensus - building in teams . In M . Letsky et al . ( Eds . ) , Macrocognition in teams : theories and methodologies . UK : Ashgate . Gobet , F . , & Clarkson , G . ( 2004 ) . Chunks in expert memory : evidence for the magical number four . . . or is it two ? Memory , 12 , 732 – 747 . Gobet , F . , & Simon , H . ( 1998 ) . Expert chess memory : revisiting the chunking hypothesis . Memory , 6 , 225 – 255 . Gobet , F . , & Simon , H . A . ( 2000 ) . Five seconds or sixty ? Presentation time in expert memory . Cognitive Science , 24 ( 4 ) , 651 – 682 . Grassé , P . ( 1959 ) . La reconstruction du nid et les coordinations inter - individuelles chez bellicositermes natalensis et cubitermes sp . la théorie de la stigmergie : Essai d ’ interprétation du comportement des termites constructeurs . Insectes Sociaux , 6 ( 1 ) , 41 – 81 . Hayne , S . , & Pendergast , M . ( 1995 ) . Experiences with object oriented group support software development . IBM Systems Journal , 34 ( 1 ) , 96 – 120 . Hayne , S . , & Ram , S . ( 1995 ) . Group database design : addressing the view modeling problem . Journal of Systems and Software , 28 ( 2 ) , 97 – 122 . Hayne , S . , & Smith , C . A . P . ( 2007 ) . Cognitively - based rapid assessment methodology ( C - RAM ) final report . Office of Naval Research , Arlington , VA , Tech . Rep . N00014 - 06 - M - 0223 . Hayne , S . , Smith , C . A . P . , & Turk , D . ( 2002 ) . The effectiveness of groups recognizing patterns . International Journal of Human Computer Studies , 59 ( 5 ) , 523 – 543 . Hayne , S . , Smith , C . A . P . , & Vijayasarathy , L . ( 2005 ) . The use of pattern - communication tools and team pattern recognition . IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication , 48 ( 4 ) , 377 – 390 . Hutchins , E . ( 1991 ) . The social organization of distributed cognition . In L . Resnick , J . Levine , & S . Teasdale ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on socially shared cognition ( pp . 283 – 307 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Hutchins , E . ( 1995 ) . How a cockpit remembers its speeds . Cognitive Science , 19 ( 3 ) , 265 – 288 . Ishii , H . , & Miyake , N . ( 1991 ) . Toward an open shared workspace : computer and video fusion approach of team workstation . Communications of the ACM , 34 ( 12 ) , 36 – 54 . Jessup , L . , & Valacich , J . ( 1993 ) . Group support systems : A new frontier . New York : MacMillan . Johnson - Lenz , P . , & Johnson - Lenz , T . ( 1982 ) . Groupware : the process and impacts of design choices . In E . Kerr & S . Hiltz ( Eds . ) , Computer - mediated communication systems . New York : Academic Press . Kaempf , G . , Klein , G . , Thordsen , M . , & Wolf , S . ( 1996 ) . Decision making in complex naval command - and - control environments . Human Factors , 38 , 220 – 231 . Keel , P . E . ( 2007 ) . EWall : a visual analyticsenvironment forcollaborative sense - making . Information Visualization , 6 ( 1 ) , 48 – 63 . Klein , G . ( 1993 ) . A recognition - primed decision ( RPD ) model of rapid decision making . In G . A . Klein , J . Orasanu , R . Calderwood , & C . E . Zsambok ( Eds . ) , Decision making in action : models and methods . Norwood : Ablex . Klein , G . , Moon , B . , & Hoffman , R . F . ( 2006a ) . Making sense of sensemaking I : alternative perspectives . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 21 ( 4 ) , 70 – 73 . Klein , G . , Moon , B . , & Hoffman , R . F . ( 2006b ) . Making sense of sensemaking Ii : a macrocognitive model . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 21 ( 5 ) , 88 – 92 . Kobayashi , M . , & Ishii , H . ( 1993 ) . ClearBoard : a novel shared drawing medium that supports gaze awareness in remote collaboration . IEICE Transactions on Communications , 76 ( 6 ) , 609 – 624 . Lavie , N . ( 1995 ) . Perceptual load as a necessary condition for selective attention . Experimental Psychology : Perception and Performance , 21 ( 3 ) , 451 – 468 . Mickolus , E . F . ( 2002 ) . How do we know we ’ re winning the war against terrorists ? Issues in measurement . Studies in Conflict & Terrorism , 25 ( 3 ) , 151 – 160 . Miller , G . A . ( 1956 ) . The magical number seven , plus or minus two : some limits on our capacity for processing information . The Psychological Review , 63 , 81 – 97 . Mohammed , S . , & Dumville , B . C . ( 2001 ) . Team mental models in a team knowledge framework : expanding theory and measurement across disciplinary boundaries . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 22 , 89 – 106 . Pendergast , M . , & Hayne , S . ( 1999 ) . Groupware and social networks : will life ever be the same again . Journal of Information and Software Technology , 41 ( 6 ) , 311 – 318 . Pirolli , P . ( 2005 ) . Rational analyses of information foraging on the web . Cognitive Science , 29 ( 3 ) , 343 – 373 . Roseman , M . , & Greenberg , S . ( 1996 ) . Teamrooms : network places for collaboration . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW Conference , pp 325 – 333 . Salas , E . , & Fiore , S . M . ( 2004 ) . Team cognition : Understanding the factors that drive process and performance . Washington , DC : APA . Schmid , A . ( 2004 ) . Statistics on terrorism : the challenge of measuring trends in global terrorism . Forum on Crime and Society , 4 ( 1 / 2 ) , 49 – 69 . Siegal , J . , Dubrovsky , V . , Kiesler , S . , & McGuire , T . ( 1986 ) . Group processes in computer mediated communication . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Process , 37 , 157 – 187 . Silke , A . ( 2004 ) . An introduction to terrorism research . In A . Silke ( Ed . ) , Research on terrorism : trends , achievements and failures ( pp . 1 – 29 ) . London : Frank Cass . Simon , H . ( 1974 ) . How big is a chunk ? Science , 183 , 482 – 488 . Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100 99 Stasser , G . , Stewart , D . D . , & Wittenbaum , G . M . ( 1995 ) . Expert roles and information exchange during discussion : the importance of knowing who know knows what . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 31 , 244 – 265 . Stasser , G . , Vaughan , S . , & Stewart , D . ( 2000 ) . Pooling unshared information : the benefits of knowing how access to information is distributed among group members . Organization Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 82 ( 1 ) , 102 – 116 . St . John , M . , Smallman , H . S . , & Voigt , B . D . ( 2006 ) . SLATE scenario one : Taliban headquarters . Unclassified technical report . San Diego : Pacific Science & Engineering Group , Inc . Stefik , M . , Foster , G . , Bobrow , D . G . , Kahn , K . , Lanning , S . , & Suchman , L . ( 1987 ) . Beyond the chalkboard : computer support for collaboration and problem solving in meetings . Communica - tions of the ACM , 30 ( 1 ) , 32 – 48 . Susi , T . , & Ziemke , T . ( 2001 ) . Social cognition , artefacts , and stigmergy : a cooperative analysis of theoretical frameworks for the understanding of artefact - mediated collaborative activity . Journal of Cognitive Systems Research , 2 ( 4 ) , 273 – 290 . Theraulaz , G . , & Bonabeau , E . ( 1999 ) . A brief history of stigmergy . Artificial Life , 5 ( 2 ) , 97 – 116 . Treisman , A . M . ( 1969 ) . Strategies and models of selective attention . Psychological Review , 76 , 282 – 299 . Trujillo , H . , & Jackson , B . ( 2008 ) . Terrorism informatics : knowledge management and data mining for homeland security . In H . Chen , E . Reid , J . Sinai , A . Silke , & B . Ganor ( Eds . ) . New York , NY : Springer Science , Chapter 9 . Varian , H . ( 1995 ) . The information economy : how much will two bits be worth in the digital marketplace ? Scientific American , 273 ( 3 ) , 200 – 201 . Warner , N . , Burkman , L . , & Biron , C , ( 2008 ) . Special Operations Reconnaissance ( SOR ) scenario : intelligence analysis and mission planning . Office of Naval Research , Arlington , VA , Tech . Rep . NAWCADPAX / TM - 2008 / 184 . Wegner , D . M . ( 1987 ) . Transactive memory : a contemporary analysis of the group mind . In B . Mullen & G . R . Goethals ( Eds . ) , Theories of group behavior ( pp . 185 – 208 ) . New York : Springer . Wegner , D . M . , Erber , R . , & Raymond , P . ( 1991 ) . Transactive memory in close relationships . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 ( 6 ) , 923 – 929 . Weick , K . ( 1995 ) . Sensemaking in organizations . Thousand Oaks : Sage . Wickens , C . D . ( 1984 ) . Processing resources in attention . In R . Parasuraman & R . Davies ( Eds . ) , Varieties of attention ( pp . 63 – 101 ) . Orlando : Academic . Wickens , C . D . , & Liu , Y . ( 1988 ) . Codes and modalities in multiple resources : a success and qualification . Human Factors , 30 , 599 – 616 . Wittenbaum , G . , & Stasser , G . ( 1996 ) . Management of information in small groups . In J . Nye & A . Brower ( Eds . ) , What ’ s social about social cognition : research on socially shared cognition in small groups ( pp . 3 – 28 ) . Thousand Oaks : Sage . Yen , J . , Fan , X . , Sun , S . , Hanratty , T . , & Dumer , J . ( 2006 ) . Agents with shared mental models for enhancing team decision makings . Decision Support Systems , 41 ( 3 ) , 634 – 653 . Zhang , G . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1985 ) . STM capacity for chinese works and idioms : chunking and acoustical loop hypotheses . Memory and Cognition , 13 , 193 – 201 . Stephen C . Hayne is a Professor of Computer Information Systems in the College of Business at Colorado State University . He received his Ph . D . from the University of Arizona ( 1990 ) ; his current research involves exploring collaboration and cognition in teams and groups , especially when under time pressure . He has received more than $ 3 . 1 million in grants from the National Science Foundation and the Office of Naval Research to continue this work and was awarded an IBM Faculty Fellowship in 2006 . His papers have been published in major conferences and numerous journals such as Journal of Management Information Systems , Database , Journal of Information and Manage - ment , Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Work , IBM Systems Journal , Electronic Markets and International Journal of Human Computer Studies . His research is based in the desire to use innovative technologies to solve real business problems . Lucy J . Troup an Assistant Professor in the Perceptual and Brain Science program in the Department of Psychology at Colorado State University . Prior to moving to the United States she was faculty in the Psychology Department at the University of the West of England , Bristol , UK . She received her PhD from the University of Plymouth UK in 1995 . She has an active research program in Human computer Interaction . Current projects include developing models of the human visual system , imaging the brain using Event Related Potentials , evaluating computer tools for intelligence agents and funded research working with both the National Parks Service and the United States Department of Agriculture . Recent publications include Environment and Behavior , Journal of Applied Social Psychology , and The Journal of Environmental Psychology . Sara A . McComb is an Associate Professor of Industrial and Systems Engineering and holds the Parsons Career Development Professorship in Engineering Management at Texas A & M Univer - sity . Prior to joining Texas A & M , she served on the faculty of the Isenberg School of Management at the University of Massachusetts Amherst . She received her B . S . I . E . from GMI Engineering & Management Institute , her M . S . E . S . from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and her Ph . D . from Purdue University ’ s School of Industrial Engineering . McComb ’ s research interests include examining project teams , particularly their communication and cognitive processes . Her research has been funded by the National Science Foundation , the Office of Naval Research , and the Department of Defense , and published in journals such as the IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , Human Factors , and the Journal of Engineering and Technology Management . 100 Inf Syst Front ( 2011 ) 13 : 89 – 100