Please Join Me / Us / Them on My / Our / Their Journey to Justice in STEM Rod D . Roscoe ( rod . roscoe @ asu . edu ) Society for Text and Discourse , August 2021 Imposter Syndrome • doubts about ones abilities , skills , and achievements • see Clance ( 1985 ) ; Clance & Imes ( 1978 ) • despite valid experience and credentials • fear of being “exposed” as a “fraud” • people may “talk themselves out of ” opportunities ( e . g . , applying for jobs or accepting invitations ) “You Don’t Belong Here” • contemporary research links imposter syndrome to marginalizing and minoritizing experiences related to race , gender , sexuality , neurodivergence , disability , and much more • lack of representation or role models • microaggressions , stereotype threat • impression management , emotional regulation Imposter Syndrome is a Symptom • imposter syndrome can be internalized exclusion • related to sense of belonging ( Strayhorn , 2018 ) • myriad factors subtly and unsubtly cause underrepresentation ( “unbelonging” ) in STEM • people may be actively pushed out of STEM • hostile communities cause people to avoid or flee STEM “I have spent my entire life proving that I belong in elite white spaces that weren’t built for Black people . I got a lot of clarity through what happened with the University of North Carolina and I decided that I didn’t want to do that anymore . … It’s not my job to heal the University of North Carolina . That’s the job of the people in power who created this situation in the first place . ” Dr . Nikole Hannah - Jones Inaugural Knight Chair in Race and Journalism , Howard University ( learn more , learn more , 1619 Project ) definitely not an imposter Where Am I Going with This ? • this talk ( almost didn’t happen ) asks the question : How do we improve representation in STEM ? • topic of belonging was a model of this talk— reflection and research with relevance to ( in ) equity and ( in ) justice • Part 1 : me / our / their and decentering • Part 2 : journeys and the myth of meritocracy • Part 3 : justice , activism , and coalitions Part 1 : Disfluency , Discomfort , Decentering The Title was Awkward on Purpose • leveraging links between disfluency and… • … attention ( Faber et al . , 2017 ) • … comprehension ( Ozuru et al . , 2010 ) • … deception ( King et al , 2018 ) • … reasoning ( Hernandez & Preston , 2013 ) stumbling is humbling Makes You Stop , Think , and Question • key mindset for critical thinking about “DEI” issues • Question : “How do we improve representation in STEM ? ” • well… what is representation ? who ? why ? • what are the causes and consequences ? • need to be open - minded and embrace disfluency Decentering • a shift in perspective from self and one’s internal world to other people and the external world • perspective taking ( Cho et al . , 2021 ; Wolgast et al . , 2020 ) • mental health ( Bernstein et al . , 2015 ) • progression of “me”  “us”  “them” in the title • humbling and uncomfortable to realize it’s not ( only ) about you , yet you should care just as much • natural for humans to think about the world from the perspective of Self • you are everywhere you go ! • my feelings , my beliefs , my choices , my actions , my needs • “How does this affect me ? ” • also fairly natural to extend our perceptions to people close to us or similar to us • reflection of Self ; tribe • our feelings , our beliefs , our choices , our actions , our needs • “How does this affect us ? ” • takes work and effort to think about their feelings , their beliefs , their choices , their actions , their needs • “How does this affect them ? ” • e . g . , correspondence bias ( Gilbert & Malone , 1995 ) and cognitive consistency ( Gawronski & Brannon , 2019 ) Decentering as “Far Transfer ” • difficult to appreciate how people are meaningfully variable while also sharing underlying connections , goals , or a common cause • e . g . , structure mapping and analogy ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) • relational reasoning ( Alexander et al . , 2015 ; Dumas et al . , 2013 ) Marginalization and Exclusion • select identities are historically and habitually centered , which creates a culture of exclusion for some people instead of a culture of belonging • i . e . , White , male , heterosexual , able - bodied , rich , etc . folks are concentrated in positions of power and prestige ; implicitly treated as the cultural “default” • WEIRD ( Clancy & Davis , 2019 ; Henrich et al . , 2010 ) Improving Representation ( Part 1 ) • people go and stay where they are wanted , valued , supported • must assess how current cultures communicate and enact exclusion ( e . g . , policies , leadership , language ) • who is centered ? who is marginalized—unseen and unheard ? • what factors are preventing or undermining belonging ? • must learn the actions , events , and experiences that contribute to sense of belonging , and then do those things Part 2 : Personal Journeys and the Myth of Meritocracy Language of “Journeys” • a variety of analogies describe how people move through STEM : “pipelines” and “pathways” ( Lee , 2019 ; Lord et al . , 2019 ) • analogies are powerful but must be used cautiously • … activate knowledge and highlight features ( Danielson , Sinatra , & Kendeou , 2016 ) • … constrained by prior knowledge ( Braasch & Goldman , 2010 ) • … misconceptions , illusions of comprehension ( Jaeger & Wiley , 2015 ) “Pipelines” • fixed , unidirectional , and predetermined by others • valves ( “weeding out” ) and reservoirs ( “pools” ) • things either “flow through” or “leak out” • what happens if a person “leaks out” from the pipeline ? splat ? “Pathways” • many different routes to get from “A” to “B” to “Z” • can diverge and converge • paths are personal , organic • often nonlinear : may backtrack , get lost , find a new path , blaze a new trail Pathways and Participation @ ASU Dr . Samantha Brunhaver engineering career pathways and adaptability ( NSF CAREER ) ; how identity - based characteristics influence adaptability ( learn more ) Dr . Dina Verdín broadening participation , issues of access and persistence ; asset - based for understanding minoritized student experiences ( learn more ) Dr . Mayra Artiles Fonseca underrepresented and minoritized doctoral student education and policy ( learn more ) ; Rising Doctoral Institute ( learn more ) “Journeys” • because people are walking those paths , with personal goals and purpose • we struggle , encounter conflicts and obstacles • we explore , make discoveries , adapt , improvise , and fail • we often need help Understanding Journeys • crucial to understand and respect peoples’ journeys , histories , and legacies if we want to understand ( or improve ) “representation in STEM” • how and why do some journeys lead people to STEM , away from STEM , into STEM , and / or out of STEM ? e . g . , My STEM Journey • I’m queer , BIPOC , able - bodied ( ish ) • undergraduate degrees in neuroscience and psychology ; graduate degrees in cognitive psychology ; 1 st generation PhD • tenured associate professor in Human Systems Engineering in a world - class engineering college • decent publication record • PI and co - PI on several grants • I worked really hard to merit those degrees , jobs , publications , grants , and tenure • maybe I’m an existence proof . If someone like me can be successful in STEM , then so can they ! • … right ? e . g . , My STEM Journey My STEM - Rich Childhood my parents built a house . I “helped . ” my dad and I built a go - cart My Parents had School Expertise college - educated parents who were career educators in public schools my mom wrote the teachers’ edition for a 5 th grade science textbook Education was Valued and Celebrated Went to College… • accepted into multiple schools • but University of Pittsburgh offered a full - ride Helen Faison Scholarship • i . e . , 4 - year degree with no debt • Dr . Helen Faison : a pioneer and champion for students ; first woman and first Black Superintendent of Pittsburgh Public Schools ( learn more ) …and then Graduate School • GRA in the lab of Dr . Michelene Chi ( more ) • generous , accessible mentors ( only a few fit on here ) Dr . Robert Hausmann ( blog , book ) Dr . Marguerite Roy ( more ) Dr . Randi A . Engle ( more ) Dr . Kirsten Butcher ( more ) Dr . Scotty D . Craig ( more ) Dr . Agnieszka Kristensen ( more ) One More Time : No Student Debt • obtaining undergraduate and graduate degrees with zero debt is / was amazing in too many ways to count • student debt is wrecking generations of learners • debt is inequitably distributed by race , gender , etc . ( Goldrick - Rab & Kelchen , 2016 ; Goldrick - Rab & Steinbaum , 2020 ) • “underserved” and “under - resourced” students are more likely to need assistance , exit before graduating , encounter employment hurdles , and / or default on loans Postdoctoral Research • second postdoc at University of Memphis with Dr . Danielle McNamara ( more ) • incredible mentor for basically how all of academia works • launched research on writing and NLP ; Writing Pal l • another very supportive , collaborative , and inspiring lab and community ( learn more ) Unwavering Family Support So… • be born to awesome parents who can explain and guide you through the processes and practices of school • be immersed in early and continuous STEM - rich environments with lots of encouragement • go to college and graduate school without debt • join stimulating , well - funded labs with generous mentors Lessons from My Journey ? easy Meritocracy • “I worked hard and earned my successes…” • a meritocratic ideology argues that success is the result of talent , skills , knowledge , and effort … and thus apparent success is the most valid proof of talent , skills , knowledge , and effort • reputation and rewards are based on or evidence of objective merit rather than subjective bias or charity credentials papers citations grants hiring + tenure Meritocracy • meritocracy seems fair and equitable • the same for everyone ( “We all have 24 hours in a day . How will you use them ? ” ) • the opposite of unfairness and discrimination ( “You get what you work for . ” ) • and feels good to those with power , prestige • justifies positive attributions and self - concept Dr . Erin A . Cech cultural mechanisms of inequality ; STEM education and workplace ; gender , race , and LGBTQ + issues ( learn more ) ( The Trouble with Passion , upcoming book ) Myth of Meritocracy • my journey demonstrates the range and depth of factors that powerfully enabled my work to matter throughout my life • but… meritocratic structures and policies ignore the journeys • ignore variation in opportunity , support , and luck • ignore variation in pressures and obstacles • ignore variation in starting places and resources • even when resources are equally provided , people vary in whether they can use those resources and opportunities Improving Representation ( Part 2 ) • journeys enable and / or hinder success in ways separate from “hard work” or “talent” • by ignoring the journeys , meritocratic ideologies reward privilege and power as much as ( or more than ) actual success within personal context—“the rich get richer” • meritocracy contributes to underrepresentation in STEM by gatekeeping who “deserves” to be in STEM • we need new ways to assess and anticipate success that involve meeting peoples’ needs prior to evaluation Part 3 : Joining Together as _ _ _ _ _ - Activists Get fired up ! Change the System • underrepresentation in STEM is the predictable product ( or symptom ) of systemic inequity and injustice in STEM fields and culture • e . g . , cultures of exclusion that are unwelcoming • e . g . , meritocratic mismeasurement of success • e . g . , ignoring our journeys and the impact of injustice • therefore , improving representation in STEM requires attention to injustice and conscious acts of justice Language of “Justice” • “representation” is demographic or compositional diversity ( who is present or not ) • “inclusion” and “belonging” encompass more than being present —truly feeling and being welcomed , integrated , and valued • “justice” entails removing or overcoming barriers that hinder representation , inclusion , belonging Justice as “Problem Solving ” • to solve a problem… • need to map the problem space ; ( re ) frame the problem ( Svihla , 2021 ; Svihla & Reeve , 2020 ) • or ( re ) structure the problem ( Ash & Wiley , 2006 ; Cushen & Wiley , 2012 ) ( Jonassen , 2000 ) • we can map out the inequitable factors , events , actions , policies , ideologies , etc . that produce , justify , and maintain problematic outcomes within the system “ _ _ _ _ _ - Activism” • activism : problem solving to fix systemic inequities • anyone can contribute as a scholar - activist , teacher - activist , practitioner - activist , developer - activist , or other roles • as a focus of our research , teaching , practice , service • as a lens for interpretation and communication • as a commitment in our methods and procedures • next… rapid - fire examples from ASU , HFES , ISLS , and AIED Madeleine Jennings pursuing MS in HSE and PhD in engineering education ; asset - based approach to neurodivergent and LGBTQ + students ( more ) Dr . Areej Mawasi learning sciences , educational technology ; equity - oriented engagement and sociopolitical dimensions of STEM ( more ) Inclusive Language Analytics • new Gates - funded project to investigate bias , inclusive applications , and inclusive method for language analytics ; with The Learning Agency Lab Dr . Maria Goldshtein ( more ) Dr . Amin Alhashim ( more ) Postdoctoral Fellows Ulrich Boser ( more ) Aigner Picou ( more ) Perpetual Baffour ( more ) Learning Agency Lab ( Feedback Prize , Tools Competition ) Committee for Campus Inclusion • promote inclusive , harmonious campus environment that celebrates individual and group diversity • training , webinars , consulting • Catalyst Awards Catalyst Award 2020 Recipients CGEST Collaborators • pending proposals : use systems mapping to explore systemic factors that affect women and girls of color in STEM ; expanding COMPUGIRLS globally using VR Dr . Kimberly Scott social and academic development ( more ) Dr . Tara Nkrumah culturally responsive science education ( more ) Dr . Brooke Coley engineering education , VR , identity ( more ) Dr . Lois Brown African American lit and culture ( CRSD , more ) job opportunities Dr . Natalie C . Benda social determinants of health ( more ) Dr . Rich J . Holden health equity , patient ergonomics ( more ) Dr . Sarah Coppola technology bias , accessibility ( more ) Dr . Kylie Gomes UX design , patient ergonomics ( more ) Dr . Enid Montague patient ergonomics , design ( more ) Dr . Theresa Nguyen UX design and user experience ( more ) Dr . Jacklin Stonewall access , participatory methods ( more ) Dr . Kermit Davis psychosocial factors , ergonomics ( more ) Dr . Rupa Valdez health equity , patient work ( more ) Dr . Chris Reid UX design , safety , ergonomics ( more ) Dr . Carolyn Sommerich ergonomics , health education ( more ) Dr . Tonya Smith - Jackson , IoT , cultural ergonomics ( more ) Dr . Erin K . Chiou trust in automation , human - automation teams , healthcare , ( more ) Dr . Abigail Wooldridge health systems , patient safety , healthcare ( more ) https : / / www . choice360 . org / choice - pick / outstanding - academic - titles - 2020 - diversity - equity - and - inclusion / ISLS Emerging Scholars Committee Dr . Victor Lee learning technology , computational thinking , data science education ( more ) , as President of ISLS Dr . Maxine McKinney de Royston culture and learning , race and equity , political clarity ( more ) Dr . Leema Berland Epistemology and argumentation , equity and integration , STEM engagement ( more ) Dr . Roberto de Roock learning , technology , and justice ( more ) Dr . Dengting Boyanton educational psychology , co - learning ( more ) Dr . Mmantsetsa Marope education administration , economics , policy ( more ) Request for Proposals : due date : September 1 st , 2021 Dr . Maxine McKinney de Royston • importance and urgency of political clarity : scholars need to be socio - politically aware and engaged in their work and how it is applied • e . g . , McKinney de Royston & Sengupta - Irving ( 2019 ) ( special issue ) • STEM and the social good : Forwarding political and ethical perspectives in the learning sciences ( Sengupta - Irving & McKinney de Royston ( Eds . ) ( 2020 ) Dr . Sherice Clarke • accountable talk , discourse , educational technology , design ( Clarke , 2018 , 2020 ) • promoting equity for diverse and underserved learners ( website ) ( more ) • need to see the full humanity of all learners , see learning as development , and see teaching as the fostering of that development • these assumptions must also apply to minoritized children—not selectively AIED and DEI : A Bidirectional Relationship • invited panel for AIED 2021 conference , to discuss equity , inclusion , artificial intelligence , and education Dr . Shima Salehi problem solving , STEM inclusion and access , learning analytics ( more ) Dr . Rose Luckin learner centered design , educational technology , ethics for AI ( more ) Dr . Chris Piech computer science education , co - teaching , learning analytics ( more ) Dr . Nia Dowell discourse analysis , group communication analysis , learning analytics ( more ) Dr . Marcelo Worsley inclusive teaching and learning via tech , multimodal learning analytics ( more ) Dr . Shima Salehi • problem solving , STEM learning • inclusion , equity , and access in STEM learning communities • barriers to equity ( e . g . , academic preparation , self - efficacy ) • Salehi et al . ( 2019a , 2019b , 2019c , 2020 ) ( more ) Dr . Nia Dowell • discourse processing , group interaction , learning analytics , collaboration ( website ) • social processes , engagement , incorporating gender and race ; promoting inclusion • Dowell et al . ( 2019 , 2020 , 2021a , 2021b ) ( more ) Dr . Marcelo Worsley • inclusive making , co - design , broadening participation • multimodal tools and learning analytics for studying complex learning environments • Worsley et al . ( 2018 , 2020 , 2021a , 2021b ) ( more ) • Technological Innovations for Inclusive Learning and Teaching ( tiilt ) Lab— centering marginalized people and communities Future Panelist ? Dr . Angela Stewart • combines education , HCI , and AI to create sociotechnical interventions for more equitable and inclusive educational spaces • collaboration and teams • Stewart et al . ( 2019 , 2020 , 2021 ) ( more ) Improving Representation ( Part 3 ) • must take action and build coalitions to solve the systemic problems that undermine the inclusive world you want • it is possible and valuable to weave inclusion , equity , and justice themes into all kinds of work • please contact the scholars noted here , or join an affinity group or book club , or partner with other organizations , or submit collaborative multi - institute grants— join forces • tell ‘em Roscoe sent ya The Question ( s ) How do we improve representation in STEM ? How and why do some journeys lead people to STEM , away from STEM , into STEM , and / or out of STEM ? Five Thought - Provoking Answers entail seeking justice in STEM—recognizing , confronting , and dismantling the inequitable systems and ideas that create and maintain underrepresentation ( 1 ) Build a Culture of Belonging • assess how your system communicates and enacts exclusion ( e . g . , policies , leadership , what is tolerated ) —sends people away and out • implement multiple ways to belong as systemic principles that encourage discovering , joining , and staying in STEM • be proactive with sincere invitations • acknowledge and celebrate people and their journeys • promote and support diverse role models at all levels • cultivate communities of generous mentorship and access • solicit needs and be accountable for meeting them ( 2 ) Decenter , and then Recenter • must challenge the “defaults” in the system • what do they look like ? where are they from ? • silence and invisibility pushes people away and out • must promote and celebrate the work of marginalized and minoritized scholars and practitioners • exciting attention that pulls in “newcomers” and “outsiders , ” while uplifting current members— welcoming them into the center • importantly , when we focus on each other , the result is a reciprocal and mutual system of support ( 3 ) Adopt a Journeyocracy * • meritocracy is inequitable gatekeeping that only constrains who can enter or stay in the system • must respect crucial variations in resources , luck , experience , and opportunities that powerfully affect how people journey through the system • must stop reducing people to publication counts , h - indexes , pedigrees , expenditures , award lists , etc . • need new models for recruiting , hiring , tenure , awards that value how we get there , not whether we got there Journeyocracy • focusing on journeys prepares us to appreciate diverse backgrounds and intervene to support ongoing journeys • identify where systems support or hinder people along their journeys— it is only equitable and valid to assess people after their needs have been met • the journey continues after joining —cultures of belonging offer continuous support ( e . g . , mentors and safety nets ) • instead of allowing people to “leak out” or “get lost , ” provide what they need to stay and keep progressing as of July 29 th , 2021 * ( 4 ) Become an _ _ _ _ _ - Activist • must embrace injustices as problems you have the tools and responsibility to address • must invest in learning about the systemic factors that include or exclude people from STEM • must act via research , teaching , service , administration , volunteering— get involved • and do so with political clarity and awareness ( 5 ) Build Coalitions • there are many experts , committees , initiatives , organizations , work groups , projects , centers , etc . • however , many folks are working in parallel but not together— forming coalitions and alliances helps us share resources , share strategies , and share wisdom • coalitions help us resist divisive tactics and rhetoric • coalitions can enact systemic change at larger scales By Our Powers Combined… • every organization contributes distinct expertise , methods , perspectives , and person - power • we should promote interdisciplinary scholarship along with interdisciplinary activism • “insiders” here may be “outsiders” there ; but joining together makes us all insiders ( a “bigger tent” ) So… please join me / us / them on my / our / their journey to justice in STEM ! Rod D . Roscoe ( rod . roscoe @ asu . edu ) Photo Credits • Polytechnic Campus : photo by R . D . Roscoe • disguise dog : photo by Braydon Anderson on Unsplash • Nikole Hannah - Jones : photo by Marcus Ingram • slip - and - fall sign : photo by Skitterphoto on Pexels • monkey mirror : photo by Andre Mouton on Unsplash • friends photo : photo by Duncan Shaffer on Unsplash • protester hug : photo by Hannah Busing on Unsplash • busy street : photo by mauro mora on Unsplash • Google search : screenshot by R . D . Roscoe • grocery list : photo by cottonbro from Pexels • construction worker Rod : photo by Roscoe Family • go - cart Rod : photo by Roscoe Family • OSU Rod : photo by Roscoe Family • textbook cover : photo by Scott , Foresman • Kindergarten graduate Rod : photo by Roscoe Family • high school graduate Rod : photo by Roscoe Family • Dr . Faison : photo by Pittsburgh Post - Gazette • Roscoe family : photo by Roscoe Family • easy cake : photo by congerdesign from Pixabay • trophy : photo by Giorgio Trovato on Unsplash • burning money : photo by Jp Valery on Unsplash • shredded paper : photo by Hans Braxmeier from Pixabay • diploma : photo by Ekrulila from Pexels • thumbs up : photo by Lukas from Pexels • matches : photo by Comfreak from Pixabay • concert hands : photo by Free - photos from Pixabay • megaphone : photo by Andrea Piacquadio from Pexels • systemic racism : photo by UnratedStudio from Pixabay • CCI award : photo by ASU Now , ASU • HSE book ( front , back ) : photo by R . D . Roscoe • Sherice Clarke : photo by c . bay milin • Journeyocracy : screenshot by R . D . Roscoe • team hands : photo by fauxels from Pexels : team hands • holding child : photo by Ketut Subiyanto from Pexels : holding child • garden maze : photo by Susanne Mumm from Pixabay garden maze • protester : photo by Ehimetalor Akhere Unuabona on Unsplash • build bridge : photo by Mason Kimbarovsky on Unsplash • sword : photo by Ryszard Porzynski from Pixabay • robot arms : photo by kalhh from Pixabay • dragon : photo by JL G from Pixabay • flames : photo by Cullan Smith on Unsplash • all photos of academic and professional colleagues sourced from public - facing profiles ; all images of webpages are screenshots of public - facing sites