CO - CREATION EXPERIENCES : THE NEXT PRACTICE IN VALUE CREATION C . K . PRAHALAD AND VENKAT RAMASWAMY c onsumers today have more choices of products and services than ever before , but they seem dissatisfied . Firms invest in greater product variety but are less abie to differentiate themseives . Growth and vaiue creation have become the dominant themes for managers , in this paper , we expiain this paradox . The meaning of value and the process of vaiue creation are rapidiy shifting from a product - and firm - centric view to personalized consumer experiences . Informed , networked , empowered , and active consumers are increasingly co - creating value with the firm . The interaction between the firm and the consumer is becoming the locus of value creation and value extrac - tion . As value shifts to experiences , the market is becoming a forum for conversation and interactions between consumers , consumer communities , and firms . It is this dialogue , access , transparency , and understanding of risk - benefits that is central to the next practice in value creation . © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . and Direct Marketing Educational Foundation , Inc . JOURNAL OP INTERACTIVE MARKETING VOLUME 18 / NUMBER 3 / SUMMER 2004 Published online in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / dir . 20015 C . K . PRAHALAD is the Harvey C . Fruehauf Professor of Business Administration at the University of Michigan Business School In Ann Arbor ; e mail : cprahalad @ aol . com VENKAT RAMASWAMY is the Michael R . and Mary Kay Hallman Feilov ; / of Electronic Business and Professor of Marketing at the University of Michigan Business School ; e - mail : venkatr @ umich . edu This article is based on Prahalad and Ramaswamy ( 2004 ) , The Future of Competition : Co - creating Unique Value with Customers , Harvard Business School Press . INTRODUCTION The word " market " conjures up two distinct images . On one hand , it represents an aggregation of con - sumers . On the other hand , it is the locus of exchange where a firm trades goods and services with the con - sumer . Imphcit in this view is a critical assumption that ; ^ rms can act autonomously in designing products , developing production processes , crafting marketing messages , and controlling sales channels with little or no interference from or interaction with consumers . ^ Consumers get involved only at the point of exchange . Firms aggregate consumers into " meaningful seg - ments " for ease of exchange . Both of these images of the market are heing challenged hy the emergence of connected , informed , empowered , and active con - sumers . Consumers now seek to exercise their influ - ence in every part of the business system . Armed with new tools and dissatisfied with available choices , con - sumers want to interact with firms and thereby " co - create " value ( Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2004 ) . The changing nature of the consumer - company interaction as the locus of co - creation ( and co - extraction ) of value redefines the meaning of value and the process of value creation . In this article , we discuss how the concept of a market is undergoing change and transforming the nature of the relationship between the consumer and the firm . CONSUMERS , MARKETS , FIRMS , AND VALUE CREATION : THE TRADITIONAL SYSTEM In the traditional conception of process of value cre - ation , consumers were " outside the firm . " Value cre - ation occurred inside the firm ( through its activities ) and outside markets . The concept of the " value chain " epitomized the unilateral role of the firm in creating value I Porter . 1980 ) . The firm and the consumer had distinct roles of production and consumption , respec - tively . In this perspective , the market , viewed either as a locus of exchange or as an aggregation of con - sumers , was separate from the value creation process ( Kotler , 2002 ) . It had no role in value creation . Its role was value exchange and extraction . The market , ^ We use the terms " consumer " and " customer " interchangeably throughout the paper . defined as an aggregation of consumers , was a " tar - get " for the firm ' s offerings . ^ Needless to say , the traditional concept of a market is company - centric . So is the process of value cre - ation . Consequently , firms conceptualize customer - relationship management as targeting and managing the " right " customers . Firms focus on the locus of interaction—the exchange—as the locus of economic value extraction . The interactions between companies and customers are not seen as a source of value cre - ation ( Normann & Ramirez , 1994 ; Wikstrom , 1996 ) . Value exchange and extraction are the primary func - tions performed by the market , which is separated from the value creation process , as shown in Figure 1 . It is no surprise that the flow of communications is also from the firm to the consumer , as the market is a place where value is exchanged and the consumer has to be persuaded such that the firm can extract the most value from transactions . Informed , connected , empowered , and active con - sumers are increasingly learning that they too can extract value at the traditional point of exchange . Consumers are now subjecting the industry ' s value creation process to scrutiny , analysis , and evaluation . Consumer - to - consumer communication and dialogue provides consumers an alternative source of informa - tion and perspective . They are not totally dependent on communication from the firm . Consumers can choose the firms they want to have a relationship with based on their own views of how value should be created for them . Online auctions for hotel rooms and airline reserva - tions are just one example of this growing phenomenon . The popularity of businesses such as eBay suggests that the auction is increasingly serving as the basis for pricing goods and services online . From the customer ' s perspective , the advantage of the auction process is that prices truly reflect the utility to that customer , at a given point in time , of the goods and services being purchased . That doesn ' t necessarily mean that prices are lower , only that the customer pays according to her ^ We use the term " ofFering " to denote products and services . Our point of view applies equally to conventional distinctions of " products " versus " services . " JOURNAL OF INTERAaiVE MARKETING Firm ^ onsumer Interaction ( 1 ) Interaction is the locus of economic value extraction by the firm ( and tfie consumer ) ( 2 ) Interaction is the basis of consumer experience The Firm : Creates value TheMarfcat Exchange of value ( products and sendees ) TmConsuman Demand target for the finm ' s offerings Tbe market Is separate from the value creation process FIGURE 1 The Traditional Concept of a Market Source : Prahalad and Ramaswamy ( 2004 ) utility rather than according to the company ' s cost of production . As customers become more knowledgeable and increasingly aware of their negotiating clout , more businesses—from automakers to cosmetic surgery clinics—will feel pressure to adopt an implicit ( if not an explicit ) negotiation . An auction is one approach to this negotiation process . Armed with knowledge drawn from today ' s increasingly transparent business environment , customers are much more willing than in the past to negotiate prices and other transaction terms with companies . We are moving toward a world in which value is the result of an implicit negotiation between the individual consumer and the firm . Therefore , value creation , for an automaker , for example , is the result of individualized negotiations with millions of consumers . The consequences of not recognizing this shift can be high . As long as firms believe that the market can be separated from the value creation process , firms in search of sources of value will have no choice but to squeeze as much costs from their " value chain " activ - ities as possible . Meanwhile , globalization , deregula - tion , outsourcing , and the convergence of industries and technologies are making it much harder for man - agers to differentiate their offerings . Products and services are facing commoditization as never before . Companies can certainly not escape being super effi - cient . However , if consumers do not see any differen - tiation they will buy smart and cheap . The result is the " Walmartization " of everything , from clothes to DVD players . Is there an antidote to this dilemma ? We think so . Firms continually reduce costs and the consumers negotiate away the cost reductions in price erosion . But to find the antidote , companies must escape the firm - centric view of the past and seek to co - create value with customers through an obsessive focus on personalized interactions between the consumer and the company . Further , doing so viill require managers to escape their product - centered thinking and instead focus on the experiences that customers will seek to co - create . We need to challenge the traditional , dis - tinct roles of both the consumer and the company and examine the impact of a convergence of the roles of production and consumption ; or the convergence of the roles of the company and the consumer . CO - CREATION EXPERIENCES AS THE BASIS FOR VALUE CREATION High - quality interactions that enable an individual customer to co - create unique experiences with the company are the key to unlocking new sources of competitive advantage . Value will have to be jointly cre - ated by both the firm and the consumer ( see Table 1 ) . In the traditional system , as firms decide the prod - ucts and services they will produce , by implication they decide what is of value to the customer . In this CO - CREATION EXPERIENCES system , consumers have little or no role in value cre - ation . During the last two decades , managers have found ways to partition some of the work done by the firm and pass it on to their consumers—be it self - checkout ( e . g . , gas pumps , ATMs , supermarket checkout ) , involvement of a subset of customers in product development ( e . g . , industrial customers help design the products they need as airlines do with Boeing ) , or a range of variants in between . Consumers find some of these beneficial . Firms such TABLE 1 The Concept of Co - Creation WHAT CO - CREATION IS NOT • Customer focus •Customer is king or customer is always right ' Delivering good customer service or pampering the customer with lavish customer service ' Mass customization of offerings that suit the industry ' s suppiy chain • Transfer of activities from the firm to the customer as in self - service • Customer as product manager or co - designing products and services Product variety • Segment of one ' Meticulous Market research ' Staging experiences ' Demand - side innovation for new products and services WHAT CO - CREATION IS • Co - creation is ahout joint creation of value by the company and the customer . It is not the firm trying to please the customer • Allowing the customer to co - construct the service experience to suit her context • Joint problem definition and problem solving • Creating an experience environment in which consumers can have active dialogue and co - construct personalized experiences ; product may be the same ( e . g . , Lego Mindstorms ) but customers can construct different experiences • Experience variety • Experience of one • Experiencing the business as consumers do in real time • Continuous dialogue ' Co - constructing personalized experiences • Innovating experience environments for new co - creation experiences as Disney and Ritz Carlton have found interesting ways to stage an experience for consumers ( Pine & Gilmore , 1999 ) . In all variations of consumer involve - ment , from self - checkout to participation in a staged experience , the firm is still in charge of the overall orchestration ofthe experience . Yes , they focus on con - sumer experience , but their consumers are basically treated as passive . Such companies disproportionate - ly influence the nature of the experience . They are primarily product - centric , service - centric , and , there - fore , company - centric . The focus is clearly on connect - ing the customer to the company ' s offerings . This firm - centric view of the world , refined over the last 75 years , is being challenged not by new competi - tors , but by communities of connected , informed , empowered , and active consumers . We believe that there is an emerging disconnect between the opportu - nities for value creation and differentiation enabled by a networked , active , informed consumer ( and con - sumer communities ) , their expectations and capabili - ties and the constraining force of the traditional con - cept of a market . The more than 1 . 3 billion cell phones and the proliferation of PCs around the world are cre - ating ubiquitous connectivity . For example , more than 70 million Americans have visited www . WebMD . com . More than 500 chat rooms exist on just cancer alone . A visit to the doctor today is qualitatively different than it was 10 years ago . Patients want to engage in dia - logue . They want to understand the risk - benefits of alternate modalities of treatment . They have access to more information than ever before , regardless of qual - ity . Consumers expect transparency . " Don ' t hold back , tell me the truth , " is often the approach . Doctors may not like this . It takes time . It exposes them and the quality of their expertise . It is hard to hide behind authority . However , the doctor now has a better patient . Because he or she understands and is involved , the patient is more willing to comply with the treatment modalities that they have jointly developed . Put yourself in the position of a patient . What is of value here ? Is it the medications , the hospital , the equipment that is used , and the expertise of the doc - tor ? Surely , all these are critical . But what differenti - ates one hospital from another ? One doctor from another ? For the patient , it is the experience of co - creating with the doctor a modality of treatment that takes into account his or her peculiar circumstances . 8 JOURNAL OF INTERAaiVE MARKETING Patient A may live alone and find it difficult to follow the diet regimen . She may need help . A different patient with the same medical condition may have totally different circumstances or context . His experi - ence may depend on taking care of his children . He wants to indulge his children in the American ritual and must make it to the little league games without appearing to be very sick . The traditional view of the hospital and its product—medical treatment—has not disappeared . Rather , what has emerged as the basis for unique value to consumers is their experience ( which is contextual ) . The quality of that experience is dependent on the nature of the involvement the customer ( patient ) has had in co - creating it with doc - tors , counselors , and others . Individual involvement can go beyond the treatment modality to the process of diagnosis , therapy , counseling , and wellness indica - tors . It can vary from patient to patient , and depends on how each patient chooses to co create his or her own unique experiences . What we need to create is an experience environment within which individual patients ( consumers ) can create their own unique personalized experience . Thus , products can be com - moditized hut co - creation experiences cannot he . BUILDING BLOCKS OF INTERACTIONS : DIALOGUE , ACCESS , RISK BENEFITS , AND TRANSPARENCY ( DART ) Let us look at what has changed . How do we build a system for co - creation of value ? First , we have to start with the building blocks of interactions between the firm and consumers that facilitate co - creation experi - ences . Dialog , access , risk - benefits , and transparency ( DART ) are emerging as the basis for interaction between the consumer and the firm ( see Figure 2 ) . These huilding hlocks of consumer - company interac - tion challenge the strong positions managers have traditionally taken on labeling laws , disclosure of risks ( as in smoking or genetically modified plants ) , transparency of financial statements , and open access and dialog with consumers and communities . Dialog is an important element in the co - creation view . Markets can be viewed as a set of conversations between the customer and the firm ( Levine , Locke , Searls , & Weinberger , 2001 ) . Dialog implies interac - tivity , deep engagement , and the ability and willing - Dialogue Tfaneparency Access Risk - benalHs FIGURE 2 Building Blocks of Interactions for Co - creation of Value ness to act on both sides . It is difficult to envisage a dialog between two unequal partners . So , for an active dialog and the development of a shared solu - tion , the firm and the consumer must become equal and joint problem solvers . Dialog must center around issues of interest to both—the consumer and the firm and must have clearly defined rules of engagement . For example , buyers and sellers engage in a dialogue in eBay . The rules of engagement are evolving but clear at any point in time . But dialog is difficult if consumers do not have the same access and transparency to information . Firms have traditionally benefited fi " om exploiting the infor - mation asymmetry between them and the individual consumer . Because of ubiquitous connectivity , it is possible for an individual consumer to get access to as much information as she needs from the community of other consumers as well as from the firm . Both access and transparency are critical to have a mean - ingful dialog . More importantly , dialog , access , and transparency can lead to a clear assessment by the consumer ofthe risk - benefits of a course of action and decision . Should I change my medication ? What are the risks ? Instead of just depending on the doctor—the expert—the patient has the tools and the support structure to help make that decision—not in some generic risk category hut " for me " —with a medical condition , a lifestyle , or social obligations . This is a personalized understand - ing of risk - benefits . The progress towards DART cannot be stopped . The case of the patient - doctor interaction is not isolated . CO - CREATION EXPERIENCES We believe that the opportunities for value creation are enhanced significantly for firms that embrace the concepts of personalized co - creation experience as the source of unique value . Personalizing the co - creation experience differs from the concept of " customers as innovators . " Customers of a firm like General Electric Plastics assume much of the task of developing a cus - tom resin for a specific application . By providing access to tools and a library of compounds , GE shifts effort and risk to its customers ( Thomke & von Hippel , 2002 ) . When the process works well , both par - ties benefit . GE saves development time and reduces its risk , while customers can get what they want with greater speed and accuracy . But as long as the process remains firm centric and product centered , it is at best a variant of the cuirent dominant logic . The same applies to the conventional approach to product or service customization . Starting from a tra - ditional firm - centric view of value creation , managers focus on providing products and services to a single customer at low cost . This process leads to mass cus - tomization , which combines the benefits of " mass " ( large - scale production and marketing and therefore low cost ) with those of " customization " ( targeting a single customer ) . The focus on product - feature devel - opment leads to increased product choice for con - sumers . On the Web , for example , consumers can cus - tomize products and services ranging from business cards and computers to home mortgages and fiower arrangements , simply by choosing from a menu of fea - tures . But such customization tends to suit the com - pany ' s supply chain , rather than a consumer ' s unique desires and preferences . Personalizing the co - creation experience means fos - tering individualized interactions and experience out - comes . It involves more than a company ' s a la carte menu . A personalized co - creation experience reflects how the individual chooses to interact with the expe - rience environment that the firm facilitates . We are suggesting a totally different process—one that involves individual consumers on their terms—a broad challenge that business leaders must face ( Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2003 ) . Once we discard the " firm - centric " view of value cre - ation and accept the " co - creation " view , the evidence of this shift is visible in a wide variety of industries . For example , video games could not exist without active co - creation with consumers . At the other extreme , tra - ditional firms like John Deere are building extensive networks that allow farmers to share their experi - ences , dialogue with the company and among them - selves , and increase their productivity . The OnStar network of GM is another case in point . The system has the potential to allow individuals to construct their own experience . GM provides the platform . As an indi - vidual , I can decide to seek advice on restaurants or ask them to alert me to breaking news or the progress of my favorite football team . These are all possibilities . Individuals construct their own experiences . Ebay and Amazon are further examples of this trend—both facil - itate the process of personalized experiences , both involve communities , both facilitate dialogue . The transition fi " om a firm - centric view to a co - creation view is not about minor changes to the tradi - tional system . Note what co - creation is not . It is neither the transfer or outsourcing of activities to cus - tomers nor a customization of products and services . Nor is it a scripting or staging of customer events around the firm ' s various offerings ( e . g . , La Salle & Britton , 2002 ; Peppers & Rodgers , 1993 ; Schmitt , 1999 ; Seybold , 1998 ) . That kind of company - customer interaction no longer satisfies most consumers today . The change that we are describing is far more funda - mental . It involves the co - creation of value through personalized interactions based on how each individ - ual wants to interact with the company . Co - creation puts the spotlight squarely on consumer - company interaction as the locus of value creation . Because there can be multiple points of interaction anywbere in the system ( including the traditional point of exchange ) , this new framework implies that all the points of consumer - company interaction are critical for creating value . Since no one can predict the expe - rience a consumer will have at any point in time , the task of the firm is one of innovating a robust experi - ence environments ( Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2003 ) . Hence , our view of value co - creation challenges both images of a market : as an exchange of product and service offerings and as an aggregation of consumers . Traditional economics focuses squarely on the exchange of products and services between the com - pany and the consumer , placing value extraction by the firm and the consumer at the heart of the interac - tion . In the co - creation view , all points of interaction 10 JOURNAL OF INTERAaiVE MARKETING between the company and the consumer are opportu - nities / or both value creation and extraction . The co - creation view also challenges the market as an aggregation of consumers for what the firm can offer . In the new value co - creation space , business man - agers have at least partial control over the experience environment and the networks they build to facilitate co - creation experiences . But they cannot control how individuals go about co - constructing their experi - ences . Co - creation , therefore , forces us to move away from viewing the market as an aggregation of con - sumers and as a target for the firm ' s offerings . Market research , including focus groups , surveys , statistical modeling , video ethnography , and other techniques were developed in an effort to get a better under - standing of consumers , identify trends , assess con - sumer desires and preferences , and evaluate the rela - tive strength of competitors ' positions . Within this framework , the ultimate concept in customer segmen - tation is one - to - one marketing . While debates rage about the adequacy of our mar - keting methodology , the underlying vision of con - sumers as targets ( prey ) is rarely questioned . But what if the consumers were to turn the tables ? What if consumers were to start investigating companies , products , and potential experiences in a systematic way ? Is it sufficient for companies to " sense and respond " to customer demands ? Do managers need market foresight—besides market insight ? Must they learn to anticipate and lead , and further , to co - shape expectations and experiences ? In co - creation , direct interactions with consumers and consumer communities are critical . Consumer shifts are best understood by being there , co - creating with them . Firms must learn as much as possible about the customer through rich dialogue that evolves with the sophistication of consumers . The information infra - structure must be centered on the consumer and encourage active participation in all aspects ofthe co - creation experience , including information search , configuration of products and services , fulfillment , and consumption . Co - creation is more than co - marketing or engaging consumers as co - sales agents . It ' s about developing methods to attain a visceral understanding of co - creation experiences so that com - panies can co - shape consumer expectations and expe - riences along with their customers . Thus , in the emerging concept of a market , the focus is squarely on consumer - company interaction— the roles of the company and the consumer converge . The fiirm and the consumer are both collaborators and competitors—collaborators in co - creating value and competitors for the extraction of economic value . The market as a whole becomes inseparable from the value creation process , as shown in Figure 3 . Co - creation converts the market into a forum where dialogue among the consumer , the firm , consumer Rrm - Consumer Interaction ( 1 ) Interactionisthelocusof co - creat / on of va / ue and economic value extraction by the consumer and the firm ( 2 ) Co - creatlon experiences are the basis of value TlM Market ; Co ^ rwetlan experiences of Unique Value in the contOKt of an tndtvtdual at a specific momeni TheConsunMR Collaboratw tn co - cmatlng value and competitor in extracting economic vaiue TheRrm : CallaboTHtor in co - ctBating value and competHor in extracting economic value Ttw market ) s integral to the value creation procesa FIGURE 3 The Emerging Concept of the Market CO - CREATION EXPERIENCES 11 TABLE 2 FROM • One - way • Firm to consumer • Controlled by firm • Consumers are ' prey ' • Choice = buy / not buy • Firm segments and targets consumers ; consumers must " fit into " firm ' s offerings Transformation of the Relationship Between Firms and Consumers TO •Two - way •Consumer to firm • Consumer to consumer • Consumer can " hunt " • Consumer wants to / can impose her view of choice • Consumer wants to / is being empowered to co - construct a personalized experience around herself , with firm ' s experience environment SouKE Adapted from Prahalad & Ramaswamy ( 2005 ) . communities , and networks of firms can take place . The transformation of the relationship between firms and consumers is shown in Table 2 . THE MARKET AS A FORUM FOR CO - CREATION EXPERIENCES Co - creation of value fundamentally challenges the traditional distinction between supply and demand . When the experience , along with the value inherent in it , is co - created , the firm may still produce a phys - ical product . But the focus shifts to the characteristics of the total experience environment . Now demand is contextual . Given that customers cannot predict their experiences , co - creation of value may well imply the death of traditional forecasting . Instead , the focus shifts to capacity planning , the ability of the experi - ence network to scale up and down rapidly , and for the system to reconfigure resources in real time to accommodate shifting consumer desires and person - alization of co - creation experiences . Such a system may be highly demanding , yet it promises incredihle efficiency gains as well . We must view the market as a space of potential co - creation experiences in which individual constraints and choices define their will - ingness to pay for experiences . In short , the market resembles a forum for co - creation experiences . The market as a forum challenges the basic tenet of traditional economic theory : that the firm and the consumers are separate , with distinct , predetermined roles , and , consequently , that supply and demand are distinct , but mirrored , processes oriented around the exchange of products and services between firms and consumers . We believe that , in time , new approaches and tools consistent with a new experience - based view of economic theory will emerge . We have identified and summarized some of the key points of departure in Table 3 . The new frame of value creation creates new compet - itive space for firms . To compete effectively however , managers need to invest in building new infrastruc - ture capabilities , as luell as new functional and gover - nance capabilities —capabilities that are centered on co - creation through high - quality customer - company interactions and personalized co - creation experiences ( see Prahalad & Ramaswamy , 2004 ) . While the build - ing of new capabilities is critical , it is less difficult than changing one ' s dominant logic . Unless we make a shift from a firm - centric to a co - creation perspective on value creation , co - extraction of economic value by informed , connected , empowered , and active commu - nities of consumers on the one hand and cost pres - sures wrought by increased competition , competitive discontinuities , and commoditization on the other will only make it harder for companies to develop a sus - tainable competitive advantage . The future belongs to those that can successfully co - create unique experi - ences with customers . IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERACTIVE MARKETING As we move rapidly to a co - creation experience as the basis of value , the fundamental interaction between the firm and the consumer changes in character and importance . As we have discussed , the interaction becomes the locus of value creation ; the interaction can be anywhere in the system , not just at the con - ventional point of sale or customer service . In the tra - ditional view of marketing , interaction is where the firm markets its offerings to extract economic value from the consumer ( based on the value the firm has already created through its value chain ) . This firm - centric and product - centric view is deep - rooted and manifests itself at all the interfaces and touchpoints between firms and customers . Firms manage cus - tomer relationships leaving little room for customers 12 JOURNAL OF INTERAaiVE MARKETING TABLE 3 The Market as a Target for the Firm ' s Offerings Versus a Forum for Co - Creation Experiences THE MARKET AS ATARGET The firm and the consumer are separate , with distinct predetermined roles . Supply and demand are matched ; price is the clearing mechanism . Demand is forecast for products and services that the firm can suppiy . Value is created by the firm in Its value chain . Products and services are exchanged with consumers . Firm disseminates information to consumers . Fimi chooses which consumer segments to serve , and the distribution channels to use for its offerings . Firms extract consumer surplus . Consumers are " prey , " whether as ' groups " or " one - to - one . " Firms want a 360 - degree view of the customer , but remain opaque to customers . Firms want to " own " the customer relationship and lifetime value . Companies determine , define , and sustain the brand . THE MARKET AS A FORUM The firm and the consumer converge ; the relative " roles of the moment " cannot be predicted . Demand and suppiy are emergent and contextual . Supply is associated with facilitating a unique consumer experience on demand . Value is co < reated at multiple points of Interaction . Basis of value Is co - creation experience . Consumers and consumer communities can also initiate a dialogue among themselves . Consumer chooses the nodal firm and the experience environment to interact with and co - create value . The nodal firm , its products and services , employees , multiple channels , and consumer communities come together seamiessly to constitute the experience environment for individuals to co - construct their own experiences . Consumers can extract the firm ' s surplus . Value is co - extracted . Consumers expect a 360 - degree view of the experience that is transparent in the consumer ' s language . Trust and stickiness emerge from compelling experience outcomes . Consumers are competitors In extracting value . The experience is the brand . The brand is co - created and evolves with experiences . Source . - Prahalad & Ramaswamy ( 2004 ) . to have a voice , inject their view of how they want to ( individually and collectively ) interact with firms and consumer communities , and co - create value that cus - tomers are , by design , " willing to pay for . " But co - creation demands that both managers and consumers make the necessary adjustments . For example , both must recognize that the interaction between the two—the locus of value creation—must be built on critical building blocks . It must start from access and transparency . Firms have traditionally opposed transparency . The fight against product labeling is well known . Releasing information regard - ing the likely risks is often mandated . It must become voluntary . Further , transparency and access are of lit - tle value if the firms do not create the infrastructure for dialog . This requires investment in technology but more important , investments in socializing managers and changing managerial practices . How does a firm engage in a dialog ? How do you understand the underlying expectations of millions of consumers and their utility functions ? The infrastructures and the governance processes that are emerging in a wide range of industries is an indication of implicit negoti - ations ( e . g . , Expedia , eBay , Amazon , and others ) . The system allows for the consumers to inject or state their expectations and their willingness to monetize their own experiences and makes it explicit . The firm also has a way of accepting or rejecting that specific transaction at that time . What is emerging is that dialog requires us to invest time and effort to under - stand the economics of experience and develop sys - tems to come to agreements rapidly . Finally , firms must recognize that the more educated the consumer , the more likely it is that she will make an intelligent choice and make tradeoffs that are appropriate to her CO - CREATION EXPERIENCES 13 context . This does not take away the responsibility of the company to deny some choices . As everyone knows , the barman has the obligation to know when to stop serving drinks . Consumers have to also learn that co - creation is a two - way street . The risks cannot be one sided . They must take some responsibility for the risks they con - sciously accept . The tobacco company has the obliga - tion to educate consumers on the risks of smoking and develop cessation programs . But if a consumer per - sists in smoking , he must take responsibility for his own actions . In cases where the consumer is unlikely to have the expertise to make that choice , they must accept the choice made for them by a neutral party such as the Federal Drug Administration . The gover - nance issues that will mediate the interactions and create mutually beneficial results for the consumer and the firm is the goal . This we believe is the next practice of value creation . REFERENCES Kotler , P . ( 2002 ) . Marketing Management . Engiewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . LaSalle , D . , & Britton , TA . ( 2002 ) . Priceless : Turning Ordinary Products into Extraordinary Experiences . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Levine , R . , Locke , C , Searls , D . , & Weinberger , D . ( 2001 ) . The Cluetrain Manifesto : The End of Business as Usual . Cambridge , MA ; Perseus Publishing . Normann , R . , & Ramirez , R . ( 1994 ) . Designing Interactive Strategy : From Value Chain to Value Constellation . Chichester , UK : Wiley . Peppers , D . , & Rogers , M . ( 1993 ) . The One to One Future : Building Relationships One Customer at a Time . New York : Doubleday . Pine , B . J . , II , & Gilmore , J . H . ( 1999 ) . The Experience Economy : Work Is Theater and Every Business a Stage . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Porter , M . E . ( 1980 ) . Competitive Strategy : Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors . The Free Press . Prahalad , C . K . , & Ramaswamy , V . ( 2003 ) . The New Frontier of Experience Innovation . Sloan Management Review , Summer , 12 - 18 . Prahalad , C . K . , & Ramaswamy , V . ( 2004 ) . The Future of Competition : Co - Creating Unique Value with Customers . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Prahalad , C . K . , & Ramaswamy , V . ( 2005 ) . Building New Strategic Capital for Co - Creation . Strategy + Business , forthcoming . Schmitt , B . H . ( 1999 ) . Experiential Marketing : How to Get Customers to Sense , Feel , Think , Act , and Relate to Your Company and Brands . New York : Free Press . Seybold , P . B . ( 1998 ) . Customers . com : How to Create a Profitable Business Strategy for the Internet and Beyond . New York : Times Books . Thomke , S . , & Von Hippel , E . ( 2002 ) . Customers as Innovators : A New Way to Create Value . Harvard Business Review , April , 74 - 81 . Wikstrom , S . ( 1996 ) . Value Creation by Company - Consumer Interaction . Journal of Marketing Management , 12 , 359 - 374 . 14 JOURNAL OF INTERAQtVE MARKETING