Newcastle University e - prints Date deposited : 8 th October 2012 Version of file : Author final Peer Review Status : Peer reviewed Citation for item : Lindsay S , Taylor N , Olivier P . Opportunistic Engagement by Designing on the Street . In : ACM annual conference extended abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ) . 2012 , Austin , Texas : ACM Press . Further information on publisher website : http : / / dl . acm . org Publisher’s copyright statement : © ACM , 2012 . This is the author ' s version of the work . It is posted here by permission of ACM for your personal use . Not for redistribution . The definitive version was published at : http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2223697 The definitive version of this article is available at : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2223697 Always use the definitive version when citing . Use Policy : The full - text may be used and / or reproduced and given to third parties in any format or medium , without prior permission or charge , for personal research or study , educational , or not for profit purposes provided that : • A full bibliographic reference is made to the original source • A link is made to the metadata record in Newcastle E - prints • The full text is not changed in any way . The full - text must not be sold in any format or medium without the formal permission of the copyright holders . Robinson Library , University of Newcastle upon Tyne , Newcastle upon Tyne . NE1 7RU . Tel . 0191 222 6000 Opportunistic Engagement by Designing on the Street Abstract Lightweight , opportunistic participatory design exercises in public spaces have the potential to collect large volumes of candid feedback and insights from members of the public . We motivate the need for ‘designing on the street’ in terms of the time and resource requirements of traditional participatory design methods , and begin the process of unpicking the conditions for success and practical requirements . We demonstrate through a pilot study that opportunistic participatory design can be a useful tool for addressing design challenges in everyday settings , where most people have some familiarity with the design area . Keywords Participatory design ; public engagement . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m [ Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) ] : Miscellaneous ; Introduction Although traditional participatory design sessions have proven to be extremely valuable when designing new technologies , some of our experiences designing for domestic environments have been frustrating . We have found that organising design sessions can be time - Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI’12 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1016 - 1 / 12 / 05 . Stephen Lindsay Culture Lab School of Computing Science Newcastle University , UK stephen . lindsay @ ncl . ac . uk Nick Taylor Culture Lab School of Computing Science Newcastle University , UK nick . taylor @ ncl . ac . uk Patrick Olivier Culture Lab School of Computing Science Newcastle University , UK patrick . olivier @ ncl . ac . uk consuming , as participants need to be found and convenient sessions organised , requiring considerable effort relative to the volume of input that can be generated . In addition , potential participants can be discouraged by the time commitment required or would simply never consider taking part in a study . Originally , participatory design was envisioned as a way to work with actual end users who hold expertise and experience in the activities at hand , but outside of the workplace anyone on the street could potentially have valuable insights into certain design involving everyday activities . Bødker [ 2 ] argued that when moving our focus from workplace tasks to more experiential , non - workplace interactions , we need to be willing to re - evaluate our methods . Following this thinking , we present our experiences and reflections on a study in which we used snap feedback elicited through short design discussions with members of the public . Our approach involved the display of design materials in a vacant retail space around which we invited passersby to take part in short discussions about the project aims and initial designs . Such approaches have been used by a number of previous projects . For example , projects have used town hall - style meetings [ 1 ] , demonstrated prototypes and gathered feedback at public events that attract large and varied audiences [ 4 ] [ 6 ] , or utilised crowdsourced feedback through social media [ 5 ] . However , while this is by no means a new approach , little consideration has previously been given to the specific affordances of the method itself . In this paper , we begin the process of examining the intrinsic qualities of this approach . We discuss the potential complementary strengths of designing on the street in relation to traditional participatory design approaches , the roles that it might play in the design process , and practical issues that need to be addressed . Pilot Study : The Safe Home Living Project Our interest in opportunistic participatory design arose from issues encountered when attempting to recruit participants for the Safe Home Living ( SHEL ) project . Our role in SHEL was to evaluate and revise initial design proposals for a website that displayed real - time information about the activity of an elderly family member or friend , based on an existing set of in - home infrared sensors . The sensors were deployed in the homes of potentially vulnerable older adults living alone . The website displayed real - time information about their in - home activity to nominated family or friends , who , although concerned for their wellbeing , would not consider themselves to be the older people’s caregivers . Motivation Despite having access to a large research participant pool including many older people and our success in recruiting participants to trial the system in their homes , we found it difficult to recruit younger adult participants willing to take part in traditional design sessions to discuss the monitoring website and visualisation designs . Conversation with participants that dropped out prior to these two - hour workshops revealed that many were unwilling to commit the time that travel and participation required . Indeed , a design goal of SHEL was to help time - and resource - stretched people who needed to balance checking on their older relatives with full time jobs and family commitments . Notably , as they were not full - time caregivers and their relatives did not have specific medical conditions , no common forum existed for these people , such as a group meeting or clinical centre , which are traditional sources of participants for assistive technology design projects . Our conclusion was that recruitment methods for traditional participatory design approaches , centred on accessing people through these common forums , were not ideal for working with this varied and widespread group . Consequently , we sought to be more opportunistic in the way we approached potential participants and employ methods that required—and were perceived to require—a lower level of commitment on their part . For example , intercept interviews involve administering on - the - spot questionnaires in the street . While these are most typically used for polling and market research , we have attempted to harness this type of approach in a design process by taking advantage of a small , city centre retail space used by our institution as an off - campus exhibition space ( Figure 1 ) . By creating a participatory design environment in the retail space and inviting members of the public to enter and discuss the project , we hoped to elicit feedback from participants based on their first impressions with no need to commit to lengthy meetings . Method A process of opportunistic participatory design was trialled for two hours a day during lunch breaks for five consecutive weekdays . Potential participants were invited into the space as they walked past and offered refreshments in return for taking part in an interview lasting 10 - 15 minutes . Those who agreed to participate were asked if they had an older relative or friend living alone who they had any safety concerns about , to help ground the discussion in their real experiences . They were given an overview of the SHEL system and shown a set of sensors , then asked to comment on the aesthetic and functional aspects of its design and provide their impressions of how useful the system might be to them or to their relatives . Our main interest was not in the sensors themselves , but in designing visualisations of the relative’s activity around their home . The facilitator explained that the system could produce visualisations and participants were shown a large poster with four existing visualisations from the system ( Figure 2 ) . Using a typical workshop practice , they were asked to use green coloured stickers to indicate aesthetically pleasing visuals and blue stickers to indicate informative visuals . The facilitator discussed their choices and encouraged them to write down their reasoning on sticky notes and place them on the images . This was intended to encourage asynchronous dialogue between participants by allowing later participants to respond to the comments made in earlier sessions , compensating for the lack of direct interaction between different participants . The participants were then asked to look at another large poster featuring a wide selection of data visualisation styles drawn from the web . They were again asked to select the most visually attractive ones and those that they thought might represent a day’s activity . These choices were again indicated with stickers and responses were posted on sticky notes . Finally , the participants were asked if they could think of any specific type of information they would like to have access to that would reassure them that their relative was safe . Figure 1 . A participatory design environment was created inside a vacant retail space . Figure 2 . Participants were shown posters displaying existing visualisations ( top ) and a variety of possible visualisations ( bottom ) . Taking advantage of the lightweight nature of the process , we intended to dynamically reconfigure the design environment and protocol between individual interactions with participants . This would ensure that the process remained agile and responsive to the characteristics exhibited in the participants’ feedback and insights from our interactions . Observations and Findings During the pilot study , we made a number of early observations that we believe indicate potential benefits and uses of the approach , as well as practical considerations that need further consideration . Engaging Passersby Over a single hour , we observed 70 people passing the location , with the number peaking between 12 : 30 and 13 : 30 each day as people took their lunch breaks . As the space occupied a route between offices and nearby eateries , we observed many of the same individuals each day . Given each interview lasted up to 15 minutes , we could theoretically have conducted 40 interviews over the five days , but we were able to recruit 15 participants , who came into the site either on their own or in groups of two or three ( Figure 3 ) . This is a modest number for ten hours , but in our experience , recruiting , arranging venues , arranging materials , and planning traditional participatory design exercises takes a similar amount of time . We also believe that this number could be greatly improved upon . The location of the space was not ideal , as it was mostly passed by busy professionals on their lunch breaks who did not have time to stop and speak to us . They also represented a relatively narrow demographic , albeit very different to the one we typically engaged with in design . We envisage this approach being utilised on busy shopping streets where a more diverse audience could be reached , perhaps during weekends when people might have more time to spare . The physical characteristics of the space also impacted our success , such as typical walking routes and aspects of the space that might discourage people from entering . Ideally , we would wish participants to enter the space of their own volition , but we had to directly encourage potential participants to enter . Being approached on the street is often considered to be a nuisance , and we would hope to avoid this . Marketing literature notes that “atmospherics” such as A - frame billboards , flags and potted plants can help to entice people [ 3 ] and that the internal fixtures ( carpeting , lighting , etc . ) can also play an important role [ 7 ] . Characterising Design Insights The feedback received from our participants was characterised by its spontaneity and candidness , which we believe to be a result of the very brief nature of the engagements . This meant that participants were quick to raise their most pertinent or pressing thoughts on the issues , often volunteering thoughts on a topic before we reached that part of the questioning . For example , participants who were concerned by the privacy implications of the system would raise these concerns before they were questioned directly about the issue . This feedback was surprisingly pertinent , demonstrating that members of the public were more than capable of understanding and contributing to the design and research process when engaged spontaneously . The candid nature of the comments was also interesting , as Figure 3 . Participants entered the space both individually and in groups . participants did not hesitate to criticise the designs presented . Many freely suggested that their relatives would never consider using such a system , for example . Eliciting this type of negative feedback during participatory design sessions can often be difficult , but is extremely important for identifying potential issues . The large volume and variety of feedback allowed us to map out the design space and identify factors affecting the design . For example , while designing our visualisations of activity we had been mindful of the trade - off between aesthetic appeal and the level of information conveyed . Some participants commented that showing too much information created a potential for unpleasant experiences . By contrast , other participants noted that if the visualisations did not represent enough data or were too abstract they felt they were pointless . Another example of this was mapping the variety of circumstances in which people felt the system would be useful , such as after having an accident or another “close call” . The feedback encouraged us to challenge our existing ideas and consider new avenues for exploration . Participants were extremely candid and did not hesitate to criticise ideas and designs while suggesting alternative functionality that they would prefer . For example , some participants commented on wanting to use the system to monitor if their relative was carrying a fall alarm . In retrospect , this is a reasonably obvious application that had not previously been considered . Dynamic Reconfiguration The low - fidelity nature of the process allowed us to make adjustments in response to our experiences with each individual or group . For example , the verbal introduction to the system was refined to place an emphasis on “reassurance” rather than “safety” , as participants were sceptical of such a system’s ability to keep vulnerable people safe . Although any design approach might be piloted and modified in this way , we see this as an inherent , ongoing characteristic and potential benefit of the approach . This allowed us to quickly refine the language , materials and other aspects of the sessions without expending resources conducting long participatory design sessions , while at the same time collecting usable design input . Quickly finding new ways to support participants’ ability to contribute proved particularly valuable . We soon found it advantageous for the facilitator to create the sticky notes , based on the remarks from the participants , and place them on the posters after they left rather than requiring participants to write these notes themselves . This placed the focus of the interaction on dialogue with the participant and lowered the amount of effort required on their part . By contrast , the participants were happy to use coloured stickers to indicate preferences and introduced the use of red stickers to indicate designs they particularly disliked , which was a more lightweight task that was easier to engage with . Asynchronous Dialogue Participants paid little attention to notes written by others during the first days of the trial . However , by the end of the week the volume of notes appeared to have reached a critical mass and started commanding much more attention from new participants . At this later stage , participants began to engage with comments by using coloured stickers to indicate agreement with specific notes rather than generate new comments . Some participants also began to question earlier comments , mainly mentioning that they wanted to better understand the reasoning behind them . This highlights a need to find ways to further support asynchronous interaction . For example , making recordings to be played to later participants might help to convey the reasoning behind sticky note comments . We feel that this is an important challenge to address , which might allow us to combine benefits of this approach with the valuable discussions made possible by having many participants together . Summary and Future Work Based on our initial attempts to explore issues around opportunistic participatory design , we believe that designing on the street is a potentially viable means of gathering quick , varied feedback on design areas with which the general public is likely to have experience . While our primary intended benefit of gaining a greater volume of input proved not to be the case in this pilot study ( although we believe this can be improved upon ) , we instead found that the candidness of the responses and the ability to rapidly reconfigure our interviews most useful . Consequently , we expect that this approach could be particularly effective during the early stages of the design process . Researchers and designers might use the approach to scope a design space and seed more extended participatory design engagements . Further research is required to refine the methods used to engage members of the public , as well as exploring its roles in a wider participatory design processes . References [ 1 ] Arnold , M . , Gibbs , M . and Wright , P . Intranets and the creation of local community : ‘Yes , an intranet is all very well , but do we still get free beer and a barbeque ? ' . In Proc . C & T 2003 , Kluwer ( 2003 ) , 185 – 204 . [ 2 ] Bødker , S . When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges . Proc . NordiCHI 2006 , ACM Press ( 2006 ) , 1 – 8 . [ 3 ] Cornelius , B . , Natteir . M . and Faure , C . How storefront displays influence retail store image . Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 17 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 143 – 151 . [ 4 ] DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Akin , A . and Louw , M . The Neighborhood Networks project : a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . In Proc . PDC 2008 , ACM Press ( 2008 ) , 41 – 50 . [ 5 ] Hagen , P . and Robertson , T . Dissolving boundaries : social technologies and participation in design . In Proc . OZCHI 2009 , ACM Press ( 2009 ) , 129 – 136 . [ 6 ] Taylor , N . and Cheverst , K . Creating a rural community display with local engagement . Proc . DIS 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 218 – 227 . [ 7 ] Turley , R . and Millman , J . Atmospheric effects on shopping : experimental evidence . Journal of Business Research 49 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 193 – 211 .