ORIGINAL ARTICLE Cell Research ( 2016 ) 26 : 593 - 612 . © 2016 IBCB , SIBS , CAS All rights reserved 1001 - 0602 / 16 $ 32 . 00 www . nature . com / cr Numb regulates vesicular docking for homotypic fusion of early endosomes via membrane recruitment of Mon1b Ximing Shao 1 , * , Yi Liu 1 , 2 , 7 , * , Qian Yu 1 , 2 , * , Zhihao Ding 1 , Wenyu Qian 2 , 3 , Lei Zhang 1 , Jianchao Zhang 1 , Nan Jiang 2 , 8 , Linfei Gui 1 , Zhiheng Xu 5 , Yang Hong 6 , Yifan Ma 1 , Yanjie Wei 1 , Xiaoqing Liu 3 , Changan Jiang 1 , 2 , Minyan Zhu 3 , Hongchang Li 1 , Huashun Li 3 , 4 1 Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Molecular Biology of Neural Development , Institute of Biomedicine and Biotechnology , Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Shenzhen , Guangdong 518055 , China ; 2 West China Develop - mental & Stem Cell Biology Institute , West China Second University Hospital , and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy , West China Hospital , Sichuan University , Chengdu , Sichuan 610041 , China ; 3 SARITEX Center for Stem Cell Engineering Translational Med - icine , Shanghai East Hospital , Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital , Tongji University School of Medicine , Shanghai 200123 , China ; 4 ATCG Corp , BioBay , Suzhou Industrial Park , Suzhou , Jiangsu 215123 , China ; 5 State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmen - tal Biology , Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100101 , China ; 6 Department of Cell Biology & Physiology , University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine , Pittsburgh , PA 15261 , USA Numb is an endocytic protein that plays crucial roles in diverse cellular processes such as asymmetric cell division , cell migration and differentiation . However , the molecular mechanism by which Numb regulates endocytic trafficking is poorly understood . Here , we demonstrate that Numb is a docking regulator for homotypic fusion of early endo - somes ( EEs ) . Numb depletion causes clustered but unfused EEs , which can be rescued by overexpressing cytosolic Numb 65 and Numb 71 but not plasma membrane - attached Numb 66 or Numb 72 . Time - lapse analysis reveals that paired vesicles tend to tether but not fuse with each other in the absence of Numb . We further show that Numb binds to another docking regulator , Mon1b , and is required for the recruitment of cytosolic Mon1b to the EE membrane . Consistent with this , deletion of Mon1b causes similar defects in EE fusion . Our study thus identifies a novel mecha - nism by which Numb regulates endocytic sorting by mediating EE fusion . Keywords : Numb ; Mon1 ; early endosome ; homotypic fusion Cell Research ( 2016 ) 26 : 593 - 612 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cr . 2016 . 34 ; published online 18 March 2016 * These three authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence : Hongchang Li a , Huashun Li b a E - mail : hc . li @ siat . ac . cn b E - mail : huashunli @ tongji . edu . cn 7 Current address : Department of Molecular Genetics , University of Toron - to , Toronto , Ontario M5S 1A8 , Canada 8 Current address : Department of Biology , University of Washington , Seat - tle , Washington , USA Received 21 July 2015 ; revised 17 November 2015 ; accepted 17 January 2016 ; published online 18 March 2016 Introduction Asymmetric cell division is a fundamental way of generating cell diversity in metazoans , and Numb is the first identified intrinsic determinant of cell fate ; mutation of Numb leads to the loss of most of the sensory neu - rons in the Drosophila peripheral nervous system [ 1 - 3 ] . Mammals have two Numb homologs , Numb and Numb - like , which play redundant but distinct roles in various cellular processes such as asymmetric cell division , cell differentiation , migration , stem cell activation , adherens junction maintenance , tissue regeneration , tumorigenesis and even Alzheimer’s disease - related beta - amyloid pre - cursor protein ( APP ) cleavage [ 4 - 14 ] . There are at least four major alternatively spliced isoforms of Numb , with different combinations of an 11 - amino acid insert in the phosphotyrosine - binding ( PTB ) domain and a 48 - amino acid insert in the proline - rich region , generating four pro - teins : Numb 65 , Numb 66 , Numb 71 and Numb 72 . To - gether with Numblike , five proteins are differentially ex - pressed : Numb 65 , Numb 66 and Numblike are preferen - tially expressed in differentiated cells , whereas Numb 71 and Numb 72 are mostly expressed in proliferating cells . Presumably , Numb 65 , Numb 66 and Numblike promote npg 594 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 cell differentiation , whereas Numb 71 and Numb 72 pro - mote cell proliferation [ 15 , 16 ] . Different Numb proteins are also distinctly localized to different subcellular com - partments : Numb 65 , Numb 71 and Numblike are mostly localized in the cytosol , whereas Numb 66 and Numb 72 are mostly localized to the plasma membrane [ 17 ] , sug - gesting that different Numb isoforms have distinct roles in different compartments . Numb localizes to endocytic organelles and partici - pates in both clathrin - dependent and clathrin - indepen - dent endocytic trafficking of a number of key molecules such as Notch , EGFR , transferrin , integrin , N - cadherin , E - cadherin and L1 ( a neuronal cell adhesion molecule ) [ 9 , 17 - 21 ] . Genetic evidence shows that Numb contributes to cell fate determination by antagonizing Notch activity in one of the two daughter cells after asymmetric cell division [ 2 , 3 , 22 ] . A recent study suggested that Numb suppresses Notch activity either by facilitating lysosom - al degradation of Notch or by reducing its recycling to the plasma membrane [ 23 ] . Numb also antagonizes the Notch pathway via facilitating the endocytosis of Dro - sophila sanpodo , which is a membrane protein that is required for Notch activation [ 24 ] . These findings sug - gest that Numb suppresses Notch activity by regulating endosomal trafficking . In addition , Numb controls the intracellular trafficking of APP for membrane recycling and for γ - secretase - mediated cleavage in an isoform - de - pendent manner ; thus Numb may be involved in APP metabolism and Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis [ 12 , 13 ] . In line with these discoveries , Numb was identified as an endocytic matrix protein [ 25 ] and is speculated to function as a homeostatic sensor , which regulates signal - ing attenuation , termination and maintenance in response to different cellular signals . Although all Numb isoforms bind the clathrin adaptor α - adaptin and other Eps 15 - ho - mology domain ( EHD ) - containing proteins involved in clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytosis [ 26 - 29 ] , the detailed mechanisms by which Numb regu - lates endocytic trafficking remain to be characterized . Here , we unexpectedly find that cytosolic Numb is a novel docking regulator for homotypic fusion of early endosomes ( EEs ) . In general , EE homotypic fusion oc - curs in distinct but consecutive processes , i . e . , vesicular tethering , docking , and fusion , and involves multiple proteins including RabGTPases , NSF , a - SNAP , SNAP 25 and EEA1 , as well as the SNARE complex [ 30 - 35 ] . Briefly , activated Rab5 drives NSF - primed endosomes to tether and dock with each other via oligomerized EEA1 , syntaxin12 / 13 [ 32 ] and possibly the Mon1 / CCZ1 com - plex [ 36 ] for subsequent homotypic fusion to generate a fused large endosome . Proteins in the fused large endo - somes are either recycled back to the plasma membrane or transported to the trans - Golgi network or lysosome for destruction [ 37 ] . We used RNA interference technology [ 38 ] to knock down Numb and Numblike to characterize their roles in substrate trafficking . Surprisingly , Numb knockdown ( Numb - KD ) causes EEs to form a cluster instead of fusing into large vesicles . Time - lapse analysis shows that the endosomes in Numb - KD cells tend to tether to each other but do not fuse . Remarkably , only Numb 65 and Numb 71 can rescue the endosome clus - tering phenotype in the absence of Numb or promote EE fusion when overexpressed . We further demonstrate that Numb binds to Mon1b , a mammalian homolog of a yeast vacuolar tethering / docking factor Mon1 . A mutation in yeast Mon1 impairs cis - SNARE complex assembly and the subsequent trans - SNARE pairing [ 36 ] . Loss of Numb blocks cytosolic Mon1b from being recruited to EEA1 - positive vesicles . Thus , our study has identified cytosolic Numb as a novel docking regulator required for recruiting cytosolic Mon1b to EEA1 - positive vesi - cles for homotypic fusion , suggesting that Numb may regulate multiple critical events such as endocytosis , re - cycling and degradation of proteins to fine - tune signaling strength and duration in a variety of physiological pro - cesses . Results Mammalian Numb is required for homotypic fusion of early endosomes To characterize the detailed mechanisms underlying Numb - mediated endocytic trafficking , we used two short hairpin RNAs ( shRNAs ) to knock down Numb expression in MCF7A cells ( Figure 1A ) and performed anti - EEA1 immunofluorescence staining to examine the EEs . Compared with control cells , most EEA1 - positive EEs concentrated and formed large clusters ( ≥ 2 vesicles ) in the perinuclear region of Numb - KD cells . Interest - ingly , EE clusters in Numb - KD cells were organized in linear arrays ( Figure 1B ) . As EEs are known to be as - sociated with F - actin [ 39 - 41 ] , the linear arrangement of clustered EEs suggests that the EE clusters most likely bind to F - actin . Quantification showed that > 70 % of EEs formed clusters in Numb - KD cells , whereas only half of EEs appeared as clusters in control cells ( Figure 1C ) . Notably , more than 30 % of EE clusters consisted of ≥ 5 endosomes and only ~ 27 % of EE clusters contained 2 endosomes in Numb - KD cells , whereas ~ 50 % of EE clusters had only 2 endosomes in control cells ( Figure 1D ) . By using transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) , we further found that Numb KD did not affect EE mor - phology but greatly increased the vesicle numbers ( Fig - ure 1E ) . Vesicle size distribution analysis revealed that Ximing Shao et al . 595 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Figure 1 Numb knockdown induces EE clustering . ( A ) Western blot showing transfection of shRNA ( pGIPZ - Numb or pLKO1 - Numb ) targeting Numb efficiently knocks down Numb expression . Bottom panel shows Numb expression normalized by β - actin protein level . ( B - D ) Control and Numb - KD MCF7A cells are stained with anti - EEA1 antibodies . Representative images are shown in B and areas within the white squares are enlarged on the right . Clustered EEA1 - positive EEs in Numb - KD cells are outlined by dotted line and quantified in C and D ( n = 30 cells ) . ( E ) Electron micrographs of control and Numb - KD MC - F7A cells . Areas within the white squares are enlarged on the right . Endocytic vesicles are identified based on their unique membrane projections and lack of internal electron density . ( F ) Size distribution of vesicles based on electron micrographs of control and Numb - KD cells ( n = 10 cells , P = 0 . 0316 ) . ( G - I ) Control and Numb - KD MCF7A cells expressing Rab5 - RFP are stained with anti - EEA1 antibody . Representative images are shown in G . Quantification of the clustered EEs is shown in H and I ( n = 30 cells ) . ( J - L ) MCF7A cells are co - stained with antibodies against Numb and EEA1 ( J ) or Numb and HGS ( K ) . Co - localization coefficients of Numb and EEA1 , and Numb and HGS are shown in L ( n = 5 cells ) . The Numb - depleted MC - F7A cells in B - I are obtained by transfection of pGIPZ - Numb , and cells expressing pGIPZ - empty serve as control . Scale bars in B , G , J and K , 5 µ m . * P < 0 . 01 . 596 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 Numb - KD cells contained fewer large vesicles and more small vesicles compared with control cells ( Figure 1F ) , very likely owing to reduced vesicle fusion . Of note , Numb depletion - induced EE clustering was confirmed in several other cell lines and primary cells ( Supplementary information , Figure S1 ) . These data suggest that Numb may play a general role in EE homotypic fusion . We further validated the Numb KD - induced defects in EE fusion by using another shRNA that also dramatically reduces Numb expression ( Figure 1A and Supplementary information , Figure S2 ) . This strongly suggests that the defects in EE fusion are specifically due to the lack of Numb expression . Mammals contain two Numb homologs , Numb and Numblike , which play both redundant and distinct roles in various cellular processes [ 4 , 5 , 9 ] . Thus , we also ex - amined the effect of Numblike KD on EE fusion . Numb - like - KD cells did not show obvious defects in EE fusion , suggesting that Numblike has little or no function in the homotypic fusion of EEs ( Supplementary information , Figure S3 ) . Rab5 is a well - documented docking / fusion factor for EE maturation . Next , we asked whether Numb - mediated EE fusion is Rab5 - dependent or Rab5 - independent . Con - sistent with previous reports [ 30 , 42 ] , Rab5 overexpres - sion produced a large number of giant EEs . However , Numb KD completely blocked Rab5 - mediated formation of giant EEs ( Figure 1G - 1I ) , suggesting that Numb may act downstream of Rab5 signaling . By using a previously developed Rab5 activity assay [ 43 ] , we further deter - mined that Numb KD had no striking effect on Rab5 activity ( Supplementary information , Figure S4A - S4C ) . Thus , our data uncover a novel function of Numb in EE homotypic fusion . In line with these findings , Numb is partially co - localized with EE proteins EEA1 and HGS on EEs ( co - localization coefficient of ~ 0 . 2 ; Figure 1J - 1L ) . Numb is a docking regulator for EE fusion Homotypic fusion of EEs proceeds in three consecu - tive and discernible steps : tethering , docking and fusion [ 31 ] . To precisely determine at which step Numb controls homotypic fusions , we performed live imaging analysis to investigate this dynamic fusion process . To visualize the endocytic vesicles , cells were first incubated with DiI - LDL or Alexa - 555 - conjugated transferrin , which is internalized by the cells , and then quickly subjected to time - lapse imaging [ 44 ] . As expected , three distinct steps during the endosome fusion process , tethering , docking and fusion , were observed in control cells ( Figure 2A and Supplementary information , Movie S2 ) . In contrast , EEs in Numb - KD cells were capable of moving to the perinuclear region but were unable to proceed to fusion . Remarkably , these clustered EEs were not stably docked but rapidly oscillated around each other ( Figure 2A and Supplementary information , Movie S2 ) , suggesting that the defect occurred before the fusion step but after the tethering step because otherwise the clusters would move away if not tethered . Next , we further analyzed the EE behavior . The vesicles recorded were classified into three groups : randomly running endosomes , which neither oscillated around nor fused with each other ; tethering endosomes , which performed long - term oscillations ( at least five cycles of kiss and run ) around each other in a very narrow range ( 500 - 1 000 nm ) ; and docking / fused endosomes , which physically associated or further fused with each other at the end of chased period ( Supplemen - tary information , Figure S5A and Movie S1 ) . We found that Numb depletion did not affect the randomly running endosomes . However , Numb depletion dramatically increased the number of tethering endosomes and de - creased the number of docking / fusion endosomes , indi - cating that Numb depletion severely impaired the process from tethering to fusion , very likely the docking step ( Figure 2B ) . The similar phenotype caused by Numb KD was confirmed by tracing transferrin - labeled EEs ( Figure 2C , Supplementary information , Figure S5B and Movie S3 ) . Because transferrin is recycled via recycling endo - somes and LDL is degraded via lysosomes , involvement of Numb in both endocytic processes therefore suggests that Numb plays a general role in EE docking process . It should be noted that Numblike knockdown showed no obvious effect on EE dynamics ( Figure 2A - 2C , Supple - mentary information , Figure S5B , Movies S2 and S3 ) , further indicating that only Numb , but not Numblike , plays roles during EE fusion . To validate that Numb regulates EE docking in a ubiq - uitous manner , we further examined the effect of Numb KD on Rab5 - positive EEs in Rab5 - RFP - expressing cells . We found that ~ 70 % of Rab5 - positive vesicles were capable of completing the entire fusion process , tether - ing , docking and fusion , in control cells ( Figure 2D , 2E and Supplementary information , Movie S4 ) . Strikingly , Numb KD reduced the percentages of EEs that complet - ed the fusion process to ~ 36 % , and most of the observed EEs were rapidly oscillating with each other in a very narrow range , presumably at the tethering distance , in the chasing period ( Figure 2D , 2E and Supplementary infor - mation , Movie S4 ) , indicating that the docking process between these EEs was impaired . These data support that Numb is a critical docking regulator for EE fusion . Cytosolic Numb 65 and Numb 71 regulate homotypic fu - sion of EEs Ximing Shao et al . 597 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Figure 2 Numb knockdown causes EE docking defects . ( A , B ) Fusion of endocytic vesicles in Dil - LDL - labeled control , Numb KD and Numblike KD MCF7A cells visualized by time - lapse video microscopy . Dashed lines outline representative vesicles undergoing fusion ( A ) . Percentages of Dil - LDL - positive vesicles at different phases of fusion ( random movement , tethering and docking / fusion ) in control and Numb - depleted cells ( B , n = 15 cells ) . ( C ) Percentages of transferrin - 555 - positive vesicles at different phases of fusion in control and Numb - depleted cells based on time - lapse video microscopy ( n = 15 cells ) . ( D , E ) Time - lapse video microscopy of control and Numb - depleted MCF7A cells transfect with Rab5 - RFP which labels vesicles un - dergoing fusion ( D ) . Percentages of vesicles that complete fusion ( E , n = 20 cells ) . Numb - depleted MCF7A cells are obtained by transfection of pGIPZ - Numb , and cells expressing pGIPZ - empty serve as control . Scale bar , 500 nm . * P < 0 . 01 . 598 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 In contrast to Drosophila which has only one form of Numb , mammals have four alternatively spliced isoforms of Numb ( Numb 65 , Numb 66 , Numb 71 and Numb 72 ) and Numblike , each localized in a distinct set of subcel - lular compartments and presumably performing com - partment - specific functions [ 15 ] . We wondered whether all these molecules are involved in EE homotypic fusion . Here , we show that overexpression of cytosolic Numb 65 and Numb 71 , both lacking an insertion in the PTB domain , produced giant EEA1 - positive endosomes , pre - sumably due to increased fusion of EEs , whereas overex - pression of Numb 66 and Numb 72 did not have obvious effects on EE fusion , and overexpression of Numblike had only a moderate effect ( Figure 3A - 3D ) . Furthermore , we found that only expression of Numb 65 and Numb 71 could rescue the Numb depletion - induced EE docking defects ( Figure 3E - 3H ) . These data indicate that only cy - tosolic Numb 65 and 71 regulate EE docking / fusion . Consistent with the above findings , only Numb 65 and Numb 71 were found to be enriched in perinuclear EEs ( Figure 3A ) . A previous report showed that the presence of the insertion in the PTB domain influences of Numb’s localization [ 15 ] . Thus , we examined whether the short PTB domain is responsible for EE recruitment of Numb . To this end , we generated various myc - tagged Numb truncation constructs ( Supplementary information , Fig - ure S6A ) . We found that the PTB domain without the insertion was predominantly localized in the cytosol and nucleus and partially co - localized with EEs . In contrast , the PTB domain with the insertion is mostly localized on the plasma membrane but not on EEs ( Supplemen - tary information , Figure S6B and S6C ) . Conversely , the Numb 71 mutant lacking the PTB domain completely lost recruitment to EEs but significantly accumulated on AP2 - positive endocytic vesicles ( Supplementary infor - mation , Figure S6D and S6E ) . Taken together , these data strongly indicate that the PTB domain of Numb is essen - tial for Numb’s localization on EEs . In line with these findings , we further identified that amino acids 69 - 171 of Numb 71 may constitute the core domain for Numb recruitment to EEs as a truncated PTB domain lacking the N - termial 68 aminal acids showed much stronger EE localization than the WT PTB fragment ( Supplementary information , Figure S6F and S6G ) . To clearly understand the relationship between Numb and Rab5 during EE fusion , we overexpressed Numb along with different forms of Rab5 in MCF7A cells . Expression of either wild - type Rab5 or a constitutively activated mutant ( Q79L ) of Rab5 had almost no ef - fect on Numb - induced EE fusion , but expression of a dominant - negative mutant ( S34N ) of Rab5 completely abolished the Numb - induced EE fusion , suggesting that Numb - induced EE fusion requires Rab5 activity ( Sup - plementary information , Figure S4D - S4F ) . Notably , expression of Rab5 Q79L significantly facilitated the recruitment of Numb 65 and Numb 71 to the giant EEs , further indicating that EE recruitment of Numb probably requires Rab5 activity ( Supplementary information , Fig - ure S4E ) . To definitively prove the role of Numb in EE docking / fusion , we applied a previously developed in vitro ves - icle fusion assay [ 45 ] . Briefly , endocytic vesicles were labeled by internalization of transferrin - 488 or transfer - rin - 555 at 37 ° C for 5 min . The postnuclear supernatant ( PNS ) preparation containing labeled vesicles and cyto - solic preparation containing soluble factors were isolated and used for the subsequent in vitro fusion reactions ( Figure 4A ) . The amount of fusion is determined by examining double - labeled vesicles after the reaction is terminated . We tested two concentrations of PNS ( 1 and 2 µg / µl ) in our in vitro assays . Using cytosolic and PNS fractions from Numb KD cells dramatically reduced the number of fused vesicles by ~ 50 % compared with control reactions after a 40 - min incubation at 37 ° C ( Figure 4B and 4D ) , even if equal numbers of vesicles were employed in the assays before the temperature is shifted to 37 ° C ( Figure 4B and 4C ) . We followed the vesicle fusion during the 40 - min period and found that the number of fused vesi - cles increased gradually in control reaction , whereas the vesicle fusion was greatly reduced in Numb KD reaction ( Figure 4E ) . We also found that the number of vesicles larger than 2 . 0 µm 2 was remarkably reduced in the Numb KD reaction ( Figure 4F ) , most likely result of slow vesi - cle fusion . These data further support the idea that Numb has a crucial function in vesicle fusion . In these assays , Numb KD also significantly reduced the number of ves - icles smaller than 0 . 5 µm 2 , suggesting that Numb KD may also impair the vesicle fission process ( Figure 4F ) . Importantly , the reaction using control cytosolic fraction and Numb KD PNS or Numb KD cytosolic fraction and control PNS generated vesicle fusion rates ( Figure 4B and 4E ) and vesicle sizes ( Figure 4F ) similar to the con - trol reaction , suggesting that Numb from either the cyto - solic or the PNS fraction can support EE fusion . Numb interacts with mammalian Mon1a and Mon1b in vivo We next carried out co - immunoprecipitation assays to search for potential cytosolic factors through which Numb regulates EE docking . We selected twelve proteins that have been previously characterized for their function in vacuole fusion . Among them , Mon1b , a mammalian homolog of a yeast vacuolar tethering / docking factor Ximing Shao et al . 599 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Figure 3 Numb 65 and Numb 71 are required for EE fusion . ( A - D ) MCF7A cells transfected with GFP or various GFP - tagged Numb isoforms are stained with anti - EEA1 antibody . Representative images are shown in A . Areas in white squares are enlarged on the right . Arrowheads indicate perinuclear localization of GFP - Numb 65 and GFP - Numb 71 . Percentages of cells with enlarged EEs ( B , n ≥ 20 cells ) , mean size of EEs ( C , n ≥ 20 cells ) and size distribution of EEs ( D , n ≥ 20 cells , P = 1 . 58E−05 for Numb 65 , P = 4 . 46E−20 for Numb 71 ) upon expression of different Numb isoforms . ( E - H ) Anti - EEA1 immu - nostaining of MCF7A cells stably expressing pLKO . 1 - Numb and transiently expressing GFP or various GFP - Numb isoforms . Representative images are shown in E . Average number of EEA1 - positive EE clusters per cells ( F , n ≥ 20 cells ) , percentages of single EEs ( G , n ≥ 20 cells ) , and size distribution of EEA1 - positive endosomal clusters ( H , n ≥ 20 cells ) . Scale bar , 5 µ m . * P < 0 . 01 . 600 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 Ximing Shao et al . 601 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Mon1 , specifically bound to Numb71 ( Supplementary information , Figure S7A ) . We further found that both Mon1a and Mon1b , two mammalian homologs of yeast Mon1 , were associated with endogenous Numb ( Figure 5A and 5B ) . Further analysis showed that amino acids 240 - 311 of Numb were required for interaction between Numb and Mon1 proteins ( Supplementary information , Figure S7B - S7E ) . Surprisingly , all Numb isoforms and Numblike bound to Mon1a and Mon1b ( Supplementary information , Figure S7F and S7G ) , although only Numb 65 and Numb 71 function in EE docking , suggesting that Numb and Mon1 interactions may have broader roles in a variety of cellular processes . Numb recruits Mon1b from the cytoplasm to EEs We next asked whether Numb regulates vesicular fu - sion via Mon1 . Immunofluorescence staining shows that Numb KD dramatically reduced the punctate signals of both Mon1a ( ~ 57 % reduction ) and Mon1b ( ~ 37 % reduc - tion ; Supplementary information , Figure S8A - S8D ) . The altered subcellular distribution pattern of Mon1a after Numb KD was confirmed by overexpression of Mo - n1a - myc and Mon1a - GFP proteins ( Supplementary infor - mation , Figure S8E - S8G ) . Interestingly , only Mon1b , but not Mon1a , was detected on Rab5 - RFP or EEA1 - labeled EEs ( Figure 5C - 5F and Supplementary information , Fig - ure S8H ) , suggesting that only Mon1b is relevant to EE docking . Thus , we tested whether Numb contributes to Mon1b localization on EEs . As shown in Figure 5F and 5G , Numb KD significantly reduced the localization of Mon1b on EEs in MCF7A cells . To validate this effect of Numb KD on Mon1 recruitment to the EE membrane , we further purified EEs . In line with our immunofluores - cence staining data , Mon1b , but not Mon1a , was detect - ed in isolated EEs , and Numb KD significantly reduced the amount of Mon1b on these EEs ( Figure 5H ) . Of note , Numb KD did not affect the overall protein expression of Mon1a and Mon1b ( Figure 5H ) . Taken together , these data suggest that Numb is required for Mon1b recruit - ment to EEs , which may be a major mechanism by which Numb regulates EE docking . Although Mon1a was not detected on EEs , we noticed that Numb KD also reduced the punctate signals of Mon1a ( Supplementary informa - tion , Figure S8A , S8B , S8E - S8G ) , suggesting that Numb may regulate Mon1a in other cellular processes than EE fusion . Mon1b is an essential docking factor for EE fusion The yeast Mon1 is crucial for vacuolar tethering / docking [ 36 ] , but the role of its mammalian homolog in EE fusion is unknown . By using RNA interference [ 38 ] , we knocked down Mon1a and Mon1b ( Figure 6A and Supplementary information , Figure S9A and S9B ) . Mo - n1a KD had no effect on EE fusion ( Figure 6B - 6D and Supplementary information , Figure S9C - S9E ) , whereas depletion of Mon1b blocked EE fusion , as evidenced by the drastic accumulation of EEA1 - positive vesicle clus - ters ( ~ 75 % increase ; Figure 6E - 6G ) . We then performed time - lapse analysis . Similar to the EEs in Numb KD cells , EEs in Mon1b KD cells remained tethered for ex - tended periods of time instead of proceeding to docking and fusion , whereas EEs in Mon1a KD cells fused like those control cells ( Figure 6H , 6I and Supplementary information , Movie S5 ) . All these data suggest that only mammalian Mon1b , but not Mon1a , has a conserved function in vesicular docking . Consistently , transmission electron microscopy assays showed that more smaller endocytic vesicles in Mon1b KD cells than in control cells ( Figure 6J and 6K ) , similar to what was observed in Numb KD cells , indicating that both Numb and Mon1b are critical regulators of vesicle fusion . We also investigated the effect of Numb / Mon1b KD on late endosomes and recycling endosomes . Numb KD had no effect on Rab7 - labeled late endosome and Lamp1 - labeled lysosome , whereas Mon1b KD caused significant aggregation of late endosomes in the perinu - clear region ( Supplementary information , Figure S10A - S10B ) . These data are consistent with the previously de - Figure 4 Numb regulates EE docking / fusion in vitro . ( A ) Schematic overview of the in vitro vesicle fusion assay . MCF7A cells are divided into two aliquots ; one is incubated with Transferrin - 488 for 5 min at 37 °C , and the other with Transferrin - 555 un - der the same condition . Postnuclear supernatants ( PNSs ) of both aliquots are mixed and incubated in the presence of ATP , buffer , and cytosol ( either from control cells or Numb KD cells ) at 4 °C or 37 °C for various times . The reaction product is centrifuged onto a coverslip and imaged . The amount of fusion is determined by measuring the production of double - labeled vesicles after reaction . ( B ) Representative fluorescence images from various reactions at 4 °C or 37 °C . Fused vesicles are marked with yellow circles . ( C , D ) Numbers of different transferrin - labeled vesicles at 4 °C ( C ) or after a 40 - min reaction ei - ther at 4 °C or 37 °C ( D ) . Control : control PNS + control cytosol ; Numb − : Numb − PNS + Numb − cytosol . The data are extracted from at least 40 microscopic fields from three independent experiments . ( E ) Time course of vesicle fusion in different condi - tions . The data are extracted from at least 40 microscopic fields from three independent experiments . ( F ) Size distributions of Transferrin - 555 - containing vesicles after a 40 - min vesicle fusion reaction at 37 °C . The data are extracted from at least 40 microscopic fields from three independent experiments . Scale bar , 100 µ m . * P < 0 . 05 ; * * P < 0 . 01 . 602 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 scribed function of Mon1b in late endosome maturation [ 46 , 47 ] . As Numb KD does not affect late endosomes , the function of Mon1b in late endosome maturation is very likely Numb - independent . We further found that Figure 5 Numb is required for the recruitment of Mon1b to EEs . ( A , B ) Co - immunoprecipitation assay of MCF7A cells trans - fected with Myc - Mon1a ( A ) or Myc - Mon1b ( B ) . ( C - E ) Immunostaining of MCF7A cells transfected with Rab5 - RFP with anti - body against Mon1b ( C ) or Mon1a ( D ) . Co - localization coefficients of Mon1b , and Mon1a with Rab5 - RFP ( E , n = 5 cells ) . ( F , G ) Immunostaining of control and Numb KD MCF7A cells with anti - Mon1b and anti - EEA1 antibodies ( F ) . Numb KD reduces the number of Mon1b - positive puncta ( G , n = 60 cells ) . ( H ) EEs in control and Numb KD MCF7A cells are immunoisolated using anti - EEA1 antibody and subjected to immunoblotting . Densitometric values for Mon1b in EEs are shown below the bands . The Numb - depleted MCF7A cells in these experiments are obtained by transfection of pLKO . 1 - Numb , and cells expressing pLKO . 1 - empty serve as control . Scale bar , 5 µ m . * P < 0 . 01 . Ximing Shao et al . 603 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Figure 6 Knockdown of Mon1b , but not Mon1a , perturbs vesicular docking during EE fusion . ( A ) Depletion of Mon1a and Mon1b via shRNA . ( B - G ) Control and Mon1a - ( B ) or Mon1b - ( E ) depleted MCF7A cells are stained with anti - EEA1 antibody . Dashed lines mark the EE clusters . Quantifications are performed as in Figure 1 and the results are shown in C , D , F and G ( n = 30 cells ) . ( H , I ) Time - lapse video microscopy of control and Mon1a - or Mon1b - depleted MCF7A cells labeled with Dil - LDL ( n = 30 cells ) . ( J , K ) Electron micrographs of control and Mon1b - KD MCF7A cells ( J ) . Endocytic vesicles are identified and quantified as in Figure 1 and the results are shown in K ( n = 10 cells , P = 1 . 0966E - 06 ) . Scale bars in B and E , 5 µ m ; scale bars in H , 500 nm . * P < 0 . 01 . ND , no significant difference . 604 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 Numb / Mon1b KD had no effect on the Rab4 - positive fast recycling endosomes ( Supplementary information , Fig - ure S10C ) , and Numb KD , but not Mon1b KD , caused striking perinuclear accumulation of Rab11 - positive slow recycling endosomes ( Supplementary information , Figure S10D ) , suggesting that Numb has a Mon1b - inde - pendent function in slow recycling endosome maturation or trafficking . Taken together , these observations suggest that Numb and Mon1b may have additional independent roles other than regulating EE fusion in endocytic traf - ficking . Numb - mediated regulation of EE docking depends on Mon1b To determine the relationship of Numb and Mon1 in EE docking , we examined the EE fusion events in Mon1b KD MCF7A cells overexpressing various Numb isoforms and Numblike . Overexpression of all Numb isoforms in Mon1b KD cells did not induce fusion of EEs above control ( Figure 7A - 7C ) . EEs in these cells remained severely clustered , and none of the Numb iso - forms or Numblike could rescue the Mon1b - depletion - in - duced EE docking defects ( Figure 7D and 7E ) . More - over , expression of either Numb - 65 - ∆ 240 - 311 or Numb - 71 - ∆ 240 - 311 , which are unable to bind Mon1b , could not increase EE fusion ( Figure 7F and 7G ) or rescue Numb KD - caused EE fusion defects ( Figure 7H and 7I ) . These data together indicate that Numb acts upstream of Mon1b , and Numb - Mon1b association is essential for Numb - mediated EE docking . Numb - and Mon1b - mediated EE docking is essential for endocytic cargo sorting EEs are the key endocytic cargo sorting station and have been proposed to be the center of the entire endo - cytic system [ 44 , 48 ] . Our data have shown that Numb and Mon1b are docking regulators for EE fusion and both Numb and Mon1b KD resulted in severe EE dock - ing defects . We therefore hypothesized that Numb and Mon1b KD would disrupt endocytic sorting . To test this , we tracked the trafficking route of fluorescently labeled LDL in control , Numb KD and Mon1b KD cells . LDL has been well - documented to be degraded through lyso - somes after being internalized into the cell and packed into endocytic vesicles via the classic endocytic pathway [ 49 ] . We found that the fluorescence intensity of LDL in control cells gradually decreased during a 180 - min chase period after cells were released from the LDL - con - taining media ( ~ 24 % retention ; Figure 8A and 8B ) . In contrast , the fluorescence intensity of LDL in Numb or Mon1b KD cells was much more stable within the same chase period ( ~ 80 % retention ; Figure 8A and 8B ) . This suggests that both Numb and Mon1b KD block LDL trafficking to the lysosome for its degradation . We then performed EEA1 or Lamp1 immunostaining to char - acterize the retented vesicles . Most of the trapped LDL was enclosed in EEA1 - labeled EEs in Numb or Mon1b KD cells after a 15 - min chase period , by the time almost half of the LDL had left the EEs in control cells ( Figure 8C and 8D ) . Consistent with this observation , after a 30 - min chase period , almost all the LDL in the control cells entered lysosomes for degradation , whereas only half of the LDL in Numb or Mon1b KD cells trafficked to lyso - somes ( Figure 8E and 8F ) . These data suggest that Numb and Mon1b KD cause an EE docking defect that severely perturbs the trafficking of LDL towards lysosomes . To further investigate the impact of Numb and Mon1b KD on endocytic sorting , we used a previously reported assay which tracks the transferrin recycling and LDL degradation simultaneously [ 50 ] . It has been shown pre - viously that both internalized transferrin and LDL are transported to EEs via fusion of endocytic vesicles to EEs , and then transferrin is recycled to the plasma mem - brane while LDL is transported to lysosomes for degra - dation . Thus , the separation of transferrin and LDL from EEs represents a typical endocytic sorting process . After simultaneous incubation with fluorescent transferrin and LDL , control and Numb KD cells were released and plated in a fresh medium without fluorochrome - tagged ligands and imaged 5 min or 15 min after the release . Both LDL and transferrin were rapidly transported to EEs in the perinuclear region 5 min after the release , and nearly 50 % of the LDL - positive vesicles were also trans - ferrin - positive , indicating that a proportion of LDL and transferrin were internalized together into the same endo - cytic vesicles . Next , we carefully followed the separation of fluorescently labeled transferrin and LDL vesicles , which would reflect the typical sorting process in EEs . At 15 min after the release , almost half of the double - la - beled vesicles in control cells separated , as indicated by a ~ 50 % reduction of co - localization of fluorescent transfer - rin and LDL . However , both Numb and Mon1b depletion markedly blocked / delayed this separation process ; only a very slight decrease in the co - localization of fluorescent transferrin and LDL was detected 15 min after the release in Numb KD ( ~ 17 . 5 % reduction ) and Mon1b KD ( ~ 20 % reduction ) cells . Moreover , we noticed that most co - lo - calized fluorescent transferrin and LDL in either Numb or Mon1b KD cells remained in the perinuclear region , where EEs mostly locate ( Figure 8G and 8H ) , suggesting that the observed sorting blockage is most likely due to EE fusion defects before sorting . These data strongly support that Numb / Mon1b - mediated EE docking and fu - sion are essential for intracellular signal sorting through Ximing Shao et al . 605 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Figure 7 Numb - mediated EE docking is Mon1b - dependent . ( A ) Anti - EEA1 staining of control cells and Mon1b - KD MCF7A cells stably expressing pLKO . 1 - Mon1b - 1 and transiently expressing various Numb and Numblike proteins and quantification of EEA1 vesicles ( B - E ) from 20 cells . ( F , G ) EEA1 immunostaining of MCF7A cells transfected with various constructs indi - cated in the panel ( F ) and size quantification of EEs ( G , n = 20 cells ) . ( H , I ) EEA1 immunostaining of control cells and Numb - KD MCF7A cells with various constructs indicated in the panel and quantification of EEs ( I , n = 20 cells ) . Scale bars , 5 µ m . 606 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 Figure 8 Knockdown of either Numb or Mon1b blocks the endocytic cargo sorting process . ( A , B ) Dil - LDL is internalized to control and Numb - or Mon1b - KD MCF7A cells after a 30 - min incubation at 37 °C . After 3 washes , cells are released into fresh medium for 10 , 60 , and 180 min before microscopy ( A ) . Fluorescence intensities of Dil - LDL at each time point are shown in B . ( C - F ) Dil - LDL is internalized to control and Numb - or Mon1b - KD MCF7A cells were internalized with Dil - LDL after a 15 - min incubation at 4 °C . After 3 washes , cells are incubated in pre - warmed fresh medium for 5 or 15 min at 37 °C and stained with antibodies against EEA1 ( C ) or Lamp1 ( E ) . Percentage of LDL within EEs or lysosomes at each time point is shown in D and F . ( G , H ) Transferrin - 488 and Dil - LDL are internalized by control cells and Numb - or Mon1b - KD MCF7A cells for 15 min at 4 °C . After washing , cells are released into pre - warmed fresh media for 5 or 15 min at 37 °C before microscopy ( G ) . Percentage of vesicles positive for both Transferrin - 488 and Dil - LDL at each time point is shown in H . Scale bars in A , 10 µ m ; scale bars in C , E and G , 5 µ m . * P < 0 . 01 . Ximing Shao et al . 607 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research the endocytic pathway . Discussion Numb plays very important roles as a signaling adap - tor in a variety of cellular processes , including cell fate determination , asymmetric cell division , adherens junc - tion maintenance , polarity generation , and cell migration [ 1 - 4 , 9 , 18 ] . Numb carries out these functions via reg - ulating endocytic trafficking of several key molecules , such as Notch , sanpodo , cadherins and integrins [ 4 , 7 , 9 , 14 , 17 , 18 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 51 , 52 ] . Although in all these con - texts Numb functions as an endocytic adaptor protein , the exact role of Numb in endocytic trafficking remains an open question . Several studies have demonstrated that Numb interacts with two endocytic partners , α - adaptin and Eps15 [ 26 , 27 ] , and is thereby involved in the reg - ulation of clathrin - dependent endocytosis ; but whether and how Numb regulates signal molecule degradation and intracellular trafficking through sorting endosomes are not clear . In this study , we unexpectedly identified cytosolic Numb as a novel regulator of EE homotypic fusion . Numb KD severely delays / blocks EE docking . Remarkably , overexpression of only Numb 65 and Numb 71 promotes EE fusion and rescues Numb KD - induced EE fusion defects . Furthermore , cytosolic Numb recruits Mon1b , a homolog of yeast vacuolar tethering / docking protein Mon1 , to the EE membrane to promote EE fu - sion . This finding uncovers a subcellular mechanism by which cytosolic Numb regulates the intracellular signal sorting process . It is plausible that Numb functions as a selective docking factor to allow selected vesicles to fuse with EEs . The signal molecules within these EEs are further transported into late endosomes for degradation or recycled to the plasma membrane via into recycling endosomes , depending on the nature of the signal and the signal strength . In this manner , Numb may selectively regulate various signaling molecules , thereby fulfilling its diverse functions in multiple cellular processes . All Numb isoforms and Numblike have a C - terminal binding domain for α - adaptin and EPS15 [ 26 , 28 ] , which are responsible for endocytosis , exocytosis and presum - ably other unidentified types of vesicular trafficking . However , these five Numb proteins have complex struc - tures in their N - terminal domain , which result in distinct subcellular localizations of Numb proteins . Numb 66 and Numb 72 are attached on the plasma membrane and have an 11 - aa insertion in the PTB domain . In contrast , Numb 65 , Numb 71 and Numblike lack the 11 - aa insertion in their PTB domain , and are mostly localized in the cyto - sol [ 15 , 17 ] . These observations suggest that the presence of the 11 - aa fragment within the PTB domain affects cell membrane localization of Numb proteins . Here , we show that the 11 - aa insertion in the PTB domain also determines the role of Numb in the control of endocytic trafficking . We show although all isoforms of Numb and Numblike can bind to Mon1a and Mon1b [ 36 , 47 ] , only Numb 65 , Numb 71 and partially Numblike are responsi - ble for EE docking during homotypic fusion . In line with this finding , we observed that Numb 65 , Numb 71 and partially Numblike localize on EEs in the perinuclear region , where endocytic sorting occurs in the mamma - lian cells . These data reveal a novel functional diversity of mammalian Numb proteins during homotypic fusion and cargo sorting process . Our study thus may provide a mechanistic explanation for the different fate of APP in cells expressing Numb with different PTB domains [ 12 ] . Interestingly , we found that a truncated PTB domain with deletion of the N - terminal 68 - aa region shows stron - ger localization to EEs ( Supplementary information , Fig - ure S6F and S6G ) . These data suggest that the N - termi - nal and C - terminal parts of the Numb PTB domain may have different functions in regulating the recruitment of Numb to EEs . The C - terminal part most likely contains a critical domain for EE association , whereas the N - ter - minal part may regulate this association by modulating the conformation of the PTB domain . The deletion of the N - terminal 68 - aa region may completely change the con - formation of the PTB domain , allowing it to target to the EEs . It is plausible that the 11 - aa insertion in the N - ter - minal part of the PTB domain may cause subtle yet sig - nificant structural change in the PTB domain , precluding its association with EEs . Previous studies have demonstrated that yeast Mon1 is a crucial tethering / docking factor for homotypic vacuolar fusion . In mammals , two homologs of yeast Mon1 pro - tein , Mon1a and Mon1b , have been characterized . Recent studies have shown that both mammalian Mon1 proteins are located on EEs and act as a switch in the early - to - late endosome transition by controlling the localization of Rab5 and Rab7 GEFs [ 47 ] . However , whether the func - tion of Mon1 proteins in vacuolar fusion is conserved in mammals is unknown . In our study , we identified Mon1b as a critical regulator of EE docking , supporting that the Mon1 - mediated vacuole membrane fusion is mechanis - tically conserved in mammals . Surprisingly , Mon1a , un - like Mon1b , does not play a role in EE docking . This is , however , consistent with previous finding that Mon1b , but not Mon1a , is a core component of the class C VPS / HOPS complex [ 36 ] , which is required for EE homotyp - ic docking and fusion . How exactly does Numb regulate Mon1b in the reg - ulation of EE docking ? Yeast Mon1 is a part of cis - SNARE complex . Mon1 mutation impairs the binding of 608 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 Syntaxin to VPS18 - a in the C - VPS / HOPS complex and causes improper assembly of the cis - SNARE complex , perturbing the subsequent trans - SNARE pairing during homotypic fusion [ 36 , 53 ] . It is plausible that cytosolic Numb may bind soluble Mon1b in the cytosol , and then move as a complex to the EE membrane where they regulate the trans - SNARE pairing in homotypic fusion . Considering the conserved function of SNARE cycling in almost all intracellular membrane fusion , we propose that Numb may also be involved in other intracellular membrane fusion events , such as vesicle fission and exo - cytosis . How might Numb - mediated EE docking be related to its role in asymmetric cell division of stem cells or progenitor cells ? Numb was first recognized as a critical cell fate determinant antagonizing the Notch signaling activity in Drosophila [ 2 ] . In mammals , four Numb iso - forms and Numblike have overlapping and redundant functions , making the roles of Numb in the control of cell fate hard to discern . In mammalian cortical develop - ment , Numb was shown to play important roles in main - tenance of neural progenitors and adherens junctions , and in neuronal differentiation at different developmental stages [ 4 , 5 , 9 ] . Based on the finding that Numb 71 and Numb 72 are mostly expressed in proliferative cells and Numb 65 , Numb 66 and Numblike are mostly expressed in differentiated cells [ 15 , 16 ] , the combinatorial and dy - namic expression of the Numb isoforms , each engaging a potentially different array of substrates , would contribute to an enormous diversity of cellular physiology in neural stem cell self - renewal , neural differentiation , and neu - ral regeneration . Based on our results and unpublished data , we propose the following model for the function of mammalian Numb in asymmetric cell division . All iso - forms of Numb and Numblike are present in asymmetri - cally dividing progenitor cells . Owing to an unidentified mechanism , Numb 71 and Numb 72 remain in daughter cells that retain the progenitor cell fate , whereas Numb 65 , Numb 66 and Numblike are preferentially sorted to the cells fated for differentiation [ 15 ] . In this combina - torial manner , Numb 71 and Numb 72 would regulate factors that maintain stem cell fate and Numb 65 , Numb 66 and Numblike would regulate factors that promote neuronal differentiation . At the subcellular level , Numb 65 and Numb 71 regulate signal sorting within EEs , whereas Numb 66 and Numb 72 regulate endocytosis at the plasma membrane . For Notch signaling in asymmet - rically dividing progenitors , plasma membrane - attached Numb 66 may facilitate the ubiquitination of Notch by Itch for endocytosis , and cytosolic Numb 65 may sense the density or number of vesicles carrying the internal - ized Notch and recruit soluble Mon1b to promote EE fusion , preparing for Notch degradation in the differenti - ating daughter cells [ 19 ] . In this scenario , Numb 65 and Mon1b work together in the EEs . Similarly , in the pro - liferating daughter cells , the plasma membrane - attached Numb 72 facilitates the endocytosis of other receptors for recycling to sustain mitogenic signals , or passes them onto Numb 71 and Mon1b , which mediate an endocytic trafficking pathway that leads to their degradation . Thus , asymmetrically sorted Numb 66 and Numb 65 act at the endocytic step and the EE fusion step , respectively , to propagate the differentiation potential in one half of the cells , whereas Numb 72 and Numb 71 function at these two steps to maintain stem cell or progenitor cell proper - ties in another half of the cells . Consequently , asymmet - ric daughter cell fates are determined . In summary , our study uncovers a novel function of two cytosolic isoforms of Numb , which act as docking regulators in EE homotypic fusion and subsequent signal sorting . These findings lay a foundation for exploring more detailed mechanisms of Numb function in the asymmetric cell division of stem cells , in cell survival , as well as in tumorigenesis . Materials and Methods Vector construction and RNAi All Numb and Numblike expression vectors were made by cloning of the full - length or fragments of Numb and Numblike into pcDNA3 . 1 - Myc ( Invitrogen ) or pEGFP - C2 ( Clontech ) vectors . Human Mon1A and Mon1B expression vectors were generated similarly . The RFP - Rab5 expression construct was purchased from Addgene ( plasmid 14437 , generously deposited by Dr Ari Hele - nius ) . Q79L and S34N mutants of RFP - Rab5 were generated using the QuickChange Site - Directed Mutagenesis Kit ( Stratagene ) . The shRNA lentiviral constructs used to knockdown human Numb ( Cat No RHS4696 - 99359228 and RHS3979 - 9576173 ) , Numblike ( Cat No RHS3979 - 97052327 ) , and Mon1b ( Cat No RHS3979 - 9627154 and RHS3979 - 9627156 ) were purchased from Open Biosystems . To knock down human Mon1a , we used two shRNA constructsp - GIPZ - Mon1a ( Cat No RHS4430 - 101107193 ) was purchased from Open Biosystems , and pLKO . 1 - Mon1a was constructed by our group . The targeted sequence is as follows : GTGCCATCCATA - AGCTGATGC . Cell culture and transfection MCF 7A cells were cultured in RPMI - 1640 medium sup - plemented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) fetal bovine serum , 100 units / ml penicillin , and 100 units / ml streptomycin at 37 °C in 5 % CO 2 . HEK293T , Cos7 and primary MEF cells were grown in Dulbec - co’s modified Eagle medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % FBS , 2 mM L - glutamine , 1 mM sodium pyruvate and 4 . 5 mg / ml glucose . Plasmid DNA was transfected using Megtran1 . 0 ( Origene ) as described by the manufacturers . Transfected cells were harvest - ed 36 h after transfection and analyzed by immunoprecipitation and western blotting . MCF 7A , HEK293T and Cos7 cells stably expressing various shRNAs were obtained by 2 - 3 week selection Ximing Shao et al . 609 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research of transfected cells with 2 µg / ml puromycin . Antibodies Rabbit polyclonal antibody against Numb ( 2756S ) was pur - chased from Cell Signaling . Mouse monoclonal antibody against Numb ( MAB4338 ) was purchased from R & D systems . Antibodies against Myc ( 2276S ) , Rab7 ( 9367S ) and Rab11 ( 5589S ) were purchased from Cell Signaling . Rabbit polyclonal antibody ( 2411S ) and mouse monoclonal antibody against EEA1 ( ab70521 ) were purchased from Cell Signaling and Abcam , respectively . Mon1B antibodies were purchased from Novus ( NBP1 - 92131 ) and Pro - teintech ( 17638 - 1 - AP ) . HGS antibody ( H00009146 - M01 ) , AP2 antibody ( 11401 - 1 - AP ) , Rab4 antibody ( 07 - 655 ) , Lamp1 ( L1418 ) , Flag antibody ( ANT146 ) , HA antibody ( MMS - 101p ) , GFP ( 75 - 131 ) , actin antibody ( sc47778 ) were purchased from Abnova , Proteintech , Merck Millipore , Sigma , PROSPEC , Covance , Neur - oMab , Santa Cruz , respectively . The Mon1A antibody was a kind gift from Dr Fudi Wang ( Institute of Nutritional Sciences , CAS , China ) . Immunoblotting , immunoprecipitation and immunofluores - cence staining Whole cell lysates were incubated with different antibodies indicated in each experiment at 4 °C for 3 h , followed by 1 - h in - cubation with protein A / G - Sepharose beads . Immunoprecipitated complexes were resolved by SDS - PAGE , and coimmunoprecipi - tated proteins were detected by western blotting using antibodies indicated in the specific experiments . Antibodies against Numb , Myc , GFP , Flag , HA , Mon1a , and Mon1b were used at 1 : 1 000 dilution , whereas the antibody against actin was used at 1 : 5 000 . Immunofluorescence staining was performed as follows . Cells were fixed with 3 . 7 % formaldehyde for 10 min at room tempera - ture , washed 3 times with PBS buffer containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and incubated with the indicated primary antibody for 2 h at room temperature . Cells were washed again and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with the appropriate secondary antibody conjugated to either Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor 555 ( Invitro - gen ) . For HGS , Mon1a and Mon1b staining , cells were first treated with ice - cold acetone for 30 s before fixation in 3 . 7 % formalde - hyde and then were washed and stained as described above . Anti - bodies against Numb , Mon1a , Mon1b , Rab4 , Rab7 , Rab11 , AP2 and Lamp1 were used at 1 : 100 dilution , and antibodies against EEA1 , Rab5 , HGS were used at 1 : 200 dilution . Anti - Myc antibody was used at 1 : 1 000 dilution . In vitro vesicle fusion assay In vitro vesicle fusion assay was performed as described previ - ously [ 45 ] . In brief , control and Numb KD MCF7A cells were in - cubated with Transferrin - 488 or Transferrin - 555 for 5 min at 37 °C to internalize these fluorochrome - tagged ligands . Both PNS and cytosol fractions from control and Numb KD cells were prepared and combined for in vitro reaction by following the described pro - tocol . Images were acquired on a Zeiss 510 confocal microscope equipped with a PlanApo 63× oil - immersion objective . Image acquisition and analysis Immunofluorescence images were acquired on a Zeiss 510 con - focal microscope equipped with a PlanApo 63× oil - immersion ob - jective . Further image deconvolution and co - localization analysis were performed using AutoQuant X software ( Imaris , Bitplane ) . Vesicle size measurement was conducted using ImageJ software ( Rasband WS , Image J ; National Institutes of Health ) . The cumu - lative distribution of areas of endosomes / vesicles was analyzed and plotted using R . In each experiment , at least 3 000 vesicles from 10 - 30 cells were measured . The significance of the difference between a given pair of distributions was determined using the Student’s t - test . For live - cell imaging , MCF 7A cells seeded on 35 - mm culture dishes were either transfected with Rab5 - RFP for 24 h or incubated with 50 µg / ml transferrin at 37 °C for 3 min or cultured with 10 µg / ml Di - LDL at 37 °C for 5 min to label early endosomes , as described in the published protocol [ 45 ] . After washing with fresh medium for 3 times , cells were immediately imaged on a Nikon ECLIPSE TE200 microscope , equipped with a PlanApo 100× oil - immersion objective . Images were acquired at 5 - s intervals for 10 min . Vesicle tracking assignments were per - formed on all Rab5 - , Dil - LDL - and transferrin - labeled endosomes at time = 0 min to monitor their tethering - docking - fusion behav - iors during the entire live imaging period . Electron microscopy Transmission electron microscopy ( EM ) was carried out ac - cording to standard procedures . Briefly , cells were gently washed with PBS , fixed in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer ( pH 7 . 3 ) containing 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde for 4 h at 4°C , followed by incubation in 2 % aqueous osmium tetroxide for additional 1 h on ice . The cells were then stained with 2 % uranyl acetate , dehydrated in a graded eth - anol - acetone series , embedded in Spurr’s resin , and sliced using an Ultracut - R ultramicrotome ( Leica , Germany ) . EM images were acquired with a Hitachi H - 7650 transmission electron microscope . The cumulative distribution of areas of approximately 500 endo - cytic vesicles from 10 cells was analyzed and plotted by R . The significance of the difference was performed using the Student’s t - test . EE isolation EEs were immunopurified using a slightly modified protocol that was described previously [ 54 ] . Briefly , MCF7A or HEK293T cells were homogenized in buffer ( 250 mM glucose , 3 mM imidaz - ole , and 1 mM EDTA at pH 7 . 4 ) containing protease inhibitors by using a glass tissue grinder . Next , PNS was purified by sequential centrifugation of the total cell homogenates for 10 min at 700× g and 30 min at 17 000× g . EEs in PNS were immunoisolated using anti - EEA1 antibodies . Membrane proteins on EEs were detected by immunoblotting as indicated . FRET measurements Rab5 activity in living cells was analyzed by a FRET assay , as described previously [ 43 ] . Briefly , MCF7A cells seeded on glass dishes were transfected with plasmids CFP - Rab5 and R5BD - YFP . At 24 h after transfection , images of the cells were acquired at room temperature using 2 × 2 binning mode on a Olympus micro - scope ( I×81 ) equipped with a 100× oil - immersion objective lens , iXon3 EMCCD Camera ( Andor Technology ) and DV2 Multi - channel Imaging System ( Photometrics ) . The filter sets used were YFP ( excitation , 500 / 20 nm ; emission , 535 / 40 nm ( DV2 ) ) ; CFP ( excitation , 436 / 20 nm ; emission , 480 / 30 nm ( DV2 ) ) ; and FRET ( excitation , 436 / 20 nm ; emission , 535 / 40 nm ( DV2 ) ) . T455Ip ( CFP / FRET ) and T515Ip ( YFP ) dichroic mirrors ( Chroma ) were 610 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 used . Corrected FRET ( FRET C ) and normalized sensitized FRET ( FRETN ) values were calculated according to the following equa - tions by FRET modules of the xcellence software . FRET C = FRET − ( 0 . 56 × CFP ) − ( 0 . 155 × YFP ) ( 1 ) FRETN = FRET C / ( CFP × YFP ) ( 2 ) FRET , CFP and YFP correspond to background - subtracted images of cells co - expressing CFP and YFP acquired through the FRET , CFP and YFP channel , respectively . The values 0 . 56 and 0 . 155 are the fractions that were calculated for the bleed - through of CFP and YFP fluorescence , respectively , through the FRET fil - ter channel . Pseudocolor FRET C images were obtained by using the xcel - lence software and were displayed with blue ( cold ) indicating low values and red ( hot ) indicating high values . Endocytosis assays Endocytosis assays were performed according to the published protocol with minor modification [ 45 , 55 ] . Briefly , for internal - ization of fluorochrome - tagged ligands , cells grown on 3 . 5 - cm glass bottom dishes were incubated with 100 µg / ml Alex Fluor 555 - transferrin ( Invitrogen ) or 20 µg / ml Dil - labeled LDL ( Invit - rogen ) for 15 min at 4 °C . After 3 washes with ice - cold PBS , cells were released into 37 °C pre - warmed culture medium , followed by imaging . Quantitative real - time PCR analysis Quantitative real time ( RT ) - PCR reactions were conducted on a CFX96 RT PCR detection system ( Bio - Rad ) . Reaction mix - tures were prepared using SsoFast Era Green Supermix ( Bio - Rad , Cat No 172 - 5201AP ) . Total RNA was prepared using TransZol Up ( TransGen Biotech , Cat No ET111 - 01 ) . First - strand cDNAs were synthesized using TransScript One - step gDNA Removal and cDNA synthesis SuperMix kit ( TransGen Biotech , Cat No AT311 - 02 ) and served as templates . Nucleotide sequences of the primers used for PCR amplifications were as follows : β - actin ， 5′ - CTCCTCCCTGGAGAAGAGCTA - 3′ and 5′ - CCTTCTG - CATCCTGTCGGCAA - 3′ ; Numb ， 5′ - ACTTTTGATGCTAGTC - GGACC - 3′ and 5′ - GAAGTAGGAGAGGTGGGAGAG - 3′ ; Numblike ， 5′ - TCTCCTTTTGTGCTCCTGAC3 - ′ and 5′ - TTCTC - CCGTCGCTGTTTTC - 3′ ; Mon1a ， 5′ - ACACCCTTACCCCTC - CAT - 3′ and 5′ - CTTCTCTTCCTCTGCATGTCAG - 3′ ; and Mon1b ， 5′ - TGGCTGAGAAGGAGACACTAC - 3′ and 5′ - GGTG - GGTAACGAATGAAGAGC - 3′ . Acknowledgments We thank Fudi Wang for Mon1A antibody , Yun Wang and Yuxing Wang for technical support . This work was supported by the Ministry of Science & Technology , China ( 2014CB964602 , 2012CB966802 , 2011CB965100 , 2010CB945600 , 2009CB941402 , 2007CB947202 , 2013ZX09509104 and 2009R0002 ) , the Nation - al Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31301125 , 31071283 , 30771102 , 81502537 , 81370457 and 81271498 ) , China Post - doctoral Science Foundation ( 2015M572383 ) , Shenzhen Pea - cock Plan ( KQCX20130628112914292 ) , Shenzhen Science and Technology Program ( JCYJ20150401145529014 and JCYJ20150630114942300 ) , Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Molec - ular Biology of Neural Development ( ZDSY20120617112838879 ) , SIAT Innovation Program for Excellent Young Researchers ( 201404 and 201413 ) , and faculty development support ( Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology - CAS & Tongji University Shanghai East Hospital ) . Author Contributions HCL and HSL conceived and supervised the study . XMS , YL and QY performed most of the experiments . ZHD , LZ , JCZ and NJ contributed to vector construction and immunoprecipitation experiments . WYQ contributed to electron microscopy experiments . LFG and YJW contributed to statistical analysis of the endosome size . HCL and HSL wrote the manuscript with the assistance from XMS , YL and QY . ZHX , YH , YFM , XQL , CAJ and MYZ provided insightful suggestions and contributed to improving the manuscript . Competing Financial Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . References 1 Uemura T , Shepherd S , Ackerman L , Jan LY , Jan YN . Numb , a gene required in determination of cell fate during sensory organ formation in Drosophila embryos . Cell 1989 ; 58 : 349 - 360 . 2 Rhyu MS , Jan LY , Jan YN . Asymmetric distribution of numb protein during division of the sensory organ precursor cell confers distinct fates to daughter cells . Cell 1994 ; 76 : 477 - 491 . 3 Knoblich JA , Jan LY , Jan YN . Asymmetric segregation of Numb and Prospero during cell division . Nature 1995 ; 377 : 624 - 627 . 4 Li HS , Wang D , Shen Q , et al . Inactivation of Numb and Numblike in embryonic dorsal forebrain impairs neurogenesis and disrupts cortical morphogenesis . Neuron 2003 ; 40 : 1105 - 1118 . 5 Petersen PH , Zou K , Hwang JK , Jan YN , Zhong W . Progen - itor cell maintenance requires numb and numblike during mouse neurogenesis . Nature 2002 ; 419 : 929 - 934 . 6 Conboy IM , Rando TA . The regulation of Notch signaling controls satellite cell activation and cell fate determination in postnatal myogenesis . Dev Cell 2002 ; 3 : 397 - 409 . 7 Pece S , Serresi M , Santolini E , et al . Loss of negative regula - tion by Numb over Notch is relevant to human breast carcino - genesis . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 167 : 215 - 221 . 8 Colaluca IN , Tosoni D , Nuciforo P , et al . NUMB controls p53 tumour suppressor activity . Nature 2008 ; 451 : 76 - 80 . 9 Rasin MR , Gazula VR , Breunig JJ , et al . Numb and Numbl are required for maintenance of cadherin - based adhesion and polarity of neural progenitors . Nat Neurosci 2007 ; 10 : 819 - 827 . 10 Cicalese A , Bonizzi G , Pasi CE , et al . The tumor suppressor p53 regulates polarity of self - renewing divisions in mammary stem cells . Cell 2009 ; 138 : 1083 - 1095 . 11 Kyriazis GA , Wei Z , Vandermey M , et al . Numb endocytic adapter proteins regulate the transport and processing of the amyloid precursor protein in an isoform - dependent manner : implications for Alzheimer disease pathogenesis . J Biol Chem 2008 ; 283 : 25492 - 25502 . 12 Chan SL , Pedersen WA , Zhu H , Mattson MP . Numb mod - ifies neuronal vulnerability to amyloid beta - peptide in an Ximing Shao et al . 611 npg www . cell - research . com | Cell Research isoform - specific manner by a mechanism involving altered calcium homeostasis : implications for neuronal death in Alz - heimer’s disease . Neuromolecular Med 2002 ; 1 : 55 - 67 . 13 Roncarati R , Sestan N , Scheinfeld MH , et al . The gam - ma - secretase - generated intracellular domain of beta - amyloid precursor protein binds Numb and inhibits Notch signaling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002 ; 99 : 7102 - 7107 . 14 Ezratty EJ , Bertaux C , Marcantonio EE , Gundersen GG . Clathrin mediates integrin endocytosis for focal adhesion dis - assembly in migrating cells . J Cell Biol 2009 ; 187 : 733 - 747 . 15 Dho SE , French MB , Woods SA , McGlade CJ . Characteriza - tion of four mammalian numb protein isoforms . Identification of cytoplasmic and membrane - associated variants of the phos - photyrosine binding domain . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 33097 - 33104 . 16 Verdi JM , Bashirullah A , Goldhawk DE , et al . Distinct hu - man NUMB isoforms regulate differentiation vs . prolifera - tion in the neuronal lineage . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 10472 - 10476 . 17 Santolini E , Puri C , Salcini AE , et al . Numb is an endocytic protein . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 151 : 1345 - 1352 . 18 Nishimura T , Kaibuchi K . Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 . Dev Cell 2007 ; 13 : 15 - 28 . 19 McGill MA , McGlade CJ . Mammalian numb proteins pro - mote Notch1 receptor ubiquitination and degradation of the Notch1 intracellular domain . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 23196 - 23203 . 20 Nishimura T , Fukata Y , Kato K , et al . CRMP - 2 regulates polarized Numb - mediated endocytosis for axon growth . Nat Cell Biol 2003 ; 5 : 819 - 826 . 21 Sorensen EB , Conner SD . AAK1 regulates Numb function at an early step in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1791 - 1800 . 22 Spana EP , Doe CQ . Numb antagonizes Notch signaling to specify sibling neuron cell fates . Neuron 1996 ; 17 : 21 - 26 . 23 McGill MA , Dho SE , Weinmaster G , McGlade CJ . Numb reg - ulates post - endocytic trafficking and degradation of Notch1 . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 26427 - 26438 . 24 Cotton M , Benhra N , Le Borgne R . Numb inhibits the recy - cling of sanpodo in Drosophila sensory organ precursor . Curr Biol 2013 ; 23 : 581 - 587 . 25 Scita G , Di Fiore PP . The endocytic matrix . Nature 2010 ; 463 : 464 - 473 . 26 Berdnik D , Torok T , Gonzalez - Gaitan M , Knoblich JA . The endocytic protein alpha - Adaptin is required for numb - medi - ated asymmetric cell division in Drosophila . Dev Cell 2002 ; 3 : 221 - 231 . 27 Salcini AE , Confalonieri S , Doria M , et al . Binding specificity and in vivo targets of the EH domain , a novel protein - protein interaction module . Genes Dev 1997 ; 11 : 2239 - 2249 . 28 Smith CA , Dho SE , Donaldson J , Tepass U , McGlade CJ . The cell fate determinant numb interacts with EHD / Rme - 1 family proteins and has a role in endocytic recycling . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 3698 - 3708 . 29 Tokumitsu H , Hatano N , Yokokura S , Sueyoshi Y , Nozaki N , Kobayashi R . Phosphorylation of Numb regulates its inter - action with the clathrin - associated adaptor AP - 2 . FEBS Lett 2006 ; 580 : 5797 - 5801 . 30 Bucci C , Parton RG , Mather IH , et al . The small GTPase rab5 functions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic path - way . Cell 1992 ; 70 : 715 - 728 . 31 Wickner W . Membrane fusion : five lipids , four SNAREs , three chaperones , two nucleotides , and a Rab , all dancing in a ring on yeast vacuoles . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2010 ; 26 : 115 - 136 . 32 McBride HM , Rybin V , Murphy C , Giner A , Teasdale R , Ze - rial M . Oligomeric complexes link Rab5 effectors with NSF and drive membrane fusion via interactions between EEA1 and syntaxin 13 . Cell 1999 ; 98 : 377 - 386 . 33 Christoforidis S , McBride HM , Burgoyne RD , Zerial M . The Rab5 effector EEA1 is a core component of endosome dock - ing . Nature 1999 ; 397 : 621 - 625 . 34 Rybin V , Ullrich O , Rubino M , et al . GTPase activity of Rab5 acts as a timer for endocytic membrane fusion . Nature 1996 ; 383 : 266 - 269 . 35 Stenmark H , Vitale G , Ullrich O , Zerial M . Rabaptin - 5 is a direct effector of the small GTPase Rab5 in endocytic mem - brane fusion . Cell 1995 ; 83 : 423 - 432 . 36 Wang CW , Stromhaug PE , Kauffman EJ , Weisman LS , Klion - sky DJ . Yeast homotypic vacuole fusion requires the Ccz1 - Mon1 complex during the tethering / docking stage . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 163 : 973 - 985 . 37 Zeigerer A , Gilleron J , Bogorad RL , et al . Rab5 is necessary for the biogenesis of the endolysosomal system in vivo . Na - ture 2012 ; 485 : 465 - 470 . 38 Elbashir SM , Harborth J , Lendeckel W , Yalcin A , Weber K , Tuschl T . Duplexes of 21 - nucleotide RNAs mediate RNA interference in cultured mammalian cells . Nature 2001 ; 411 : 494 - 498 . 39 Gauthier NC , Monzo P , Gonzalez T , et al . Early endosomes associated with dynamic F - actin structures are required for late trafficking of H . pylori VacA toxin . J Cell Biol 2007 ; 177 : 343 - 354 . 40 Morel E , Parton RG , Gruenberg J . Annexin A2 - dependent po - lymerization of actin mediates endosome biogenesis . Dev Cell 2009 ; 16 : 445 - 457 . 41 Girao H , Geli MI , Idrissi FZ . Actin in the endocytic pathway : from yeast to mammals . FEBS Lett 2008 ; 582 : 2112 - 2119 . 42 Hirota Y , Kuronita T , Fujita H , Tanaka Y . A role for Rab5 ac - tivity in the biogenesis of endosomal and lysosomal compart - ments . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007 ; 364 : 40 - 47 . 43 Galperin E , Sorkin A . Visualization of Rab5 activity in living cells by FRET microscopy and influence of plasma - mem - brane - targeted Rab5 on clathrin - dependent endocytosis . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 4799 - 4810 . 44 Lakadamyali M , Rust MJ , Zhuang X . Ligands for clath - rin - mediated endocytosis are differentially sorted into distinct populations of early endosomes . Cell 2006 ; 124 : 997 - 1009 . 45 Barysch SV , Jahn R , Rizzoli SO . A fluorescence - based in vitro assay for investigating early endosome dynamics . Nat Protoc 2010 ; 5 : 1127 - 1137 . 46 Poteryaev D , Fares H , Bowerman B , Spang A . Caenorhabdi - tis elegans SAND - 1 is essential for RAB - 7 function in endo - somal traffic . EMBO J 2007 ; 26 : 301 - 312 . 47 Poteryaev D , Datta S , Ackema K , Zerial M , Spang A . Identifi - cation of the switch in early - to - late endosome transition . Cell 2010 ; 141 : 497 - 508 . 612 Numb regulates early endosome fusion npg Cell Research | Vol 26 No 5 | May 2016 48 Barroso M , Sztul ES . Basolateral to apical transcytosis in polarized cells is indirect and involves BFA and trimeric G protein sensitive passage through the apical endosome . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 124 : 83 - 100 . 49 Dunn KW , McGraw TE , Maxfield FR . Iterative fractionation of recycling receptors from lysosomally destined ligands in an early sorting endosome . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 109 : 3303 - 3314 . 50 Barysch SV , Aggarwal S , Jahn R , Rizzoli SO . Sorting in early endosomes reveals connections to docking - and fusion - asso - ciated factors . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 ; 106 : 9697 - 9702 . 51 Hutterer A , Knoblich JA . Numb and alpha - Adaptin regulate Sanpodo endocytosis to specify cell fate in Drosophila exter - nal sensory organs . EMBO Rep 2005 ; 6 : 836 - 842 . 52 Benhra N , Lallet S , Cotton M , Le Bras S , Dussert A , Le Bor - gne R . AP - 1 controls the trafficking of Notch and Sanpodo to - ward E - cadherin junctions in sensory organ precursors . Curr Biol 2011 ; 21 : 87 - 95 . 53 Sato TK , Rehling P , Peterson MR , Emr SD . Class C Vps protein complex regulates vacuolar SNARE pairing and is required for vesicle docking / fusion . Mol Cell 2000 ; 6 : 661 - 671 . 54 de Araujo ME , Huber LA , Stasyk T . Isolation of endocitic or - ganelles by density gradient centrifugation . Methods Mol Biol 2008 ; 424 : 317 - 331 . 55 Osborne A , Flett A , Smythe E . Endocytosis assays in intact and permeabilized cells . Curr Protoc Cell Biol 2005 ; Chapter 11 : Unit 11 . 18 . ( Supplementary information is linked to the online version of the paper on the Cell Research website . )