2023 I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n A r t i f i c i a l I n t e lli g e n c e , B i g D a t a , C o m pu t i n g a nd D a t a C o mm un i c a t i o n S y s t e m s ( i c A B C D ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 1480 - 9 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / I C A B C D 59051 . 2023 . 10220449 Cybersecurity practices of rural underserved communities in Africa : A case study from Northern Namibia Gabriel Tuhafeni Nhinda Faculty of Computing and Informatics Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Namibia gnhinda @ nust . na Abstract - Globally , Information Communication Technology ( ICT ) device usage has seen a steep rise over the last few years . This also holds in developing countries , which have embarked on connecting the unconnected or previously disadvantaged parts of their populations . This connectivity enables people to interact with cyberspace , which brings opportunities and challenges . Opportunities such as the ability to conduct business online , attend online education , and perform online banking activities . Challenges experienced are the cost of Internet access and more worrying cyber - risks and potential for exploitation . There remain pockets of communities that experience sporadic connectivity to cyberspace , these communities tend to be more susceptible to cyber - attacks due to issues of lack/limited awareness of cyber secure practices , an existent culture that might be exploited by cybercriminals , and overall , a lackluster approach to their cyber - hygiene . We present a qualitative study conducted in rural Northern Namibia . Our findings indicate that both secure and insecure cybersecurity practices exist . However , through the Ubuntu and Uushiindaism Afrocentric lenses , practices such as sharing mobile devices without passwords among the community mirror community unity . Practices such as this in mainstream research can be considered insecure . We also propose interrogating " common " secure cybersecurity practices in their universality of applicability . Keywords- cybersecurity practices , Social Cybersecurity , rural underserved communities , Ubuntu , Uushiindaism I . INTRODUCTION Information communication technology device usage has seen a steep rise over the last few years . Developing countries are not exempt from this development , where many new Internet users are coming online through mobile Internet­ enabled devices . Internet penetration in Africa has been on the increase , the International Telecommunications Union ( ITU ) reports that between 2019 and 2021 there has been a 23 % increase in the number oflnternet users [ 1 ] . The ITU adds that globally urban residents are twice as likely to use the Internet compared to rural residents . In Africa this connectivity divide is greater , where urban residents are four times ( 47 % ) more likely to use the Internet compared to the 13 % of rural residents [ 1 ] . Internet access is enabled by the availability of broadband access and technological devices with such capabilities . Broadband access in Africa in rural areas as of 2021 still stood at 18 % [ 1 ] . Technology device ownership and use have outpaced the diffusion of Internet development in many rural African countries [ 2 ] . It is projected that by 2025 mobile device ownership will be highest in rural areas with the youth contingent being the highest adopters [ 3 ] . 979 - 8 - 3503 - 1480 - 9 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 ©2023 IEEE Fungai Bhunu Shava Faculty of Computing and Informatics Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Namibia tbshava @ nust . na ICT device ownership comes with many advantages , such as the ability to communicate with geographically distant relatives ; the ability to attend online classes ; potential for conducting business online ; among many benefits . However , there are also challenges to the ownership of ICT devices , access to electricity to charge these devices , access to broadband to enable Internet access , and the cost of Internet access [ 4 ] . Most prevalent is that many in sub - Saharan Africa are mobile - first Internet users and may not be familiar with issues of cyber - hygiene and personal cybersecurity [ 5 ] . Mokobane and Both [ 6 ] argue that within this region Ubuntu principles that govern interaction may influence social engineering susceptibility . They add that some nefarious characters may abuse various tenets like trust and hospitability to gain the confidence of unsuspecting new Internet users with this ethos . Similarly , there remains scant Internet access especially within rural areas of developing countries [ 1 ] , to this , many governments have embarked on connecting the unconnected or previously disadvantaged parts of their populations [ 7 ] . Therefore , this paper aims to understand current cybersecurity practices within rural communities ( villages ) in northern Namibia . A . Case site The national population of Namibia according to [ 8 ] was at 2 . 1 million in 2014 . However , the gini - coefficient which aims to look at economic inequality was recorded at 59 . 1 % in 2015 , indicating an uneven society . To get a better understanding of the cybersecurity practices of the inhabitants of rural underserved communities ( villages ) , we conducted a qualitative study within 4 villages in northern Namibia . The choice of these four villages was conveniently chosen to avoid potential issues of language barriers and lost in translation issues as experienced by some community co - design researchers in Namibia [ 9 ] . Additionally , we follow the guidance of Mkabela [ 1 0 ] who advises that ' ' researcher must have some familiarity with history , language , philosophy , and myths of the people under study " . In our study , one of the researchers is familiar with people under study . The 4 villages are in Northen Namibia , where villages comprise of multiple Omahangu ( pearl millet ) fields with homesteads in the centre . These homesteads are constructed in a circular fashion with a boundary made from wooden palisades , the homesteads are comprised of rooms are of the rondavel type connected by intricate passages [ 11 , p . 43 ] . Each homestead is occupied by one family . Namibia is categorized as a middle - high - income nation . According to the latest population census of reported in 2014 , our study location has a population of24 271 [ 12 ] . The 4 villages we conducted our study are reported to have a Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . literacy rate of 90 . 4 % per the Namibia Statistics Agency ( NSA ) census of2014 . Our observation was that these figures are not representative of comprehension . Furthermore , the villages are situated along the border with Angola on the northern side and many of the villages are surrounded by Oshana , which also acts as a natural border between them . An Oshana is a seasonal floodplain . Oshikwanyama is the indigenous language , and many residents have little knowledge of English beyond pleasantries , even though the official language of Namibia is English [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] . Additionally , due to the proximity to Angola , many youths tend to be more proficient in Portuguese than English . Consequently , our study was conducted in a code - switching mann er , a mixture between Oshiwambo , English , and Portuguese . The rest of this paper is organized in the following sections , related work , methodology including the data collection instrument used to collect the data , and the analysis . The findings and discussion section precedes the conclusion section and references . II . RELATED WORKS Here we introduce existing work on ( 1 ) cybersecurity practices in rural indigenous communities , ( 2 ) rural African communities , cybersecurity practices , and ( 3 ) Ubuntu and Uushiindaism as guiding theories . Cybersecurity research within rural areas is not a new phenomenon . A . Rural Communities in Africa Generally , what areas considered as being rural are defined as any area in the countryside and surrounded by vast unoccupied lands , and outside any municipal proclamations , this definition has not changed since the 1970s [ 15 ] . Within the African context , rural areas are categorized as lacking services and infrastructure , thus underserved in terms of service provision , ranging from telecommunications services to postal and educational facilities [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] . This lack of service can be attributed to the levels of socio - economic prowess of residents in rural areas . According to [ 17 ] , the level of poverty within some rural areas does not present a profitable business case for infrastructure investment . However , computing devices with Internet access capabilities are existent and utilized within rural communities [ 16 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] . The 2014 National census in Namibia reported that2 . 5 % of the population in rural areas had access to computers , while 40 . 6 % had access to a cellphone [ 8 , p . 48 ] . The census further indicated that less than 3 % of the population had access to the Internet . However , these are the latest figures that report on computing devices at a national level . Other studies like [ 13 ] reported that greater Internet use in a peri - urban setting . B . Technology and rural communities Due to migration patterns , rural areas tend to be occupied by indigenous communities with older people and the youngest as residents . These communities are often not included in development agendas , resulting in being underserved ( Frohlich & Peters , 2017 ) . However , within cybersecurity research , this gap has been noted and many nation - states realized the need for inclusion [ 18 ] , [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] . Many factors led to this development , most notably the emigration and the inability of governments to meet the shelter needs , public service infrastructure needs , and the resultant brain drain in rural areas [ 13 ] . As such , many postulate that developing rural areas would encourage youths and able­ bodied persons to remain in those areas . A move of this nature is that the cities are not able to accommodate the ever - growing number of people flocking to urban areas for " better opportunities " . Within the context of developing rural areas , the investment in ICT infrastructure is a key strategy for bootstrapping development efforts , bringing services closer to rural communities [ 22 ] . Services like access to online education , electronic gov ernm ent services ( birth registration , application of identification documents ) , and virtual health consultations [ 4 ] . The noble effort of bringing various services closer to persons residing in rural areas has included the construction of telecommunication towers , community networks , and e­ consultation and e - banking solutions . Though access to various digital services has become more prevalent in rural areas , much of it comes with challenges [ 23 ] . Challenges such as the high cost of Internet access [ 7 ] , susceptibility to cyberattacks [ 6 ] and inadequate digital literacy to effectively use these digital services [ 2 ] , [ 13 ] . C. Cybersecurity Cybersecurity as a domain primarily focuses on the organizational level of technological advances to help secure critical infrastructure [ 5 ] . Various definitions of cybersecurity center around the ability to wrangle processes , technology , structures , and people to protect data assets from unauthorized access [ 24 ] . [ 24 ] argue that the lack of a concise and broad definition that encompasses the multidisciplinary of cybersecurity leads to techno - centric views of cybersecurity and excludes disciplines that might aid in further understanding the various challenges in cybersecurity ( behavior , norms , practices , etc . ) . To assist in the identified challenges , [ 25 ] conducted a systematic literature review and suggest that cybersecurity research should also focuses on h uman factors as any technological solutions involve a human implementor and often also the user . For this study we define cybersecurity is one ' s ability to ascertain , protect and recover from cyber - incidences within their given context . There exists literature that argues for the creation of cybersecurity awareness programs [ 18 ] , [ 26 ] - [ 28 ] Additionally , some researchers postulate that for awareness programs to be successful , there is a need to study the cybersecurity behavioral intentions , through research frameworks such as Theory of Planned Behavior , Protection Motivation Theory , etc . [ 29 ] . However , these very frameworks have [ 30 ] . Therefore , there is a need to understand how people act currently and argue for usable security , which has a lower cognitive load on technology end users . Usable security suggests that security measures have ease of use for those security measures [ 31 ] to encourage actual behavior as opposed to relying solely on intended behavior . Within the African context , most Internet users connect via mobile devices [ 32 ] , prompting terms like mobile - first . Mobile first in this instance refers to how individuals first encounter the Internet . This has also birthed some scholars to argue for studying the security features of these mobile devices [ 33 ] . There exist studies on authentication on mobile devices from the usage of patterns and passwords that present some of the security features inherent with mobile devices . D . Cybersecurity practices Cybersecurity practices are transposed from organizational policies on Information Communication Technology ( ICT ) within organizations . According to Nurse [ 34 ] , this also means that there is often a dedicated department responsible for the cyber posture of the organization and its Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . employees . Individuals are guided by these policies and enforced through cyber - physical access controls . These cybersecurity practices range from password lengths and complexity to routine password changes , intrusion detection systems , cybersecurity and cyber - hygiene awareness training sessions , and the adherence to industry - specific standards that aid in the overall security of those organizations [ 33 ] . [ 21 ] described a study they conducted with indigenous Canadians . Theirs was a survey intended to offer cybersecurity education to rural indigenous Canadian Citizens . They indicated that some cybersecurity practices like logging out of social media sites accessed via web browsers were something many did not do as they figured closing the browser was enough . Within the realm of personal cybersecurity practices , most efforts operate within the technical security features as they appear in operating systems [ 33 ] , looking at usable security and home - based security systems . These practices look to how individuals may guard themselves , a Western approach to self - preservation and prosperity . Within rural underserved communities in Africa that are based on Ubuntu principles and Uushiindaism , the tenets often rely heavily on communal cohesion and unity [ 5 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 35 ] . A study by [ 5 ] reports that often cybersecurity within rural communities looks at a one­ sided angle , how to be secure and not focus on insecure practices . These practices tend to be developed by " experts " residing in urban centers and imposed on rural communities . [ 36 ] found that among rural area inhabitants , youth used to access devices as a status symbol that can be leveraged for other social capital gains . In research , cybersecurity neglects the h uman factor , castigating the h uman as the weakest link in any cybersecurity chain [ 36 ] - [ 38 ] . Rather it focuses on technical solutions or conformity to security policies in organizations . Similarly , cybersecurity practices in most studies originates ' from western perspectives , which is often based on individualism whereas in Africa there is a sense of collectivism through Afrocentric philosophy [ lO ] . To this effect , Zimmermann and Renaud [ 3 7 ] argues that the h uman should be considered a part of the solution in cybersecurity ; cybersecurity differently . E . Ubuntu and Uushiindaism Ubuntu is an African theory of ethics that emphasizes humaneness and unity . Derived from the Nguni saying ' ' umuntu gumuntu , gabantu " to mean ' I am because you are ' [ 10 ] . Therefore , no one person can flourish without the other . Uushiidaism is a sub - philosophical paradigm proposed by [ 35 ] , they postulate that tenets of collectivism could be used to solve societal challenges like i . e . , hunger through the neighborliness of rural Aawambo communities . The closeness of neighbors they argue often is greater than that of a kinsman . Therefore , within cybersecurity research , we use these two theories to identify mental models that could be used in understanding secure and insecure practices . These African theories ofbeing , guide as lenses to understanding community members ' interaction with the Internet via end - user computing devices ( i . e . , Smartphones , laptops , etc . ) . Ill . METHODOLOGY We report ongoing research in a long - term community­ based qualitative case study research project in Northern Namibia , having conducted interviews at 4 villages in Northern Namibia . Due to the paucity of literature and data about the Internet and overall technology use literature from these communities , we deem this an exploratory study . Qualitative research allows for a detailed understanding of the phenomenon under study , in situ . The engagement protocol suggested by [ 5 ] was followed , including participant recruitment . Formal ethical clearance has been received from our university , local constituency office , and the senior village headman . Firstly , they recommend the following steps , 1 ) performing desktop research about the community , 2 ) identifying a community liaison [ 39 ] , 3 ) Setting community engagement protocols , and 4 ) aligning the research study to existing qualitative research framework . We applied it as follows : 1 ) Conducting desktop research of the community , which revealed little information . We relied mostly on newspaper articles and government census reports . From here , we learned of the demographics of the villages , ranging from age distribution , language competencies , technology use status , telecommunication services availability , electrification , and socio - economic status . 2 ) We then identified a senior village headman of the Oukwanyama Traditional Authority an intermediary . We briefed the senior village headman of our research intentions and received permission to conduct our research in the villages identified . The headman also recruited a junior village headman who then facilitated the recruitment of interview participants as part of the overall project . The senior village headman recruited participants from the village he presides . The village heads also selected the locations where the research activities will take place . All took place under a tree , which they prepared by cleaning leaves , one junior headman also provided chairs to the research team and participants . 3 ) We arrived at our research location and engaged the respective village heads , starting at the senior village headman ' s homestead . It is customary to announce one ' s presence in the villages with the village head before any research activities commence , even though research permission was already granted . This took us a full day before commencing our research activities the following day . Procedures and engagement protocols were highlighted by the headmen . All were similar and centered around respect , honesty , and reciprocity . 4 ) We aligned our work by seeking consent from research participants , first informing them , and often translating from English to Oshikwanyama about the intentions and expectations . Then answer any questions , the participants had . We then commenced conducting interviews . In total , we conducted 10 interviews between the 4 villages , the participants were self selecting from the people that showed up under the identified tree by the respective village headmen . Of these , 4 were female , and 6 were male . Interviews ranged from 27 minutes to over an hour . The duration was determined by the interviewees willingness to speak and available time . The senior village headman had an interview longer than 1 hour , whilst one of the youths had an interview that was 27 minutes long . As part of keeping within norms , it is considered rude to stop elders when speaking , this also contributed to the lengthy interview period , however , we gained a wealth of knowledge , not only about cybersecurity practices , technology use , and community challenges , but also about overall governance structures within the OvaKwanyama kingdom . We conducted our data collection in a mixture of Oshikwanyama and English . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . The interviews were audio recorded and transcribed with translations from Oshikwanyama to English . The transcripts were inductively analyzed using Atlas . ti software following a 6 step thematic analysis process [ 40 ] . The next section presents the findings and discussions of the cybersecurity practices from the case sites . IV . FINDINGS AND D ISCUSSIONS In this section , we present the findings and discussion . We begin this section with a reflection on the study experience and how it relates to cybersecurity and the various configurations of the participants in the interviews . Additionally , we also present a table of the major themes that emanated from the cybersecurity practices of these rural underserved communities . We conclude with a statement on the lenses used to interpret these findings and how this new understanding might impact cybersecurity research , interventions , and policy alike . Our research was conducted in 4 villages within a constituency in Northern Namibia . As indicated in the methodology section , our intermediary called for community meetings . In Villages 1 and 3 youths ( 18 - 35 ) were the only attendees of these community meetings . This phenomenon is uncommon within African villages , as often , elders would attend the community meetings . However , when probed , our intermediary indicated that the topic of discussion is technology , youths are more likely to be interested . He adds that community members ordinarily attend based on the subject of discussion , normally , community meetings tend to center around community affairs , to which youths hardly attend as these require elders to make decisions for the common good . Villages 2 and 4 had a mixture of youth and adults . This composition reflects the status of the socio­ economic challenges imposed by COVID - 19 causing many youths to move back " home " due to job losses and varsity moving online all due to COVID - 19 . Our research envisaged engaging 5 villages , however , the respective Headman of village 5 declined permission , lamenting " I do not know who you are , why don ' t you conduct the study in your village ? " , this after all relevant and supporting documents were sent to his office . We opted not to pursue this permission as part of this research to honour the wishes of the elderly as per local customs . This display of distrust was not an isolated incident , we further experienced distrust when seeking permission to conduct our study from the constituency councilor wherein our study was to be conducted . He remarked that due to the status of cybercrime ' many conduct us via " omalungula " - the Internet - ( this description includes phone calls , short message system ( SMS ) , messaging applications enabled by the Internet ) seeking permission only for them to turn out as sc amm ers or untruthful persons ' as such his office is cautious of permission requests made via technological communication , in efforts to protect constituents . The honorable councilor requested the researchers to engage the constituency office oftline for permission to be granted . Trust which is a tenet of Ubuntu is elucidated by the above instances resulting in the conclusion that trust is earned and not merely given to strangers . If this approach ( mental model ) can be applied in cyberspace , it may emerge as a strength , as it can curb trust exploitation attacks such as information disclosure , phishing , vishing , and smishing . Community members are engaged in various cybersecurity practices , these practices such as use of in­ device security features , frequent password changes , sharing of phone - lock pins , trusting of strangers which can be categorized as either secure or insecure . In this paper , we interrogate these categorizations under the guidance of Ubuntu and Uushiindaism as lenses to understanding the community under study . Table 1 provides a succinct depiction of the themes and the various discussions that follow thereafter . TABLE I . Category "' 0 <> l � 0 rll "' 0 <> . .., e p. . � 0 "' ..s CYBERSECURITY PRACTICES THEMES IN UNDERSERVED RURAL COMMUNITIES security practice Theme Quote " I decided to put phone lock and Use of Indevice smartphone app locks whereby you security features cannot go in any app without putting in the code . " " My cellphone banking , for Not sharing example , I want to check my balance , I am the only one who passwords knows that password , that one I will never share with nobody ' ' Logging out of " When I am done using my insta or online platforms FB I log out because sometimes it is not my phone I am using " " If I share my phone with someone , Change of that means , once the phone is back , potentially I ' ll change the password . " compromised as soon as it comes . Because I am passwords not sure if they did not share it with someone else " Codes for the " I can only come up with a password Creation of that contains something that will security remind me that only I know ' ' passwords Use of different " On my banking , I have a different passwords password than my phone , I don ' t know why , it ' s just like that " " There was a guy that wanted some girls ' numbers , I did not share them Obscuring with him . So , he took my phone and sensitive took the numbers . From there , I have information people ' s numbers with question marks and exclamation marks . Codes , just so I know who the person is . " " If I get a link that says I won , I use Clicking links to click on it , but it does not go from friends anywhere , it just says I must forward it to " " I put my private information on my No passwords on laptop since I am the only one who some devices uses it . No need for a password since someone cannot just come and start using my laptop . Thank is private " Sharing of " Sometimes I use my fathers ' phone to access the Internet because I don ' t cellphones have data " " If I am stuck , I ask my daughter over there to assist me , she is the one Sharing of pin who is supposed to free me . She knows my pin to the phone and bank card " " I got a call saying I won money from the mobile operator because I recharged a lot , they asked me to Trusting strangers give them my bank card number , so I receive the money . My father said no , and we need to know more or go to the offices of the mobile operator , but I wanted to collect my winnings " Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Category security practice Theme Quote " I tried using sentences , but the sentences can be a little bit long , so I Use of common have words instead that I can remember . " words/phrases for " I just put passwords and mostly Passwords book tides because I read many books . " Our findings are not unique to the context under study , we note that some of the classical secure practices from mainstream cybersecurity practices are present , such as not sharing passwords , regular password changes albeit not in conformity to an established protocol , and the utilization of in­ device security features . These findings are in line with [ 41 ] who advocate that secure passwords are vital to the security of persons and organizations and [ 42 ] who advocates for regular password changing . Our research also revealed that many inhabitants of these rural communities have never heard of the term cybersecurity . This is in part because , during the time of data collection , there were no national efforts to educate the citizenry from the government ' s perspective on cybersecurity . However , in 2023 the government of Namibia embarked upon the operationalization of a National Cybersecurity Strategy and Awareness Creation Plan 2022 - 2027 under the theme : " A Step to Cyber Resilience & Digital Security . " that targets parents , and school learners as the key targets [ 43 ] . Our findings are in line with those of [ 5 ] who note that even though English is the official language , many in these rural areas lack comprehension beyond pleasantries . Therefore , there is a need for the localization of cybersecurity awareness programs for effectiveness . Category 2 of the practices focused on those activities or behaviors that can be perceived as insecure . The use of easy­ to - remember passwords ( words and book titles ) poses a security risk for individuals . [ 36 ] also found that youths are likely to befriend strangers online , in our context , trust of strangers online takes a step further with participants willing to share bank card numbers which could lead to financial loss . However , looking at the socio - economic status of the communities under study , we can understand how scams that promise winning masquerading with a reputable organization ' s name could be successful . Additionally , cyber attackers do take advantage of what [ 6 ] says the tenets of Ubuntu could be exploited for the gain of cyber criminals . However , intra - community trust exists , which may expose even those with secure cybersecurity practices to vishing , smishing , and phishing attacks through mobile applications like WhatsApp ( which per our observations was the most used Internet enabled messaging platform with voice calling capabilities ) . Congruent with the theory ofUushiindaism , this potential risk is eminent if the phishing and smishing messages originate from a trusted source like a neighbor . This also confirms the findings of [ 6 ] who argue that Ubuntu tenets are exploitable by cybercriminals to ensure the success of phishing attacks . We thus argue that for national cybersecurity awareness efforts to have impact , they need to move from policy and legislation to tangible engagement / intervention! education! awareness efforts , ideally in indigenous languages . V . CONCLUSION This paper presented findings on cybersecurity practices in 4 rural communities from Northern Namibia , Africa . These practices can be categorized as either secure or insecure , secure practices were identified as : the use of in - device security features , not sharing passwords , logging out of online platforms , change of potentially compromised passwords , codes for the creation of security passwords , use of different passwords , and obscuring sensitive information . Cyber security practices such as clicking links from friends , no passwords on some devices , sharing of cellphones , sharing of pin , trusting strangers , and use of common words / phrases for passwords can be thought of as insecure . However , interpreted with the Afro - centric lenses of Ubuntu and Uushiindaism , some of these practices within each category are representative of the community ethos . This ethos is underpinned by tenets of sharing , hospitality , and trust . Our research also uncovered that trust as tenet within the communities is no afforded to all , but for strangers the level should be earned . Although this study was conducted in a mostly homogenous rural part of one country , the findings are not dissimilar to those from other rural parts of the world [ 18 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 36 ] . The implications thereof are a better understanding which can guide policy and awareness initiatives . Future studies could focus on awareness campaigns guided by existing practices long the existing worldview of rural areas inhabitants . Additionally the identified cybersecurity practices could also be critical success factors for cyber safety for rural , under resourced communities . A common challenge is a conceptualization of what the Internet is , therefore starting with digital literacy would be key to facilitating cybersecurity awareness . In addition , the use of indigenous languages with analogies to narrate threats found in cyberspace can have a great impact on the success of those cybersecurity awareness initiatives . Lastly , community communication practices and learning behavior as indicated in this paper may also help in improving rural underserved communities behaviors within the cyberspace hence the citizen cybersecurity . ACKNOWLEDGMENT We would like to thank all the community members that participated in this study for their invaluable contribution . We would like to thank the Mobile Telecommunications Company ( MTC ) for availing funding to conduct research in this area of computing . REFERENCES [ 1 ] International Telecommunication Union , " 2021 Measuring digital development : Facts and figures , " Geneva , 2021 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . itu . int/ en!mediacentre/Documents / Media Relations / lTD Facts and Figures 2019 - Embargoed 5 November 1200 CET . pdfl/oOAhttps : / / www . itu . int / en!ITU­ D / Statistics/Pages / facts / default . aspx [ 2 ] S . P . Shihomeka , " Engaging citizens : Youth , mobile phones , political leadership and inclusive democracy in the Ohangwena Region , Namibia , " NAWA Journal of Language and Communication (NJLM) , vol . 1 1 , no . 1 , pp . 4 - 17 , 2017 . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . [ 3 ] A . Quandt et al . , " Mobile phone use is associated with higher smallholder agricultural productivity in Tanzania , East Africa , " PLoS One , vol . 15 , no . 8 August , Aug . 2020 , doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0237337 . [ 4 ] M . M . Ujakpa et al . , " Understanding Mobile Phone Use in Electricity Scarce Context : Extended TAM for Sub­ Saharan African Countries , " in 1ST - Africa 2021 Conference Proceedings , 2021 , pp . 1 - 8 . [ 5 ] G . T . Nhinda and F . Bhunu Shava , " Towards the use of Participatory Methods in Cybersecurity research in rural Africa : A grassroots Approach , " in 2021 3rd International Multidisciplinary Information Technology and Engineering Conference , IMITEC 2021 , Windhoek : IEEE , 2021 , pp . 1 - 8 . doi : 10 . 1 1 09 / IMITEC52926 . 2021 . 9714649 . [ 6 ] N . B . Mokobane and R . A . Botha , " Does Ubuntu Influence Social Engineering Susceptibility ? , " in International Symposium on Human Aspects of Information Security and Assurance , Springer , Cham , 2020 , pp . 97 - 108 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 57404 - 8 _ 8 . [ 7 ] N . Friederici , S . Ojanperii , and M . Graham , " The impact of connectivity in Africa : Grand visions and the mirage of inclusive digital development , " Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries , vol . 79 , no . 1 , pp . 1 - 20 , Mar . 2017 , doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 1681 - 4835 . 2017 . tb00578 . x . [ 8 ] Namibia Statistics Agency , " Namibia 201 1 Population & Housing Census , " 2014 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . nsa . org . na / files / downloads / Namibia 201 1 Population and Housing Census Main Report . pdf [ 9 ] H . Winschiers - Theophilus and N . J . Bidwell , " Toward an Afro - Centric Indigenous HCI Paradigm Toward an Afro - Centric Indigenous HCI Paradigm , " Int J Hum Comput Interact , vol . 29 , no . 4 , pp . 37 - - 41 , 2013 . [ 10 ] Q . Mkabela , " Using the Afrocentric Method in Researching Indigenous African Culture , " The qualitative Report , vol . 10 , no . 1 , pp . 178 - 189 , 2005 , [ Online ] . Available : https : / / nsuworks . nova . edu / tqr / vol1 0 / iss 1 / 10 / [ 11 ] N . Shiweda and R . Nghitevelekwa , " The Architectural Designs of Finnish Missions in North - Central Namibia , " in Intertwined histories : 150 years of Finnish - Namibian relations , Napandulwe . Shiweda , Leila . Koivunen , andMarjo . Kaartinen , Eds . , University ofTurku , 2019 , pp . 45 - 52 . [ 12 ] Namibia Statistics Agency , " 201 1 Population and Housing Census - Ohangwena Regional Profile , " 2014 . [ 13 ] K . Frohlich and A . Peters , " E - Government Social Exclusion and Satisfaction Among Namibian Citizens : A Case of a Namibian Government Ministry , " in Proceedings of the South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists , 2017 , pp . 1 - 6 . doi : 10 . 1 145 / 3129416 . 31294 . [ 14 ] H . N . Aludhilu and N . J . Bidwell , " Home is not Egumbo : Language , identity and web design , " in ACM International Conference Proceeding Series , Association for Computing Machinery , Dec . 2018 , pp . 13 - 23 . doi : 10 . 1 145 / 3283458 . 3283460 . [ 15 ] B . J . Smith and D . W . Parvin , " Defining and measuring rurality , " Southern Journal of Agricultural Economics , no . July , pp . 109 - 1 14 , 1973 . [ 16 ] K . Salemink , D . Strijker , and G . Bosworth , " Rural development in the digital age : A systematic literature review on unequal ICT availability , adoption , and use in rural areas , " J Rural Stud , vol . 54 , pp . 360 - 371 , 2017 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 1 0 . 10 16 / j . jrurstud . 20 15 . 09 . 00 1 . [ 17 ] K . Frohlich , M . Nieminen , A . Peters , and A . Pinomaa , " Considerations for Co - Designing e - Government Services in Under - Served Rural Communities , " in Proceedings of African Conference on Human Computer Interaction ( AfriCHI ' 18 ) , 2018 , pp . 204 - 207 . [ 18 ] N . Awang , S . Zambri , and S . Abdullah , " Awareness on Cybersecurity Threats for rural community , " in 2nd International E - Conference on New Normal in Education 2021 Igniting Minds Beyond the New Norms , 2021 , pp . 194 - 202 . [ 19 ] M . Grobler , Z . Dlamini , S . Ngobeni , and A . Labuschagne , " Towards a cyber security aware rural community , " in Proceedings of the 2011 Information Security for South Africa (ISSA ) Conference . , 201 1 , pp . 1 - 7 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / goo . gV680YtV [ 20 ] E . Pearlman , " ' Wait and see ' : Uses and Gratifications of ICTs in an Indigenous Community , " International Journal of Public Administration in the Digital Age , vol . 7 , no . 4 , pp . 88 - 95 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 40 18 / ijpada . 2020 100 1 . oa3 . [ 21 ] S . Plosker and G . Srivastava , " Cybersecurity Education in Rural Indigenous Canada , " in In 2021 Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering , IEEE , 2021 , pp . 1 - 6 . doi : 10 . 1 109 / CCECE53047 . 2021 . 9569147 . [ 22 ] C . Stork and E . Calandro , " Internet gone mobile in Namibia , " in ICT Pathways to Poverty Reduction , 2014 , pp . 205 - 225 . doi : 10 . 3362 / 9781780448152 . 009 . [ 23 ] K . Frohlich , K . Jain , A . Pinomaa , and M . Nieminen , " Empowering communities in marginalized surroundings : Opportunities from collaborative community - managed electrification and advanced ICT , " in 1st International Conference of the ACM Greek SIGCHI Chapter ( CHI Greece 2021 ) , Association for Computing Machinery , Nov . 2021 , pp . 1 - 7 . doi : 10 . 1 145 / 3489410 . 3489437 . [ 24 ] D . Craigen , N . Diakun - Thibault , and R . Purse , " Defining Cybersecurity , " Technology Innovation Management Review , vol . 4 , no . 10 , pp . 13 - 21 , 2014 , doi : 10 . 22215 / timreview835 . [ 25 ] J . J . Jeong , J . Mihelcic , G . Oliver , and C . Rudolph , " Towards an Improved Understanding of Human Factors in Cybersecurity , " in 2019 IEEE 5th International Conference on Collaboration and Internet Computing ( CIC ) , IEEE , 2019 , pp . 338 - 345 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / lib . unimelb . edu . au [ 26 ] M . Bada , A . Sasse , and J . Nurse , " Cyber Security Awareness Campaigns : Why They Fail to Change Behavior , " in International Conference on Cyber Security for Sustainable Society , 2015 , p . 1 1 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . cs . ox . ac . uk / publications / publication9343 - abstract . html % 0Ahttp : / / discovery . ucl . ac . uk / 1468954 / l I Awareness CampaignsDraftWorkingPaper . pdf Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . [ 27 ] L . Slusky and P . Partow - Navid , " Students Information Security Practices and Awareness , " Journal of Information Privacy and Security , vol . 8 , no . 4 , pp . 3 - 26 , 2012 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 15536548 . 2012 . 10845664 . [ 28 ] A . Sultan , " Improving Cybersecurity Awareness in Underserved Populations , " Berkeley , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / cltc . berkeley . edu / 20 19 / 04 / 15 / improving­ cybersecurity - awareness - in - underserved - populations / [ 29 ] C . Y oon and H . Kim , " Understanding computer security behavioral intention in the workplace : An empirical study of Korean firms , " Information Technology and People , vol . 26 , no . 4 , pp . 401 - 419 , 2013 , doi : 10 . 1108 / ITP - 12 - 2012 - 0147 . [ 30 ] A . Almansoori , M . Al - Emran , and K . Shaalan , " Exploring the Frontiers of Cybersecurity Behavior : A Systematic Review of Studies and Theories , " Applied Sciences ( Switzerland ) , vol . 13 , no . 9 . MDPI , May 01 , 2023 . doi : 10 . 3390 / app13095700 . [ 31 ] M . Theofanos , " Is Usable Security an Oxymoron ? , " Computer (Long Beach Calif) , vol . 53 , no . 2 , pp . 71 - 74 , 2020 , doi : 10 . 1109 / MC . 2019 . 2954075 . [ 32 ] M . Hasbi and A . Dubus , " Determinants of Mobile Broadband Use in Developing Economies : Evidence from Sub - Saharan Africa , " Telecomm Policy , vol . 44 , no . 5 , pp . 1 - 34 , 2020 . [ 33 ] P . Markert , D . V . Bailey , M . Golla , M . Diirmuth , and A . J . Aviv , " On the Security ofSmartphone Unlock PINs , " ACM Transactions on Privacy and Security , vol . 24 , no . 4 , pp . 1 - 36 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1 145 / 3473040 . [ 34 ] J . R . C . Nurse , " Cybersecurity Awareness , " Encyclopedia of Cryptography , Security and Privacy , pp . 1 - 5 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 27739 - 9 _ 1596 - 1 . [ 35 ] P . A . Mbenzi and S . N . Ashikuti , " Uushiindaism as a collective poverty alleviation mechanism and social support , " Journal of University of Namibia Language Centre , vol . 3 , no . 1 , pp . 2026 - - 8297 , 2018 . [ 36 ] P . B . Maoneke , F . B . Shava , A . M . Gamundani , M . Bere - Chitauro , and I . Nhamu , " ICTs use and cyberspace risks faced by adolescents in Namibia , " in Proceedings of the Second African Conference for Human Computer Interaction : Thriving Communities , 2018 , pp . 109 - 1 17 . doi : 10 . 1 145 / 3283458 . 3283483 . [ 37 ] V . Zimmermann and K . Renaud , " Moving from a ' human - as - problem " to a ' human - as - solution " cybersecurity mindset , " International Journal of Human Computer Studies , vol . 131 , no . May , pp . 169 - 187 , 2019 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2019 . 05 . 005 . [ 38 ] F . Bhunu Shava and D . Van Greunen , " Designing user security metrics for a security awareness at Higher and Tertiary Institutions , " in Proceedings of the 8th International Development Informatics Association Conference , 2014 , pp . 281 - 296 . [ 39 ] F . Ssozi - Mugarura , E . Blake , and U . Rivett , " Supporting community needs for rural water mana gement through community - based co - design , " in ACM International Conference Proceeding Series , 2016 , pp . 91 - 100 . doi : 10 . 1 145 / 2940299 . 294031 1 . [ 40 ] V . Braun and V . Clarke , " Using thematic analysis in psychology , " Qual Res Psycho [ , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 77 - 101 , 2006 , doi : 10 . 1 191 / 1478088706qp063oa . [ 41 ] A . Da Veiga , M . Loock , and K . Renaud , " Cyber4Dev­ Q : Calibrating Cyber Awareness in the Developing Country Context , " The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries , vol . 88 , no . 1 , 2022 . [ 42 ] J . Silaa , M . Morolong , A . Gamundani , and F . Bhunu Shava , " Towards User Online Security and Privacy Protection , " in 2021 1ST - Africa Conference (1ST­ Africa ) , M . Cunningham and P . Cunningham , Eds . , 2021 , pp . 1 - 8 . [ 43 ] Staff reporter , " information ministry to launch national cybersecurity strategy and awareness plan , " namibia economist , windhoek , mar . 30 , 2023 . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .