eScience for Sea Science : A Semantic Scientific Knowledge Infrastructure for Marine Scientists Kristin Stock Allworlds Geothinking and University of Nottingham kristin . stock @ nottingham . ac . uk Tim Stojanovic University of Cardiff , UK stojanovic @ cardiff . ac . uk Anne Robertson EDINA , UK a . m . robertson @ ed . ac . uk Jens Ortmann University of Muenster , Germany jens _ ortmann @ hotmail . co m Mohamed Bishr University of Muenster , Germany m . bishr @ uni - muenster . de Femke Reitsma University of Canterbury , NZ femke . reitsma @ canterbury . ac . nz Abstract The COastal and Marine Perception Application for Scientific Scholarship ( COMPASS ) is a knowledge infrastructure that supports enhanced discovery of scientific resources , including publications , data sets and web services . It provides users with the ability to discover resources on the basis of domain knowledge using ontologies , and scientific knowledge , including the scientific models , theories and methods that were used to conduct the research described by the resource . The application includes an architecture that adopts standards from the geospatial information community to ensure interoperability between repositories and allow interaction with content from digital libraries . The architecture shows how ontologies can be used as a registry for an interoperable infrastructure . A prototype was successfully implemented and evaluated with users , finding enthusiasm and support for the approach , with some suggestions for improvements of the prototype implementation . 1 . Introduction Scientists in any discipline typically search for scientific resources ( for example , publications and data sets ) using keyword searches on the internet or digital libraries . The COastal and Marine Perception Application for Scientific Scholarship ( COMPASS ) is a knowledge infrastructure with a web - based interface that aims to provide enhanced tools for the discovery of scientific resources . These tools employ semantic information about the resources and the scientific knowledge ( for example , analysis methods , theories and methods ) that those resources encapsulate . In this way , scientists can discover a wider range of resources that are tailored to their requirements , and opportunities are developed for more advanced visualization and inference about the relationships between scientific resources and the ways in which science develops over time . In addition to the goal of providing enhanced discovery tools for scientists , the knowledge infrastructure develops a new semantic architecture that is based on open standards and provides interoperable access to geospatial information provided through standards compliant web services . Access to data sets and scientific models is of particular importance in geoscientific research , and the COMPASS application was developed as a prototype with content from the marine science domain . However , the architecture and tools apply across all domains , with particular benefits for those domains that use geographic information . A number of geographic information standards are employed . This paper describes and evaluates the COMPASS application . Section 2 presents related work . Section 3 describes the architecture of the knowledge infrastructure . Section 4 describes the user interface and explains how users interact with the knowledge infrastructure . Section 5 evaluates the knowledge infrastructure and presents the findings of the research . The main contributions of this paper are firstly a new approach to the architecture of infrastructures that is both interoperable and semantically enriched , and secondly a set of new approaches to the discovery of scientific resources , using information about domain semantics ; informal user tags and the components of scientific knowledge ( including theories , analysis methods and scientific models ) . 2 . Related Work Initial approaches to digital access and discovery of scientific resources were based on print technology , and extended the old models of library organisation , augmenting the original paper - based searches by author and topic with keyword searches . Search engines like Google Scholar and online collaboratories [ 1 ] adopt this keyword search approach . These methods are often inadequate in searching for relevant scientific resources , because the keywords and title for a publication may not include information about the scientific theories or models used , or about many of the concepts involved . Furthermore , such unstructured methods do not allow new forms of information to be derived from the scientific resources , including for example , visualisation of the use of a scientific theory , geographic dispersion of particular types of research and examination of temporal relationships between research and the links between one theory and another . Efforts towards the creation of more effective methods for access and discovery of scientific resources have included the creation of models of scientific knowledge [ 2 ] and discovery [ 3 ] . Hars’ model has been implemented as a database and web server ( cybrarium 1 ) as a first step towards a knowledge infrastructure [ 4 ] . Science Commons 2 is another effort towards the creation of a knowledge infrastructure , and attempts to develop tools to facilitate the use of research data and materials . Its focus is on issues of security , copyright and licensing , but it also includes efforts to improve data communication to support researchers . 1 http : / / cybrarium . usc . edu 2 http : / / sciencecommons . org / The Geosciences Network ( GEON ) 3 is another example of an implementation of a knowledge infrastructure . GEON is a project to develop a cyberinfrastructure in support of an environment for integrative geoscience research . The GEON provides an infrastructure for organising four types of scientific resources , including data , tools , web services and knowledge . Scientists from a wide range of earth science sub - disciplines can publish and share their resources using GEON , in which resources can be queried and integrated to support collaborative research related to the earth system . Recent work has also developed methods for using inference to examine the links between different uses of concepts by different scientists to support discovery [ 18 ] . A number of social networking tools to support researchers are also available , and some of these include literature searching capabilities . For example , ResearchGate ( www . researchgate . net ) is a social networking site for researchers that includes semantic search capabilities . It is focussed on making and managing contacts , but also allows members to list their publications and provides access to publications from the major literature databases using semantic correlations and provides recommendations for similar publications . It also does text matching based on abstracts that have similar themes using semantic methods , and is thus more advanced than keyword searches . While these infrastructures have varying technological implementations , none has provided advanced discovery , inference and visualisation functions , and none has used ontologies to achieve this , as is done in the knowledge infrastructure described in this research . 3 . Knowledge Infrastructure Architecture The knowledge infrastructure uses an architecture that is based on open standards , particularly focusing on those from the geospatial standards community , ensuring that geospatial resources can be supported by the knowledge infrastructure . 3 . 1 . The software architecture Geospatial registry standards describe an interface through which systems can interact with all of the metadata and related information that is needed to manage a knowledge infrastructure . Such information includes descriptions of the resources and where they 3 http : / / www . geongrid . org / can be found on the internet . The use of a standard for the definition of such an interface ensures interoperability between infrastructures , as a common format for communication can be used . Existing registry standards have limited ability to represent the semantics ( or meaning ) of the resources in the infrastructure . Such semantics may be represented in a number of ways , the most common current approach being the use of description logics like Web Ontology Language ( OWL ) . This language is used to develop ontologies that describe the semantics of a domain , and web service ontologies ( for example , OWL - S ontologies ) are used to describe the semantics of web services in terms of the kinds of processing they do and the information they provide . Thus in the marine domain , ontologies may be developed to describe marine concepts ( for example , waves ) , and web service ontologies may be developed to describe marines services ( for example , a web service that provides wave modeling ) . The benefits of adding semantic content to registries has been recognized and a number of efforts have been made to work towards semantic registries , including the mapping of OWL constructs to ebRIM registries [ 5 ] ; the addition of DAML - S ( another ontology language ) web service ontologies to UDDI registries [ 6 ] ; the transformation and storage of OWL ontologies in ebRIM registries [ 10 ] and the representation of semantics within registries using Feature Type Catalogues [ 11 ] . Other work has used ontologies to assist with discovery of resources , but not in the registry itself [ 7 , 8 , 9 , 17 ] . However , none of these efforts have stored ontologies in the registry in their native form in a way that allows existing ontology management and inference tools to be used without extraction and transformation or duplication of content . The architecture of the knowledge infrastructure uses a new approach : the ontology - registry . In order to create this , an OWL application profile for CSW ( the Open Geospatial Consortium registry standard that was used for this work [ 12 ] ) was developed to show how OWL ontologies could be stored in a standards - compliant registry and to define the way in which the interface could be adapted to meet the requirements of ontologies [ 13 ] . This new application profile may thus be used to allow registries to store semantic content without the need for duplication or transformation , and also to ensure interoperability between different infrastructures . Figure 1 . COMPASS Software Architecture Figure 1 shows the architecture of the knowledge infrastructure , including the ontology - registry . This architecture illustrates the ontology registry , the CSW interface being the registry standard interface , which accesses the ontologies through some knowledge management middleware ( in the COMPASS prototype , Jena was used ) . The architecture also illustrates interoperability with digital library repositories . Such repositories have large volumes of data about scientific resources , but typically do not include semantic information . Thus the digital library repositories could be accessed through the CSW interface , but the search capabilities were limited . The top row of the architecture diagram shows the user interface . The discovery interface ( see Section 4 ) allows users to search for scientific resources , taking a user selection and formulating the CSW request ( using the standards - based OWL application profile for CSW ) . Other systems could potentially also access the CSW interface in this way , allowing system - to - system interaction . The architecture also includes a user interface for user tagging , which allows users to add their own informal tags to resources ( in addition to the formal semantics that are expressed through the ontologies ) . New ontologies may also be created and edited using ontology management software . 3 . 2 . The information architecture The ontology - registry stores all content in the form of ontologies . This decision was made to avoid the need for two separate storage structures , and considering the need for semantic information about a significant proportion of the content of the ontology - registry . A number of different ontologies are used , as depicted in Figure 2 . Figure 2 . COMPASS Information Architecture The most important of these ontologies are : • domain ontologies describe the semantics of the concepts in the domains that the scientific resources address ( for example , concepts in the marine domain ) ; • the scientific knowledge ontology describes the semantics of scientific knowledge , and the theories , methods and models used in science ; • the information source ontology describes the semantics of the scientific resources ( for example , metadata ) ; • the tag ontology contains informal user tags that are applied to the resources ; • application ontologies describe each scientific resource ( except web services ) using concepts from the domain , scientific knowledge , information source and location ontologies and • web service ontologies describe each web service ( a type of scientific resource ) using concepts from the domain and scientific knowledge ontologies , as well as its own concepts . 4 . User Interface The second major contribution of this research is a set of new approaches to the discovery of scientific resources , as shown in the Figure 3 . The COMPASS discovery interface ( Figure 3 ) includes a series of boxes that allow a query to be built using a number of different approaches to scientific discovery . The currently selected query is previewed in the top right box . Figure 3 . COMPASS Discovery Interface 4 . 1 . Discovery by domain ontology The top left box allows users to specify a search on the basis of domain concepts . This box displays the domain ontology or ontologies visually , showing concepts from the marine domain ( in the case of the prototype ) , but extendable to any domain . The ontology may be viewed in its entirety , or sub - areas can be examined in detail . All of the properties linking concepts in the ontology are displayed as lines ( colour coded by property type ) . Users can select concepts and also perform semantic relaxation , meaning that they can specify that additional concepts be included that are generalizations , specializations or linked in other ways to the initially selected concept . For the purposes of the prototype , a domain ontology of marine instruments was developed , and users could select particular types of instruments or general terms of interest in the marine domain . If the user selects particular domain ontology concepts , only those resources that include those concepts in their application ontology ( in the case of publications or data sets ) or their web service ontology ( in the case of web services ) are returned . 4 . 2 . Discovery by user tags The middle left box allows users to select informal tags that have previously been applied by users in another part of the interface ( see Section 4 . 6 ) . This is done simply by clicking on the tag . If the user selects particular user tags , only those resources that have those tags applied to them are returned . 4 . 3 . Discovery by scientific knowledge ontology The bottom left box allows users to select particular scientific elements . The scientific knowledge ontology itself [ 14 ] provides a framework of scientific knowledge and includes elements like scientific theories , models , analysis and sampling methods , inductions , deductions and facts . The application ontology for each resource creates or references instances of those elements that describe the scientific content of the resource . For example , a publication that uses principal components analysis might create or reference an instance of the Analysis element in its application ontology . Similarly a web service that provides numerical tidal modeling might create or reference an instance of the ScienceModel element in its web service ontology . Users may thus select the scientific instances that are of interest to them in identifying scientific resources , and only those resources are returned . It is also possible to perform semantic relaxation on the scientific knowledge ontology if the user is also interested in related scientific elements . 4 . 4 . Discovery by time and space Users may also specify a limitation in the time or location of the scientific resource . The time refers to the date of publication or data collection or processing ( in the case of a web service or data set ) . All resources have a bounding box attached to them indicating the location of the research . In the case of data sets , this is usually where the data was collected , while in the case of publications and models published as web services , it may relate to the area over which the research applies . The prototype included resources from the Severn and Forth Estuaries in the UK , but some scientific publications proposed theories that applied across wider geographical regions . 4 . 5 . Combined Discovery The combination of these different approaches to querying allows users to build up various selections to identify different groups of scientific resources . For example in the marine domain : • if a user is interested in the way a particular analysis method has been used in different disciplines , she can select the appropriate concepts in the scientific knowledge ontology , but not restrict the domain ; • if a user is interested in applications of a particular scientific model only in Europe , he can select the appropriate concept from the scientific knowledge ontology and the restrict the map location ; • if a user is interested in research using a particular group of marine instruments , she can select the appropriate concept and then use semantic relaxation to include all specializations of that group of instruments ; • if a user is looking for a web service that runs a particular scientific model based on a particular theory of the ways in which waves affect coastlines , she can select the appropriate scientific model concept in the scientific knowledge ontology and the appropriate concepts for waves ( etc ) in the domain ontology . 4 . 6 . Results After the user has selected all of the items of interest using the multiple boxes in the discovery interface , she is presented with the resources that fulfill the selections , as shown in Figure 4 . Users are also provided with recommendations based on geography ( similar location ) , theme ( connected to semantically similar domain ontology concepts ) or scientific knowledge ( connected to semantically similar scientific knowledge elements ) . Users may also apply their own tags to the resources , and these then appear in the discovery page . Figure 4 . COMPASS Results Page The user may view metadata about the resource ( in the right box ) , and may also access the actual resource itself . In the case of publications , the link to the resource accesses a copy of the resource on the internet ( or the web site of the owner of the publication if it is not publicly accessible ) . In the case of data sets , the user may download the data set . In the case of web services , the user may execute the web service . The prototype supports web services that use the standards of the Open Geospatial Consortium , namely Web Feature Service [ 15 ] and Web Map Service [ 16 ] . These web services are described using web service ontologies that contain the URL and parameters required to execute the service , and also any additional information that is required from the user to execute the web service . This information is stored in the web service ontology and the dialog box that prompts the user for input is generated on - demand on the basis of the content of the web service ontology . The user may then select the parameters ( for example , the map layers that are of interest ) and execute the web service . 5 . Evaluation A prototype of the COMPASS knowledge infrastructure was created using a small sub - domain from marine science . This Section describes the main outcomes of the evaluation of the approach described in this paper . 5 . 1 . The user experience An evaluation of the user interface was conducted with 12 marine scientists . The scientists were allowed to use all of the functionality of the interface , and were particularly asked to consider the different approaches to resource discovery : by domain ontology , by user tags and by scientific knowledge ontology . Discovery by user tagging received the most positive response , as users found it simple , easy to use and easy to understand . Discovery by domain ontology was recognized as powerful and innovative , but there was some criticism of the clutter and complication involved . Discovery by scientific knowledge ontology was not well understood . Although users still liked the idea in principle , they found it difficult to understand and use . This may be partly because it represents a completely different approach to resource discovery than anything considered before ( in contrast to the domain ontology , which although innovative is an extension of the notion of keyword searching with the imposition of some structure ) . The appropriateness of this way of scientific resource discovery may also be related to the types of science that individuals are involved with , and whether they are accustomed to thinking in terms of scientific knowledge as structured in the scientific knowledge ontology . While some scientists regularly work with and discuss theories , models , hypotheses and other aspects of the scientific process , other scientists adopt a more pragmatic approach and thus these concepts may be less meaningful to them . When asked to identify aspects of the interface that they particularly liked , users identified the visual nature of the interface ; the ability to view and explore concepts and their interrelationships ; the ability to select by geographical region ; the discovery by user tags and the ability to build up a query in steps . The majority of the aspects that users didn’t like or suggestions for improvement were based on the limitations of the prototype implementation rather than the concept , which was supported enthusiastically . The prototype had performance and reliability issues that affected the user experience , and users said that a Help function was needed . Both of these issues can be solved in future development of the knowledge infrastructure . It is also expected that additional explanations about the scientific knowledge ontology would assist users in realizing the potential of the function . 5 . 2 . Data population As described in Section 3 . 2 , the knowledge infrastructure is supported by a number of ontologies and some work is required to build these ontologies . This is one of the shortcomings of the approach , in that ontology creation can be time consuming . The ontology building activities that required the most effort related to the domain ontology , the application ontologies and the web service ontologies . The other ontologies were only required to be created once and could then be used for the entire knowledge infrastructure , so are less of an issue . The domain ontology was created as part of the project using workshops with domain experts , followed by significant effort by ontology engineers . Only a small part of the marine domain was modeled in the ontologies : that describing a particular set of marine instruments . One problem is that in order for the knowledge infrastructure to be fully supported , domain ontologies with a large scope are required to allow users to select both detailed concepts from a particular specialized domain and also more general concepts across multiple domains . For example , in the prototype , publications were selected about particular marine instruments that appeared in the marine instruments ontology that was developed for the project , but usually these publications also related to general concepts from the marine or wider domains , like environmental impact assessment , or biodiversity . Thus a full operational knowledge infrastructure requires a comprehensive ontology across a wide range of domains . On the other hand , some efforts to create such ontologies for the geosciences have been undertaken ( for example , SWEET 4 ) , and the architecture supports the inclusion of multiple domain ontologies , so as new ontologies are created by other projects and groups , these can easily be added to the COMPASS knowledge infrastructure . The knowledge infrastructure depends on the existence of an application ontology for each publication and data set and a web service ontology for each web service . The creation of these ontologies requires some manual effort . The application ontologies and web service ontologies include standard metadata about the resource , and this component could potentially be automatically populated from existing metadata ( for example digital library ) sources . However , the application ontologies and web service ontologies also include concepts from the domain ontology ( to indicate the subject area of the resource ) and the scientific knowledge ontology , to describe the scientific aspects of the resource . This part cannot easily be automated , and requires manual effort . The scientific knowledge aspect is particularly time consuming because it requires the resource and the process by which it was created to be well understood . The most practical solution to this problem would be to have the creators of scientific resources create application ontologies for them when they are first published , if incentives could be created to do this . 5 . 3 . Architecture The architecture of the knowledge infrastructure worked well and achieved the broad goals of a standards - based , semantically - enriched yet interoperable registry that was able to interoperate with other repositories ( for example , digital libraries ) . There were some challenges involved in fitting the ontology model into the Open Geospatial Consortium catalogue standard ( CSW ) [ 12 ] , mainly because that standard is based around a notion of database records that have particular attributes that can be retrieved as a self - contained record . However , ontologies do not have a clearly fragmented structure like this , and it is sometimes difficult to retrieve subsets of data . This sometimes resulted in the retrieval of more content than was strictly required , with performance implications . Another finding of the work was that the use of OWL - S for web service ontologies was cumbersome . Definition of a web service using OWL - S was time - consuming and involved significant duplication ( for 4 http : / / sweet . jpl . nasa . gov / ontology / example of inputs and outputs ) . Although this duplication resulted from OWL - S design decisions that were justifiable , the practical application of OWL - S for this project required a number of modifications to make it feasible to use . The web services used in the project all conformed to Open Geospatial Consortium ( GOC ) web service specifications , and these were defined in OWL - S for the project , and then instances of specific web services were created using the generic OGC web service specification ontologies . Modifications that were made to model the web services in OWL - S for the project included defining inputs and outputs in only one place and referencing them ; defining a model for grounding that was suitable for representation in OWL ( rather than WSDL ) and that conformed to OGC standards and creating an extenstion to OWL - to allow users to select parameters for on - demand execution of web services . This extension defined the details of the parameters for which users should be prompted and what to do with the result . The software that accessed and used the OWL - S web service ontologies had to be aware of these changes in order to use the content correctly . 6 . Conclusions The COMPASS knowledge infrastructure presents a new approach to the discovery of scientific resources on the basis of domain knowledge with its own internal structure and inter - relationships , and scientific knowledge , including theories , models and scientific methods . Furthermore , the knowledge infrastructure adopts a standards - based architecture that is interoperable and illustrates how a registry conforming to geospatial information standards can also be semantically enriched in a way that allows ontologies to be stored efficiently and without duplication , but still supports the registry standards that permit interoperability . The approach was supported by users enthusiastically , although they found the prototype implementation required some improvements and problems of understanding and clutter presented some barriers to usability . The knowledge infrastructure architecture was valid , but a significant overhead in creating ontologies to support the infrastructure necessitates : • the future development of tools to support automatic population of metadata elements of application and web service ontologies ; • the adoption of existing and still to be developed domain ontologies from other projects and • the involvement of scientists in the process of describing the semantics of their own resources , particularly with reference to the science aspects , and the need for tools to support this and make it easy and convenient for scientists . The work presented in this paper illustrates how knowledge infrastructures can be used to enhance the process of scientific investigation and the development of new ideas . Furthermore , future work may make use of the scientific knowledge aspects of the knowledge infrastructure by developing tools and approaches for visualization and inference of patterns of scientific knowledge across resources , leading to new potential in the discovery of patterns in the development of science , identification of work being done in different domains using similar approaches and cross - fertilization between disciplines . These extended uses of the knowledge infrastructure further illustrate its exciting potential and long term benefits for the advancement of science . References [ 1 ] Guedon , J - C . , 1996 . The seminar , the encyclopedia , and the eco - museum as possible future forms of electronic publishing . In : R . Peek and G . Newby , eds . Scholarly publishing : the electronic frontier . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press [ 2 ] Hars , A . , 2001 . Designing scientific knowledge infrastructures : the contribution of epistemology . Information Systems Frontiers , 3 , 63 - 73 . [ 3 ] Shrager , J . , and Langley , P . , 1990 . Computational approaches to scientific discovery . In : J . Shrager and P . Langley , eds . Computational models of scientific discovery and theory formation . San Mateo , California : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers . [ 4 ] Hars , A . , 1998 . USC Cybrarium : An infrastructure for the creation and management of information systems knowledge . In : W . R . J . Baets , ed . Proceedings 6th European conference on information systems , 4 - 6 June 1998 Aix - en - provence , 75 - 85 . [ 5 ] Dogac , A . , Kabak , Y . , Laleci , G . B . , Mattocks , C . , Najmi , F . and Pollock , J . , 2005 , Enhancing ebXML Registries to make them OWL Aware . Distributed and Parallel Databases , 18 , 9 - 36 . [ 6 ] Dogac , A . , Cingil , I . , Lalaeci , G . B . and Kabak , Y . , 2002 , Improving the Functionality of UDDI Registries through Web Service Semantics . In 3 rd VLDB Workshop on Technologies for Web Services ( TES - 02 ) , 23 - 24 August 2002 , Hong Kong , China . [ 7 ] Bernard , L . Einspanier , U . , Haubrock , S . , Hubner , S . , Klien , E . , Kuhn , W . , Lessing , R . , Lutz , M . and Visser , U . , 2004 , Ontology - based Discovery and Retrieval of Geographic Information in Spatial Data Infrastructures . In Geotechnologien Science Report No 4 . [ 8 ] Vogele , T . and Spittel , R . , 2004 . Enhancing Spatial Data Infrastructures with Semantic Web Technologies In : F . Toppen and M . Painho , eds . Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Geographic Information Science ( AGILE 2004 ) , 29 April – 1 May , Heraklion , Greece . [ 9 ] Klien , E . , Lutz , M . , and Kuhn , W . , 2006 . Ontology - Based Discovery of Geographic Information Services - An Application in Disaster Management . Computers , Environment and Urban Systems 30 , 102 - 123 . [ 10 ] Yue , P . , Di , L . , Yang , W . , Yu , G . and Zhao , P . , 2007 . Semantics - based automatic composition of geospatial Web service chains . Computers and Geosciences , 33 , 649 - 665 . [ 11 ] Stock , K . , Atkinson , R . , Higgins , C . , Small , M . , Woolf , A . , Millard , K . and Arctur , D . , ( forthcoming ) . A semantic registry using a Feature Type Catalogue instead of ontologies to support spatial data infrastructures . International Journal of Geographical Information Science , in press . [ 12 ] Nebert , D . , Whiteside , A . and Vretanos , P . , 2007 . OGC Catalogue Service Specificatio n . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 07 - 006r1 . [ 13 ] Stock , K . , 2009 , OGC Catalogue Services – OWL Application Profile of CSW . Reference number OGC 09 - 010 . [ 14 ] Brodaric , B . , Reitsma , F . and Qiang , Y . , 2008 . SKIing with DOLCE : toward an e - Science Knowledge Infrastructure . In : C . Eschenbach and M . Gruninger , eds . Formal Ontology in Information Systems , Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference ( FOIS08 ) , IOS Press , 208 - 219 . [ 15 ] Vretanos , P . , 2005 . Web Feature Service Implementation Specification . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 04 - 094 . [ 16 ] de la Beaujardiere , J . , 2006 . Web Map Service Implementation Specification . Open Geospatial Consortium Specification 06 - 042 . [ 17 ] Durbha , S . S . and King , R . L . , 2005 . Semantics - enabled framework for knowledge discovery from earth observation data archives . IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 43 ( 11 ) , 2563 – 2572 . [ 18 ] Gahegan , M . , Luo , J . , Weaver , S . D . , Pike , W . and Banchuen , T . ( forthcoming ) . Connecting GEON : making sense of the myriad resources , researchers and concepts that comprise a geoscience cyberinfrastructure . Computers and Geosciences , in press .