Cell , Vol . 111 , 647 – 659 , November 27 , 2002 , Copyright  2002 by Cell Press Guidance of Primordial Germ Cell Migration by the Chemokine SDF - 1 opus , Drosophila , and zebrafish ( reviewed in Starz - Gai - ano and Lehmann , 2001 ; Wylie , 1999 ) . These studies showed that while migrating , PGCs interact with differ - Maria Doitsidou , 1 Michal Reichman - Fried , 1 Ju¨rg Stebler , 1 Marion Ko¨prunner , 1 Julia Do¨rries , 1 Dirk Meyer , 2 Camila V . Esguerra , 3 TinChung Leung , 3 and Erez Raz 1 , 4 ent somatic structures in the developing embryo . These structures can carry the PGCs along , as part of general 1 Germ Cell Development Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry morphogenetic movements , repel them from certain re - gions of the embryo , and attract them toward intermedi - Am Fassberg 11 37077 Go¨ttingen ate and final targets ( Deshpande et al . , 2001 ; Godin et al . , 1990 ; Jaglarz and Howard , 1995 ; Kuwana and Germany 2 Department for Developmental Biology Rogulska , 1999 ; Starz - Gaiano et al . , 2001 ; van Doren et al . , 1998 ; Weidinger et al . , 1999 , 2002 ; Zhang et al . , Institute for Biology I University of Freiburg 1997 ) . Yet , despite the fact that this migration process has been studied for several decades in different model Hauptstrasse 1 D - 79104 Freiburg organisms , the molecular nature of the actual signals that direct PGCs toward their intermediate and final tar - Germany 3 Mermaid Pharmaceuticals GmbH gets has remained unknown . We have chosen to study PGC migration in zebrafish , Falkenried 88 20251 Hamburg benefiting from the fast , extrauterine embryonic devel - opment , the optical clarity , and the availability of mutant Germany strains and genomic tools . Previously , we have de - scribed the migration path of zebrafish PGCs and ana - lyzed the requirement for specific somatic structures in Summary allowing proper migration to take place ( Weidinger et al . , 1999 , 2002 ) . As in other organisms , PGC migration The signals directing primordial germ cell ( PGC ) mi - gration in vertebrates are largely unknown . We dem - inzebrafishcanbedividedintoseveralstepsthatappeartorelyontheintegrityofspecificsomaticstructures . onstrate that sdf - 1 mRNA is expressed in locations where PGCs are found and toward which they migrate Nevertheless , even though PGC migration in zebrafish has been described in great detail and the available data in wild - type as well as in mutant embryos in which PGC migration is abnormal . Knocking down SDF - 1 or support the notion that secreted factors are involved in the process , the identity of such molecules was not its receptor CXCR4 results in severe defects in PGC migration . Specifically , PGCs that do not receive the known ( Braat et al . , 1999 ; Weidinger et al . , 1999 , 2002 ; Yoon et al . , 1997 ) . SDF - 1 signal exhibit lack of directional movement to - ward their target and arrive at ectopic positions within In this work , we have identified the chemokine stro - mal - cell - derived - factor ( SDF ) - 1aasapivotalcomponent the embryo . Finally , we show that the PGCs can be attracted toward an ectopic source of the chemokine , guiding PGC migration . We show that sdf - 1a is ex - pressed in domains toward which the PGCs migrate strongly suggesting that this molecule provides a key directional cue for the PGCs . and that alterations in its expression pattern lead to corresponding alterations in the migration route of the cells . Importantly , inhibition of the translation of SDF - 1a , Introduction or its seven transmembrane G protein - coupled receptor CXCR4b , lead to misguided PGC migration . Taken to - Directional cell migration during early development and adult life is crucial for the establishment of the embry - gether , these findings indicate that SDF - 1a and its re - ceptor CXCR4b are key molecules directing the PGCs onic body plan , organogenesis , and organ function . Identification of the molecular cues governing cell mi - toward their intermediate and final targets . gration in vivo is of major importance for understanding development and for therapy in cases of diseases re - Results sulting from aberrant cell movement . A useful model system for studying the process of directional migration SDF - 1a Is Expressed in Regions toward Which is that of primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) . In most organ - the PGCs Migrate , and Its Receptor Is isms , the formation of a functional gonad depends on Expressed in the Migrating PGCs the migration of PGCs from their site of specification to In the course of a large - scale antisense oligonucleotide - the position where the somatic part of the gonad devel - mediated knockdown screen for genes important for ops ( Starz - Gaiano and Lehmann , 2001 ; Wylie , 1999 , PGC migration , we discovered that the seven - trans - 2000 ) . Therefore , the PGCs have to travel long distances membrane G protein - coupled receptor CXCR4b ( Chong within the embryo , which itself undergoes complex pro - et al . , 2001 ) plays a critical role in the directional migra - cesses of morphogenesis and differentiation . tion of PGCs ( see below ) . With significant relevance to PGCmigrationhasbeenstudiedinchick , mouse , Xen - our work , it has been previously shown that CXCR4 and its ligand , the chemokine SDF - 1 , are essential for stem cell homing and mobilization ( Peled et al . , 1999b ; Petit et 4 Correspondence : eraz @ gwdg . de Cell648 Figure 1 . Expression Patterns of cxcr 4b and sdf - 1a ( A , C , E , and G ) The distribution of the CXCR4b transcripts in wild - type embryos from gastrulation to mid - somitogenesis stages . ( A and C ) During early gastrulation themRNA ofthereceptoris uniformlydistrib - uted . ( E and G ) Tissue - specific pattern is evi - dent during somitogenesis stages when the PGCs coexpress cxcr 4b and a PGC - specific RNA , nanos - 1 . ( I ) The expression of the receptor persists in the PGCs after they arrive at the region of the gonad ( arrowhead ) . ( B , D , F , andH ) Theexpressionpatternof sdf - 1amRNArelativetothe positionofthePGCs . ( B and D ) Expression of sdf - 1 mRNA during early gastrulation . ( F ) sdf - 1a expression dur - ing early somitogenesis . Depending on their positionatthisstage , thePGCsmigratelater - ally or anteriorly ( arrows ) . ( H ) During somito - genesis , sdf - 1aisexpressedalongtheborder of the trunk mesoderm , in the somites , and in specific domains in the head . ( J ) By theend of the firstday of development , sdf - 1a is expressed in the somites , in the brain , and along the pronephric duct . In the region where the gonad develops , a larger number of cells express sdf - 1a ( arrowhead ) . ( K – M ) Alterations in sdf - 1a expression during somitogenesis . ( N ) sdf - 1a is expressed in the lateral plate mesoderm of the trunk lateral to the domain expressing pax 8 . ( O and P ) Two examples showing that the position of the PGC clusters overlaps with the anterior border of high sdf - 1a expression along the trunk mesoderm . al . , 2002 ) , leuckocyte traffic ( Aiuti et al . , 1997 ; Baggiolini , tering position and continue expressing it after arriving at the site where the gonad will develop . 1998 ; Bleul et al . , 1996a ; Zou et al . , 1998 ) , neuronal cell migration ( Zou et al . , 1998 ) , nerve growth cone guidance We next sought to determine whether the CXCR4b ligand expression pattern is consistent with its putative ( Xiang et al . , 2002 ) , and determination of metastatic des - tination of tumor cells ( Muller et al . , 2001 ; Murphy , 2001 ) . role in PGC migration . CXCR4 has been shown to bind a single molecule , SDF - 1 , a CXC subfamily chemokine To establish direct relationships between this receptor and PGC migration , we first analyzed the RNA expres - ( Baggiolini et al . , 1997 ; Bleul et al . , 1996a , 1996b ) , and this ligand appears to interact exclusively with the sion patterns of this molecule and its ligand in relation to the position of the PGCs at different steps of their CXCR4 receptor . We therefore cloned the zebrafish sdf - 1a gene , which encodes a protein that exhibits a high migration . During early gastrulation stages , at the onset of PGC levelofconservationwiththemouseSDF - 1protein ( 43 % identity at the amino acid level ; see Supplemental Fig - migration , the cxcr 4b RNA is uniformlydistributed within the embryo and is thus expressed also in the migrating ure S1 at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 111 / 5 / 647 / DC1 ) . PGCs ( Figures 1A and 1C ) . By the end of gastrulation , the RNA is expressed in the PGCs that align along the Analysisofthe sdf - 1aspatio - temporalexpressionpat - tern revealed a remarkable correlation with the PGC lateral plate mesoderm of the trunk and the border be - tween the head and the trunk mesoderm ( insert in Figure localization at different developmental stages . Specifi - cally , at the onset of gastrulation , sdf - 1a is expressed 1E ) . During somitogenesis stages , the PGC - specific ex - pression of the receptor is evident in the clustered PGCs around the blastoderm margin with the exception of the dorsal - most aspect of the embryo , coinciding with the ( arrowheads and insert in Figure 1G ) as well as in cells migrating toward the clusters ( small insert in Figure 1G ) . position where the PGCs are found at this stage ( Figures 1B and 1D ; Weidinger et al . , 1999 ; Yoon et al . , 1997 ) . At 24 hr postfertilization ( hpf ) , the PGCs , found at the anterior part of the yolk extension , strongly express During gastrulation and early somitogenesis , the PGCs align along the lateral plate mesoderm of the trunk and cxcr 4b ( arrowhead in Figure 1I ) . Thus , PGCs express cxcr 4b at the time when they migrate toward their clus - at the border between the head and trunk mesoderm SDF - 1 and Primordial Germ Cell Migration 649 ( Weidinger et al . , 1999 ) , and at this stage too , the PGCs proper PGC migration ( Weidinger et al . , 1999 , 2002 ) . Therefore , we set out to reexamine some of those mu - are found mainly within domains of sdf - 1a expression tants in an attempt to correlate the PGC migration de - ( Figure 1F ) . At later stages , when the PGCs cluster at fects with possible altered expression pattern of the sdf - the bilateral positions , strong expression of the ligand 1a gene in these embryos . is observed in the lateral plate mesoderm where the The spadetail ( spt ) gene , encoding a T box protein , PGCs are located ( Figures 1H and 1N ) . During the last is important for normal development of trunk paraxial step of migration , the PGCs migrate posteriorly to the mesoderm ( Griffin et al . , 1998 ) . In spt mutant embryos , position where the gonad develops . Consistently , a high the PGCs do not align along the border between the level of sdf - 1a RNA is detected at this position as well head and the trunk mesoderm ( step IIIa in Weidinger et ( Figure 1J ) . In conclusion , we find a strong correlation al . , 1999 ) , and as a result , some PGCs arrive at anterior between the position of the PGCs at different stages of positions where they eventually cluster ( Figure 2D ; Wei - their migration and the tissues expressing high levels dinger et al . , 1999 ) . Indeed , the abnormal PGC migration of sdf - 1a transcripts . pattern observed in spt mutant embryos coincides with If sdf - 1a indeed acts as an attractant for the PGCs , the altered expression pattern of sdf - 1a . Specifically , at then one would expect that the dynamics of its expres - the stage when the PGCs normally align between the sion pattern would mirror the migration pattern of these head and the trunk mesoderm , sdf - 1a is not expressed cells . To test this notion , we looked more closely at along this border as it is in wild - type embryos , thus the expression pattern of the ligand at several stages allowing some cells to reach anterior locations in the relative to concurring steps of PGC migration . embryo ( arrowheads in Figure 2B ) . Consistent with the During early somitogenesis stages , the PGCs which proposed role for SDF - 1a as an attractant for the PGCs , align along the tissues that express sdf - 1a in the trunk while clustering occurs at the normal positions , the ec - ( steps IIIa and IIIb in Weidinger et al . , 1999 ; Figure 1F ) topic cells that arrive at the very anterior positions are migrate toward the clustering positions ( steps IV and V concentrated in a region where high levels of sdf - 1a in Weidinger et al . , 1999 ; Figure 1F , arrows ) . Consistent mRNA can be detected ( arrowhead in Figure 2D ) . with a role for SDF - 1a in directing this migration , we As we previously described , in spadetail and notail find that its RNA is strongly expressed in a large number ( ntl ) ( spt ; ntl ) double mutant embryos , differentiation of of cells at the clustering position ( Figure 1K ) . In addition , the somatic tissue at the clustering position is defective in parallel to PGC migration toward the lateral clustering as determined by marker gene expression , and conse - sites ( Figure 1F , horizontal arrows pointing left and right ) quently , no PGCclustering occurs at thenormal position a reduction in the expression of the ligand at the first ( Weidinger et al . , 2002 ) . In agreement with the proposed somite is observed while the expression in lateral posi - role for SDF - 1a in attracting PGCs toward the clustering tions at the same anteroposterior level is enhanced point , very low levels of sdf - 1a RNA are detected at this ( compare Figures 1F and 1K ) . This presumably leads position in spt ; ntl mutant embryos ( compare Figure 2E to cell migration toward the adjacent lateral positions and Figure 2C ) . expressing high levels of sdf - 1a . Loss of function of the zebrafish chordin homolog We then investigated another step of PGC migration chordino , a BMP antagonist , leads to an expansion of where the PGCs migrate posteriorly away from the posi - ventral - posterior tissues ( Hammerschmidt et al . , 1996 ; tion where they initially cluster ; that is , from the level of Schulte - Merker et al . , 1997 ) . In chordino ( din ) mutant the first three somites toward the anteroposterior level embryos , starting at early somitogenesis stages , more of the eighth to tenth somites ( step VI in Weidinger et PGCs are found in the posterior positions ( Weidinger et al . , 1999 , 2002 ) . At this stage too , the expression of the al . , 1999 ) . Unlike the situation in wild - type embryos , ligand is in perfect agreement with its proposed role these cells never leave this region and are found in the in directing the PGCs’ route of migration . Here , sdf - 1a tail of 24 - hour - old mutant embryos . The distribution of expression in the lateral plate mesoderm progressively sdf - 1a provides the basis for the din PGC phenotype . recedes from the position of the first somites toward Here , instead of the posterior gap in sdf - 1a expression more posterior somites in dynamics identical to that observed in wild - type embryos ( Figures 2A and 2C ) , sdf - observed for the posteriorly migrating PGCs ( Figures 1a is strongly expressed in the posterior - most part of 1K – 1M ; Weidinger et al . , 1999 ) . This striking correlation the mutant embryos ( Figure 2F ) . This result is therefore between the expression pattern of the ligand and the consistent with the idea that in wild - type embryos PGCs position of the PGCs can be visualized in double stain - migrate toward more anterior positions where the ligand ings where the anterior border of sdf - 1a coincides with is expressed and eventually arrive at the clustering posi - the position of the migrating cell cluster ( Figure 1O ) . This tion . The strong expression of the ligand in posterior pointisclearlydemonstratedinFigure1Pwhereresidual tissues of din mutant embryos therefore prevents the sdf - 1a expression can still be detected anterior to the anterior migration of PGCs and consequently they re - PGC cluster that has migrated toward the region ex - main in the tail ( Figures 2F and 2G ) . While we do not pressing a higher level of the ligand . know the basis for the ectopic posterior sdf - 1a expres - sion , a contributing factor to this phenomena could be Alterations in the Expression Pattern of sdf - 1a the abnormal cell movements in this mutant ( Myers et in Mutant Embryos Are Paralleled al . , 2002 ) . Specifically , the increase in nonconverging by Abnormal PGC Migration ventral cells in this mutant could interfere with the elimi - Based on the analysis of PGC migration in mutant em - nation of the ventral sdf - 1a expression . bryos that exhibit specific differentiation defects , we The last step in PGC migration that we have analyzed have previously demonstrated that normal development in mutant embryos is the migration of the cluster from the original clustering site at the level of the first somites of certain structures within the embryo is essential for Cell650 Figure 2 . A Correlation between Specific Alterations in the Expression Pattern of sdf - 1a in Mutant Embryos and the Direction of PGC Migration ( A ) In wild - type embryos at 1 somite stage , the PGCs are found along the borders of the trunk mesoderm where sdf - 1a is expressed . ( B ) In spadetail embryos , the expression of sdf - 1a along the border between the head and the trunk mesoderm is eliminated , thereby allowing some cells to reach the head ( arrowheads ) . ( C ) In wild - type embryos at 12 somite stage , most of the PGCs are found in two cell clusters around the level of the fourth somite . ( D ) At the same stage in spadetail embryos , PGCs that arrived at the head cluster ectopically in a region that exhibits a high level of sdf - 1a expression . ( E ) In spadetail / notail double mutants , sdf - 1a expression in the lateral plate mesoderm of the trunk is severely reduced , and consequently no clustering occurs at the normal position . ( F ) Posterior expression of sdf - 1a in chordino mutant embryos ( arrowheads point at posterior PGCs ) . ( G ) In 24 - hour - old chordino embryos , the ectopic cells are concentrated in regions expressing high levels of the ligand . ( H ) In hands off mutant embryos , the expression of sdf - 1a at the trunk lateral plate mesoderm is reduced ( arrow ) . ( I ) During subsequent somitogenesis stages in hands off mutants , sdf - 1a expression continues to decline and a dispersed anterior PGC cluster is observed . ( J ) sdf - 1a in a 24 - hour - old wild - type embryo relative to the PGCs . toward a more posterior position as well as anterior of the cluster to migrate posteriorly and of trailing poste - rior cells to migrate anteriorly . migration of trailing posterior cells toward the region where the gonad develops . We have previously found In conclusion , the expression analysis described aboveinwild - typeandmutantembryosshowsaremark - thatin handsoff mutantembryos , whichcarryamutation in the bHLH transcription factor hand 2 , the migration of able correlation between the positions at which sdf - 1a is expressed at higher levels and positions toward which the PGC cluster posteriorly is disrupted ( Weidinger et al . , 2002 ; Yelon et al . , 2000 ) . We therefore examined the the PGCs migrate during the first 24 hr of zebrafish embryonic development . To examine more directly expression of sdf - 1a in this mutant . From the 12 somite stage and onward , the expression domain of sdf - 1a be - whether CXCR4b and SDF - 1a are functionally essential for normal PGC migration , we studied the effect of comes increasingly restricted in hands off mutant em - bryos ( compare Figure 2H , arrow , with Figure 2C ) , but knocking down the activity of each one of them on the migration process . this has yet no effect on the cells that cluster normally and align along the line defined by the expression pat - tern of the gene . It is only at later stages that the level Knockdown of the Activity of CXCR4b and of the SDF - 1a Ligand Result in of sdf - 1a is reduced to a degree that leads to abnormal migration ( compare Figure 2I with Figure 2J ) . The severe Severe PGC Migration Defects To determine how a reduction in the amount of CXCR4b decline in the level of sdf - 1a mRNA in the region where the gonad should develop presumably results in inability and the chemokine SDF - 1a would affect PGC migration , SDF - 1 and Primordial Germ Cell Migration 651 weinjectedembryoswithmorpholinoantisenseoligonu - cleotides ( Nasevicius and Ekker , 2000 ) directed against either one of these genes and examined the resulting PGC distribution by in situ hybridization using different PGC markers . Injection of these morpholino oligonucle - otides ( two different oligonucleotides were used for each gene with similar results ) resulted in a dramatic migration phenotype where at mid somitogensis stages most of the PGCs were randomly scattered in the em - bryo ( Figures 3A – 3C ) . Analysis of the morpholino - injected embryos using different markers demonstrates that the abnormal phe - notype reflects primarily migration rather than a PGC or somatic differentiation defect . First , the ectopic PGCs show normal expression of a PGC RNA marker , the zebrafish h 1 m RNA ( Figures 3A – 3C ; Mu¨ller et al . , 2002 ) . The regulation of h 1 m RNA tissue - specific expression is unique considering that it is not incorporated into the zebrafish germ plasm and is not subjected to “degrada - tion - protection” regulation as seen in other PGC - spe - cific genes ( Ko¨prunner et al . , 2001 ; Mu¨ller et al . , 2002 ; Wolke et al . , 2002 ) . At the same time , the PGCs exhibit normal expression of RNA molecules like nanos - 1 ( Fig - ures 3J – 3L ) and vasa ( data not shown ) that characteristi - cally reside in the germ plasm . Further , when a fusion RNA between GFP and the 3 (cid:1) untranslated region ( 3 (cid:1) - UTR ) of the nanos - 1 gene was coinjected with the anti - sense oligonucleotides , the abnormally migrating cells were capable of specifically protecting this RNA from degradation , thereby obeying to the degradation - pro - tection rule of regulation as do the PGCs in control embryos ( Figures3D – 3F ) . Last , the knockeddown PGCs contained perinuclear granules , a characteristic feature of germ cells ( Eddy , 1974 ; Eddy and Ito , 1971 ; Hay et al . , 1988 ; Knaut et al . , 2000 ; Schisa et al . , 2001 ; Strome and Wood , 1982 ) . This point was demonstrated by ex - pressing a Vasa - GFP fusion protein in the PGCs and observing proper subcellular localization to the perinu - clear granules whether the cells arrived at the gonad region ( Figure 3G ; Wolke et al . , 2002 ) or were found at ectopic positions ( Figures 3H and 3I ) . While the reduction in the activity of SDF - 1a or CXCR4bresultsinseveremigrationdefects , itisformally possiblethatthiseffectisindirect , resultingfromdefects in the differentiation of somatic tissues that normally support PGC migration . Several lines of evidence argue against this possibility . First , despite the adverse effect on PGC migration , the morphology and development of the embryos ( e . g . , Figures 3A – 3I ) appeared similar to embryos injected with the control morpholino oligonu - cleotides . To substantiate this point more rigorously , we Figure 3 . Knockdown of CXCR4b and SDF - 1a by Morpholinos Dis - analyzed the injected embryos using different molecular rupts PGC Migration without Affecting Their Identity markers expressed in somatic tissues . Under the experi - ( A – C ) h 1 m RNA is normally expressed in the PGC clusters of 14 mentalconditionsthataffectedPGCmigration , wecould somitestagecontrolembryosaswellasinectopicPGCsinembryos not detect any obvious defects reflected by alteration injected with a morpholino directed against cxcr 4b or sdf - 1a . in gene expression . For example , the lateral border of ( D – F ) PGCs in embryos injected with the control morpholino and gfp - nanos - 1mRNAspecificallyprotecttheinjectedmRNA , similarto ectopic PGCs in embryos injected with morpholino directed against cxcr 4b or sdf - 1a . ( G – I ) A GFP - Vasa fusion protein is subcellularly localized to perinu - control morpholino or morpholinos against cxcr 4b or sdf - 1a as re - cleargranulesinthePGCsofcontrolembryossimilartothelocaliza - vealed by the expression of sdf - 1a mRNA . tion in ectopic cells in embryos injected with morpholino directed ( M ) ThePGCmigrationphenotypeinembryosinjectedwithmorpho - against cxcr 4b , or sdf - 1a . linos against the CXCR4b is reversed by specific expression of the ( J – L ) Normal somatic development in embryos injected with the receptor in the PGCs . Cell652 the mesoderm , the clustering point at the anterior trunk , The Chemokine SDF - 1 Directs PGC Migration the developing somites , and specific structures in the The migration phenotype described above is consistent head were expressing sdf - 1a in a pattern similar to that with the notion that SDF - 1a functions by introducing a in control embryos ( Figures 3J – 3L ) . Using other markers bias in the direction of cell migration , leading the PGCs for somatic structures such as Myo D ( somites and adax - toward the source of the ligand . A prediction of this ial cells ) , Pax 8 , and Pax 2 . 1 ( midhindbrain boundary and proposal is that expression of the ligand at high levels pronephros ) , we did not detect any obvious abnormali - within the PGCs themselves would interfere with their ties in the injected embryos ( data not shown ) . ability to detect the endogenous signal . Indeed , overex - To prove that the activity of CXCR4b is indeed re - pression of the ligand in the PGCs results in pronounced quired specifically in the PGCs , we coinjected embryos migration defects in otherwise wild - type embryos ( Fig - with a morpholino against the receptor and different ure 4D and see Supplemental Movie S4 at http : / / amounts of cxcr 4b - nanos - 1 RNA lackingthe morpholino www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 111 / 5 / 647 / DC1 ) . Specifi - binding site . This way we targeted specific expression cally , PGCs overexpressing the ligand exhibit limited of CXCR4b to the PGCs in embryos globally depleted migration relative to their somatic neighbors and form of the protein ( see Experimental Procedures and Ko¨p - cellular protrusions all around the circumference of the runner et al . , 2001 ) . Indeed , small amounts of this RNA cell . As a result , the PGCs overexpressing SDF - 1a are were sufficient to reverse the morpholino - induced phe - randomly distributed within the embryo ( Figure 4D ) . In - notype , allowing all of the PGCs to arrive at the region terestingly , the morphology of the cellular extensions in of the gonad in most of the embryos ( Figure 3M ) . Inter - this case was different from that of the knocked down estingly , when high amounts of the RNA were injected , cells . PGCs overexpressing the SDF - 1a develop longer PGC migration appeared abnormal , presumably due to and thinner cellular extensions ( Figure 5C and Supple - basal level of signaling of the overexpressed receptor . mental Movie S7 ) , suggesting that high level of CXCR4b Taken together , these experiments show that activation promotes the stabilization of these protru - CXCR4b activity in PGCs is important for their direc - sions . tional migration . This finding allows us now to follow the In view of these results , coupled with the strong corre - chemokine - dependent migration in live embryos and to lation between the expression patternof SDF - 1a and the evaluate the effects of loss of this signaling pathway on direction of PGC migration , it is reasonable to consider cell behavior . SDF - 1a as the molecule that attracts the PGCs toward their intermediate and final targets . To examine this as - Alterations in the Level of the SDF - 1 Signaling sumption , wedesignedexperimentsinwhichtheendog - Interferes with Directional PGC Migration enous SDF - 1a activity was inhibited and tested the abil - To account for the abnormal distribution of the cells in ity of exogenously introduced SDF - 1a to attract the which the chemokine signaling level was altered , we PGCs to ectopic positions ( Figure 6 ) . first analyzed PGC migration in knocked down embryos To overcome the activity of the endogenous SDF - 1a , at low magnification using time - lapse microscopy . A we inhibited its translation by injecting specific anti - sdf - detailed description of the effects of this treatment on 1a morpholinos into 1 cell stage embryos as well as the dynamics of cell behavior and cytoskeletal architec - mRNA encoding EYFP fused to the nanos - 1 3 (cid:1) - UTR for ture will be presented elsewhere ( M . R - F . , M . D . , and E . R . , the purpose of labeling the PGCs . We then raised the unpublished ) , but a clear phenotype is evident already embryos to the 32 cell stage and injected cells with at this level of resolution . The PGCs in which the chemo - morpholino - resistant sdf - 1a mRNA and with mRNA en - kine signaling was knocked down were capable of mi - coding the ECFP protein , thereby generating an ECFP - grating relative to their neighboring somatic cells ( Fig - and SDF - 1a - expressing clone of cells . The ability of the ures 4A – 4C ) . However , in sharp contrast to the directed EYFP - labeled PGCs to arrive at areas in the embryo migration of wild - type PGCs toward the borders of the expressing high level of SDF - 1a ( marked by ECFP ex - trunk mesoderm , the knocked down cells exhibit irregu - pression ) wasmonitoredandcomparedtothatincontrol lar nondirectional movement ( Figures 4A – 4C and see experiments . Indeed , while the cells exhibited random Supplemental Movies S1 – S3 at http : / / www . cell . com / distribution with respect to the ECFP expression in the cgi / content / full / 111 / 5 / 647 / DC1 ) . As a result , the cells control experiment in which SDF - 1a was knocked down remained in regions that they normally vacate , such as ( Figures 6B and 6E ) , they specifically arrived at regions the segmental plate and the notochord , and exhibit no in which SDF - 1a was expressed ( Figures 6C and 6E ) . specific anteroposterior positioning . Furthermore , the ability of the PGCs to respond to the To observe the cellular morphology and movement at exogenously supplied SDF - 1a depended on the expres - a higher resolution , individual cells whose membrane sion of CXCR4b . Injection of anti - cxcr 4b antisense oli - was labeled with GFP were examined at higher magni - gonucleotides at the 1 cell stage interfered with the fication . Here again , a clear difference was observed directed PGC migration toward the SDF - 1a source ( Fig - between the knocked down PGCs and the control . Al - ures 6D and 6E ) . though PGCs depleted of CXCR4b generated lamelli - podia , in striking contrast to control cells , these cellular Discussion protrusions extended in multiple directions , leading to a nonpolarized appearance of the cells ( Figures 5A and Startingtheir migrationfromrandompositions withinthe 5B and see Supplemental Movies S5 and S6 at http : / / embryo , zebrafish PGCs execute a number of migration www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 111 / 5 / 647 / DC1 ) . Similar steps , passing through several intermediate targets on apolar cellular behavior was observed when the SDF - 1a level was reduced ( data not shown ) . their way toward two clustering positions on either side SDF - 1 and Primordial Germ Cell Migration 653 Figure 4 . Alterations in the Level of the SDF - 1a Signaling in the PGCs Result in Nondi - rected Cell Migration as Revealed by Time Lapse Analysis ( A ) In embryos injected with control morpho - lino , the PGCs migrate toward the border be - tween the head and the trunk mesoderm . ( B and C ) Inhibiting the translation of the cxcr 4b or sdf - 1a mRNA results in random mi - grationwithcellsarrivingatectopicpositions . ( D ) Overexpression of SDF - 1a in the PGCs leads to a similar phenotype . In each image , four time points are shown , representing 3 hr of development starting at late gastrulation ( 80 % epiboly ) . In each image , the filmed em - bryo is shown at the end of the first day of development . In the experimental embryos , two individual cells were artificially colored in red and green ( B – D ) . The filmed embryos were injected with gfp - nanos - 1 mRNA , lead - ing to GFP expression in their PGCs , and ex - pressGFPunderthecontrolofthe goosecoid promoter , which labels their axial mesoderm ( see corresponding Supplemental Movies S1 – S4 at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 111 / 5 / 647 / DC1 ) . of the body axis in the region where the gonad will be pretation of these findings is that SDF - 1a acts as a natural chemoattractant for zebrafish PGCs . A formal formed . In this study , we provide strong evidence for the involvement of the chemokine SDF - 1a in providing possibility is that SDF - 1a is not the actual attractant , butratherthatthechemokinesignalleadstotheproduc - directional information to the migrating cells . The expression pattern of SDF - 1a perfectly overlaps tion of another molecule that acts as the actual cue for the PGCs . We consider the idea of such a relay with the positions toward which the PGCs migrate , and alterations in theexpression pattern of SDF - 1ain mutant mechanism unlikely . First , consistent with our model , in a wide range of experimental systems , SDF - 1 has been embryoslead toapredictablemigration phenotype . Fur - thermore , reduction in the level of SDF - 1a or of its puta - shown to act as the chemotactic factor per se , directing cells toward their target . Second , we observe exceed - tive receptor CXCR4b results in migration defects . Last , we show that migration of the PGCs can be redirected ingly tight temporal relationships between the RNA ex - pression of SDF - 1a and the cellular response , a finding toward sites of ectopically expressed SDF - 1a . Our inter - Cell654 Figure 5 . Alterations in the Level of the SDF - 1aSignalingAffectsPGCPolarityandCellularMorphologyasRevealedbyHigh - Magnifica - tion Time Lapse Analysis ( A ) Migrating PGCs are characteristically po - larized , exhibiting protrusions that are ex - tended primarily in the direction of their movement ( indicated byarrowheads ) andare normally elongated in shape . ( B ) Inhibition of cxcr 4b translation leads to apolar cell morphology . ( C ) Overexpression of SDF - 1a in the PGCs similarly leads to loss of polarity with cellular extensionsthatappearlongerandmoreelab - orate . In each image , snapshots from a time lapse video recorded over9 min ( see Supple - mental Movies S5 – S7 at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 111 / 5 / 647 . DC1 ) . that renders a relay mechanism less likely . Third , our their target despite complex and sometimes opposing morphogenetic movements that occur at the same time ability to redirect cells toward ectopic positions by applying SDF - 1a to these positions and to misguide during development ( Weidinger et al . , 1999 ) . The robust manner in which SDF - 1a guides PGCs was demon - the PGCs by expressing the ligand within them is less compatible with a relay mechanism in which a vast array strated here by its ability to attract PGCs to ectopic locations . Conversely , PGCs transplanted into the ani - of cell types would be required to be capable of mediat - ing this process . Last , restoring the activity of CXCR4b mal pole of the zebrafish blastula , a region normally devoid of PGCs , are able to arrive at the correct position specifically in the PGCs was sufficient to reverse the abnormal migration phenotype in embryos globally de - by the end of the first day of development ( Ciruna et al . , 2002 ) , notwithstanding the ectopic origin of migration pleted for the receptor , providing further support to the notion that the activity of the receptor is required in the andthecoincidingcomplicatedgastrulationmovementsintheembryo . Analogously , the potency of SDF - 1 en - migrating cells themselves . The PGCs appear to be very sensitive to changes in ables efficient stem cell homing and mobilization ( Peled et al . , 1999b ; Petit et al . , 2002 ) and leuckocyte traffic the level of SDF - 1a protein , which is reflected by the tight correlation between high sdf - 1a expression and ( Aiuti et al . , 1997 ; Baggiolini , 1998 ; Bleul et al . , 1996a ; Zou et al . , 1998 ) . It will be interesting to determine if the the position of the cells or their direction of migration . This high sensitivity of the cells to small changes in analogy between zebrafish PGC migration and leuko - cyte trafficking can be extended to other levels such as the attractant level is consistent with studies revealing particularly high potency of SDF - 1 - mediated lympho - regulated cell adhesion , which plays an important role in targeting of leukocytes ( Campbell et al . , 1998 ; Mazo cytechemoattractionrelativetootherchemokines ( Bleul et al . , 1996a ) . Such high sensitivity of the responding et al . , 1998 ; Peled et al . , 1999a ; Springer , 1994 ) . Unlike other chemokines whose function and expres - cellsto SDF - 1aallowsprecise migrationof PGCstoward SDF - 1 and Primordial Germ Cell Migration 655 Figure 6 . PGCs Are Attracted toward an Ec - topic Source of SDF - 1a ( A ) An embryo injected with control morpho - lino and eyfp - nanos - 1 RNA at 1 cell stage and ecfp - globin at 32 cell stage . The EYFP - labeled PGCs ( black ) are found at the normal position . ( B ) Anembryoinjectedatthe1cellstagewith SDF - 1a - MO and eyfp - nanos - 1 mRNA , fol - lowed by a later injection of ECFP mRNA into cells at the 32 cell stage . The PGCs are ran - domly distributed with respect to the ECFP - expressing clone of cells ( pseudocolors of red and white represent high and higher lev - els of ECFP expression , respectively ) . ( C ) Top : anembryoinjectedatthe1cellstage with SDF - 1a - MO and eyfp - nanos - 1 mRNA followed by injection of cells at the 32 cell stage with ECFP and morpholino - resistant sdf - 1a mRNA . The PGCs are preferentially found in close proximity to the ECFP - and SDF - 1a - expressing cells ( pseudocolors rep - resentthelevelsofECFP - andthereforeSDF - 1a expression ) . Bottom : high - magnification picturesoftheheadregion ( left ) andthenoto - chord ( right ) of a different embryo treated as above . ( D ) Anembryoinjectedatthe1cellstagewith SDF - 1a - MO , CXCR4b - MO , and eyfp - nanos - 1 mRNA followed by injection of cells at the 32 cell stage with ECFP and morpholino - resis - tant sdf - 1a mRNA . In these embryos , many PGCs are randomly distributed relative to the ECFP - expressing clone of cells . ( E ) Quantitative analysis of the experimental results . In embryos treated as described in ( B ) , approximately 20 % of the somatic cells exhibit ECFP expression , and a similar pro - portion ( yellow bar , 21 . 5 % (cid:2) 6 . 4 % ) of PGCs were found within the clone . In embryos treatedasdescribedin ( C ) , thePGCsarepref - erentially found within the ECFP / SDF - 1a - expressingclone ( redbar , 82 . 5 % (cid:2) 3 . 9 % , p (cid:3) 0 . 001inttest ) . TheattractionofPGCstoward the SDF - 1a clone is inhibited when CXCR4b is knocked down ( green bar , 38 . 4 % (cid:2) 4 . 5 % , p (cid:3) 0 . 001 in t test ) . Cell656 sion are centered around their role in leukocyte traffick - penetrate the vascular system and are found in the ex - ing , both SDF - 1 and its receptor CXCR4 were found to traembryonic blood vessels and then in the blood circu - be expressed in a wide variety of cell types and tissues . lation of the embryo proper . The PGCs then leave the Consistently , mice lacking either the SDF - 1 or its recep - blood vessels and begin to penetrate the gonadal epi - tor exhibit defects that extend beyond the immune sys - thelium . This route of PGC migration is noticeably remi - tem , revealing roles for this chemokine in the genesis niscent of leukocyte trafficking , where the cells migrate of the circulatory and central nervous systems ( Naga - into and out of blood vessels to arrive at their target . sawaetal . , 1996 ; Tachibanaetal . , 1998 ; Zouetal . , 1998 ) . The involvement of attracting signals directing PGC mi - Our finding that PGC migration depends on directional gration in the chick has been suggested , for example , signaling by SDF - 1a allows us to model these processes byshowingthatanectopicallytransplantedtargettissue in a more accessible system at a higher resolution . is capable of attracting and then being colonized by Furthermore , although embryos in which SDF - 1a or PGCs ( Kuwana and Rogulska , 1999 ) . In addition to seek - CXCR4b activity was knocked down did not exhibit in - ing a generalized concept underlying the findings pre - creased lethality or obvious somatic defects , given the sented here and PGC migration in other organisms , it widespread expression of these genes , a thorough anal - would be necessary to determine the relationships be - ysis of behavior of other cell types may reveal additional tween SDF - 1 signaling and the corresponding pathways requirements for SDF - 1a and its receptor in zebrafish . that are involved in PGC migration in other organisms Our initial observations indicate that the activity of the ( Starz - Gaiano and Lehmann , 2001 ; Wylie , 1999 , 2000 ) . chemokine signaling pathway is not required for the For example , the possible relevance of lipid - metaboliz - formation of the cellular extensions characteristic of mi - ing enzymes whose function is important for PGC migra - grating cells , nor is it essential for the ability of the cell tion in Drosophila ( Starz - Gaiano et al . , 2001 ; van Doren to move . Rather , the most prominent feature of cells in et al . , 1998 ; Zhang et al . , 1996 ) should be investigated which SDF - 1a function is inhibited is the loss of stable in the fish . Similarly , the involvement of specific cell - cell cell polarity and directed cell migration . Consistent with and cell - matrix adhesion molecules shown to partici - our findings , G protein - linked signaling has been shown pate in mouse PGC migration ( Anderson et al . , 1999 ; to polarize cells such as neutrophils that respond to Bendel - Stenzel et al . , 2000 ) should also be examined in chemoattractants by polarizing the distribution of PIP 3 the zebrafish system . and directed migration ( Servant et al . , 2000 ) . The most Besides their importance in normal processes such detailed understanding of establishment of cell polarity as leukocyte migration and organ development , SDF - 1 in chemotaxis was obtained in Dictyostelium discoid - and CXCR4 have been shown to be involved in several deum ( reviewed in Iijima et al . , 2002 ; Parent and Dev - pathological conditions . CXCR4 plays a central role in reotes , 1999 ) . Inthismodelsystem , directionalmigration T cell accumulation in rheumatoid arthritis synovium toward the chemoattractant is also controlled by asym - ( e . g . , Buckley et al . , 2000 ; Gu et al . , 2002 ; Nanki et al . , metric activation of a G protein - coupled receptor . This 2000 ) , it determines the metastatic destination of tumor is translated into asymmetrical distribution of PIP 3 by cells ( Muller et al . , 2001 ) , and it acts as a coreceptor for spatially and temporally regulated production and sub - the HIV - 1 entry and membrane fusion with the target sequent degradation of this phosphoinositide ( Funa - cell ( Muller et al . , 2001 ) . Using the available genetic and moto et al . , 2002 ; Iijima and Devreotes , 2002 ) . In accor - genomic tools in zebrafish as a model for these diseases dance with our findings , an important conclusion would enhance our understanding of these disorders . derived from studying chemotaxis in Dictyostelium is Moreover , compounds that may provide a possible pro - that while directional sensing depends on receptor acti - spective treatment for conditions of this kind ( e . g . , Mat - vation , the actual movement of the cell is independent thys et al . , 2001 ; Schols et al . , 1997a , 1997b ) could be of it ( Parent and Devreotes , 1999 ) . An interesting avenue screened for , using PGC migration as an in vivo assay of research would be to determine whether these strik - for the SDF - 1 - CXCR4 signaling pathway ( Peterson et ing similarities between Dictyostelium chemoattraction al . , 2000 ) . and PGC migration includes the molecular cascade downstream of the receptor . These questions can be Experimental Procedures addressed now in vivo in the context of a live vertebrate at a resolution approaching that obtained in Dictyoste - Cloning of CXCR4b and SDF - 1a lium . The cxcr 4b ( Chong et al . , 2001 ) cDNA was PCR amplified from early somitogenesis AB cDNA using the primers 5 (cid:1) - CCGGACTTAT As mentioned above , the process of PGC migration TGCGCCTTT - 3 (cid:1) and 5 (cid:1) - TGATTTTTAGGTTTTATTATGAAATGG - 3 (cid:1) . takes place in many different organisms . The question Another cxcr 4 gene , the cxcr 4a ( Chong et al . , 2001 ) , has been pre - of whether PGC migration in these organisms is regu - viously described . Based on the expression pattern of this gene lated by molecular mechanisms similar to those de - and the fact that inhibition of its translation does not affect PGC scribed here for the zebrafish remains open . While migration , we consider it unlikely that it plays a role in this process . strong tools are available for following PGC migration The cDNA of sdf - 1a ( GenBank accession number AY147915 ) was in mouse ( Anderson et al . , 2000 ; Molyneaux et al . , 2001 ) , amplified from early somitogenesis AB cDNA using the primers 5 (cid:1) - CAGTGCGGATCTCTTCTTCA - 3 (cid:1) ( forward ) and 5 (cid:1) - AAACACGGAG they have not yet been applied to study mice deficient CAAACAGGAC - 3 (cid:1) ( reverse ) based on expressed sequence tags for SDF - 1 or for CXCR4 . In addition , it is not clear ( ESTs ) sequences identified using BLAST search for molecules ho - whether molecules that are functionally homologous to mologoustothemouse sdf - 1 . AnESTforanother sdf - 1 - relatedgene SDF and its receptor are present in Drosophila . The wasidentified ( termed sdf - 1b , accessionnumberBM070896 ) . Based question of conservation is especially intriguing in the on the expression pattern of this gene and the fact that its overex - chick ( reviewed in Niewkoop and Sutasurya , 1979 ) . In pression in the PGCs did not affect their migration , we consider it unlikely that this gene is involved in PGC migration . this organism , following their segregation , the PGCs SDF - 1 and Primordial Germ Cell Migration 657 Knockdown Experiments 1999 ) , cxcr 4b ( Chong et al . , 2001 ) , myo D ( myod ; Zebrafish Informa - tion Network ) ( Weinberg et al . , 1996 ) , nos 1 ( Ko¨prunner et al . , 2001 ) , Two nonoverlapping morpholino oligonucleotides were used to in - hibit the translation of cxcr 4b with similar results : R4b - 1 - MO TGC ntl ( Schulte - Merker et al . , 1994 ) , pax 2 . 1 ( pax 2 a ; Zebrafish Informa - tion Network ) ( Krauss et al . , 1991 ) , pax 8 ( Pfeffer et al . , 1998 ) , and TCAAAAAGGTGCAATAAGTCCG and R4b - 2 - MO AAATGATGCTAT CGTAAAATTCCAT . As a control , a morpholino oligonucleotide that sdf - 1a ( this work ) . includes four mismatching bases was injected : R4b - 2 - CO - MO AA T TGA A GCTATCGTAA T ATT G CAT . To inhibit the translation of sdf - 1a Time Lapse Analysis of PGC Migration mRNA , two different morpholino oligonucleotides were used with For the time lapse analysis at low magnification ( Figure 4 , 10 (cid:4) similar results : SDF - 1a - 1 - MO 5 (cid:1) - CTACTACGATCACTTTGAGATC objective ) , the PGCs were labeled by microinjection of 150 pg gfp - CAT - 3 (cid:1) and SDF - 1a - 2 - MO 5 (cid:1) - TTGAGATCCATGTTTGCAGTGTGAA - 3 (cid:1) . nanos - 1 RNA ( Ko¨prunner et al . , 2001 ) into embryos obtained by For the knockdown experiments , 0 . 4 pmol of these morpholino matingwild - typeABfemaleswith goosecoid - GFP transgenicmales . oligonucleotides dissolved in 10 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 6 ) were injected The embryos were oriented in 1 . 5 % agarose ramps and overlaid into 1 cell stage embryos . with 0 . 3 (cid:4) Danieau’s solution ( Westerfield , 1995 ) . The time lapse movies were generated using the Metamorph software ( Universal Imaging ) controlling a Zeiss Axioplan2 microscope . Pictures were Construction of RNA Expression Vectors and RNA Synthesis taken at 1 min intervals . For the time lapse analysis at high magnifi - gfp - nanos - 1 is a construct that includes the mmGFP open reading cation ( Figure 5 , 63 (cid:4) objective ) , wild - type embryos were microin - frame ( ORF ) ( Siemering et al . , 1996 ) fused to the 3 (cid:1) - UTR of the jected with 140 pg of farnesylated - egfp - nanos - 1 RNA leading to nanos - 1 gene as previously described ( Korpuner , 2001 ) . Injection GFP expression in the membrane of the PGCs . To obtain faint label - ofRNAgeneratedfromthisconstructresultsinspecificGFPexpres - ingofsomaticcells , 2pgfarnesylated egfp - globin wasalsoinjected . sion in the PGCs . Pictures were taken at 10 s intervals . yefp - nanos - 1 - 3 (cid:1) - UTR is a construct similar to gfp - nanos - 1 , with YEFP replacing the mmGFP ORF . vasa - gfp - nanos - 1 is a construct that encodes a fusion between Ectopic Expression of SDF - 1a VasaandmmGFPORFsaspreviouslydescribed ( Wolkeetal . , 2002 ) , To express SDF - 1a in ectopic positions in the embryo , the embryos with the 3 (cid:1) - UTR of vasa exchanged for that of the nanos - 1 gene . were injected at the 1 cell stage with 0 . 4 pmol SDF - 1a - 1 MO , 0 . 2 The resulting fusion protein is subcellularly localized to perinuclear pmol R4b - 2 - CO - MO , and 120 pg YEFP - nanos - 1 - 3 (cid:1) - UTR RNA . The granules in the PGCs ( Wolke et al . , 2002 ) . embryos were raised to the 32 cell stage and cells were injected Farnesylated egfp - nanos - 1 is a construct that was cloned for the with 100 pg morpholino - resistant sdf - 1a - globin RNA and 100 pg purpose of targeting GFP expression to the membrane of PGCs cefp - globin RNA . As a control , the embryos were treated at 1 cell ( Weidinger et al . , 2002 ) . stage similarly to the experimental embryos and at 32 cell stage cefp - globin was made by CEFP cloned into pSP64T . Injection of wereinjectedonlywith200pg cefp - globinRNA . Asasecondcontrol , RNAproducedfromthisconstructleadstoCEFPexpressionincells the embryos were injected at 1 cell stage with 0 . 4 pmol SDF - 1 a - that inherit it . MO , 0 . 2 pmol R4b - 2 - MO , and 120 pg yefp - nanos - 1 and at the 32 For cxcr 4b - nanos - 1 , the CXCR4b ORF was fused to the 3 (cid:1) - UTR cell stage were treated as the experimental embryos . The injected of nanos - 1 for the purpose of expressing the protein specifically in embryoswerephotographedataround24hpfusingECFPandEYFP PGCs . The coding region of cxcr 4b was amplified by PCR using the specific fluorescent filters . Pseudocolors were used to improve the primers 5 (cid:1) - AAAGGATCCGAACAAAATGGAATTTTACGATAGC - 3 (cid:1) and visualizationofthefluorescenceintensities . TheproportionofPGCs 5 (cid:1) - AAACTCGAGACATGCACACACTAACTCGTCA - 3 (cid:1) and was cloned in contact with red and white spots that correspond to high and upstream of the nanos - 1 UTR . higher intensities , respectively , of ECFP ( and therefore of SDF - 1a ) For sdf - 1a - nanos - 1 , the SDF - 1a ORF was fused to the 3 (cid:1) - UTR was counted and the results were analyzed using student’s t test . of nanos - 1 for the purpose of overexpressing the protein in PGCs . Additional information regarding experimental procedures is pro - The codingregion of sdf - 1a wasamplified byPCR usingthe primers videdin theSupplementalData athttp : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / 5 (cid:1) - AAAGGATCCAACATGGATCTCAAAGTG - 3 (cid:1) ( forward ) and 5 (cid:1) - AAA full / 111 / 5 / 647 / DC1 . CTCGAGTTAGACCTGCTGCTGTTG - 3 (cid:1) ( reverse ) . The sdf - 1a coding region was cloned into the gfp - nanos - 1 construct replacing the Acknowledgments GFP ORF . Morpholino - resistant sdf - 1a - globin was used for ectopic expres - This work was supported by grants from the DFG and the Volkswa - sion of SDF - 1a in SDF - 1a - MO - injected embryos . The SDF - 1a ORF gen - Stiftung to E . R . We thank members of the Raz lab for discus - was amplified using the primers 5 (cid:1) - AAAGGATCCAACATGGACTT sions , Karin Dumstrei and Krasimir Slanchev for comments on the GAAGGTCATCGTAGT - 3 (cid:1) ( underline , nucleotide exchanges relative manuscript , and Peter Gruss and Herbert Ja¨ckle for help and en - to the wild - type sdf - 1a which should eliminate the binding of the couragement . SDF - 1a - MO - 1 ) and 5 (cid:1) - AAAACTAGTTTAGACCTGCTGCTGTTG - 3 (cid:1) . The amplification product that encodes a wild - type SDF - 1a was Received : September 9 , 2002 cloned into CEFP - globin construct replacing the CEFP ORF . Revised : October 25 , 2002 Phenotypic Rescue and Overexpression Experiments References To express CXCR4b specifically in the PGCs in embryos globally depleted of CXCR4b , embryos were coinjected at 1 cell stage with Aiuti , A . , Webb , I . , Bleul , C . , Springer , T . , and Gutierrez - Ramos , J . 0 . 4 pmol of R4b - 1 - MO and different amounts of cxcr 4b - nanos - 1 ( 1997 ) . The chemokine SDF - 1 is a chemoattractant for human and gfp - nanos - 1 RNA . The injected amounts of cxcr 4b - nanos - 1 CD34 (cid:5) hematopoietic progenitor cells and provides a new mecha - were 0 , 2 , 10 , 20 , 50 , 100 , and 200 pg per embryo , and the total nism to explain the mobilization of CD34 (cid:5) progenitors to peripheral amount of injected RNA was supplemented with gfp - nanos - 1 to 300 blood . J . Exp . Med . 185 , 111 – 120 . pg . For each combination , 40 embryos or more were analyzed . The Anderson , R . , Fassler , R . , Georges - Labouesse , E . , Hynes , R . , Bader , cxcr 4b - nanos - 1 RNA lacks the sequence recognized by the B . , Kreidberg , J . , Schaible , K . , Heasman , J . , and Wylie , C . ( 1999 ) . R4b - 1 - MO . Mouse primordial germ cells lacking beta1 integrins enter the germ - For SDF - 1a overexpression in the PGCs , embryos were injected line but fail to migrate normally to the gonads . Development 126 , at 1 cell stage with 100 pg sdf - 1a - nanos - 1 RNA . 1655 – 1664 . Anderson , R . , Copeland , T . K . , Scholer , H . , Heasman , J . , and Wylie , Whole - Mount In Situ Hybridization C . ( 2000 ) . The onset of germ cell migration in the mouse embryo . One - and two - color in situ hybridization was performed as pre - Mech . Dev . 91 , 61 – 68 . viously described ( Jowett and Lettice , 1994 ) with modification ac - cording to Hauptmann and Gerster ( 1994 ) and Weidinger et al . Baggiolini , M . ( 1998 ) . Chemokines and leukocyte traffic . Nature 392 , 565 – 568 . ( 2002 ) . The following probes were used : cmlc 2 ( Yelon and Stainier , Cell658 Baggiolini , M . , Dewald , B . , and Moser , B . ( 1997 ) . Human chemo - Jaglarz , M . K . , and Howard , K . R . ( 1995 ) . The active migration of Drosophila primordial germ cells . Development 121 , 3495 – 3503 . kines : an update . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 15 , 675 – 705 . Bendel - Stenzel , M . R . , Gomperts , M . , Anderson , R . , Heasman , J . , Jowett , T . , andLettice , L . ( 1994 ) . Whole - mountin situ hybridizations on zebrafish embryos using a mixture of digoxigenin - and fluores - and Wylie , C . ( 2000 ) . The role of cadherins during primordial germ cell migration and early gonad formation in the mouse . Mech . Dev . cein - labelled probes . Trends Genet . 10 , 73 – 74 . 91 , 143 – 152 . Knaut , H . , Pelegri , F . , Bohmann , K . , Schwarz , H . , and Nusslein - Volhard , C . ( 2000 ) . ZebrafishvasaRNAbutnotitsproteinisacompo - Bleul , C . , Fuhlbrigge , R . , Casasnovas , J . , Aiuti , A . , and Springer , T . ( 1996a ) . A highly efficacious lymphocyte chemoattractant , stromal nentofthegermplasmandsegregatesasymmetricallybeforegerm - line specification . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 875 – 888 . cell - derived factor 1 ( SDF - 1 ) . J . Exp . Med . 184 , 1101 – 1109 . Bleul , C . C . , Farzan , M . , Choe , H . , Parolin , C . , Clark - Lewis , I . , So - Ko¨prunner , M . , Thisse , C . , Thisse , B . , and Raz , E . ( 2001 ) . A zebrafish nanos - related gene is essential for the development of primordial droski , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 1996b ) . The lymphocyte chemoattrac - tantSDF - 1isaligandforLESTR / fusinandblocksHIV - 1entry . Nature germ cells . Genes Dev . 15 , 2877 – 2885 . 382 , 829 – 833 . Krauss , S . , Johansen , T . , Korzh , V . , and Fjose , A . ( 1991 ) . Expression patternofzebrafishpaxgenessuggestsaroleinearlybrainregional - Braat , A . , Zandbergen , T . , van de Water , S . , Goos , H . , and Zivkovic , D . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of zebrafish primordial germ cells : mor - ization . Nature 353 , 267 – 270 . phology and early distribution of vasa RNA . Dev . Dyn . 216 , 153 – 167 . Kuwana , T . , andRogulska , T . ( 1999 ) . Migratorymechanismsofchick primordial germ cells toward gonadal anlage . Cell Mol . Biol . ( Noisy - Buckley , C . D . , Amft , N . , Bradfield , P . F . , Pilling , D . , Ross , E . , Aren - zana - Seisdedos , F . , Amara , A . , Curnow , S . J . , Lord , J . M . , Scheel - le - grand ) 45 , 725 – 736 . Toellner , D . , and Salmon , M . ( 2000 ) . Persistent induction of the che - Matthys , P . , Hatse , S . , Vermeire , K . , Wuyts , A . , Bridger , G . , Henson , mokine receptor CXCR4 by TGF - beta 1 on synovial T cells contrib - G . W . , De Clercq , E . , Billiau , A . , and Schols , D . ( 2001 ) . AMD3100 , a utestotheiraccumulationwithintherheumatoidsynovium . J . Immu - potent and specific antagonist of the stromal cell - derived factor - 1 nol . 165 , 3423 – 3429 . chemokinereceptorCXCR4 , inhibitsautoimmunejointinflammation in IFN - gammareceptor - deficient mice . J . Immunol . 167 , 4686 – 4692 . Campbell , J . J . , Hedrick , J . , Zlotnik , A . , Siani , M . A . , Thompson , D . A . , andButcher , E . C . ( 1998 ) . Chemokinesandthearrestoflymphocytes Mazo , I . B . , Gutierrez - Ramos , J . C . , Frenette , P . S . , Hynes , R . O . , rolling under flow conditions . Science 279 , 381 – 384 . Wagner , D . D . , andvonAndrian , U . H . ( 1998 ) . Hematopoieticprogeni - tor cell rolling in bone marrow microvessels : parallel contributions Chong , S . , Emelyanov , A . , Gong , Z . , andKorzh , V . ( 2001 ) . Expression pattern of two zebrafish genes , cxcr4a and cxcr4b . Mech . Dev . 109 , by endothelial selectins and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 . J . Exp . Med . 188 , 465 – 474 . 347 – 354 . Ciruna , B . , Weidinger , G . , Knaut , H . , Thisse , B . , Thisse , C . , Raz , Molyneaux , K . A . , Stallock , J . , Schaible , K . , and Wylie , C . ( 2001 ) . Time - lapse analysis of living mouse germ cell migration . Dev . Biol . E . , and Schier , A . F . ( 2002 ) . Production of maternal - zygotic mutant zebrafish by germ - line replacement . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , in 240 , 488 – 498 . press . Muller , A . , Homey , B . , Soto , H . , Ge , N . , Catron , D . , Buchanan , M . E . , McClanahan , T . , Murphy , E . , Yuan , W . , Wagner , S . N . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Deshpande , G . , Swanhart , L . , Chiang , P . , and Schedl , P . ( 2001 ) . Hedgehog signaling in germ cell migration . Cell 106 , 759 – 769 . Involvement of chemokine receptors in breast cancer metastasis . Nature 410 , 50 – 56 . Eddy , E . ( 1974 ) . Fine structural observations on the form and distri - bution of nuage in germ cells of the rat . Anat . Rec . 178 , 731 – 758 . Mu¨ller , K . , Thisse , C . , Thisse , B . , and Raz , E . ( 2002 ) . Expression of a linker histone - like gene in the primordial germ cells in zebrafish . Eddy , E . M . , and Ito , S . ( 1971 ) . Fine structural and radioautographic Mech . Dev . 117 , 253 – 257 . observations on dense perinuclear cytoplasmic material in tadpole oocytes . J . Cell Biol . 49 , 90 – 108 . Murphy , P . M . ( 2001 ) . Chemokinesandthemolecularbasisofcancer metastasis . N . Engl . J . Med . 345 , 833 – 835 . Funamoto , S . , Meili , R . , Lee , S . , Parry , L . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 2002 ) . Spatial and temporal regulation of 3 - phosphoinositides by PI Myers , D . C . , Sepich , D . S . , andSolnica - Krezel , L . ( 2002 ) . Bmpactivity gradient regulates convergent extension during zebrafish gastrula - 3 - kinase and PTEN mediates chemotaxis . Cell 109 , 611 – 623 . tion . Dev . Biol . 243 , 81 – 98 . Godin , I . , Wylie , C . , and Heasman , J . ( 1990 ) . Genital ridges exert long - range effects on mouse primordial germ cell numbers and Nagasawa , T . , Hirota , S . , Tachibana , K . , Takakura , N . , Nishikawa , S . , Kitamura , Y . , Yoshida , N . , Kikutani , H . , and Kishimoto , T . ( 1996 ) . direction of migration in culture . Development 108 , 357 – 363 . Defects of B - cell lymphopoiesis and bone - marrow myelopoiesis in Griffin , K . J . , Amacher , S . L . , Kimmel , C . B . , and Kimelman , D . ( 1998 ) . micelackingtheCXCchemokinePBSF / SDF - 1 . Nature 382 , 635 – 638 . Molecular identification of spadetail : regulation of zebrafish trunk and tail mesoderm formation by T - box genes . Development 125 , Nanki , T . , Hayashida , K . , El - Gabalawy , H . S . , Suson , S . , Shi , K . , Girschick , H . J . , Yavuz , S . , and Lipsky , P . E . ( 2000 ) . Stromal cell - 3379 – 3388 . derivedfactor - 1 - CXC chemokinereceptor 4interactions playa cen - Gu , J . , Marker - Hermann , E . , Baeten , D . , Tsai , W . C . , Gladman , D . , tral role in CD4 (cid:5) T cell accumulation in rheumatoid arthritis synov - Xiong , M . , Deister , H . , Kuipers , J . G . , Huang , F . , Song , Y . W . , et al . ium . J . Immunol . 165 , 6590 – 6598 . ( 2002 ) . A 588 - gene microarray analysis of the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of spondyloarthropathy patients . Rheumatology Nasevicius , A . , and Ekker , S . C . ( 2000 ) . Effective targeted gene ‘knockdown’ in zebrafish . Nat . Genet . 26 , 216 – 220 . ( Oxford ) 41 , 759 – 766 . Hammerschmidt , M . , Pelegri , F . , Mullins , M . C . , Kane , D . A . , van Niewkoop , P . D . , and Sutasurya , L . A . ( 1979 ) . Primordial Germ Cells in the Chordates . ( Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press ) . Eeden , F . J . , Granato , M . , Brand , M . , Furutani - Seiki , M . , Haffter , P . , Heisenberg , C . P . , et al . ( 1996 ) . dino and mercedes , two genes regu - Parent , C . A . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 1999 ) . A cell’s sense of direction . lating dorsal development in the zebrafish embryo . Development Science 284 , 765 – 770 . 123 , 95 – 102 . Peled , A . , Grabovsky , V . , Habler , L . , Sandbank , J . , Arenzana - Seisd - Hauptmann , G . , and Gerster , T . ( 1994 ) . Two - color whole - mount in edos , F . , Petit , I . , Ben - Hur , H . , Lapidot , T . , and Alon , R . ( 1999a ) . The situ hybridization to vertebrate and Drosophila embryos . Trends chemokine SDF - 1 stimulates integrin - mediated arrest of CD34 ( (cid:5) ) Genet . 10 , 266 . cells on vascular endothelium under shear flow . J . Clin . Invest . 104 , 1199 – 1211 . Hay , B . , Ackerman , L . , Barbel , S . , Jan , L . , andJan , Y . ( 1988 ) . Identifi - cation of a component of Drosophila polar granules . Development Peled , A . , Petit , I . , Kollet , O . , Magid , M . , Ponomaryov , T . , Byk , T . , 103 , 625 – 640 . Nagler , A . , Ben - Hur , H . , Many , A . , Shultz , L . , et al . ( 1999b ) . Depen - dence of human stem cell engraftment and repopulation of NOD / Iijima , M . , and Devreotes , P . ( 2002 ) . Tumor suppressor PTEN medi - ates sensing of chemoattractant gradients . Cell 109 , 599 – 610 . SCID mice on CXCR4 . Science 283 , 845 – 848 . Peterson , R . T . , Link , B . A . , Dowling , J . E . , and Schreiber , S . L . ( 2000 ) . Iijima , M . , Huang , Y . E . , and Devreotes , P . ( 2002 ) . Temporal and spatial regulation of chemotaxis . Dev . Cell 3 , 469 – 478 . Small molecule developmental screens reveal the logic and timing SDF - 1 and Primordial Germ Cell Migration 659 of vertebrate development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 12965 – Wylie , C . ( 1999 ) . Germ cells . Cell 96 , 165 – 174 . 12969 . Wylie , C . ( 2000 ) . Germ cells . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 10 , 410 – 413 . Petit , I . , Szyper - Kravitz , M . , Nagler , A . , Lahav , M . , Peled , A . , Habler , Xiang , Y . , Li , Y . , Zhang , Z . , Cui , K . , Wang , S . , Yuan , X . B . , Wu , C . P . , L . , Ponomaryov , T . , Taichman , R . S . , Arenzana - Seisdedos , F . , Fujii , Poo , M . M . , and Duan , S . ( 2002 ) . Nerve growth cone guidance medi - N . , etal . ( 2002 ) . G - CSFinducesstemcellmobilizationbydecreasing ated by G protein coupled receptors . Nat . Neurosci . 5 , 843 – 848 . bone marrow SDF - 1 and up - regulating CXCR4 . Nat . Immunol . 17 , Yelon , D . , andStainier , D . Y . ( 1999 ) . Patterningduringorganogenesis : 687 – 694 . genetic analysis of cardiac chamber formation . Semin . Cell Dev . Pfeffer , P . L . , Gerster , T . , Lun , K . , Brand , M . , and Busslinger , M . Biol . 10 , 93 – 98 . ( 1998 ) . Characterization of three novel members of the zebrafish Yelon , D . , Ticho , B . , Halpern , M . E . , Ruvinsky , I . , Ho , R . K . , Silver , Pax2 / 5 / 8 family : dependency of Pax5 and Pax8 expression on the L . M . , and Stainier , D . Y . ( 2000 ) . The bHLH transcription factor hand2 Pax2 . 1 ( noi ) function . Development 125 , 3063 – 3074 . plays parallel roles in zebrafish heart and pectoral fin development . Schisa , J . A . , Pitt , J . N . , and Priess , J . R . ( 2001 ) . Analysis of RNA Development 127 , 2573 – 2582 . associatedwithPgranulesingermcellsofC . elegansadults . Devel - Yoon , C . , Kawakami , K . , and Hopkins , N . ( 1997 ) . Zebrafish vasa opment 128 , 1287 – 1298 . homologue RNA is localized to the cleavage planes of 2 - and 4 - cell - Schols , D . , Este , J . A . , Henson , G . , and De Clercq , E . ( 1997a ) . Bi - stage embryos and is expressed inthe primordial germ cells . Devel - cyclams , a class of potent anti - HIV agents , are targeted at the HIV opment 124 , 3157 – 3165 . coreceptor fusin / CXCR - 4 . Antiviral Res . 35 , 147 – 156 . Zhang , N . , Zhang , J . , Cheng , Y . , andHoward , K . ( 1996 ) . Identification Schols , D . , Struyf , S . , Van Damme , J . , Este , J . A . , Henson , G . , and and genetic analysis of wunen , a gene guiding Drosophila melano - De Clercq , E . ( 1997b ) . Inhibition of T - tropic HIV strains by selective gaster germ cell migration . Genetics 143 , 1231 – 1241 . antagonizationofthechemokinereceptorCXCR4 . J . Exp . Med . 186 , Zhang , N . , Zhang , J . , Purcell , K . J . , Cheng , Y . , andHoward , K . ( 1997 ) . 1383 – 1388 . The Drosophila protein Wunen repels migrating germ cells . Nature Schulte - Merker , S . , van Eeden , F . J . M . , Halpern , M . E . , Kimmel , C . B . , 385 , 64 – 67 . and Nu¨sslein - Volhard , C . ( 1994 ) . no tail ( ntl ) is the zebrafish homo - Zou , Y . R . , Kottmann , A . H . , Kuroda , M . , Taniuchi , I . , and Littman , logue of the mouse T ( Brachyury ) gene . Development 120 , 1009 – D . R . ( 1998 ) . FunctionofthechemokinereceptorCXCR4inhaemato - 1015 . poiesis and in cerebellar development . Nature 393 , 595 – 599 . Schulte - Merker , S . , Lee , K . J . , McMahon , A . P . , andHammerschmidt , M . ( 1997 ) . The zebrafish organizer requires chordino . Nature 387 , 862 – 863 . Servant , G . , Weiner , O . D . , Herzmark , P . , Balla , T . , Sedat , J . W . , and Bourne , H . R . ( 2000 ) . Polarization of chemoattractant receptor sig - naling during neutrophil chemotaxis . Science 287 , 1037 – 1040 . Siemering , K . , Golbik , R . , Sever , R . , and Haseloff , J . ( 1996 ) . Muta - tions that suppress the thermosensitivity of green fluorescent pro - tein . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1653 – 1663 . Springer , T . A . ( 1994 ) . Traffic signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyteemigration : the multistepparadigm . Cell 76 , 301 – 314 . Starz - Gaiano , M . , and Lehmann , R . ( 2001 ) . Moving towards the next generation . Mech . Dev . 105 , 5 – 18 . Starz - Gaiano , M . , Cho , N . K . , Forbes , A . , and Lehmann , R . ( 2001 ) . Spatiallyrestrictedactivityofa Drosophila lipidphosphataseguides migrating germ cells . Development 128 , 983 – 991 . Strome , S . , and Wood , W . B . ( 1982 ) . Immunofluorescence visualiza - tion of germ - line - specific cytoplasmic granules in embryos , larvae , and adults of Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 79 , 1558 – 1562 . Tachibana , K . , Hirota , S . , Iizasa , H . , Yoshida , H . , Kawabata , K . , Ka - taoka , Y . , Kitamura , Y . , Matsushima , K . , Yoshida , N . , Nishikawa , S . , et al . ( 1998 ) . The chemokine receptor CXCR4 is essential for vascularization of the gastrointestinal tract . Nature 393 , 591 – 594 . van Doren , M . , Brohier , H . T . , Moore , L . A . , and Lehmann , R . ( 1998 ) . HMG - CoAreductase guidesmigrating primordialgerm cells . Nature 396 , 466 – 469 . Weidinger , G . , Wolke , U . , Koprunner , M . , Klinger , M . , and Raz , E . ( 1999 ) . Identification of tissues and patterning events required for distinct steps in early migration of zebrafish primordial germ cells . Development 126 , 5295 – 5307 . Weidinger , G . , Wolke , U . , Koprunner , M . , Thisse , C . , Thisse , B . , and Raz , E . ( 2002 ) . Regulationofzebrafishprimordialgermcellmigration by attraction towards an intermediate target . Development 129 , 25 – 36 . Weinberg , E . S . , Allende , M . L . , Kelly , C . S . , Abdelhamid , A . , Murakami , T . , Andermann , P . , Doerre , O . G . , Grunwald , D . J . , and Riggleman , B . ( 1996 ) . Developmental regulation of zebrafish MyoD in wild - type , no tail and spadetail embryos . Development 122 , 271 – 280 . Westerfield , M . ( 1995 ) . The Zebrafish Book ( Oregon : University of Oregon Press ) . Wolke , U . , Weidinger , G . , Ko ¨ prunner , M . , andRaz , E . ( 2002 ) . Multiple levels of post - transcriptional control lead to germ line specific gene expression in the zebrafish . Curr . Biol . 12 , 289 – 294 .