Cultures are defined in part by their media and their tools for thinking , working , learning , and collaborating . In the past , the design of most media emphasized a clear distinction between produc - ers and consumers [ 1 ] . Television is the medium that most obviously exhibits this orientation and has contributed to the degeneration of humans into “couch potatoes” [ 2 ] , for whom remote controls are the most important instruments of their cognitive activities . In a similar manner , our current edu - cational institutions often treat learners as consumers , fostering in students a mind - set of consumer - ism rather than of ownership of problems , which they carry with them for the rest of their lives . As a result , learners , workers , and citizens often feel left out of deci - sions by teachers , managers , and policymakers , denied opportunities to take active roles . The rise in social computing ( based on social production and mass collaboration ) has facilitated a shift from consumer cultures ( specialized in producing finished artifacts to be consumed pas - sively ) to cultures of participation ( in which all people are provided with the means to participate and to contribute actively in per - sonally meaningful problems ) [ 3 ] . These developments repre - sent unique and fundamental opportunities , challenges , and transformative changes for inno - vative research and practice in human - centered computing , as we move away from a world in which a small number of people define rules , create artifacts , and make decisions for many con - sumers toward a world in which everyone has interests and oppor - tunities to actively participate . Our research is exploring theo - retical foundations and system developments for understanding , fostering , and supporting cultures of participation grounded in the basic assumption that innovative technological developments are necessary for cultures of participa - tion , but they are not sufficient . Sociotechnical environments are needed because cultures of participation are not dictated by technology ; they are the result of changes in human behavior and social organization , in which active contributors engage in the innovative design , adoption , and adaptation of technologies to their needs and in collabora - tive knowledge construction . Understanding , Fostering , and Supporting Cultures of Participation Gerhard Fischer University of Colorado | gerhard @ colorado . edu cover STorY i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 42 cover STorY i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J un e 2011 43 SITE oBJECTIVES AnD unIquE ASPECTS Wikipedia Web - based collaborative multilingual encyclopedia with a single , collaborative , and verifiable article ; authority is distributed ( http : / / www . wikipedia . org / ) KnoLA a library of articles by recognized experts in specific domains ; authors take credit and elicit peer reviews . Readers can provide feedback and comments , but authority rests primarily with the author ( http : / / knol . google . com / ) iTunes u Courses by faculty members from “certified institutions” ; control via input filters—material cannot be remixed and altered by consumers ( http : / / www . apple . com / education / itunes - u / ) youTube Video - sharing website with weak input filters and extensive support for rating ( http : / / www . youtube . com / ) Encyclopedia of Life ( EoL ) Documentation of the 1 . 8 million known living species , development of an extensive curator network , partnership between the scientific community and the general public ( http : / / www . eol . org / ) Sketchup and 3D Warehouse Repository of 3 - D models created by volunteers organized in collections by curators and used in Google Earth ( http : / / sketchup . google . com / 3dwarehouse / ) Scratch Learning environment for creating , remixing , and sharing programs to build creative communities in education ( http : / / scratch . mit . edu ) Instructables Sociotechnical environment focused on user - created and shared do - it - yourself projects involving other users as raters and critics ( http : / / www . instructables . com / ) PatientsLikeMe Collection of real - world experiences enabling patients who suffer from life - changing diseases to connect and converse ( http : / / www . patientslikeme . com / ) ushahidi Tools for democratizing information , increasing transparency , and lowering the barriers for individuals to share their stories ; originated in the collaboration of Kenyan citizen journalists during crises ( http : / / www . ushahidi . com / ) Stepgreen Library of energy - saving actions , tips , and recommendations by citizen contributors for saving money and being environmentally responsible ( http : / / www . stepgreen . org / ) Table 1 : Environments created by cultures of participation with unique features . the unique needs of people with disabilities as addressed by design for diversity ) . Cultures of participation are facilitated and supported by a variety of different technological environments , such as the par - ticipatory Web ( Web 2 . 0 ) , tabletop computing , and domain - oriented design environments—all of them contributing in different ways to the aims of engaging diverse audi - ences , enhancing creativity , shar - ing information , and fostering the collaboration among users acting as active contributors and design - ers . They democratize design and innovation by shifting power and control toward users , support - ing them to act as both designers and consumers ( “prosumers” ) and allowing systems to be shaped through real - time use [ 5 ] . cannot solve ( e . g . , to create 3 - D models of all buildings in the world as addressed by Google SketchUp and 3D Warehouse ) • problems of a systemic nature , requiring the collaboration of many different minds from a vari - ety of backgrounds ( e . g . , urban - planning problems as addressed by the Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory ( EDC ) at the University of Colorado , Boulder ) • poorly understood and ill - defined problems requiring high - level involvement because they cannot be delegated to others ( e . g . , software - design problems as tack - led by open source software devel - opments ) • problems modeling unique , changing worlds that are depen - dent on open , living informa - tion repositories and tools ( e . g . , Our emerging theoretical frame - work is grounded in a variety of different application contexts , including open source software , urban planning , assistive technol - ogy , energy sustainability , and learning and education [ 4 ] , and it has allowed us to articulate initial design guidelines and to explore the implications of these develop - ments for future research and advances in human - centered social computing focused on cultures of participation . Cultures of Participation Cultures of participation offer important and interesting oppor - tunities to address major problems our societies are facing today , including : • problems of a magnitude that individuals and even large teams i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 44 cover STorY Table 1 provides an overview of a sample of environments created by cultures of participation with unique features . A fundamental challenge for cultures of participation is to conceptualize , create , and evolve socio - technical environments that not only technically enable and support users’ participation , but also successfully encourage it . Participation is often determined by an individual’s assessment of value / effort . The effort can be reduced by providing the right kind of tools with meta - design , and the value can be increased by mak - ing all voices heard by supporting social creativity . As effort and value vary greatly among individu - als , richer ecologies of participation are required to identify distinct roles . These components of our emerging theoretical framework are later . Figure 1 illustrates ( using a broad qualitative representation ) some of the major cultural changes caused by new media over the past few millenia . The interesting question is whether cultures of participation will cause similar transformative changes in the years to come as reading and writing did thousands of years ago . Will the power of the collective human mind aided by technology improve further or are there major drawbacks to come ( as Socrates argued would be the consequences of reading and writ - ing ) ? And if so , we need to investi - gate whether these drawbacks will outweigh advantages and how we can avoid or at least reduce their impact . Components of a Theoretical Framework Without a theoretical framework , the developments listed in Table 1 may be seen merely as interesting phenomena instead of what they really are : fundamentally different ways to cope with a large num - ber of difficult problems in which new social organizations and new media can make a difference . This section describes three major components of our emerging framework : • Meta - design is aimed at defining and creating social and technical infrastructures in which cultures of participation can come alive and new forms of collaborative design can take place . • Social creativity , focused on “transcending the individual human mind , ” makes all voices heard in the framing and solving of complex problems , supports interactions with other people and shared artifacts , and exploits new media for transdisciplinary col - laborations . • Richer ecologies of participation are focused on “creating different levels of participation” by differen - tiating , analyzing , and supporting distinct roles based on different levels of expertise , interests , and motivations that can be found in cultures of participation . Meta - Design . Meta - design is focused on “design for design - ers” [ 6 ] . It creates open systems at design time that can be modified by their users acting as co - design - ers , requiring and supporting more complex interactions at use time . Meta - design is grounded in the basic assumption that future uses and problems cannot be completely anticipated at design time , when a system is being developed . At use time , users will invariably discover mismatches between their needs and the support that an existing system can provide for them . Meta - design contributes to the invention and design of sociotechnical envi - ronments in which humans can express themselves and engage in personally meaningful activities . Meta - design supports cultures of participation as follows : • Making changes must seem pos - sible . Contributors should not be intimidated and should not have the impression that they are incapable of making changes ; the more users become convinced that changes are not as difficult as they think they are , the more they may be willing to participate . • Changes must be technically fea - sible . If a system is closed , then contributors cannot make any changes ; as a necessary prerequi - site , there need to be possibilities and mechanisms for extension . • Benefits must be perceived . Contributors have to believe that what they get in return justifies the investment they make . The benefits perceived may vary and can include professional benefits ( helping for one’s own work ) , social benefits ( increased status in a com - munity , possibilities for jobs ) , and personal benefits ( engaging in fun activities ) . • The environments must support tasks that people engage in . The best environments will not succeed if they are focused on activities that people do rarely or consider of marginal value . • Low barriers must exist to shar - ing changes . Evolutionary growth is greatly accelerated in a system in which participants can share changes and keep track of multiple versions easily . If sharing is diffi - cult , it creates an unnecessary bur - den that participants are unwilling to overcome . • Designers must become meta - designers . They should use their own creativity to create socio - technical environments in which other people can be creative by shifting from determining the i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 45 cover STorY meaning , functionality , and con - tent of a system to encouraging and supporting users to act as designers . They must be willing to share control of how systems will be used , which content will be contained , and which func - tionality will be supported . Meta - design allows significant modifications when the need aris - es . It reduces the gap in the world of computing between a population of elite , high - tech scribes who can act as designers and a much larger population of intellectually disen - franchised knowledge workers who are forced into consumer roles . Meta - design supports underde - sign by designers at design time . Underdesign does not mean less design ; rather , it is a design methodology that offers users ( acting as designers at use time ) as many alternatives as pos - sible , avoiding irreversible com - mitments they cannot undo . Additional aspects of underdesign in support of cultures of partici - pation include the following : • It is grounded in the need for “loose fit” in designing artifacts at design time so that unexpected uses of the artifact can be accom - modated at use time ; it does so by creating contexts and content - cre - ation tools rather than content . • It avoids design decisions in the earliest part of the design process , when everyone knows the least about what is really needed . • It acknowledges the necessity to differentiate between structur - ally important parts for which extensive professional experience is required , and should therefore not be easily changed ( such as weight - bearing walls in buildings ) , and components that users should be able to modify to their needs because their personal knowledge is most relevant . • It creates technical and social conditions for broad participation in design activities by supporting “hackability” and “remixability . ” Social Creativity . Where do new ideas come from in cultures of par - ticipation ? The creativity potential is grounded in user - driven innova - tions supported by meta - design environments , taking advantage of breakdowns as sources of creativ - ity and exploiting the symmetry of ignorance ( meaning that all stakeholders are knowledgeable in some domains and ignorant in others ) [ 7 ] . Increasing social creativity requires diversity ( each participant should have some unique information or perspec - tive ) , independence ( participants’ opinions are not determined by the opinions of those around them ) , decentralization ( participants are able to specialize and draw on local knowledge ) , and aggregation ( mechanisms exist for turning individual contributions into col - lections , and private judgments into collective decisions ) . In addi - tion , participants must be able to express themselves ( requiring technical knowledge on how to contribute ) , must be willing to contribute ( motivation ) , and must be allowed to be heard ( control ) . Social creativity is based on the assumption that the power of the unaided individual mind is limited [ 7 ] . Although creative individuals are often thought of as working in isolation , much human creativ - ity arises from activities that take place in a social context in which interaction with other people and the artifacts that embody collec - tive knowledge are important con - tributors to the process . The fun - damental problems of the 21st cen - tury are complex and open - ended , requiring ongoing contributions of many minds , particularly from the people who own problems and are directly affected by them [ 8 ] . Richer Ecologies of Participation Individual people have differ - ent motivations for doing things , and those motivations create dif - ferent levels of participation . To understand , foster , and support cultures of participation requires differentiating , analyzing , and sup - porting distinct roles that can be found in cultures of participation : consumers , contributors , collabora - tors , and meta - designers . Figure 2 ( inspired and derived from [ 6 ] and [ 9 ] ) illustrates that most partici - pants will start as consumers , and only a small percentage of these will eventually contribute , collabo - rate , and act as meta - designers , and thereby be responsible for the content that is shared with every - one . ( To avoid the figure becoming overly complex , it does not illus - trate that the migration paths do not always go through all stages and that people may retreat to less - demanding roles over time . ) Cultures of participation must handle the startup paradox , when early in their lifecycle they have few members to generate content and little content to attract mem - bers . To address this paradox , we have developed the seeding , evolu - tionary growth , and reseeding ( SER ) model [ 2 ] , an emerging descrip - tive and prescriptive model that supports meta - design . Instead of attempting to build complete sys - tems at design time , the SER model advocates building seeds ( grounded in participatory design activities between meta - designers and users ) that can evolve over time through contributions of a large number of people ( the defining characteristics of a culture of participation ) . A seed is something that has the potential to change and grow . In sociotechni - cal environments , seeds need to i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 46 cover STorY • Figure 2 . Ecologies of participation . Socrates Reading and Writing Power of the collective human mind , aided by technology Printing Press Personal Computer Internet Cultures of Participation 2500BC 1500 1980 1993 2010 Time • Figure 1 . Major cultural changes caused by new media . Transitions Level - 0 : Unaware consumers Level - 1 : Consumers aware of possibilities Becoming aware of possibilities Level - 2 : Contributors , decision makers Making contributions Level - 3 : Collaborators , facilitators , organizers , curators Organizing content , mentoring Level - 4 : Meta - Designers Extending the range of the environment i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 47 cover STorY Exploring Different Application Domains To assess the viability and applica - bility of the concepts and compo - nents of the theoretical framework described in the previous section , we have explored cultures of par - ticipation in numerous domains , including the following : • open source software , with an emphasis on open source as a suc - cess model of decentralized , collab - orative , evolutionary development • architectural design and urban planning , with an emphasis on underdesign and allowing and supporting all participants ( as illustrated by the EDC , a tabletop computing environment supporting stakeholders from diverse back - grounds in face - to - face meetings ) • design of computational arti - facts , with an emphasis on cus - tomization , personalization , tailor - ability , end - user modifiability , and design for diversity ( as illustrated by the Memory Aiding Prompting System ( MAPS ) , supporting people with cognitive disabilities and their caregivers ) • new models of teaching and learning , with an emphasis on learning communities , teachers as meta - designers , and courses - as - seeds ( these approaches challenge the assumption that information must move from teachers and other credentialed producers to passive learners and consumers ) These developments will be described in the sidebar “Collaborative Efforts in Large - Scale Projects . ” Open Source Software . Open source software is one of the earli - est success models of cultures of participation . Some of the slogans developed in these communities served as indicators of the oppor - tunities associated with cultures of participation : “if there are enough be designed and created for the technical as well as the social com - ponent of the environment . The SER model postulates that systems that evolve over a sustained time span must continually alternate between periods of planned activ - ity ( the seeding phase ) , unplanned evolution ( the evolutionary growth phase ) , and periods of deliberate ( re ) structuring and enhancement ( the reseeding phase ) . In cultures of participation , not every participant must contribute , but all participants must have opportunities to contribute when they want to . For cultures of par - ticipation to become viable and be successful , it is critical that a sufficient number of participants take on the more active and more demanding roles . To encourage and support migration paths toward more demanding roles , mecha - nisms are needed that lead to more involvement and motivation , and that facilitate the acquisition of the additional knowledge required by the more demanding and involved roles . These mechanisms will include objectives such as : • “low threshold and high ceil - ing , ” allowing new participants to contribute as early as possible , and at the same time supporting experienced participants with a broad functionality for their more complex tasks • scaffolding mechanisms to support migration paths • special interaction mecha - nisms for different levels of partici - pation ( e . g . , contributors , curators , and meta - designers ) • support for different levels of participation with regard to the time and effort that an individual must invest • rewards and incentives needed to reduce the funnel effect [ 10 ] from one level to the next . coLLaBoraTIve eFForTS In LarGe - ScaLe ProJecTS In addition to our own developments , we have been engaged in collaborative efforts in large - scale projects , including the following [ 4 ] : Modeling the Whole World in 3 - D . Google’s SketchUp / Building Maker + 3D Warehouse + Google Earth ( http : / / sketchup . google . com / 3dwarehouse / ) is an environment in which people from around the world can create 3 - D models with SketchUp or Building Maker , share and organize it in collections in the 3D Warehouse , and display them in Google Earth . The amount of work and local knowledge needed to achieve this is beyond the scope and capability of any locally operating development team . It requires the contributions of a large user base , and as such represents a unique example for assessing the theoretical framework cultures of participation . Energy Sustainability . New developments in the energy domain , such as smart grids and smart meters , provide support for measuring and visualizing energy consumption . To take advantage of these developments , users must change from passive consumers of energy into active decision makers . Migrating toward these roles ( see Figure 2 ) provides foundations for behavior changes to reduce energy consumption that can be fostered through social as well as technological interventions . While these developments are focused on individuals , they are complemented by supporting cultures of participation at the national and international level with the Open Energy Information ( OpenEI ) ( http : / / en . openei . org / ) initiative environment developed by National Renewable Energy Laboratory’s ( NREL ) . OpenEI ( and other environments , such as Stepgreen , mentioned in Table 1 ) represents collaboratively constructed information repositories to inform participants about energy sustainability themes and allow them to share their experiences . Community Networks . SAP’s Community Network ( SCN ) ( www . sdn . sap . com ) is an example of a successful sociotechnical environment for peer - support communities that consists of more than one million registered users forming a highly active online community . To move beyond anecdotal examples , we have analyzed SCN using our theoretical framework , compared it with open source communities , and interpreted a variety of data in order to understand the context - and application - specific nature of the collaborations underlying cultures of participation in this specific context [ 12 ] . i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 48 cover STorY eyeballs , all bugs are shallow , ” indicates the public scrutiny of col - laborative developed artifacts can lead to a high reliability and trust - worthiness , and “do not send a bug report , send a bug fix , ” indicates the desirable migration from the role of bug reporter to bug fixer . In software design , many of the challenges mentioned earlier were clearly recognized , including the need for open and evolvable systems ( perpetual beta ) based on fluctuating , conflicting require - ments , which will lead over time to mismatches between an evolving world and the software system that models this world—as well as the need for supporting communica - tion and coordination in a richer ecology of participants who have different interests , skills , and back - ground knowledge . A recent interview with a geosci - entist at the University of Colorado , Boulder highlights the importance of these challenges . He uses a couple of domain - specific software systems to analyze his research data , but none of the existing systems can provide complete solutions to his problems as his research unfolds and his under - standing of the problem , data , and results proceeds . “I spend on average an hour every day developing software for myself to analyze the data I collected because there is not any available software . Even if there is a software developer sitting next to me , it would not be of much help , because my needs vary as my research progresses and I can - not clearly explain what I want to do at any moment . Even if the software developer can manage to write a pro - gram for me , I will not know if he or she has done it right without looking at the code…So I spent three months to gain enough programming knowledge to get by . Software development has now become an essential task of my research , but I do not consider myself a software developer and I don’t know many other things about software development . ” Clearly , he is not a professional software engineer and does not intend to become one , but he is definitely acting as a participant . The Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory ( EDC ) . The EDC is a long - term research platform that explores conceptual frameworks for democratizing design in the context of framing and resolving complex urban planning by bring - ing together participants from vari - ous backgrounds in face - to - face meetings [ 7 ] . The knowledge to understand , frame , and solve such problems does not already exist but is constructed and evolves dur - ing the solution process . The EDC ( representing a sociotechnical envi - ronment ) incorporates a number of innovative technologies , including tabletop computing , the integra - tion of physical and computational components supporting new inter - action techniques , and an open architecture , and has proven to be an ideal environment in which to study and support meta - design and social creativity by making all voices heard . During the past decade , our research with the EDC to foster and support cultures of participation within collaborative design activities led to the following observations : • Each urban - planning problem is unique : It has to take into consid - eration the geography , culture , and population of specific locations . • More creative solutions to problems can emerge from the collective interactions with the environment by heterogeneous communities ( such as communities of interest , which are more diverse than communities of practice ) . • Boundary objects are needed to establish common ground and establish shared understanding for communities of interest . • Participants must be able to naturally express what they want to say . • Interaction mechanisms must have a low threshold for easy par - ticipation and a high ceiling for expressing sophisticated ideas . • Participants are more readily engaged if they perceive the design activities as personally meaningful by associating a purpose with their involvement . The further investigation of the above has been thwarted by obstacles that rest with the dif - ficulties of democratizing the design of the EDC by providing more control to the participants [ 5 ] . Currently , EDC developers have to customize the system at the source - code level to reflect the specific characteristics of the city and its urban - planning problem . As urban planning deals with ill - defined problems , the domain - and context - specific knowledge is sticky , tacit , and difficult to trans - fer from local urban planners to the EDC developers . The EDC sup - ports problem - solving activities by bringing individuals who share a common problem ( the representa - tives of the Boulder City Council and the Regents of the University of Colorado ) together in face - to - face meetings and promoting social reflection - in - action . Problems are discussed and explored by provid - ing participants with a shared construction space in which they interact with computationally enhanced physical objects that are used to represent the situation . Computer - generated information is projected back onto the table - top construction area , creating an augmented reality environment . i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 49 cover STorY Rethinking Learning and Education . The current mind - set about learning , teaching , and edu - cation is dominated by a view in which a supposedly all - knowing teacher explicitly tells or shows unknowing , passive learners some - thing they presumably know noth - ing about . A critical challenge is to reformulate and reconceptualize this impoverished and misleading conception . A culture - of - participation per - spective for learning and education is focused not on delivering predi - gested information to individuals , but on providing opportunities and resources for learners to engage in authentic activities , participate in social debates and discussions , cre - ate shared understanding among diverse stakeholders , and frame and solve personally meaningful problems . It is grounded in the fun - damental belief that all humans have interest and knowledge in one or more niche domains and are eager to actively contribute in these contexts . Over the past decade , we have reconceptualized and reinvented our teaching activities and ground - ed them in sociotechnical environ - ments in which communities of mutual learners act simultaneously as learners and as active contribu - tors ( based on the assumption that being a teacher or a learner is not an attribute of a person but an attribute of a context ) . Peer - to - peer learning is supported , and teachers act as “guides on the side” rather than as “sages on the stage , ” and courses are considered seeds rather than finished products [ 2 ] . Implications and Impact As illustrated in Figure 1 , the new opportunities and the drawbacks of cultures of participation need to be carefully assessed . These This construction in the table - top environment is coupled with information displayed on a vertical electronic whiteboard relevant to the problem currently being dis - cussed . A key aspect of the EDC that makes it a critical and unique component ( and sets it apart from other environments , such as the Google 3 - D modeling environment ) is the emphasis on the collab - orative construction of artifacts , rather than on the sharing of individually constructed items . Coping with “Universes of One” : Design for Diversity . Individuals with disabilities are often unable to live independently due to their inability to perform activities of daily living , such as cooking , housework , or shopping . But with socio - technical environments to extend their abilities , and thereby their independence , these individu - als can lead lives less dependent on others . Our research to support and empower people with cognitive disabilities explored cultures of participation by supporting mobile - device customization , per - sonalization , and configuration by caregivers and effective use by clients [ 10 ] . People with cognitive disabilities represent a “universe of one” problem : A solution for one person will rarely work for another . Understanding and addressing unexpected and great variations in skills and needs , particularly with respect to creating task support , requires an intimate knowledge of the client that only caregivers can provide . Currently , a substantial portion of all assistive technology is abandoned after initial purchase and use—the very population that could most benefit from technology is paying for expensive devices that end up in the back of closets after a short time . A unique challenge of cultures of participation in the domain of cognitive disabilities is that the clients themselves cannot act as designers . However , the caregiv - ers , who have the most intimate knowledge of the client , need to become the designers . The scripts needed to effectively support users are specific for particular tasks , creating the requirement that the people who know about the clients and the tasks ( i . e . , the local care - givers , rather than a technologist far removed from the action ) must be able to develop scripts . Caregivers generally have no specific professional technology training , nor are they interested in becoming computer programmers . This creates the need for design environments with extensive meta - design support to allow caregivers to create , store , and share scripts . The Memory Aiding Prompting System ( MAPS ) allows caregiv - ers to create complex multimodal prompting sequences that enables sound , pictures , and video to be assembled by using a film - strip - based scripting metaphor [ 11 ] . The design of MAPS involved three different groups of partici - pants ; assistive technology pro - fessionals and special education teachers ; parents of clients ; and , professional caregivers . By design - ing the MAPS environment to enable script redesign and reuse , caregivers were able to create an environment that matched the unique needs of an individual with cognitive disabilities . MAPS repre - sents an example of democratizing design by supporting meta - design , embedding new technologies into sociotechnical environments , and helping people with cognitive disabilities and their caregivers have more interesting and more rewarding lives . i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 50 cover STorY assessments should be based on measurements ; however , new ways to measure developments are needed—especially as new dis - courses are established to under - stand , foster , and support cultures of participation . Drawbacks of Cultures of Participation . Cultures of participa - tion open up unique new opportu - nities for mass collaboration and social production , but they are not without drawbacks . One such drawback is that humans may be forced to cope with the burden of being active contributors in per - sonally irrelevant activities . This can be illustrated by do - it - yourself societies . With modern tools , humans are empowered to per - form many tasks themselves that were done previously by skilled domain workers serving as agents and intermediaries . Although this shift provides power , freedom , and control to customers , it also has forced people to act as contributors in contexts for which they lack the experience ( which profession - als have acquired and maintained through the daily use of systems ) and the broad background knowl - edge to do these tasks efficiently and effectively ( e . g . , companies offloading work to customers ) . More experience and assess - ment is required to determine the design trade - offs for specific con - texts and application domains in which the advantages of cultures of participation ( such as extensive coverage of information , creation of large numbers of artifacts , cre - ative chaos by making all voices heard , reduced authority of expert opinions , and shared experience of social creativity ) will outweigh the disadvantages ( accumulation of irrelevant information , wasting human resources in large informa - tion spaces , and lack of coherent voices ) . The following research questions need to be explored : • Under which conditions is a fragmented culture ( with numer - ous idiosyncratic voices represent - ing what some might character - ize as a modern version of the Tower of Babel ) better or worse than a uniform culture ( which is restricted in its coverage of the uniqueness of local identities and experience ) ? • If all people can contribute , how do we assess the quality and reliability of the resulting arti - facts ? How can curator networks effectively increase the quality and reliability ? • What is the role of trust , empathy , altruism , and reciprocity in such an environment , and how will these factors affect cultures of participation ? Measurement . Some aspects determining cultures of participa - tion can be easily measured—e . g . , how well a site lives up to certain usability and sociability factors [ 9 ] , how people located a site , and how often they visit it—and tools for obtaining these measurements exist ( such as Google Analytics ) . But other aspects are much more difficult to assess and measure . In our collaborative work analyz - ing the SAP Community Network ( SCN ) ( see sidebar ) as a culture of participation , we have created and investigated the following param - eters [ 12 ] : • Responsiveness . How responsive are communities to the needs of its members ? • Engagement intensity . How time - ly is the peer support ? • Role distribution : How wide is the participation of users and in what kind of roles do they participate ? • Reward system . What is the impact of explicit reward ( point ) systems on community behavior ? Establishing New Discourses : Motivation , Control , Ownership , Autonomy , and Quality . Cultures of participation are establishing new discourses . Human beings are diversely motivated beings . We act not only for material gain , but for psychological well - being , for social integration and con - nectedness , for social capital , for recognition , and for improv - ing our standing in a reputation economy . The motivation for going the extra step to engage in cultures of participation is based on the overwhelming evidence of the IKEA effect [ 13 ] : People are more likely to like a solution if they have been involved in its gen - eration , even though it might not make sense otherwise . Creating something personal ( such as hand - knitted sweaters and socks and home - cooked meals ) even of moderate quality has a differ - ent kind of appeal than consum - ing something of possibly higher quality made by others—even something of very high quality . Cultures of participation rely on intrinsic motivation for participa - tion by providing contributors with the sense and experience of joint creativity , by giving them a sense of common purpose and mutual support in achieving it , and , in many situations , by replacing com - mon background or geographic proximity with a sense of well - defined purpose , shared concerns , and the successful common pur - suit of these . Cultures of participation sup - port users as active contributors who can transcend the func - tionality and content of existing systems . Through the facilitation of these possibilities , control is distributed among all stakehold - ers in the design process . There is evidence that shared control will i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 51 cover STorY Research in behavioral psy - chology has shown that provid - ing feedback , goal setting , and tailored information are useful in motivating people to change their behaviors [ 13 ] . Our studies provide evidence that we become engaged when we can decide and that we value what we make [ 6 ] . All people want to be in some situ - ations a consumer ( in personally irrelevant activities ) and in others an active contributor ( in person - ally meaningful activities ) . Being a consumer or active contributor is not an attribute of a person , but of a context . Cultures of participation empower humans to be active con - tributors in personally meaningful activities . Conclusion Cultures of participation , which include technological changes in human - centered computing , pursue a much broader and more fundamental agenda : participation is invited , supported , encouraged , and valued rather than prohibited ; control , creative contributions , and innovations are decentralized and extended from design time to use time ; new relationships between the individual and soci - ety are established ; artifacts are found in the Encyclopedia Britannica with Wikipedia and has come to the conclusion that “Wikipedia comes close to Britannica in terms of the accuracy of its sci - ence entries” [ 14 ] . There are many more open issues to be investi - gated about quality and trust in cultures of participation . Errors will always exist , resulting in learners acquiring the important skill of always being critical of information rather than blindly believing what others ( specifically experts or teachers ) are saying . Ownership is also a critical dimen - sion—the community at large has a greater sense of ownership and is thereby more willing to put an effort into fixing errors . Technology alone does not deter - mine social structure , nor does it change human behavior ; rather , it creates feasibility spaces for new social practices [ 1 ] and can persuade and motivate changes at the individual , group , and com - munity levels . Human - centered technologies can change people’s lives by making it easier for people to do things , by allowing people to explore cause - and - effect relation - ships , and by providing value that cannot be accounted for in mon - etary terms [ 13 ] . lead to more innovation : “Users that innovate can develop exactly what they want , rather than rely - ing on manufacturers to act as their ( often very imperfect ) agents” [ 5 ] . ( A similar argument surfaced in the interview with the geosci - entist described earlier . ) Cultures of participation erode monopoly positions held by professions , edu - cational institutions , experts , and high - tech scribes [ 2 ] . Our experiences gathered in the context of the design , develop - ment , and assessment of our sys - tems indicate that cultures of par - ticipation are less successful when users are brought into the process late ( thereby denying them owner - ship ) and when they are “misused” to fix problems and to address weaknesses of systems that the developers did not fix themselves . Many teachers will tell their students that they will not accept research findings and argumen - tation based on articles from Wikipedia . This exclusion is usu - ally based on considerations such as : “How are we to know that the content produced by widely dis - persed and qualified individuals is not of substandard quality ? ” The online journal Nature has compared the quality of articles DESIGn GuIDE RATIonALE Support human - problem interaction By advancing human - computer interaction to human problem - domain interaction with meta - design environments , owners of problems are put in charge and social creativity is supported . Underdesign for emergent behavior Instead of providing fixed content , rules , and processes , create seeds for open , living information repositories and contexts in which participants can create content , cope with exceptions , design work - arounds , and engage in negotiations . Support different engagement levels Honor the fact that users have different capabilities , different interests , and different knowledge ; sup - port migration paths to more demanding roles . Reward and recognize contributions Transcend the sole reliance on economic incentives by supporting social capital , reputation econo - mies , and gift cultures . Co - evolution of artifacts and user community Support the mutual cross - pollination between the evolution of communities and the resources for sys - tem developments . Design guidelines supporting cultures of participation . i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 52 cover STorY [ 8 ] Shirky , C . Cognitive Surplus—Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age . Penguin Press , new york , 2010 . [ 9 ] Preece , J . and Shneiderman , B . The reader - to - leader framework : Motivating technology - mediated social participation . AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 13 - 32 . [ 10 ] Porter , J . Designing for the Social Web . new Riders , Berkeley , Ca , 2008 . [ 11 ] Carmien , S . P . and Fischer , G . Design , adoption , and assessment of a socio - technical environment supporting independence for per - sons with cognitive disabilities . Proc . of the 26th Annual SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Florence , Italy , apr 5 - 10 ) . aCM , new york , 2008 , 597 - 607 . [ 12 ] Gorman , a . and Fischer , G . Toward an analytic Framework for Understanding and Fostering Peer - Support Communities in Using and Evolving Software Products . Proc . of the 4th International Conference on Communities and Technologies ( University Park , Pa , June 25 - 27 ) . aCM , new york , 2009 , 1 - 9 . [ 13 ] ariely , D . The Upside of Irrationality — the Unexpected Benefits of Defying Logic at Work and at Home . HarperCollins , new york , 2010 . [ 14 ] Giles , J . Internet encyclopedias go head to head . Nature 438 , 7070 ( 2005 ) , 900 - 901 . About thE Author Gerhard Fischer is a professor of computer science , a fellow of the Institute of Cognitive Science , and the director of the Center for Lifelong Learning and Design ( L3D ) at the University of Colorado , Boulder . His research is focused on new conceptual frameworks and new media for learn - ing , working , and collaborating , human - computer interaction , design and meta - design , domain - ori - ented design environments , social creativity , dis - tributed cognition , universal design ( assistive tech - nologies ) , and socio - technical environments . DoI : 10 . 1145 / 1962438 . 1962450 © 2011 aCM 1072 - 5220 / 11 / 05 $ 10 . 00 developed as open , evolvable seeds rather than finished products ; and the focus of education is shifted from teaching to learning . While social computing is potentially the most important new driving force behind cul - tures of participation ( illustrated with the examples in Table 1 ) , the framework also strives to increase social creativity , put domain pro - fessionals in charge of exploring ill - defined problems , and make owners of problems independent of high - tech scribes . The major role for new media and new technologies from a culture - of - participation perspec - tive is not to deliver predigested information and non - changeable artifacts and tools to individuals , but rather to provide the oppor - tunity and resources for engaging them in authentic activities , for participating in social debates and discussions , for creating shared understanding among diverse stakeholders , and for framing and solving personally meaningful problems . Acknowledgements I thank the members of the Center for LifeLong Learning and Design at the University of Colorado . I specifically thank collaborators : Hal Eden and Ernesto Arias , the major designers of the EDC ; Stefan Carmien , who devel - oped the MAPS system ; Yunwen Ye , and Andrew Gorman . The research was supported in part by the ( 1 ) National Science Foundation IIS - 0613638 , IIS - 0843720 , IIS - 0968588 , OCI - 1028017 , ( 2 ) Google , and ( 3 ) SAP . Thanks also to Ron Wakkary , Ben Shneiderman , Jonathan Grudin , Don Norman , Rul Gunzenhäuser , Andrew Gorman , Sophia Liu , Li ( Julie ) Zhu , Shin’ichi Konomi , and Isa Jahnke . EndnotEs [ 1 ] Benkler , y . The Wealth of Networks : How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . yale University Press , new Haven , 2006 . [ 2 ] Fischer , G . Beyond ‘couch potatoes’ : From con - sumers to designers and active contributors . First Monday 7 , 12 ( 2002 ) ; http : / / firstmonday . org / htbin / cgiwrap / bin / ojs / index . php / fm / article / view / 1010 / 931 [ 3 ] Jenkins , H . Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Cultures : Media Education for the 21st Century . MIT Press , Cambridge , 2009 . [ 4 ] Fischer , G . End - user development and meta - design : Foundations for cultures of participation . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing 22 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 52 - 82 . [ 5 ] von Hippel , E . Democratizing Innovation . MIT Press , Cambridge , 2005 . [ 6 ] Fischer , G . and Giaccardi , E . Meta - design : a framework for the future of end user develop - ment . In End User Development , H . Lieberman , F . Paternò , and V . Wulf ( Eds . ) . Kluwer academic Publishers , Dordrecht , The netherlands , 2006 , 427 - 457 . [ 7 ] arias , E . G . , Eden , H . , Fischer , G . , Gorman , a . and Scharff , E . Transcending the Individual human mind—creating shared understanding through col - laborative design . ACM Transactions on Computer Human - Interaction 7 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 84 - 113 . CHALLEnGES FoR FuTuRE RESEARCH Identify the social abilities , technical skills , and cultural competencies that people need in cultures of participation . Extend the theoretical framework to support the design of sociotechnical environments in which users can act as co - designers in personally meaningful problems . analyze the different processes and trade - offs underlying cultures of participation ( e . g . , creating seeds for open , living artifacts ) and consumer cultures ( e . g . , create complete systems ) . Broaden the scope of human - centered design from the usability of systems to providing resources , incentives , information to encourage participation and sustain it and allow users to reflect upon changing their behavior . Create a deeper understanding of how cultures of participation harness important social benefits related to national priorities , such as energy sustainability , lifelong learning , education , and healthcare . Differentiate domains in which cultures of participation will flourish and be successful from the ones that are not suitable by exploring the drawbacks associated with cultures of participation . i n t e r a c t i o n s M a y + J u n e 2011 53 cover STorY