Article Intentional or Negligent Homicide ? Evidence for Juror Decision Making Elisa Gambetti , Raffaella Nori , and Fiorella Giusberti Department of Psychology , University of Bologna , Italy Abstract The present study examined the influence of specific evidence and testimonies on a juror’s decision to make a verdict of intentional or negligent homicide in a Civil law country . Italian students ( N ¼ 280 ; M age ¼ 25 . 0 years , SD ¼ 2 . 9 ) read different affi - davits characterized by the presence or absence of three elements against the defendant : motive , skill in use of weapons , and previous violence toward the victim . Participants then decided a verdict and provided a confidence judgment on their decision . Results showed that the presence of motive , skill , and previous vio - lence influenced the jurors’ decision , significantly changing the verdict from negligent to intentional homicide . The findings were discussed in terms of the folk - concept approach of intentionality . Keywords Decision making , intentionality , attribution Introduction In the past 20 years , there has been a growing interest in the investigation of jurors’ decision making . Psychologists have examined how jurors perceive , inter - pret , and remember evidence ( e . g . , Giusberti , Bensi , & Nori , 2013 ) . Research has been conducted in numerous areas including models of juror decision making ( e . g . , Pennington & Hastie , 1992 ) , biases and the heuristics of jurors’ thinking ( e . g . , Hastie , 1993 ) , and inﬂuence of jurors’ emotions and moods on their judg - ments ( e . g . , Feigenson , 2010 ) . These studies have considered both legal , such as type and severity of oﬀense , and extra - legal variables , such as prior criminal Psychological Reports 2016 , Vol . 119 ( 2 ) 395 – 410 ! The Author ( s ) 2016 Reprints and permissions : sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0033294116661545prx . sagepub . com Corresponding Author : Elisa Gambetti , Department of Psychology , University of Bologna , Viale Berti Pichat 5 , 40127 Bologna , Italy . Email : e . gambetti @ unibo . it history , age , gender , and race of the defendant , that aﬀected jurors’ decisions ( e . g . , Brown & Sorensen , 2014 ; Davis , 1989 ; Devine , Buddenbaum , Houp , Stolle , & Studebaker , 2007 ; Ruva , Guenther , & Yarbrough , 2011 ) . Recently , Bornstein and Greene ( 2011 ) pointed out that studies on jurors’ decision making , including research focused on decision processes ( e . g . , attribution , hypothesis testing ) as well as decision outcomes ( e . g . , verdicts ) , aﬀord the oppor - tunity to conduct basic and applied research simultaneously . For example , as regards the decision about intentionality , research can focus on both basic attri - bution processes , that is mental processes that people follow to understand desires and forecasts of another person ( Forguson , 1989 ) , and decision making applied to penal matters , i . e . , the application of the law to circumstances and behaviors , which could have been months or even years prior , founding objective standards for evaluation of responsibility and punishment ( Wiener , Bornstein , & Voss , 2006 ) . The present study ﬁts into this perspective exploring how juror understand the level of criminal intent through the consideration of some of psychological processes and legal concepts involved in decision making . The intentionality concept : Psychological and legal elements In most cases , it is diﬃcult to determine whether the defendant intentionally committed the crime . The determination of intentionality is not a simple task because it underlies the attribution of will and knowledge with respect to the occurrence of the criminal act . This attribution requires that the defendant committed the crime with the intent to bring about particular consequences , that is , the mens rea of the defendant . In the case of murder , the requisite intent would be that the defendant intended to cause the death of the victim ( Dennison , 2007 ) . This type of assessment underlies many psychological pro - cesses and the integration of diﬀerent legal elements . Some of the psychological processes implicated are as follows : counterfactual thinking ( considering alter - native outcomes ; Byrne & McEleney , 2000 ) , hindsight bias ( seeing a possibility as more likely when one knows the outcome ; Harley , 2007 ) , self - serving bias ( whereas actors attribute their negative behaviors to situational factors and their positive behaviors to personal characteristics , e . g . , Ames , Ames , & Garrison , 1977 ; Medway , 1979 ; Solano , 1979 ; Yamauchi , 1988 ) , availability heuristic ( relying on how easy it is to retrieve information ; Tversky & Kahneman , 1982 ) , and representativeness heuristic ( overattending to salient features ; Tversky & Kahneman , 1982 ) . As regards the legal elements , jurors have to consider during the determination of guilt the legal concept of intentionality , that varies by legal systems and jurisdictions , and at sentencing the aggravating and mitigating circumstances , that aﬀect only the severity of the crime . For example , the brutality of a crime and acting for trivial and abject reasons are considered “aggravating” behaviors ( in the legal sense ) , whereas acting for par - ticular moral or social reasons or reacting in a state of anger , for example , 396 Psychological Reports 119 ( 2 ) as determined by another’s unjust action , are considered mitigating circum - stances of the crime . Taken as whole , these factors can lead to diﬀerent verdicts and to more or less severe punishments . In order to investigate the adult folk concept of intentionality , Malle and Knobe ( 1997 ) developed a hierarchically related components model ( see Figure 1 ) . The core component of the model is intention , the mental state in choosing and planning the criminal act . It is determined , in turn , by beliefs about how the act would lead to that outcome , that is , thoughts about the conse - quences of the act or the act itself before it takes place , and desire for the speciﬁc outcome or “the outcome itself as a goal , purpose , or aim . ” In order to evaluate whether a criminal action is intentional , skill , and awareness of performing the act have to be present . The skill is the agent’s ability to perform the action that he intends , whereas the awareness refers to the agent’s mental and physical conditions at the time of acting that permits to fulﬁll the intention . Performing an intentional action thus requires at least minimal conscious awareness . Starting from the model of Malle and Knobe ( 1997 ) , several studies have sought to identify other speciﬁc components that people deem necessary to label an action intentional , such as the character of the defendant ( Sripada , 2010 ) . Speciﬁcally , this component refers to the agent’s disposition to have cer - tain desires and beliefs . Recently , Sloman , Fernbach , and Ewing ( 2012 ) pro - posed a model that implies two inferential routes to judgment about the intentionality of someone else’s action : bottom - up routes are from action to desire and top - down routes are from character and disposition to action . In the ﬁrst case , the observation of action provides a bottom - up inference from eﬀect to cause . For instance , learning that a homicide took place because the victim has been pushed down the stairs increases the probability of an intention to perform that crime . The second case involves reasoning from an actor’s char - acter , that comprises traits , dispositions , or current mood , to his or her likely desires . For instance , learning that the defendant was a good person , but he was very angry in that moment provides a top - down inference from potential causes of attitudes to consequences , that is the push and the consequent death of the Belief Desire Skill Intention Awareness Intentionality Figure 1 . The five - component model of the intentionality concept . Source : Malle and Knobe ( 1997 ) . Gambetti et al . 397 victim . One of the two inferential routes is chosen on the basis of the jurors’ available information : the action or the actor’s character . Intentionality under civil and common law The defendant’s character , awareness , intention ( that implies both desire and belief ) , and skill , which conjoin to deﬁne intentionality , cannot be a priori known by the juror who has to infer the intentionality of the defendant’s acts or omissions . As a result , the verdict is based on the jurors’ capacity to infer mental states , and thus intentionality , from the evidence and testimonies pre - sented at trial about behaviors and circumstances surrounding the crime . Therefore , it is clear that forensic decisions about criminal behavior are based on the interpretation of acts within the penal code of each country . In Civil law countries , such as most European nations , China , Japan , and most African and South American nations , the juror must apply the abstract legal code to a crim - inal case , which depends on the interpretation of facts and events . The type of argument is inquisitorial ; judges , who are generally legal experts , ask questions and demand evidence . Lawyers present arguments based on the evidence , which the prosecution ﬁnds . As regards the crime of homicide , in Italy , the court at ﬁrst instance is made up of two legal experts and six laypersons who individually vote on the matter . Unanimity is not necessary as in the Civil law model . Under Italian law , jurors must determine intentionality on the basis of judgments about consciousness ( cognitive component ) and will ( aﬀective component ) in order to distinguish , intentional and unintentional or negligent crime . For exam - ple , a person who kills a driver throwing a stone from a highway bridge in order to hit a car commits an intentional homicide because the criminal behavior was carried out with the consciousness and the will of hurting someone . Conversely , a driver who kills a pedestrian by losing control of his car , because he had not checked the brakes that had already showed signs of malfunction , commits a negligent homicide , that is , without the consciousness and the willingness to hit someone . The legal concepts of consciousness and will could theoretically cor - respond with the folk concepts of belief and desire in Malle and Knobe’s ( 1997 ) model . Moreover , negligent homicide may be distinguished from accidental death . For example , a person who is driving carefully , but whose car neverthe - less hits an individual darting out into the street , has not committed a negligent homicide . In Common law countries , such as Unites States , Canada , England , Australia , and India , the legal system is characterized by case law , which is law developed by judges through decisions of courts , that generally are juries comprising laypersons . The type of argument is adversarial : lawyers ask ques - tions of witnesses , demand production of evidence and testimonies , and present cases based on the elements they have gathered . The function of juries is to weigh evidence presented to them . In this context , murder and manslaughter 398 Psychological Reports 119 ( 2 ) are legal terms for the killing of a human being . The ﬁrst occurs when the defendant acts with the intention to kill , whereas the second is the unlawful killing with ( voluntary manslaughter ) or without ( involuntary manslaughter ) malice aforethought , either expressed or implied . Voluntary manslaughter occurs , for example , when a homicide is committed in the heat of passion , or as a response to a provocation that fairly meets some speciﬁc legal criteria , whereas involuntary manslaughter involves criminal liability , or high degree of negligence , with the absence of intention to kill . For example , a person who runs a red light driving a vehicle and hits someone crossing the street has committed an involuntary manslaughter . This kind of crime is similar to the legal concept of negligent homicide , whereas murder is equivalent to intentional homicide , in Civil law countries . Psychological research recently showed that there are several factors that inﬂuence the attribution of intentionality . For example , Spackman , Belcher , Calapp , and Taylor ( 2002 ) and Spackman , Belcher , Cramer , and Delton ( 2006 ) highlighted the importance of jurors’ a priori theories about emotions on the perception of defendant’s responsibility through the observation of some mock - jurors’ deliberation periods . The results showed that defendants who had a history of violence toward the victim and who intended their actions and dwelt upon or were overwhelmed with their emotions were mostly likely to be con - victed of a murder rather than a manslaughter . According to the authors , the diﬀerence between murder and manslaughter verdicts is principally due to pre - existing folk theories of emotions . Speciﬁcally , jurors voting for murder suggested that emotion and reason are interdependent and that persons can simultaneously act from emotion as well as reason , whereas jurors voting for manslaughter suggested that emotions can remain for long periods and cannot operate simultaneously with reason . The present study In literature , a variety of psychological and legal accounts of the intentionality judgments have been proposed . However , there are few studies that have inves - tigated empirically whether people psychologically understand others’ mental states in a manner consistent with the law ( e . g . , Levinson , 2005 ) . Intentional versus negligent homicide law does vary to some degree in Civil and Common law countries . However , the defendant’s state of mind at the time of the killing and the circumstances under which the killing occurred remain important ( e . g . , Kittichaisaree , 2001 ) . With such matters in mind , the purpose of the present work was to begin to gain an understanding of the issues jurors must deliberate when making the distinction between intentional versus negligent in a Civil law country . In par - ticular , the study examined whether and how speciﬁc elements that identify intentionality aﬀect the juror’s decision . In order to deﬁne the concept of Gambetti et al . 399 intentionality , using Malle and Knobe’s ( 1997 ) model , this study considered skill , that is , the ability to commit a crime , and intention , which in a trial must be inferred from the motivating circumstances . This aspect of the ﬁve - compo - nent model that derives from the “desire” factor was operationalized using defendant’s motivations to hate the victim , that could represent the motive of the crime . In the present study , the belief and awareness elements of the Malle and Knobe’s ( 1997 ) model remain constant because the ﬁrst lays the foundation for the baseline ( that is a negligent homicide ) and the second is a necessary condition for the skill and desire variables . Moreover , previous violence against the victim , is another important factor in attributing intentionality to commit a homicide , thus predicting the verdict . It does not theoretically correspond to any element of the Malle and Knobe’s ( 1997 ) model , but it refers instead to the character concept of Sripada ( 2010 ) and Sloman et al . ( 2012 ) . This factor indeed highlights both the relationship between victim and defendant and the personality of the defendant who could be considered unable to control negative emotions . To our knowledge no prior work , in the area of jury decision making , examined the eﬀect of skill , motive , and previous violence speciﬁcally committed by the defendant against the victim on juror perception of intentionality . The following hypotheses are proposed . Hypothesis 1 . Defendants with greater weapons skills , greater motive and previous violence against the victim will be more likely to have their actions judged as intentional . Conversely , the presence of low skill to use weapons and no motive of the defendant , and good relationship between the victim and the defendant , will diminish the degree of intentionality attributed to the defendant . Hypothesis 2 . The presence of skill , motive and previous violence could also increase juror’s conﬁdence about their judgments that may be an additional indi - cator of the factors that most inﬂuence an intentional verdict . Conversely , the absence of these three elements could diminish conﬁdence . Method Participants Two hundred and eighty participants , undergraduate students of the University of Bologna ( Italy ) , without any experience about criminal justice or law and selected randomly from some introductory psychology and medicine classes , took part in the experiment voluntarily ( 103 men and 177 women ; age 18 – 31 years , M ¼ 25 . 0 , SD ¼ 2 . 9 ) . They had an average of 14 . 3 years of education ( SD ¼ 2 . 6 ) . Participants worked individually in this simulation of the Civil law tradition . Thirty - ﬁve participants were randomly assigned to each experimental 400 Psychological Reports 119 ( 2 ) condition ( Table 1 ) . All participants signed the written consent form before the study began . Measures Participants received case material composed of a background case , one of the eight versions of a criminal trial summary and a verdict page . The evidence and testimonies considered against the defendant were as follows : a motive ( i . e . , a circumstance that could have motivated the homicide and from which the juror could infer the intention to kill ) , the skill to use weapons , and pre - vious violence toward the victim . The combination of the presence or absence of each of the three variables determined eight diﬀerent experimental condi - tions ( Table 1 ) . Baseline phase The ﬁrst page of the case material consisted of the background case , which was a description of an event concerning a boar - hunt in which a hunter was killed by a bullet . A hunting companion claims to have ﬁred a shot thinking that a boar had come out of the bush . 1 At the end of this description , there was a brief explanation of the diﬀerence between intentional ( “an expected and wanted crime” ) and negligent homicide ( “a crime that occurs as a result of negligence , incompetence or imprudence” ) according to the Italian Penal Code . Two questions then assessed the partici - pants’ opinion by asking for a judgment about the crime ( in a continuum from 0 ¼ “negligent homicide” to 100 ¼ “intentional homicide” ) and the conﬁdence about their decision ( in a continuum from 0 ¼ “not certain” to 100 ¼ “absolutely certain” ) . The case background information was presented prior to the aﬃdavits in order to provide participants with a meaningful context in which to evaluate Table 1 . Experimental conditions . Previous violence Skill Motive Condition 1 Present Present Present Condition 2 Absent Absent Present Condition 3 Absent Present Absent Condition 4 Present Absent Absent Condition 5 Absent Present Present Condition 6 Present Absent Present Condition 7 Present Present Absent Condition 8 Absent Absent Absent Gambetti et al . 401 the evidence and the testimonies . Moreover , asking participants to make a deci - sion , the baseline phase was important to control individual diﬀerences in case verdict , that is , to be sure that any successive diﬀerence in verdict could be due to the introduction of independent variables and not to the participants’ prior opinion or to diﬀerent methods of response . Experimental phase On the second page , three witness aﬃdavits were presented . Each aﬃdavit pro - vided new information about the case . Speciﬁcally , one deposition regarded the presence or absence of previous violence toward the victim , i . e . , the description of a brawl in a bar versus a peaceful time such as playing cards at the bar , while commenting on the bond between the victim and the defendant . The second deposition concerned the presence or absence of the defendant’s skill in using a gun , i . e . , the defendant’s expertise versus non - expertise in using guns . The third deposition regarded the presence or absence of a motive , i . e . , the defendant’s wife had fallen in love with the victim and wanted to leave her husband versus the victim and the defendant were close friends . The order of the three aﬃdavits was randomized to eliminate any possible order eﬀect . Finally , in the verdict page , participants were instructed to reach a decision by considering all the aﬃdavits . They were asked to state their verdict on a continuum from 0 ( neg - ligent homicide ) to 100 ( intentional homicide ) and their conﬁdence in their deci - sion on a continuum from 0 ( not certain ) to 100 ( absolutely certain ) as in the baseline phase . Procedure On arrival , participants were informed that they would be deciding , taking all the time they wanted , about a criminal case by distinguishing between negligent or intentional murder . After ﬁlling out a personal data form ( sex , age , and education ) , participants were provided the case material , with the instruction to proceed through the packet sequentially without looking ahead or back . They spent an average of 20 minutes to ﬁnish the task . Finally , participants were thanked for their contribution to the study . Results To analyze the inﬂuence of gender , age , and education on the case decision and conﬁdence , two linear regression analyses were performed . The results did not show any signiﬁcant relations between personal data and case decisions , F ( 3 , 276 ) ¼ 0 . 76 , p ¼ . 47 ; age , (cid:2) ¼ (cid:2) 0 . 04 , t ¼ (cid:2) 0 . 71 , p ¼ . 48 ; sex of participants , (cid:2) ¼ 0 . 06 , t ¼ 1 . 03 , p ¼ . 30 ; education , (cid:2) ¼ . 09 , t ¼ 1 . 65 , p ¼ . 09 ; or between per - sonal data and conﬁdence about the decision , F ( 3 , 276 ) ¼ 0 . 42 , p ¼ . 73 ; age , 402 Psychological Reports 119 ( 2 ) (cid:2) ¼ (cid:2) 0 . 06 , t ¼ (cid:2) 0 . 98 , p ¼ . 33 ; sex of participants , (cid:2) ¼ 0 . 00 , t ¼ 0 . 11 , p ¼ . 91 ; edu - cation , (cid:2) ¼ 0 . 02 , t ¼ 0 . 32 , p ¼ . 75 . A 2 ( presence vs . absence of motive ) (cid:3) 2 ( presence vs . absence of previous violence ) (cid:3) 2 ( presence vs . absence of skill ) between - participant analysis of covariance ( ANCOVA ) was used , considering the baseline scores as covariates , to examine both the case decision data and the conﬁdence data . The ANCOVA on case decision showed signiﬁcant main eﬀects for motive , F ( 1 , 279 ) ¼ 79 . 25 , p < . 001 , (cid:3) 2 ¼ 0 . 23 , skill , F ( 1 , 279 ) ¼ 7 . 32 , p < . 01 , (cid:3) 2 ¼ 0 . 03 , and previous vio - lence , F ( 1 , 279 ) ¼ 10 . 55 , p < . 001 , (cid:3) 2 ¼ 0 . 04 , and a signiﬁcant interaction between motive and previous violence F ( 1 , 279 ) ¼ 4 . 31 , p < . 05 , (cid:3) 2 ¼ 0 . 01 . Bonferroni pairwise comparison showed that the condition in which motive and previous violence were absent ( M ¼ 34 . 67 , SE ¼ 2 . 34 ) signiﬁcantly diﬀered from the con - dition in which both variables were present ( M ¼ 63 . 12 , SE ¼ 2 . 34 , p < . 05 ) . Descriptive statistics are reported in Figure 2 . The ANCOVA on conﬁdence data did not show any signiﬁcant eﬀects . Descriptive statistics are reported in Figure 3 . Discussion Intentionality attribution is strictly linked to culpability judgments ( Finkel & Groscup , 1997 ) , so understanding how jurors determine defendants’ mental states is fundamentally important to criminal law . The present study was con - ducted to empirically test how people judge defendants’ intentionality in the Figure 2 . Means and standard deviations of case decisions for the eight experimental conditions . Note . V : previous violence ; S : skill ; M : motive . Foreach condition , the first column refers to judgments in the baseline phase and the second column to judgments in the experimental phase . Means scores are shown . Gambetti et al . 403 Italian legal context , using some elements from psychological research ( Malle & Knobe , 1997 ; Spackman et al . , 2002 ) . The results supported the ﬁrst hypothesis : there is a relationship between the juror’s decision in a case of homicide and the speciﬁc evidence and testimonies in favor or against the defendant , that is respectively the absence or the presence of motive to kill , skill in use of weapons , and previous violence on the victim . In particular , the presence of these three elements signiﬁcantly moves the verdict from negligent to intentional homicide . These ﬁndings support the Malle and Knobe’s theoretical model . In fact , as the authors assumed , both skill and motive are important to deﬁne the attribution of intentionality . Moreover , the results pointed out the relevance of previous violence in making a determination about a case . This variable , unlike those identiﬁed by the Malle and Knobe’s model , which are based solely on the defendant’s mental state and individual characteristics at the time of the criminal event , emphasizes the importance of the relational aspects between the defendant and the victim . Therefore , of the presence of previous violence against the victim is important to the issue of intentionality and by itself is suﬃcient to move a juror from making a deter - mination from negligent to intentional homicide . This result conﬁrmed the study of Spackman et al . ( 2002 ) , which shows that , besides the particular emotion experienced by the defendant during the homicide ( i . e . , jealousy , fear , anger , and sadness ) , the presence of a history of violence of the defendant on the victim inﬂuences the verdict . However , it is necessary to highlight some diﬀerences Figure 3 . Means and standard deviations of confidence data for the eight experimental conditions . Note . V : previous violence ; S : skill ; M : motive . For each condition , the first column refers to judgments in the baseline phase and the second column to judgments in the experimental phase . Means scores are shown . 404 Psychological Reports 119 ( 2 ) between the two studies . First , the present study distinguished between inten - tional and negligent homicide in Civil law context , while Spackman et al . ( 2002 ) considered the distinction between murder and voluntary manslaughter in Common law context . As pointed out in the introduction , the legal deﬁnition of negligent homicide is most similar to involuntary manslaughter rather than voluntary manslaughter . Second , while Spackman’s study highlighted the importance of prior acts of violence against the victim to predict the juror’s verdicts , the present study showed that a single violent behavior , before the crime , provides information on the intentions of the defendant , playing a key role in the distinction between intentional versus negligent crime . The presence in the case of previous violence provides information about not only the previous relations between the defendant and the victim but also the defendant’s personality . This result is in line with studies , which highlighted the importance of the character of the defendant in the attribution of intentionality . For example , Sripada ( 2010 ) suggests that when perceivers make inferences about intentionality they not only attend to a person’s immediate beliefs , desires , and intentions ( the so - called “acting self” ) but also to a person’s enduring char - acter , attitude , and morals ( the so - called “deep self” ) . Similarly , Newman , Freitas , and Knobe ( 2015 ) , in order to understand how people attribute various mental states to others , showed that they hold diﬀerent intuitions about the “true self , ” that is , the whole of moral values , mood and will , inside every indi - vidual , that calling him or her to behave in speciﬁc ways . Thus , the recent lit - erature showed that people try to mentally represent the character and the moral dispositions of a defendant when they have to judge the intentionality of a behavior and the present study seems to support this view . Moreover , applying the Lee and Shapiro’s ( 2014 ) model , the participants in the experimental phase may have followed an intuitionist sequence of reasoning , rather than a rationalist sequence , in forming judgments about the defendant . This model , providing an explanation of the dynamic process between inten - tionality and moral judgments about a story character , suggests that people use two diﬀerent sequences of reasoning on the basis of information available during the decision - making process . When an observer knows the character’s actions , he or she ﬁrst decides the degree of intentionality and , then , infers the moral judgments about the character following a rationalist sequence of reasoning . On the other hand , when he or she has available information about the character ﬁrst informs moral assessments and then intentionality judgments about the actions following an intuitionist sequence of reasoning . In the present study , the information provided about the defendant , that is the brawl in a bar with the victim , inform ( moral and ) intentionality judgments about the criminal action . Similarly , applying Sloman et al . ’s ( 2012 ) model , participants followed a top - down judgment from defendant’s intention , inferred from the previous episode of violence and the motive , to action . Indeed , learning that the defend - ant was an aggressive person , who had a tangible reason to hate the victim , Gambetti et al . 405 provides a top - down inference from potential desires and thoughts of killing to a speciﬁc action , that is the shooting during a boar - hunt . The results of this study also showed an interaction between motive and pre - vious violence : the defendant was most likely to be convicted of intentional homi - cide if both a motive and a previous episode of violence emerged at trial , beyond information about skill . Thus , these evidence and testimonies seem necessary , and suﬃcient , to support a verdict of intentional homicide . The juror reasoning seems the following : the defendant has the personal characteristics for commit the crime , that is , the criminal intent ( motive ) and the individual disposition ( previous vio - lence ) . In this kind of reasoning the assessment of skill , that is a practical ability , has an irrelevant role . This ﬁnding is in line with a number of studies supporting the idea that people strive to integrate information into a coherent and meaningful impression by obtaining a sense of how defendant’s character , motives , and behavior ﬁt together ( Asch , 1946 ; Hughes & Traﬁmow , 2012 ; Read & Miller , 1993 ; Reeder , Vonk , Ronk , Ham , & Lawrence , 2004 ) . However , it goes against early theorizing which suggested that perceivers decide whether or not an action is intentional and then proceed to make sense of the behavior ( Heider , 1958 ; Jones & Davis , 1965 ; Shaver , 1985 ) . According to this view , information about a defendant’s motives and character should not inﬂuence judgments about intentionality because people explain the behavior ( in terms of the situation or the actor ) only once a decision about intentionality is made . Regarding the second hypothesis , that is the jurors’ conﬁdence about the verdict may increase after the experimental phase in conditions where one , two , or three elements against the defendant were present , the considered factors were not found to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the jurors’ level of conﬁdence . A possible explanation for this lack of an eﬀect is that , even in experimental conditions in which the verdicts signiﬁcantly move from negligent to intentional homicide , the jurors continued to give scores around the middle of the continuum . Therefore , the conﬁdence variable was not able to show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the baseline and the experimental phase . This is probably because the case presented showed incriminating but not decisive evidence and testimonies in order to assess where the boundary between negligent and intentional verdict lies . From a criminal justice perspective , this is a striking ﬁnding because begs the question in terms of just what would increase the accuracy or the strength of jury decision making . For this reason , future research could evaluate whether other kinds of evidence might inﬂuence the decision of negligent or intentional homi - cide and the conﬁdence about the verdict . Although the present study oﬀers important insight into the processes of jurors deliberating intentionality , it does suﬀer from certain limitations . First , the study does not come close to providing an account of the nature of the cognitive pro - cesses that are at work in the domain of the attribution of intentionality , but it only produces some potentially interesting ﬁndings that are suggestive of a causal model of decision making in the issue of homicide . Second , the inﬂuence of these 406 Psychological Reports 119 ( 2 ) variables may be also analyzed in a group deliberation , following the Common law model . Probably some issues that individual jurors considered important in the distinction between intentional and negligent homicide are , in some way , diﬀerent from those considered by juries , considering that some studies showed that there are some diﬀerences between decisions made by a judge or a jury ( e . g . , Kerr , MacCoun , & Kramer , 1996 ) . However , future research could be useful to assess whether the present ﬁndings are generalizable to juries and also whether there are any diﬀerences between decisions taken individually or in groups . Third , because the participants were students , who were non - expert in legal matters , the results may not be generalizable to judges in a civil law context who generally have a more nuanced understanding of the law . Therefore , although the ﬁndings of the present study could be applicable to judges in some basic decision processes about intentionality , more research is needed . Moreover , it should be noted that for both common and civil law legal systems , the literature on the use of students as mock jurors , as opposed to jury - eligible adults or actual jurors , is quite contro - versial ( MacCoun , 1989 ) . On one hand , there is some evidence that simulated trial presentations might artiﬁcially exaggerate the eﬀect of experimentally manipu - lated variables , particularly defendant characteristics ( e . g . , Tanford & Penrod , 1984 ) . On the other hand , other studies showed that decisions made by non - experts are quite comparable to those of experts . For example , Nori , Bensi , Gambetti , and Giusberti ( 2012 ) claimed that , irrespective of expertise , both legal professionals and those who were not legal professionals tended to reason in the same manner when estimating a defendant’s probability of guilt . Moreover , researchers found little or no diﬀerence in comparisons of verdicts by student and adult jury - eligible respondents for the same cases ( Bray , Struckman - Johnson , Osborne , McFarlane , & Scott , 1978 ; MacCoun & Kerr , 1988 ) . Finally , the decision to utilize a scale on intentionality was useful methodo - logically as a more precise measure of how judgments change between the initial and supplementary information about the oﬀense ; but , from a legal standpoint , it reduced the ecological validity of the study . Indeed the ultimate decision , both in common and civil law systems , would be whether or not a crime was inten - tional or negligent homicide . For this reason , future studies might explore this issue also using a dichotomous measure , that is , the jurors would deliberate and have to decide that the level of intent either was there , or was not there . Declaration of Conflicting Interests The author ( s ) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research , authorship , and / or publication of this article . Funding The author ( s ) received no ﬁnancial support for the research , authorship , and / or publica - tion of this article . Gambetti et al . 407 Note 1 . According to the Italian Penal Code , the scenario represents a negligent homicide because the defendant did not properly represent a constitutive element of the event , the presence of the hunter rather than the boar . For the Italian case law , it is not an accidental death for the following reasons : ( 1 ) a hunter has a duty to assess the move - ments of his companions before firing ; ( 2 ) the act of firing on a poorly identified target is not legitimate , for example , in an area covered by dense vegetation ; ( 3 ) the explosion of a shot at man - height , without ensuring the absence of people in the target area , is considered gravely imprudent behavior . References Ames , R . , Ames , C . A . , & Garrison , W . M . ( 1977 ) . Children’s causal ascrip - tions for positive and negative interpersonal outcomes . Psychological Reports , 41 , 595 – 602 . Asch , S . E . ( 1946 ) . Forming impressions of personality . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 41 , 258 – 290 . Bornstein , B . H . , & Greene , E . ( 2011 ) . Jury decision making : Implications for and from psychology . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 20 , 63 – 67 . Bray , R . M . , Struckman - Johnson , C . , Osborne , M . D . , McFarlane , J . B . , & Scott , J . ( 1978 ) . The effects of defendant status on the decisions of student and community juries . Social Psychology , 41 , 256 – 260 . Brown , J . M . , & Sorensen , J . R . ( 2014 ) . Legal and extra - legal factors related to the imposition of blended sentences . Criminal Justice Policy Review , 25 ( 2 ) , 227 – 241 . Byrne , R . M . J . , & McEleney , A . ( 2000 ) . Counterfactual thinking about actions and failures to act . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 , 1318 – 1331 . Davis , J . H . ( 1989 ) . Psychology and law : The last 15 years . Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 19 ( 3 ) , 199 – 230 . Dennison , S . ( 2007 ) . Criminal responsibility . In D . Carson , R . Milne , F . Pakes , K . Shalev & A . Shawyer ( Eds . ) , Applying psychology to criminal justice ( pp . 131 – 146 ) . Chichester , England : John Wiley & Sons Ltd . Devine , D . J . , Buddenbaum , J . , Houp , S . , Stolle , D . , & Studebaker , N . ( 2007 ) . Deliberation quality : A preliminary examination in criminal juries . Journal of Empirical Legal Studies , 4 , 273 – 303 . Feigenson , N . ( 2010 ) . Emotional influences on judgments of legal blame : How they happen , whether they should , and what to do about it . In B . H . Bornstein & R . L . Wiener ( Eds . ) , Emotion and the law : Psychological perspectives ( pp . 45 – 96 ) . New York , NY : Springer . Finkel , N . , & Groscup , J . ( 1997 ) . Crime prototypes , objective versus subjective culpabil - ity , and a commonsense balance . Law and Human Behavior , 21 , 209 – 230 . Forguson , L . ( 1989 ) . Common sense . New York , NY : Routledge . Giusberti , F . , Bensi , L . , & Nori , R . ( 2013 ) . Oltre ogni ragionevole dubbio . Decidere in tribunale [ Beyond any reasonable doubt . Decision - making in court ] . Roma / Bari , Italy : Laterza . Harley , E . M . ( 2007 ) . Hindsight bias in legal decision - making . Social Cognition , 25 ( 1 ) , 48 – 63 . 408 Psychological Reports 119 ( 2 ) Hastie , R . ( 1993 ) . Inside the juror . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Heider , F . ( 1958 ) . The psychology of interpersonal relations . New York , NY : Wiley . Hughes , J . S . , & Trafimow , D . ( 2012 ) . Inferences about character and motive influence intentionality attributions about side effects . British Journal of Social Psychology , 51 , 661 – 673 . Jones , E . E . , & Davis , K . E . ( 1965 ) . From acts to dispositions : The attribution process in person perception . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 2 , pp . 219 – 266 ) . New York , NY : Academic Press . Kerr , N . L . , MacCoun , R . J . , & Kramer , G . P . ( 1996 ) . Bias in judgment : Comparing individuals and groups . Psychological Review , 103 , 687 – 719 . Kittichaisaree , K . ( 2001 ) . International criminal law . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Lee , T . K . , & Shapiro , M . A . ( 2014 ) . The interaction of affective dispositions , moral judgments , and intentionality in assessing narrative characters : Rationalist and intu - itionist sequences . Communication Theory , 24 , 146 – 164 . Levinson , J . D . ( 2005 ) . Mentally misguided : How state of mind inquiries ignore psycho - logical reality and overlook cultural differences . Howard Law Journal , 49 ( 1 ) , 1 – 29 . MacCoun , R . J . ( 1989 ) . Experimental research on jury decision - making . Jurimetrics Journal , 30 , 223 – 233 . MacCoun , R . J . , & Kerr , N . L . ( 1988 ) . Asymmetric influence in mock jury deliberation : Jurors’ bias for leniency . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 , 21 – 33 . Malle , B . F . , & Knobe , J . ( 1997 ) . The folk concept of intentionality . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 33 , 101 – 121 . Medway , F . J . ( 1979 ) . Developmental aspects of self and other causal attributions . Psychological Reports , 45 , 155 – 159 . Newman , G . E . , De Freitas , J . , & Knobe , J . ( 2015 ) . Beliefs about the true self explain asymmetries based on moral judgment . Cognitive Science , 39 ( 1 ) , 96 – 125 . Nori , R . , Bensi , L . , Gambetti , E . , & Giusberti , F . ( 2012 ) . Integration information in judicial field : Adding versus averaging models . Psychology , Crime and Law , 18 , 877 – 895 . Pennington , N . , & Hastie , R . ( 1992 ) . Explaining the evidence : Tests of the story model for juror decision making . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 189 – 206 . Read , S . J . , & Miller , L . C . ( 1993 ) . Rapist or “regular guy” : Explanatory coherence in the construction of mental models about others . Personal and Social Psychology Bulletin , 19 , 526 – 541 . Reeder , G . D . , Vonk , R . , Ronk , M . J . , Ham , J . , & Lawrence , M . ( 2004 ) . Dispositional attribution : Multiple inferences about motive - related traits . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 86 , 530 – 544 . Ruva , C . L . , Guenther , C . C . , & Yarbrough , A . ( 2011 ) . Positive and negative pre - trial publicity : The roles of impression formation , emotion and predecisional distortion . Criminal Justice and Behaviour , 38 , 511 – 534 . Shaver , K . G . ( 1985 ) . The attribution of blame : Causality , responsibility , and blameworthi - ness . New York , NY : Springer - Verlag . Sloman , S . A . , Fernbach , P . M . , & Ewing , S . ( 2012 ) . A causal model of intentionality judgment . Mind & Language , 27 , 154 – 180 . Gambetti et al . 409 Solano , C . H . ( 1979 ) . Actor—observer differences in attribution : A replication . Psychological Reports , 44 , 583 – 586 . Spackman , M . P . , Belcher , J . C . , Calapp , J . , & Taylor , A . ( 2002 ) . An analysis of the effects of subjective and objective instruction forms on mock - juries’ murder / man - slaughter distinctions . Law and Human Behavior , 26 , 605 – 623 . Spackman , M . P . , Belcher , J . C . , Cramer , L . , & Delton , Y . ( 2006 ) . A qualitative investigation of mock - jurors’ theories of emotion and reason . Cognition and Emotion , 20 , 671 – 693 . Sripada , C . S . ( 2010 ) . The deep self model and asymmetries in folk judgments about intentional action . Philosophical Studies , 151 ( 2 ) , 159 – 176 . Tanford , S . , & Penrod , S . D . ( 1984 ) . Social inference processes in juror judgments of multiple - offence trials . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 47 , 749 – 765 . Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1982 ) . Evidential impact of base rates . In D . Kahneman , P . Slovic & A . Tversky ( Eds . ) , Judgment under uncertainty : Heuristics and biases ( pp . 153 – 163 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Wiener , R . L . , Bornstein , B . H . , & Voss , A . ( 2006 ) . Emotion and the law : A framework for inquiry . Law and Human Behaviors , 30 , 231 – 248 . Yamauchi , H . ( 1988 ) . Effects of actor’s and observer’s roles on causal attributions by Japanese subjects for success and failure in competitive situations . Psychological Reports , 63 , 619 – 626 . Author Biographies Elisa Gambetti is a psychologist and adjunct professor of the University of Bologna , Italy . She received her doctorate from the Department of Psychology of the University of Bologna . She was postdoctoral fellow collabor - ating at several research projects about forensic psychology . She works in pri - vate practice in individual psychotherapy with both adults and children . Her research interests include juror decision - making , personality traits , eyewitness testimony and testing validation . Raffaella Nori is a researcher and professor of Virtual Reality at the University of Bologna , Italy . She participated at the validation of tests measuring intelli - gence and visual - spatial abilities . Her most important focus of research includes spatial memory , eyewitness memory and juror decision - making . On these issues he has published several books and articles in international journals . Fiorella Giusberti is a professor of General Psychology and Forensic Psychology at the University Bologna , Italy . Her main focus of research includes cognitive processes , psychology of thinking , legal psychology in both civil and criminal judicial reasoning , eyewitness testimony and representation of space . She has written in each of these areas , both books and articles , and has presented papers and chaired sessions at several professional conferences and meetings over the years . 410 Psychological Reports 119 ( 2 )