Engaging with Nature Sounds & Citizen Science by Designing for Creative & Contextual Audio Encounters Jessica L . Oliver Queensland University of Technology jessie . l . oliver @ gmail . com Selen Turkay Queensland University of Technology selen . turkay @ qut . edu . au David M . Watson Charles Sturt University dwatson @ csu . edu . au Margot Brereton Queensland University of Technology m . brereton @ qut . edu . au Paul Roe Queensland University of Technology p . roe @ qut . edu . au ABSTRACT Wildlife if only we know how to listen to them . Eforts to understand and inform restoration of healthy ecosystems with environmental audio recordings languish from insufcient tools to learn and identify sounds in recordings . To address this problem , we designed and playtested the Bristle Whistle Challenge prototype with ten play - ers . We explored how to design delightful interactions with audio for gaining awareness of nature sounds and supporting wildlife conservation through citizen science . We found that rather than presenting audio alone , it was necessary to connect sounds to other senses and experiences in creative ways to impart meaning and enhance engagement . We ofer recommendations to design creative and contextual interactions with media to build awareness of na - ture’s wonders . We call for greater eforts in interaction design to engage people with nature , which is the key to turning around our environmental crisis . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing ; • Human - computer interac - tion ( HCI ) ; KEYWORDS Agent , Audio , Birds , Citizen Science , Creativity , Emotion , Games , Games with a Purpose , Learning , Ludic Design , Nature , Participa - tory Design , Sound , Wildlife calls are the best witnesses to the health of ecosystems , ACM Reference Format : Jessica L . Oliver , Selen Turkay , Margot Brereton , David M . Watson , and Paul Roe . 2021 . Engaging with Nature Sounds & Citizen Science by Designing for Creative & Contextual Audio Encounters . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445390 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8096 - 6 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445390 1 INTRODUCTION The sounds of nature often go unnoticed in the everyday lives of most people . Interactions with audio are generally understud - ied in HCI , though there has been a recent surge of interest in designing interactions with calls of the wild [ 6 , 41 , 42 , 60 , 67 ] . Inter - actions with playfully designed devices that include environmental audio recordings have shown promise to spark interest in nature [ 4 , 14 , 57 , 60 ] . Research has also explored how expert birdwatch - ers , or birders , identify birds in the wild by sight and sound , as well as when listening to audio recordings . Such studies have pro - vided insights for developing systems to support environmental monitoring with audio recordings [ 10 , 11 , 66 ] . Studies have also highlighted difculties with auditorily and visually interpreting au - dio recordings [ 7 , 13 , 40 , 41 ] . For example , visualizations of sound , called spectrograms , can be difcult to interpret [ 13 , 41 ] . However , with some training , spectrograms can improve the interpretation of audio [ 61 , 65 ] . We need to understand how to design enjoyable and rewarding experiences , so people can explore , learn about , and study the sounds in nature recordings . With advances in technology , people can now capture short en - vironmental audio recordings with mobile devices [ 55 ] or place acoustic sensors in environments for extended periods [ 30 ] . These recordings can potentially support fnding and monitoring secre - tive and rare wildlife that may otherwise go undetected , such as little - known , endangered Eastern bristlebirds [ 63 ] . However , some species , like bristlebirds , have calls that are understudied and highly variable . This makes automatic detection of calls with comput - ers difcult until a set of accurately identifed calls is available to train algorithms [ 26 , 42 ] . Having enticing designs that support learning calls may ofer community members ( i . e . as citizen sci - entists ) and ecologists new opportunities to forge collaborative scientifc investigations with audio that support saving species [ 15 , 42 ] . For this exploratory study , we aimed to investigate how audio interactions can entice curiosity about nature and foster engage - ment with citizen science that supports wildlife conservation . Our two primary objectives were to 1 ) design a prototype that includes diverse interactions with audio recordings , and 2 ) observe how peo - ple interacted with this prototype . We were guided by two research questions ( RQs ) : 1 . Can technology support people to increase their interest in wildlife and their calls ? If so , what forms might this technol - ogy take ? CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Jessica Oliver et al . Figure 1 : Screenshots of most Bristle Whistle Challenge sections . Players progressed , in sequence , to : A ) view an activity overview and introductory narrative ; B ) gamefully match soundscape spectrograms with audio recordings ; C ) playful explore bristlebird calls ; D ) gamefully match bird call spectrograms with audio recordings , and then match this media with bird photos ; E ) playfully name calls by shape and then sound ; F ) gamefully identify bristlebird calls in soundscapes ( see Supplementary Video ) . 2 . Can technology engender skills that increase engagement in the study of wildlife ? If so , how can this inform the design of future citizen science technologies ? To explore these questions , we created the Bristle Whistle Chal - lenge , a gameful prototype ( hereafter called “the Challenge” ; Fig - ure 1 ) . We focused the Challenge on Eastern bristlebirds because of our experience with the species [ 42 ] and the popularity of environmentally - focused citizen science [ 34 , 46 ] . A narrative in - troduced bristlebirds and their conservation needs . Additionally , the narrative explained how people’s experiences while playing the Challenge may inform the design of technologies that support learning and identifying bristlebird calls . We incorporated game elements within a non - game context ( i . e . gameful design or gamifcation [ 17 ] ) to explore the design of Engaging with Nature Sounds & Citizen Science by Designing for Creative & Contextual Audio Encounters CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Table 1 : Research goals for interactions with the Challenge Interactions ( section ) Receiving Guidance ( 3 . 1 ) A gameful personifed conversational agent provides useful support for audio interpretation Matching Media ( 3 . 2 ) Gameful tasks matching soundscapes * , calls , & photos support making sense of bird media Exploring Media ( 3 . 2 ) Playful interactions with birds by sight & sound or naming calls elicit interest & creativity Questing for Calls ( 3 . 4 ) Prior sections prove useful to gamefully identify bristlebird calls in soundscapes Enjoying Experience ( 3 . 5 ) Elements are engaging ( e . g . narrative , agent , play , game , aesthetics , & feedback ) To determine whether : * Soundscape = 30 - second environmental audio recordings capturing sounds of a landscape enjoyable experiences with audio recordings . Designing for enjoy - ment often involves gameful , goal - oriented tasks , or more free - form playful exploratory activities [ 17 ] . We designed the Challenge for people to receive guidance as they progressed through a mixture of gameful and playful activities . We set out to understand how each interaction may support enjoyment and learning ( Table 1 ) . Given the overall gamefulness of the Challenge prototype , we refer to participants as players and sessions as playtests [ 22 ] . Playtesting was conducted with 10 players to answer our RQs . We found that playful interactions with the conversational agent “Bob Bristlebird” supported players emotionally and logistically , while also making the game enjoyable ( see Table 3 ) . Each player readily applied their newly acquired experiences of interpreting audio to the fnal task of identifying bristlebird calls in soundscapes . Overall , players found the experience enjoyable , despite the cog - nitive demands of soundscape matching . Players engaged with multisensory experiences enthusiastically , which is promising for the design of future playful interactions with environmental audio . This work contributes to the HCI and citizen science communi - ties by providing a new understanding of how mixing supportive , creative , and structured interactions with multisensory media can aford sense - making of complex information , such as the inter - play between how birds look , sound and live . Our research extends knowledge in understudied areas of HCI , including audio - visual interactions , playfulness in citizen science , gamefulness in training , and nature engagement . We ofer recommendations to design cre - ative and contextual interactions with media to build awareness of nature sounds . We call for greater eforts in interaction design to engage people with nature , to improve environmental awareness , ecological research with citizen science , and wildlife conservation . 2 LITERATURE REVIEW 2 . 1 Games & Citizen Science Games are generally played for entertainment and include struc - tured , goal - oriented tasks that often have competitive elements [ 17 ] . Games are also increasingly created for purposes beyond just entertainment , such as for use in education , health , and science [ 52 , 68 ] . Researchers , for example , have explored games that en - gage people with sound ( i . e . primarily music ) while collecting data on their perceptions and annotations with the intent to inform audio searches [ 2 , 19 , 33 , 36 - 38 ] . Similarly , citizen scientists are commonly recruited to complete a variety of gameful tasks , which provides researchers with data needed to answer scientifc ques - tions [ 43 , 47 , 48 ] . Tasks in most citizen science projects are designed to be easy , requiring little prior knowledge or training to participate [ 54 ] . How - ever , identifcation of wildlife calls can vary in difculty depending on the context of the species being sought after and the sound - scape . For instance , the low frequency , consistent calls of a White - bellied heron are more distinct than the versatile calls of Eastern bristlebirds [ 13 ] . More people may explore wildlife calls when de - signs are available that improve call accessibility and ofer enjoyable learning experiences . 2 . 2 Play to Understand Nature “ . . . Play is not just mindless entertainment , but an essential way of engaging with and learning about our world and ourselves — for adults as well as children ” [ 23 ] . In design , play usually refers to creating freeform , exploratory , improvisational experiences [ 17 ] . Some view play and games on opposite ends of a spectrum , though people do regularly shift into playful modes of thinking while playing games [ 17 ] . Most technol - ogy is created with a utilitarian , task - oriented purpose , but there is value in designing playful explorations that tap into our incli - nations to be curious , explore , and refect [ 23 , 25 ] . Gaver proposes that designing for activities to elicit curiosity , exploration , and re - fection without a defned task “ can be a mechanism for developing new values and goals , for learning new things , and for achieving new understandings ” [ 25 , p 886 ] . Most citizen science is contributory , being led by researchers ( typically scientists ) , with the public contributing data [ 50 , 59 ] . Additionally , many design studies on citizen science are refexive , exploring factors like participant motivations , engagement rates , gameful design , and data quality , to maximize scientifc outcomes [ 12 , 21 , 48 , 64 ] . Relatively few citizen science technologies are de - signed with a participatory design approach , gearing towards em - powering communities , rather than controlling engagement [ 50 ] . We take inspiration from those who have designed to foster holistic experiences with nature that evoke playful curiosity , learning , shar - ing , and desires to help nature [ 18 , 58 ] . Since learning animal calls is daunting , we are exploring how to design engaging experiences with audio that make animal calls more accessible to learn through guided playful and gameful activities . 3 DESIGNING THE CHALLENGE The Challenge design is a culmination of our data corpus exploring how to design enticing nature engagement and citizen science with CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Jessica Oliver et al . Figure 2 : The frst two soundscape spectrograms in the Challenge . The middle band is crickets calling at night . B ) The top band is likely cicada insects , the middle is crickets , and the bottom half is birds calling ( x = 30 seconds ; y = 0 to 11kHz frequency ) . audio recordings to inform wildlife conservation [ 6 , 40 - 42 , 60 ] . We created the Challenge using Microsoft PowerPoint because the soft - ware was likely familiar to players . The Challenge consisted of 61 slides , embedded with diverse combinations of media , animations , and clickable buttons in arrangements aimed to be intuitive and aes - thetically cheerful . Players read text , considered agent comments , played audio recordings , interpreted spectrograms , interrogated photos , and received feedback on answers . Playtests were designed to last 1 . 5 hours , assuming players would engage with all informa - tion presented , describe impressions and decisions , and refect on their overall experience upon session completion . In this section , design goals , rationale , and mechanics for key interactions in the Challenge are explained ( see Table 1 for goals ) . Interactions are grouped by categories of player actions and experiences , including Receiving Guidance , Gamefully Matching Media , Playfully Explor - ing Media , Gamefully Questing for Calls , and Enjoying Experience ( Supplementary Video ) . 3 . 1 Receiving Guidance We designed light - hearted Bob Bristlebird to explore whether the use of a playful conversational agent supports players to make sense of spectrogram variables , soundscapes , sound events ( e . g . bird calls ) , and bird photographs ( Figure 1B ) . Conversational agents can support people with online learning [ 44 ] . However , agents need to be designed to appear without interrupting activity fow , or being presumptuous of human intention and feelings about interventions [ 56 ] . Given this , we designed Bob to pop - up and provide guidance and encouragement , usually between activity transitions . Bob also prompted players to refect on media in the Challenge , to reveal insights to researchers , such as experiences players may have with bird species featured in the Challenge . 3 . 2 Gamefully Matching Media Matching tasks were designed to elucidate how players make sense of soundscapes , specifc sounds , and bird photos ( Figure 1B , D , & F ) . We were interested in whether gameful aspects of memory recall , scafolding , repetition , multisensory perception , and feedback were useful and enjoyable . Upon completing the Soundscape Match sec - tion , players progressed to a playful section to explore bird media ( i . e . Bioacoustics Bonanza , see below ) . Then , players progressed to gamefully Call Match and Photo Match sections ( Supplementary Video ) . 3 . 2 . 1 Soundscape Match . We designed the Soundscape Match sec - tion to engage players with gamefully matching 30 - second sound - scape audio recordings with spectrograms ( Figure 1B ) . During pre - liminary prototyping , we observed that matching pairs of sound - scape spectrograms and audio recordings were most difcult for people when multiple soundscapes had equivalent complexity or spacing of prominent sound events , such as bird calls . Given this , we designed three Soundscape Match levels to become progressively more difcult , by increasing : 1 ) The number of new spectrogram - audio pairs ofered ( i . e . 2 , 4 , and then 6 new pairs ) 2 ) Complexity similarity across soundscapes ; and 3 ) The similarity of call spacing within and across soundscapes . In Level 1 , players listened to a soundscape audio recording and then were asked to choose which one of two spectrograms matched their memory of the audio . This introduced listening , re - calling memories of sounds , and interpreting spectrograms . Then , players were tasked with matching two audio recordings to the spectrograms ( Figure 2 ) . After players verbalized decisions , an - swers were revealed with borders of audio icons changing to col - ors that match corresponding spectrogram borders ( e . g . compare Figure 1B & D audio icons ) . Level 2 tasked players with match - ing four new soundscapes , and the two original ones again ( Fig - ures 1B & 2 ) . Soundscapes varied in complexity , with unevenly spaced sounds , such as cricket chirps , car engines , dogs bark - ing , and birds calling ( Figure 1B ) . In Level 3 , six new sound - scapes with similar complexity were presented . We strategically selected soundscapes that featured relatively evenly spaced Eastern bristlebird calls , with the intent to maximize pattern recognition difculty . 3 . 2 . 2 Call & Photo Matches . We designed the Call Match section to explore whether evoking player prior knowledge , memory re - call , and multisensory perception supports noticing diferences in how bird calls look and sound . Four calls from four species were Engaging with Nature Sounds & Citizen Science by Designing for Creative & Contextual Audio Encounters CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 3 : Calls creatively named by their shape in a s trogram . An annotation of a bristlebird call that is : A ) altered , B ) drawn on and tagged “the emu” , and C ) draw and tagged “a swimmer” . pec - un - n on used . First , two spectrograms were presented , with Bob encour - aging players to interpret calls vocally ( e . g . by whistling ) . Then , four audio recordings were provided , and players were tasked to determine , from memory , which audio recordings matched the two previous spectrograms . Players were then tasked to match addi - tional call spectrograms and audio , with opportunities to confrm their answers ( Figure 1D ) . In the Photo Match , we looked to assess if players knew four species by sight or sound . Four photographs were provided to dis - cuss . The species in photos were also featured in the Call Match . We were interested if players would make this connection . To provide them with opportunities to make this connection , the call spectro - grams were provided again , followed by audio , which allowed us to assess prior knowledge and reinforce experiences from previous sections . 3 . 3 Playfully Exploring Media We designed media exploration activities to consider whether play - ful interactions with audio that aren’t goal - oriented would be en - gaging for players and elicit curiosity that may help them make sense of audio recordings ( Figure 1C & E ; Supplementary Video ) . 3 . 3 . 1 Bioacoustics Bonanza . With the Bioacoustics Bonanza sec - tion , we set out to explore whether players enjoyed engaging in a freeform exploration of bird media between gameful tasks . Addi - tionally , we were interested to know if such opportunities proved useful in later activities ( Figure 1 ) . First , eight diferent bristlebird call spectrograms and audio recordings were presented to players , giving them opportunities to hear and see how much bristlebird calls can vary ( Figure 1C ) . Then , players were provided information about four additional bird species ( i . e . one photo , call spectrogram , and call audio per species ) . Players received prompts to notice a few common and nuanced features that can help distinguish bristlebird calls from other species with similar calls . 3 . 3 . 2 Naming Calls . In a prior study , one participant commented that the call shape of the Sulphur - crested cockatoo looked like “ . . . a highway , or car tracks ” [ 40 , p 1690 ] . This led us to consider how people might creatively name the shapes of calls in spectrograms . We were also inspired by the Rorschach test [ 53 ] , a psychological test that examines the shapes people perceive in the random or ambiguous visual pattern of inkblot plates ( an example of pareidolia [ 39 ] ) . To explore this further , we posted a 30 - second soundscape spec - trogram containing several identical bristlebird calls on social media and invited participants to name the call based on its shape “ a little like a Rorschach test ” . One participant downloaded the spectrogram , cropped a single call ( Figure 3A ) , drew a shape over the top , and shared the sketch indicating it was an “emu” ( Figure 3B ) . Another participant provided two suggestions , drawing “a swimmer” ( Fig - ure 3C ) and superimposing an “Enterprise” spaceship image on a cropped call spectrogram . With this positive outcome , we de - cided to include freeform pareidolia exploration in the forthcoming Challenge . While pareidolia typically refers to visual perception , we were also interested in extending this to consider whether there was an auditory equivalent of perceiving a specifc sound in a random or ambiguous auditory pattern , such as a bird call . To ensure clarity between the two forms of perception , we will hereafter specify naming calls in spectrograms as “ visual pareidolia ” and naming calls by sound as “ auditory pareidolia ” . For the Challenge , we designed the Naming Calls section to explore whether playfully naming calls by sight and sound elicits creativity . Additionally , we sought to know whether named calls are then more recognizable and memorable . After completing the gameful Photo Match , Bob briefy introduced players to the idea of naming calls , relating the activity to people seeing shapes in Rorschach inkblots . Players were ofered spectrograms of three diferent bristlebird calls and asked if the call shapes reminded them of anything ( Figure 1E ) . Once fnished interpreting calls by shapes , players advanced to naming each of the same calls again , this time metaphorically by the audible sound . 3 . 4 Gamefully Questing for Calls The Call Quest was designed to explore how players applied ex - periences from previous sections ( Figure 1F ) . Players were given two 30 - second soundscape spectrograms and corresponding audio recordings . They were asked to identify familiar calls . Next , photos of three species were presented , and their calls in spectrograms were revealed , to reinforce awareness of calls from multiple species , including bristlebird . To explore if players recognized calls from previous sections , they were then tasked to identify bristlebird calls from six pairs of soundscape spectrograms and audio recordings . Four pairs were new , whereas two were from the previous level . Upon completing the section , players were given the option to complete two bonus levels of the Challenge or begin a refective interview . 3 . 5 Enjoying Experience All Challenge interactions were created to provide players with an enjoyable experience engaging with audio visually and auditorily . We refected on our playtest observations to identify how people felt while completing activities . Also , we considered which experiences were most memorable for players , positive or negative , based on what they discussed in refexive interviews afterwards . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Jessica Oliver et al . Table 2 : Participant backgrounds , interests , and experiences revealed during sessions Identifer * Relevant Experience & Interests DR1 HCI senior lecturer & researcher focused on user interface design and evaluation DR2 HCI professor , instructor , & researcher with diverse areas of study ( e . g . digital interactions with nature ) DR3 HCI lecturer and researcher focused on games and learning DR4 Designer & software developer who completed a PhD in HCI on audio interactions & birdwatchers . Has tried citizen science projects involving classifcation of galaxy photos online & submitting nature photos . DR5 Industry project manager overseeing design & development of software & websites ( e . g . for citizen science initiatives ) . Has contributed wildlife sightings as a citizen scientist and played in a hobbyist band . PR1 Citizen science enthusiast who moderates social media for a national organization . Has tried a diverse range of projects too . Has played saxophone in a twenty - piece big band for more than 25 years . PR2 Interested in learning about birds ( e . g . recruitment from visiting bird conservation booth at a music festival ) PR3 Citizen science practitioner for 5 years , developing , supporting , and participating in projects and global working groups . Has aided in development of interfaces and platforms . Played trombone for nearly 10 years , being “a sound nerd ever since” via sound design and data sonifcation . Interested in soundscape ecology . PRC1 Interested in citizen science from learning of it during University studies in ecology ( e . g . a symposium led by the lead author ) . Aspires to learn more about birds ( i . e . owns an identifcation feld guide ) . PRC2 Broadly aware of the term citizen science and became interested in this research from brother * Identifer acronyms : DR = design recruit ; PR = public recruit ; PRC = public recruit cooperative . DRs and PRs completed playtests individually ; whereas PRC1 brought his sister to his playtest session , who was also interested in wildlife , so we welcomed the serendipitous opportunity to observe them cooperatively playtest the Challenge . 4 PLAYTESTING THE CHALLENGE As design researchers , we were interested in how players expe - rienced gameful and playful interactions with audio , rather than evaluating , in a hypothesis - driven sense , whether players engaged and completed activities “successfully” . Instead , we adopted an exploratory approach to assessment , which focuses , “ . . . on cap - turing a rich description of the encounters people have with the prototypes , addressing their activities , experiences , and interpreta - tions from a variety of perspectives . . . ” . [ 24 , p 128 ] . We aimed to develop a depth of understanding , and while not generalizable , readers can ascertain whether our fndings apply to their respective contexts . To do this , we recruited a total of ten participants by purposive sampling , with the intent to identify unique and rich experiences of value [ 20 ] . All participants were recruited for interests in design , citizen science , or wildlife . We included fve people with design expertise given their experience in navigating wicked problems [ 5 ] , by skillfully articulating , ideating , and evaluating technology interactions . The remaining fve participants were members of the public , to gain diverse perspectives and experiences . As sessions began , we asked players about their experiences with design , citizen science , birds , and audio . Additionally , we noted relevant experiences revealed during playtests ( Table 2 ) . To gain insights into player cognitive processes and experiences dur - ing playtesting , we asked players to verbalize actions , decisions , and feelings following concurrent think - aloud protocols [ 1 ] . Upon completing the Challenge , we asked players refexive questions following retrospective think - aloud protocols [ 1 ] , to 1 ) triangulate observations ; 2 ) understand what was most memorable ( i . e . positive or negative ) ; and 3 ) invite additional ideas for overcoming barriers , increasing fun , improving learning , or facilitating cooperation . Ses - sion observational notes and audio transcripts were reviewed to identify patterns in player experiences with Challenge interactions and to understand overall experiences . 5 FINDINGS Overall , players enjoyed all Challenge interactions , and the skills gained were useful to identify bird calls ( Table 3 ) . This section discusses how players engaged with each activity . 5 . 1 Receiving Guidance 5 . 1 . 1 Being Supported Emotionally & Logistically by Bob . Bob Bristlebird , the agent , provided players with emotional and logisti - cal support . Players enjoyed seeing Bob , regularly referring to him and his dialog in endearing terms , such as being “ cute ” . For instance , after completing the most difcult Soundscape Match level decipher - ing diferent bristlebird calls , Bob popped up and said , “ That was tricky huh ? ! I would make a wicked DJ the way I also remix all of these songs ! ” , which both reassured and amused most players af - ter a taxing section . Additionally , players typically followed Bob’s recommendations . When starting the Call Match , for example , Bob said , “ You might realize what the calls are if you sound them out aloud © ” , as two call spectrograms appeared without audio , and players who hadn’t tried this on their own took the advice . PR3 elab - orated he thought including the emoji was a good idea , as it might help more self - conscious players be more comfortable with the idea of interpreting a spectrogram verbally . Players also engaged when Bob prompted them to notice details . When exploring Bioa - coustic Bonanza , for example , Bob alerted players that bristlebird and Australian King Parrot calls “ can be pretty easily mixed up ” , which led DR2 to spend time enthusiastically comparing those calls . Such observations highlight how an agent can playfully provide entertainment , encouragement , and guidance . Engaging with Nature Sounds & Citizen Science by Designing for Creative & Contextual Audio Encounters CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Table 3 : Summary of fndings from player experiences with the Challenge Interactions ( section ) Interactions led to players : Receiving Guidance ( 5 . 1 ) Being supported emotionally & logistically by Bob Bristlebird , a conversational agent Matching Media ( 5 . 2 ) Perceiving soundscapes in varied ways , homing in on details , & applying prior experiences Exploring Media ( 5 . 3 ) Playing with media for insights & imagining creative call names , often with personal meaning Questing for Calls ( 5 . 4 ) Applying experiences with Bob , gameful , & playful interactions to fnd bristlebird calls Enjoying Experience ( 5 . 5 ) Enjoying soundscapes despite being taxing & engaging enthusiastically with all sections 5 . 2 Gamefully Matching Media 5 . 2 . 1 Employing Diverse Approaches to Matching Soundscapes . Each player approached deciphering patterns in spectrograms and audio recordings based on soundscape features and personal pref - erences , with no two players using identical strategies . Common actions included : • Comparing overall soundscape diferences in complexity & regularity • Comparing overall soundscape patterns in musical terms ( beats , rhythms , tempo , etc . ) • Comparing temporally when sounds began or ended in soundscapes • Comparing locations of specifc familiar sounds within a soundscape • Comparing features of specifc calls to musical terms ( pitch , crescendo , etc . ) • Counting the number of calls • Counting seconds between calls • Whistling or onomatopoetically verbalizing calls When deciphering the frst set of six soundscapes that include diverse environmental sounds ( i . e . level 2 ) , players often began by identifying broad diferences , and then gradually homed in on more nuanced details of difcult pairs ( Figure 1B ) . When matching the next set of six soundscapes that included evenly spaced bristlebird calls ( i . e . level 3 ) , players often zeroed in on features and diferences of specifc calls . Illuminating exemplar strategies for interpreting soundscape spectrograms and audio recordings , as well as processes for deciphering between pairs , may make audio recordings less abstract and more appealing to explore . 5 . 2 . 2 Homing in on Finer Details of Specific Birds & Their Calls . Once fnished exploring Bioacoustics Bonanza freely , players pro - gressed to the gameful Call Match section , by frst enthusiastically attempting to whistle or verbalize the frst two call spectrograms provided ( i . e . with pink and blue borders in Figure 1D ) . Remember - ing call matches proved less difcult than remembering soundscape matches , though people often replayed audio for both when answers were revealed to confrm their recollection of their answers . When provided all four call spectrograms and audio recordings , most play - ers were able to correctly match them , regardless of whether they knew any of the bird species calling ( Figure 1D ) . Once transitioning to the Photo Match section , only the loud , ubiquitous cockatoo was regularly recognized . Some of the players thought they recognized other bird species in photos , but then de - scribed conficting attributes that revealed players were thinking of a diferent species . Some players playfully personifed species they did not recognize , such as DR3 and PR1 independently referring to the Eastern whipbird as , “ the angry - looking bird ” . Players without prior knowledge , could not match photos with previous call spec - trograms and audio recordings when given again . Those with prior knowledge who had correctly matched call audio recordings and spectrograms , however , were sometimes then able to match the correct photo . For example , DR5 did this while also telling stories about hearing whipbirds camping . Being new to Brisbane , DR3 was unfamiliar with the birds . She described that matching call audio recordings and spectrograms as easier than matching calls to bird photos . DR3 elaborated that patterns in the calls could be recognized and linked by sight and sound without experience with birds , but a bird’s appearance couldn’t be intuitively associated to a call without prior knowledge . 5 . 2 . 3 Applying Prior Experiences to Sensemaking . Players were recruited based on having experiences and interests in either tech - nology design , nature , or citizen science . Initial interview questions and playtest sessions , however , revealed that players were often interested in more than one of these topics , and had broader rele - vant experiences , such as sound designing , computer science with audio , and playing music ( Table 1 ) . Several players , for example , related visuals , soundscape audio , and bird calls to experiences with music . For instance , DR2 shared that when previously trying to distinguish calls of two bird species , her musician son introduced her to thinking in musical terms , saying “ [ . . . ] he described it in quite an interesting way , and it helped me to learn the diference ” . Additionally , PR1 attempted to distinguish diferences in spectro - grams , saying , “ I will put this in music language because that’s how I understand it for myself ” . When deciphering soundscapes , PR1 described , “counting it out like beats to a bar” . She likened spectro - grams to being analogous to a “treble clef” type of “stave” if lines were added . Additional music terminology she applied included , “ emphasis mark ” , “ gliss ” , types of “ notes ” ( “ grace ” , “ high ” , “ low ” , “ qua - ver ” , “ triple forte ” ) , “ strokes ” ( up and down ) , “ timbre ” , and “ upswing ” . Similarly , DR5 also described observed patterns in musical terms . After completing the most difcult level of the Soundscape Match , containing audio with only evenly spaced bristlebird calls , for ex - ample , DR5 justifed mismatches made , saying “ to my credit , there’s some pretty even beats and it’s the same bird ” . Later , while matching call spectrograms and audio , he also commented , “ [ . . . ] the whip - bird was a bit easier too because it kind of has got that crescendo [ . . . ] ” . His description referred to the male bird’s characteristic call that begins as a gradually increasing whistle that reaches a fnal , loud cracking whip sound . Those with prior experience interacting with audio , music or otherwise , appeared to have benefted from CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Jessica Oliver et al . Figure 4 : Spectrograms of bristlebird calls that players were invited to name creatively by shape and then by sound . having an established language that perhaps made thinking about and discussing sounds of nature more accessible and engaging . 5 . 3 Playfully Exploring Media 5 . 3 . 1 Broadening Contextual Knowledge to Decipher Calls . In the Bioacoustics Bonanza section , most players openly explored the photo and call media provided . However , as with the Soundscape Match , the amount of time and efort each player spent interrogat - ing nuanced audible and visible diferences between calls varied ( Figure 1C ) . For instance , DR2 took time to play each call at least twice . She attempted to verbalize and whistle every call , switch - ing between pages multiple times . DR2 carefully considered call attributes , after reading comments and “dialog” between Bob and a bird in a photograph . Others questioned why this information was provided and anticipated being tested . All players broadly com - mented on some aspect of the section being interesting or useful to better understand birds and calls . 5 . 3 . 2 Imagining Visual Pareidolia that Ofen Reflected Personal Connection . Players readily provided names for call shape , which refected visual pareidolia . Ideas were often personalized , refecting specifc knowledge , interests , and past experiences . Some players had exhibited a propensity for visual pareidolia during the Spectro - gram Match , likening call shapes to objects , such as chairs ( DR4 ) , broken bones ( DR3 ) , and mushrooms ( DR3 for two diferent calls ) . During the Naming Calls section , after Bob primed players with a Rorschach inkblot image , responses varied . Most players readily ofered name ideas based on shapes in spectrograms for each of the three calls provided . Two exceptions included one player naming only two of the calls , and another player not imagining names based on shape for any of the three call spectrograms provided . Collectively , some ideas were similar , while others were distinct . Multiple players likened , for instance , the frst call to a mushroom ( PR1 , PR3 , PRC2 and previously DR3 ) or a lamp ( DR4 , DR1 ; Figure 4A ) ; the second to a jellyfsh ( PRC1 , DR4 , DR2 ; Figure 4B ) ; and the third to steps ( DR4 , PRC1 , PR1 ) or stairs ( PR1 , DR1 ; Figure 4C ) . Some ideas were of a similar vein , such as the second call resembling plant - like forms , including a kelp forest and grasses ( DR2 ) ; a pine plantation and bamboo ( PR1 ) ; and a forest of thin eucalypts ( PRC1 elaborated from PRC2’s suggestion of trees ; Figure 4B ) . Other ideas were also unique , such as the shape of the second call also evoking ideas of a window with rods ( DR1 ) ; a sideways squeegee for cleaning windows ( DR3 ) ; windshield wipers ( DR5 ) ; blinds on the side of a house ( PR1 ) ; electric cables with an electricity charge ( DR2 ) ; the mythological creature “ Slenderman ” and a barcode ( PRC2 ) ; and the Star Wars Imperial droids specifcally in The Empire Strikes Back movie ( PR3 ; Figure 4B ) . Ideas by players often included refections of knowledge and per - sonal stories . For instance , DR3 described the frst call as looking like specifc rock formations in Cappadocia , Turkey , known as fairy chimneys , which she knew of with Turkey being her country of origin ( Figure 4A ) . Similarly , the same call evoked DR2’s memories of living abroad in Japan , and she likened the shape to her recollec - tion of the Chinese character for water , which she then confrmed via her nearby book of Chinese logograms ( Figure 4A ) . Some players asked us months later , using their call names , whether we found any bristlebird calls in audio recordings from the wild . For instance , DR5 asked whether we found any “ Washington Monuments ” , which was his name for the frst call ( Figure 4A ) . This demonstrates that players applying personal meanings of experi - ences and knowledge to calls through creating names holds promise to strengthen call relatability , recognizability , and memorability . 5 . 3 . 3 Imagining Auditory Pareidolia that Ofen Reflected Personal Connection . Players readily created auditory pareidolia manifesta - tions relating to calls via onomatopoeias , phrases , emotional tones , and everyday sounds . Such ideas sometimes also refected personal experiences , interests , and auditory awareness . A few players had a propensity to mimic sounds encountered in audio by whistling and creating verbal onomatopoeias before beginning the Naming Call activity ( DR2 , DR4 ) . Most attempted creating verbalizations of calls only after being prompted by Bob to do so ( DR1 , PR3 ) . Most play - ers found the idea of naming calls based on a likeness to another sound ambiguous and requested examples , which the interviewer provided . Players regularly shared sentiments that they only heard bird calls , lacked ideas , or were not creative ( PR3 , PRC2 , ST , DR1 , PR2 ) . Regardless of initial apprehensions , all players interpreted at least one call auditorily , often ofering multiple ideas per call . Some players related calls to existing onomatopoeias and human language . For instance , DR2 verbalized the frst call to be akin to an “achoo ! ” sneezing sound ( Figure 4A ) . Similarly , DR3 described the second call resembling , “ psh , psh , psh , psh , psh ” , as a shooting sound efect in a video game ( Figure 4B ) . Players sometimes likened calls to English words , such as the frst call being akin to , “ Here I am ! Here I am " ( PR1 ) , “ I like chips " ( DR4 ) , “ What’s up ? ” ( PRC2 ) , and “ far out ” ( PRC1 ; Figure 4A ) . Some players translated calls by tone , anthropomorphically re - lating calls to a human emotional state . For instance , the second Engaging with Nature Sounds & Citizen Science by Designing for Creative & Contextual Audio Encounters CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan call conjured ideas of the bird having a “ real pissed of ” ( PRC2 ) , aggressive , or persistent attitude , due to the mixed registers ( PR3 ) and short , sharp staccato notes ( DR5 ; Figure 4B ) . Words applied to the second call likewise , often tonally matched being aggressive or persistent . Examples include PRC1 saying , " danger here ! danger here ! ” after being startled by the intense call , " Julie Shut up ! " ( PRC2 ) , “ Go away , get out of here ” ( DR5 ) , or akin to seagulls in the animated Disney movie Finding Nemo incessantly saying “mine” ( PR1 ; Figure 4B ) . By contrast , DR2 related the same call to have a secretive tone , and sounded reminiscent of “ Pst , come here ” ( Figure 4B ) . Occasionally , players related what they heard to familiar , every - day sounds or memories . To PR2 , the second call was unpleasant and like someone erratically scratching a polystyrene box ( Figure 4B ) . The third call was reminiscent of ’ I want more tea please ’ for DR2 ( Figure 4C ) . She then shared memories of her and her mum learning together years earlier that a local bird of the United King - dom named a yellowhammer has a call reminiscent of the phrase , “ a little bit of bread and no cheese ” . This story exemplifes that be - coming familiar with bird calls by similar - sounding human speech resonates as an engaging activity that can help with remembering calls . Auditory pareidolia shows similar promise as visual pareido - lia for bird vocalizations , with players applying meaning to calls that have the potential to support them becoming auditorily more relatable , recognizable , and memorable . 5 . 4 Gamefully Questing for Calls 5 . 4 . 1 Finding Bristlebird Calls by Sensemaking with Previous Chal - lenge Experiences . All prior sections provided players playful and gameful experiences that were then applicable to the gameful task of identifying bristlebird and other calls in soundscapes . Bob’s guidance through each of the previous sections assisted players in developing a process for identifying vocalizations . Players applied strategies gained through experiences gamefully matching spec - trograms , calls , and photos ; playfully exploring bird media ; and creatively naming calls . Often players began to search for bristlebird calls by applying a broad process of elimination that was commonly adopted when matching soundscape audio recordings and spectro - grams previously . Once soundscapes that seemed to lack bristlebirds were ruled out , players would begin homing in on specifc calls . This meant that players then attended to determining what features make a call unique , as a common discrimination strategy . Those players who commonly verbalized calls onomatopoeically or via whistling continued to do so during Call Questing . Additionally , players often explored how calls in the soundscapes related to their personalized names created . Players related their visual pareidolia names more often than auditory ones . The playtest session high - lighted the value in providing players with a diverse mixture of agent guided playful and gameful interactions that engaged them with learning a suite of processes to identify specifc sounds from environmental audio recordings . 5 . 5 Enjoying Experience 5 . 5 . 1 Gaining Interest in Bristlebirds . The narrative of the Chal - lenge prototype focused on understanding design needs to sup - port the use of audio for bristlebird conservation . The focus on bristlebirds piqued player interest in learning more about the secretive species . Playtesting confrmed that no player knew of Eastern bristlebirds by sight or call . For instance , when Bob in - quired if any bristlebird calls were heard or seen in the second level of the Soundscape Match , no players identifed the planted bristlebird calls , beyond DR3 randomly guessing correctly ( i . e . calls within pink circles in Figure 1B ) . Most players became curious to know more about the species than what was revealed explicitly in the Challenge sections . For example , some inquired about the bristlebird’s eponymous feather bristles at the top of its beak ( PR3 ) ; how audio recordings of the bird were collected ( DR1 ) ; the meaning of calls , and whether players may encounter the birds in the wild ( PR2 ) . The reactions of players to the narrative of the bristlebird story show promise for interest to be sparked to learn more and potentially take action to help the species . 5 . 5 . 2 Matching Soundscapes was Taxing , Albeit Engaging . Over - all , the Soundscape Match was enjoyable , despite being the most cognitively demanding section of the Challenge . Players enjoyed how they were introduced to audio interpretation and other game mechanics , though the lack of explicit direction led to some confu - sion . For example , not telling players that the initial habitat photo was just for broad context caused some to search the image expect - ing to fnd a bird ( DR1 ) . Players also indicated wanting advanced warning that they would need to remember the audio they heard to match it by memory to a spectrogram later in the Challenge . While players readily matched the frst two soundscapes ( Figure 2 ) , some did not recognize that Level 2 repeated soundscapes from Level 1 ( Figure 1B ) . Additionally , some players found the jump from two soundscapes to six a bit overwhelming ( DR3 ) . Given our use of PowerPoint , players were required to remember simultaneously which audio recordings had been played , which spectrograms had been matched , and which media needed fur - ther interrogation . Having to retain such information proved an arduous and cognitively demanding task that caused temporary frustration for some players . This may , in part , explain why a few took a rather haphazard approach to matching tasks . Bob’s sassy comments helped to lighten the mood and caused most players to laugh , helping to alleviate tension from cognitively demanding interactions . Some players , such as DR2 and PR1 , however , took de - light in the difculty of tasks , happily replaying calls several times when matches were forgotten and to resolve initial ambiguity . PR1 shared this natural inclination , saying , “ I’m gonna play that again and see if I’m right because as a musician , I don’t play one thing once . I play it like 20 or 30 diferent times ” . Overall , the gestures and comments of players during gameplay indicated they were engaged , irrespective of any temporary frustra - tion . Upon completing matches , all players sought to be reminded of their decided pairs , so they could determine if the feedback re - ceived matched their responses . All players were eager to know how they did with each gameful activity level , indicating overall enjoyment and that the task enticed them to compete with them - selves . During refections , players regularly stated fnding that the task was fun . Additionally , they readily suggested useful ideas to reduce the memory burden , such as to drag and drop media , draw lines , or tick boxes . They also suggested other ways to elucidate associations between soundscape spectrograms and audio , which CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Jessica Oliver et al . further demonstrated their interest in the experience . The Sound - scape Matching section was likely most difcult in part because it was also the frst section introducing players to game mechanisms , as well as crossmodal perception of audio by sight and sound si - multaneously . Playtests showed promise that orienting people to the sounds of the wild with supportive guidance may help to abate feelings of frustration while learning a difcult task . 5 . 5 . 3 Feeling Enthusiastic About the Mixture of Gameful & Play - ful Multisensory Activities . As with the Soundscape Match , players exhibited and expressed enjoyment for other activities , often ofer - ing ideas to improve and extend interactions . Designers liked the gameful design of matching spectrograms and audio recordings in a scafolded way , and then searching for bristlebirds , with feedback received at every level ( Figure 1B , D , & F ) . While all broadly en - joyed exploring materials in the Bioacoustics Bonanza section , some players ( DR2 ; PR3 ) were enthralled with exploring and critically thinking about “dialog” between Bob and other birds describing call features . Several players also enthusiastically opted to complete optional bonus Soundscape Match and Questing for Calls sections . While matching spectrograms with audio recordings could easily be done without prior experience , as DR3 pointed out , matching the birds by what they looked like to their calls was impossible without prior knowledge or training . We consciously designed the section this way to assess prior knowledge , but since players were not told this explicitly , the feedback was useful to validate our assumption . DR3 elaborated that despite being unable to accurately match photos to calls , she enjoyed seeing the birds and imagining their personalities based on appearance . She also suggested design ideas for restructuring the Challenge to create more opportunities for learning about how the appearances of birds may be related to their calls . Collectively , players enjoyed the opportunity to be creative by imagining names for calls ( Figure 4 ) . Though preferences varied for naming calls by sight or sound . Most players were confused when frst asked “ What does it sound like this bristlebird is saying ? ” . To clarify , the researcher described a range of example mnemonic devices commonly used by birders , including creating birdie talk [ 9 ] ( i . e . verbally mimicking calls as some players had already naturally been doing ) , relating the calls to human words , and likening calls to everyday sounds . Some players suggested that prompts would be helpful , with PR2 suggesting Bob Bristlebird could provide this information . Once given guidance , most players enjoyed naming each call by sound and expressed a curiosity for how others named calls . When naming calls together , PRC1 and PRC2 , sometimes reached an agreement . Other times , they teasingly joked about one having a better idea than the other , hinting at a light - hearted competitive nature . PRC1 later refected , “ I am quite competitive as a person ” . He then described enjoying being able to compare his answers and name interpretations with PRC2 . Then recalling a particular moment in completing the Questing for Calls section , PRC2 said to his sister , who did not identify as a birder , “ I was jealous of your ability to be like , ‘oh , that’s a noisy miner’ , and you knew exactly what it was , it’s impressive ” . Our playtests show promise that combining playful , gameful , and social interactions may create an enjoyable experience exploring environmental audio recordings . Additionally , the study shows how people’s feelings about certain tasks can be wide - ranging , albeit providing a variety of tasks can provide an overall engaging experience . 6 DISCUSSION In recent years , Preece [ 48 , 49 ] highlighted opportunities for HCI researchers to advance the design for nature engagement and sav - ing species with citizen science . This study builds upon this call to action by exploring design with environmental audio record - ings to inspire more people to take notice of nature’s sounds and support wildlife conservation . Our study revealed that delightful interactions with environmental audio recordings hold promise to pique people’s interest in learning more about wildlife ( RQ1 & Table 3 ) . Engaging our players with environmental information through both creative and goal - oriented audio encounters enticed players to be curious about a little - known bird species and nature . Addi - tionally , our fndings show promise that such designs can engender skills likely to support people in the study of wildlife ( RQ2 ; Table 3 ) . While we did not quantitatively evaluate skill increase , our detailed qualitative investigation of players’ interactions with the Challenge suggests activities were fun and useful . This was particularly ev - ident when refecting on how players applied experiences earlier in the Challenge playtest to the fnal task of identifying bristlebird calls in soundscapes . However , this is just one piece of a very large design puzzle . We still need to understand how design can support people with meaningful and engaging ways to explore , study , and save the wild . Looking forward , we refect on how players engaged with each type of interaction . We provide recommendations for designing to engage people with nature and species conservation using audio recordings ( Table 4 ) . Additionally , we frame the remainder of the discussion with key questions worth further investigation . 6 . 1 Receiving Guidance : What Form of Logistical & Emotional Support Advances Learning ? The need for guidance to support the learning of animal calls and interpretation of environmental audio recordings is evident [ 40 - 42 ] . Bob Bristlebird , the conversational agent , was central to providing logistical instruction on game mechanics , audio interpretation , and nature information . The emotional support he provided was also a critical ingredient . Bob kept a lighthearted tone , even as players became self - conscious or taxed completing tasks . Agents built with ill - timed or presumptuous interventions are known to be disliked [ 56 ] , so understanding how people feel about agents like Bob with long - term learning about nature deserves attention . Also , other forms of emotional support would be worth exploring . 6 . 2 Matching Media : How Can Gameful Interactions Lead to Stronger Contextualization ? Previous studies demonstrate that spectrograms can help people interpret environmental sound [ 13 , 41 ] . Understanding what factors infuence the shapes of sounds in spectrograms is difcult without training [ 40 ] . This study deepens our understanding of how players related auditory cues embedded in audio to visual representations . Engaging with Nature Sounds & Citizen Science by Designing for Creative & Contextual Audio Encounters CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Table 4 : Recommendations from interactions with the Challenge Interactions ( section ) To support fun experiences learning sounds of the wild , consider including : Receiving Guidance ( 5 . 1 ) Fun guidance for mechanics , sensemaking , & emotional support ( e . g . with a playful agent ) Matching Media ( 5 . 2 ) Gameful , scafolded media with diverse examples to gradually home in attention on calls Exploring Media ( 5 . 3 ) Playful sections that ofer freeform exploration of context and elicit multisensory creativity Questing for Calls ( 5 . 4 ) A mixture of guidance , gameful , & playful interactions for useful context to identify birds Enjoying Experience ( 5 . 5 ) A range of diverse , changing interactions to account for sensory & animal preferences What makes this possible is the human brain’s ability to receive and interpret multiple cues that share space and time ( i . e . crossmodal perception [ 35 ] ) . While our spectrograms were a static visual on a screen , our players perceived how sounds in audio related to the visual over a common time . Whether relating audio and spectro - grams of soundscapes or short calls , players crossmodally perceived diferences between recordings . Matching calls was likely easier than matching soundscapes for players because of the diference in the amount of audio being presented at once . This study highlights the processes players used to crossmodally interpret spectrograms and audio recordings . Aspects such as how much audio to provide in activities , how many calls to feature , and the infuence of envi - ronmental context , are worthwhile to investigate , for those seeking to support nature engagement and learning wildlife calls . Players without prior knowledge were unable to match bird pho - tos with calls , though they still had fun playfully personifying birds . Similarly , such serendipitous engagements personifying animals were also noted for some citizen scientists who were enticed to take more notice of local bees visiting their garden [ 58 ] . Personi - fying animals is common , whether pets or wildlife , and this may well be useful to help people connect with animals . One study has shown that zoo visitors who observe orangutans using interactive technologies “ responded with cognitive , afective and motor empathy for the animals ” [ 69 , p 6075 ] . Given our interest in helping wildlife , we want to ensure that creatively relating animals to how humans engage with the world is balanced with relating people to how animals interact with the world and their survival needs . Studies have begun to explore the design of playful and gameful encounters with information about nature [ 40 , 60 ] . Though more research is needed to understand if such interactions result in greater long - term environmental awareness and meaningful actions . Our players demonstrated that they possessed a wide range of prior experiences that applied to making sense of bird media . Several had experiences with music , local birds , or visualizations of audio that aided with media interpretation . Perhaps designing with groups that have specifc skills could create citizen science synergies . A group of ecological sound artists , for example , have the potential to be one such ideal group given their mastery of sound and passion for raising environmental awareness on a variety of topics , from elephant conservation to preservation of river ecosystems [ 3 , 27 , 28 ] . 6 . 3 Exploring Media : How Can Playful Exploration & Creativity be Harnessed ? Playfulness has received little attention in relation to environmen - tal awareness or citizen science [ 47 , 60 ] . Several players invested substantial time in playfully interacting with bristlebird calls and media for four additional species . People commonly switch into playful modes of thinking momentarily in gameplay [ 16 ] , which was also observed during our playtests . During the taxing task of matching soundscapes , some imagined how calls related by shape and sound without prompting . Additionally , some creatively per - sonifed birds during gameful tasks , which appeared to keep them engaged , even when having little knowledge of the birds to relate to sounds . Later , players also readily engaged with creating names for the three bristlebird calls by sight and sound in the Naming Calls section . Both planned and unplanned moments of play illustrate the engaging nature of play . This study demonstrated the value in designing to foster exploration and creativity in nature - focused and citizen science gameplay activities . Other citizen science studies similarly found afording moments of such open exploration and creativity to be benefcial as well [ 47 , 58 ] . HCI studies often highlight how interactions of verbalizing , sketching , photograph viewing , and audio listening can elicit emo - tive memories , aid in developing or regaining language , and support music composition or listening [ 31 , 45 , 51 , 62 ] . Contrarily , our play - ers often attached memories to calls when engaged with naming them by shapes and sounds . Being able to create a personalized language for bird calls based on shape and auditory characteristics may entice people who would traditionally feel overwhelmed with trying to directly learn the complexities of nature . Assigning these types of meaning may make calls more relatable , memorable , and recognizable . Further investigation of shape naming , sound naming , and memory - making activities for relating to nature is worthwhile . 6 . 4 Questing for Calls : How can Playful , Gameful , & Multisensory Experiences be Synergistic ? Players readily applied their previous playtest multimodal game ex - periences to the fnal task of identifying calls of Eastern bristlebirds . Given the exploratory nature of this study , we were not concerned with whether players accurately identifed the bristlebird calls . How - ever , if ecologists and citizen scientists want to identify calls from audio recordings to study wildlife , then there is a need to ensure that identifcations are accurate and accessible [ 26 ] . This would help increase the scalability of using audio so that we can all learn about our wildlife . A variety of questions could be asked , such as which gameful and playful interactions most strongly infuence call identifcation accuracy ? Our study found players were interested in other players’ naming attempts as well as enjoying playful freeform activities themselves . To share call names remotely , players would need enticing , easy CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Jessica Oliver et al . to use support to examine , tag , co - create , share , and discuss cre - ative interpretations of bird calls by sight and sound . Sharing of call names has the potential to lead to new forms of folksonomies , which arise “ from data about how people associate terms with content that they generate , share , or consume ” [ 29 , p 1 ] . One text - based , free - hand folksonomy exploration for audio with wildlife showed that usefulness for small - scale audio libraries may be limited because of being sensitive to diferences in variables , such as spellings of a common name or onomatopoeic interpretations [ 66 ] . Neverthe - less , folksonomies can help to coordinate citizen science eforts if systems support citizen scientists to curate the tags as well [ 32 ] . The visual and auditory pareidolia interpretations provide the basis for a new type of multisensory folksonomy . Along with textual tags , people may provide sketches and audio recordings to elucidate ideas . They may also provide context , ofer musical interpretations , and share personal stories , to make learning what birds look and sound like more playful and memorable . Perhaps inspiration can come from the audio aspects of Games with a Purpose for music tag - ging [ 19 , 33 , 36 ] . Further investigation is needed to understand how player’s mnemonic aides infuence their ability to recognize calls in soundscapes . Additionally , exploring , whether sharing mnemon - ics is helpful , and how folksonomies can support both visual and auditory interpretations of wildlife calls is worthwhile . 6 . 5 Enjoying Experience : How Can Contextual Audio Encounters Build Care for Nature ? Our study highlights a variety of ways that players enjoyed inter - acting with environmental sounds when provided with guidance performing gameful tasks and exploring playfully . When searching for bristlebirds in the fnal section , players applied the strategies they developed in previous sections , as well as concurrently apply - ing relevant prior knowledge . Citizen science projects commonly engage citizen scientists to complete single tasks , such as submit or classify photographs or audio recordings to eventually inform arti - fcial intelligence algorithms [ 8 ] . However , people exploring bird media craved access to contextual information about the species and habitats [ 40 , 41 ] . Our players gained satisfaction from per - sonifying animals that caught their attention , which may signify the development of empathy whether interactions were in situ or digital explorations . It’s worthwhile to remain vigilant to design to - wards community interests and empowerment . Design can provide ways that lead communities towards greater holistic engagement with nature and actions that support wildlife . This is contrast to most contributory citizen science , designed with communities be - ing guided by scientifc objectives with limited opportunities to foster true partnership . Exploration of the Challenge evoked ideas for interaction strate - gies and revealed players gaining satisfaction at diferent levels based on sensory preferences . While gameful tasks in the Chal - lenge were designed to compete against oneself , players mused about what completing it in pairs or teams would be like , whether through competitive or cooperative approaches . More broadly , each player had preferences with sight or sound . Deeply understanding the infuences of such tendencies , such as diferences in learning styles , physical ability , or prior experiences , may inform designs to reduce hurdles of engagement . 7 CONCLUSION Our study explores the design and playtesting of the Bristle Whistle Challenge . This prototype was created to investigate how gameful and playful interactions with audio and visual media can support engaging with nature and learning how to identify bird calls . The Challenge is focused on endangered Eastern bristlebirds since the species stands to gain if the public becomes awareness of its plight and the citizen science community can support its conservation by identifying calls in audio recordings . Our exploratory Challenge playtests revealed that , with guidance from an agent , players were engaged , curious , creative , and gameful while completing the mul - tisensory experience . This study highlights the value in designing creative multisensory interactions that provide environmental con - text when designing audio encounters . Such interactions also show promise to engender people with skills to identify wildlife . We contribute a detailed understanding of how players engaged with diferent media . We also ofer future design research recommenda - tions . Our studies point to the gulf between existing interactions with audio data and what is possible through attentive interaction design that explores multisensory and creative engagement . Our natural environment is in desperate need of human beings to hear its calls . Engaging people with nature is more so an interaction design problem than any other kind of problem . We , therefore , call upon the CHI community to step up eforts in designing to engage with nature . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Sincerest thanks to anonymous reviewers , Justin Cappadonna , Anne Bowser , Jessica Wardlaw , and Mark Cottman - Fields for their invaluable manuscript feedback . Additional thanks to Alex Mayor and Joee Kelk for permission to include their social media sketches . We are appreciative to numerous artists for permission to feature their gorgeous bird photos in the Challenge and music in the Sup - plementary Video ( see video for details ) . The Australian Research Council ( DP140102325 ) supported this work . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Obead Alhadreti and Pam Mayhew . 2018 . Rethinking Thinking Aloud : A Compar - ison of Three Think - Aloud Protocols , In Proceedings of the 2018 Chi Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Paper 44 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173618 [ 2 ] Anna Aljanaki , Dimitrios Bountouridis , John Ashley Burgoyne , Jan Van Balen , Frans Wiering , Henkjan Honing and Remco Veltkamp . 2014 . Designing Games with a Purpose for Data Collection in Music Research . Emotify and Hooked : Two Case Studies . In Proceedings of the Games and Learning Alliance , 29 - 40 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 12157 - 4 _ 3 [ 3 ] Leah Barclay , Toby Giford and Simon Linke . 2020 . Interdisciplinary Approaches to Freshwater Ecoacoustics . Freshwater Science . 39 , 2 , 356 - 361 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 709130 [ 4 ] Margot Brereton , Malavika Vasudevan , Tshering Dema , Jessica L . Cappadonna , Cara Wilson and Paul Roe . 2017 . The Ambient Birdhouse : Bringing Birds inside to Learn About Birds Outside . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems , 321 - 324 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064857 . 3079184 [ 5 ] Richard Buchanan . 1992 . Wicked Problems in Design Thinking . Design Issues . 8 , 2 , 5 - 21 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1511637 [ 6 ] Jessica L . Cappadonna , Margot Brereton , David M Watson and Paul Roe . 2016 . Calls from the Wild : Engaging Citizen Scientists with Animal Sounds . In Proceed - ings of the 2016 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems , 157 - 160 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2908805 . 2909413 [ 7 ] Mark Cartwright , Ayanna Seals , Justin Salamon , Alex Williams , Stefanie Mikloska , Duncan MacConnell , Edith Law , Juan P . Bello and Oded Nov . 2017 . Seeing Sound : Investigating the Efects of Visualizations and Complexity on Crowdsourced Engaging with Nature Sounds & Citizen Science by Designing for Creative & Contextual Audio Encounters CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Audio Annotations . Proceedings of ACM Human - Computer Interaction . Vol 1 , No CSCW , 1 - 21 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134664 [ 8 ] Luigi Ceccaroni , James Bibby , Erin Roger , Paul Flemons , Katina Michael , Laura Fagan and Jessica L Oliver . 2019 . Opportunities and Risks for Citizen Science in the Age of Artifcial Intelligence . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice . 4 , 1 , 1 - 14 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 241 [ 9 ] Mark Constantine ( 2006 ) . The sound approach to birding : a guide to understand - ing bird sound . The Sound Approach . 15 - 21 [ 10 ] Mark Cottman - Fields , Margot Brereton and Paul Roe . 2013 . Virtual Birding : Extending an Environmental Pastime into the Virtual World for Citizen Science . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) , 2029 - 2032 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466268 [ 11 ] Mark Cottman - Fields , Margot Brereton , Jason Wimmer and Paul Roe . 2014 . Col - laborative Extension of Biodiversity Monitoring Protocols in the Bird Watching Community . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ’14 ) , 111 - 114 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662193 [ 12 ] Joe Cox , Eun Young Oh , Brooke Simmons , Chris Lintott , Karen Masters , Anita Greenhill , Gary Graham and Kate Holmes . 2015 . Defning and Measuring Success in Online Citizen Science : A Case Study of Zooniverse Projects . Computing in Science & Engineering . 17 , 4 , 28 - 41 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCSE . 2015 . 65 [ 13 ] Tshering Dema , Margot Brereton , Jessica L . Cappadonna , Paul Roe , Anthony Truskinger and Jinglan Zhang . 2017 . Collaborative Exploration and Sensemaking of Big Environmental Sound Data . Computer Supported Cooperative Work . 26 , 4 - 6 , 693 - 731 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 017 - 9286 - 9 [ 14 ] Tshering Dema , Margot Brereton , Michael Esteban , Alessandro Soro , Sherub Sherub and Paul Roe . 2020 . Designing in the Network of Relations for Species Conservation : The Playful Tingtibi Community Birdhouse . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 14 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376713 [ 15 ] Tshering Dema , Margot Brereton and Paul Roe . 2019 . Designing Participatory Sensing with Remote Communities to Conserve Endangered Species . In Proceed - ings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) , 1 - 16 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300894 [ 16 ] Sebastian Deterding , Stafan L . Björk , Lennart E . Nacke , Dan Dixon and Elizabeth Lawley . 2013 . Designing Gamifcation : Creating Gameful and Playful Experiences . In Proceedings of the CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 3263 – 3266 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2479662 [ 17 ] Sebastian Deterding , Dan Dixon , Rilla Khaled and Lennart Nacke . 2011 . From Game Design Elements to Gamefulness : Defning “Gamifcation” . In Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference : Envisioning Future Media Environments , 9 – 15 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2181037 . 2181040 [ 18 ] Carl DiSalvo , Illah Nourbakhsh , David Holstius , Ayça Akin and Marti Louw . 2008 . The Neighborhood Networks Project : A Case Study of Critical Engagement and Creative Expression through Participatory Design . Indiana University , Bloomington Indiana . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5555 / 1795234 . 1795241 [ 19 ] Peter Dulačka , Jakub šimko and Mária Bieliková . 2012 . Validation of Music Meta - data Via Game with a Purpose . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Semantic Systems , 177 – 180 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2362499 . 2362526 [ 20 ] Ilker Etikan , Sulaiman Abubakar Musa and Rukayya Sunusi Alkassim . 2016 . Comparison of Convenience Sampling and Purposive Sampling . American journal of theoretical and applied statistics . 5 , 1 , 1 - 4 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 11648 / j . ajtas . 20160501 . 11 [ 21 ] Alexandra Eveleigh , Charlene Jennett , Stuart Lynn and Anna L . Cox . 2013 . " I Want to Be a Captain ! I Want to Be a Captain ! " : Gamifcation in the Old Weather Citizen Science Project . In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Gameful Design , Research , and Applications ( Gamifcation ’13 ) , 79 - 82 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2583008 . 2583019 [ 22 ] Tracy Fullerton . 2014 . Chapter 9 : Playtesting , In Game Design Workshop : A Play - centric Approach to Creating Innovative Games , Third Edition . A K Peters / CRC Press LLC , New York , United States , 271 - 304 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1201 / b16671 [ 23 ] William Gaver . 2002 . Designing for Homo Ludens . I3 Magazine No . 12 , June 2002 , 2 - 6 . [ 24 ] William Gaver , John Bowers , Andrew Boucher , Andy Law , Sarah Pennington and Brendan Walker . 2007 . Electronic Furniture for the Curious Home : Assessing Ludic Designs in the Field . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction . 22 , 1 - 2 , 119 - 152 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447310709336958 [ 25 ] William W . Gaver , John Bowers , Andrew Boucher , Hans Gellerson , Sarah Pen - nington , Albrecht Schmidt , Anthony Steed , Nicholas Villars and Brendan Walker . 2004 . The Drift Table : Designing for Ludic Engagement . In Proceedings of the CHI ’04 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 885 – 900 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 985921 . 985947 [ 26 ] Rory Gibb , Ella Browning , Paul Glover - Kapfer and Kate E . Jones . 2018 . Emerging Opportunities and Challenges for Passive Acoustics in Ecological Assessment and Monitoring . Methods in Ecology and Evolution . 10 , 169 – 185 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 2041 - 210X . 13101 [ 27 ] Jonathan Gilmurray . 2017 . Ecological Sound Art : Steps Towards a New Field . Organised Sound . 22 , 1 , 32 - 41 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S1355771816000315 [ 28 ] Sue Gould . 2018 . Vicki Hallett and the Elephant Listening Project . AUDIOWINGS : Journal of the Australia Wildlife Sound Recording Group Inc . 2 , 2 , 28 . [ 29 ] anges . International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems . 3 , 1 , 1 - 11 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4018 / jswis . 2007010101 [ 30 ] Andrew P . Hill , Peter Prince , Jake L . Snaddon , C . Patrick Doncaster and Alex Rogers . 2019 . Audiomoth : A Low - Cost Acoustic Device for Monitoring Biodiver - sity and the Environment . HardwareX . 6 , e00073 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ohx . 2019 . e00073 [ 31 ] Maarten Houben , Rens Brankaert , Saskia Bakker , Gail Kenning , Inge Bongers and Berry Eggen . 2020 . The Role of Everyday Sounds in Advanced Dementia Care . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 14 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376577 [ 32 ] Corey Jackson , Kevin Crowston , Carsten Østerlund and Mahboobeh Harandi . 2018 . Folksonomies to Support Coordination and Coordination of Folksonomies . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 27 , 647 – 678 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 018 - 9327 - z [ 33 ] Bryan Kim , Yi Cheng , Zixuan Li , Ruoxi Li , Chenchen Tan , Shuo Wang , Yifeng Shi and Jessica Hammer . 2019 . Game with a Purpose to Collect Home Audio Data . In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play Companion Extended Abstracts , 445 – 452 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3341215 . 3356270 [ 34 ] Christopher Kullenberg and Dick Kasperowski . 2016 . What Is Citizen Science ? – a Scientometric Meta - Analysis . PLoS One . 11 , 1 , e0147152 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0147152 [ 35 ] Christophe Lalanne and Jean Lorenceau . 2004 . Crossmodal Integration for Per - ception and Action . Journal of Physiology - Paris . 98 , 1 , 265 - 279 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jphysparis . 2004 . 06 . 001 [ 36 ] Edith Law and Luis von Ahn . 2009 . Input - Agreement : A New Mechanism for Collecting Data Using Human Computation Games . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1197 – 1206 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518881 [ 37 ] Edith L . M . Law , Luis von Ahn , Roger B . Dannenberg and Mike Crawford . 2007 . Tagatune : A Game for Music and Sound Annotation . In Proceedings of the Inter - national Society of Music Information Retrieval , 361 - 364 . [ 38 ] Michael I . Mandel and D Daniel P . W . Ellis . 2008 . A Web - Based Game for Collecting Music Metadata . Journal of New Music Research . 37 , 2 , 151 - 165 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09298210802479300 [ 39 ] Merriam - Webster . 2020 . Pareidolia . Merriam - Webster . Retrieved on 30 Dec 2020 . https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / pareidolia [ 40 ] Jessica L . Oliver , Margot Brereton , Selen Turkay , David M . Watson and Paul Roe . 2020 . Exploration of Aural & Visual Media About Birds Informs Lessons for Citizen Science Design . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM on Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 1687 – 1700 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395478 [ 41 ] Jessica L . Oliver , Margot Brereton , David M . Watson and Paul Roe . 2018 . Visuali - sations Elicit Knowledge to Refne Citizen Science Technology Design : Spectro - grams Resonate with Birder . In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction , 133 - 144 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3292147 . 3292171 [ 42 ] Jessica L . Oliver , Margot Brereton , David M . Watson and Paul Roe . 2019 . Lis - tening to Save Wildlife : Lessons Learnt from Use of Acoustic Technology by a Species Recovery Team . In Proceedings of the 2019 Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 1335 - 1348 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322360 [ 43 ] Maria V . Palacin - Silva , Antti Knutas , Maria Angela Ferrario , Jari Porras , Jouni Ikonen and Chandara Chea . 2018 . The Role of Gamifcation in Participatory Environmental Sensing : A Study in the Wild . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173795 [ 44 ] Leo Natan Paschoal , Lucas Fernandes Turci , Tayana Uchôa Conte and Simone R . S . Souza . 2019 . Towards a Conversational Agent to Support the Software Testing Education . In Proceedings of the XXXIII Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering , 57 – 66 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3350768 . 3352456 [ 45 ] Anne Marie Piper , Nadir Weibel and James D Hollan . 2014 . Designing Audio - Enhanced Paper Photos for Older Adult Emotional Wellbeing in Communication Therapy . Academic Press , Inc . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 01 . 002 [ 46 ] Michael J . O . Pocock , John C . Tweddle , Joanna Savage , Lucy D . Robinson and Helen E . Roy . 2017 . The Diversity and Evolution of Ecological and Environmental Citizen Science . PLoS One . 12 , 4 , e0172579 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0172579 [ 47 ] Marisa Ponti , Thomas Hillman and Igor Stankovic . 2015 . Science and Gamifca - tion : The Odd Couple ? Association for Computing Machinery , London , United Kingdom . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2793107 . 2810293 [ 48 ] Jennifer Preece . 2016 . Citizen Science : New Research Challenges for Human – Computer Interaction . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction . 32 , 8 , 585 - 612 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2016 . 1194153 [ 49 ] Jennifer Preece . 2017 . How Two Billion Smartphone Users Can Save Species ! interactions . 24 , 2 , 26 - 33 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3043702 [ 50 ] Danial Qaurooni , Ali Ghazinejad , Inna Kouper and Hamid Ekbia . 2016 . Citizens for Science and Science for Citizens : The View from Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1822 - 1826 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858575 Thomas Gruber . 2007 . Ontology of Folksonomy : A Mash - up of Apples and Or - CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan [ 51 ] Hayes Rafe , Cati Vaucelle , Ruibing Wang and Hiroshi Ishii . 2007 . Jabberstamp : Embedding Sound and Voice in Traditional Drawings . In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Interaction design and children , 137 – 144 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1297277 . 1297306 [ 52 ] Ute Ritterfeld , Michael J Cody . Peter Vorderer , ( Eds . ) . Serious Games : Mechanisms and Efects . Routledge , London . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203891650 [ 53 ] Hermann Rorschach . 1942 . Psychodiagnostics : A Diagnostic Test Based on Percep - tion . ( P Lemkau & B . Kronenberg ( Trans ) : Verlag Hans Huber . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 11537 - 000 [ 54 ] Holly Rosser and Andrea Wiggins . 2018 . Tutorial Designs and Task Types in Zooniverse . Association for Computing Machinery , Jersey City , NJ , USA . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3272973 . 3274049 [ 55 ] Jodi J . L . Rowley , Corey T . Callaghan and Timothy Cutajar . 2019 . Frogid : Citizen Scientists Provide Validated Biodiversity Data on Frogs of Australia . Herpetologi - cal Conservation and Biology . 14 , 1 , 155 - 170 . [ 56 ] Paul Rudman and Mary Zajicek . 2006 . Autonomous Agent as Helper - Helpful or Annoying ? In Proceedings of the IEEE / WIC / ACM International Conference on Intelligent Agent Technology , 170 – 176 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / iat . 2006 . 41 [ 57 ] Mangalam Sankupellay , Anna Kalma , Sean Magin , Jessica L Cappadonna , Paul Roe and Margot Brereton . 2017 . Birdsound : Enticing Urban Dwellers to Engage with Local Birds around Their Home . In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Confer - ence on Computer - Human Interaction , 172 - 181 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152771 . 3152790 [ 58 ] Nirwan Sharma , Greaves Sam , Laura Colucci - Gray , Advaith Siddharthan and René van der Wal . 2019 . From Citizen Science to Citizen Action : Analysing the Potential for a Digital Platform to Cultivate Attachments to Nature . Journal of Science Communication . 18 , 1 , 1 - 35 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 22323 / 2 . 18010207 [ 59 ] Jennifer L Shirk , Heidi L Ballard , Candie C Wilderman , Tina Phillips , An - drea Wiggins , Rebecca Jordan , Ellen McCallie , Matthew Minarchek , Bruce V Lewenstein and Marianne E Krasny . 2012 . Public Participation in Scientifc Research : A Framework for Deliberate Design . Ecology and Society . 17 , 2 , 29 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5751 / ES - 04705 - 170229 [ 60 ] Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Tshering Dema , Jessica L Oliver , Min Zhen Chai and Aloha May Hufana Ambe . 2018 . The Ambient Birdhouse : An IoT Device to Discover Birds and Engage with Nature . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173971 [ 61 ] Kyle A . Swiston and Daniel J . Mennill . 2009 . Comparison of Manual and Auto - mated Methods for Identifying Target Sounds in Audio Recordings of Pileated , Jessica Oliver et al . Pale - Billed , and Putative Ivory - Billed Woodpeckers . Journal of Field Ornithology . 80 , 1 , 42 - 50 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1557 - 9263 . 2009 . 00204 . x [ 62 ] Cristina Sylla , Sérgio Gonçalves , Pedro Branco and Clara Coutinho . 2013 . Peter Piper Picked a Peck of Pickled Peppers : An Interface for Playful Language Ex - ploration . In Proceedings of the CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 3127 – 3130 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2479627 [ 63 ] Virginia Thomas . 2012 . National Recovery Plan for Eastern Bristlebird Dasyornis Brachypterus . New South Wale Ofce of Environment and Her - itage Department of Premier and Cabinet : Sydney : New South Wales . Retrieved . https : / / www . environment . gov . au / resource / national - recovery - plan - eastern - bristlebird - dasyornis - brachypterus [ 64 ] Ramine Tinati , Markus Luczak - Roesch , Elena Simperl and Wendy Hall . 2017 . An Investigation of Player Motivations in Eyewire , a Gamifed Citizen Science Project . Computers in Human Behavior . 73 , 527 - 540 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2016 . 12 . 074 [ 65 ] Anthony Truskinger , Mark Cottman - Fields , Daniel Johnson and Paul Roe . 2013 . Rapid Scanning of Spectrograms for Efcient Identifcation of Bioacoustic Events in Big Data . In Proceedings of the 2013 Institute of Electrical and Electronics En - gineers Ninth International Conference on eScience , 270 - 277 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / eScience . 2013 . 25 [ 66 ] Anthony Truskinger , Ian Newmarch , Mark Cottman - Fields , Jason Wimmer , Michael Towsey , Jinglan Zhang and Paul Roe . 2013 . Reconciling Folksonomic Tagging with Taxa for Bioacoustic Annotations , In Web Information Systems Engi - neering – Wise 2013 : 14th International Conference , Nanjing , China , October 13 - 15 , 2013 , Proceedings , Part I , Xuemin Lin et al . ( eds . ) . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , 292 - 305 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 41230 - 1 _ 25 [ 67 ] Kellie Vella , Jessica L . Oliver , Tshering Dema , Margot Brereton and Paul Roe . 2020 . Ecology Meets Computer Science : Designing Tools to Reconcile People , Data , and Practices . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376663 [ 68 ] Luis von Ahn and Laura Dabbish . 2008 . Designing Games with a Purpose . Com - munications of the ACM . 51 , 8 , 58 - 67 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1378704 . 1378719 [ 69 ] Sarah Webber , Marcus Carter , Sally Sherwen , Wally Smith , Zaher Joukhadar and Frank Vetere . 2017 . Kinecting with Orangutans : Zoo Visitors’ Empathetic Responses to Animals ? Use of Interactive Technology . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 6075 - 6088 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025729