The highly specialized morphology of neurons provides the substrate to build the circuits that underlie human cognition and behaviour . The shaping of neuronal cir - cuits occurs in sequential developmental phases and is refined by activity - dependent mechanisms and envi - ronmental cues 1 . Many neuronal subcompartments have been shown to change in response to activity ; these include dendritic arbors and spines , the axon initial segment and presynaptic boutons 2 . The different sites of structural plasticity that work in concert to ensure precise brain wiring are therefore sensitive to dysregu - lation at multiple levels and on different timescales . In particular , morphological changes in dendritic spines have been the focus of intense investigation owing to their proposed role in several neuropsychiatric disorders 3 . Neuropsychiatric disorders are a heterogeneous group of mental disorders that manifest psychiatric symptoms and demonstrable brain pathology and are thought to arise from disruptions of the synaptic circuits that subserve cognitive , social and emotional process - ing 4 . Since the advent of genomic technologies , genetic risk factors for neuro psychiatric disorders are being iden - tified at an unprecedented rate , providing a window into the molecular basis of disease . Remarkably , the path - ways that are being uncovered intersect with mecha - nisms regulating the growth and structural plasticity of synapses , which may be important for understanding the nature of these disorders . Structural plasticity of cir - cuits involves changes in both excitatory and inhibitory neurons and in both presynaptic and postsynaptic ter - mini ( reviewed in REF . 2 ) ; however , genetic studies indi - cate that excitatory postsynaptic compartments may be particularly important in the aetiology of a wide range of neuropsychiatric disorders 5 – 8 . In this Review , we focus on the structural plas - ticity that occurs at postsynaptic sites , the dendrites and spines of excitatory neurons , which are atypical in several neuro psychiatric disorders and in which synaptic plasticity mechanisms have been extensively studied . We emphasize the integration of biological insights from large - scale genomic studies of idiopathic neuro psychiatric disorders of neurodevelopmen - tal origin , including intellectual disability , epilepsy , autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) , schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . Although epilepsy is typically classi - fied as a neurological condition , we include it in this Review because it shares many genetic risk factors with ASD and intellectual disability 9 . In addition , epi - lepsy is often comorbid with intellectual disability and ASD , and individuals with epilepsy often present with various neuropsychiatric symptoms 10 . Each neuro - psychiatric disorder that we discuss is associated with a distinct pattern of dendritic spine pathology , and mounting evidence implicates the altered structural plasticity of spines as a central disease mechanism in these disorders . Dendritic structural plasticity Although multiple brain regions are likely to have a role in the development of neuropsychiatric disorders , the human neocortex has an important role in higher - order brain functions ( such as cognition ) that are dys - functional in many neuropsychiatric disorders . Thus , we here consider the postsynaptic elements of cortical circuits — the dendrites and spines of pyramidal neu - rons — and describe their developmental timeline and the mechanisms regulating their activity - dependent remodelling . 1 Department of Physiology , Northwestern University , Chicago , IL , USA . 2 Northwestern University Center for Autism and Neurodevelopment , Feinberg School of Medicine , Chicago , IL , USA . * e‑mail : p‑penzes @ northwestern . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn . 2018 . 16 Published online 16 Mar 2018 Dendritic spines Micrometre protrusions on dendritic branches of neurons that host the majority of excitatory synapses in the brain . Genetic risk factors DNA sequence variants that are associated with increased disease susceptibility . Dendritic structural plasticity and neuropsychiatric disease Marc P . Forrest 1 , Euan Parnell 1 and Peter Penzes 1 , 2 * Abstract | The structure of neuronal circuits that subserve cognitive functions in the brain is shaped and refined throughout development and into adulthood . Evidence from human and animal studies suggests that the cellular and synaptic substrates of these circuits are atypical in neuropsychiatric disorders , indicating that altered structural plasticity may be an important part of the disease biology . Advances in genetics have redefined our understanding of neuropsychiatric disorders and have revealed a spectrum of risk factors that impact pathways known to influence structural plasticity . In this Review , we discuss the importance of recent genetic findings on the different mechanisms of structural plasticity and propose that these converge on shared pathways that can be targeted with novel therapeutics . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 215 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Synaptic input field The total number and spatial arrangement of a neuron’s postsynaptic receptors . This postsynaptic field is determined by the architecture of the dendritic tree and the number and size of receptor domains contained within dendritic spines . Dendritic spines and brain development . Cortical pyramidal neurons are the main excitatory cells of the neocortex 11 . During development , pyramidal neurons elaborate complex dendritic arbors , which increase their surface area and connectivity ( FIG . 1a ) . Maturing dendrites become studded with small protrusions called dendritic spines , which host the majority of the excita - tory synapses in the brain . The total excitatory input that a neuron can receive is dependent on the complexity of the dendritic arbor and the density and size of spines , which together form the neuron’s synaptic input field . The growth of dendrites and spines is therefore fundamental to the development of neuronal circuits . Dendrites provide the support on which dendritic spines grow , and during early rodent development , the growth of both structures is intimately linked 12 . Later in development , dendritic branches become stabilized and uncoupled from the morphological changes to dendritic spines . Dendrites are therefore much less dynamic than dendritic spines in mature neurons . Dendritic spines compartmentalize the postsynaptic machinery and assist in the independent regulation of synaptic inputs 13 . Spines are typically less than 1 μm 3 in size and exist on a morphological continuum from long , thin filopodia to large , mature spines with a defined spine head 14 . Filopodia are thought of as immature spines because they arise early in development , are highly dynamic and often lack functional synapses . By contrast , mature ( or ‘mushroom’ ) spines are typically more stable and have an enlarged spine head containing neurotransmitter recep - tors and a postsynaptic density ( PSD ) . Given that certain neuronal subtypes do not have spines , the reason for the Typical neurodevelopment Schizophrenia Bipolar disorder Dendritic spine pruning Prenatal Infant Child Adolescent Adult 9mo ≥20 yr Disease onset a b d Circuit connectivity Risk factors Altered psychologicaldomains Axon 0 – 2 yr 3 – 12 yr 13 – 19 yr D e n d r i t i c s p i n e nu m b e r Pyramidal neuron Hyperconnected Hypoconnected Environmental • Epigenetics • Stress • Infection Genetic • CNV • SNV ( exome ) • SNP ( GWAS ) Nature Reviews | Neuroscience ASD Intellectual disability Epilepsy Neuron migration Neurogenesis and diﬀerentiation Dendritic growth and branching Myelination Progenitor cell death Dendritic spine morphogenesis and turnover Gene networksand pathways Dendrites and spines • Positive valence • Social processes • Cognition • Arousal and regulatory • Negative valence Multiplebrainregions TypicalASD Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder Intellectual disability Epilepsy Putative developmental trajectory of dendritic spines Birth c Figure 1 | Spine and dendrite development in health and disease . a , b | Timeline of the principal cellular events occurring during human brain development 1 , 264 and their coincidence with neuropsychiatric diseases of varying onset . Morphological events regulating dendritic structure that are discussed in this Review are highlighted in green . Intellectual disability usually presents in early infancy or early childhood , although in some cases , it cannot be formally diagnosed until later ( when standardized tests can be implemented ) 265 . Epilepsy encompasses a broad range of seizure disorders , each with their own typical age of onset . Here , we focus on genetic forms of epilepsy that have their onset largely in the age range depicted ( see REF . 266 for review ) . The symptoms of autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) are recognized early in development and are noticeable in the first few years of life 267 . These early - onset disorders overlap with the developmental processes of dendritic growth and spine morphogenesis . Bipolar disorder 268 and schizophrenia 269 are late - onset neurodevelopmental disorders that appear in late adolescence or adulthood , coinciding with the biological process of spine pruning . c | Putative developmental trajectories of spine development during typical development or in neuropsychiatric disorders , predicted from post - mortem studies . Studies have found that spine density is reduced in intellectual disability 39 and increased in ASD 41 , which may suggest a developmental alteration in spine morphogenesis . Spine and dendrite loss in epilepsy is thought to be caused by the onset of seizures 45 and is depicted as a sharp decline in spine density ( however , a primary defect in spine density before seizure onset cannot be excluded ) . Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are associated with fewer dendritic spines at post - mortem 48 , 53 , possibly caused by excessive spine pruning . d | Genetic and environmental risk factors for neuropsychiatric disorders are hypothesized to converge on a subset of genetic networks and pathways that regulate dendritic structure and alter the synaptic input field . Both hypoconnected and hyperconnected cells disrupt local and distal connectivity in the brain . Depending on the brain regions affected , this will impact different psychological domains ( here , we use the National Institutes of Health Research Domain Criteria ( RDoC ) relevant to neuropsychiatric disorders ; see ‘Related links’ ) . CNV , copy number variant ; GWAS , genome - wide association study ; mo , month ; SNP , single - nucleotide polymorphism ; SNV , single - nucleotide variation ; yr , year . R E V I E W S 216 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Postsynaptic density ( PSD ) . A specialization on excitatory dendritic spines , originally identified by electron microscopy , which contains glutamate receptors and many associated scaffolding and trafficking proteins that are crucial for excitatory synaptic transmission . Long - term potentiation ( LTP ) . Long - lasting increase in synaptic strength between neurons , usually resulting from synchronous or temporally coordinated presynaptic and postsynaptic activity . Long - term depression ( LTD ) . Long - lasting weakening of synaptic strength between neurons , often resulting from asynchronous presynaptic and postsynaptic activity . existence of such a broad array of spine morphologies in pyramidal neurons remains somewhat enigmatic ; however , their precise shape and plasticity are likely to influence the regulation and compartmentalization of biochemical and electrical signalling that are required to form complex and adaptable circuits 15 . In the human neocortex , dendrites can be recognized approximately halfway through gestation ( 17 – 25 weeks ) , whereas spines appear late in the second trimester ( 26 – 34 weeks ) ( FIG . 1a ) . The appearance of spines coin - cides with a period of intensive dendritic growth and cor - tical thickening 16 . The number of spines increases rapidly in the perinatal and postnatal periods and reaches its peak early in infancy ( 1 – 2 years ) before progressively declin - ing in a period known as ‘pruning’ , which continues into adolescence and adulthood 17 . The elimination of spines indicates the start of a fine structural reorganization of the cortex and is concurrent with the observation of cortical thinning ( measured by MRI ) in late childhood to adolescence 1 , 18 . The developmental changes in this period are consistent with the emergence of higher cognitive functions such as attention , working memory , cognitive control and response inhibition 1 . In humans , childhood is a period of massive structural refinement at the level of dendritic arbors and spines that is criti - cally important for attaining properly functioning and adaptable synaptic circuits . Importantly , early life wit - nesses the intersection of a waning developmental and a growing experience - dependent influence on plasticity , each affecting spines on their own timescales . Activity - dependent structural plasticity . Spines are highly dynamic in nature and have a remarkable capac - ity to undergo structural changes in the young and adult brain 19 , 20 . Spines can grow , shrink , form de novo and be maintained or be eliminated , all of which contribute to the formation and experience - dependent optimization of neuronal circuits 20 . In addition , the morphologi - cal modifications of spines are widely regarded as the structural basis for learning and encoding memories 21 , 22 . Spine plasticity is affected by multiple factors , includ - ing developmental stage , brain region , sensory expe - rience and synaptic activity 20 . Recent super - resolution imaging techniques have been instrumental in shaping our knowledge of the type and extent of the structural changes that take place ( BOX 1 ) . Activity - dependent changes in spines are known to occur via at least two distinct cellular mechanisms : Hebbian and homeostatic plasticity . Hebbian synaptic plasticity is a mechanism through which correlated pre - synaptic and postsynaptic activity leads to durable changes in synaptic function 23 . Long - term potentiation ( LTP ) and long - term depression ( LTD ) are two forms of Hebbian plas - ticity that can induce long - lasting increases or decreases in spine size , respectively 24 ( FIG . 2a ) . LTP is also associated with an increase in the number and stability of spines . LTP involves actin polymerization , an enlargement of the PSD and an increase in AMPA receptor ( AMPAR ) surface trafficking 25 . Opposing structural rearrangements occur during LTD , including spine shrinkage , a decrease in actin polymerization and a reduction of surface AMPARs . Homeostatic plasticity is an overarching form of plas - ticity that restrains cellular and circuit excitability within physiological limits 2 . Synaptic scaling is a form of homeo - static plasticity through which neurons can adjust the strength of their synaptic connections , by regulating the surface expression of AMPARs , in response to global changes in circuit activity 26 . Morphological correlates of synaptic scaling have been demonstrated 27 , which is per - haps not surprising given the strong correlation between spine size and AMPAR content 28 . Activity deprivation , a model for studying homeostatic plasticity , has been shown to increase the density or size of spines in vitro 29 and in vivo 30 – 32 , presumably to compensate for the loss of synaptic input ( FIG . 2b ) . By contrast , prolonged activ - ity ( such as that experienced during seizures ) reduces spine number and size 33 , 34 . However , the exact morpho - logical changes in spines that occur when modelling homeostatic plasticity in vivo appear to be variable and highly dependent on the experimental model used 35 , 36 , highlighting our incomplete knowledge of this process . Although neuronal activity plays a critical part in shaping the growth and structure of spines , recent stud - ies have also shown that spines can form in the absence of glutamate release 37 . Thus , activity - dependent and activity - independent forces influence structural plas - ticity and , together , these dynamically regulate the overall number and morphology of spines ( FIG . 2c ) . Atypical spine and dendrite development Spine pathology is a common feature of many neuro - psychiatric disorders and refers to any shift in the size , shape or density of dendritic spines from that expected in a given brain region and developmental time point ( FIG . 1b , c ) . Changes in spine morphology are often reported in human and animal models because they are easily observable by light microscopy . Given the tight relationship between spine structure and function , even small alterations in average spine size may reveal a profound dysfunction at the cellular or circuit level . Furthermore , imbalances in the processes governing spine formation and elimination can lead to a net change in spine density that , when summated with changes in dendritic complexity , can dramatically alter a neuron’s synaptic input field ( FIG . 1d ) . However , detailed reports of atypical spine development in human neuro psychiatric disorders remain scarce , presumably owing to the lim - ited availability of post - mortem brain tissue . This limita - tion also makes individual findings difficult to generalize to wider populations . In addition , such studies are sub - ject to many confounding factors 38 that can impede the discovery of robust disease pathophysiology . These factors have led to variations in findings across studies ; however , certain trends can be distilled . Spine pathology in intellectual disability . Post - mortem studies of unclassified intellectual disability ( previ - ously termed mental retardation ) were among the first to suggest a connection between dendritic defects and neuropsychiatric disorders . Spines on cortical neurons from individuals with intellectual disability have been described as long and thin , indicative of an immature R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 217 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . morphology , and display fewer spines per dendritic branch 39 . Several studies have noted reduced complex - ity of both the apical and the basal dendrites of cortical pyramidal neurons in the brain tissue of individuals with intellectual disability compared with controls 40 . Spine pathology in autism spectrum disorder . Studies of individuals with ASD have found that they exhibit higher spine densities than control subjects on the apical dendrites of layer II pyramidal neurons in the frontal , parietal and temporal lobes and the layer V projection neurons of the temporal lobe 41 , 42 . These observations suggest a disruption of the balance between spine for - mation and elimination . Coincident with these results , longitudinal MRI studies have demonstrated an enlarge - ment of brain volume and cortical grey matter in ASD that begins before 2 years of age 43 , 44 . This period parallels the rapid expansion of spine and dendrite formation in the human brain that peaks in the first 2 years of life 16 , 17 , suggesting that spine development during this period leads to an overabundance of spines in ASD . Spine pathology in epilepsy . In patients with temporal lobe epilepsy , layer III cortical pyramidal neurons have lower spine densities and fewer dendritic branch points than controls ; however , it is thought that these changes may be caused by excitotoxicity 45 . The reductions in grey matter observed by MRI in temporal lobe epilepsy patients appear not to be due to cell loss but rather to reflect the occupation of a smaller volume by neurons with sparser dendritic trees 46 . Nonetheless , it is not yet clear whether the dendritic changes observed in epilepsy are the cause or consequence of epileptic seizures 34 . Spine pathology in schizophrenia and bipolar disor - der . In schizophrenia , aberrant spine density has been reported in multiple brain regions ( reviewed in REF . 47 ) . The most reproducible observation is a reduction of spine density on layer III pyramidal neurons of the neo - cortex compared with controls 48 . More recently , a study found that pyramidal neurons in the same layer of the auditory cortex had a specific reduction in the number of small spines 49 . Post - mortem studies of schizophrenia Nature Reviews | Neuroscience PSD95 Ankyrin - G Box 1 | Super - resolution imaging of dendritic spines In recent years , super - resolution techniques that are able to break the diffraction limit of light microscopy ( ~ 200 nm ) have routinely allowed fluorescent imaging with resolutions down to 50 nm ( reviewed in REF . 244 ) . This ability has led to characterization of the dendritic spine in unprecedented detail and revealed novel mechanisms of structural regulation . Structured illumination microscopy 108 and novel image deconvolution protocols 245 allow resolving power down to ~ 100 – 200 nm . This increased resolution allowed for the characterization of ankyrin - G nanodomains within spine necks and their regulatory role in dendritic spine morphology ( see the figure ) 108 . However , techniques that rely on single - molecule localization ( stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) and photoactivated localization microscopy ) or stimulated emission depletion ( STED ) have garnered great interest owing to their ability to observe filament formation and protein complex distributions within spines . For example , STORM imaging was pivotal in the observation of previously uncharacterized presynaptic mitochondria that contribute to long - term plasticity 246 and endogenous brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) granules that were enriched in the presynaptic but not postsynaptic areas 247 . In addition , the resolution afforded by STED microscopy revealed that the spine neck is vital in compartmentalizing synaptic signals 248 and undergoes actin - dependent changes in size 249 in response to long - term potentiation 250 . A major advantage of super - resolution techniques over electron microscopy is the ability to observe changes within live cells . For example , dynamic imaging of dendritic spine extension and retraction was achieved at nanoscale resolution using membrane - selective photo - switchable probes 251 . In addition , super - resolution imaging has been applied to actin dynamics within the spine over extended periods of structural change with lateral resolutions exceeding 50 nm ( REFS 249 , 252 , 253 ) . Such studies revealed the role of actin in driving vesicle – membrane fusion 254 , a distinct AMPA receptor ( AMPAR ) trafficking mechanism within subsets of spines 255 and the formation of postsynaptic density – AMPAR scaffolds that contribute to receptor clustering and responsiveness 256 , 257 . Thus , the rapid development of fluorescent imaging techniques has provided previously unachievable insight into dendritic spine structure and regulation . Increasing access to these imaging techniques will undoubtedly result in an even greater understanding of the structural mechanisms underlying neuronal function . PSD95 , postsynaptic density protein 95 ( also known as DLG4 ) . Figure adapted with permission from REF . 108 , Elsevier . R E V I E W S 218 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Figure 2 | Mechanisms of structural plasticity . a | Hebbian synaptic plasticity mechanisms 25 , 94 . High - frequency synaptic activity associated with high calcium entry causes long - term potentiation ( LTP ) , which induces spine growth , an enlargement of the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) and actin polymerization and promotes the surface expression of AMPA receptors ( AMPARs ) . Low - frequency synaptic activity associated with modest calcium entry through NMDA receptors ( NMDARs ) causes long - term depression ( LTD ) , which induces shrinking of the spine and PSD , actin depolymerization and a reduction of surface AMPAR expression . b | Proposed mechanisms of homeostatic synaptic plasticity 2 . Synaptic scaling is a form of homeostatic plasticity that allows neurons to modify their overall synaptic input ( excitability ) in response to changes in circuit activity 26 . Activity deprivation causes neurons to scale up , proportionally strengthening synapses by increasing surface AMPAR expression to increase overall synaptic input . Studies have shown that activity blockade in vitro and activity deprivation in vivo can also cause an increase in spine size ( or density ) 29 , 31 , 32 . Prolonged circuit activity causes neurons to scale down , proportionally reducing synaptic strength by removal of surface AMPARs . Prolonged activity during seizures also reduces the size and number of spines 33 , 34 , opposing the morphological effects of activity deprivation . c | Summary of mechanisms that can regulate spine development and plasticity . Spine growth can be induced by LTP or scaling up and is associated with spine stability , reduced spine dynamics , increased synaptic strength and increased surface AMPAR expression 14 . Spine shrinkage can be induced by LTD or scaling down and is associated with spine destabilization , possibly leading to elimination or pruning of spines , synaptic weakening and a reduction of surface AMPAR expression 14 . Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Spine shrinkage a b c Spine growth Spine shrinkage Spine growth AMPAR NMDAR Activity deprivation ( circuit level ) Prolonged activity ( circuit level ) Hebbian synaptic plasticity Homeostatic plasticity Mechanisms of structural plasticity in dendritic spines High - frequency stimulation ( synaptic level ) Low - frequency stimulation ( synaptic level ) Ca 2 + Actin I n c r e a s e d s p i n e d e n s i t y a n d / o r s i z e Mechanism inducing changes in spine size Biological correlates of spine size Spine formation LTP Scaling up LTD Scaling down Spine plasticity • Spine stabilization • Reduced spine dynamics • Synaptic strengthening • Increased surface AMPARs • Spine elimination and / or pruning • Increased spine dynamics • Synaptic weakening • Reduced surface AMPARs Reduced spine density and / or size Spine shrinkage LTP LTD Scaling down Scaling up Axon R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 219 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Cell reprogramming technologies Techniques in biotechnology used to convert one cell type into another using defined biological factors ; for example , transcription factors can be introduced into adult somatic cells to reprogramme them into induced pluripotent stem cells or induced neurons . have also found evidence for reduced complexity of basal dendrites in layer III and layer V pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) compared with controls 50 , 51 . Atypical dendritic development was again reported in a more recent study that found reduced dendrite length in layer III pyramidal neurons in the PFC of individ - uals with schizophrenia and , for the first time , bipolar disorder ; however , this study did not replicate the lower spine density reported previously for schizophrenia 52 . A separate study reported lower dendrite length and spine density in the PFC of individuals with bipolar disorder but no changes in spine density in individuals treated with lithium , suggesting that lithium ameliorates spine pathology in bipolar disorder 53 . Despite these important findings , it is not known when the structural deficits occur in these disorders , as brain samples are typically collected from deceased adults . The favoured hypothesis in schizo phrenia is that the lower spine density is the result of accelerated pruning of synapses during adolescence 54 . This view is supported by longitu - dinal MRI studies reporting higher rates of grey matter reductions in individuals who go on to develop schizo - phrenia 55 , which may in part be due to spine and den - drite loss . Furthermore , studies show that the onset of cognitive symptoms preceding psychosis coincides with the biological process of spine pruning in late childhood to adolescence 56 . Spine pathology in syndromic disorders . In addition to idiopathic disorders , there has been a prominent focus on dendritic structure in Mendelian forms of disease with known genetic aetiology , such as Fragile X syn - drome , Rett syndrome and Down syndrome , each of which has a characteristic spine pathology ( reviewed in REF . 57 ) . In these cases , human post - mortem data have been supported by findings from animal and stem cell models ( BOX 2 ) , which together provide a more persua - sive assessment of spine pathology . These models also open up avenues to investigate the underlying mecha - nisms in syndromic disorders 58 . Studies of syndromic intellectual disability demonstrate that stratification of individuals on the basis of genetic aetiology can help to identify distinct spine pathologies and that different spine pathologies can converge on cognitive dysfunc - tion 40 . However , animal models often fail to recapitu - late the inherent polygenic nature of many idiopathic neuropsychiatric disorders , which is why the analysis of human brain tissue and stem cells remains essential . Models of syndromic disease also have limited utility in modelling idiopathic neuropsychiatric disorders as intellectual disability , ASD and epilepsy are often comorbid in the same individual ( as observed in Fragile X syndrome ) . Patterns of spine pathology . As described above , defec - tive cortical pyramidal neurons have been observed in a range of different neuropsychiatric disorders , mostly in the frontal and temporal lobes . Early - onset develop - mental disorders such as intellectual disability and ASD are associated with too few or too many dendritic con - nections , respectively . Epilepsy , which is often comorbid with intellectual disability and ASD , is mainly character - ized by fewer dendrites and spines . By contrast , schizo - phrenia and bipolar disorder , the later - onset psychiatric disorders , are both reported to have fewer dendritic spines and simplified arbors compared with controls . Further studies at different time points of illness are required to know exactly how and when these dendritic changes occur . Genetic risk and structural plasticity Neuropsychiatric genetics . Neuropsychiatric disorders are known to have a strong genetic component , but their genetic architecture is complex 59 . Genetic studies of common variants and rare variants in neuropsychiatric Box 2 | Stem cell models of atypical dendrite and spine development Progress in stem cell reprogramming technologies has revolutionized the way we can study neuropsychiatric conditions . Analysis of the structural and activity - dependent development of human induced pluripotent stem cell ( iPSC ) - derived neurons is still nascent and promises to complement human post - mortem and MRI studies , enabling research into the early molecular and cellular events that lead to neuropsychiatric disorders . To date , there have been several key insights from studies looking at dendritic and spine dysmorphogenesis in genetically defined human stem cells : • iPSC - derived human neurons in which SHANK3 is conditionally deleted display neurodevelopmental deficits with decreased dendritic complexity and synapse density 103 . • iPSC - derived human neurons generated from individuals with Timothy syndrome ( in which there are mutations in CACNA1C ) display defects in activity - dependent dendritic retraction 121 . • A single - nucleotide polymorphism near microRNA locus MIR137 that was identified in a genome - wide association study of schizophrenia is associated with increased dendritic complexity ( see the figure ) and an increased proportion of spines containing the AMPAR subunit GluA1 in patient iPSC - derived neurons 258 . • Deletion of chromosome band 7q11 . 23 causes Williams – Beuren syndrome , and the same copy number variant is also associated with autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) . Neurons derived from iPSCs from individuals with the typical 7q11 . 23 deletion have a larger number of dendrites and dendritic spines and increased total dendrite length compared with controls 259 . • Deletion of MECP2 causes Rett syndrome , whereas duplication of MECP2 causes a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with similar phenotypes . IPSC - derived neurons from individuals with Rett syndrome have a decreased spine density . Conversely , iPSC - derived neurons from individuals with MECP2 duplications have increased dendritic complexity concomitant with an increased number of immature spines and a reduction of mature spines but no change in total spine number 260 , 261 . • iPSC - derived neurons from individuals with atypical Rett syndrome , caused by mutations in CDKL5 , have an increased number of dendritic protrusions 262 . • A heterozygous NRXN1 deletion akin to those found in individuals with schizophrenia and ASD does not impair synapse number or dendrite development in iPSC - derived human neurons 263 . Figure adapted with permission from REF . 258 , Elsevier . Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Dendritic segment showing spines Neuron traces used for analysis of dendritic complexity Patient - derived neuron with genetic risk factor Patient - derived neuron with CRISPR - edited genetic risk factor R E V I E W S 220 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Common variants Alterations in a DNA sequence , often with small effect on disease risk , which are present in large proportion of the general population ( > 1 % ) . These are typically single - nucleotide polymorphisms that are identified in genome - wide association study ( GWAS ) . Rare variants Mutations in a DNA sequence , often with a large effect on disease risk , which occur only in a small fraction of the general population ( < 1 % ) . These types of variants are usually identified in family , exome sequencing or copy number variant ( CNV ) studies . Genome - wide association studies ( GWAS ) . Genetic studies designed to identify variants in the genome that associate with a disease or trait . Large - scale GWAS have been especially successful in identifying many common risk variants in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . Exome sequencing Genomic sequencing technique used to sequence all of the protein - coding regions ( exons ) of the genome . Enrichment analyses Bioinformatic technique used to identify over - represented gene sets or biological processes from large omic data sets . This method is typically used to understand the concerted function of hundreds of genes and / or proteins from genomic and proteomic data . disorders have discovered a range of genes and chro - mosomal regions involved in disease risk . Genome - wide association studies ( GWAS ) of common risk variants in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder have been success - ful in identifying a growing number of synaptic genes that are related to disease 60 , 61 ( TABLE 1 ; Supplementary Table S1 ) . In addition , a wide range of rare and highly penetrant copy number variants ( CNVs ) , consisting of large chromosomal deletions or duplications , have been implicated in the aetiology of multiple neuropsychiatric disorders 62 , several of which alter the structural plasticity of neurons ( TABLE 1 ) . The most recent success in revealing the genetic landscape of psychiatric disorders has come from studies using whole - genome sequencing and exome sequencing to identify protein - coding variants 63 – 67 . To aid in the interpretation of these genetic risk factors , enrichment analyses have been an invaluable and unbi - ased way to identify functionally relevant gene sets and biological pathways relevant to neuropsychiatric disor - ders 8 . Through such analyses , processes including cyto - skeletal organization 68 , 69 , transcriptional regulation and chromatin modification 6 , 70 , 71 have all been suggested to be altered in different neuropsychiatric disorders ; how - ever , postsynaptic signalling at glutamatergic synapses appears to be the most prominent shared biological pro - cess across multiple disorders 5 – 8 , 63 , 68 , 72 , and many of the genes identified are likely to impact spine plasticity . This observation has prompted the need for a detailed exami - nation of the relationship between neuropsychiatric risk factors and the mechanisms of structural plasticity . Exome sequencing studies have been particularly helpful for biologists as they implicate specific genes rather than the multigene loci often associated with GWAS and CNV studies . Therefore , exome data provide a rich source of information that can assist in disentan - gling the biological pathways involved in neuropsychi - atric disorders and may be critical in unravelling the disease pathways that could underlie spine deficits in neuropsychiatric disorders ( FIG . 3 ) . The complex polygenic nature of neuropsychiatric disorders suggests that many different mutations of var - ying severity are expected to hit a range of synaptic path - ways that converge on spine plasticity . Each pathway , or functional group of proteins , could represent a different dimension that may contribute to deficits in structural plasticity ( FIG . 3 ) . Below , we discuss prominent classes of proteins and pathways that are at the convergence point of dendritic structural plasticity and neuropsychiatric genetics , exemplifying each class with well - characterized representatives . These examples may help the functional interpretation of other potential candidate genes that are identified in genetic studies of neuropsychiatric disorders . Cell adhesion . Cell adhesion molecules ( CAMs ) com - prise a diverse set of proteins with large extracellular domains that serve as trans - synaptic anchors , ligands , receptors and mediators of activity - dependent signal - ling 73 . Neurexins and neuroligins are among the best studied CAMs and have been strongly implicated in several neuropsychiatric disorders . Deletions in NRXN1 were some of the first CNVs to be associated with schizo phrenia 74 , whereas a range of loss - of - function and de novo mutations in neuroligin genes ( NLGN1 – 3 and NLGN4X ) are detected in individuals with ASD 64 , 75 . Alterations in neurexin family members have also been reported in epilepsy and in neuropsychiatric disorders that are comorbid with epilepsy 76 , 77 . The presynaptic neurexins ( neurexin 1 ( NRXN1 ) – NRXN3 ) participate in heterophilic trans - synaptic inter - actions with the postsynaptic neuroligins , which triggers the recruitment of the scaffolding molecules and recep - tors necessary for synapse formation in co - culture mod - els 78 . In vitro , disruption of all neurexins in hippocampal neurons reduces synaptic stability and increases synapse elimination , implicating neurexins in the stabilization of nascent synapses 79 . In cultured rat hippocampal neu - rons , neuroligin 1 ( NLGN1 ) overexpression increases spine density , whereas knockdown of NLGN1 , NLGN2 or NLGN3 reduces spine number 80 . NLGN3 - R451C mice , which model a human ASD mutation , have a marked increase in spine dynamics due to spine destabi - lization in the anterior frontal cortex 81 . The same muta - tion increases the number of dendritic branch points in the stratum radiatum region of the hippocampus 82 . Contactin - associated protein - like 2 ( CNTNAP2 ; also known as CASPR2 ) is a more distantly related member of the neurexin family , with a role in structural neuro development . Homozygous loss of CNTNAP2 in humans causes a severe neurodevelopmental syndrome , whereas heterozygous mutations have been found in individuals with schizophrenia , epilepsy and autism 83 – 85 . In vitro , mature mouse cortical neurons lacking Cntnap2 have a reduced number of spines , which exhibit an altered morphology and reduced levels of the AMPAR subunit GluA1 ( also known as GRIA1 ) 86 . Live imag - ing of layer V pyramidal cells in vivo shows that spine deficits may be caused by increased spine elimination , as spine formation is unaffected in Cntnap2 - knockout mice 87 . In vitro knockdown of CNTNAP2 in developing mouse neurons causes the collapse of dendritic branches and reduction of spine head size without affecting spine or synapse density 88 . Together , these experiments sup - port a role for CNTNAP2 in the structural integrity of mature dendritic branches and the stability of newly formed spines . Mutations in a wide variety of other synaptic CAMs , including protocadherins , contactins , Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule ( DSCAM ) and cadherins , are linked to both early - onset and late - onset neuro - psychiatric disorders and have marked effects on struc - tural plasticity ( TABLE 1 ; Supplementary Table S1 ) These functions at multiple stages of dendritic development may explain why variations in CAMs are associated with a wide range of disorders with varying onset . A promi - nent role of CAM networks in neuropsychiatric disorder aetiology is consistent with their well - documented roles in multiple steps of circuit formation and remodelling , including synapse formation , specification and stabi - lization . As these adhesion events are largely activity - independent , CAMs may underlie activity - independent spine pathology processes . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 221 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Table 1 | Neuropsychiatric risk loci with a reported effect on structural plasticity Gene or copy number variant Gene name or description Type of effect on spines and / or dendrites Disease associations Cell adhesion NRXN1 Neurexin 1 Spine stability 79 SZ 280 and ASD 6 NLGN3 Neuroligin 3 Spine density 80 ASD 64 CNTNAP2 Contactin - associated protein - like 2 ( also known as CASPR2 ) Spine and dendrite stability 86 – 88 ID and ASD 83 DSCAM DS cell adhesion molecule Dendrite and spine development 281 ASD 64 PCDH10 Protocadherin 10 Spine density 282 ASD 282 and SZ 63 Glutamate receptors GRIA1 Glutamate ionotropic receptor AMPA type subunit 1 Spine size 93 SZ 60 , ID 65 and ASD 64 PRRT2 Proline - rich transmembrane protein 2 Spine density 283 Epilepsy 284 CACNG2 Calcium voltage - gated channel auxiliary subunit - γ 2 ( also known as TARP - γ 2 ) Dendritic arborization 285 ID 7 GRIN2A Glutamate ionotropic receptor NMDA type subunit 2A Dendritic arborization 99 SZ 60 and epilepsy 286 GRIN2B Glutamate ionotropic receptor NMDA type subunit 2B Spine density 97 , 98 ASD 64 Scaffold proteins SHANK3 SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains 3 Dendrite and spine development 103 , 106 , 107 ASD 64 , 287 ANK3 Ankyrin 3 ( also known as ankyrin - G ) Spine size and density and activity - dependent spine enlargement 108 BD 61 DLG4 Discs large MAGUK scaffold protein 4 ( also known as PSD95 ) Spine density and size ; activity - dependent structural plasticity 288 , 289 ASD and / or ID 290 DLGAP1 DLG associated protein 1 ( also known as GKAP and SAPAP1 ) Spine size 291 ASD and / or ID 290 CASK Calcium / calmodulin - dependent serine protein kinase Spine density and size 292 ASD and / or ID 290 and DD 67 Calcium signalling CACNA1C Calcium voltage - gated channel subunit - α 1C Spine density 120 BD 61 and SZ 60 CACNB4 Calcium voltage - gated channel auxiliary subunit - β 4 Spine density 49 SZ 115 , 116 CAMK2B Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II β Activity - dependent spine formation 293 and dendritic arborization 294 ID 295 CAMK2A Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II α Activity - dependent spine formation 293 ASD 64 and ID 295 GTPase signalling SYNGAP1 Synaptic RAS GTPase - activating protein 1 Spine formation , development and activity - dependent structural plasticity 131 , 132 , 296 ID 297 , DD 67 and ASD 6 TRIO Trio Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor Dendrite development and activity - dependent structural plasticity 146 ASD and / or ID 290 KALRN Kalirin Rho - GEF kinase Spine morphogenesis and activity - dependent structural plasticity 139 DD 67 NF1 Neurofibromin 1 Spine development and activity - dependent structural plasticity 136 ID 297 ARHGEF6 Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 6 Dendrite development and spine density 156 ID 297 OPHN1 Oligophrenin 1 Dendrite and spine development 155 ID 297 and DD 67 Copy number variant models 7q11 . 23 deletion Williams – Beuren syndrome Increased dendrite length and spine number 259 ASD 6 15q11 – 13 duplication Dup15q syndrome Increased spine turnover and deceased spine density 81 , 298 ASD 6 and SZ 280 16p11 . 2 duplication None Increased dendritic arborization 299 ASD 6 and SZ 280 22q11 . 2 deletion DiGeorge / velocardiofacial syndrome Decreased spine density and stability and increased spine turnover 300 , 301 SZ 280 As different neuropsychiatric disorders often share the same risk factors , other disease associations exist that are not referenced herein . ASD , autism spectrum disorder ; BD , bipolar disorder ; DD , developmental disorder ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; GWAS , genome - wide association study ; ID , intellectual disability ; SZ , schizophrenia . R E V I E W S 222 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Dendritic spine proteins ( PSD proteome ) Nature Reviews | Neuroscience AMPA receptor ( GRIA1 / 2 ) NMDA receptor ( GRIN2A / B ) Schizophrenia Bipolar disorder 77 8 Cell adhesion molecules Glutamate receptors Scaﬀold proteins Calcium signalling molecules Intellectual disability 110 Late onset Early onset Epilepsy 52 ASD 416 Cell adhesion Calcium signalling Genes ( % ) Genes ( % ) Genes ( % ) Genes ( % ) Genes ( % ) 848 281 4 , 136 726 53 1 , 461 1 , 461 1 , 461 1 , 461 1 , 461 b a De novo protein coding mutations ( exome sequencing ) GTPase signalling molecules Voltage - gated calcium channel 0 15 30 0 15 30 0 15 30 0 15 30 Glutamate receptor signalling GTPase signalling 0 15 30 Unknown NRXN1 NLGN3 CNTNAP2 CACNA1C Dendritic branch Dendritic spine CACNB4 Presynaptic bouton Spine development and plasticity Ca 2 + PRRT2 ARHGEF6 SYNGAP1 TRIO NF1 KALRN RAC1 CAMK2A or CAMK2B DLG4 ANK3 DLG4 DLG4 DLGAP1 SHANK3 CASK Synaptic vesicle CACNG2 Figure 3 | Neuropsychiatric risk factors and biological pathways regulating structural plasticity . a | Schematic illustration of a systems biology approach for identifying novel genes likely to affect spine plasticity in neuropsychiatric disorders . Exome sequencing studies of de novo variants are particularly useful for uncovering genetic risk networks involved in different disorders . Although many genes discovered in exome sequencing studies are individually nonsignificant , as a whole , they can reveal a mutational spectrum for each disorder and provide clues for the underlying pathways and networks involved in pathogenesis . In particular , genes with de novo mutations for which the protein products localize to the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) are excellent candidates for future studies on the dysfunctional pathways altering structural plasticity in neuropsychiatric disorders . To highlight such genes , de novo mutations affecting protein coding for each disorder were intersected with proteins present in the human PSD proteome 270 ( a proxy for the dendritic spine ) . The number of genes in each overlap is indicated ( top panels ) . All of the de novo data were obtained from denovo - db ( see ‘Related links’ ) 271 accessed on 21 September 2017 . Additional studies for schizophrenia 272 – 274 that were not in the denovo - db were obtained from supplementary data compiled in REF . 275 . Only de novo variants affecting protein - coding regions or splice sites were included ( that is , missense , frameshift and splice site mutations , altered stop codons , altered start codons , insertions and deletions ) . Human PSD proteome data were obtained from REF . 270 . Gene ontologies ( GOs ) were then used to classify PSD - associated mutations into biological processes relevant to spine structure and function . To do so , GO categories from each data set were defined in DAVID ( see ‘Related links’ ) v6 . 8 , accessed on 11 November 2017 , using the functional annotation chart . Homo sapiens was used as a background , and the ‘biological process’ ontology ( GOTERM _ BP _ FAT ) was used to annotate gene lists . The following ontologies were used to cluster genes into functional pathways : cell adhesion ( GO : 0007155 - cell adhesion ) , GluR signalling ( GO : 0007215 - glutamate signalling pathway ) , calcium ( GO : 0006816 - calcium ion transport ) and GTPase ( GO0043087 - regulation of GTPase activity ) . This analysis shows that the de novo mutations affecting PSD proteins cluster into distinct biological pathways to varying degrees , providing an overview of the contribution of each pathway to each disorder ( bottom panels ) . The percentage of genes in each GO category is depicted on the y - axis . Exome sequencing data for bipolar disorder are currently insufficient to classify mutations into categories . b | Illustration of a dendritic spine containing different functional groups of neuropsychiatric - disorder - associated risk factors ( TABLE 1 ) that regulate spine structure . Functional groups are colour coded . ANK3 , ankyrin 3 ; ARHGEF9 , Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 9 ; ASD , autism spectrum disorder ; CACNA1C , voltage - gated calcium channel subunit - α 1Ca v 1 . 2 ; CACNG2 , voltage - dependent calcium channel - γ 2 subunit ; CACNB4 , calcium channel voltage - dependent subunit - β 4 ; CAMK2A / B , calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase type II subunit - α / β ; CASK , calcium / calmodulin - dependent serine protein kinase ; CNTNAP2 , contactin - associated protein - like 2 ; DLG4 , disks large homologue 4 ; DLGAP1 , disks large - associated protein 1 ; GRIA1 / 2 , glutamate receptor ionotropic , AMPA1 / 2 ; GRIN2A / B , glutamate receptor ionotropic NMDA2A / B ; KALRN , kalirin ; NF1 , neurofibromin 1 ; NLGN3 , neuroligin 3 ; NRXN1 , neurexin 1 ; PRRT2 , proline - rich transmembrane protein 2 ; RAC1 , RAS - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 ; SHANK3 , SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains protein 3 ; SYNGAP1 , RAS / RAP GTPase - activating protein SynGAP 1 ; TRIO , triple functional domain protein . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 223 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Glutamate receptors . Excitatory neurotransmission in the brain is mediated primarily by AMPARs and NMDA receptors ( NMDARs ) . Each glutamate receptor consists of four subunits , encoded by multiple genes ( GRIA1 – GRIA4 ( AMPAR ) and GRIN1 , GRIN2A – GRIN2D and GRIN3 ( NMDAR ) ) , which are expressed with distinct spatio - temporal patterns during brain development . Glutamate receptors and their associated auxiliary subunits have been implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders by a variety of different genetic studies ( TABLE 1 ) . GRIA1 and GRIN2A were identified as genome - wide significant susceptibil - ity genes in the largest GWAS of schizophrenia to date 60 . Exome sequencing studies have revealed de novo vari - ants affecting GRIN2A in individuals with schizophre - nia , and recurrent de novo variants in GRIN2B have been identified in individuals with ASD , making it one of the strongest candidate ASD susceptibility genes 63 , 64 . AMPARs have a central role in the structure and function of spines . Spine size is robustly correlated with AMPAR content , with large spines containing more AMPARs , enhancing their synaptic strength 28 . Glutamate signalling through AMPARs is sufficient to induce the formation of new spines and maintain existing spines in hippocampal slice cultures , suggest - ing that appropriate levels of AMPARs are required for activity - dependent sculpting of neuronal circuits 89 , 90 . The GluA1 subunit is particularly important in activity - dependent AMPAR insertion into spines during LTP and experience - dependent plasticity in vivo 91 , 92 . The carboxy - terminal tail of GluA1 may be directly required to generate stable increases in spine size in vitro dur - ing chemically induced LTP , providing a link between structural and functional plasticity 93 . NMDARs are well recognized for their role in the induction of LTP and LTD , which cause long - lasting changes in spine size 94 ( FIG . 2a ) . However , blockade of NMDAR in postnatal hippocampal slice cultures results in increased dendritic arborization and synapse num - ber , demonstrating that NMDARs can also influence neuronal development 95 . Knockdown of the obliga - tory NMDAR subunit GluN1 ( encoded by GRIN1 ) , in hippo campal organotypic slice cultures causes increased spine motility and destabilization of spine structure , which is dependent on the GluN1 intracellular car - boxyl terminus , implicating NMDARs in the control of spine dynamics 96 . An ASD - linked rare mutation in the GluN2B ( encoded by GRIN2B ) carboxy - terminal tail results in decreased surface trafficking and a reduction in the spine density of cultured hippocampal neurons 97 . In vivo , loss of GRIN2B causes reductions in spine den - sity in CA1 hippocampal neurons , whereas deletion of GRIN2A causes decreases in dendritic complexity in the hippocampal dentate gyrus 98 , 99 . Interestingly , the predominant subunit used in the assembly of NMDARs changes during development from GluN2B ( ASD - associated ) to GluN2A ( schizophrenia - associated ) 100 . This developmental switch may reflect the importance of NMDA subunits at different phases of synaptic mat - uration and may implicate distinct NMDA - dependent mechanisms in governing the neurobiology and onset of ASD and schizophrenia . AMPARs and NMDARs are the centrepiece of the activity - dependent mechanisms shaping dendritic spines . Hence , alterations in glutamate receptor expression , traf - ficking or function , caused by genetic variation , are likely to have important structural implications , especially in postnatal structural plasticity and activity - dependent development . Scaffold proteins . One of the most recognizable features of dendritic spines is the presence of a PSD , constructed from a complex network of scaffold proteins . Scaffold proteins have a highly modular domain structure and contain protein interaction sites enabling them to tether receptors , ion channels and cytoskeletal elements together to regulate synaptic structure 101 . SH3 and mul - tiple ankyrin repeat domains ( SHANK ) and ankyrin ( ANK ) proteins are two types of scaffold proteins from the ankyrin repeat domain - containing protein ( ANKRD ) family . SHANK2 and SHANK3 mutations are two of the most prominent risk factors for ASD 102 . In addition , exonic mutations in SHANK1 – SHANK3 have been identified in a wide range of neurodevelopmental disor - ders 63 , 64 , 67 . Large GWAS have implicated ANK3 as one of the very few genome - wide significant susceptibility genes for bipolar disorder 61 . These studies and others strongly implicate postsynaptic scaffolds in the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric disorders ( TABLE 1 ) . In Shank3 - knockout mice , hippocampal neurons have decreased dendritic complexity and synapse den - sity in vitro 103 . In addition to hippocampal dysfunction , SHANK3 - deficient mice have reduced total spine density in medium spiny neurons expressing the dopamine D 2 receptor but not the D 1 receptor in vivo 104 . These obser - vations implicate SHANK3 in the structural development of specific striatal circuits important for social behav - iour . Interestingly , re - expression of SHANK3 in adult - hood can rescue dendritic spine deficits and behavioural abnormalities 105 , indicating that neuronal circuits can be readjusted even after the major neuro developmental events shaping brain architecture have passed . The schizophrenia - linked R1117X mutation in SHANK3 reduces spine density in cortical neurons in vivo , con - sistent with post - mortem studies in schizo phrenia 106 . The ASD - linked InsG3680 mutation also causes a significant decrease in spine density in homo zygous mice . Another set of SHANK3 mutations identified in individuals with ASD causes deficits in hippocampal spine morphology and actin polymerization in vitro 107 . The scaffold protein ANK3 ( also known as ankyrin - G ) is another ANKRD protein with important functions in spine plasticity 108 . The 190 kDa ANK3 isoform regulates spine head size and neck diameter . ANK3 accumulates in spine heads after chemical LTP , and knockdown of ANK3 disrupts LTP - induced increases in spine head size and density in cortical cultures . Notably , ANK3 - 190 is driven into spines upon lithium treatment in rats 109 , suggesting that this treatment induces similar mecha - nisms to LTP . Lithium has pleiotropic effects on cellular signalling ; however , part of its effect on ANK3 transport may result from its role as a regulator of microtubule - related trafficking 110 . Thus , reduced ANK3 expression R E V I E W S 224 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . in spines may compromise the structure of mature spines and their ability to undergo activity - dependent structural changes . Scaffold proteins are central hubs of the synapse , bringing upstream CAMs and receptors together with downstream signalling proteins and cytoskeletal ele - ments . These are all classes of proteins that are individ - ually relevant for neuropsychiatric disorders . Genetic insults to these structures would be expected to have diverse effects on both activity - dependent and activity - independent pathways regulating spine structure , possi - bly contributing to the wide spectrum of disorders with genetic variants in protein scaffolds ( TABLE 1 ) . Calcium signalling . The regulation of calcium influx into spines is crucial for activity - dependent signal - ling in neurons . Calcium channels are also important for activity - dependent postsynaptic structural refine - ment 111 , 112 . Calcium entry into spines is primarily con - trolled by synaptic activity and the gating properties of NMDARs and voltage - gated calcium channels ( VGCCs ) , which trigger calcium - dependent signalling cascades 113 . Calcium channel genes CACNA1C and CACNB2 were found to be genome - wide significant in a GWAS com - bining data from five major psychiatric disorders 114 . In addition , rare coding variants in calcium - channel - related genes have been discovered in a number of dif - ferent neuropsychiatric disorders and are enriched in individuals with schizophrenia 115 , 116 . CACNA1C encodes the pore - forming α - subunit of the L - type VGCC Ca v 1 . 2 and is a consistently replicated genome - wide - significant risk factor for bipolar disor - der and schizophrenia 60 , 61 . Heterozygous mutations in CACNA1C cause Timothy syndrome , a rare develop - mental disorder associated with cognitive dysfunction and autism 117 . Ca v 1 . 2 channels are widely expressed in dendrites and spines , where they regulate calcium entry 118 . Brain imaging studies have found that the CACNA1C risk allele is associated with an age - related prefrontal cortical thinning in individuals with bipolar disorder 119 . Activity - dependent pruning of the excita - tory synapses of medium spiny neurons is dependent on Ca 2 + entry through Ca v 1 . 2 in co - culture models , indicating that pruning may play a part in this age - related thinning 120 . Transgenic mice engineered with a Timothy - syndrome - related mutation in CACNA1C have decreased basal dendrite complexity in layer II / III , rem - iniscent of post - mortem analyses in bipolar disorder 121 . Disruption of downstream calcium - dependent signal - ling can also impair neuronal structure . A de novo ASD mutation in the catalytic domain of calcium / calmodulin - dependent kinase type II ( CAMKII ) decreases binding to other ASD - related proteins including SHANK3 , the NMDAR subunit GluN2B , and the VGCC β2a subunit , causing reduced targeting to spines and reduced spine density in hippocampal cultures 122 . Thus , elements of the calcium signalling pathway are directly involved in the structural rearrangement of neurons and may be particularly important for circuit remodelling after synaptic activity . Calcium triggers multiple downstream signalling pathways and may therefore affect an array of different cellular events linked to structural plasticity . Disruption to calcium signalling caused by genetic mutation would conceivably contrib - ute to pathogenesis in early and late neuro developmental events ( TABLE 1 ) . Small GTPases . Small GTPases are a large superfamily of regulatory proteins that induce activation of down - stream signalling upon binding of GTP , which they then hydrolyse to GDP . RAS - related C3 botulinum toxin sub - strate 1 ( RAC1 ) and RAS activation have been exten - sively characterized in vitro as causative factors in spine formation , enlargement , maturation and stabilization as well as synapse strengthening 123 , 124 , whereas transform - ing protein RhoA ( RHOA ) 125 and RAP 126 activation causes spine shrinkage and elimination as well as syn - apse weakening . GTPase activation is provided by the action of guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) and inactivation by GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) . RAS has a well - documented role in regulating syn - aptic plasticity 127 and has been implicated in intellectual disability 128 . RAS is classically activated in response to stimulation of receptor tyrosine kinases by neuro - trophins , inducing phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and extracellular - signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) sig - nalling that promotes AMPAR membrane insertion and spine enlargement 129 ( FIG . 4 ) . RAS / RAP GTPase - activating protein SynGAP ( SYNGAP1 ) is a brain - specific RAS - GAP that is highly abundant in the PSD . Mutations within SYNGAP1 cause intellectual disability , epilepsy and ASD 130 . Defects in spine and synapse for - mation were observed in cultured Syngap1‑ knockout mouse neurons 131 , 132 , whereas Syngap1 – / + mice accumu - lated glutamate receptors in spines earlier than wild - type mice , resulting in significantly higher spine density and impaired synaptic plasticity 133 . Although heterozygous Syngap1 mutants display few synaptic defects in adult - hood , conditional knockout during an early developmen - tal stage was sufficient to induce learning deficits in adult mice , suggesting that SYNGAP1 and RAS regulation are critical during early neuronal development 134 . Mutations within NF1 , which encodes neuro - fibromin ( another RAS - GAP present within spines ) , cause neurofibromatosis and intellectual disability 135 . Neurofibromin is required for normal spine density 136 . In addition , conditional knockout of Tsc1 and Tsc2 , two genes encoding GAPs for the RAS - like GTP - binding protein Rheb ( RHEB ) , in mice revealed the central importance of these molecules in maintaining normal spine size and density 137 . In humans , mutations in TSC1 and TSC2 cause tuberous sclerosis complex , a disorder associated with intellectual disability , ASD and epi - lepsy 138 . Therefore , RAS and / or RHEB regulation by GAPs is integral to the formation and development of spines , and their dysregulation is intimately linked to neuro psychiatric disorders . RHOA and RAC1 are the archetypal RHO family members that control separate and opposing rearrange - ments of the actin cytoskeleton 124 , 125 ( FIG . 4 ) . Several RHO - GEFs and RHO - GAPs have been associated with neuropsychiatric disorders and regulate spines . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 225 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nature Reviews | Neuroscience VGCC – CCBs • Nifedpine• Verapamil• Diltiazem• CP8 PAK inhibitors • PF3758309• FRAX597 Rock inhibitors • Fasudil• Ripusadil Glycine - site allosteric regulators • D - Cycloserine • BL6 – BL21 • Rapastinel• Apimostinel PAM• ORG26576• Piracetam• Aniracetam TARP inhibitors Ketamine metabolite • ( 2R , 6R ) - hydroxynor - ketamine Pore blockers • Ketamine • Memantine• MEK801 AMPARmembraneinsertion Depolarization Depolarization DepolarizationCa 2 + inﬂux Ca 2 + inﬂux Na + , K + ( Ca 2 + ) inﬂux Ca 2 + inﬂux ? CAMKII Kalirin and / or TRIO activation Cytoskeletal reorganization RHOA and / or RAC PAK or ROCK • MEK • ERK • PI3K • mTOR AMPAR traﬃcking RAC and / or RHOA inhibitors• Trip α • Secramine TRKB RAS Ras inhibitors • Statins • FTIs • Prenyl - mimetics Ribosome eEF2 eEF2K BDNF synthesis VGCC AMPAR BDNF NMDAR Dendritic spine Figure 4 | Pharmacological targets and associated structural pathways within the dendritic spine . Within the dendritic spine , AMPA receptors ( AMPARs ) govern fast synaptic transmission in response to glutamatergic signalling . Glutamate binds to , and activates , AMPARs in response to synaptic activity . The resulting influx of sodium and potassium ions through the open channel results in depolarization 276 . NMDA receptor ( NMDAR ) activation occurs in response to glycine and glutamate binding concurrently with depolarization . In addition , depolarization results in the opening of voltage - gated calcium channels ( VGCCs ; including L - type , Ca v 1 . 2 / 1 . 3 - containing channels ) . Depolarization and VGCC activation result in brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) exocytosis 277 . Calcium influx activates calcium / calmodulin - dependent kinase type II ( CAMKII ) 278 , resulting in activation of GTPase signalling by phosphorylation of kalirin 139 and / or triple functional domain protein ( TRIO ) 140 . These guanine nucleotide exchange factors regulate RAS - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 ( RAC ) / transforming protein RhoA ( RHOA ) to alter cytoskeletal dynamics . GTPase activation can either increase ( RAC pathway ) or decrease ( RHOA pathway ) actin polymerization through serine / threonine protein kinase PAK ( PAK ) or Rho - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) pathways to promote spine growth or retraction , respectively 124 , 125 . In addition , calcium results in the activation of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase ( eEF2K ) , phosphorylation of elongation factor 2 ( eEF2 ) at Thr56 ( REF . 192 ) and inhibition of BDNF translation at ribosomes . BDNF release results in the activation of the BDNF / NT3 growth factor receptor ( TRKB ; also known as NTRK2 ) and induction of the RAS pathway through growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 ( GRB2 ) and son of sevenless homologue 1 ( SOS1 ; not shown ) , which in turn activates the phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and MEK ( MAPK / ERK kinase ) and / or extracellular - signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) pathways , contributing to long - term potentiation via AMPAR trafficking and membrane insertion within the spine 279 . Many regulatory compounds targeting key synaptic signalling proteins have been isolated ( indicated in the pink boxes ) . These , or other related small molecules , may have utility in neuropsychiatric disorders by regulating synaptic function and spine dynamics . CCBs , calcium channel blockers ; FTIs , farnesyl transferase inhibitors ; mTOR , mammalian target of rapamycin ; PAM , positive allosteric modulator ; TARP , transmembrane AMPAR regulator protein . TRIP α , TRIO inhibitory aptamer ; Question mark indicates unknown mechanism . R E V I E W S 226 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Kalirin and triple functional domain protein ( TRIO ) are highly homologous , multifunctional proteins that contain both RAC - GEF and RHO - GEF domains . Both proteins are abundant in spines and regulate spine maintenance 139 . A dual Trio and Kalrn knockout in mice resulted in an 80 % loss of spines within CA1 hippo campal neurons and profound effects on LTP induction 140 . A rare mutation in the RAC - GEF domain of KALRN , detected in individuals with schizophrenia and major depressive disorder ( MDD ) , induces spine loss in vitro and is associated with reduced cortical thickness in individuals with schizophrenia carrying the mutation 141 . Another mutation in KALRN , P2255T , is the only exonic mutation with an association with schizophrenia 142 and recent studies suggest that it causes dendrite simplification 143 . Furthermore , a homozygous missense variant in KALRN causes intellectual disa - bility 144 . Mutations in TRIO and / or KALRN have been detected in intellectual disability 145 , 146 and in whole - exome sequencing studies in ASD 70 and developmental disorders 67 . Notably , alterations in the kalirin – RAC – serine / threonine protein kinase PAK ( PAK1 ) pathway have been reported in post - mortem studies in schizo - phrenia . These changes include reduced expression of kalirin 7 ( REFS 147 , 148 ) , increased expression of kalirin 9 ( REF . 149 ) , reduced PAK1 phosphorylation and increased myosin light chain phosphorylation 148 . Similarly , lev - els of the closely related RAC1 homologue , CDC42 , were reduced in human schizophrenia cortex 148 , 150 . Interestingly , despite their overlapping function within spines , mutations within TRIO and altered KALRN expres - sion are linked to different disease states — KALRN with schizophrenia 147 , 148 and TRIO with ASD and / or intellec - tual disability 70 , 151 . This difference may be a direct result of disrupted GTPase activity at key stages of spine formation and maturation , given that TRIO is expressed during early development 152 and the main neuronal kalirin isoform , kalirin 7 , is expressed at later stages 153 . Several other RAC1 and / or RHO regulators and tar - gets have been linked to intellectual disability . Of these , OPHN1 ( encoding oligophrenin 1 ) 154 , 155 , ARHGEF6 ( REF . 156 ) and PAK3 regulate spine plasticity 157 , 158 . Interestingly , mutations in GIT1 , encoding a protein that regulates synapse formation 159 and spine density 160 and alters RAC and / or PAK3 signalling , have been linked to schizophrenia 161 . The related family members , PAK2 and PAK7 , have also been found to play a key role in regulating neuroplasticity and psychoses , suggesting a functional link to schizophrenia 162 , 163 . In addition , the intellectual - disability - linked gene ARHGEF2 , encoding GEF - H1 , has been implicated in regulating spine den - sity and length as well as AMPAR mediated structural plasticity 164 . The gene encoding WAVE - associated RAC GTPase - activating protein ( WRP ) , SRGAP3 , may be associated with intellectual disability 165 and has been functionally linked to impaired spine precursor forma - tion on dendrites , resulting in reduced spine density and mushroom spine number . Indeed , loss of WRP impairs learning and memory in heterozygous and null mouse models , highlighting the importance of this GAP in spine development and neuropsychiatric disorders 166 . A prominent role for small GTPase regulatory path - ways in neuropsychiatric disorders ( TABLE 1 ) is consistent with their regulation of multiple spine and / or dendrite remodelling processes . Most severe mutations in these genes seem to be associated with early - onset neuro - psychiatric disorders , such as intellectual disability and ASD , suggesting an important role in the early formation of synaptic circuits . Novel therapeutic avenues Traditional pharmacological treatments for neuro - psychiatric disorders have typically targeted seroto - nin reuptake ( tricyclic or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants 167 ) and dopamine receptors ( antipsychotics for schizophrenia and bipolar disor - der 168 ) , whereas epilepsy treatments employ a range of sodium , calcium and GABAergic channel regulators depending on seizure type 169 . Although efficacious for many patients , these treatments suffer from various serious drawbacks . For example , antidepressants and anti psychotics can cause side effects that result in high rates of noncompliance . Furthermore , anti psychotic use ameliorates the positive symptoms of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder with limited efficacy in treating negative and cognitive defects , whereas many sufferers of depres - sion are resistant to treatment 170 . These limitations have prompted the search for novel drug targets , informed by molecular and genetic studies , which can circumvent the negative side effects of traditional therapeutics while improving patient outcomes ( FIG . 4 ) . A greater under - standing of the molecular substrates of dendritic and spine alterations in neuro psychiatric disorders may facil - itate the development of novel therapeutic approaches to reverse or delay neuronal defects and , therefore , the course of disease . Despite the prevalence of adhesion and scaffold mol - ecules identified in genetic studies of neuropsychiatric disorders , difficulty in targeting such classes has pre - cluded the development of any clinically relevant drugs . Of the risk genes associated with neuropsychiatric dis - orders , membrane receptors have received the greatest attention in drug development , although recent clinical studies suggest that GTPase signalling pathways repre - sent a novel therapeutic avenue . Below , we review recent developments in drug development targeting glutama - tergic , calcium and GTPase signalling pathways within the synapse . Targeting glutamate receptors . Owing to their central importance in synaptic transmission and plasticity and their extensive genetic links to neuropsychiatric disor - ders , NMDARs 171 and AMPARs 172 have been the focus of many drug development attempts . Emerging data suggest that structural modulation of neurons through pharmacological intervention underlies some of the ben - eficial effects of NMDAR and AMPAR regulators in dis - ease 173 , 174 . Indeed , as described above , it is hypo thesized that reducing excessive glutamatergic activity and / or spine formation in ASD may be beneficial , whereas enhancing spine formation , stabilization and plasticity may be the goal in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 227 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Interest in the NMDARs as a pharmacological target was spurred by the striking effect of the pore blocker ketamine on individuals with depression 175 . In con - trast to typical antidepressants , a single intravenous injection of ketamine can produce a rapid , long - lasting reduction in the symptoms of depression ( reviewed in REF . 176 ) . Atypical spiny synapse connectivity has been reported in MDD 177 and bipolar disorder 52 , and stress , a risk factor in MDD and bipolar disorder , causes spine alterations in animal models 178 , 179 . Accordingly , evidence shows that ketamine acts , at least in part , by modulat - ing spine plasticity 180 . For example , ketamine rapidly increased the number and function of new spiny syn - apses in the PFC of rats through mechanisms involving mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) signalling , reversing stress - induced synaptic deficits 181 . In another study , ketamine enhanced spine formation and induced a larger - scale remodelling of the dendritic arbor at different rates 173 . Despite its remarkable antidepressant effects , ket - amine can induce psychotic behaviour and cognitive defects in healthy individuals and exacerbate schizo - phrenia psychoses 182 – 184 . Furthermore , controversy exists over its mechanism of action . Indeed , mecha - nisms involving AMPAR regulation 185 , reduction of presynaptic inhibitory GABAergic input 186 , alterations in NMDA - mediated miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents 187 and metabolism of ketamine to ( 2 R , 6 R ) - hydroxynorketamine 188 have been proposed ( reviewed in REFS 189 , 190 ) . The underlying effects have been exten - sively linked to the altered translation of brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) , which has been shown to have a crucial role in mediating the sustained antidepres - sant effects of ketamine 191 , 192 . Therefore , a greater under - standing of ketamine’s modulation of spine plasticity is crucial to engineer drugs developed for maximal efficacy in neuropsychiatric disorders with minimal psychomimetic and cognitive side effects . NMDAR agonists , such as glycine / d - serine and d - cycloserine , have been shown to be efficacious in reducing depression in schizophrenia 193 – 195 and ASD 196 and lack the psychomimetic side effects of ketamine . The success of NMDAR partial agonism is exemplified by rapastinel , a tetrapeptide derivative of the B6 - B21 mono - clonal antibody , which targets the glycine - binding site 197 . This brain - permeable compound has shown promise in both preclinical and clinical trials , including fast - acting antidepressant effects similar to ketamine in the absence of psychomimetic side effects 198 , which has warranted ‘fast - tracking’ to phase III clinical trials ( NCT02951988 ( REF . 199 ) and NCT02943564 ( REF . 200 ) ) . Of particu - lar interest is the ability of rapastinel to reverse social phenotypes in preclinical animal models , suggesting that NMDAR regulation is a potential treatment for ASD 201 , 202 . Several studies show that rapastinel acts , at least in part , by modulating spine plasticity ; treatment rapidly increased the number and function of spine syn - apses in the apical dendritic tuft of layer V pyramidal neurons in the medial PFC 180 , enhanced the recovery of spines after insults 203 and increased sensitivity to LTP and metaplasticity 204 . Apimostinel , a rapastinel derivative that is suitable for oral dosage , has recently been developed , and early clinical trials for depression have recently been completed , although results are pending ( NCT02067793 ( REF . 205 ) ) . Preclinical study of the role of positive allosteric mod - ulators ( PAMs ; including ampakines ) revealed a strik - ing antidepressant effect in a variety of mouse models ( reviewed in REF . 206 ) . Furthermore , PAMs increased synaptic plasticity and showed promise in cognitive enhancement 207 . Thus , AMPARs may represent a prom - ising therapeutic target in regulating cognitive impair - ment and mood disorders , such as bipolar disorder , schizophrenia and MDD . Ampakines have been shown to modulate spine plasticity , which may underlie part of their action . They facilitate dendritic recovery and improve synaptic plasticity and memory in middle - aged rats 208 and promote spine actin polymerization in a model of Angelman syndrome 209 . The ampakines CX546 and aniracetam reduced prepulse inhibition in a mouse model of schizo phrenia 210 . This effect may be linked to the ability of CX546 to prime spines for struc - tural plasticity , promote spine head enlargement and ( in presynaptic terminals ) increase the probability of neuro transmitter release 211 . Clinical trials assessing the efficacy of ampakines in disease yielded mixed results . Phase I clinical trials assessing the suitable dosage of the AMPAR – PAM , Org 26576 , revealed the drug was well tolerated , and a sec - ond study suggested both an improvement in depressive symptomology and signs of cognitive enhancement 212 , 213 . However , the PAM CX516 showed varying efficacy , failing to produce significant improvement in cogni - tive function in individuals with fragile X syndrome or schizophrenia 214 . Despite the potential identified in pre - clinical studies , these results suggest that clinical efficacy is dependent on the drug mechanism or molecular and genetic context of disease . Further studies are required to confirm the potential of ampakines in AMPAR - related neuropsychiatric disorders . Inhibition of AMPAR may be beneficial in neuro - psychiatric disorders associated with an increased excitatory - to - inhibitory ratio 215 , such as epilepsy , ASD and some forms of intellectual disability . Indeed , the clinically approved AMPAR inhibitor perampanel has efficacy in reducing tonic - clonic seizures 216 . However , general AMPAR inhibition leads to an array of side effects and , to date , no selective subunit inhibitors have been isolated 217 . To address this lack of specificity and avoid unwanted side effects , novel brain - region - specific protein modulators of AMPAR activity have been developed that inhibit the interaction of AMPARs with transmembrane AMPAR regulatory proteins ( TARPs ; encoded by genes CACNG1 – CACNG8 ( REF . 191 ) ) . Of particular interest is TARPλ8 , which is expressed within the forebrain where it regulates AMPAR protein levels , surface expression and function . As a result , disrupting the TARPλ8 – AMPAR interaction yields brain - region - selective AMPAR regulation . Recently , compounds that selectively inhibit the AMPAR – TARPλ8 interaction have been shown to prevent seizures in animal models without the motor side effects associated with general R E V I E W S 228 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . AMPAR inhibition 218 , 219 . As TARPλ8 is underexpressed in schizophrenia 220 and CACNG2 and CACNG8 have been implicated as risk factors in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder ( TABLE 1 ) , compounds able to stabilize AMPAR – TARP complexes may provide a therapeutic strategy . TARPs can target AMPAR to the PSD and are required for LTP 221 , suggesting that TARP regulators may be of substantial benefit to disorders stemming from abnormal structural plasticity . Targeting calcium signalling . Calcium signalling is cen - tral to dendritic development and spine plasticity , with the L - type VGCC mediating synaptic calcium influx in response to membrane depolarization 222 . Within the brain , Ca v 1 . 2 and Ca v 1 . 3 ( encoded by CACNA1C and CACNA1D , respectively ) are the predominant forms of the pore - forming calcium channel subunits and are major risk genes in a range of neuropsychiatric disor - ders ( TABLE 1 ) . They have been the target of effective VGCC channel blockers ( CCBs ; including nifedipine , verapamil and diltiazem 222 ) developed for hyperten - sion and arrhythmia . The ability to repurpose VGCC – CBCs for neuropsychiatric disorders prompted studies in the 1980s and 1990s , with several positive outcomes as adjunctive therapies to antipsychotics 223 . However , critical evaluation of multiple studies found that these drugs were as effective as placebo or produced incon - sistent results 224 , 225 . Identification of CACNA1C in GWAS as a risk factor in schizophrenia 226 and bipolar disorder 61 has prompted assessment of isradipine in schizophre - nia ( currently recruiting , NCT01658150 ( REF . 227 ) ) , and early trials suggest potential in bipolar disorder 228 . The observation that Ca v 1 . 2 is the major target of cardiac - protective and pulmonary - protective drugs prompted attempts to target Ca v 1 . 3 ( REF . 229 ) . Such a strategy may avoid non - neural activation of Ca v 1 . 2 and thus facilitate Ca v 1 . 3 - selective brain targeting and a higher tolerable dosage . A recent screen identified Cp8 as a compound exhibiting 600 - fold selectivity for Ca v 1 . 3 over Ca v 1 . 2 ( REF . 229 ) . Such Ca v 1 . 3 selective compounds could pro - vide a novel route to regulate CACNA1D - dependent neuro psychiatric disorders . Future work aimed at reveal - ing the modulation of dendritic and spine plasticity by such compounds may support VGCCs as valuable therapeutic targets in neurodevelopmental disorders . Targeting small GTPases . Small GTPases have been the target of extensive drug discovery efforts , largely owing to their role in cancers , providing a bounty of therapeu - tic agents with already well - characterized tolerability . Thus , reversing the RAS dysregulation caused by NF1 and SYNGAP1 mutations ( see above ) may be a valua - ble target for repurposing efforts in neuropsychiatric disorders . RAS requires post - translation prenylation for its membrane insertion and full activity . The observation that limiting the addition of a farnesyl group to onco - genic RAS abrogated its transforming activity spurred the development of compounds to inhibit this process ( reviewed in REF . 230 ) . Most of these agents inhibit farnesyltransferase ( FT ) , but others ( including statins ) target farnesyl diphosphate synthesis to limit RAS activity . The potential of FT inhibitors and statins to treat neurological disease has been shown preclini - cally in mouse models of neuro fibromatosis type 1 ( REFS 231 , 232 ) , prompting clinical trials in neuro - fibromatosis type 1 patients . The FT inhibitor tipifarnib produced significant increases in emotional health and suggestive evidence of improved cognitive function 233 . Similarly , lovastatin improved synaptic plasticity 234 and learning and memory in neurofibromatosis type 1 patients during early - phase clinical trials 235 , 236 . However , a recent , larger trial of lovastatin failed to show benefit in cognition to children with neurofibromatosis type 1 ( REF . 237 ) . Thus , these studies suggest that RAS inhibitors are useful in neuropsychiatric disorders stemming from overactive RAS . Despite preclinical promise , conclu - sive evidence of the effects of RAS regulation in human neuro developmental disease is lacking . Conclusions and future directions Spine pathology is a convergence point of many neuro - psychiatric disorders , as supported by mounting evi - dence from human post - mortem , cellular , animal and genetic studies . The most important advance in the past decade has come from translating human genetic information into bona fide risk factors and meaningful disease pathways in order to successfully model struc - tural deficits under experimental conditions . Although this Review has covered many of the critical pathways involved in spine plasticity and disease , there are clearly other important pathways and genes that we have not been able to cover , including those affecting Wnt sig - nalling , the actin cytoskeleton and chromatin remod - elling 71 , 238 , 239 . As the genetic studies of neuropsychiatric disorders progress , we can expect more disease - relevant biological processes to be revealed as well as a more com - plete understanding of the role of structural plasticity in other psychiatric conditions where genetic and experi - mental data are still emerging , such as attention - deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) , anxiety and depres - sion . Functional analysis of these newly discovered genetic risk factors will be paramount to uncover novel mechanisms and pathways leading to atypical spine and dendrite development . In this endeavour , omic tech - nologies and systems biology - level investigations will be essential to deconstruct the global alterations taking place in model systems . Drug discovery efforts may then be designed with genetic and pathway disruptions as a guide to better target underlying disease mechanisms . In addition to genetics , new technological advance - ments in stem cell reprogramming and imaging ( BOXES 1 , 2 ) have substantially improved our under - standing of the mechanisms regulating spine plasticity in health and disease . To further our understanding of structural deficits in human brain , future neuropatho - logical studies should aim to stratify individuals on the basis of genetics and disease severity to address the con - siderable heterogeneity in neuropsychiatric disorders . The challenge for the future will be to integrate our expanding knowledge of human disorders into more comprehensive models of disease . Human neurons R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 229 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . derived from genetically defined individuals will likely play a critical role ( BOX 2 ) , overcoming the limited genetic complexity and species differences inherent in animal models . Stem cell models provide a unique opportunity to examine the effects of new drugs that target struc - tural plasticity pathways directly in dysmorphic patient neurons and in a high - throughput manner . The fact that structural pathology can be observed before cognitive symptoms in certain disorders suggests that there are critical time windows for treatment strategies to prevent disease onset 240 . Furthermore , several mouse models have also shown that certain structural and behavioural deficits can be reversed in adult animals 105 , 241 – 243 , offering hope for treating human conditions . 1 . Tau , G . Z . & Peterson , B . S . Normal development of brain circuits . Neuropsychopharmacology 35 , 147 – 168 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Wefelmeyer , W . , Puhl , C . J . & Burrone , J . Homeostatic plasticity of subcellular neuronal structures : from inputs to outputs . Trends Neurosci . 39 , 656 – 667 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Penzes , P . , Cahill , M . E . , Jones , K . A . , VanLeeuwen , J . E . & Woolfrey , K . M . Dendritic spine pathology in neuropsychiatric disorders . Nat . Neurosci . 14 , 285 – 293 ( 2011 ) . 4 . Taber , K . H . , Hurley , R . A . & Yudofsky , S . C . Diagnosis and treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders . Annu . Rev . Med . 61 , 121 – 133 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Kirov , G . et al . De novo CNV analysis implicates specific abnormalities of postsynaptic signalling complexes in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia . Mol . Psychiatry 17 , 142 – 153 ( 2012 ) . This study shows a critical role for postsynaptic signalling in the genetic aetiology of schizophrenia . 6 . Sanders , S . J . et al . Insights into autism spectrum disorder genomic architecture and biology from 71 risk loci . Neuron 87 , 1215 – 1233 ( 2015 ) . This genetic study of de novo variants in ASD finds an enrichment of postsynaptic risk factors among the 71 disease loci it identifies . 7 . Hamdan , F . F . et al . Excess of de novo deleterious mutations in genes associated with glutamatergic systems in nonsyndromic intellectual disability . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 88 , 306 – 316 ( 2011 ) . 8 . Hall , J . , Trent , S . , Thomas , K . L . , O’Donovan , M . C . & Owen , M . J . Genetic risk for schizophrenia : convergence on synaptic pathways involved in plasticity . Biol . Psychiatry 77 , 52 – 58 ( 2015 ) . 9 . Epi4K Consortium et al . De novo mutations in epileptic encephalopathies . Nature 501 , 217 – 221 ( 2013 ) . 10 . Kanner , A . M . Management of psychiatric and neurological comorbidities in epilepsy . Nat . Rev . Neurol . 12 , 106 – 116 ( 2016 ) . 11 . Spruston , N . Pyramidal neurons : dendritic structure and synaptic integration . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 9 , 206 – 221 ( 2008 ) . 12 . Koleske , A . J . Molecular mechanisms of dendrite stability . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 14 , 536 – 550 ( 2013 ) . 13 . Chen , Y . & Sabatini , B . L . Signaling in dendritic spines and spine microdomains . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 22 , 389 – 396 ( 2012 ) . 14 . Berry , K . P . & Nedivi , E . Spine dynamics : are they all the same ? Neuron 96 , 43 – 55 ( 2017 ) . 15 . Tonnesen , J . & Nagerl , U . V . Dendritic spines as tunable regulators of synaptic signals . Front . Psychiatry 7 , 101 ( 2016 ) . 16 . Mrzljak , L . & Uylings , H . B . , Kostovic , I . & Van Eden , C . G . Prenatal development of neurons in the human prefrontal cortex : I . A qualitative Golgi study . J . Comp . Neurol . 271 , 355 – 386 ( 1988 ) . 17 . Petanjek , Z . et al . Extraordinary neoteny of synaptic spines in the human prefrontal cortex . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 13281 – 13286 ( 2011 ) . 18 . Tamnes , C . K . et al . Development of the cerebral cortex across adolescence : a multisample study of inter - related longitudinal changes in cortical volume , surface area , and thickness . J . Neurosci . 37 , 3402 – 3412 ( 2017 ) . 19 . Zuo , Y . , Lin , A . , Chang , P . & Gan , W . B . Development of long - term dendritic spine stability in diverse regions of cerebral cortex . Neuron 46 , 181 – 189 ( 2005 ) . 20 . Caroni , P . , Donato , F . & Muller , D . Structural plasticity upon learning : regulation and functions . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 13 , 478 – 490 ( 2012 ) . 21 . Yang , G . , Pan , F . & Gan , W . B . Stably maintained dendritic spines are associated with lifelong memories . Nature 462 , 920 – 924 ( 2009 ) . 22 . Bourne , J . & Harris , K . M . Do thin spines learn to be mushroom spines that remember ? Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 17 , 381 – 386 ( 2007 ) . 23 . Zenke , F . , Gerstner , W . & Ganguli , S . The temporal paradox of Hebbian learning and homeostatic plasticity . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 43 , 166 – 176 ( 2017 ) . 24 . Bosch , M . & Hayashi , Y . Structural plasticity of dendritic spines . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 22 , 383 – 388 ( 2012 ) . 25 . Herring , B . E . & Nicoll , R . A . Long - term potentiation : from CaMKII to AMPA receptor trafficking . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 78 , 351 – 365 ( 2016 ) . 26 . Turrigiano , G . Homeostatic synaptic plasticity : local and global mechanisms for stabilizing neuronal function . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 , a005736 ( 2012 ) . 27 . Wallace , W . & Bear , M . F . A morphological correlate of synaptic scaling in visual cortex . J . Neurosci . 24 , 6928 – 6938 ( 2004 ) . 28 . Matsuzaki , M . et al . Dendritic spine geometry is critical for AMPA receptor expression in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 1086 – 1092 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Kirov , S . A . , Goddard , C . A . & Harris , K . M . Age - dependence in the homeostatic upregulation of hippocampal dendritic spine number during blocked synaptic transmission . Neuropharmacology 47 , 640 – 648 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Hofer , S . B . , Mrsic - Flogel , T . D . , Bonhoeffer , T . & Hubener , M . Experience leaves a lasting structural trace in cortical circuits . Nature 457 , 313 – 317 ( 2009 ) . 31 . Keck , T . et al . Synaptic scaling and homeostatic plasticity in the mouse visual cortex in vivo . Neuron 80 , 327 – 334 ( 2013 ) . 32 . Barnes , S . J . et al . Deprivation - induced homeostatic spine scaling in vivo is localized to dendritic branches that have undergone recent spine loss . Neuron 96 , 871 – 882 . e5 ( 2017 ) . 33 . Jiang , M . , Lee , C . L . , Smith , K . L . & Swann , J . W . Spine loss and other persistent alterations of hippocampal pyramidal cell dendrites in a model of early - onset epilepsy . J . Neurosci . 18 , 8356 – 8368 ( 1998 ) . 34 . Wong , M . & Guo , D . Dendritic spine pathology in epilepsy : cause or consequence ? Neuroscience 251 , 141 – 150 ( 2013 ) . 35 . Chen , C . C . , Bajnath , A . & Brumberg , J . C . The impact of development and sensory deprivation on dendritic protrusions in the mouse barrel cortex . Cereb . Cortex 25 , 1638 – 1653 ( 2015 ) . 36 . Zhou , Y . , Lai , B . & Gan , W . B . Monocular deprivation induces dendritic spine elimination in the developing mouse visual cortex . Sci . Rep . 7 , 4977 ( 2017 ) . 37 . Sigler , A . et al . Formation and maintenance of functional spines in the absence of presynaptic glutamate release . Neuron 94 , 304 – 311 . e4 ( 2017 ) . 38 . McCullumsmith , R . E . , Hammond , J . H . , Shan , D . & Meador - Woodruff , J . H . Postmortem brain : an underutilized substrate for studying severe mental illness . Neuropsychopharmacology 40 , 1307 ( 2015 ) . 39 . Purpura , D . P . Dendritic spine “dysgenesis” and mental retardation . Science 186 , 1126 – 1128 ( 1974 ) . This seminal study observes the presence of microstructural pathology in the brains of individuals with intellectual disability . 40 . Kaufmann , W . E . & Moser , H . W . Dendritic anomalies in disorders associated with mental retardation . Cereb . Cortex 10 , 981 – 991 ( 2000 ) . 41 . Hutsler , J . J . & Zhang , H . Increased dendritic spine densities on cortical projection neurons in autism spectrum disorders . Brain Res . 1309 , 83 – 94 ( 2010 ) . This study reports spine abnormalities in ASD . 42 . Tang , G . et al . Loss of mTOR - dependent macroautophagy causes autistic - like synaptic pruning deficits . Neuron 83 , 1131 – 1143 ( 2014 ) . 43 . Hazlett , H . C . et al . Early brain development in infants at high risk for autism spectrum disorder . Nature 542 , 348 – 351 ( 2017 ) . 44 . Schumann , C . M . et al . Longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging study of cortical development through early childhood in autism . J . Neurosci . 30 , 4419 – 4427 ( 2010 ) . 45 . Multani , P . , Myers , R . H . , Blume , H . W . , Schomer , D . L . & Sotrel , A . Neocortical dendritic pathology in human partial epilepsy : a quantitative Golgi study . Epilepsia 35 , 728 – 736 ( 1994 ) . 46 . Bothwell , S . et al . Neuronal hypertrophy in the neocortex of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy . J . Neurosci . 21 , 4789 – 4800 ( 2001 ) . 47 . Glausier , J . R . & Lewis , D . A . Dendritic spine pathology in schizophrenia . Neuroscience 251 , 90 – 107 ( 2013 ) . 48 . Glantz , L . A . & Lewis , D . A . Decreased dendritic spine density on prefrontal cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia . Arch . Gen . Psychiatry 57 , 65 – 73 ( 2000 ) . 49 . MacDonald , M . L . et al . Selective loss of smaller spines in schizophrenia . Am . J . Psychiatry 174 , 586 – 594 ( 2017 ) . 50 . Kalus , P . , Muller , T . J . , Zuschratter , W . & Senitz , D . The dendritic architecture of prefrontal pyramidal neurons in schizophrenic patients . Neuroreport 11 , 3621 – 3625 ( 2000 ) . 51 . Broadbelt , K . , Byne , W . & Jones , L . B . Evidence for a decrease in basilar dendrites of pyramidal cells in schizophrenic medial prefrontal cortex . Schizophr . Res . 58 , 75 – 81 ( 2002 ) . 52 . Konopaske , G . T . , Lange , N . , Coyle , J . T . & Benes , F . M . Prefrontal cortical dendritic spine pathology in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . JAMA Psychiatry 71 , 1323 – 1331 ( 2014 ) . This study compares dendritic pathology in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . 53 . Tobe , B . T . D . et al . Probing the lithium - response pathway in hiPSCs implicates the phosphoregulatory set - point for a cytoskeletal modulator in bipolar pathogenesis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 114 , E4462 – E4471 ( 2017 ) . 54 . Moyer , C . E . , Shelton , M . A . & Sweet , R . A . Dendritic spine alterations in schizophrenia . Neurosci . Lett . 601 , 46 – 53 ( 2015 ) . 55 . Dietsche , B . , Kircher , T . & Falkenberg , I . Structural brain changes in schizophrenia at different stages of the illness : a selective review of longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging studies . Aust . N . Z . J . Psychiatry 51 , 500 – 508 ( 2017 ) . 56 . Mollon , J . & Reichenberg , A . Cognitive development prior to onset of psychosis . Psychol . Med . 48 , 392 – 403 ( 2018 ) . 57 . Phillips , M . & Pozzo - Miller , L . Dendritic spine dysgenesis in autism related disorders . Neurosci . Lett . 601 , 30 – 40 ( 2015 ) . 58 . Levenga , J . & Willemsen , R . Perturbation of dendritic protrusions in intellectual disability . Prog . Brain Res . 197 , 153 – 168 ( 2012 ) . 59 . Sullivan , P . F . , Daly , M . J . & O’Donovan , M . Genetic architectures of psychiatric disorders : the emerging picture and its implications . Nat . Rev . Genet . 13 , 537 – 551 ( 2012 ) . 60 . Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium . Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia - associated genetic loci . Nature 511 , 421 – 427 ( 2014 ) . This landmark study in schizophrenia identifies over 100 genome - wide significant risk factors , including several with excitatory postsynaptic functions . 61 . Psychiatric GWAS Consortium Bipolar Disorder Working Group . Large - scale genome - wide association analysis of bipolar disorder identifies a new susceptibility locus near ODZ4 . Nat . Genet . 43 , 977 – 983 ( 2011 ) . 62 . Kirov , G . CNVs in neuropsychiatric disorders . Hum . Mol . Genet . 24 , R45 – R49 ( 2015 ) . 63 . Fromer , M . et al . De novo mutations in schizophrenia implicate synaptic networks . Nature 506 , 179 – 184 ( 2014 ) . R E V I E W S 230 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 64 . Yuen , R . K . C . et al . Whole genome sequencing resource identifies 18 new candidate genes for autism spectrum disorder . Nat . Neurosci . 20 , 602 – 611 ( 2017 ) . 65 . Lelieveld , S . H . et al . Meta - analysis of 2 , 104 trios provides support for 10 new genes for intellectual disability . Nat . Neurosci . 19 , 1194 – 1196 ( 2016 ) . 66 . Epi4K Consortium . De novo mutations in SLC1A2 and CACNA1A are important causes of epileptic encephalopathies . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 99 , 287 – 298 ( 2016 ) . 67 . Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study . Prevalence and architecture of de novo mutations in developmental disorders . Nature 542 , 433 – 438 ( 2017 ) . This exome sequencing , the largest ever performed for developmental disorders , is the first to discover genome - wide significant risk genes from analysis of rare de novo mutations . 68 . Chang , J . , Gilman , S . R . , Chiang , A . H . , Sanders , S . J . & Vitkup , D . Genotype to phenotype relationships in autism spectrum disorders . Nat . Neurosci . 18 , 191 – 198 ( 2015 ) . 69 . Gilman , S . R . et al . Rare de novo variants associated with autism implicate a large functional network of genes involved in formation and function of synapses . Neuron 70 , 898 – 907 ( 2011 ) . 70 . De Rubeis , S . et al . Synaptic , transcriptional and chromatin genes disrupted in autism . Nature 515 , 209 – 215 ( 2014 ) . 71 . McCarthy , S . E . et al . De novo mutations in schizophrenia implicate chromatin remodeling and support a genetic overlap with autism and intellectual disability . Mol . Psychiatry 19 , 652 – 658 ( 2014 ) . 72 . Kochinke , K . et al . Systematic phenomics analysis deconvolutes genes mutated in intellectual disability into biologically coherent modules . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 98 , 149 – 164 ( 2016 ) . 73 . Dalva , M . B . , McClelland , A . C . & Kayser , M . S . Cell adhesion molecules : signalling functions at the synapse . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 206 – 220 ( 2007 ) . 74 . Rujescu , D . et al . Disruption of the neurexin 1 gene is associated with schizophrenia . Hum . Mol . Genet . 18 , 988 – 996 ( 2009 ) . 75 . Jamain , S . et al . Mutations of the X - linked genes encoding neuroligins NLGN3 and NLGN4 are associated with autism . Nat . Genet . 34 , 27 – 29 ( 2003 ) . 76 . Zweier , C . et al . CNTNAP2 and NRXN1 are mutated in autosomal - recessive Pitt - Hopkins - like mental retardation and determine the level of a common synaptic protein in Drosophila . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 85 , 655 – 666 ( 2009 ) . 77 . Moller , R . S . et al . Exon - disrupting deletions of NRXN1 in idiopathic generalized epilepsy . Epilepsia 54 , 256 – 264 ( 2013 ) . 78 . Graf , E . R . , Zhang , X . , Jin , S . X . , Linhoff , M . W . & Craig , A . M . Neurexins induce differentiation of GABA and glutamate postsynaptic specializations via neuroligins . Cell 119 , 1013 – 1026 ( 2004 ) . 79 . Quinn , D . P . et al . Pan - neurexin perturbation results in compromised synapse stability and a reduction in readily releasable synaptic vesicle pool size . Sci . Rep . 7 , 42920 ( 2017 ) . 80 . Chih , B . , Engelman , H . & Scheiffele , P . Control of excitatory and inhibitory synapse formation by neuroligins . Science 307 , 1324 – 1328 ( 2005 ) . 81 . Isshiki , M . et al . Enhanced synapse remodelling as a common phenotype in mouse models of autism . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4742 ( 2014 ) . This important study finds similar deficits in spine dynamics in multiple genetic mouse models of neuropsychiatric disease , suggesting that different risk factors can lead to common perturbations . 82 . Etherton , M . et al . Autism - linked neuroligin - 3 R451C mutation differentially alters hippocampal and cortical synaptic function . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 13764 – 13769 ( 2011 ) . 83 . Rodenas - Cuadrado , P . et al . Characterisation of CASPR2 deficiency disorder — a syndrome involving autism , epilepsy and language impairment . BMC Med . Genet . 17 , 8 ( 2016 ) . 84 . Bakkaloglu , B . et al . Molecular cytogenetic analysis and resequencing of contactin associated protein - like 2 in autism spectrum disorders . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 82 , 165 – 173 ( 2008 ) . 85 . Friedman , J . I . et al . CNTNAP2 gene dosage variation is associated with schizophrenia and epilepsy . Mol . Psychiatry 13 , 261 – 266 ( 2008 ) . 86 . Varea , O . et al . Synaptic abnormalities and cytoplasmic glutamate receptor aggregates in contactin associated protein - like 2 / Caspr2 knockout neurons . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 6176 – 6181 ( 2015 ) . 87 . Gdalyahu , A . et al . The autism related protein contactin - associated protein - like 2 ( CNTNAP2 ) stabilizes new spines : an in vivo mouse study . PLoS ONE 10 , e0125633 ( 2015 ) . 88 . Anderson , G . R . et al . Candidate autism gene screen identifies critical role for cell - adhesion molecule CASPR2 in dendritic arborization and spine development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 18120 – 18125 ( 2012 ) . 89 . McKinney , R . A . , Capogna , M . , Durr , R . , Gahwiler , B . H . & Thompson , S . M . Miniature synaptic events maintain dendritic spines via AMPA receptor activation . Nat . Neurosci . 2 , 44 – 49 ( 1999 ) . 90 . Richards , D . A . et al . Glutamate induces the rapid formation of spine head protrusions in hippocampal slice cultures . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 6166 – 6171 ( 2005 ) . 91 . Hayashi , Y . et al . Driving AMPA receptors into synapses by LTP and CaMKII : requirement for GluR1 and PDZ domain interaction . Science 287 , 2262 – 2267 ( 2000 ) . 92 . Zhang , Y . , Cudmore , R . H . , Lin , D . T . , Linden , D . J . & Huganir , R . L . Visualization of NMDA receptor - dependent AMPA receptor synaptic plasticity in vivo . Nat . Neurosci . 18 , 402 – 407 ( 2015 ) . 93 . Kopec , C . D . , Real , E . , Kessels , H . W . & Malinow , R . GluR1 links structural and functional plasticity at excitatory synapses . J . Neurosci . 27 , 13706 – 13718 ( 2007 ) . 94 . Luscher , C . & Malenka , R . C . NMDA receptor - dependent long - term potentiation and long - term depression ( LTP / LTD ) . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 , a005710 ( 2012 ) . 95 . Luthi , A . , Schwyzer , L . , Mateos , J . M . , Gahwiler , B . H . & McKinney , R . A . NMDA receptor activation limits the number of synaptic connections during hippocampal development . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 1102 – 1107 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Alvarez , V . A . , Ridenour , D . A . & Sabatini , B . L . Distinct structural and ionotropic roles of NMDA receptors in controlling spine and synapse stability . J . Neurosci . 27 , 7365 – 7376 ( 2007 ) . 97 . Liu , S . et al . A rare variant identified within the GluN2B C - terminus in a patient with autism affects NMDA receptor surface expression and spine density . J . Neurosci . 37 , 4093 – 4102 ( 2017 ) . 98 . Brigman , J . L . et al . Loss of GluN2B - containing NMDA receptors in CA1 hippocampus and cortex impairs long - term depression , reduces dendritic spine density , and disrupts learning . J . Neurosci . 30 , 4590 – 4600 ( 2010 ) . 99 . Kannangara , T . S . et al . Deletion of the NMDA receptor GluN2A subunit significantly decreases dendritic growth in maturing dentate granule neurons . PLoS ONE 9 , e103155 ( 2014 ) . 100 . Sanz - Clemente , A . , Nicoll , R . A . & Roche , K . W . Diversity in NMDA receptor composition : many regulators , many consequences . Neuroscientist 19 , 62 – 75 ( 2013 ) . 101 . Zhu , J . , Shang , Y . & Zhang , M . Mechanistic basis of MAGUK - organized complexes in synaptic development and signalling . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 17 , 209 – 223 ( 2016 ) . 102 . Monteiro , P . & Feng , G . SHANK proteins : roles at the synapse and in autism spectrum disorder . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 18 , 147 – 157 ( 2017 ) . 103 . Yi , F . et al . Autism - associated SHANK3 haploinsufficiency causes Ih channelopathy in human neurons . Science 352 , aaf2669 ( 2016 ) . 104 . Wang , W . et al . Striatopallidal dysfunction underlies repetitive behavior in Shank3 - deficient model of autism . J . Clin . Invest . 127 , 1978 – 1990 ( 2017 ) . 105 . Mei , Y . et al . Adult restoration of Shank3 expression rescues selective autistic - like phenotypes . Nature 530 , 481 – 484 ( 2016 ) . This work suggests that certain early neurodevelopment defects can be reversed in adults to improve disease outcome . 106 . Zhou , Y . et al . Mice with Shank3 mutations associated with ASD and schizophrenia display both shared and distinct defects . Neuron 89 , 147 – 162 ( 2016 ) . 107 . Durand , C . M . et al . SHANK3 mutations identified in autism lead to modification of dendritic spine morphology via an actin - dependent mechanism . Mol . Psychiatry 17 , 71 – 84 ( 2012 ) . 108 . Smith , K . R . et al . Psychiatric risk factor ANK3 / ankyrin - G nanodomains regulate the structure and function of glutamatergic synapses . Neuron 84 , 399 – 415 ( 2014 ) . This publication reports a role for bipolar risk factor ANK3 in the activity - dependent structural plasticity of dendritic spines . 109 . Nanavati , D . et al . The effects of chronic treatment with mood stabilizers on the rat hippocampal post - synaptic density proteome . J . Neurochem . 119 , 617 – 629 ( 2011 ) . 110 . Gottschalk , M . G . et al . Lithium reverses behavioral and axonal transport - related changes associated with ANK3 bipolar disorder gene disruption . Eur . Neuropsychopharmacol . 27 , 274 – 288 ( 2017 ) . 111 . Kang , M . G . et al . A functional AMPA receptor - calcium channel complex in the postsynaptic membrane . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 5561 – 5566 ( 2006 ) . 112 . Wong , R . O . & Ghosh , A . Activity - dependent regulation of dendritic growth and patterning . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 3 , 803 – 812 ( 2002 ) . 113 . Higley , M . J . & Sabatini , B . L . Calcium signaling in dendritic spines . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 , a005686 ( 2012 ) . 114 . Cross - Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium . Identification of risk loci with shared effects on five major psychiatric disorders : a genome - wide analysis . Lancet 381 , 1371 – 1379 ( 2013 ) . 115 . Purcell , S . M . et al . A polygenic burden of rare disruptive mutations in schizophrenia . Nature 506 , 185 – 190 ( 2014 ) . 116 . Heyes , S . et al . Genetic disruption of voltage - gated calcium channels in psychiatric and neurological disorders . Prog . Neurobiol . 134 , 36 – 54 ( 2015 ) . 117 . Splawski , I . et al . Ca V 1 . 2 calcium channel dysfunction causes a multisystem disorder including arrhythmia and autism . Cell 119 , 19 – 31 ( 2004 ) . 118 . Obermair , G . J . , Szabo , Z . , Bourinet , E . & Flucher , B . E . Differential targeting of the L - type Ca 2 + channel alpha 1C ( CaV1 . 2 ) to synaptic and extrasynaptic compartments in hippocampal neurons . Eur . J . Neurosci . 19 , 2109 – 2122 ( 2004 ) . 119 . Soeiro - de - Souza , M . G . et al . The CACNA1C risk allele rs1006737 is associated with age - related prefrontal cortical thinning in bipolar I disorder . Transl Psychiatry 7 , e1086 ( 2017 ) . 120 . Tian , X . , Kai , L . , Hockberger , P . E . , Wokosin , D . L . & Surmeier , D . J . MEF - 2 regulates activity - dependent spine loss in striatopallidal medium spiny neurons . Mol . Cell Neurosci . 44 , 94 – 108 ( 2010 ) . 121 . Krey , J . F . et al . Timothy syndrome is associated with activity - dependent dendritic retraction in rodent and human neurons . Nat . Neurosci . 16 , 201 – 209 ( 2013 ) . This key study shows altered activity - dependent structural plasticity in genetically defined patient - derived neurons related to autism . 122 . Stephenson , J . R . et al . A novel human CAMK2A mutation disrupts dendritic morphology and synaptic transmission , and causes ASD - related behaviors . J . Neurosci . 37 , 2216 – 2233 ( 2017 ) . 123 . Penzes , P . et al . Rapid induction of dendritic spine morphogenesis by trans - synaptic ephrinB - EphB receptor activation of the Rho - GEF kalirin . Neuron 37 , 263 – 274 ( 2003 ) . 124 . Tashiro , A . & Yuste , R . Regulation of dendritic spine motility and stability by Rac1 and Rho kinase : evidence for two forms of spine motility . Mol . Cell Neurosci . 26 , 429 – 440 ( 2004 ) . 125 . Tashiro , A . , Minden , A . & Yuste , R . Regulation of dendritic spine morphology by the rho family of small GTPases : antagonistic roles of Rac and Rho . Cereb . Cortex 10 , 927 – 938 ( 2000 ) . 126 . Woolfrey , K . M . et al . Epac2 induces synapse remodeling and depression and its disease - associated forms alter spines . Nat . Neurosci . 12 , 1275 – 1284 ( 2009 ) . 127 . Stornetta , R . L . & Zhu , J . J . Ras and Rap signaling in synaptic plasticity and mental disorders . Neuroscientist 17 , 54 – 78 ( 2011 ) . 128 . San Martin , A . & Pagani , M . R . Understanding intellectual disability through RASopathies . J . Physiol . 108 , 232 – 239 ( 2014 ) . 129 . Kim , M . J . , Dunah , A . W . , Wang , Y . T . & Sheng , M . Differential roles of NR2A - and NR2B - containing NMDA receptors in Ras - ERK signaling and AMPA receptor trafficking . Neuron 46 , 745 – 760 ( 2005 ) . 130 . Berryer , M . H . et al . Mutations in SYNGAP1 cause intellectual disability , autism , and a specific form of epilepsy by inducing haploinsufficiency . Hum . Mutat . 34 , 385 – 394 ( 2013 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 231 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 131 . Clement , J . P . et al . Pathogenic SYNGAP1 mutations impair cognitive development by disrupting maturation of dendritic spine synapses . Cell 151 , 709 – 723 ( 2012 ) . 132 . Vazquez , L . E . , Chen , H . J . , Sokolova , I . , Knuesel , I . & Kennedy , M . B . SynGAP regulates spine formation . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8862 – 8872 ( 2004 ) . 133 . Komiyama , N . H . et al . SynGAP regulates ERK / MAPK signaling , synaptic plasticity , and learning in the complex with postsynaptic density 95 and NMDA receptor . J . Neurosci . 22 , 9721 – 9732 ( 2002 ) . 134 . Aceti , M . et al . Syngap1 haploinsufficiency damages a postnatal critical period of pyramidal cell structural maturation linked to cortical circuit assembly . Biol . Psychiatry 77 , 805 – 815 ( 2015 ) . This paper identifies a critical window in development , suggesting a time frame for pharmacological intervention that is beneficial in genetic disease arising from SYNGAP1 mutation . 135 . Gutmann , D . H . et al . Neurofibromatosis type 1 . Nat . Rev . Dis . Primers 3 , 17004 ( 2017 ) . 136 . Wang , H . F . et al . Valosin - containing protein and neurofibromin interact to regulate dendritic spine density . J . Clin . Invest . 121 , 4820 – 4837 ( 2011 ) . 137 . Tavazoie , S . F . , Alvarez , V . A . , Ridenour , D . A . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . & Sabatini , B . L . Regulation of neuronal morphology and function by the tumor suppressors Tsc1 and Tsc2 . Nat . Neurosci . 8 , 1727 – 1734 ( 2005 ) . 138 . Jones , A . C . et al . Comprehensive mutation analysis of TSC1 and TSC2 - and phenotypic correlations in 150 families with tuberous sclerosis . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 64 , 1305 – 1315 ( 1999 ) . 139 . Xie , Z . et al . Kalirin - 7 controls activity - dependent structural and functional plasticity of dendritic spines . Neuron 56 , 640 – 656 ( 2007 ) . 140 . Herring , B . E . & Nicoll , R . A . Kalirin and Trio proteins serve critical roles in excitatory synaptic transmission and LTP . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 2264 – 2269 ( 2016 ) . 141 . Russell , T . A . et al . A sequence variant in human KALRN impairs protein function and coincides with reduced cortical thickness . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4858 ( 2014 ) . 142 . Kushima , I . et al . Resequencing and association analysis of the KALRN and EPHB1 genes and their contribution to schizophrenia susceptibility . Schizophr . Bull . 38 , 552 – 560 ( 2012 ) . 143 . Russell , T . A . et al . A schizophrenia - linked KALRN coding variant alters neuron morphology , protein function , and transcript stability . Biol . Psichiatry 83 , 499 – 508 ( 2018 ) . 144 . Makrythanasis , P . et al . Exome sequencing discloses KALRN homozygous variant as likely cause of intellectual disability and short stature in a consanguineous pedigree . Hum . Genom . 10 , 26 ( 2016 ) . 145 . Pengelly , R . J . et al . Mutations specific to the Rac - GEF domain of TRIO cause intellectual disability and microcephaly . J . Med . Genet . 53 , 735 – 742 ( 2016 ) . 146 . Ba , W . et al . TRIO loss of function is associated with mild intellectual disability and affects dendritic branching and synapse function . Hum . Mol . Genet . 25 , 892 – 902 ( 2016 ) . 147 . Hill , J . J . , Hashimoto , T . & Lewis , D . A . Molecular mechanisms contributing to dendritic spine alterations in the prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia . Mol . Psychiatry 11 , 557 – 566 ( 2006 ) . 148 . Rubio , M . D . , Haroutunian , V . & Meador - Woodruff , J . H . Abnormalities of the Duo / Ras - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 / p21 - activated kinase 1 pathway drive myosin light chain phosphorylation in frontal cortex in schizophrenia . Biol . Psychiatry 71 , 906 – 914 ( 2012 ) . 149 . Deo , A . J . et al . Increased expression of Kalirin - 9 in the auditory cortex of schizophrenia subjects : its role in dendritic pathology . Neurobiol . Dis . 45 , 796 – 803 ( 2012 ) . 150 . Datta , D . , Arion , D . , Corradi , J . P . & Lewis , D . A . Altered expression of CDC42 signaling pathway components in cortical layer 3 pyramidal cells in schizophrenia . Biol . Psychiatry 78 , 775 – 785 ( 2015 ) . 151 . Sadybekov , A . , Tian , C . , Arnesano , C . , Katritch , V . & Herring , B . E . An autism spectrum disorder - related de novo mutation hotspot discovered in the GEF1 domain of Trio . Nat . Commun . 8 , 601 ( 2017 ) . 152 . Ma , X . M . , Huang , J . P . , Eipper , B . A . & Mains , R . E . Expression of Trio , a member of the Dbl family of Rho GEFs in the developing rat brain . J . Comp . Neurol . 482 , 333 – 348 ( 2005 ) . 153 . McPherson , C . E . , Eipper , B . A . & Mains , R . E . Genomic organization and differential expression of Kalirin isoforms . Gene 284 , 41 – 51 ( 2002 ) . 154 . Billuart , P . et al . Oligophrenin - 1 encodes a rhoGAP protein involved in X - linked mental retardation . Nature 392 , 923 – 926 ( 1998 ) . 155 . Govek , E . E . et al . The X - linked mental retardation protein oligophrenin - 1 is required for dendritic spine morphogenesis . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 364 – 372 ( 2004 ) . 156 . Ramakers , G . J . et al . Dysregulation of Rho GTPases in the alphaPix / Arhgef6 mouse model of X - linked intellectual disability is paralleled by impaired structural and synaptic plasticity and cognitive deficits . Hum . Mol . Genet . 21 , 268 – 286 ( 2012 ) . 157 . Allen , K . M . et al . PAK3 mutation in nonsyndromic X - linked mental retardation . Nat . Genet . 20 , 25 – 30 ( 1998 ) . 158 . Boda , B . et al . The mental retardation protein PAK3 contributes to synapse formation and plasticity in hippocampus . J . Neurosci . 24 , 10816 – 10825 ( 2004 ) . 159 . Zhang , H . , Webb , D . J . , Asmussen , H . & Horwitz , A . F . Synapse formation is regulated by the signaling adaptor GIT1 . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 131 – 142 ( 2003 ) . 160 . Menon , P . et al . Impaired spine formation and learning in GPCR kinase 2 interacting protein - 1 ( GIT1 ) knockout mice . Brain Res . 1317 , 218 – 226 ( 2010 ) . 161 . Kim , M . J . et al . Functional analysis of rare variants found in schizophrenia implicates a critical role for GIT1 - PAK3 signaling in neuroplasticity . Mol . Psychiatry 22 , 417 – 429 ( 2017 ) . 162 . Morris , D . W . et al . An inherited duplication at the gene p21 protein - activated kinase 7 ( PAK7 ) is a risk factor for psychosis . Hum . Mol . Genet . 23 , 3316 – 3326 ( 2014 ) . 163 . Mulle , J . G . et al . Microdeletions of 3q29 confer high risk for schizophrenia . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 87 , 229 – 236 ( 2010 ) . 164 . Kang , M . G . , Guo , Y . & Huganir , R . L . AMPA receptor and GEF - H1 / Lfc complex regulates dendritic spine development through RhoA signaling cascade . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 3549 – 3554 ( 2009 ) . 165 . Endris , V . et al . The novel Rho - GTPase activating gene MEGAP / srGAP3 has a putative role in severe mental retardation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 11754 – 11759 ( 2002 ) . 166 . Carlson , B . R . et al . WRP / srGAP3 facilitates the initiation of spine development by an inverse F - BAR domain , and its loss impairs long - term memory . J . Neurosci . 31 , 2447 – 2460 ( 2011 ) . 167 . Vaswani , M . , Linda , F . K . & Ramesh , S . Role of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in psychiatric disorders : a comprehensive review . Prog . Neuropsychopharmacol . Biol . Psychiatry 27 , 85 – 102 ( 2003 ) . 168 . Forray , C . & Buller , R . Challenges and opportunities for the development of new antipsychotic drugs . Biochem . Pharmacol . 143 , 10 – 24 ( 2017 ) . 169 . Yamatogi , Y . Principles of antiepileptic drug treatment of epilepsy . Psychiatry Clin . Neurosci . 58 , S3 – S6 ( 2004 ) . 170 . Al - Harbi , K . S . Treatment - resistant depression : therapeutic trends , challenges , and future directions . Patient Prefer . Adherence 6 , 369 – 388 ( 2012 ) . 171 . Gonda , X . Basic pharmacology of NMDA receptors . Curr . Pharm . Des . 18 , 1558 – 1567 ( 2012 ) . 172 . Pirotte , B . , Francotte , P . , Goffin , E . & de Tullio , P . AMPA receptor positive allosteric modulators : a patent review . Expert Opin . Ther . Pat . 23 , 615 – 628 ( 2013 ) . 173 . Phoumthipphavong , V . , Barthas , F . , Hassett , S . & Kwan , A . C . Longitudinal effects of ketamine on dendritic architecture in vivo in the mouse medial frontal cortex . eNeuro 3 , ENEURO . 0133 - 15 . 2016 ( 2016 ) . 174 . Li , N . et al . mTOR - dependent synapse formation underlies the rapid antidepressant effects of NMDA antagonists . Science 329 , 959 – 964 ( 2010 ) . 175 . Berman , R . M . et al . Antidepressant effects of ketamine in depressed patients . Biol . Psychiatry 47 , 351 – 354 ( 2000 ) . This paper ignited the depression field , offering a novel therapeutic approach that was not only effective but also far more rapid than traditional treatments , although the mechanism remains controversial . 176 . Kavalali , E . T . & Monteggia , L . M . How does ketamine elicit a rapid antidepressant response ? Curr . Opin . Pharmacol . 20 , 35 – 39 ( 2015 ) . 177 . Duman , C . H . & Duman , R . S . Spine synapse remodeling in the pathophysiology and treatment of depression . Neurosci . Lett . 601 , 20 – 29 ( 2015 ) . 178 . Magarinos , A . M . et al . Effect of brain - derived neurotrophic factor haploinsufficiency on stress - induced remodeling of hippocampal neurons . Hippocampus 21 , 253 – 264 ( 2011 ) . 179 . Conrad , C . D . , McLaughlin , K . J . , Huynh , T . N . , El - Ashmawy , M . & Sparks , M . Chronic stress and a cyclic regimen of estradiol administration separately facilitate spatial memory : relationship with hippocampal CA1 spine density and dendritic complexity . Behav . Neurosci . 126 , 142 – 156 ( 2012 ) . 180 . Liu , R . J . et al . GLYX - 13 produces rapid antidepressant responses with key synaptic and behavioral effects distinct from ketamine . Neuropsychopharmacology 42 , 1231 – 1242 ( 2017 ) . 181 . Abelaira , H . M . et al . Effects of ketamine administration on mTOR and reticulum stress signaling pathways in the brain after the infusion of rapamycin into prefrontal cortex . J . Psychiatr . Res . 87 , 81 – 87 ( 2017 ) . 182 . Breier , A . , Malhotra , A . K . , Pinals , D . A . , Weisenfeld , N . I . & Pickar , D . Association of ketamine - induced psychosis with focal activation of the prefrontal cortex in healthy volunteers . Am . J . Psychiatry 154 , 805 – 811 ( 1997 ) . 183 . Malhotra , A . K . et al . Ketamine - induced exacerbation of psychotic symptoms and cognitive impairment in neuroleptic - free schizophrenics . Neuropsychopharmacology 17 , 141 – 150 ( 1997 ) . 184 . Honey , G . D . et al . Individual differences in psychotic effects of ketamine are predicted by brain function measured under placebo . J . Neurosci . 28 , 6295 – 6303 ( 2008 ) . 185 . Maeng , S . et al . Cellular mechanisms underlying the antidepressant effects of ketamine : role of alpha - amin o - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - methylisoxazole - 4 - propionic acid receptors . Biol . Psychiatry 63 , 349 – 352 ( 2008 ) . 186 . Aligny , C . et al . Ketamine alters cortical integration of GABAergic interneurons and induces long - term sex - dependent impairments in transgenic Gad67 - GFP mice . Cell Death Dis . 5 , e1311 ( 2014 ) . 187 . Suzuki , K . , Nosyreva , E . , Hunt , K . W . , Kavalali , E . T . & Monteggia , L . M . Effects of a ketamine metabolite on synaptic NMDAR function . Nature 546 , E1 – E3 ( 2017 ) . 188 . Zanos , P . et al . NMDAR inhibition - independent antidepressant actions of ketamine metabolites . Nature 533 , 481 – 486 ( 2016 ) . Metabolism to an active metabolite is found to underlie many of the beneficial effects of ketamine in sufferers of depression , suggesting that NMDAR - independent mechanisms are novel , druggable disease targets . 189 . Abdallah , C . G . , Sanacora , G . , Duman , R . S . & Krystal , J . H . Ketamine and rapid - acting antidepressants : a window into a new neurobiology for mood disorder therapeutics . Annu . Rev . Med . 66 , 509 – 523 ( 2015 ) . 190 . Aleksandrova , L . R . , Phillips , A . G . & Wang , Y . T . Antidepressant effects of ketamine and the roles of AMPA glutamate receptors and other mechanisms beyond NMDA receptor antagonism . J . Psychiatry Neurosci . 42 , 222 – 229 ( 2017 ) . 191 . Song , M . , Martinowich , K . & Lee , F . S . BDNF at the synapse : why location matters . Mol . Psychiatry 22 , 1370 – 1375 ( 2017 ) . 192 . Bjorkholm , C . & Monteggia , L . M . BDNF — a key transducer of antidepressant effects . Neuropharmacology 102 , 72 – 79 ( 2016 ) . 193 . Goff , D . C . & Evins , A . E . Negative symptoms in schizophrenia : neurobiological models and treatment response . Harv . Rev . Psychiatry 6 , 59 – 77 ( 1998 ) . 194 . Goff , D . C . et al . Once - weekly D - cycloserine effects on negative symptoms and cognition in schizophrenia : an exploratory study . Schizophr . Res . 106 , 320 – 327 ( 2008 ) . 195 . Tuominen , H . J . , Tiihonen , J . & Wahlbeck , K . Glutamatergic drugs for schizophrenia : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Schizophr . Res . 72 , 225 – 234 ( 2005 ) . 196 . Wink , L . K . et al . d - Cycloserine enhances durability of social skills training in autism spectrum disorder . Mol . Autism 8 , 2 ( 2017 ) . 197 . Moskal , J . R . et al . GLYX - 13 : a monoclonal antibody - derived peptide that acts as an N - methyl - D - aspartate receptor modulator . Neuropharmacology 49 , 1077 – 1087 ( 2005 ) . 198 . Preskorn , S . et al . Randomized proof of concept trial of GLYX - 13 , an N - methyl - D - aspartate receptor glycine site partial agonist , in major depressive disorder nonresponsive to a previous antidepressant agent . J . Psychiatr . Pract . 21 , 140 – 149 ( 2015 ) . R E V I E W S 232 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 199 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT02951988 ( 2018 ) . 200 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT02943564 ( 2018 ) . 201 . Moskal , J . R . , Burgdorf , J . , Kroes , R . A . , Brudzynski , S . M . & Panksepp , J . A novel NMDA receptor glycine - site partial agonist , GLYX - 13 , has therapeutic potential for the treatment of autism . Neurosci . Biobehav Rev . 35 , 1982 – 1988 ( 2011 ) . The remarkable progression of GLYX - 13 through clinical trials and the wide range of potential applications , including autism , as outlined within this preclinical work , support NMDAR glycine site regulators as potent tools in regulating human neurodevelopmental disorders . 202 . Santini , A . C . et al . Glix 13 , a new drug acting on glutamatergic pathways in children and animal models of autism spectrum disorders . Biomed . Res . Int . 2014 , 234295 ( 2014 ) . 203 . Zhang , X . L . , Sullivan , J . A . , Moskal , J . R . & Stanton , P . K . A . NMDA receptor glycine site partial agonist , GLYX - 13 , simultaneously enhances LTP and reduces LTD at Schaffer collateral - CA1 synapses in hippocampus . Neuropharmacology 55 , 1238 – 1250 ( 2008 ) . 204 . Burgdorf , J . et al . The long - lasting antidepressant effects of rapastinel ( GLYX - 13 ) are associated with a metaplasticity process in the medial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus . Neuroscience 308 , 202 – 211 ( 2015 ) . 205 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT02067793 ( 2016 ) . 206 . Nisenbaum , E . S . & Witkin , J . M . in Glutamate‑Based Therapies for Psychiatric Disorders ( ed . Skolnick , P . ) 39 – 56 ( 2010 ) . 207 . O’Neill , M . J . & Dix , S . AMPA receptor potentiators as cognitive enhancers . IDrugs 10 , 185 – 192 ( 2007 ) . 208 . Lauterborn , J . C . et al . Chronic ampakine treatments stimulate dendritic growth and promote learning in middle - aged rats . J . Neurosci . 36 , 1636 – 1646 ( 2016 ) . 209 . Baudry , M . et al . Ampakines promote spine actin polymerization , long - term potentiation , and learning in a mouse model of Angelman syndrome . Neurobiol . Dis . 47 , 210 – 215 ( 2012 ) . 210 . Lipina , T . , Weiss , K . & Roder , J . The ampakine CX546 restores the prepulse inhibition and latent inhibition deficits in mGluR5 - deficient mice . Neuropsychopharmacology 32 , 745 – 756 ( 2007 ) . 211 . Chang , P . K . , Prenosil , G . A . , Verbich , D . , Gill , R . & McKinney , R . A . Prolonged ampakine exposure prunes dendritic spines and increases presynaptic release probability for enhanced long - term potentiation in the hippocampus . Eur . J . Neurosci . 40 , 2766 – 2776 ( 2014 ) . 212 . Nations , K . R . et al . Examination of Org 26576 , an AMPA receptor positive allosteric modulator , in patients diagnosed with major depressive disorder : an exploratory , randomized , double - blind , placebo - controlled trial . J . Psychopharmacol 26 , 1525 – 1539 ( 2012 ) . 213 . Nations , K . R . et al . Maximum tolerated dose evaluation of the AMPA modulator Org 26576 in healthy volunteers and depressed patients : a summary and method analysis of bridging research in support of phase II dose selection . Drugs R . D . 12 , 127 – 139 ( 2012 ) . 214 . Goff , D . C . et al . A placebo - controlled add - on trial of the Ampakine , CX516 , for cognitive deficits in schizophrenia . Neuropsychopharmacology 33 , 465 – 472 ( 2008 ) . 215 . Gao , R . & Penzes , P . Common mechanisms of excitatory and inhibitory imbalance in schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders . Curr . Mol . Med . 15 , 146 – 167 ( 2015 ) . 216 . Krauss , G . L . Perampanel : a selective AMPA antagonist for treating seizures . Epilepsy Curr . 13 , 269 – 272 ( 2013 ) . 217 . Ko , D . , Yang , H . , Williams , B . , Xing , D . & Laurenza , A . Perampanel in the treatment of partial seizures : time to onset and duration of most common adverse events from pooled Phase III and extension studies . Epilepsy Behav . 48 , 45 – 52 ( 2015 ) . 218 . Kato , A . S . et al . Forebrain - selective AMPA - receptor antagonism guided by TARP gamma - 8 as an antiepileptic mechanism . Nat . Med . 22 , 1496 – 1501 ( 2016 ) . 219 . Maher , M . P . et al . Discovery and characterization of AMPA receptor modulators selective for TARP - gamma8 . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 357 , 394 – 414 ( 2016 ) . 220 . Drummond , J . B . , Tucholski , J . , Haroutunian , V . & Meador - Woodruff , J . H . Transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory protein ( TARP ) dysregulation in anterior cingulate cortex in schizophrenia . Schizophr . Res . 147 , 32 – 38 ( 2013 ) . 221 . Sumioka , A . , Yan , D . & Tomita , S . TARP phosphorylation regulates synaptic AMPA receptors through lipid bilayers . Neuron 66 , 755 – 767 ( 2010 ) . 222 . Ortner , N . J . & Striessnig , J . L - Type calcium channels as drug targets in CNS disorders . Channels 10 , 7 – 13 ( 2016 ) . 223 . Kabir , Z . D . , Martinez - Rivera , A . & Rajadhyaksha , A . M . From gene to behavior : L - type calcium channel mechanisms underlying neuropsychiatric symptoms . Neurotherapeutics 14 , 588 – 613 ( 2017 ) . 224 . Hollister , L . E . & Trevino , E . S . Calcium channel blockers in psychiatric disorders : a review of the literature . Can . J . Psychiatry 44 , 658 – 664 ( 1999 ) . 225 . Cipriani , A . et al . A systematic review of calcium channel antagonists in bipolar disorder and some considerations for their future development . Mol . Psychiatry 21 , 1324 – 1332 ( 2016 ) . 226 . Lencz , T . & Malhotra , A . K . Targeting the schizophrenia genome : a fast track strategy from GWAS to clinic . Mol . Psychiatry 20 , 820 – 826 ( 2015 ) . 227 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT01658150 ( 2017 ) . 228 . Ostacher , M . J . et al . Pilot investigation of isradipine in the treatment of bipolar depression motivated by genome - wide association . Bipolar Disord . 16 , 199 – 203 ( 2014 ) . 229 . Kang , S . et al . CaV1 . 3 - selective L - type calcium channel antagonists as potential new therapeutics for Parkinson’s disease . Nat . Commun . 3 , 1146 ( 2012 ) . 230 . Basso , A . D . , Kirschmeier , P . & Bishop , W . R . Lipid posttranslational modifications . Farnesyl transferase inhibitors . J . Lipid Res . 47 , 15 – 31 ( 2006 ) . 231 . Costa , R . M . et al . Mechanism for the learning deficits in a mouse model of neurofibromatosis type 1 . Nature 415 , 526 – 530 ( 2002 ) . 232 . Li , W . et al . The HMG - CoA reductase inhibitor lovastatin reverses the learning and attention deficits in a mouse model of neurofibromatosis type 1 . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1961 – 1967 ( 2005 ) . Lovastatin shows promise in preclinical models of neurofibromatosis type 1 , suggesting that the vast range of RAS inhibitors developed for cancer may be suitable for repurposing for Rasopathies within the developing brain . 233 . Widemann , B . C . et al . Phase 2 randomized , flexible crossover , double - blinded , placebo - controlled trial of the farnesyltransferase inhibitor tipifarnib in children and young adults with neurofibromatosis type 1 and progressive plexiform neurofibromas . Neuro Oncol . 16 , 707 – 718 ( 2014 ) . 234 . Mainberger , F . et al . Lovastatin improves impaired synaptic plasticity and phasic alertness in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 . BMC Neurol . 13 , 131 ( 2013 ) . 235 . Acosta , M . T . et al . Lovastatin as treatment for neurocognitive deficits in neurofibromatosis type 1 : phase I study . Pediatr . Neurol . 45 , 241 – 245 ( 2011 ) . 236 . Bearden , C . E . et al . A randomized placebo - controlled lovastatin trial for neurobehavioral function in neurofibromatosis I . Ann . Clin . Transl Neurol . 3 , 266 – 279 ( 2016 ) . 237 . Payne , J . M . et al . Randomized placebo - controlled study of lovastatin in children with neurofibromatosis type 1 . Neurology 87 , 2575 – 2584 ( 2016 ) . 238 . Yan , Z . , Kim , E . , Datta , D . , Lewis , D . A . & Soderling , S . H . Synaptic actin dysregulation , a convergent mechanism of mental disorders ? J . Neurosci . 36 , 11411 – 11417 ( 2016 ) . 239 . Packer , A . Enrichment of factors regulating canonical Wnt signaling among autism risk genes . Mol . Psychiatry 22 , 492 – 493 ( 2018 ) . 240 . Marin , O . Developmental timing and critical windows for the treatment of psychiatric disorders . Nat . Med . 22 , 1229 – 1238 ( 2016 ) . 241 . Robinson , L . et al . Morphological and functional reversal of phenotypes in a mouse model of Rett syndrome . Brain 135 , 2699 – 2710 ( 2012 ) . 242 . Boda , B . , Mendez , P . , Boury - Jamot , B . , Magara , F . & Muller , D . Reversal of activity - mediated spine dynamics and learning impairment in a mouse model of Fragile X syndrome . Eur . J . Neurosci . 39 , 1130 – 1137 ( 2014 ) . 243 . Ehninger , D . , Li , W . , Fox , K . , Stryker , M . P . & Silva , A . J . Reversing neurodevelopmental disorders in adults . Neuron 60 , 950 – 960 ( 2008 ) . 244 . Wegel , E . et al . Imaging cellular structures in super - resolution with SIM , STED and localisation microscopy : a practical comparison . Sci . Rep . 6 , 27290 ( 2016 ) . 245 . Lam , F . , Cladiere , D . , Guillaume , C . , Wassmann , K . & Bolte , S . Super - resolution for everybody : an image processing workflow to obtain high - resolution images with a standard confocal microscope . Methods 115 , 17 – 27 ( 2017 ) . 246 . Younts , T . J . et al . Presynaptic protein synthesis is required for long - term plasticity of GABA release . Neuron 92 , 479 – 492 ( 2016 ) . 247 . Andreska , T . , Aufmkolk , S . , Sauer , M . & Blum , R . High abundance of BDNF within glutamatergic presynapses of cultured hippocampal neurons . Front . Cell . Neurosci . 8 , 107 ( 2014 ) . 248 . Tønnenson , J . , Katona , G . , Rózsa , B . & Näggerl , U . V . Spine neck plasticity regulates compartmentalization of synapses . Nat . Neurosci . 17 , 678 – 685 ( 2014 ) . 249 . Bar , J . , Kobler , O . , van Bommel , B . & Mikhaylova , M . Periodic F - actin structures shape the neck of dendritic spines . Sci . Rep . 6 , 37136 ( 2016 ) . 250 . Urban , N . T . , Willig , K . I . , Hell , S . W . & Nagerl , U . V . STED nanoscopy of actin dynamics in synapses deep inside living brain slices . Biophys . J . 101 , 1277 – 1284 ( 2011 ) . 251 . Shim , S . H . et al . Super - resolution fluorescence imaging of organelles in live cells with photoswitchable membrane probes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 13978 – 13983 ( 2012 ) . 252 . Frost , N . A . , Kerr , J . M . , Lu , H . E . & Blanpied , T . A . A network of networks : cytoskeletal control of compartmentalized function within dendritic spines . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 20 , 578 – 587 ( 2010 ) . 253 . Izeddin , I . et al . Super - resolution dynamic imaging of dendritic spines using a low - affinity photoconvertible actin probe . PLOS ONE 6 , e15611 ( 2011 ) . 254 . Wen , P . J . et al . Actin dynamics provides membrane tension to merge fusing vesicles into the plasma membrane . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12604 ( 2016 ) . 255 . Hoze , N . et al . Heterogeneity of AMPA receptor trafficking and molecular interactions revealed by superresolution analysis of live cell imaging . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 17052 – 17057 ( 2012 ) . 256 . MacGillavry , H . D . , Song , Y . , Raghavachari , S . & Blanpied , T . A . Nanoscale scaffolding domains within the postsynaptic density concentrate synaptic AMPA receptors . Neuron 78 , 615 – 622 ( 2013 ) . 257 . Nair , D . et al . Super - resolution imaging reveals that AMPA receptors inside synapses are dynamically organized in nanodomains regulated by PSD95 . J . Neurosci . 33 , 13204 – 13224 ( 2013 ) . 258 . Forrest , M . P . et al . Open chromatin profiling in hiPSC - derived neurons prioritizes functional noncoding psychiatric risk variants and highlights neurodevelopmental loci . Cell Stem Cell 21 , 305 – 318 . e8 ( 2017 ) . 259 . Chailangkarn , T . et al . A human neurodevelopmental model for Williams syndrome . Nature 536 , 338 – 343 ( 2016 ) . This is a highly impactful study showing similar dendritic deficits in induced pluripotent stem - cell - derived neurons and Golgi - impregnated brain from patients with the autism related 7q11 . 23 deletion . 260 . Marchetto , M . C . et al . A model for neural development and treatment of Rett syndrome using human induced pluripotent stem cells . Cell 143 , 527 – 539 ( 2010 ) . 261 . Nageshappa , S . et al . Altered neuronal network and rescue in a human MECP2 duplication model . Mol . Psychiatry 21 , 178 – 188 ( 2016 ) . 262 . Ricciardi , S . et al . CDKL5 ensures excitatory synapse stability by reinforcing NGL - 1 - PSD95 interaction in the postsynaptic compartment and is impaired in patient iPSC - derived neurons . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 911 – 923 ( 2012 ) . 263 . Pak , C . et al . Human neuropsychiatric disease modeling using conditional deletion reveals synaptic transmission defects caused by heterozygous mutations in NRXN1 . Cell Stem Cell 17 , 316 – 328 ( 2015 ) . 264 . Silbereis , J . C . , Pochareddy , S . , Zhu , Y . , Li , M . & Sestan , N . The cellular and molecular landscapes of the developing human central nervous system . Neuron 89 , 248 – 268 ( 2016 ) . 265 . Moeschler , J . B . , Shevell , M . & Committee on Genetics . Comprehensive evaluation of the child with intellectual disability or global developmental delays . Pediatrics 134 , e903 – e918 ( 2014 ) . 266 . Neubauer , B . A . , Gross , S . & Hahn , A . Epilepsy in childhood and adolescence . Dtsch . Arztebl Int . 105 , 319 – 328 ( 2008 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 19 | APRIL 2018 | 233 © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 267 . Jones , E . J . , Gliga , T . , Bedford , R . , Charman , T . & Johnson , M . H . Developmental pathways to autism : a review of prospective studies of infants at risk . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 39 , 1 – 33 ( 2014 ) . 268 . Leboyer , M . , Henry , C . , Paillere - Martinot , M . L . & Bellivier , F . Age at onset in bipolar affective disorders : a review . Bipolar Disord . 7 , 111 – 118 ( 2005 ) . 269 . Jones , P . B . Adult mental health disorders and their age at onset . Br . J . Psychiatry 202 , S5 – S10 ( 2013 ) . 270 . Bayes , A . et al . Characterization of the proteome , diseases and evolution of the human postsynaptic density . Nat . Neurosci . 14 , 19 – 21 ( 2011 ) . 271 . Turner , T . N . et al . denovo - db : a compendium of human de novo variants . Nucleic Acids Res . 45 , D804 – D811 ( 2017 ) . 272 . Xu , B . et al . De novo gene mutations highlight patterns of genetic and neural complexity in schizophrenia . Nat . Genet . 44 , 1365 – 1369 ( 2012 ) . 273 . Xu , B . et al . Exome sequencing supports a de novo mutational paradigm for schizophrenia . Nat . Genet . 43 , 864 – 868 ( 2011 ) . 274 . Girard , S . L . et al . Increased exonic de novo mutation rate in individuals with schizophrenia . Nat . Genet . 43 , 860 – 863 ( 2011 ) . 275 . Genovese , G . et al . Increased burden of ultra - rare protein - altering variants among 4 , 877 individuals with schizophrenia . Nat . Neurosci . 19 , 1433 – 1441 ( 2016 ) . 276 . Huganir , R . L . & Nicoll , R . A . AMPARs and synaptic plasticity : the last 25 years . Neuron 80 , 704 – 717 ( 2013 ) . 277 . Lepack , A . E . , Fuchikami , M . , Dwyer , J . M . , Banasr , M . & Duman , R . S . BDNF release is required for the behavioral actions of ketamine . Int . J . Neuropsychopharmacol . 18 , pyu033 ( 2015 ) . 278 . Lee , S . J . , Escobedo - Lozoya , Y . , Szatmari , E . M . & Yasuda , R . Activation of CaMKII in single dendritic spines during long - term potentiation . Nature 458 , 299 – 304 ( 2009 ) . 279 . Yoshii , A . & Constantine - Paton , M . Postsynaptic BDNF - TrkB signaling in synapse maturation , plasticity , and disease . Dev . Neurobiol . 70 , 304 – 322 ( 2010 ) . 280 . Marshall , C . R . et al . Contribution of copy number variants to schizophrenia from a genome - wide study of 41 , 321 subjects . Nat . Genet . 49 , 27 – 35 ( 2017 ) . 281 . Maynard , K . R . & Stein , E . DSCAM contributes to dendrite arborization and spine formation in the developing cerebral cortex . J . Neurosci . 32 , 16637 – 16650 ( 2012 ) . 282 . Schoch , H . et al . Sociability deficits and altered amygdala circuits in mice lacking Pcdh10 , an autism associated gene . Biol . Psychiatry 81 , 193 – 202 ( 2017 ) . 283 . Liu , Y . T . et al . PRRT2 mutations lead to neuronal dysfunction and neurodevelopmental defects . Oncotarget 7 , 39184 – 39196 ( 2016 ) . 284 . Heron , S . E . et al . PRRT2 mutations cause benign familial infantile epilepsy and infantile convulsions with choreoathetosis syndrome . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 90 , 152 – 160 ( 2012 ) . 285 . Hamad , M . I . et al . Type I TARPS promote dendritic growth of early postnatal neocortical pyramidal cells in organotypic cultures . Development 141 , 1737 – 1748 ( 2014 ) . 286 . Lemke , J . R . et al . Mutations in GRIN2A cause idiopathic focal epilepsy with rolandic spikes . Nat . Genet . 45 , 1067 – 1072 ( 2013 ) . 287 . Durand , C . M . et al . Mutations in the gene encoding the synaptic scaffolding protein SHANK3 are associated with autism spectrum disorders . Nat . Genet . 39 , 25 – 27 ( 2007 ) . 288 . El - Husseini , A . E . , Schnell , E . , Chetkovich , D . M . , Nicoll , R . A . & Bredt , D . S . PSD - 95 involvement in maturation of excitatory synapses . Science 290 , 1364 – 1368 ( 2000 ) . 289 . Wu , Q . , Sun , M . , Bernard , L . P . & Zhang , H . Postsynaptic density 95 ( PSD - 95 ) serine 561 phosphorylation regulates a conformational switch and bidirectional dendritic spine structural plasticity . J . Biol . Chem . 292 , 16150 – 16160 ( 2017 ) . 290 . Stessman , H . A . et al . Targeted sequencing identifies 91 neurodevelopmental - disorder risk genes with autism and developmental - disability biases . Nat . Genet . 49 , 515 – 526 ( 2017 ) . 291 . Hung , A . Y . , Sung , C . C . , Brito , I . L . & Sheng , M . Degradation of postsynaptic scaffold GKAP and regulation of dendritic spine morphology by the TRIM3 ubiquitin ligase in rat hippocampal neurons . PLOS ONE 5 , e9842 ( 2010 ) . 292 . Chao , H . W . , Hong , C . J . , Huang , T . N . , Lin , Y . L . & Hsueh , Y . P . SUMOylation of the MAGUK protein CASK regulates dendritic spinogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 141 – 155 ( 2008 ) . 293 . Jourdain , P . , Fukunaga , K . & Muller , D . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II contributes to activity - dependent filopodia growth and spine formation . J . Neurosci . 23 , 10645 – 10649 ( 2003 ) . 294 . Fink , C . C . et al . Selective regulation of neurite extension and synapse formation by the beta but not the alpha isoform of CaMKII . Neuron 39 , 283 – 297 ( 2003 ) . 295 . Kury , S . et al . De novo mutations in protein kinase genes CAMK2A and CAMK2B cause intellectual disability . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 101 , 768 – 788 ( 2017 ) . 296 . Araki , Y . , Zeng , M . , Zhang , M . & Huganir , R . L . Rapid dispersion of SynGAP from synaptic spines triggers AMPA receptor insertion and spine enlargement during LTP . Neuron 85 , 173 – 189 ( 2015 ) . 297 . Johns Hopkins University . OMIM , online mendelian inheritance in man . OMIM https : / / omim . org / ( 2018 ) . 298 . Wang , M . et al . Distinct defects in spine formation or pruning in two gene duplication mouse models of autism . Neurosci . Bull . 33 , 143 – 152 ( 2017 ) . 299 . Blizinsky , K . D . et al . Reversal of dendritic phenotypes in 16p11 . 2 microduplication mouse model neurons by pharmacological targeting of a network hub . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 8520 – 8525 ( 2016 ) . 300 . Moutin , E . et al . Palmitoylation of cdc42 promotes spine stabilization and rescues spine density deficit in a mouse model of 22q11 . 2 deletion syndrome . Cereb . Cortex 27 , 3618 – 3629 ( 2017 ) . 301 . Fenelon , K . et al . The pattern of cortical dysfunction in a mouse model of a schizophrenia - related microdeletion . J . Neurosci . 33 , 14825 – 14839 ( 2013 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank M . D . Martin - de - Saavedra and K . Myczek for lively discussions and critical input on preparing the manuscript . Author contributions M . P . F . , E . P . and P . P . researched data for the article , made substantial contributions to discussions of the content , wrote the article and reviewed and / or edited the manuscript before submission . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Reviewer Information Nature Reviews Neuroscience thanks L . Pozzo - Miller , H . Zhang and the other anonymous reviewer ( s ) , for their contri - bution to the peer review of this work . RELATED LINKS NIH Research Domain Criteria ( RDoC ) : https : / / www . nimh . nih . gov / research - priorities / rdoc / index . shtml denovo‑db ( collection of human de novo variants ) : http : / / denovo - db . gs . washington . edu / denovo - db / DAVID ( Database for annotation , visualization and integrated discovery ) : https : / / david . ncifcrf . gov / ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 234 | APRIL 2018 | VOLUME 19 www . nature . com / nrn © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .