Contents lists available at ScienceDirect NeuroImage journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / neuroimage Creative constraints : Brain activity and network dynamics underlying semantic interference during idea production ☆ Roger E . Beaty a , ⁎ , 1 , Alexander P . Christensen b , 1 , Mathias Benedek c , Paul J . Silvia b , Daniel L . Schacter a a Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science , Harvard University , USA b Department of Psychology , University of North Carolina at Greensboro , USA c Department of Psychology , University of Graz , Austria A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Creativity Divergent thinking Cognitive control Functional connectivity Default network Executive control network A B S T R A C T Functional neuroimaging research has recently revealed brain network interactions during performance on creative thinking tasks — particularly among regions of the default and executive control networks — but the cognitive mechanisms related to these interactions remain poorly understood . Here we test the hypothesis that the executive control network can interact with the default network to inhibit salient conceptual knowledge ( i . e . , pre - potent responses ) elicited from memory during creative idea production . Participants studied common noun - verb pairs and were given a cued - recall test with corrective feedback to strengthen the paired association in memory . They then completed a verb generation task that presented either a previously studied noun ( high - constraint ) or an unstudied noun ( low - constraint ) , and were asked to “ think creatively ” while searching for a novel verb to relate to the presented noun . Latent Semantic Analysis of verbal responses showed decreased semantic distance values in the high - constraint ( i . e . , interference ) condition , which corresponded to increased neural activity within regions of the default ( posterior cingulate cortex and bilateral angular gyri ) , salience ( right anterior insula ) , and executive control ( left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ) networks . Independent component analysis of intrinsic functional connectivity networks extended this ﬁ nding by revealing di ﬀ erential interactions among these large - scale networks across the task conditions . The results suggest that interactions between the default and executive control networks underlie response inhibition during constrained idea production , providing insight into speci ﬁ c neurocognitive mechanisms supporting creative cognition . Introduction Creative cognition involves ﬂ exibly combining concepts stored in memory to form novel and useful associations . Previous theories have emphasized the contribution of associative mechanisms that passively unfold within semantic memory networks ( i . e . , spreading activation ) , with closely associated concepts generally considered less creative than remote associations ( Mednick , 1962 ) . Although memory provides a foundation for creative thought , evidence suggests that it can also act as a source of interference by biasing search processes toward salient conceptual knowledge ( e . g . , recalling known uses for an object during the alternate uses task ; Gilhooly et al . , 2007 ) , thus requiring cognitive control to inhibit pre - potent response tendencies ( Benedek et al . , 2012 ) . Neuroimaging research has demonstrated that memory and cognitive control are supported by the brain ' s default and executive control networks ( Zabelina and Andrews - Hanna , 2016 ) , and that the interaction of these systems supports performance on creative thinking tasks ( Beaty et al . , 2016 ) . Nevertheless , the cognitive mechanisms associated with such interactions remain poorly understood . In the present research , we developed an experimental paradigm to examine brain activity and network connectivity underlying conceptual inter - ference during creative idea production . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2017 . 01 . 012 Received 20 September 2016 ; Accepted 6 January 2017 ☆ R . E . B , P . J . S . , and M . B . were supported by Grant RFP - 15 - 12 from the Imagination Institute ( www . imagination - institute . org ) , funded by the John Templeton Foundation . The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily re ﬂ ect the view of the Imagination Institute or the John Templeton Foundation . D . L . S was supported by National Institute of Mental Health R01 MH060941 . ⁎ Correspondence to : Department of Psychology , 33 Kirkland St . , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA ; 1 Authors contributed equally . E - mail address : rbeaty @ fas . harvard . edu ( R . E . Beaty ) . NeuroImage 148 ( 2017 ) 189 – 196 Available online 08 January 2017 1053 - 8119 / © 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . MARK Neurocognitive mechanisms supporting creative idea production One of the most in ﬂ uential models of the creative thought process is the associative theory described by Mednick ( 1962 ) . According to this framework , individual di ﬀ erences in creative thinking ability can be explained by variation in the structural organization of concepts within semantic networks . Memory ' s contribution to creative thought is apparent across both domain - general ( e . g . , divergent thinking ) and domain - speci ﬁ c ( e . g . , creative writing ) contexts , both of which require drawing upon acquired knowledge to construct novel and useful solutions to open - ended problems . Despite the importance of memory to creativity , substantial evidence suggests that it can also function to constrain idea production , such as in the phenomenon of functional ﬁ xedness in convergent problem solving ( Duncker , 1945 ; Osman , 2008 ) and divergent thinking ( Chrysikou and Weisberg , 2005 ; Ward et al . , 2004 ) . In the alternate uses task ( AUT ) , for example , people are typically asked to produce creative uses for common objects . Behavioral research has linked performance de ﬁ cits on the AUT and other divergent thinking tasks to an inability to transcend salient conceptual knowledge ( i . e . , recalling the known uses of an object ; Beaty and Silvia , 2012 ; Chrysikou et al . , 2016 ; Gilhooly et al . , 2007 ) . Moreover , when presented with pictorial examples of possible re - sponses to open - ended problems prior to idea generation , people often produce responses that conform to the examples ( Jansson and Smith , 1991 ; Smith et al . , 1993 ) , even when instructed to avoid doing so ( Chrysikou and Weisberg , 2005 ; Ward et al . , 2004 ) . Behavioral evidence suggests that the constraining e ﬀ ects of memory can be mitigated by cognitive control . Several control pro - cesses have been found to support creative task performance , including pre - potent response inhibition ( Benedek et al . , 2012 ) , broad retrieval ability ( Benedek et al . , 2012 ; Silvia et al . , 2013 ) , and conceptual category switching ( Finke et al . , 1992 ; Nusbaum and Silvia , 2011 ) . Benedek et al . ( 2012 ) reported a correlation between ideational ﬂ uency in the alternate uses task and pre - potent response inhibition — the ability to overcome interference by suppressing dominant responses ( i . e . , an overlearned or salient response tendency with a strong association to a given concept or behavior ; Friedman and Miyake , in press ) . Other work has examined the contribution of broad retrieval ability — an executive function associated with controlled memory retrieval — and shown positive correlations with various tasks involving divergent thinking ( Beaty and Silvia , 2013 ; Benedek et al . , 2012 ; Silvia et al . , 2013 ) . Such ﬁ ndings suggest that idea production is supported in part by the interaction of memory systems and cognitive control . The involvement of memory in creativity is further supported by neuroimaging evidence . Several fMRI studies have reported activation of regions within the brain ' s default network , a set of cortical midline , medial temporal , and posterior inferior parietal regions associated with self - generated cognition ( e . g . , mind - wandering and memory retrieval ; Andrews - Hanna et al . , 2014 ; Buckner et al . , 2008 ; Schacter et al . , 2012 ) . Benedek et al . ( 2014a ) found that generating creative meta - phors elicits activation of the posterior cingulate and left angular gyrus , core default network regions associated with memory retrieval and semantic integration ( Badre and Wagner , 2007 ; McAvoy et al . , 2016 ) . Further evidence comes from large - scale individual di ﬀ erences studies reporting correlations among divergent thinking ability and default network structure and function ( Chen et al . , 2015 ; Jauk et al . , 2015 ; Jung et al . , 2016 ) . Neuroimaging research has also implicated brain regions within the executive control network — a system comprised of lateral prefrontal and anterior inferior parietal cortices implicated in the executive control of attention and cognition ( Seeley et al . , 2007 ; Spreng et al . , 2010 ; Vincent et al . , 2008 ) . The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( DLPFC ) , for example , has been implicated in studies of general creative cognitive processing ( Chen et al . , 2017 ; Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ; Wu et al . , 2015 ) and artistic performance ( Beaty , 2015 ; Boccia et al . , 2015 ; Pinho et al . , 2014 , 2016 ) . DLPFC activation during creative task performance is thought to re ﬂ ect the involvement of executive control processes ( Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Benedek et al . , 2014a ; Chen et al . , 2015 , 2017 ) . Another prefrontal region commonly implicated in neuroimaging studies of creative cognition is the left inferior frontal gyrus ( IFG ; Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ; Vartanian et al . , 2014 ) . The IFG shows robust activation during cognitive tasks that require controlled memory retrieval , particularly those requiring the selection of a target concept among a set of competing alternatives ( Grindrod et al . , 2008 ; Zhang et al . , 2004 ) . Although speci ﬁ c regions within the default and executive control networks have shown consistent activation in fMRI studies , the extent to which these regions cooperate during creative task performance has only recently been explored . This emerging literature has reported default and control network interaction across several creative tasks and domains ( Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Christo ﬀ et al . , 2016 ; Jung et al . , 2013 ; Zabelina and Andrews - Hanna , 2016 ) . In an fMRI study of divergent thinking , Beaty et al . ( 2015 ) found increased functional connectivity between regions of the default ( PCC ) , control ( DLPFC ) , and salience ( insula ) networks across the task duration . Other research using verbal creativity tasks has further demonstrated interactions among regions within these networks ( e . g . , Green et al . , 2015 ; Mayseless et al . , 2015 ) . Studies of artistic performance have also reported co - activation of regions with the default and control networks , including musical improvisation ( Pinho et al . , 2016 ) , visual art ( Ellamil et al . , 2012 ) , and poetry production ( Liu et al . , 2015 ) . Mounting evidence thus suggests that creative cognition involves functional connectivity of the default and executive control networks . The present research Although neuroimaging studies have reported interactions among large - scale brain systems during creative task performance , the cogni - tive mechanisms associated with these interactions remain poorly understood . One way in which the control network may interact with the default network is by managing conceptual interference that can arise during memory retrieval . During divergent thinking tasks , for example , people often begin by recalling known uses for objects before eventually generating novel uses ( Benedek et al . , 2014b ; Gilhooly et al . , 2007 ) . Importantly , however , people with higher cognitive abilities tend not to show this e ﬀ ect ( Beaty and Silvia , 2012 ) . These ﬁ ndings suggest that concepts strongly associated to a given cue can act as a source of interference , and that cognitive control may function to suppress such salient conceptual knowledge , which is re ﬂ ected in functional interactions among regions within the default and executive control networks . Here we sought to test this hypothesis by developing a paradigm to experimentally induce conceptual interference during idea production . We used a modi ﬁ ed version of the verb generation task which has recently been used to assess creative cognition in several behavioral and neuroimaging studies ( Green et al . , 2015 , 2017 ; Prabhakaran et al . , 2014 ) . In these studies , participants were presented with a series of nouns and asked to “ think creatively ” while searching for novel verbs to relate to the nouns ; verbal responses were recorded and analyzed using Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSA ) , a computational method for quantify - ing semantic similarity between words in a given semantic space ( cf . Green , 2016 ) . Green and colleagues have demonstrated that compared to a condition where participants are not instructed to think creatively , the instruction to think creatively yields signi ﬁ cantly greater semantic distance values between the nouns and participant generated verbs . Prabhakaran et al . ( 2013 ) provided evidence for the validity of the verb generation task as an assessment of creative thought , reporting strong correlations between semantic distance values in the creativity instruc - tions condition and a range of established markers of creative cognition and behavior , including performance on the alternate uses task and self - reported creative achievement . R . E . Beaty et al . NeuroImage 148 ( 2017 ) 189 – 196 190 In the present research , we asked participants to study a list of noun and verb pairs ( e . g . , shoe - walk ) , and then use either studied ( ‘ High - Constraint ’ ) or non - studied nouns ( ‘ Low - Constraint ’ ) to generate novel verb associations during functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) ; a cued - recall control condition ( ‘ Recall ’ ) presented the studied nouns and asked participants to recall the studied noun . Consistent with past work , participant ' s verbal responses were analyzed using LSA . We hypothesized that verb responses generated with studied nouns would be less semantically distant than those generated with unstudied nouns because the previously encoded verbs act as a source of semantic interference ( i . e . , a pre - potent response ) . We hypothesized that compared to the Recall condition , the High - and Low - Constraint conditions would similarly engage the left IFG , consistent with past research past research using the verb generation task ( e . g . , Thompson - Schill et al . , 1997 ) but that the High - Constraint condition would be associated with greater activity of regions within the executive and salience networks , in light of their role in cognitive control and network switching , respectively ( Uddin , 2015 ) . Critically , we further hypothe - sized that compared to the Low - Constraint condition , the High - Constraint condition would show increased activity within regions of the executive , salience , and default networks , because this condition places greater demands on brain network dynamics related to the activation of a pre - potent response in memory ( default ) , suppression of this response via cognitive control ( executive ) , and dynamic switching mechanisms that facilitate default - control network interactions ( sal - ience ) . The involvement of executive processes as a function of ideational constraints would also be consistent with past work on the role of cognitive control ( Chrysikou et al . , 2014 ) and “ hypofrontal ” states ( Mayseless and Shamay - Tsoory , 2015 ) . On the one hand , the added task demand of overcoming conceptual interference should require greater cognitive control , re ﬂ ected in increased activation of frontal brain regions ( cf . Chrysikou et al . , 2014 ) . On the other hand , generat - ing verbs in response to unstudied nouns should be less constraining and thus require relatively fewer executive resources ( cf . Mayseless et al . , 2015 ) . We further predicted that the executive and default networks would show greater functional connectivity during the interference condition compared to the control condition , re ﬂ ecting the inhibition of pre - potent responses stemming from their activation in the default network ( Beaty et al . , 2016 ) . Method Participants The total sample comprised 26 healthy adults from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro ( UNCG ) . Two participants were excluded from the analyses due to excessive head movement , resulting in a ﬁ nal sample of 24 ( 15 females , mean age : 24 . 19 , age range : 18 – 47 ) . Participants were paid in cash for their involvement in the study . All participants were right - handed with normal or corrected - to - normal vision , and reported no history of neurological disorder or psychotropic medication . Experimental task and procedure The experimental procedure consisted of three phases . In a study phase , a list of 36 noun - verb pairs ( e . g . , shoe - walk ) was presented for two iterations ( 3 . 5 min each ) , and participants were asked to remem - ber the word pairs for a later memory task . The study phase was completed during an initial anatomical MRI scan because functional imaging data from this phase were not of interest . Noun - verb pairs presented during the study phase were derived from a recent study examining the validity of the verb generation task as a measure of creative cognitive ability ( Prabhakaran et al . , 2013 ) . Verbs associated with nouns during the study phase re ﬂ ected the most common responses generated by participants in this study ( e . g . , phone - call ) . Semantically similar noun - verb pairs were used to maximize concep - tual interference during the subsequent verb generation phase : the aim was to strengthen preexisting semantic associations in memory and thus promote pre - potent response tendencies when attempting to generate a new verb associate . In a cued - recall phase , participants ’ memory for the studied noun - verb pairs was assessed . The purpose of this recall test was to further strengthen the encoded noun - verb associations , thus MRI data were not obtained during this phase . Participants were presented with the 36 nouns from the study phase and asked to recall the associated verb . A trial displayed a previously studied noun with a question mark ( e . g . , shoe - ? ) . Participants were instructed to speak the associated verb into an MRI compatible microphone ( Optoacoustics ; Mazor , Israel ) . Verbal responses were recorded online by an experimenter to ensure com - pliance and to assess recall performance . Following each response period , the correct noun - verb association was displayed for partici - pants to restudy , with the goal of further strengthening these associa - tions in memory . A ﬁ nal generation phase consisted of the main fMRI tasks of interest : two verb generation tasks and one control task ( i . e . , cued recall ) . Each condition included 18 trials presented in a pseudo - random order that was ﬁ xed across participants . Stimuli comprised the 36 previously studied nouns and 18 novel nouns ( also used in Prabhakaran et al . ( 2013 ) ) . All trials presented a noun with the condition name listed above : ‘ Create ’ or ‘ Recall . ’ For ‘ Create ’ trials , participants were asked to “ think creatively ” and come up with a verb to associate with the presented noun ( cf . Green , 2016 ; Green et al . , 2015 , 2017 ; Prabhakaran et al . 2013 ; Weinberger et al . , 2016 ) . The ‘ Create ’ condition was divided into two sub - conditions that di ﬀ ered in terms of ideational constraints . The ‘ Low - Constraint ’ condition presented unstudied nouns for verb generation ; the ‘ High - Constraint ’ condition presented previously studied nouns . Participants were told during initial instruction that some trials would include nouns from the study phase , but that they should always try to generate a new verb , not the one they had studied . The ‘ High - Constraint ’ condition was hypothesized to induce greater conceptual interference by activating the previously studied verb association , requiring inhibi - tory mechanisms to overcome pre - potent response tendencies . The ‘ Low - Constraint ’ condition was expected to induce relatively less conceptual interference because the noun cues were not previously associated with a semantically related verb during the study phase . The cued - recall task was similar to the recall task used in the second phase : a previously studied noun was displayed with the word ‘ Recall ’ above , and participants were asked to recall the associated verb . This recall condition served as a baseline control that permitted a direct contrast of brain activity related to memory retrieval and idea generation within high - and low - constraints . The experimental design followed the same procedure across all conditions . Visual stimuli were presented using E - Prime and viewed through a mirror attached to the head coil . Trials consisted of a jittered ﬁ xation cross ( 4 – 6 s ) , a thinking period displaying the condition ( ‘ Create ’ or ‘ Recall ’ ) above a noun paired with a question mark ( e . g . , shoe - ? ; 7 s ) , and a response period requiring participants to speak their responses into the MRI microphone ( 3 s ) ; the duration of the thinking period was based on reaction time data provided in Prabhakaran et al . ( 2013 ) . Verbal responses were recorded online during functional imaging by an experimenter . Recall responses were subsequently coded for accuracy , and Create responses were coded for semantic distance via Latent Semantic Analysis ( Green , 2016 ) ; behavioral data from three subjects were not included due to technical issues with the MRI microphone . Only valid responses ( i . e . , verbs ) were included in the LSA . Semantic distance was derived by computing the inverse of the semantic similarity values ( Prabhakaran et al . , 2013 ) . R . E . Beaty et al . NeuroImage 148 ( 2017 ) 189 – 196 191 MRI data acquisition and preprocessing Participants completed the fMRI task in a single run . Whole - brain imaging was performed on a 3T Siemens Magnetom MRI system ( Siemens Medical Systems , Erlangen , Germany ) using a 16 - channel head coil . BOLD - sensitive T2 * - weighted functional images were ac - quired using a single shot gradient - echo EPI pulse sequence ( TR = 2000 ms , TE = 30 ms , ﬂ ip angle = 78° , 32 axial slices , 3 . 5×3 . 5×4 . 0 mm , distance factor 0 % , FoV = 192×192 mm , interleaved slice ordering ) and corrected online for head motion . The ﬁ rst two volumes were discarded to allow for T1 equilibration e ﬀ ects . A high resolution T1 scan was acquired for anatomic normalization . Imaging data were slice - time corrected and realigned using the Statistical Parametric Mapping ( SPM ) 12 package ( Wellcome Institute of Cognitive Neurology , London ) . Functional volumes were co - registered and resliced to a voxel size of 3 mm 3 , normalized to the MNI template brain ( Montreal Neurological Institute ) , and smoothed with an 8 mm 3 isotropic Gaussian kernel . Functional network connectivity To explore di ﬀ erences in functional network connectivity across conditions , we used independent component analysis ( ICA ) implemen - ted in the CONN Toolbox ( Whit ﬁ eld - Gabrieli and Nieto - Castanon , 2012 ) . ICA is a data - driven method for identifying spatiotemporal voxel clusters , also known as intrinsic connectivity networks ( Calhoun et al . , 2001 ) , and has been widely used to identify brain networks in resting - state and task - based fMRI data . For our purposes , ICA was employed to extract brain networks associated with the three task conditions and to explore correlational patterns among these networks . We identi ﬁ ed 20 independent components within the fMRI task data , using a dimension - ality reduction of 64 ( Calhoun et al . , 2001 ) . We then extracted networks of interest ( i . e . , group - level spatial maps ) to explore functional interac - tions during the task conditions : anterior default ( medial prefrontoal cortex ) , posterior default ( posterior cingulate / precuneus and bilateral angular gyri ) , left executive ( left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and left anterior inferior parietal lobe ) , right executive ( right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and right anterior inferior parietal lobe ) , and salience ( bilateral insulae and anterior cingulate cortex ) . Network maps were speci ﬁ ed as regions of interest ( ROI ) to examine between - network connectivity di ﬀ erences associated with the three task conditions . fMRI univariate analysis Functional imaging analysis was conducted using SPM12 . We speci ﬁ ed ﬁ xed - e ﬀ ects models for each participant in a ﬁ rst - level analysis . All events within an experimental trial were modeled in the design matrix . Subject - speci ﬁ c movement parameters were modeled as regressors of no interest . Contrasts were computed for the three conditions of interest — verb generation for studied nouns ( High - Constraint ) , verb generation for unstudied nouns ( Low - Constraint ) , and cued recall for studied nouns ( Recall ) — and entered into a second - level random - e ﬀ ects model . Unless otherwise noted , results are re - ported when signi ﬁ cant at a voxel - level threshold of p < . 05 familywise error ( FWE ) corrected and cluster size k ≥ 10 . Functional connectivity analysis was conducted using the CONN Toolbox in Matlab ( Whit ﬁ eld - Gabrieli and Nieto - Castanon , 2012 ) . For each participant , CONN implemented CompCor , a method for identify - ing principal components associated with segmented white matter ( WM ) and cerebrospinal ﬂ uid ( CSF ; Behzadi et al . , 2007 ) . These components were entered as confounds along with realignment para - meters in a ﬁ rst - level analysis ( Whit ﬁ eld - Gabrieli and Nieto - Castanon , 2012 ) . For second - level analyses , t - tests on Fisher ' s Z - transformed correlations were computed to test for di ﬀ erences between task conditions . Functional connectivity results are reported when signi ﬁ - cant at threshold of p < . 05 false discovery rate ( FDR ) corrected . Results Behavioral results Participants accurately recalled a majority of the noun - verb pairs during the ﬁ rst ( M = 76 % , SD = . 16 ) and second ( M = 94 % , SD = . 06 ) cued - recall tests . Recall performance improved signi ﬁ cantly from the ﬁ rst to the second memory test ( t = 6 . 28 , p < . 001 ) , suggesting that the restudy period e ﬀ ectively boosted memory for the noun - verb pairs . 2 Regarding semantic distance , results showed that the semantic distance between noun cues and verb responses was signi ﬁ cantly greater in the Low - Constraint ( M = . 76 , SD = . 03 ) compared to the High - Constraint condi - tion ( M = . 74 , SD = . 05 ; t ( 21 ) = 2 . 12 , p = . 04 ) , suggesting that the inter - ference manipulation a ﬀ ected idea production , re ﬂ ected in moderately decreased semantic distance in the High - Constraint condition . Verb generation and memory retrieval The fMRI analysis began by contrasting the two verb generation conditions separately with the memory retrieval condition . Generating verb associations for new nouns compared to recalling studied associations ( Low - Constraint > Recall ) revealed signi ﬁ cant activation of four clusters : left IFG ( BA 45 ) , left superior frontal gyrus ( BA 8 ) , caudate , and cerebellum ( see Table 1 ) . The reverse contrast ( Recall > Low - Constraint ) showed activation of several clusters corresponding to the default network , including the precuneus ( PCC ; 31 ) , medial prefrontal cortex ( mPFC ; BA 10 ) , bilateral angular gyri ( AG ; BA 40 ) , and right middle temporal gyrus ( MTG ; BA 21 ) . We then assessed activity related to verb generation for studied nouns ( i . e . , the interference condition ) compared to memory retrieval ( High - Constraint > Recall ) . Results showed signi ﬁ cant activation with - in six voxel clusters ( see Table 1 ) . Two of these clusters overlapped with the previous contrast — left IFG ( BA 45 ) and cerebellum — with addi - tional clusters found within the right anterior insula ( BA 13 ) , MFG ( BA 6 ) , and thalamus . The reverse contrast ( Recall > High - Constraint ) yielded activity of two clusters within the precuneus ( BA 31 ) and right inferior parietal lobe ( IPL ; BA 40 ) . Semantic interference during verb generation Our next analysis examined brain activity during semantic inter - ference by contrasting the High - Constraint and Low - Constraint con - ditions ( High - Constraint > Low - Constraint ) . Initial results showed activation of a small cluster within the precuneus ( p < . 05 , FWE corrected ) . At a reduced threshold ( p < . 001 , uncorrected ) , additional clusters were found in the left DLPFC ( BA 9 ) , PCC ( BA 23 ) , bilateral AG ( BA 40 ) , and right anterior insula ( BA 13 ; see Table 2 and Fig . 1 ) . The reverse contrast ( Low - Constraint > High - Constraint ) did not reveal signi ﬁ cant activation related to the Low - Constraint condition at both the corrected and uncorrected thresholds . These ﬁ ndings provide preliminary evidence that constrained idea generation involves rela - tively greater activation of regions of the default , executive , and salience networks . Functional network connectivity Our next set of analyses examined interactions among the ﬁ ve networks of interest identi ﬁ ed using ICA — anterior default , posterior default , left executive , right executive , and salience — during verb generation and memory retrieval . We ﬁ rst contrasted network connec - tions associated with the Low - Constraint condition compared to 2 Note that the second cued - recall test included half the number of trials ( n = 18 ) as the ﬁ rst recall period ( n = 36 ) because half of the studied cues were used for the ‘ High - Constraint ’ generation condition to induce interference . R . E . Beaty et al . NeuroImage 148 ( 2017 ) 189 – 196 192 memory retrieval ( Low - Constraint > Recall ) . Results showed increased functional coupling of the posterior default and salience networks , as well as the anterior default and right executive networks ( see Fig . 2a ) . The reverse contrast ( Recall > Low - Constraint ) revealed greater cou - pling of the right and left executive networks . We then assessed network connections associated with the High - Constraint condition compared to memory retrieval ( High - Constraint > Recall ) . Similar to the results of the Low - Constraint condition , we found increased coupling of the anterior default network with the right executive network ( see Fig . 2b ) . In addition , the anterior default network showed further coupling with two other networks : left execu - tive and salience . The reverse contrast ( Recall > High - Constraint ) revealed similar connectivity as shown in the other reverse contrast ( Recall > Low - Constraint ) between the left and right executive net - works . Finally , we contrasted the High - Constraint condition with the Low - Constraint condition ( High - Constraint > Low - Constraint ) . This analy - sis revealed greater connectivity between the anterior default and left executive network ( see Fig . 2c ) . The reverse contrast ( Low - Constraint > High - Constraint ) did not show signi ﬁ cant connectivity di ﬀ erences . In sum , the verb generation conditions were associated with increased functional coupling among the default , salience , and executive control networks . Discussion Creative cognition has previously been associated with functional interactions among large - scale brain networks , but the mechanisms underlying these dynamics remain largely unknown . The present research isolated one core component of creative cognition — over - coming conceptual interference during idea production — and identi ﬁ ed speci ﬁ c patterns of functional connectivity among these systems . Univariate analysis contrasting High - Constraint vs . Low - Constraint verb generation revealed greater activity within core regions of the default ( bilateral AG and precuneus ) , salience ( right anterior insula ) , and control ( DLPFC ) networks ( p < . 001 , uncorrected ) . We extended these ﬁ ndings to the level of large - scale brain networks , and demon - strated that semantic interference induces di ﬀ erential interactions among these systems . The ﬁ ndings provide initial insight into the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying brain network interactions during constrained idea production . As expected , we found greater activation of the left IFG during both generative conditions when compared to memory retrieval . The left IFG has previously been implicated in fMRI studies using the verb generation task ( Crescentini et al . , 2010 ; Thompson - Schill , 2003 ) , and it has shown consistent activation in neuroimaging studies of creative cognition ( Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ; Wu et al . , 2015 ) . A substantial body of evidence has shown that the left IFG supports semantic retrieval processes , particularly during cognitive tasks involving the Table 1 Univariate analysis contrasting verb generation ( ‘ High - Constraint ’ and ‘ Low - Constraint ’ ) and memory retrieval ( ‘ Recall ’ ) . Peak ( MNI ) Region Lat . BA x y z k T Low - Constraint > Recall Inferior Frontal G . L 45 − 51 35 14 641 9 . 75 Superior Frontal G . L 8 − 3 17 56 361 10 . 64 Caudate L – − 15 5 8 85 8 . 09 Cerebellum R – 18 - 70 - 31 114 7 . 29 Recall > Low - Constraint Medial Prefrontal C . R 10 3 53 - 4 30 7 . 00 Middle Temporal G . R 21 60 - 13 - 19 39 9 . 11 Angular G . L 40 - 57 - 61 38 48 9 . 06 R 40 60 - 52 38 565 13 . 19 Precuneus R 31 12 - 55 35 562 11 . 12 Middle Frontal G . R 8 30 35 47 25 6 . 51 High - Constraint > Recall Inferior Frontal G . L 45 - 51 17 23 1035 10 . 74 Superior Frontal G . – 6 0 26 44 569 12 . 24 Anterior Insula R 13 30 26 - 7 63 9 . 42 Thalamus L – - 6 - 4 - 1 235 9 . 13 Cerebellum L – - 33 - 58 - 37 21 7 . 36 R – 18 - 73 - 28 398 9 . 59 Recall > High - Constraint Precuneus R 31 12 - 55 29 29 7 . 18 Inferior Parietal L . R 40 60 - 40 47 95 7 . 49 Notes . Lat . = Laterality , BA = Brodmann area , k = cluster size , L / R = Left / right ; C = Cortex ; G = Gyrus ; L = Lobule . Results are corrected for multiple comparisons ( p < . 05 , FWE - corrected ; k > 10 ) . Table 2 Univariate analysis contrasting ‘ High - Constraint ’ and ‘ Low - Constraint ’ verb generation . Peak ( MNI ) Region Lat . BA x y z k T High - Constraint > Low - Constraint Precuneus L 7 - 3 - 55 38 1141 6 . 03 R 7 9 - 55 71 13 4 . 18 Angular G . L 40 - 45 - 61 41 1622 4 . 34 R 40 48 - 49 32 269 5 . 23 Posterior Cingulate C . – 23 0 - 25 26 24 3 . 98 Middle Frontal G . ( DLPFC ) L 9 - 42 26 44 16 4 . 25 Anterior Insula R 13 30 20 - 28 27 4 . 10 Lingual G . – 18 0 - 76 - 10 15 3 . 78 Cerebellum – – 0 - 61 - 1 43 4 . 41 Low - Constraint > High - Constraint – – – – – – – Notes . Lat . = Laterality , BA = Brodmann area , k = cluster size , L / R = Left / right ; C = Cortex ; DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ; G = Gyrus ; L = Lobule . Results are uncorrected for multiple comparisons ( p < . 001 , uncorrected ; k > 10 ) . Notes . AG = angular gyrus ; DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ; INS = insula ; PreCu = precuneus . Fig . 1 . Univariate results contrasting ‘ High - Constraint ’ and ‘ Low - Constraint ’ verb generation . R . E . Beaty et al . NeuroImage 148 ( 2017 ) 189 – 196 193 search and selection of target concepts among a large set of competing alternatives ( Crescentini et al . , 2010 ; Grindrod et al . , 2008 ) . We also found common activation of the cerebellum and subcortical structures ( e . g . , caudate ) in the generative conditions compared to the control condition . Although we did not make predictions about the involve - ment of these regions , their activation is consistent with recent neuroimaging research on creative cognition , such as studies implicat - ing the cerebellum ( Saggar et al . , 2015 , 2017 ) and caudate ( Jauk et al . , 2015 ) . Notably , the only di ﬀ erence that emerged across generative conditions when contrasted with the control task was unique activation of the right anterior insula during constrained generation . As a key node of the salience network , the right anterior insula plays a central role in detecting behaviorally relevant stimuli ( Uddin , 2015 ) and has also been shown to function as a switching mechanism between the default and executive control networks ( Menon and Uddin , 2010 ; Sridharan et al . , 2008 ) . The right anterior insula thus may support constrained generation by both detecting previously encoded informa - tion ( i . e . , the studied noun - verb association ) and facilitating interac - tions between the default and control networks . Using ICA , we extended the univariate ﬁ ndings by extracting networks associated with the task conditions . Between - network con - nectivity analyses revealed di ﬀ erential network con ﬁ gurations under - lying verb generation with high - and low - constraints compared to memory retrieval . Although both generative conditions elicited in - creased connectivity among the default , salience , and control networks , the networks showed greater convergence during high - constraint generation compared to low - constraint generation . Speci ﬁ cally , the anterior default network cluster acted as a hub during high - constraint generation , showing connections to the salience and bilateral executive networks . During low - constraint generation , in contrast , results re - vealed a relatively sparse connectivity pro ﬁ le , with the three networks diverging into discrete , pairwise connections . This pattern suggests that constrained idea production elicits greater network convergence compared to low - constraint production , a pattern that may re ﬂ ect greater coordination among brain systems supporting memory retrie - val and cognitive control . This interpretation was further reinforced by the contrast of the two generative conditions . Compared to low - constraint generation , the high - constraint condition was associated with greater functional cou - pling between the anterior default and left executive networks . We suspect that the high - constraint condition caused semantic interfer - ence by activating a pre - potent response ( i . e . , the encoded verb association ) , which in turn recruited cognitive control circuits to inhibit its activation and redirect search processes . This explanation is consistent with studies demonstrating the involvement of left lateral prefrontal cortex in the selection of non - dominant semantic associates ( Je ﬀ eries , 2013 ; Whitney et al . , 2011 ) . Moreover , the observed func - tional coupling of the left executive network with default regions during constrained generation is in line with a recent fMRI study reporting increased functional connectivity between the PCC and left lateral prefrontal regions as a function of increasing demands on semantic retrieval ( Krieger - Redwood et al . , 2016 ) . The constraining e ﬀ ect of semantic interference on idea production was supported by the behavioral results showing decreased semantic distance in this condition relative to the low - constraint condition . This observation is consistent with research described on the serial order e ﬀ ect in divergent thinking tasks — the tendency to produce stereo - typical responses ( or known uses for objects ) at the early stages of idea generation ( Beaty and Silvia , 2012 ) — although the current paradigm and behavioral studies vary considerably in terms of time allotted for idea production . Nevertheless , because the response period for verb generation was limited to a short duration ( 7 s ; cf . Green et al . , 2015 ) , we suspect that the probability of activating salient semantic associates at the onset of the generation period was maximized by the interference manipulation . Our ﬁ ndings extend previous research reporting default and control network coupling by clarifying the interaction of cognitive control and memory systems during creative idea production . Recent work has identi ﬁ ed other task contexts associated with cooperation of these brain systems ( for reviews , see Beaty et al . ( 2016 ) , Zabelina and Andrews - Hanna ( 2016 ) ) . In a study of visual art production , Ellamil et al . ( 2012 ) found greater functional connectivity among core regions of the default and control networks during the evaluation of previously generated ideas . Although we suspect that default - control network coupling re ﬂ ected the involvement of inhibitory mechanisms , in the context of Ellamil et al . ( 2012 ) , an alternate interpretation of such coupling is that it re ﬂ ects increased demands on idea evaluation . Default - control network interactions were reported in a study of poetry generation ( Liu et al . , 2015 ) . In this study , professional poets were asked to freely generate novel poetry in one condition , and then revise their ideas in a separate condition . Compared to generation , the revision condition was associated with increased coupling among default and control network regions . Similar to the present study , the generation tasks used in these studies were relatively less constraining compared to the evaluation and revision tasks . Likewise , the generation of novel verb associations in the semantic interference condition reported here required increased cognitive control demands because it was more constraining than generating verbs with less interference , re ﬂ ected in greater coupling of the control network with default regions . The verb generation task employed in this study was motivated by a similar task described in recent behavioral and neuroimaging studies Notes . A = anterior ; P = posterior ; R = Right ; L = Left . Fig . 2 . Between - network functional connectivity contrasting verb generation ( ‘ High - Constraint ’ and ‘ Low - Constraint ’ ) and memory retrieval ( ‘ Recall ’ ) . R . E . Beaty et al . NeuroImage 148 ( 2017 ) 189 – 196 194 ( for a review , see Green ( 2016 ) ) . Green and colleagues modi ﬁ ed the classic verb generation task by cuing participants to “ think creatively ” as they searched for verbs to relate to presented noun ; they were also the ﬁ rst research group to apply Latent Semantic Analysis to quantify semantic distance of participant responses ( Prabhakaran et al . 2013 ) . In a series of neuroimaging studies , Green et al . provide evidence that compared to uncued conditions with no creativity instructions , cuing participants to think creatively elicits robust activation within fronto - polar cortex ( Green et al . , 2015 ) , a region involved in relational integration and ﬂ exible thinking ( Bendetowicz et al . , 2017 ; Boorman et al . , 2009 ; Green et al . , 2006 ) . It is important to point out that our task similarly instructed people to think creatively during the verb generation task , but unlike Green and colleagues , we did not observe activation within frontopolar cortex . We suspect that this discrepancy is critically related to di ﬀ erences in task contexts and corresponding fMRI contrasts . Speci ﬁ cally , Green et al . ( 2015 ) assessed brain activity related to cued ( creativity instructions ) vs . uncued ( no creativity instructions ) . In contrast , our study did not include an uncued condition but rather cued participants to think creatively in both generative conditions ( i . e . , ‘ High - Constraint ’ and ‘ Low - Constraint ’ verb generation ) ; our paradigm also included an experimental manipulation designed to induce semantic interference during creative verb genera - tion . Taken together , these key di ﬀ erences in task demands and fMRI contrasts between our study and those of Green and colleagues raise challenges for comparing results across studies . We nevertheless think that both approaches can shed light on the neurocognitive mechanisms associated with creative idea production . Costs and bene ﬁ ts of memory to creative thought The present study illustrates how memory can constrain idea production , pointing to a potential cost of memory to creativity . On the other hand , an emerging literature has documented a central role of semantic ( Beaty et al . , 2014 ; Benedek et al . , 2012 ; Kenett et al . , 2014 , in press ) and episodic ( Addis et al . , 2016 ; Madore et al . , 2015 , 2016 ) memory systems to creative cognition . The present work illustrates how semantic memory can constrain creative thought by activating salient conceptual knowledge during idea generation , but it is clear that memory also bene ﬁ ts creativity by providing acquired knowledge and retrieval mechanisms ( Abraham , 2017 ) . We think that it is useful to brie ﬂ y consider our study in the context of this broader literature in order to highlight ways in which memory and creativity may interact . Contemporary models of memory posit at least two systems . A semantic system stores information about the meaning of concepts and their interrelations ; such concepts are thought to be represented in a network that is relatively ﬁ xed in its structural organization , although networks can be updated and reorganized through learning and experience . An episodic system , in contrast , stores information about personal past experiences ( i . e . , episodes ; Tulving , 2002 ) ; this system is thought to represent past events in a constructive manner , extracting and combining relevant constituent components ( i . e . , people , places , objects , and actions ) into a coherent mental representation . Episodic memory has been shown to support both recalling past experiences and imagining future experiences that have not yet occurred ( Schacter et al . , 2012 ) , providing evidence for the involvement of constructive episodic retrieval processes ( Schacter and Addis , 2007 ) . Recent behavioral experiments ( Madore et al . , 2015 , 2016 ) have highlighted the contribution of episodic memory to divergent thinking by using an episodic speci ﬁ city induction , where 1 ) participants are trained to recall as much detail as possible about a recently experienced event ( e . g . , a short video clip ) , and 2 ) the e ﬀ ect of this brief training on performance of subsequent tasks is examined . Several studies have shown that speci ﬁ city inductions selectively enhance performance on subsequent tasks that draw on episodic memory — including imagining future experiences ( Madore , Gaesser , and Schacter , 2014 ; Madore et al . , 2017 ) and solving means - end problems ( Madore and Schacter , 2014 ) — by increasing access to episodic content via facilitation of constructive processes ( Schacter and Madore , 2016 ) . More directly relevant to the present research , Madore et al . ( 2015 , 2016 ) demon - strated selective bene ﬁ ts of the speci ﬁ city induction to tasks involving divergent thinking ( i . e . , the alternate uses task and the consequences task ) but not convergent thinking ( i . e . , the remote associates task ) . These ﬁ ndings suggest that divergent thinking relies in part on episodic memory and related retrieval mechanisms involved in the extraction and combination of stored information . Limitations and future directions The present research used a novel semantic interference manipula - tion to examine brain mechanisms underlying constrained idea pro - duction . Our results extend recent work by clarifying the contribution of the default and executive control networks to creative cognition , and suggest that the interaction of these networks may re ﬂ ect the interplay of memory systems and cognitive control . Future research should continue to explore brain network interactions supporting creative task performance as the verb generation task employed in this study likely re ﬂ ects only one aspect of creative cognition . Moreover , the recall condition employed as a control task was notably di ﬀ erent from the two idea generation conditions ( i . e . , High - and Low - Constraint ) , so com - parisons of these generative conditions with the recall condition should be made with caution . Future studies could employ more comparable control tasks such as the uncued verb generation task used in previous studies that asks participants to generate a verb associate without creativity instructions ( e . g . , Green et al . , 2015 ) . Moreover , the di ﬀ er - ence between the High - and Low - Constraint conditions in terms of semantic distance was marginally signi ﬁ cant , so future research should attempt to replicate and extend this ﬁ nding in a laboratory or neuroimaging context . Our study focused on the impact of semantic memory , but recent evidence suggests that episodic memory also contributes to performance on creative thinking tasks ( Madore et al . , 2015 ; Madore et al . , 2016 ) . Understanding the speci ﬁ c contributions of these memory systems may clarify the default network ' s role in creative cognition , and provide critical insight into how and when memory systems interact with cognitive control to support the production of novel and useful ideas . References Abraham , A . , 2017 . The imaginative mind . Hum . Brain Mapp . Addis , D . R . , Pan , L . , Musicaro , R . , Schacter , D . L . , 2016 . Divergent thinking and constructing episodic simulations . Memory . 24 , 89 – 97 . Andrews ‐ Hanna , J . R . , Smallwood , J . , Spreng , R . N . , 2014 . The default network and self ‐ generated thought : component processes , dynamic control , and clinical relevance . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1316 , 29 – 52 . Badre , D . , Wagner , A . D . , 2007 . Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory . Neuropsychologia 45 , 2883 – 2901 . Beaty , R . , Benedek , M . , Kaufman , S . , Silvia , P . , 2015 . Default and executive network coupling supports creative idea production . Sci . Rep . 5 , 10964 . Beaty , R . E . , 2015 . The neuroscience of musical improvisation . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 51 , 10 8 – 117 . Beaty , R . E . , Silvia , P . J . , 2012 . Why do ideas get more creative across time ? An executive interpretation of the serial order e ﬀ ect in divergent thinking tasks . Psychol . Aesthet . Creat . Arts 6 , 309 – 319 . Beaty , R . E . , Silvia , P . J . , 2013 . Metaphorically speaking : cognitive abilities and the production of ﬁ gurative language . Mem . Cogn . 41 , 255 – 267 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Silvia , P . J . , Schacter , D . L . , 2016 . Creative cognition and brain network dynamics . Trends Cogn . Sci . 20 , 87 – 95 . Beaty , R . E . , Silvia , P . J . , Nusbaum , E . C . , Jauk , E . , Benedek , M . , 2014 . The roles of associative and executive processes in creative cognition . Mem . Cogn . 42 , 1186 – 1197 . Behzadi , Y . , Restom , K . , Liau , J . , Liu , T . T . , 2007 . A component based noise correction method ( CompCor ) for BOLD and perfusion based fMRI . NeuroImage 37 , 90 – 101 . Bendetowicz , D . , Urbanski , M . , Aichelburg , C . , Levy , R . , Volle , E . , 2017 . Brain morphometry predicts individual creative potential and the ability to combine remote ideas . Cortex in press . Benedek , M . , Franz , F . , Heene , M . , Neubauer , A . C . , 2012 . Di ﬀ erential e ﬀ ects of cognitive inhibition and intelligence on creativity . Pers . Individ . Di ﬀ er . 53 , 480 – 485 . Benedek , M . , Beaty , R . , Jauk , E . , Koschutnig , K . , Fink , A . , Silvia , P . J . , Neubauer , A . C . , 2014a . Creating metaphors : the neural basis of ﬁ gurative language production . NeuroImage 90 , 99 – 106 . R . E . Beaty et al . NeuroImage 148 ( 2017 ) 189 – 196 195 Benedek , M . , Jauk , E . , Fink , A . , Koschutnig , K . , Reishofer , G . , Ebner , F . , Neubauer , A . C . , 2014b . To create or to recall ? Neural mechanisms underlying the generation of creative new ideas . NeuroImage 88 , 125 – 133 . Boccia , M . , Piccardi , L . , Palermo , L . , Nori , R . , Palmiero , M . , 2015 . Where do bright ideas occur in our brain ? Meta - analytic evidence from neuroimaging studies of domain - speci ﬁ c creativity . Front . Psychol . , 6 . Boorman , E . D . , Behrens , T . E . , Woolrich , M . W . , Rushworth , M . F . , 2009 . How green is the grass on the other side ? Frontopolar cortex and the evidence in favor of alternative courses of action . Neuron 62 , 733 – 743 . Buckner , R . L . , Andrews - Hanna , J . R . , Schacter , D . L . , 2008 . The brain ' s default network : anatomy , function , and relevance to disease . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1124 , 1 – 38 . Calhoun , V . D . , Adali , T . , Pearlson , G . D . , Pekar , J . J . , 2001 . A method for making group inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis . Hum . Brain Mapp . 14 , 140 – 151 . Chen , Q . , Beaty , R . E . , Wei , D . , Yang , J . , Sun , J . , Liu , W . , … Qiu , J . , 2017 . Longitudinal alterations of frontoparietal and frontotemporal networks predict future creative cognitive ability . Cereb . Cortex in press . Chen , Q . L . , Xu , T . , Yang , W . J . , Li , Y . D . , Sun , J . Z . , Wang , K . C . , Qiu , J . , 2015 . Individual di ﬀ erences in verbal creative thinking are re ﬂ ected in the precuneus . Neuropsychologia 75 , 441 – 449 . Christo ﬀ , K . , Irving , Z . C . , Fox , K . C . , Spreng , R . N . , Andrews - Hanna , J . R . , 2016 . Mind - wandering as spontaneous thought : a dynamic framework . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 17 , 718 – 731 . Chrysikou , E . G . , Weisberg , R . W . , 2005 . Following the wrong footsteps : ﬁ xation e ﬀ ects of pictorial examples in a design problem - solving task . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 31 , 1134 . Chrysikou , E . G . , Weber , M . , Thompson - Schill , S . L . , 2014 . A matched ﬁ lter hypothesis for cognitive control . Neuropsychologia 62 , 341 – 355 . Chrysikou , E . G . , Motyka , K . , Nigro , C . , Yang , S . , Thompson - Schill , S . L . , 2016 . Functional ﬁ xedness in creative thinking tasks depends on stimulus modality . Psychol . Aesthet . Creat . Arts 10 , 425 – 435 . Crescentini , C . , Shallice , T . , Macaluso , E . , 2010 . Item retrieval and competition in noun and verb generation : an fMRI study . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 22 , 1140 – 1157 . Duncker , K . , 1945 . On problem - solving . Psychol . Monogr . 58 , ( i - 113 ) . Ellamil , M . , Dobson , C . , Beeman , M . , Christo ﬀ , K . , 2012 . Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the creative process . NeuroImage 59 , 1783 – 1794 . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , 1992 . Creative Cognition : Theory , Research , and Applications . MIT Press , Cambridge . Gilhooly , K . J . , Fioratou , E . , Anthony , S . H . , Wynn , V . , 2007 . Divergent thinking : strategies andexecutive involvement ingenerating novel usesfor familiar objects . Br . J . Psychol . 98 , 611 – 625 . Gonen - Yaacovi , G . , de Souza , L . C . , Levy , R . , Urbanski , M . , Josse , G . , Volle , E . , 2013 . Rostral and caudal prefrontal contribution to creativity : a meta - analysis of functional imaging data . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 7 , 465 . Green , A . E . , 2016 . Creativity , within reason : semantic distance and dynamic state creativity in relational thinking and reasoning . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 25 , 28 – 35 . Green , A . E . , Fugelsang , J . A . , Kraemer , D . J . , Shamosh , N . A . , Dunbar , K . N . , 2006 . Frontopolar cortex mediates abstract integration in analogy . Brain Res . 1096 , 125 – 137 . Green , A . E . , Cohen , M . S . , Raab , H . A . , Yedibalian , C . G . , Gray , J . R . , 2015 . Frontopolar activity and connectivity support dynamic conscious augmentation of creative state . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 , 923 – 934 . Green , A . E . , Spiegel , K . A . , Giangrande , E . J . , Weinberger , A . B . , Gallagher , N . M . , Turkeltaub , P . E , 2017 . Thinking cap plus thinking zap : tDCS of frontopolar cortex improves creative analogical reasoning and facilitates conscious augmentation of state creativity in verb generation . Cereb . Cortex in press . Grindrod , C . M . , Bilenko , N . Y . , Myers , E . B . , Blumstein , S . E . , 2008 . The role of the left inferior frontal gyrus in implicit semantic competition and selection : an event - related fMRI study . Brain Res . 1229 , 167 – 178 . Jansson , D . G . , Smith , S . M . , 1991 . Design ﬁ xation . Design studies . 12 , 3 – 11 . Jauk , E . , Neubauer , A . C . , Dunst , B . , Fink , A . , Benedek , M . , 2015 . Gray matter correlates of creative potential : a latent variable voxel - based morphometry study . NeuroImage 111 , 312 – 320 . Je ﬀ eries , E . , 2013 . The neural basis of semantic cognition : converging evidence from neuropsychology , neuroimaging and TMS . Cortex 49 , 611 – 625 . Jung , R . E . , Flores , R . A . , Hunter , D . , 2016 . A new measure of imagination ability : anatomical brain imaging correlates . Front . Psychol . , 7 . Jung , R . E . , Mead , B . S . , Carrasco , J . , Flores , R . A . , 2013 . The structure of creative cognition in the human brain . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 7 , 330 . Kenett , Y . N . , Anaki , D . , Faust , M . , 2014 . Investigating the structure of semantic networks in low and high creative persons . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 6 , 407 . Krieger - Redwood , K . , Je ﬀ eries , E . , Karapanagiotidis , T . , Seymour , R . , Nunes , A . , Ang , J . W . A . , Smallwood , J . , 2016 . Down but not out in posterior cingulate cortex : deactivation yet functional coupling with prefrontal cortex during demanding semantic cognition . NeuroImage 141 , 366 – 377 . Liu , S . , Erkkinen , M . G . , Healey , M . L . , Xu , Y . , Swett , K . E . , Chow , H . M . , Braun , A . R . , 2015 . Brain activity and connectivity during poetry composition : toward a multidimensional model of the creative process . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 , 3351 – 3372 . Madore , K . P . , Schacter , D . L . , 2014 . An episodic speci ﬁ city induction enhances means - end problem solving in young and older adults . Psychol . Aging 29 , 913 – 924 . Madore , K . P . , Gaesser , B . , Schacter , D . L . , 2014 . Constructive episodic simulation : dissociable e ﬀ ects of a speci ﬁ city induction on remembering , imagining , and describing in young and older adults . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 40 , 609 – 622 . Madore , K . P . , Addis , D . R . , Schacter , D . L . , 2015 . Creativity and memory : e ﬀ ects of an episodic - speci ﬁ city induction on divergent thinking . Psychol . Sci . 26 , 1461 – 1468 . Madore , K . P . , Jing , H . G . , Schacter , D . L . , 2016 . Divergent creative thinking in young and older adults : extending the e ﬀ ects of an episodic speci ﬁ city induction . Mem . Cogn . 44 , 974 – 988 . Madore , K . P . Szpunar , K . K . , Addis , D . R . , Schacter , D . L . , 2017 . Episodic speci ﬁ city induction impacts activity in a core brain network during construction of imagined future experiences . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 133 10696 - 10701 . Mayseless , N . , Shamay - Tsoory , S . G . , 2015 . Enhancing verbal creativity : modulating creativity by altering the balance between right and left inferior frontal gyrus with tDCS . Neuroscience 291 , 167 – 176 . Mayseless , N . , Eran , A . , Shamay - Tsoory , S . G . , 2015 . Generating original ideas : the neural underpinning of originality . NeuroImage 116 , 232 – 239 . McAvoy , M . , Mitra , A . , Coalson , R . S . , d ' Avossa , G . , Keidel , J . L . , Petersen , S . E . , Raichle , M . E . , 2016 . Unmasking language lateralization in human brain intrinsic activity . Cereb . Cortex 26 , 1733 – 1746 . Mednick , S . , 1962 . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychol . Rev . 69 , 220 . Menon , V . , Uddin , L . Q . , 2010 . Saliency , switching , attention and control : a network model of insula function . Brain Struct . Funct . 214 , 655 – 667 . Nusbaum , E . C . , Silvia , P . J . , 2011 . Are intelligence and creativity really so di ﬀ erent ? Fluid intelligence , executive processes , and strategy use in divergent thinking . Intelligence 39 , 36 – 45 . Osman , M . , 2008 . Positivetransferandnegativetransfer / antilearningof problem - solving skills . J . Exp . Psychol . : General . 137 , 97 . Pinho , A . L . , de Manzano , Ö . , Fransson , P . , Eriksson , H . , Ullén , F . , 2014 . Connecting to create : expertise in musical improvisation is associated with increased functional connectivity between premotor and prefrontal areas . J . Neurosci . 34 , 6156 – 6163 . Pinho , A . L . , Ullén , F . , Castelo - Branco , M . , Fransson , P . , de Manzano , Ö . , 2016 . Addressing a paradox : dual strategies for creative performance in introspective and extrospective networks . Cereb . Cortex 26 , 3052 – 3063 . Prabhakaran , R . , Green , A . E . , Gray , J . R . , 2013 . Thin slices of creativity : using single - word utterances to assess creative cognition . Behav . Res . Methods 46 , 641 – 659 . Saggar , M . , Quintin , E . M . , Bott , N . T . , Kienitz , E . , Chien , Y . H . , Hong , D . W . , … Reiss , A . L . , 2017 . Changes in brain activation associated with spontaneous improvization and ﬁ gural creativity after design - thinking - based training : a longitudinal fMRI study . Cereb . Cortex in press . Saggar , M . , Quintin , E . M . , Kienitz , E . , Bott , N . T . , Sun , Z . , Hong , W . C . , Hawthorne , G . , 2015 . Pictionary - based fMRI paradigm to study the neural correlates of spontaneous improvisation and ﬁ gural creativity . Sci . Rep . 5 , 10894 . Schacter , D . L . , Addis , D . R . , 2007 . The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory : remembering the past and imagining the future . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . ( B ) 362 , 773 – 786 . Schacter , D . L . , Madore , K . P . , 2016 . Remembering the past and imagining the future : identifying and enhancing the contribution of episodic memory . Mem . Stud . 9 , 245 – 255 . Schacter , D . L . , Addis , D . R . , Hassabis , D . , Martin , V . C . , Spreng , R . N . , Szpunar , K . K . , 2012 . The future of memory : remembering , imagining , and the brain . Neuron 76 , 677 – 694 . Silvia , P . J . , Beaty , R . E . , Nusbaum , E . C . , 2013 . Verbal ﬂ uency and creativity : general and speci ﬁ c contributions of broad retrieval ability ( Gr ) factors to divergent thinking . Intelligence 41 , 328 – 340 . Smith , S . M . , T . B . , Ward , Schumacher , J . S . , 1993 . Constraining e ﬀ ects of examples in a creative generation task . Mem . Cogn . 21 , 837 – 845 . Spreng , R . N . , Stevens , W . D . , Chamberlain , J . P . , Gilmore , A . W . , Schacter , D . L . , 2010 . Default network activity , coupled with the executive control network , supports goal - directed cognition . NeuroImage 53 , 303 – 317 . Sridharan , D . , Levitin , D . J . , Menon , V . , 2008 . A critical role for the right fronto - insular cortex in switching between central - executive and default - mode networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 105 , 12569 – 12574 . Thompson - Schill , S . L . , 2003 . Neuroimagingstudies of semanticmemory : inferring “ how ” from “ where ” . Neuropsychologia 41 , 280 – 292 . Thompson - Schill , S . L . , D ’ Esposito , M . , Aguirre , G . K . , Farah , M . J . , 1997 . Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic knowledge : a reevaluation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 94 , 14792 – 14797 . Tulving , E . , 2002 . Episodic memory : from mind to brain . Ann . Rev . Psychol . 53 , 1 – 25 . Uddin , L . Q . , 2015 . Salience processing and insular cortical function and dysfunction . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 16 , 55 – 61 . Vartanian , O . , Bouak , F . , Caldwell , J . L . , Cheung , B . , Cupchik , G . , Jobidon , M . - E . , Smith , I . , 2014 . The e ﬀ ects of a single night of sleep deprivation on ﬂ uency and prefrontal cortex function during divergent thinking . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 8 , 214 . Vincent , J . L . , Kahn , I . , Snyder , A . Z . , Raichle , M . E . , Buckner , R . L . , 2008 . Evidence for a executive control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity . J . Neurophysiol . 100 , 3328 – 3342 . Ward , T . B . , Patterson , M . J . , Sifonis , C . M . , 2004 . The role of speci ﬁ city and abstraction in creative idea generation . Creat . Res . J . 16 , 1 – 9 . Weinberger , A . B . , Iyer , H . , Green , A . E . , 2016 . Conscious augmentation of creative state enhances “ real ” creativity in open - ended analogical reasoning . PLoS One 11 , e0150773 . Whit ﬁ eld - Gabrieli , S . , Nieto - Castanon , A . , 2012 . Conn : a functional connectivity toolbox for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks . Brain Connect . 2 , 125 – 141 . Whitney , C . , Kirk , M . , O ' Sullivan , J . , Ralph , M . A . L . , Je ﬀ eries , E . , 2011 . The neural organization of semantic control : tms evidence for a distributed network in left inferior frontal and posterior middle temporal gyrus . Cereb . Cortex 21 , 1066 – 1075 . Wu , X . , Yang , W . , Tong , D . , Sun , J . , Chen , Q . , Wei , D . , Qiu , J . , 2015 . A meta ‐ analysis of neuroimaging studies on divergent thinking using activation likelihood estimation . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 , 2703 – 2718 . Zabelina , D . L . , Andrews - Hanna , J . R . , 2016 . Dynamic network interactions supporting internally - oriented cognition . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 40 , 86 – 93 . Zhang , J . X . , Feng , C . - M . , Fox , P . T . , Gao , J . - H . , Tan , L . H . , 2004 . Is left inferior frontal gyrus a general mechanism for selection ? NeuroImage 23 , 596 – 603 . R . E . Beaty et al . NeuroImage 148 ( 2017 ) 189 – 196 196