www . stke . org / cgi / content / full / OC _ sigtrans ; 2002 / 119 / pe6 Page 1 Mechanotransduction is cellular signal transduction in response to mechanical stimuli . Mechanical stresses regulate a diverse ar - ray of physiological functions , ranging from highly specialized sound sensation by the cells of the inner ear , to the detection of fluid shear stress imparted by blood flow across the endotheli - um . Mechanical cues modulate almost all aspects of cell func - tion , including growth , differentiation , migration , gene expres - sion , protein synthesis , and apoptosis . Mechanical forces also directly affect the form and function of tissues ; the effects of compression on bone and cartilage and of tension on muscle and skin are two familiar examples . Thus , uncovering the mech - anisms by which living cells sense mechanical stress lies at the core of understanding how they respond and adapt to their phys - ical environments . Traditionally , investigators distinguished mechanotransduc - tion from other types of signal transduction because they as - sumed that it occurs independently of ligand - mediated activa - tion of cell surface receptors , and instead relies on converting mechanical stimuli to chemical sequelae through generalized membrane distortion . This assumption led to a search for mem - brane mechanotransducers , components of the cell surface that could mediate this type of mechanochemical conversion . In - deed , mechanochemical transducing molecules have been iden - tified , such as the ubiquitous stress - sensitive ion channels that are found in cell surface membranes . These channels either in - crease or decrease ion flux when the membrane is mechanically stressed . However , these transducers normally do not act alone . For example , although members of the Msc family of bacterial stretch - sensitive channels can be activated by mechanical dis - tortion when isolated in pure liposomes , they lack the regula - tion they normally exhibit in the bacterial membrane ( 1 ) . In Xenopus eggs , stress - sensitive ion channels are highly regulated in intact cells , but become hyperreactive when the surface bi - layer is physically torn away from the underlying cortical cy - toskeleton ( 2 ) . In fact , among the mechanosensitive signaling pathways of most cells , including specialized sensory cells , a common theme emerges : the function of their mechanotrans - ducer molecules depends on linkage to the cytoskeleton . That the cytoskeleton , the load - bearing architecture of the cell , plays a role in mechanotransduction is not surprising . In living tissues , mechanical stresses are normally distributed to cells through the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) scaffolds that hold the cells together and provide mechanical support to the tissue . Mechanical signals that propagate from the ECM converge on cell surface adhesion receptors known as integrins . These trans - membrane receptors link intracellularly to the actin cytoskele - ton within specialized focal adhesion structures that are essen - tially dynamic “spot - welds” between the cell and the ECM ( 3 ) . Thus , the role of these structural connections in mechanotrans - duction has become a focus of investigation , and it has yielded fruitful results . Much of the research on mechanotransduction in eukaryotes has been conducted on specialized cells whose main function is to sense and respond to mechanical stresses . These specialized cells include hair cells of the inner ear and cutaneous touch - sensitive neurons . The identity of the molecules that mediate mechanotransduction in these cells remains elusive . Based on the speed of these cells’ depolarizations , however , it is almost certain that they possess cation channels that are mechanically gated independently of second messengers ( 4 ) . Yet none of these channels appear to function independently of connections to the cytoskeleton . Recently , investigators identified brain sodium channel - 1 ( BNC - 1 ) as critical for touch sensation in mice ( 5 ) . BNC - 1’s structure and function correlate well with known Caenorhabdi - tis elegans touch - sensitive channels composed of degenerins , because they all belong to the same superfamily of channels , known as the degenerins / epithelial sodium channels ( DEG / ENaCs ) . Degenerins were originally identified in a simple genetic screen for touch - insensitive worms , known as mec mutants , and importantly , degenerins require connections to cytoskeleton and ECM proteins to be touch sensitive : MEC - 7 and MEC - 12 are tubulins ; MEC - 2 is homologous to stomatin , a membrane protein that associates with cytoskeleton ; and MEC - 9 is secreted by the sensory neuron and associates with extra - cellular MEC - 5 , which resembles collagen ( 6 ) . In hair cells , although no specific mechanosensitive channel has been identified , much is known about the channel’s location and the cytoskeletal proteins involved in its gating and adapta - tion ( 4 , 6 ) . In particular , the channels are located at the tips of a hair cell’s stereocilia , whose core filaments are composed of cross - linked actin . Extracellularly , the channels are linked by an unidentified protein or protein complex known as the tip - link , which is normally under tension ; it is “prestressed , ” much like a tuned violin string . When the stereocilia are deflected in response to sound vibrations , the tip - link ( or an associated protein at the base of the tip - link ) becomes stretched , and the resulting increase in tension opens the channel . Intracellularly , the channel most likely connects to the actin scaffold through a myosin - based motor , which tends to travel toward the tip of the stereocilium along an actin filament , maintaining basal levels of tension and accounting for a hair cell’s adaptation to prolonged deflections . Thus , the prestress or tone in the cell may help to tune the mechanical signaling response . Given the important role of cytoskeletal force transmission in the rapid detection mechanisms of cutaneous and inner ear Mechanotransduction : All Signals Point to Cytoskeleton , Matrix , and Integrins Francis J . Alenghat and Donald E . Ingber * ( Published 12 February 2002 ) P E R S P E C T I V E Departments of Pathology and Surgery , Children’s Hospital and Har - vard Medical School , Enders 1007 , 300 Longwood Avenue , Boston , MA 02115 , USA . * Corresponding author . Telephone , 617 - 355 - 8031 ; fax , 617 - 232 - 7914 ; e - mail , donald . ingber @ tch . harvard . edu www . stke . org / cgi / content / full / OC _ sigtrans ; 2002 / 119 / pe6 Page 2 mechanosensory cells , it is not surprising that the function and development of these specialized cells relies on the presence of specific cytoskeletal products . Deafness can be caused by muta - tions in mDia1 ( 7 ) , a protein that binds to the small guanosine triphosphatase ( GTPase ) Rho , an established regulator of cy - toskeletal dynamics and prestress ( 3 ) , or by mutations in espins , actin - binding and cross - linking proteins of the stereocilia ( 8 ) . Maturation of stereocilia , along with hair cell differentiation , is hindered by mutations in various specialized ECM proteins and by the absence of integrin α 8 β 1 , which in hair cells is found specifically in stereocilia ( 9 ) . Although linkage to the cytoskeleton predominates as a theme in mechanisms of specialized mechanosensory cells , re - sponses to mechanical stimuli are also well documented among many different cell types and across many different organ sys - tems . Mechanosensitive osteocytes , osteoblasts , and osteoclasts supervise bone remodeling in response to altered compressive loads . Smooth muscle alters its tone in response to increased pressure in blood vessels , intestines , and airways . Stress stimu - lates fibroblasts to deposit ECM proteins . Endothelial cells ex - press atheroprotective gene products in response to laminar blood flow . These are all cell types whose primary function is not one of mechanosensation , yet they are mechanoresponsive nonetheless . Moreover , these mechanically triggered responses involve rapid activation of stretch - sensitive ion channels , as well as more complex and slower intracellular signaling cascades that result in transcriptional changes . It is therefore reasonable to ex - pect that their mode of sensing mechanical stimuli may be less specialized than that of hair cells , yet is still coupled to the cy - toskeleton . However , the role of cytoskeleton in “generic” mechanotransduction by nonspecialized parenchymal cells has been a matter of contention . Some investigators posit that corti - cal membrane deformation is the main mediator of cellular mechanotransduction ( 10 ) , whereas others hold that the cell can be treated as a mechanical continuum , like a membrane filled with a viscous fluid cytosol ( 11 ) , in which case cytoskeletal components should bear no more load than any soluble protein . Our group recently demonstrated that the mechanical behav - ior of cells is not one of a mechanical continuum or of a tensed cortical membrane , but rather , one in which discrete elements of the cytoskeleton bear compression in cooperation with the ECM in order to prestress and thereby stabilize a network of tension elements ( 12 ) . The intracellular compression elements are primarily microtubules , whereas the tension elements are primarily actin microfilaments and intermediate filaments . In response to a mechanical load , either focused at a point or over the whole cell , subcellular displacements were observed prefer - entially in cytoskeletal elements and physically associated structures ( for example , organelles ) , and the pattern of deforma - tion was consistent with mathematical predictions based on the tensegrity model of cell architecture in which tensile prestress plays a fundamental stabilizing role ( 13 ) . These findings estab - lish that loads applied to the cell surface are preferentially borne by the cytoskeleton , and most importantly , that the trans - mission of the load depends on integrin - mediated connectivity between the ECM , the cell surface , and the cytoskeletal lattice . All adherent cells have integrins that link the internal actin cytoskeleton to the ECM through a group of actin - associated proteins ( for example , talin , vinculin , paxillin , and α - actinin ) within the focal adhesion . Focal adhesions also harbor many proteins involved in various biochemical signaling cascades [ for example , tyrosine kinases , inositol lipid kinases , ion channels , heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide - binding proteins ( G pro - teins ) , growth factor receptors ] ( 14 , 15 ) . Thus , it follows that mechanical forces , either applied at the integrin or transmitted outward from the cytoskeleton , converge with biochemical sig - nals at the focal adhesion . For this reason , researchers have fo - cused on integrins as candidates for transducing mechanical stimuli into biochemical responses inside the cell ( 16 , 17 ) . In fact , many studies clearly demonstrate a central role for cell surface integrins in cellular mechanotransduction . For example , the adenosine 3 ′ , 5 ′ - monophosphate ( cAMP ) signaling pathway can be upregulated by applying mechanical stress to integrins using a magnetic twisting cytometer ( 18 ) . In this method , mi - crometer - sized ferromagnetic beads coated with ligands or anti - bodies for specific cell surface receptors are allowed to bind to cells and are then twisted by a magnetic field to produce a local shear stress at the interface between the bead and the cell , but only through the ligated receptors . In this manner , different cell surface proteins can be targeted and assessed for their ability to transduce mechanical signals . Importantly , cAMP signaling was up - regulated when mechanical stress was applied to β 1 inte - grins , whereas this response did not occur when the same stress was applied to transmembrane metabolic receptors that do not physically interconnect with the internal ( noncortical ) cy - toskeleton . Although this signal transduction mechanism re - quired the action of G proteins , transduction did not occur if mechanical stress was similarly applied to traditional G protein - coupled receptors . The integrins also had to be in an activated form with their binding sites for RGD ( the arginine - glycine - aspartic acid motif found in many ECM proteins ) occupied in order to transduce the mechanical signal into a chemical re - sponse . This finding is consistent with earlier studies demon - strating that when ligand - activated , integrins increase recruit - ment of many more signaling molecules to their focal adhesion sites ( 14 ) . Thus , it is possible that G proteins that mediate pro - duction of cAMP ( Gs α ) may be recruited to these sites as well . Many other studies also demonstrate that integrins play a central role in cellular mechanotransduction in response to fluid shear flow . Among recent findings , expression of endothelin - 1 ( ET - 1 ) , a potent vasoconstrictor implicated in many cardiovas - cular diseases , was stimulated in endothelial cells when inte - grins were manipulated with a variation of magnetic twisting cytometry ( 19 ) . Again , twisting nonadhesion receptors , such as metabolic acetylated low - density lipoprotein receptors or histo - compatibility antigens , yielded no change in ET - 1 mRNA lev - els . Furthermore , reducing cytoskeletal tension ( prestress ) or disrupting actin stress fibers blocked twist - induced ET - 1 ex - pression . Blocking stretch - activated channels with gadolinium also prevented this response , thus linking integrins and cy - toskeleton once again to these direct mechanochemical trans - ducer molecules . In another study , fluid shear flow - induced vasodilation of coronary arteries was effectively blocked by either soluble RGD peptides or a blocking antibody against β 3 integrin exposed on arterial endothelial cells , both of which compete with ECM pro - teins for integrin binding ( 20 ) . In osteoblasts , actin disruption , mutant focal adhesion proteins , and mutant Rho all inhibited shear flow - induced expresssion of the enzyme Cox - 2 and the transcription factor c - fos ( 21 ) . Fluid shear - induced association of Shc [ an adapter protein upstream of the extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) signaling pathway ] to integrins depend - P E R S P E C T I V E www . stke . org / cgi / content / full / OC _ sigtrans ; 2002 / 119 / pe6 Page 3 ed on the type of ECM ligand : sheared cells plated on fi - bronectin accumulated α v β 3 - Shc complexes , whereas similarly treated cells on vitronectin accumulated α 6 β 1 - Shc complexes ( 22 ) . The accumulation of these putative signaling complexes under shear flow required dynamic interactions between inte - grins and the activating ligands ; blocking new binding of addi - tional integrins with antibodies prevented the integrin - Shc asso - ciation . Finally , other investigators have demonstrated that api - cally applied forces require mDia1 - Rho - mediated transmission through the cytoskeleton to stimulate basal focal adhesion growth and activity ( 23 ) . All of these findings raise the possibil - ity that the mechanical load in fluid shear flow is transmitted from the luminal surface of the cell , through the cytoskeleton , to the basal focal adhesions , and that this is where much of the mechanochemical conversion occurs , rather than on the apical cell surface . Despite the strong evidence for the role of integrins and the cytoskeleton in mechanotransduction , some researchers argue that certain mechanosensitive events may occur independently of focal adhesion - dependent linkages to the cy - toskeleton . For example , fluid shear flow activates G proteins that have been recon - stituted in liposomes , suggesting that lipid bilayer distortion , or membrane fluidity , is alone sufficient for activation in the cell ( 10 ) , and that such a mechanism could account for transient shear - induced ERK activation ( 24 ) . Membrane transport vesicles called caveolae , which are char - acterized morphologically by a smooth invagination of the plasma membrane and biochemically by the presence of cave - olin , may also be important for mechan - otransduction , in that flow induces tyro - sine - phosphorylation and recruitment of cytosolic signaling molecules to caveolae ( 25 ) . A separate study blocked the fluid shear flow - activated ERK pathway by in - troducing anti - caveolin - 1 antibody into the cytoplasm ( 26 ) . Given the role of caveolae in the compartmentalization and concentration of cell - surface G q , re - searchers have also proposed that the G q - caveolin complex functions as a mechanotransducer ( 27 ) . But links are even emerging be - tween integrins and these putative membrane mechanotransducers . For in - stance , caveolin - 1 association with in - tegrin subunits is required for Shc re - cruitment to integrins , subsequent ERK pathway activation , and adhesion - de - pendent cell proliferation ( 28 ) . These findings agree well with the aforemen - tioned independent findings that fluid shear flow induces ERK activation both through caveolin - 1 and through activat - ed integrins . As for biological respons - es to shear flow mediated by G pro - teins , increasing evidence suggests their connection to integrins through an intermediate linker . Because caveolin - 1 associates with both G proteins and integrins , it is a good candidate . Other studies , however , have uncovered a supramolecular complex containing G protein subunits , an integrin - associated protein ( CD47 ) , and integrins . This linkage possibility is particularly intriguing in that CD47 ( with five transmembrane segments ) appears to play the role of an adapter by associating with the two integrin subunits to form a seven - transmembrane spanning complex that resembles a traditional G protein - coupled receptor ( 29 ) . The future of the field requires a more detailed view of the connections between activated integrins , other structural com - ponents of focal adhesions , and the signal transduction molecules that are involved in mechanosensitive pathways ( Fig . P E R S P E C T I V E Fig . 1 . Schematic diagram of how forces applied through the ECM ( A ) or directly to the cell surface ( B ) travel to integrin - anchored focal adhesions through matrix attachments or cy - toskeletal filaments , respectively . Internally - generated tension and forces transmitted through cell - cell contact similarly reach focal adhesions through the cytoskeleton . Forces concentrated within the focal adhesion ( magnified at bottom of figure ) can stimulate integrin clustering and induce recruitment of additional cytoskeletal linker proteins ( Vin , vinculin ; Pax , paxillin ; Tal , tal - in ) that connect directly to microfilaments and indirectly to microtubules . Forces applied to this specialized cytoskeletal adhesion complex also activate integrin - associated signal cascades . Focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) may be involved in Shc recruitment as well as modulation of Rho activity which , in turn , can regulate the force response through mDia1 . Caveolin - 1 ( cav - 1 ) can also recruit Shc to integrins to activate the ERK cascade . CD47 associates with the integrin heterodimer to form a protein complex with seven transmembrane segments that mimics the action of G protein - coupled receptors . In the case shown , when integrins are mechanically stressed , the complex stimulates G s - mediated up - regulation of the cAMP cascade through adenylate cyclase ( AC ) , resulting in nuclear translocation of the catalytic subunit of protein ki - nase A , PKA - c . See text for details . MEK , mitogen - activated protein kinase or extracellular sig - nal - regulated kinase kinase ; ERK , extracellular signal - regulated kinase ; GDP , guanosine diphosphate ; ATP , adenosine triphosphate . www . stke . org / cgi / content / full / OC _ sigtrans ; 2002 / 119 / pe6 Page 4 1 ) . It is also critical to understand that , even in specialized cells like hair cells , mechanotransduction likely does not occur inde - pendently of other signaling pathways . Signals emanating from mechanical stress and classical receptor - ligand interactions may converge into common pathways that enter the nucleus , so that ultimately , mechanical stress modulates cellular response to re - ceptor - ligand interactions , and vice versa . Furthermore , similar to how the prevailing tension in a tip - link modulates a stereocil - ium’s response to further deflection , cellular prestress may gov - ern how nonspecialized cells respond to both mechanical and chemical signals . As an example , growth factors , ECM , and mechanical distortion ( cell shape changes ) all promote growth , yet cell cycle progression can be blocked under conditions of optimal stimulation by dissipating cytoskeletal prestress using inhibitors of actomyosin - based tension generation ( 30 ) . Finally , at some point the distinction between mechanical responses and traditional ligand responses should disappear , because every ligand - receptor interaction essentially yields a change in physi - cal conformation of the receptor , causing a mechanical “stress” on a much smaller scale than the twist of a bead . References 1 . S . I . Sukharev , P . Blount , B . Martinac , C . Kung , Mechanosensitive channels of Escherichia coli : the MscL gene , protein , and activities . Annu . Rev . Phys - iol . 59 , 633 - 657 ( 1997 ) . 2 . Y . Zhang , O . P . Hamill , On the discrepancy between whole - cell and mem - brane patch mechanosensitivity in Xenopus oocytes . J . Physiol . 523 , 101 - 115 ( 2000 ) . 3 . K . Burridge , M . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , Focal adhesions , contractility , and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , 463 - 519 ( 1996 ) . 4 . J . García - Añoveros , D . P . Corey , The molecules of mechanosensation . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 20 , 567 - 594 ( 1997 ) . 5 . M . P . Price , G . R . Lewin , S . L . McIlwrath , C . Cheng , J . Xie , P . A . Heppen - stall , C . L . Stucky , A . G . Mannsfeldt , T . J . Brennan , H . A . Drummond , J . Qiao , C . J . Benson , D . E . Tarr , R . F . Hrstka , B . Yang , R . A . Williamson , M . J . Welsh , The mammalian sodium channel BNC1 is required for normal touch sensation . Nature 407 , 1007 - 1011 ( 2000 ) . 6 . P . G . Gillespie , R . G . Walker , Molecular basis of mechanosensory transduc - tion . Nature 413 , 194 - 202 ( 2001 ) . 7 . E . D . Lynch , M . K . Lee , J . E . Morrow , P . L . Welcsh , P . E . León , M . C . King , Nonsyndromic deafness DFNA1 associated with mutation of a human ho - molog of the Drosophila gene diaphanous . Science 278 , 1315 - 1318 ( 1997 ) . 8 . L . Zheng , G . Sekerková , K . Vranich , L . G . Tilney , E . Mugnaini , J . R . Bartles , The deaf jerker mouse has a mutation in the gene encoding the espin actin - bundling proteins of hair cell stereocilia and lacks espins . Cell 102 , 377 - 385 ( 2000 ) . 9 . A . L . Evans , U . Müller , Stereocilia defects in the sensory hair cells of the in - ner ear in mice deficient in integrin α 8 β 1 . Nature Genet . 24 , 424 - 428 ( 2000 ) . 10 . S . Gudi , J . P . Nolan , J . A . Frangos , Modulation of GTPase activity of G pro - teins by fluid shear stress and phospholipid composition . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 2515 - 2519 ( 1998 ) . 11 . E . Evans , A . Yeung , Apparent viscosity and cortical tension of blood granu - locytes determined by micropipet aspiration . Biophys . J . 56 , 151 - 160 ( 1989 ) . 12 . N . Wang , K . Naruse , D . Stamenovic , J . J . Fredberg , S . M . Mijailovich , I . M . Tolic - Norrelykke , T . Polte , R . Mannix , D . E . Ingber , Mechanical behavior in living cells consistent with the tensegrity model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 7765 - 7770 ( 2001 ) . 13 . D . Stemenovic , M . F . Coughlin , The role of prestress and architecture of the cytoskeleton and deformability of cytoskeletal filaments in mechanics of adherent cells : a quantitative analysis . J . Theor . Biol . 201 , 63 - 74 ( 1999 ) . 14 . S . Miyamoto , H . Teramoto , O . A . Coso , J . S . Gutkind , P . D . Burbelo , S . K . Akiyama , K . M . Yamada , Integrin function : molecular hierarchies of cy - toskeletal and signaling molecules . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 791 - 805 ( 1995 ) . 15 . G . E . Plopper , H . P . McNamee , L . E . Dike , K . Bojanowski , D . E . Ingber , Con - vergence of integrin and growth factor receptor signaling pathways within the focal adhesion complex . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1349 - 1365 ( 1995 ) . 16 . D . Ingber , Integrins as mechanochemical transducers . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 , 841 - 848 ( 1991 ) . 17 . J . Y . Shyy , S . Chien , Role of integrins in cellular responses to mechanical stress and adhesion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 707 - 713 ( 1997 ) . 18 . C . J . Meyer , F . J . Alenghat , P . Rim , J . H . Fong , B . Fabry , D . E . Ingber , Me - chanical control of cyclic AMP signalling and gene transcription through in - tegrins . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 666 - 668 ( 2000 ) . 19 . J . Chen , B . Fabry , E . L . Schiffrin , N . Wang , Twisting integrin receptors in - creases endothelin - 1 gene expression in endothelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 280 , C1475 - C1484 ( 2001 ) . 20 . J . M . Muller , W . M . Chilian , M . J . Davis , Integrin signaling transduces shear stress - dependent vasodilation of coronary arterioles . Circ . Res . 80 , 320 - 326 ( 1997 ) . 21 . F . M . Pavalko , N . X . Chen , C . H . Turner , D . B . Burr , S . Atkinson , Y . F . Hsieh , J . Qiu , R . L . Duncan , Fluid shear - induced mechanical signaling in MC3T3 - E1 osteoblasts requires cytoskeleton - integrin interactions . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 275 , C1591 - C1601 ( 1998 ) . 22 . S . Jalali , M . A . del Pozo , K . Chen , H . Miao , Y . Li , M . A . Schwartz , J . Y . Shyy , S . Chien , Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction requires its dynamic in - teraction with specific extracellular matrix ( ECM ) ligands . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 1042 - 1046 ( 2001 ) . 23 . D . Riveline , E . Zamir , N . Q . Balaban , U . S . Schwarz , T . Ishizaki , S . Naru - miya , Z . Kam , B . Geiger , A . D . Bershadsky , Focal contacts as mechanosen - sors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal con - tacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 - 1186 ( 2001 ) . 24 . X . Bao , C . Lu , J . A . Frangos , Mechanism of temporal gradients in shear - induced ERK1 / 2 activation and proliferation in endothelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 281 , H22 - H29 ( 2001 ) . 25 . V . Rizzo , A . Sung , P . Oh , J . E . Schnitzer , Rapid mechanotransduction in situ at the luminal cell surface of vascular endothelium and its caveolae . J Biol . Chem . 273 , 26323 - 26329 ( 1998 ) . 26 . H . Park , Y . M . Go , R . Darji , J . W . Choi , M . P . Lisanti , M . C . Maland , H . Jo , Caveolin - 1 regulates shear stress - dependent activation of extracellular sig - nal - regulated kinase . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 278 , H1285 - H1293 ( 2000 ) . 27 . P . Oh , J . E . Schnitzer , Segregation of heterotrimeric G proteins in cell sur - face microdomains . G q binds caveolin to concentrate in caveolae , whereas G i and G s target lipid rafts by default . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 685 - 698 ( 2001 ) . 28 . K . K . Wary , A . Mariotti , C . Zurzolo , F . G . Giancotti , A requirement for cave - olin - 1 and associated kinase Fyn in integrin signaling and anchorage - dependent cell growth . Cell 94 , 625 - 634 ( 1998 ) . 29 . E . J . Brown , W . A . Frazier , Integrin - associated protein ( CD47 ) and its lig - ands . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 130 - 135 ( 2001 ) . 30 . S . Huang , C . S . Chen , D . E . Ingber , Control of cyclin D1 , p27 Kip1 , and cell cycle progression in human capillary endothelial cells by cell shape and cytoskeletal tension . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 3179 - 3193 ( 1998 ) . 31 . Supported by NASA grant NAG2 . 1501 , NIH grant CA - 45548 , and an HHMI Predoctoral Fellowship ( F . A . ) P E R S P E C T I V E