©Strategics Published in Edited Form in INCOSE INSIGHT Volume 16 , Number 2 , Pages 68 - 69 Page 1 of 1 Book Review Orchestrating Human - Centered Design By Dr . Guy André Boy , Springer Verlag , 2013 , ISBN 978 - 1 - 4471 - 4339 - 0 Reviewed By Dr . Lawrence D . Pohlmann , Strategics , pohlmann @ incose . org “Human Centered Design involves a broader perspective of what we want to do with technology , organizations and people . . . to cope with the current finance driven organizational systems . . . " Target Audiences . While many authors say things like " this book in intended for . . . , " Dr . Boy does not . From the title , you might expect this to be a ' how to ' book for mid - to senior - level systems engineers , human factors engineers , and process engineers . This is reasonable . I believe he is talking to people mature enough to think about their roles philosophically , rather than merely procedural - ly . For academics who deal with humans in systems concerns , the book is rich in references and theory of design processes . Lastly , I believe this book is also targeted at company chief technology officers , program chief engineers , and sys - tems engineering managers who must make decisions on product design philos - ophies , R & D investment strategies , and human resource allocations on product line and individual program developments . Included in all of these are decisions on when , how much , and how we think about the human elements ( e . g . , build - ers , transporters , installers , operators , maintainers , and others ) who will be in - volved in some way with our systems over the system life cycle . The Author . Dr . Guy André Boy is a University Professor at Florida Institute of Technology ( FIT ) and Director of FIT ' s Human Centered Design Institute . He is also Chief Scientist for Human Centered Design at the NASA Kennedy Space Center . He was educated in France ; he has over a 30 - year career in the human and machine interaction / integration domain . He is a prolific author , and has an extensive set of publications in both French and English , including 10 books . He has supported and consulted with both industry and government . The extent of his experience allows him to bring engineering , managerial , and philo - sophical perspectives to the discussion . Additional information on Dr . Boy is available through my . fit . edu / ~ gboy , and via googling his name . He is obviously very well qualified to author in this engineering and management area . Content and Structure . A continuing theme throughout the book is lamenting that we are too entrenched in finance - driven , short term thinking—and that this is not in the best interest of our system designs , our longer term company success - es , our national interests , and our longer term interests for society at large . A second theme is that in building our systems , especially life critical systems , we need a balanced consideration of Technology , Organizations , and People ( TOP ) —and that this balance can be ' orchestrated . ' Thirdly , successful Human Centered Design ( HCD ) is best achieved through thinking across the total system life cycle from six perspectives : Life Critical Systems + Cognitive Science + Complexity Analysis + Advanced Interaction Media + Modeling and Simula - tion + Organization Design and Management . A chapter discusses each of these in detail and uses a wide range of supporting stories and anecdotes . Usability . This book provides a rare opportunity to ' listen ' to and benefit from the more than 30 years of experience of a man who has achieved elder statesman status in thinking about how to appropriately and efficiently include human con - siderations across the life cycle of systems . The numerous anecdotes and stories provide vicarious experience to those engineers , managers , and executives who are experienced enough and willing to benefit . The book is organized around the six HCD perspectives listed above . The nearly stream - of - consciousness writing style is challenging . Some readers may have difficulty with this approach . Availability . This 211 - page book is listed at $ 69 . 95 ( E - Book : $ 49 . 95 ) by the publisher ( www . springer . com ) . Amazon has it at $ 56 . 65 ( E - Book $ 53 . 82 ) . Additional Information . For additional information , use the Look Inside fea - tures at Springer - Verlag and Amazon . Should You Buy This Book ? If you are part of one of the target audiences sug - gested above , consider the book . For INCOSE members , the book should be required reading for the Human Systems Working Group ( WG ) . It will also be of interest to the Complex Systems WG , the Systems Science WG , and the Sys - tem of Systems WG . I would also reco mmend that Corporate Advisory Board members of large companies that have matrix management recommend the book to the human factors / crew systems functional . In Closing . This is a book for thinkers . It is not a process recipe book for junior practitioners . It is far ranging . It confronts serious and difficult issues on how we design systems , especially life critical systems . It suggests ways to think and act differently . It is not read - a - chapter - at - lunch or bedtime book . It requires a serious approach to reading and use . I believe the book is best used in a repeated read - a - little / think - a - little manner over an extended period by senior decision makers who are dealing with serious and far - reaching issues for designing and developing complex , human - in - the - loop systems . I like the book ! I look for - ward to spending more time with it over the next few months ! “HCD is not about human factors and ergonomics that is used when systems are already designed and developed . . . HCD is about reinventing engineering and design in to a single discipline that integrates technology , organization , and people , "