73 Cultural Hybridity in Participatory Design Samantha Merritt School of Informatics and Computing Indiana University Bloomington , Indiana , USA sasumerr @ indiana . edu Erik Stolterman School of Informatics and Computing Indiana University Bloomington , Indiana , USA estolter @ indiana . edu ABSTRACT In this paper we examine challenges identified with participatory design research in the developing world and develop the postcolonial notion of cultural hybridity as a sensitizing concept . While participatory design intentionally addresses power relationships , its methodology does not to the same degree cover cultural power relationships , which extend beyond structural power and voice . The notion of cultural hybridity challenges the static cultural binary opposition between the self and the other , Western and non - Western , or the designer and the user —offering a more nuanced approach to understanding the malleable nature of culture . Drawing from our analysis of published literature in the participatory design community , we explore the complex relationship of participatory design to international development projects and introduce postcolonial cultural hybridity via postcolonial theory and its application within technology design thus far . Then , we examine how participatory approaches and cultural hybridity may interact in practice and conclude with a set of sensitizing insights and topics for further discussion in the participatory design community . Author Keywords Technology design ; ICT4D ; postcolonial ; culture ; reflexivity ; hybridity ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 . [ Information interfaces and presentation ] : User Interfaces - Theory and methods , Evaluation / methodology INTRODUCTION Participatory design is an approach to design and development that has its roots in Scandinavia in the 1970s . Participatory design has gone through many changes and developments since then when it comes to its philosophical foundation as well as the methods and techniques associated with the approach . The approach evolved in a highly politicized Scandinavian work environment , where questions about power and influence in workplaces , in many cases , dominated both the local and national political and ideological agenda ( Kensing and Blomberg , 1998 ) . Participatory design as a movement emerged through a close collaboration between researchers , labor unions and workers . A core reason behind the development of participatory design was the fast technological development , especially the increasing and influential computerization of work places . Participatory design has since then evolved into a broader approach for design that in many cases has lost its ideological foundation . Important for the argument made in this paper is the fact that participatory design as an approach emerged in a society with a lively ideological public discourse inside an unusually homogenous culture . This might also be the reason for why participatory design from its start did not address cultural issues to the same extent as ideological issues . In today’s global digital economy , attention to culture is critical , although mostly absent from what can be seen as the contemporary participatory design approach and practice . We argue that there is a need for further community discourse to identify underlying assumptions within the participatory design methodology which , when addressed , offer valuable insights for practitioners designing for cultures vastly different than their own . PARTICIPATORY DESIGN AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS Much the same as the original sentiments that inspired participatory design , the introduction of technology to developing countries is seen as an indication of a modernization agenda—making the participatory design methodology a natural choice . Additionally , participatory design methods , which attempt to level the uneven power relationship between decision makers , system designers and the users of a system , are potentially well positioned to address power inequities present within technology design projects in developing countries . Indeed , participatory design methods are increasingly employed in such projects ( Dearden and Rizvi , 2008 ) . Though the methods are commonly used , the participatory design community appears to be concerned with improving participatory design practice in developing nations ( Dearden and Rizvi , 2008 ; Puri et al , 2004 ) , and researchers have reported altering methods and the need to address methodological challenges for use in developing nations ( for examples , see : Puri et al , 2004 ; Elovaara et al , 2006 ; Godjo , 2012 ; Winschiers et al , 2010 ; Camara et al , 2008 ) . First , it is important to recognize that refined approaches to improve participation do not necessarily ensure balanced power relationships . Several researchers reflect upon this concern in their work . Winschiers et al , highlight the notion of designers themselves “being participated” and suggest reframing an idea of participation that recognizes that researchers should not exclusively hold leadership roles . Participation , as a type of interaction , should be negotiated in situ ( Winschiers et Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . PDC ' 12 , August 12 - 16 2012 , Roskilde , Denmark Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1296 - 7 / 12 / 08 … $ 10 . 00 74 al , 2010 ) , a sentiment repeated by other researchers . Similarly , Puri et al , articulate varied understandings of participation , and it is not clear which ways participation affects decision - making power ( Puri et al , 2004 ) . In both of their 2008 papers , Dearden and Rizvi strongly call for a critical look at the assumptions within mainstream participatory methods and renew critical examination of power relationships . Referencing Heeks , the authors also echo others acknowledging the imbalance of power due to varied levels of participation and non - participatory method decisions . ( Dearden and Rizvi , 2008 ) The discourse forming around the very nature of participation elucidates the shortcomings of simply attending to participation as a means to balance power—participation alone , in its various forms , does not ensure empowerment . Next , it is important to acknowledge that participatory design has been created , improved , and discussed largely within the developed world , thus affecting the extent of participation and empowerment in other contexts . Puri et al , acknowledge this point directly , arguing some assumptions of the methodology do not hold in for many instances in cross - cultural projects . ( Puri et al , 2004 ) Camara et al , report systematically modifying participatory design in Kenya because “in a culturally and geographically diverse setting , it can be very challenging to capture effectively and efficiently actors’… actual participation…” ( Camara et al , 2008 ) Elovaara et al , explore methodological challenges through a comparative study ( analyzing similar studies in Sweden and Tanzania - Zanzibar ) , which illustrates situational differences and reveals an important insight that designers “seem to dominate in the Tanzanian - Zanzibar case compared to the Swedish [ case ] . ” ( Elovaara et al , 2006 ) Winschiers et al show specifically how participatory design’s existing tools do not entirely balance power between designers and users and drawing from an African philosophy , encourage designers to be open to “being participated . ” ( Winschiers et al , 2010 ) Cross - cultural contexts present identifiable challenges for participatory designers , enough for a small community of researchers to begin a discourse of improvement . ( Oyugi et al , 2010 ) In summary , participatory design faces at least two foundational challenges when implemented in developing countries : ( 1 ) The field of participatory design has , arguably , moved away from its original focused efforts to balance power in design practices toward increased attention on methods and increased participation ( Dearden and Rizvi , 2008 ; Iversen , 2010 ) . Refined methods and increased participation , however , do not guarantee the assumed power - balancing nature of participatory design is treated with vigilance . ( 2 ) Participatory design was created to balance power inequities within the same culture , and therefore does not necessarily address design teams working in and coming from multi - cultural contexts . Culture , it seems , plays a role in participatory design work , and culture appears as a recurring term in previous studies , though not always precisely defined . Culture , for this paper , refers to one’s cultural identity—as cultural theorist Stuart Hall conceptualized the notion according to Maria Eriksson Baaz . …cultural identity is not something that already exists , transcending place , time or history . Identity is about being positioned and investing in a particular ( subject ) position . This process of positioning cannot be understood outside discourse and power . ( Baaz , 2001 ) This definition of culture highlights the roles of power and position as features of identity , features perhaps easily overlooked . Specifically , we point to cultural identity —the embodied , subjectively understood position , situated in a particular context ( in a place , in a time , and with a history ) . Culture is negotiated , malleable , and intertwined with power relationships . POSTCOLONIAL HYBRITIDY The dedicated efforts of postcolonial theorists to understand the cultural implications of power relationships offer technology design disciplines a rich body of work addressing cultural power dynamics—an issue we present as centrally relevant to participatory design . Within the postcolonial discipline , the notion cultural hybridity , or a hybrid cultural identity , maintains a central discursive topic . Much critical work on hybridity in postcolonial theory exists unattainably incomprehensible to those outside of its own field . We do not claim that the following interpretation and application of postcolonial hybridity fully represents the richness of the position , instead we hope to present one possible voice among the critical , reflective discourses of technology design methods . In the following sections , we aim to begin a discussion on the role of culture in participatory design contexts where , more and more , cultural collisions impact the nature of the design process . The Postcolonial A brief introduction to postcolonialism is a necessary background to understand cultural hybridity . The term postcolonial does not necessarily apply only to previously colonized people or specifically to the historical period after colonial rule , but as a critical discipline aimed at understanding power relationships and consequences on a global scale . “Rather than being seen as an issue which concerns only some people , postcolonialism re - reads colonization as part of an essentially global process— which—in different ways has marked most societies” ( Baaz , 2001 p . 7 ) . Most centrally , postcolonialism critically explores ‘otherness , ’ or the ‘cultural other , ’ as a means of explicating relationships between people ( s ) . Cultural Hybridity Postcolonialism contains within it a concept of hybridity , or a notion that “challenges the ideas of the existence of separate bounded cultures , and the idea of the possibility to retrieve the ‘real’ and ‘unspoiled’ …” ( Baaz , 2001 ) . Hybridity blurs the lines between the ‘self’ and the ‘cultural other , ’ making ‘otherness’ a dynamic concept . Culture is not static , for anyone . The cultures within economically and technologically developing countries are not unchanging , exotic , or “pure” cultures . 75 Historically , the action of colonization included a “process of cultural hybridization” which was not reversed upon decolonization . ( Baaz , 2001 ) Beyond its historical roots , hybridity , in current literature and theory seeks to destroy the static cultural binary opposition between the self and the other , ( or in our design processes , these binaries may be ‘ Western’ and ‘ non - Western’ or the designer and the user ) . This binary is converted into a spectrum along which a single person’s cultural identity may traverse over time , thus always adopting a hybrid cultural identity comprised of elements of both ends of the spectrum . That linear spectrum is given another spatial dimension in the writings of Homi K . Bhabha . He writes of the liminal space —a cultural stairwell metaphor . ( Bhabha , 1994 ) The liminal space describes the idea that the hybrid identity is neither entirely the dominant culture nor entirely the subjugated culture , but always some degree of both . In keeping with the stairwell metaphor , there is no pure position on a cultural “floor” because once belonging to a culture , you always possess some of its qualities . Most , if not all , of us have cultural hybridity . Consider this thought exercise : image you grew up in a much different culture than the culture where you now live ( or perhaps you really did ) —rural to urban , one region / state to another , or to another continent . Do you embody different cultural traits when you travel ' home ' for a visit ? Do you communicate differently , not just in language , but also in rhetorical style ? Do you exhibit different values or expectations for yourself and those around you ? Perhaps you find yourself suddenly shifting between cultures upon meeting a friend from ' home . ' This sense of hybridity and the relative ' distance ' between the cultures we each possess varies uniquely from person to person ; changes over time and according to our experiences ; and is contextually dependent . Culture , of course , extends beyond those tied to a place , but may also include other forms of culture ( such as economic status , gender , employment , ethnicity , age , etc . ) . HYBRIDITY IN TECHNOLOGY DESIGN Postcolonial - focused contributions have appeared in the human - computer interaction community making use of postcolonial concepts and theories . ( Irani et al 2010 ; Irani and Dourish 2009 ; Merritt and Bardzell 2011 ) Most notably , Irani et al ( 2010 ) coined the term “postcolonial computing” as an alternative design and analysis perspective . In that paper the authors deeply interrogate the idea of simple cultural binaries and static , taxonomized geographically - based cultural definitions . Irani and Dourish ( 2009 ) present hybridity and dynamic cultural identity , among other postcolonial concepts , for consideration in computer supported cooperative work . Bhabha’s hybridity appears in the The Human – Computer Interaction Handbook participatory design chapter , though in a different application than we present here . Muller presents Bhabha’s liminal space as “the third space” containing “an unpredictable and changing combination of attributes of each of the two bordering spaces” ( Muller , 2008 p . 1064 ) The author then draws attention to the “knowledges and practices” between software professionals and end users . While this conceptualization is valuable , it omits the role of cultural identities , and potential power relationships between them . Maintaining features of the cultural and power focus introduced by Bhabha and others , technology designers can gain a richer understanding of users and the dynamics of culture in design interactions . SENSITIZING CONCEPTS In this section , we present what we see as some defining characteristics of postcolonial cultural hybridity as they look from a technology designer’s position , hybridity as : preexisting , unavoidable , and traversable . We offer this list with the goal of making practitioners aware of the fluid nature of culture , and to support a reflexive understanding of the interactions that are part of the design process and how they contribute to cultural hybrid identities—both for designers and users . Hybridity as Preexisting There already exists a global history of interacting cultures and formed hybrid cultures—some more pronounced than others . A Western modernizing agenda is often viewed by those in developing countries as inherently imposing cultural changes upon intended users ( Jules - Rosette , 1990 ) , and that imposition deserves more attention from technology design researchers . For some cultures in developing countries who view technology as inherently representing Western cultural values and modernizing objectives , any project pursed using methods , designers , or funds from the ‘West’ ( or ‘Global North’ ) conjures notions of a necessarily hybrid culture , one which must embrace new modernizing technologies while maintaining grasp on previously held beliefs , values , and behaviors . The design of a new technological solution is an intervention—resulting in changes that likely alter cultural identity , just as historical interventions have altered cultures in historically postcolonial countries . Designers are encouraged to explore the history of cultural interactions and identities of potential users . Hybridity as Unavoidable As we explained , interaction and context inform hybridity . Both designers and participants may find themselves forming and changing hybrid identities during the design process . Not only is hybridity itself unavoidable , so is the nature of the accompanying power relationships . For design projects in the developing world , power relationships go beyond those which participatory design was created to address , adding a layer of embedded cultural power relationships ( or culturally negotiated positions of power and subordination ) atop already pervasive power structures in society , organizations , and designer - user relationships . Being present as an ‘outsider’ with means and resources for generating a technological intervention is a powerful position by itself , and implies a position of dominance that accompanies a designer’s cultural identity . The decisions and ideas of designers ( as well as participants ) carry cultural influence , thus exercised power is exercised cultural imposition . Designers should be aware of the role of cultural hybridity in design decisions and explore the 76 role of cultural positions embedded in the design process as much as the design . Hybridity as Traversable Finally , and most importantly , cultural hybridity is traversable , or described in the words of Bhabha : The hither and thither of the stairwell , the temporal movement and passage that it allows , prevents identities at either end of it from settling into primordial polarities . ( Bhabha , 1994 ) Designers and participants can freely move among their cultural identities , taking up whatever cultural blend is situationally appropriate—within boundaries of pre - determined cultural positions . Of course , each person possesses several concurrent cultural identities , going beyond those of nationality and ethnicity . Designers should reflexively observe changes in cultural positions and correlating situational influences and similarly seek to discover the cultural hybridities of design participants . In summary , we have introduced three sensitizing concepts that we believe could function as reflexivity tools for practicing designers . This list is by no means complete and the concepts are here far from exhaustively defined , so we encourage the community to further develop and debate our appropriation of postcolonial hybridity . CONCLUSION In this paper we argue that the participatory design community needs to further discuss its theoretical positions with regard to technology design in developing countries . We argue that there is a need for a more sophisticated understanding of cultural aspects in design and that participatory design is a suitable candidate for incorporating such a sensibility . We also argue that postcolonial work , particularly the notion of cultural hybridity , supplies a promising theoretical approach that also can be practically valuable . We offer a set of sensitizing concepts drawn from postcolonial theory that extend beyond traditional participatory design work in developing countries to all cross - cultural design work . We are all in a postcolonial world where our cultural identities are understood , negotiated , and changed by each other . Even though cross - cultural issues are perhaps most visible in design work that spans countries and maybe continents , with global population movements the notion of local cultural coherence becomes difficult to uphold even in Western settings . A stronger focus on culture as a factor in design should therefore be a core aspect in design research , and the field should strive to find appropriate approaches and concepts that can support such an ambition . We believe that the concepts we have introduced in this paper are promising for such a development . REFERENCES Baaz , M . E . Introduction : African Identity and the Postcolonial , in Same and other : negotiating African identity in cultural production . Baaz , M . E . and Palmberg , M . ( eds . ) . Elanders Gotab , Sweeden . 2001 . Bhabha , H . K . The Location of Culture . Routledge , UK . 1994 . Camara , S . B . , Noœra , J . A . , and Dunckley , P . L . Exploring the problem domain : a socio - technical ICT design for the developing world . Proc . PDC 2008 , 154 - 157 . Dearden , A . and Rizvi , H . Adapting Participatory and Agile Software Methods to Participatory Rural Development . Proc . PDC 2008 , 221 - 225 . Dearden , A . and Rizvi , H . Participatory IT Design and Participatory Development : A comparative review . Proc . PDC 2008 , 81 - 91 . Elovaara , P . , Igira , F . T . , and Mörtberg , C . Whose Participation ? Whose Knowledge ? — Exploring PD in Tanzania - Zanzibar and Sweden . Proc . PDC 2006 , 105 - 114 . Godjo , T . Scenarios to foster user participation in the design of small scale agricultural and food processing equipment in sub - Saharan Africa countries . Proc . PDC 2010 , 247 - 250 . Irani , L . C . and Dourish , P . Postcolonial interculturality . Proc . IWIC 2009 , 249 - 252 . Irini , L . , Vertesi , J . , Dourish , P . , Philip , K . , Grinter , R . E . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . Proc . CHI 2010 , 1311 - 1320 . Iversen , O . S . , Halskov , K . , and Leong , T . W . Rekindling Values in Participatory Design . Proc . PDC 2010 , 91 - 100 . Jules - Rosette , B . Terminal Signs : Computers and Social Change in Africa . Mouton de Gruyter , Berlin . 1990 . Kensing , F . and Blomberg , J . Participatory Design : Issues and concerns . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 1998 , 7 ( 3 - 4 ) : 167 - 185 . Merritt , S . and Bardzell , S . Postcolonial language and culture theory for HCI4D . Proc . CHI EA 2011 , 1675 - 1680 . Muller , M . J . Participatory Design : The Third Space in HCI . In The Human – Computer Interaction Handbook : Fundamentals , Evolving Technologies , and Emerging Applications , 2 nd ed . Sears , A and Jacko , J . A . ( eds ) , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , USA . 2008 , 1061 - 1080 . Oyugi , C . Nocera , J . A . , Dunckley , L . , and Dray , S . The Challenges for Participatory Design in the Developing World . Proc . PDC 2008 , 295 - 296 . Puri , S . K . , Byrne , E . , Nhampossa , J . L . , and Quraishi , Z . B . Contextuality of Participation in IS Design : A Developing Country Perspective . Proc . PDC 2004 , 42 - 52 . Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , Chivuno - Kuria , S . , Kapuire , G . K . , Bidwell , N . J . , and Blake , E . Being Participated - A Community Approach . Proc . PDC 2010 , 1 - 10 .