Lost in Migration : Information Management and Community Building in an Online Health Community Drashko Nakikj Columbia University , Department of Biomedical Informatics New York , USA dn2311 @ cumc . columbia . edu Lena Mamykina Columbia University , Department of Biomedical Informatics New York , USA om2196 @ cumc . columbia . edu ABSTRACT The ever - growing volume of information within online health communities ( OHCs ) presents an urgent need for new solutions that improve the efficiency of information organization and retrieval for their members . To meet this need , OHCs may choose to adopt off - the - shelf platforms that provide novel features for information management , but were not specifically designed to meet these communities’ needs . The questions remain , however , as to the impact of these new platforms on social dynamics within OHCs and their well - being . To examine these questions , we qualitatively studied a migration of a popular OHC , focusing on diabetes self - management , between two off - the - shelf social computing platforms . Despite improving information management , the migration served as a catalyst to reveal the importance of features for identity management and closed circle communication that were not apparent to either the management or the membership of the community . We describe the study and draw implications for research and design for OHCs . Author Keywords Online health community ; social computing platform ; informational support ; socio - emotional support ; platform migration ; information management ; community building ; balanced design . ACM Classification Keywords H . 4 . 3 Communications Applications : Bulletin boards ; H . 5 . 3 Group and Organization Interfaces : Computer - supported cooperative work ; J . 3 Life and medical sciences : Health ; INTRODUCTION In recent years , online health communities ( OHCs ) have become an important source of informational and emotional support for individuals with a variety of health challenges and conditions , as well as their family caregivers [ 3 , 17 , 69 , 70 ] with generally positive impact on the wellbeing of their members [ 42 ] . OHCs achieve this success by providing two types of social support : informational support , through which individuals meet their needs for information and knowledge , and socio - emotional support that addresses their needs for belonging , emotional affiliation , and companionship [ 33 , 35 , 56 ] . Traditionally , OHCs have relied on relatively simple discussion forums in which members post their questions and stories and receive replies from others [ 56 ] . However , as the membership of these communities grew and the volume of information collected within their forums increased [ 24 , 38 ] , making sense of this information became increasingly difficult [ 32 ] . In recent years , new social computing platforms ( SCPs ) like Wikipedia , Yahoo ! Answers , Stack Overflow , Quora , Reddit , and Discourse introduced new mechanisms for supporting improved access to and sharing of information , knowledge production , and collective sensemaking [ 31 , 48 , 49 , 51 , 55 ] . For many OHCs , following these progressive trends and adopting a more sophisticated off - the - shelf platform may appear as an attractive option . Questions remain , however , as to the degree to which these new platforms that optimize knowledge production and information management are consistent with the specific informational and socio - emotional needs of OHCs members and what impact they may have on the social dynamics within and the well - being of these communities . Previous studies had already highlighted the importance of balancing informational and socio - emotional support in the design for OHC platforms in order to satisfy the specific coexistence of informational and socio - emotional needs in these communities [ 33 , 46 ] . However , these previous studies have examined members’ perceptions and experiences within a single platform , which may have limited their ability to anticipate real consequences of changes in platform features and affordances . To overcome these limitations , our research team took advantage of a rare opportunity to study a platform migration of a popular diabetes self - management OHC . The community originally utilized a commercially available social networking Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada . © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5620 - 6 / 18 / 04… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173720 CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 1 platform Ning [ 67 ] that relied on a forum with traditional discussion board format . However , recently the community migrated to a new increasingly popular forum platform Discourse [ 68 ] , which introduced a number of innovative features for improved information access and organization of discussions . Our expectation in this study was that the migration to a new platform could help to reveal previously unnoticed and underappreciated connections between platform features and social behaviors of community members , and shed light on the importance of different SCP features for the OHC in the study . Our study focused on the following research questions : 1 . What were the community’s values with respect to provision of informational and socio - emotional support ? 2 . What were members’ perceptions regarding the role of different platform features in their ability to obtain / provide informational and socio - emotional support pre and post migration ? 3 . What were the effects of the migration on the social dynamic in the community and its wellbeing ? To answer these questions , we relied on a case study method [ 19 ] that included : thematic analysis of 59 discussion threads that occurred prior to , during , and post - migration and specifically focused on issues related to platform migration ; in - depth interview with a member of the community leadership ; and a focus group with three community moderators , who were familiar with the experiences of the OHC and were considered key opinion holders . The study resulted in several important findings . First , it showed that the community in this study valued both efficient access to information and socio - emotional support among its members : both members and the community leadership shared a vision for the OHC as a place where members should feel warm , welcomed and supported , but also use it as a resource for easy - to - find actionable information towards their diabetes self - management . Second , it showed that the migration to a new platform helped the community successfully address challenges related to information overload by improving information management . However , while the new platform improved efficiency of information organization and retrieval , it lacked affordances for identity management and for developing strong personal connections with other members . As a result , the loss of these community building features led to some disruption of social relationships within the community , and perceived loss of identity for many of its members , which threatened the community’s wellbeing . Notably , this impact came as a surprise to the OHC’s leadership and its moderators who did not recognize the importance of these socializing capabilities for the community until they were no longer available . These results have several implications for the research and design in OHCs . First , this study further reinforces previous claims that for health - oriented communities , identity management , emotional support , close ties with others , and other community - building abilities could be as important , or perhaps even more important than efficiency of access to information . Second , it shows that features intended to optimize access to information may have unintended negative consequences on the social dynamics within communities and require more careful study and consideration before introduction . Moreover , it suggests that recognizing connections between community values , behaviors that promote these values , and technical affordances of SCPs may be non - trivial for OHCs , their leaderships and members . This presents a need for new tools to help communities discover and better understand these connections and to flexibly configure platform features to better meet the unique needs of their members . The contributions of this paper include : 1 . Highlighting the importance of identifying OHC’s value - driven community building behaviors that support its well - being , and discovering and characterizing the connections between these behaviors and features of the OHC’s hosting platform . 2 . Further evidence for the need of balanced design for OHC platforms by paying equal attention to satisfying information needs and socio - emotional needs through a real life example . 3 . Design implications for detecting important value - driven behaviors that support community wellbeing and connecting them to the hosting platform features , to enable easy feature configuration for achieving balanced design . RELATED WORK Socio - emotional and informational support as core values for OHCs The value of OHCs falls within two main dimensions : a ) i nformational support , related to providing relevant information for managing and living with the disease and b ) socio - emotional support , related to providing emotional support and companionship [ 33 , 56 ] . In order for these communities to succeed , these values have to be embedded in the design of the platforms that host them [ 13 ] . Promoting socio - emotional support within OHCs Socio - emotional support in OHCs is often defined as a response of the community to a member’s desire to change their mental state , usually to be more optimistic , motivated , and determined [ 35 ] . Over half of the reasons why people participate in health related online communities is for obtaining socio - emotional support through chat , humor , and empathy and building friendships [ 45 , 56 ] . This is perhaps not surprising given the rich body of research , which demonstrated that social relationships and integration have a powerful effect on physical and mental health , and may extend survival [ 4 ] . Other studies found that the quality of socio - emotional support can depend upon a member’s integration within the community’s social structure [ 22 ] . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 2 Related research explored the dynamics of online group interactions and the relationship between the participation in an OHC and individuals’ off - line life and found that participation in these strongly knit communities positively affects the life outside of the virtual space [ 29 , 30 ] . Also , many mechanisms have been proposed for helping people stay connected with those they interacted with in the past , or with whom they exhibit similarity in profiles , interests , and social circles [ 6 , 18 , 41 ] . In PateintsLikeMe , members can locate similar others based on shared circumstances and medical experiences through manually entered , detailed profiles [ 15 ] . Taking this notion one step further , researchers automatically extracted health data from posts and reconstructed members’ profiles for peer mentor matching [ 20 ] . The importance of such features that support sociability was explored and stressed by Preece [ 40 ] . This researcher suggested sociability determinants for the success of online communities based on measurements such as the number of messages per unit of time , amount of interactivity ( thread depth ) and reciprocity ( taking from and giving back to the community ) , among others . While there is a solid understanding about the importance of socio - emotional support for the members in OHCs , it is still not clear which SCP features might play a crucial role for enabling these behaviors , and how important they are in the co - presence of informational support , and with respect to the well - being of these communities . Overcoming information overload within OHCs Previous research found that the members’ ability to extract useful information from the forum positively affects individual’s empowerment [ 2 ] . To support this process in an increased information overload setting , a host of research initiatives emerged from the information retrieval [ 16 , 47 ] , recommendation systems [ 1 , 8 ] , and visual analytics [ 12 , 23 , 36 ] perspective , predominantly outside of the healthcare domain . Particularly in the OHC domain , a visual analytics tool DisVis provided features for detailed discussion exploration for an individual member of an OHC based on keywords , participants and discussion activity over time [ 34 ] . On the other hand , VisOHC focused on providing support to moderators by visualizing aggregated dimensions for a set of individual discussion threads [ 28 ] . To complement ongoing research on improved information access , other studies identified different ways for improving information management through more sophisticated ways of knowledge construction and sharing . Popular Q & A platforms like Yahoo ! Answers , Stack Overflow , and Quora use a variety of mechanisms , such as voting and different reward structures , to enable a community to socially curate information and to identify most popular answers that are surfaced on the top of the answer list and made easily accessible to users [ 31 , 48 , 55 ] . In the OHCs domain , PatientsLikeMe was specifically designed to enable its members to share their experience using patient - reported outcomes , find similar others based on demographic and clinical characteristics , and learn from the aggregated data reports of others to potentially improve their outcomes [ 59 ] . However , most of these advancements in information management were mainly inspired by and developed for more general purpose communities and in order to design popular off - the - shelf platforms for hosting them , without clear focus on health . Those that were designed for OHCs were not taking into account the social ecosystem in the community . Therefore the impact these solutions might have on the social - dynamics and the well - being of the OHCs is still an open question . Balancing informational and socio - emotional needs and support in online health forums for community well - being Studies pointed out that while the informational and socio - emotional needs might be differently expressed depending on the disease [ 10 ] , matching members’ needs with the appropriate form of support ( informational or socio - emotional ) is essential for membership retention [ 54 , 56 – 58 ] . This was shown to be highly correlated with the well - being of the community [ 26 ] . Also , personal relationships among members and their knowledge about and trust in each other have a significant impact on the knowledge contribution in the OHCs and members’ ability to rely on the information shared by others [ 62 , 63 ] . More recently , Nakikj and Mamykina [ 33 ] and Rubya and Yarosh [ 46 ] pointed out that informational and socio - emotional needs in OHCs can often be in tension , which can pose a significant challenge for designing balanced solutions to address both . While these studies painted the picture of how informational and socio - emotional needs and support coexist in OHCs , they did not examine which concrete SCP features are connected with different types of support . Moreover , they did not have an advantage of observing a real life migration , in which some features were lost and others were added , and the impact of these losses and gains on perceptions about the importance of certain behaviors of the community members . Connections between OHCs values and their technical platforms Different communities of practice have different sets of values shared among their members [ 52 ] . When such communities use SCPs , these values often translate into different sets of features that promote behaviors consistent with these values and discourage behaviors deemed contrary to them [ 53 ] . For example , Wikipedia emphasizes leadership coordination [ 65 , 66 ] , and negotiation and resolution of differences in opinions [ 25 ] , all in order to promote construction of a stable and agreed - upon knowledge [ 51 ] . Somewhat in contrast to that , Stack Overflow and similar Question and Answer ( Q & A ) sites emphasize the role of community in identifying the best answer among those constructed by individual members , rather than encouraging collaborative construction of knowledge . As a result , Stack Overflow includes a set of sophisticated mechanisms for collective curating of answers , including voting and filtering , among others [ 31 ] . Along these lines , other studies examined relationships CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 3 between OHCs platform features and diabetes self - management behaviors by analyzing 18 OHCs available to adolescents with Type 1 diabetes [ 21 ] . These authors classified the features of those platforms in 5 categories : social learning and networking , information , guidance , engagement , and personal and health sharing . However , typical OHCs can rarely afford to develop their own homegrown platforms uniquely suited to their needs and have to rely on off - the - shelf solutions to host them . Many of the OHCs lack the resources to investigate the relationship between the community values and the platform’s features to assess the compatibility and make decision for future improvements . The question of supporting the detection of these connections and knowing how they might support the key OHC values with regards to satisfying informational and socio - emotional needs remains unexplored . In summary , previous research established the importance of two main values with intricate coexistence around which OHCs are built : satisfying members’ informational and socio - emotional needs . Research also stressed the need for improved information management in these communities and offered solutions , but hasn’t focused enough on exploring the potential impact of these solutions on social dynamic in the community and its well - being . Previous studies pointed the need for balanced design in which satisfying informational and socio - emotional needs is equally appreciated , but the relative importance of the behaviors that support these tendencies for OHCs might not be always clearly observable . In addition , in order to successfully achieve that balance , there are still gaps in our understanding of connections between community values and concrete design features of OHC platforms and the implications of changes in such features for community’s social dynamics and wellbeing . Our study attempts to address these knowledge gaps . METHODS The study was conducted within a peer - to - peer OHC for diabetes self - management for adults with over 30 , 000 members . According to the community leadership , members of this community predominantly include individuals diagnosed with different types of diabetes , with a higher prevalence of Type 1 , but also caregivers , such as parents and significant others . Unlike many other OHCs , this particular community was not moderated by healthcare professionals but rather by volunteer moderators recruited among community members . Much of the information collected within this community is publically available in the discussion forum and is generated by registered community members . Our goal in this study was to provide an in - depth account of a specific case of platform migration in order to gain insights for future design and research in OHC platforms that may generalize to other scenarios . Consequently , and similarly to the approach in [ 19 ] , we used a case - study method . In order to address our research questions , we conducted an in - depth semi - structured interview with a member of the community leadership and a semi - structured focus group session with three moderators that were heavily engaged in the transition process . The member of the community leadership was responsible for supervising and coordinating the moderators , and planning and devising strategies for promoting and growing the community . The main goal of this interview was to learn more about the reasons for the migration and the leadership’s perceptions regarding the impact of this event on the community . The moderators were experienced members of the community , with the general responsibility of promoting community values among the members , carrying out new initiatives and helping the community maintain its lively and friendly spirit . We selected these participants because they could speak not only to their own personal experiences with the two platforms but also to the opinions and perceptions of other members of the community and thus could be considered opinion leaders . The goal of the focus group was to learn more about the moderators’ impressions regarding the response to the migration from the community members and their perceptions of the two platforms , and members’ experiences with their respective features . Both the in - depth interview and the focus group were audio - recorded and transcribed for further analysis . To complement the perspectives of these participants with opinions of regular community members , we analyzed 59 discussion threads identified within the forum that focused on issues related to the platform migration . The discussion threads covered close to 1 , 000 posts and came from 108 members . Our analysis of the contributors’ profiles showed that these discussions included a diverse selection of members including both regulars and occasional posters , experienced members and newcomers , those with decades of experience with the disease and those recently diagnosed with diabetes . The discussions spanned from November 2014 ( migration was officially announced ) through April 2015 ( it took place ) and until December 2015 ( the last discussions focusing on the migration ) . We used the following inclusion criteria to create our dataset : the initial post of the discussion needed to be related to the timeline of the transition , features of either of the platforms , or to include soliciting feedback related to the transition . These three different sources helped our team examine different angles of bias and subjectivity , and gain different perspectives on the transition from multiple time points . During the data analysis , all the transcripts and written messages from the discussion threads were analyzed using inductive thematic analysis . The investigators first read through the transcripts and discussions to form general impressions . This was followed by the first cycle of coding —inductive coding , in which the first author identified meaningful units of discourse in the transcripts and assigned them labels . The coding was reviewed by both authors , and all disagreements were discussed and clarified . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 4 In the second cycle of coding , the researchers collaboratively grouped the codes in categories and similar categories into themes . Through a collaborative consensus building process the themes were discussed in a group meeting with other qualitative researchers in the healthcare domain for prioritization and focus of the findings . In addition , the codes from the 59 discussions served as a source of reevaluation and potential enrichment of the themes obtained from the interview and the focus group . However , all of the key themes pertinent to our research questions were covered in all three data sources . Other themes that emerged in these sources were only marginally relevant to our research questions , which led us to the conclusion that we have successfully reached data saturation in the analysis . We describe these key themes below in the Results section . RESULTS The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of platform migration on social dynamics and behaviors within an OHC . The two platforms discussed in this paper are both widely available and popular not only among OHCs , but also among many diverse online communities . The first platform , Ning [ 67 ] , launched in October 2005 , started as a highly customizable platform for open - source social applications ; however , it later transitioned to a commercial platform primarily focused on hosting a variety of social networks . The main features used by the community in this study included customizable user profiles , an open discussion forum where registered users could initiate new discussions and reply to posts submitted by others , live chat , and blogs , among several others . The second platform , Discourse [ 68 ] , was introduced in 2013 with an explicit goal of improving user experience with online forums . Discourse , which remains open source , introduced a number of innovative features to help users manage increasing amount of information within the forum , including scrolling through discussions posts , updates on new content and direct replies , improved search , and many others . The analysis identified three major themes , which included : 1 ) improvements in information management ; 2 ) disruption in identity management and close ties within the community , and 3 ) changes in the dynamics of the community and the nature of interactions among members due to the transition . To help contextualize our findings , we include a comparison of platform features that emerged as important from the data analysis ( Table 1 ) . Notably , since our questions were directed towards members’ perceptions regarding these features’ usefulness and effectiveness , this table and other characterizations of the platforms discussed in this paper represent members’ perspectives rather than results of our own analysis . As one can see from the table , the two platforms : the old one ( Platform A – Ning ) and the new one ( Platform B – Discourse ) varied considerably in the prominence of features for information management versus community building . In the rest of the results section we further elaborate on these perceptions . To illustrate our findings we included 20 representative quotes from 10 different participants from the full dataset : 1 community manager , 3 moderators and 6 members . For clarity of the quotes , we will label the roles in the community with CM for the member of community leadership , MOD1 - MODX for the moderators and MEM1 – MEMXX for a member . We will also label the data sources the quotes came from with : Interview , FocusGroup and Forum . For example , the same person who is a moderator and participated in the focus group and a discussion will be labeled as MODX _ FocusGroup and MODX _ Forum , respectively . We represent the detailed results below . FEATURES A B Information Management Information access effective search engine no yes members badges no yes open discussions yes yes Information generation discussion generation : one level of reply depth , citations , referencing ( contributors and other discussions ) , discussion forking no yes new content tracking no yes Community feedback “like” button no yes Information organization autocomplete : similar discussions suggestion no yes forking discussions no yes high granularity in categorization no yes Community Building Identity management members badges no yes Identity management and self - expression rich profiles yes no blogs yes no Trust and close relationships friendship relationship yes no closed groups yes no Identity management and self - expression , and trust and close relationships personal pages yes no Table 1 . Information management and community building features of the two platforms : Ning ( A ) and Discourse ( B ) . Improving information management in the forum One of the main reasons for the migration was to improve members’ access to information collected within the ever - growing forum and their ability to quickly identify information of interest . The results of the study showed that members did perceive multiple improvements in the efficiency of information organization and access . These improvements fell into one of the three main categories : a ) CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 5 information generation – the way the discourse was conducted and discussions updated and presented ; b ) community feedback – the way the community could evaluate the quality of the contributions ; c ) information organization – the way discussions could be classified and interconnected and d ) information access – the capabilities to search for a particular piece of information . Information generation One of the main reasons for migration was confusing organization and structure of discussions that presented significant challenges to the members’ ability to find information of interest and to follow discussion threads . According to the participants of the study , much improvement has been made in the way discussions were presented for enhanced readability . Replacing pagination with scrollable pages that listed the entire discussion was universally perceived as an important improvement . In addition , abandoning the hierarchical structure of discussions with multiple levels of replies and enabling a flat structure mitigated disruptions in the discussion flow : MEM1 _ Forum : “One thing I absolutely HATED about the old system was how difficult it was to tell who was responding to whom in longer discussion threads . As soon as it got past a page or two - - and breaking them into pages was itself a totally obsolete and misconceived piece of interface design - - you had no idea to what earlier statement a given comment was responding or by which member unless mentioned by name . ” These improvements were particularly well - received because they preserved members’ ability to provide replies to individual posts without disrupting the flow of the discussion . Moreover , participants shared that the new platform allowed members to tag persons to whom the reply was directed , and cite a portion of a post to which the new post or a reply was attached . Additionally , the new platform provided members with various notifications on updates to discussions of interest and with features to visually distinguish between old and new content . This helped members track new content easily and in a timely manner , and as a result helped them engage in discussions in a more meaningful way . MOD3 _ Forum : “I can see any new topics added since my last visit , and any new replies to topics I ' ve read or have been following . If there ' s new replies , it remembers where you last stopped reading , so you don ' t have to go through PAGES , a def improvement imo . ” While many of the new features were found to be useful , some others had unanticipated negative impact . For example , restricting the minimum post length to 20 characters , which was assumed to aim at improving discussions’ quality and eliminating meaningless posts , prevented members from quickly reporting on their self - monitoring data and participating in light - weight socializing , such as word association games , a very popular social activity in the community . Community feedback Another perceived limitation of Platform A was lack of features that allowed members to express their agreement or disagreement with posts of others in a way that could be aggregated across members . These features were highly desired because they were perceived as enabling the community to collectively curate the information collected within the forum and simplifying access to perspectives held by majority of community members . In response to this , Platform B included a feature relatively common to social media platforms that allows members to collectively evaluate the quality of content , specifically , the “Like” button . However , after the transition and initial experience with the feature , it received mixed reviews from the members . Some participants felt that the “Like” button could be very useful and could serve as a form of quick acknowledgement and other members questioned this feature’s real value and applicability to OHCs . Moreover , the introduction of the “Like” feature had an impact on how discussion threads were summarized , with posts receiving more “Likes” being more likely to be included in the summary . Awareness of this relationship led some participants to use this feature with caution . Information organization To eliminate possible redundancies in the content , the new forum offered a feature to automatically detect similar discussion starters as the member was initiating a new discussion . The purpose of this feature was perceived as to remind members that there might be already an answer to their problem and creating a new discussion will only introduce duplication in the system . In addition , the new platform offered an option to reply to a post by starting a new discussion . This was perceived as a tendency to keep the discussions on - topic . Similarly , participants also felt that the new forum offered more granular structuring of the discussion threads by breaking them into different categories : CM _ Forum : “ [ The new platfrom ] allows for much more granular and specific organization than our current platform . The goal for us is to create categories that make it as easy to post in the forum as possible , AND as easy as possible to find other people ' s posts , based on your interests . ” All these new features were perceived as having a positive impact on members’ ability to find information and meet their information needs . Information access Participants reported on significant improvement in finding desired content in the new platform . MEM2 _ Forum : “I have found [ Platform A ] to be one big PITA in terms of finding discussions . ( Nothing is linked ! ) Yes , there is search capability . But except for the CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 6 occasional times when your search is so specific that it takes you almost immediately to the post you are looking for , you usually have to do a lot of post search sifting & winnowing . And you STILL may not be able to track down what you thought you remembered . This is much easier in [ Platform B ] . In some cases it can be jaw droppingly easy as in a single click gets you the context you wanted to reference . ” The new search engine incorporated numerous options that could more precisely define the query and order and narrow down the relevant results . It also included different facets of information that could be searched for like time , author , and location in discussion , among others . Disruption in identity management and building strong ties between members The results presented in the previous section suggest that the migration to the new platform was successful as far as improving members’ ability to more efficiently follow and engage in the discussions and find information of interest faster is concerned . However , together with these improvements , study participants discussed several unintended consequences of the migration that for some of them erased or at least significantly reduced the gains . Most importantly , these consequences were related to the members’ ability to construct their online identities and develop more intimate ties with selected others in addition to participating in a larger forum . In our study , these changes were most often associated with several features that lost their richness or were completely lost in the migration . These included : personal profiles , an ability to declare certain members as friends , an ability to form groups , and ability to create and maintain personal blogs . Instead , the new platform assigned explicit members’ roles by earning badges with active participation . MOD1 _ FocusGroup : “And the transition ended up with a different system where certain things came over and so you had to do the same sorts of social interactions , but other social interactions we lost . And I don’t know how others feel , but I kind of feel like we mourn that that some of our community actually that was kind of the primary thing they did . And so that was part of the difficulty we had . ” Personal profiles One of the main losses of the migration lamented by the community leadership and moderators , but also most of the community members in the study was in relation to member’s ability to create a personal profile page . Members used this page to create their own personal space in the community , or “my little house” as one of the participants described it : CM _ Interview : “A lot of our members have really come to feel like their profile page was their little house . It’s my little front porch and you can stop by and post a picture on my profile page and say hi and people really did think of it as visiting each other . ” The ability to post text , images and videos , as well as create one’s own theme of the profile page highly contributed to members’ presentation of self , managing identity and coping : MEM8 _ Forum : “I hope that the page decorating is still an option . I have gotten over many lows changing my page layout . ” These personalization capabilities also helped members learn about personalities of other members , which often served as a foundation for deeper social connections and support . One strongly valued feature in promoting bonding between members was the option to post on somebody’s profile page . Those postings , that often started conversations , were on a more intimate level and were judged less appropriate for the forum . Related to bonding , the loss of personal profiles was deeply felt by all study participants who missed their ability to learn more personal details about others : MOD1 _ Forum : “One of the things we really miss is personal profiles , a way of clicking on someone ' s picture , seeing a summary of who they are , seeing the stories they have shared , their pictures , their videos and to leave personal comments . ” One participant was worried that the lack of a rich and active profile page might “numb” the community : MEM9 _ Forum : “Clearly the personal images in the profiles tell something personal about the users . There is undeniably a bonding effect associated with these personal nuggets people are sharing here . The effect might be that [ the OHC ] becomes just one of those discussion sites we have more than plenty of . Perhaps some of those abandoned [ Platform A ] features even make [ the OHC ] so special or unique - have you considered that ? ” Forming “friendship” relationships Another feature that was lost in the transition and was important for building the social scaffolding in the community was the ability to declare certain other members as “friends” . Some members pointed that one of the most important consequences of the loss of the “friend” feature was that it removed members’ ability to form smaller , more intimate circles and share information more privately : MOD1 _ Forum : “You are correct , the " Friends " concept didn ' t come over . But that was really not the biggest change , the biggest change is the model of privacy . And in fact " Friends " in the old [ OHC ] wasn ' t really about a positive social network it was about privacy . Only friends could msg or if you wished only friends could see your profile or blog . ” Moreover , the “friend” feature didn’t only have socializing purpose , but also served as an index to reliable content of interest : CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 7 MEM10 _ Forum : " Friends " made it much easier to find the people whose posts I always check out . At the moment , I just roam around hoping I ' ll run into them somewhere . I with Holger on this . . . . ” Blogs Blogs were used as a place to share stories , feelings , and personal experiences as well as perspectives and opinions . It was regarded as a strong tool for self - expression and a form to represent one’s identity to the community . Hence , it was also regarded as a way to connect to other bloggers in the community more intimately : MEM10 _ Forum : “ So many of our blog posts move me deeply and feel like a bridge to our shared humanity” Because of that , many members were disappointed about the loss of blogging feature in the new platform . Groups Groups were used as places where people with special interests could come together to discuss a topic . Groups were of closed characters and a member required an approval to join . Similarly to the “friend” feature , groups presented a safe place to discuss highly intimate and sensitive topics : MOD3 _ FocusGroup : “ We had two groups men sexuality and women’s sexuality group , it worked in every amm… I think men used it more , because , you know , there was a place for men to talk about diabetes , to talk about having a an erectile dysfunctions . And there is – we don’t have any place like that where that’s sort of private , but— . “ In addition , the groups did not only provide a safe place for sharing sensitive stories , but also served as a very reliable tool for solving problems as members would have some form of shared mental model already established . In contrast , not all members considered groups to be as valuable as the quotes above indicate , as they believed they led to fragmentation in the community . However , most participants agreed that loss of an ability to form groups further contributed to the loss of intimacy in the forum and resulted in a more open , impersonal atmosphere : MEM2 _ Forum : “There are some very personal stories I would like to share . It doesn ' t feel safe to do so here anymore . The one I would like to delve into at the moment , I would have posted in the Bernstein Group on the old site - - a place where there was a baseline agreement on a starting place , no long explanations needed of where one is coming from . ” Members’ roles and trust In addition to lamenting loss of the features participants valued in the old platform , the new platform introduced a number of new features that further contributed to members’ frustration . For example , in order to highlight individual members’ contributions to the forum , the new platform introduced the concept of badges . Badges were awarded depending on the activity and engagement in the community which would define someone’s role in the community . A single user could have multiple badges , in some occasions even more than 10 . While badges are a common feature of many social platforms , they were viewed as deeply inconsistent with the non - competitive spirit of this particular OHC : MEM10 _ Forum : “I , too , find badges offensive and would very much like to disengage from all such competitive - seeming garbage . It actually makes me want to NOT participate in anything” A related feature that was introduced with the new platform included the trust levels of members . While some study participants acknowledged its ability to assist with moderating discussions and to recognize and intercept intruders , many members felt that such explicit means were inconsistent with the spirit of the community that mostly relied on social moderation and peaceful ways of reinforcing community values . Changes in the community As a result of these transformations , the participants of the study shared common perceptions of the changes in the nature of social dynamics in the forum . Most study participants characterized this OHC as being a warm and welcoming environment where people can freely express their feelings and opinions . Members of the community shared intimate stories and experiences and formed true friendships : MEM10 _ Forum : “The old OHC felt like Home because it felt intimate . I would share personal highs and lows there , especially the lows when I needed a boost - - - things I would never post on a place like FB - - - at least not with any detail” The community encouraged diversity in opinions and members were inevitably exposed to a variety of them . In some occasions this exposure was positive for the learning experience . With the transition to the new platform , much of this old spirit was lost : MOD1 _ FocusGroup : “And people become – people you know only actually established social fabric if they sort of learn about each other , know each other intimate . Instead of just being sort of talking heads online . And so one of the things I kind of mourn about what we have was that we had a much better ability to like express who we were as people . ” Some members drew clear connections between the perceived changes in the community and design philosophies of the two platforms : CM _ Interview : “Really the thing is that the guys who created Platform B , they really value the sharing of content and ideas and the folks who created Platform A really value sharing identity . And so the two platforms reflect that a lot . I mean you really got to manage your identity to put up pictures of yourself and you could write problems about yourself or about your family and post them on your profile CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 8 page and all the stuff . I think combination of the two would be ideal . ” All these changes ultimately led some of the members to change their levels of engagement : MEM12 _ Forum : “… you know , I ' m not here very much anymore . I miss some features on the old site - - a special place for blogs , my favorite groups , and most of all the ability to talk to others on their Profile Pages . Now it all seems so darn impersonal , not friendly at all . Oh well . ” One of the community moderators reflected on the overall impact on the community membership : MOD2 _ FocusGroup : “I think a lot of people still have that issue because we’ve retained a lot of – we lost some good members in the process . We’ve retained a few you know . We’ve retained probably 60 to 70 % of them mostly . I don’t know how many we’ve lost , but some people still mourn that loss today . Some of our regular members just sort of left , and so in a way I’d rule out I think where evolves in everybody else , but use those functions , ‘cause we lost some of the sociability of the site by doing this . ” DISCUSSION In this work we examined implications of a platform migration on perceptions , attitudes , and social dynamics within a popular diabetes self - management OHC . While the specifics of the migration may be unique to the community we studied , it presents an insightful case study that can enhance our understanding of social dynamics within OHCs , values and priorities of their members , as well as ways these values impact and are in turn impacted by technical affordances of social computing platforms that host these communities . Overall , the study showed that all participants had a shared vision regarding the core values of the community : providing a warm and inclusive social space , where members can easily navigate through the information space to satisfy their interests . The participants also had a shared perception of which behaviors were consistent with these community values : construction of social identity , development of close and intimate social relationships , giving everyone a chance to be heard , and contribution of useful and actionable information that could be easily accessed . The study also suggested that there were direct connections between these behaviors and platform features that enabled them . For example , rich customizable profiles and blogs were critical for identity management , building self - image and self - expression . Similarly , marking others as “friends” and the ability to create small closed discussion groups were essential for building trust and close social ties through discussions on intimate topics . These findings are consistent with previous studies that examined the impact of different design features on community building and membership retention ( i . e . identity and bond - based commitment ) , and , consequently , the wellbeing of online communities [ 26 , 27 , 43 , 44 ] . However , our study also led to several new observations not highlighted by the previous research . First , our study suggests that while some of the connections between design features and social behaviors were relatively direct and straightforward , others were less obvious , and at times not apparent to either the members or the leadership of the community . For example , the ability to post private messages and engage in small group discussions turned out to be critical to supporting social connections and providing socio - emotional support . However , prior to the migration , these abilities were perceived by some as limiting an unrestricted flow of information within the forum ; their true importance was recognized only after they were lost . Second , the study suggested that some features introduced within the new platform for improving information management had unintended consequences that negatively affected self - expression and building of social connections . For example , the feature for detecting similar discussion starters has clear benefits of preventing unnecessary duplication of content and redundant discussions . At the same time , this feature was met with criticism from the members who viewed it as censorship of content that may prevent members from freely expressing their views and experiences . Similarly , limiting posts’ length to fewer than 20 characters has a potential to reduce noise in discussions and stimulate deeper engagement . However , in this study , it was often perceived as preventing quick self - monitoring updates , expressing empathy and playing social bonding games that require very short utterances . Finally , the study suggested that some features that were successful in other communities and settings did not produce the expected positive impact , often because they did not match community values . For example , badges and an ability to “like” posts by others , while widely popular and successful in many social media sites , were perceived as introducing competitiveness and exclusivity both of which were at odds with the spirit of the community . Combined , these three findings highlight the idiosyncratic and at times unpredictable impact of different design choices on social behaviors . Previous research on online communities often focused on producing knowledge regarding the impact of different design solutions that may generalize across communities and settings [ 26 ] . Complementary to this view , our study showed that identifying connections between design features and value - driven behaviors can be non - trivial due to unpredictability of technology appropriation [ 14 ] . This is particularly relevant for OHCs that often have to maintain a careful balance between providing informational and socio - emotional support [ 33 ] . For example , according to previous research , positive feedback on user’s engagement and carefully tailored rewards typically stimulate contributions by members [ 26 ] . However , our study showed that both the feedback and rewards could be highly specific to the culture within a community . Similarly , previous research emphasized the importance of closed small groups on CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 9 identity and bond - based commitment , essential for building the social fabric in the community [ 26 ] . However , in a fact - oriented community that primarily values free information flow , small closed groups might not be of high priority to users and might not have the desired effect on member commitment [ 31 ] . As a consequence , while previous work established a solid foundation for promoting user engagement within social computing platforms , our study suggests that such generalizable knowledge may need to be complemented with innovative solutions that allow communities to discover what design choices work in their concrete settings and fine - tune affordances of their platforms to align with community values . We propose that these new solutions can fall within two broad categories . First , they can include new tools for easy customization of platform configuration that do not require high level of technical skills . For the vast majority of contemporary social computing platforms , platform customization requires a certain level of technical expertise and , typically , involvement of platform technical teams . This may prevent small non - technical communities from fine - tuning their platform affordances to better meet their members’ need . In contrast , new platforms can provide moderators with easy to use visual interfaces for turning different features on and off , and for dynamically changing their parameters . These abilities have been shown critical to the success of such communities as Stack Overflow , whose creators tuned its design through multiple iterations and continuous feedback cycle with its users [ 31 ] . Related to this , and given the richness of existing knowledge on online communities in general and OHCs in particular , these interfaces could alert moderators to the possible social impact of different features , based on their previously documented successes . The real innovation , however , could come in the form of tools to help community leaders and moderators more fully examine connections between different design features and social behaviors within their community . Most of the monitoring tools for online communities proposed thus far have focused on analyzing content contributed by members to detect abnormal behaviors [ 5 , 7 , 37 , 50 ] or help moderators understand the flow and structure of the discussions [ 9 , 28 , 61 ] . However , little research has focused on helping communities to discover and understand the relationships between value - driven social behaviors of their members and features of their platforms , as well as these features’ impact on community wellbeing [ 11 ] . To start tackling this problem we could rely on the work that reveals patterns of interactions by integrating interaction logs and social networks analysis [ 39 , 60 , 64 ] and combine it with computational content analysis . For example , by conducting a detailed graph analysis of social and topical networks on Quora , researchers were able to establish connections between positive behaviors in the community that were responsible for creating valuable content and features of the platforms [ 55 ] . Similar approaches could be applied within an OHC setting . For example , in our study , noticing high utilization and frequent updates to user profiles could have alerted the moderators of the high value placed on identity expression . Similarly , high volume of private messages with positive sentiment could suggest the importance of small - group interactions . These computationally derived mappings could be further used as probes for surveying the community to validate discoveries and arrive at new ones . These new approaches can greatly increase the ability of OHCs to adapt their platforms to the unique needs and values of their members and enable communities to evolve their platforms overtime . This could also reduce the need for migrating between platforms , thus avoiding associated threats to community wellbeing . Moreover , if such migration is unavoidable , as can be the case if a platform is no longer supported , it could help the leadership identify the most valued and utilized features and make informed choices in regards to selection of a new platform . This study has several limitations . First , in our study , we relied on OHC members’ perceptions to infer associations between platform features and social behaviors , their relative importance and their impact on the social dynamics in the community and its wellbeing . However , making more explicit claims about the impact of specific features on social behaviors would require additional analysis of feature utilization logs and produced content which were not available in this study . Second , the study mostly reflects perspectives of members who joined the community prior to the migration , rather than new members who may have different opinions regarding the affordances of the new platform . Third , it is possible that some of the changes in the community were due to these other factors related to the migration process , rather than to differences in platform affordances . CONCLUSION In this work we studied changes in the attitudes , perception , and social dynamics of an OHC after migration to a new technical platform . The study further highlighted the need to balance informational and socio - emotional support features in the SCP for OHCs . Further , it pointed to the difficulty and the importance of recognizing the true importance of social behaviors in the community and their connections to SCP features , and provided descriptions of these connections . Finally , the study suggested the need for new approaches to the design of OHC platforms that allow for easy and flexible configuration of features based on prioritization of the value - driven behaviors types , and monitoring tools for discovering new potential connections between those behaviors and SCP features . REFERENCES 1 . Naji Ahmad Albatayneh , Khairil Imran Ghauth , and Fang - Fang Chua . 2014 . A Semantic Content - Based Forum Recommender System Architecture Based on Content - Based Filtering and Latent Semantic Analysis . In Recent Advances on Soft Computing and Data CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 10 Mining . Springer , Cham , 369 – 378 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 07692 - 8 _ 35 2 . Allen C . Johnston , James L . Worrell , Paul M . Di Gangi , and Molly Wasko . 2013 . Online health communities : An assessment of the influence of participation on patient empowerment outcomes . Information Technology & People 26 , 2 : 213 – 235 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / ITP - 02 - 2013 - 0040 3 . Paul J . Ambrose and Grace J . Johnson . 2006 . Neo - tribes : the power and potential of online communities in health care . Commun . ACM 49 : 107 – 113 . 4 . L . F . Berkman , T . Glass , I . Brissette , and T . E . Seeman . 2000 . From social integration to health : Durkheim in the new millennium . Social Science & Medicine ( 1982 ) 51 , 6 : 843 – 857 . 5 . Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Mattia Samory , Anirudh Srinivasan , and Eric Gilbert . 2017 . The Bag of Communities : Identifying Abusive Behavior Online with Preexisting Internet Data . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , 3175 – 3187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3026018 6 . Jilin Chen , Werner Geyer , Casey Dugan , Michael Muller , and Ido Guy . 2009 . Make New Friends , but Keep the Old : Recommending People on Social Networking Sites . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) , 201 – 210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518735 7 . Justin Cheng , Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , and Jure Leskovec . 2015 . Antisocial Behavior in Online Discussion Communities . arXiv : 1504 . 00680 [ cs , stat ] . Retrieved from http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1504 . 00680 8 . Jason H . D . Cho , Parikshit Sondhi , Chengxiang Zhai , and Bruce R . Schatz . 2014 . Resolving Healthcare Forum Posts via Similar Thread Retrieval . In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Bioinformatics , Computational Biology , and Health Informatics ( BCB ’14 ) , 33 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2649387 . 2649399 9 . T . Chomutare , E . Årsand , and G . Hartvigsen . 2015 . Mining Symptoms of Severe Mood Disorders in Large Internet Communities . In 2015 IEEE 28th International Symposium on Computer - Based Medical Systems , 214 – 219 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CBMS . 2015 . 36 10 . Andrea Civan and Wanda Pratt . 2007 . Threading Together Patient Expertise . AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings 2007 : 140 – 144 . 11 . Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , Moritz Sudhof , Dan Jurafsky , Jure Leskovec , and Christopher Potts . 2013 . A Computational Approach to Politeness with Application to Social Factors . arXiv : 1306 . 6078 [ physics ] . Retrieved from http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1306 . 6078 12 . Kushal Dave , Martin Wattenberg , and Michael Muller . 2004 . Flash Forums and forumReader : Navigating a New Kind of Large - scale Online Discussion . In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’04 ) , 232 – 241 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1031607 . 1031644 13 . George Demiris . 2006 . The diffusion of virtual communities in health care : Concepts and challenges . Patient Education and Counseling 62 , 2 : 178 – 188 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pec . 2005 . 10 . 003 14 . Alan Dix . 2007 . Designing for Appropriation . In Proceedings of the 21st British HCI Group Annual Conference on People and Computers : HCI . . . But Not As We Know It - Volume 2 ( BCS - HCI ’07 ) , 27 – 30 . Retrieved April 24 , 2017 from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1531407 . 1531415 15 . Jeana H Frost and Michael P Massagli . 2008 . Social Uses of Personal Health Information Within PatientsLikeMe , an Online Patient Community : What Can Happen When Patients Have Access to One Another’s Data . Journal of Medical Internet Research 10 , 3 : e15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 1053 16 . Gayatree Ganu and Amélie Marian . 2013 . One Size Does Not Fit All : Multi - granularity Search of Web Forums . In Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM International Conference on Conference on Information & Knowledge Management ( CIKM ’13 ) , 9 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2505515 . 2505745 17 . Frances Griffiths , Jonathan Cave , Felicity Boardman , Justin Ren , Teresa Pawlikowska , Robin Ball , Aileen Clarke , and Alan Cohen . 2012 . Social networks - - the future for health care delivery . Social Science & Medicine ( 1982 ) 75 , 12 : 2233 – 2241 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . socscimed . 2012 . 08 . 023 18 . John Hannon , Mike Bennett , and Barry Smyth . 2010 . Recommending Twitter Users to Follow Using Content and Collaborative Filtering Approaches . In Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems ( RecSys ’10 ) , 199 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1864708 . 1864746 19 . Derek L . Hansen , Mark S . Ackerman , Paul J . Resnick , and Sean Munson . 2007 . Virtual community maintenance with a collaborative repository . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 44 , 1 : 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / meet . 1450440272 20 . Andrea L . Hartzler , Megan N . Taylor , Albert Park , Troy Griffiths , Uba Backonja , David W . McDonald , Sam Wahbeh , Cory Brown , and Wanda Pratt . 2016 . Leveraging cues from person - generated health data for peer matching in online communities . Journal of the CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 11 American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA 23 , 3 : 496 – 507 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jamia / ocv175 21 . Yun - Xian Ho , Brendan H . O’Connor , and Shelagh A . Mulvaney . 2014 . Features of online health communities for adolescents with type 1 diabetes . Western Journal of Nursing Research 36 , 9 : 1183 – 1198 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0193945913520414 22 . Sara D . Hodges , Kristi J . Kiel , Adam D . I . Kramer , Darya Veach , and B . Renee Villanueva . 2009 . Giving Birth to Empathy : The Effects of Similar Experience on Empathic Accuracy , Empathic Concern , and Perceived Empathy . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0146167209350326 23 . E . Hoque and G . Carenini . 2014 . ConVis : A Visual Text Analytic System for Exploring Blog Conversations . Computer Graphics Forum 33 , 3 : 221 – 230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cgf . 12378 24 . Quentin Jones , Gilad Ravid , and Sheizaf Rafaeli . 2004 . Information Overload and the Message Dynamics of Online Interaction Spaces : A Theoretical Model and Empirical Exploration . Info . Sys . Research 15 , 2 : 194 – 210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 1040 . 0023 25 . Aniket Kittur , Bongwon Suh , Bryan A . Pendleton , and Ed H . Chi . 2007 . He Says , She Says : Conflict and Coordination in Wikipedia . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’07 ) , 453 – 462 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240698 26 . Robert E . Kraut , Paul Resnick , Sara Kiesler , Moira Burke , Yan Chen , Niki Kittur , Joseph Konstan , Yuqing Ren , and John Riedl . 2012 . Building Successful Online Communities : Evidence - Based Social Design . The MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass . 27 . Robert Kraut , Xiaoqing Wang , Brian Butler , Elisabeth Joyce , and Moira Burke . 2010 . Beyond information : Developing the relationship between the individual and the group in online communities . Information Systems Research 10 . Retrieved March 4 , 2015 from http : / / casci . umd . edu / research - resource / theory - concept - summaries / online - communities - 2 / publications _ butler _ 2010 / 28 . Bum Chul Kwon , Sung - Hee Kim , Sukwon Lee , Jaegul Choo , Jina Huh , and Ji Soo Yi . 2016 . VisOHC : Designing Visual Analytics for Online Health Communities . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 22 , 1 : 71 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2015 . 2467555 29 . Diane Maloney - Krichmar and Jenny Preece . 2002 . The Meaning of an Online Health Community in the Lives of Its Members : Roles , Relationships and Group Dynamics Social Implications of Information and Communication Technology . In International Symposium on Technology and Society , 20 – 27 . 30 . Diane Maloney - Krichmar and Jenny Preece . 2005 . A Multilevel Analysis of Sociability , Usability , and Community Dynamics in an Online Health Community . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 12 , 2 : 201 – 232 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1067860 . 1067864 31 . Lena Mamykina , Bella Manoim , Manas Mittal , George Hripcsak , and Björn Hartmann . 2011 . Design Lessons from the Fastest Q & a Site in the West . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) , 2857 – 2866 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979366 32 . Lena Mamykina , Drashko Nakikj , and Noemie Elhadad . 2015 . Collective Sensemaking in Online Health Forums . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) , 3217 – 3226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702566 33 . Drashko Nakikj and Lena Mamykina . A Park or A Highway : Overcoming Tensions in Designing for Socio - emotional and Informational Needs in Online Health Communities . In To appear in the Proceedings of CSCW 2017 . 34 . Drashko Nakikj and Lena Mamykina . DisVis : Visualizing Discussion Threads in Online Health Communities . In To appear in the Proceedings of AMIA 2016 . 35 . Priya Nambisan . 2011 . Information seeking and social support in online health communities : impact on patients’ perceived empathy . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA 18 , 3 : 298 – 304 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / amiajnl - 2010 - 000058 36 . Srikanth Narayan and Coye Cheshire . 2010 . Not Too Long to Read : The Tldr Interface for Exploring and Navigating Large - Scale Discussion Spaces . In Proceedings of the 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ’10 ) , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2010 . 288 37 . Chikashi Nobata , Joel Tetreault , Achint Thomas , Yashar Mehdad , and Yi Chang . 2016 . Abusive Language Detection in Online User Content . In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web ( WWW ’16 ) , 145 – 153 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2872427 . 2883062 38 . Yannick Ouardi , Tarun Goyal , Lorenz Graf - Vlachy , Jan Mammen , Andreas König , and Carol Saunders . 2016 . THE COST OF SHARING : THE EFFECT OF SHARING INCLINATION ON INFORMATION OVERLOAD . Research Papers . Retrieved from http : / / aisel . aisnet . org / ecis2016 _ rp / 162 39 . Pietro Panzarasa , Tore Opsahl , and Kathleen M . Carley . 2009 . Patterns and dynamics of users’ behavior and interaction : Network analysis of an online community . Journal of the American Society for CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 12 Information Science and Technology 60 , 5 : 911 – 932 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 21015 40 . Jenny Preece . 2001 . Sociability and usability : Twenty years of chatting online . Behavior and Information Technology Journal 20 , 5 : 347 – 356 . 41 . Emilee Rader and Rebecca Gray . 2015 . Understanding User Beliefs About Algorithmic Curation in the Facebook News Feed . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) , 173 – 182 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702174 42 . Stephen A . Rains and Valerie Young . 2009 . A Meta - Analysis of Research on Formal Computer - Mediated Support Groups : Examining Group Characteristics and Health Outcomes . Human Communication Research 35 , 3 : 309 – 336 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2958 . 2009 . 01353 . x 43 . Yuqing Ren , F . Maxwell Harper , Sara Drenner , Loren Terveen , Sara Kiesler , John Riedl , and Robert E . Kraut . 2012 . Building Member Attachment in Online Communities : Applying Theories of Group Identity and Interpersonal Bonds . MIS Q . 36 , 3 : 841 – 864 . 44 . Yuqing Ren and Robert E . Kraut . A Simulation for Designing Online Community : Member Motivation , Contribution , and Discussion Moderation . 45 . Catherine M . Ridings and David Gefen . 2004 . Virtual Community Attraction : Why People Hang Out Online . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 10 , 1 : 00 – 00 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1083 - 6101 . 2004 . tb00229 . x 46 . Sabirat Rubya and Svetlana Yarosh . 2017 . Video - Mediated Peer Support in an Online Community for Recovery from Substance Use Disorders . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) , 1454 – 1469 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998246 47 . Jangwon Seo , W . Bruce Croft , and David A . Smith . 2011 . Online Community Search Using Conversational Structures . Inf . Retr . 14 , 6 : 547 – 571 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10791 - 011 - 9166 - 8 48 . H . Shen , Z . Li , J . Liu , and J . E . Grant . 2015 . Knowledge Sharing in the Online Social Network of Yahoo ! Answers and Its Implications . IEEE Transactions on Computers 64 , 6 : 1715 – 1728 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TC . 2014 . 2322598 49 . Philipp Singer , Fabian Flöck , Clemens Meinhart , Elias Zeitfogel , and Markus Strohmaier . 2014 . Evolution of Reddit : From the Front Page of the Internet to a Self - referential Community ? In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web ( WWW ’14 Companion ) , 517 – 522 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2567948 . 2576943 50 . Sara Owsley Sood , Elizabeth F . Churchill , and Judd Antin . 2012 . Automatic Identification of Personal Insults on Social News Sites . J . Am . Soc . Inf . Sci . Technol . 63 , 2 : 270 – 285 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 21690 51 . Jason Swarts . 2009 . The Collaborative Construction of “Fact” on Wikipedia . In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Design of Communication ( SIGDOC ’09 ) , 281 – 288 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1621995 . 1622051 52 . Russell Spears Tom Postmes . 2002 . Intergroup differentiation in computer - mediated communication : Effects of depersonalization . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice 6 , 1 : 3 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 1089 - 2699 . 6 . 1 . 3 53 . Jeffrey W . Treem and Paul M . Leonardi . 2012 . Social Media Use in Organizations : Exploring the Affordances of Visibility , Editability , Persistence , and Association . Social Science Research Network , Rochester , NY . Retrieved September 20 , 2016 from http : / / papers . ssrn . com / abstract = 2129853 54 . Tatiana A . Vlahovic , Yi - Chia Wang , Robert E . Kraut , and John M . Levine . 2014 . Support Matching and Satisfaction in an Online Breast Cancer Support Community . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) , 1625 – 1634 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557108 55 . Gang Wang , Konark Gill , Manish Mohanlal , Haitao Zheng , and Ben Y . Zhao . 2013 . Wisdom in the Social Crowd : An Analysis of Quora . In Proceedings of the 22Nd International Conference on World Wide Web ( WWW ’13 ) , 1341 – 1352 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2488388 . 2488506 56 . Xi Wang , Kang Zhao , and Nick Street . 2014 . Social Support and User Engagement in Online Health Communities . In Smart Health , Xiaolong Zheng , Daniel Zeng , Hsinchun Chen , Yong Zhang , Chunxiao Xing and Daniel B . Neill ( eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , 97 – 110 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 08416 - 9 _ 10 57 . Yi - Chia Wang , Robert E . Kraut , and John M . Levine . 2015 . Eliciting and receiving online support : using computer - aided content analysis to examine the dynamics of online social support . Journal of Medical Internet Research 17 , 4 : e99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 3558 58 . Yi - Chia Wang , Robert Kraut , and John M . Levine . 2012 . To Stay or Leave ? : The Relationship of Emotional and Informational Support to Commitment in Online Health Support Groups . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) , 833 – 842 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145329 CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 13 59 . Paul Wicks , Michael Massagli , Jeana Frost , Catherine Brownstein , Sally Okun , Timothy Vaughan , Richard Bradley , and James Heywood . 2010 . Sharing Health Data for Better Outcomes on PatientsLikeMe . Journal of Medical Internet Research 12 , 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 1549 60 . Christo Wilson , Bryce Boe , Alessandra Sala , Krishna P . N . Puttaswamy , and Ben Y . Zhao . 2009 . User Interactions in Social Networks and Their Implications . In Proceedings of the 4th ACM European Conference on Computer Systems ( EuroSys ’09 ) , 205 – 218 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1519065 . 1519089 61 . Shaodian Zhang , Erin Bantum , Jason Owen , and Noémie Elhadad . 2014 . Does Sustained Participation in an Online Health Community Affect Sentiment ? AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings 2014 : 1970 – 1979 . 62 . Jing Zhao , Sejin Ha , and Richard Widdows . 2013 . Building trusting relationships in online health communities . Cyberpsychology , Behavior and Social Networking 16 , 9 : 650 – 657 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / cyber . 2012 . 0348 63 . Jing Zhao , Sejin Ha , and Richard Widdows . 2016 . The influence of social capital on knowledge creation in online health communities . Information Technology and Management 17 , 4 : 311 – 321 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10799 - 014 - 0211 - 3 64 . Kang Zhao , John Yen , Greta Greer , Baojun Qiu , Prasenjit Mitra , and Kenneth Portier . 2014 . Finding influential users of online health communities : a new metric based on sentiment influence . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 21 , e2 : e212 – e218 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / amiajnl - 2013 - 002282 65 . Haiyi Zhu , Robert E . Kraut , Yi - Chia Wang , and Aniket Kittur . 2011 . Identifying Shared Leadership in Wikipedia . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) , 3431 – 3434 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979453 66 . Haiyi Zhu , Robert Kraut , and Aniket Kittur . 2012 . Effectiveness of Shared Leadership in Online Communities . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) , 407 – 416 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145269 67 . 2017 . Ning ( website ) . Wikipedia . Retrieved January 3 , 2018 from https : / / en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = Ning _ ( webs ite ) & oldid = 812976909 68 . 2017 . Discourse ( software ) . Wikipedia . Retrieved January 3 , 2018 from https : / / en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = Discourse _ ( software ) & oldid = 816465614 69 . Fox S , Purcell K . Social Media and Health , Pew Research Center . June , 2009 . 70 . Fox S , Purcell K . Social Media and Health , Pew Research Center . March , 2010 . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 146 Page 14