Echo Chambers : Emotional Contagion and Group Polarization on Facebook Michela Del Vicario 1 , Gianna Vivaldo 1 , Alessandro Bessi 1 , 2 , Fabiana Zollo 1 , Antonio Scala 1 , 3 , Guido Caldarelli 1 , and Walter Quattrociocchi 1 , * 1 Laboratory of Computational Social Science , Networks Dept , IMT School for Advanced Studies , 55100 Lucca , Italy 2 IUSS Institute for Advanced Study , Piazza della Vittoria 5 , 27100 Pavia , Italy 3 ISC - CNR Uos ”Sapienza” , 00185 Roma , Italy * walter . quattrociocchi @ gmail . com ABSTRACT Recent ﬁndings showed that users on Facebook tend to select information that adhere to their system of beliefs and to form polarized groups – i . e . , echo chambers . Such a tendency dominates information cascades and might affect public debates on social relevant issues . In this work we explore the structural evolution of communities of interest by accounting for users emotions and engagement . Focusing on the Facebook pages reporting on scientiﬁc and conspiracy content , we characterize the evolution of the size of the two communities by ﬁtting daily resolution data with three growth models – i . e . the Gompertz model , the Logistic model , and the Log - logistic model . Then , we explore the interplay between emotional state and engagement of users in the group dynamics . Our ﬁndings show that communities’ emotional behavior is affected by the users’ involvement inside the echo chamber . Indeed , to an higher involvement corresponds a more negative approach . Moreover , we observe that , on average , more active users show a faster shift towards the negativity than less active ones . Introduction Misinformation has traditionally represented a political , social , and economic risk . The digital age , in which new ways of communication arose , has exacerbated its extent , and mitigation strategies are even more uncertain . However , according to the World Economic Forum , massive digital misinformation remains one of the main threats to our society . 1 The diffusion of social media caused a shift of paradigm in the creation and consumption of information . We passed from a mediated ( e . g . , by journalists ) to a more disintermediated selection process . Such a disintermediation elicits the tendencies of the users to a ) select information adhering to their system of beliefs – i . e . , conﬁrmation bias – and b ) to form groups of like - minded people where they polarize their opinion – i . e . echo chamber . 2 – 7 Under these settings , discussion within like - minded people seems to negatively inﬂuence users’ emotions and to enforce group polarization . 8 , 9 What’s more , experimental evidence shows that conﬁrmatory information gets accepted even if containing deliberately false claims , 10 – 14 while dissenting information is mainly ignored or might even increase group polarization . 15 Current solutions , such as debunking efforts or algorithmic driven solutions based on the reputation of the source , seem to be ineffective . 16 , 17 To make things more complicated , users on social media aim at maximizing the number of likes ( Attention Bulimia ) and often information , concepts , and debate get ﬂattened and oversimpliﬁed . In such a disintermediated environment , indeed , the public opinion deals with a large amount of misleading information that might inﬂuence important decisions . Computational social science 18 seems to be a powerful tool for a better understanding of the cognitive and social dynamics behind misinformation spreading . 1 Along this path , in the present work we address the evolution of online echo chambers by performing a comparative analysis of two distinct polarized communities on the Italian Facebook , i . e . , science and conspiracy . The sizes of both the communities are ﬁrstly analyzed in terms of their temporal evolution and ﬁtted by classical population growth models deriving from biology and medicine ﬁelds . The behavior of users turns out to be similar for both categories , irrespective of the contents : both science and conspiracy communities reach a thresholding value in their sizes , after an almost exponential growth , in agreement with classical growth models . Moreover , we analyze the community behavior by accounting for the engagement and the emotional dynamics of users . Indeed , whether a news item , either substantiated or not , is accepted as true by a user may be strongly affected by social norms or by how much it coheres with the community shared system of beliefs . Users’ emotional behavior seems to be affected by their engagement within the community . An higher involvement in the echo chamber , resolves in a more negative emotional state . Such a phenomenon appears in both users categories . Moreover , we observe that , on average , more active users show a faster shift towards the negativity than less active ones . The paper is structured as it follows . First we analyze the structural evolution of both science and conspiracy communities a r X i v : 1 6 07 . 01032v1 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 29 J un 2016 on the Italian Facebook . Then we explore the user sentiment behavior as a single unit , and subsequently we explore the sentiment contagion inside each of the two communities from a macroscopic point of view . Results and Discussion Community Evolution Online social networks might elicit the aggregation of individuals in communities of interest . For the particular case of science and conspiracy users on the Italian Facebook ( refer to section Methods for more details on the data collection and classiﬁcation ) , the emergence of two separate echo chambers has already been shown in a previous study . 11 However little is known about the structural evolution of the two communities and the role of users’ engagement in shaping them . To shade light on the determinants of group formation , as a ﬁrst step , we analyze and compare the temporal evolution of science and conspiracy communities size by considering users commenting activity . More in details , we divide users in three categories : • U 1 the set of all active users – i . e . of all those users that commented at least once , • U 2 the set of all users that commented at least twice , and • U 5 the set of all users that commented at least ﬁve times . For each set of users we look at the temporal evolution of the science and conspiracy communities , deﬁned as : S i ( t ) = (cid:26) u ∈ U i : s u n u ≥ 0 . 95 (cid:27) and C i ( t ) = (cid:26) u ∈ U i : c u n u ≥ 0 . 95 (cid:27) , where i ∈ { 1 , 2 , 5 } , n u is the total number of comments made by user u , s u is the number of comments that user u made on science posts , c u is the number of comments that user u made on conspiracy posts , and t ∈ { 1 , . . . , T } 1 . We consider the threshold of 0 . 95 for the membership inside one community in accordance with previous studies . 10 , 12 Figure 1 ( a ) shows the temporal evolution of the size of the communities resulting from the previous classiﬁcation . The dataset has been sampled by daily resolution , over the period January 2010 – April 2012 , for a total of 835 - days observations . A similar global behavior emerges in all cases , and signiﬁcant quantitative differences arise between C 1 ( or C 2 ) and C 5 , as well as between C 1 ( or C 2 ) and S i , i ∈ { 1 , 2 , 5 } . This phenomenon may be linked to the abundance of low - activity users inside the conspiracy communities , and for this reason in the next sections we will restrict our attention to the respective most active communities , S 5 and C 5 . We also pairwise compared the six sample distributions by means of the Kolmogorov - Smirnov test ( see Tab . 1 for the tests’ results ) . For each users typology , we reject the null hypothesis of equivalence between science and conspiracy distributions , at the 99 % conﬁdence level . D C p S 1 / C 1 0 . 763 0 . 079 2 . 2 × 10 − 16 S 2 / C 2 0 . 886 0 . 079 2 . 2 × 10 − 16 S 5 / C 5 0 . 970 0 . 079 2 . 2 × 10 − 16 Table 1 . Results from Kolmogorov - Smirnov tests . D is the estimated maximum distance between the two distributions under analysis , C is the corresponding critical value , and p the resulting p - value . Considering a level of signiﬁcance α = 0 . 01 , we reject the null hypothesis of equivalence of the two distributions in all the cases . In Fig . 1 ( b ) we report the summarizing statistics for the users’ mobility inside one particular community by box and whiskers plots 19 ( or , simply boxplots ) . Black horizontal lines represent the median of the number of users entering or exiting the science and conspiracy communities , and the colored boxes represent the interquartile ranges ( i . e . , the 25th – 75th percentile ranges ) and they statistically measure the degree of dispersion and the skewness of each analyzed distribution : the users which enter the science and conspiracy communities ( violet and blue boxes , respectively ) , and the users which exit from each community ( green and orange boxes for science and conspiracy , respectively ) . Vertical lines ( i . e . , the whiskers ) are lower and upper bounded by the minimum and maximum values of the corresponding distribution , once both outliers and extreme values are removed from the data . Individual points represent the outliers of each analyzed distribution . From the left to the right , each set of boxplots corresponds to one user’s category ( i . e . , U 1 , U 2 , and U 5 ) . 1 The observation is carried out over the period January 2010 – April 2012 , by daily temporal resolution . T is the number of days of observation and it is equal to 835 . 2 / 14 Figure 1 . ( a ) Temporal evolution of the size of the communities S 1 ( solid violet ) , S 2 ( dotted orange ) , S 5 ( dashed pink ) , C 1 ( solid blue ) , C 2 ( dotted sea green ) , and C 5 ( dashed green ) . The observation is carried out in the period January 2010 – April 2012 , with daily temporal resolution . ( b ) Boxplots of the users’ mobility within each group . The black horizontal lines represent the median of the number of users entering or exiting the science and conspiracy communities for each temporal step . Individual points refer to the outliers of the distributions . Colored boxes represent the interquartile range ( 25th – 75th percentile range ) , where blue stands for incoming users in conspiracy community , violet for incoming users in science , orange for exiting users from conspiracy , and green for exiting users from science . On the x - axis we have , from left to right , results for C 1 , S 1 , C 2 , S 2 , C 5 , and S 5 . In all cases we notice a signiﬁcant difference between the users entering into and exiting from a community , favorable to the formers , indeed more than 99 % of the users’ ﬂow is made up of those users entering one community . These two results underline that the behavior of users is similar for both categories , irrespective of the contents . After an initial spike - like growth , the communities evolve at a nearly constant rate . Moreover , once a user enters one community the probability to get out of it is very small . To better characterize the temporal evolution of both communities , we ﬁt the Gompertz growth model ( GM ) in ( 5 ) , the Logistic model ( LM3 , LM5 ) in ( 6 ) , and the Log - logistic model ( LLM ) in ( 7 ) to our sample distributions S 5 and C 5 , representing the temporal proﬁle of quite active users , i . e . with at least 5 total comments , afﬁliated to science or conspiracy communities , respectively . The models are chosen on the basis of the observed evolution of the communities’ size , that is characterized by a ﬁrst phase of rapid growth , approximately exponential , followed by a more gradual one . For each model we estimate its parameters through the Nonlinear Least Squares NLS ( see Section Methods for more details about the ﬁtting models ) . Fit’s results are shown in Fig . 2 for both science ( panel a ) and conspiracy ( panel b ) . Four ﬁts are superposed to original data ( green dotted line ) : GM ( bold orange line ) , LM3 ( dotted violet line ) , LM5 ( dashed - dotted blue line ) , and LLM ( dashed purple line ) . As it can be deduced from Fig . 2 , all models show a good approximation of the temporal evolution of science and conspiracy communities sizes . Anyway , in order to identify the best ﬁt and the quality of each ﬁt , we perform a series of Kolmogorov - Smirnov tests ( KS ) between the real data and each of the synthetic distributions and Maximum Likelihood Estimates ( MLE ) . Results of the KS tests are reported in Tab . 2 . By considering a level of signiﬁcance α = 0 . 01 , we fail to reject the null hypothesis of equivalence of the two distributions in all cases . The Logistic model maximizes the log - likelihood for both S 5 and C 5 . The particular S - shaped behavior observed on raw data , and then characterized by growth - model ﬁts , reminds the one observed in the framework of population growth , where after a ﬁrst stage of huge growth , a saturation level is reached , and 3 / 14 Figure 2 . Fit of the temporal evolution of the size of science ( a ) and conspiracy ( b ) communities . We ﬁtted the data with four growth models : GM ( bold orange line ) , LM3 ( dotted violet line ) , LM5 ( dashed - dotted blue line ) , and LLM ( dashed purple line ) . All models show a good ﬁt for our data samples . The temporal scale is represented by daily temporal steps , starting from January 2010 ( t = 0 ) till April 2012 ( t = 835 ) . D C p D C p S 5 / GM 0 . 071 0 . 079 0 . 031 C 5 / GM 0 . 060 0 . 079 0 . 100 S 5 / LM3 0 . 061 0 . 079 0 . 089 C 5 / LM3 0 . 077 0 . 079 0 . 015 S 5 / LM5 0 . 049 0 . 079 0 . 267 C 5 / LM5 0 . 050 0 . 079 0 . 241 S 5 / LLM 0 . 047 0 . 079 0 . 322 C 5 / LLM 0 . 053 0 . 079 0 . 197 Table 2 . Results from Kolmogorov - Smirnov test . D is the estimated maximum distance between the two distributions under analysis , C is the corresponding critical value , and p the resulting p - value . Considering a level of signiﬁcance α = 0 . 01 , we fail to reject the null hypothesis of equivalence of the two distributions in all cases . population stabilizes . Logistic and Gompertz growth models found several ﬁelds of application , ranging from demography and sociology , to biology and ecology . 20 , 21 Science and conspiracy communities reach a thresholding value in their sizes growth , as ﬁt results suggest . Those users which are deeply engaged in a community are more likely to become focused on a particular topic , and their increasing involvement into highly speciﬁed topics makes them “isolated” from the neighboring environment , which in this case is the whole world of knowledge . What is curious is that both conspiracy and science communities show the same size proﬁles . To better assess the reliability of model ﬁts results , we further inspect the time evolution of S 5 and C 5 communities sizes through advanced spectral methodologies extremely useful to uncover the presence of signiﬁcant oscillatory movements , besides the huge growing trend dominating both communities temporal evolution . More precisely , we try to identify trends , oscillatory components ( both periodic and not - periodic ) , and background noise in our series to ﬁnally reconstruct the embedded true signal , by summing up the contributions of all its signiﬁcant components . We chose non - parametric methods , such as singular - spectrum analysis and similar methodologies , 22 , 23 in order to analyze our records time evolution by an alternative approach , which is not based on ﬁtting an assumed model to the data , with the ﬁnal goal in mind to further support model ﬁts results by a completely different method . Indeed , the simultaneous and ﬂexible application of more than one spectral tool can assure a quite reliable and robust analysis of temporal dynamics , especially when the signal - to - noise ratio is low , besides dealing with ﬁnite sample length . Moreover Monte - Carlo SSA ( MCSSA ) 24 , 25 test is applied to assess the signiﬁcance of the 4 / 14 revealed oscillatory modes with respect to both white and red noise background noise null - hypotheses . The reader is referred to Section Methods for deeper details about the applied methodology . Both conspiracy and science time series behavior turn out to be described by the ﬁrst two T - PCs ( temporal principal components ) , which in that case correspond to the trend . More in details , the trends capture the 96 . 16 % and the 95 . 44 % of S 5 and C 5 series total variance , respectively . Besides , we extracted the pure signiﬁcant reconstructed signals from our series , and we observed that they turned out to be quite similar to trends ( exception made for some boundary effects due to the ﬁnite - sample length ) . Figure 3 shows the trends ( dotted violet line ) and reconstructed signals ( dashed green line ) superposed to S 5 ( panel a ) and C 5 ( panel b ) communities size evolution in time ( orange lines ) . Boundary effects are visible , especially at the beginning of the series , but quite negligible . Trends are able to catch both S 5 and C 5 temporal proﬁle , and they mainly coincide with the reconstructed signiﬁcant signals , in both cases . As a further check , we pre - process data , ﬁrst by removing the trend , second by standardizing - by - trends the so obtained residual time series . 2 No signiﬁcant cycle is detected in S 5 and C 5 series after trend removal . Figure 4 shows S 5 and C 5 detrended time series ( panel a ) and S 5 and C 5 residual time series standardized by their trends ( panel b ) 3 . The apparent oscillating behavior visible in raw data and in the detrended time series ( especially in C 5 , Fig . 4a ) is not connected to signiﬁcant oscillatory modes , according to Monte - Carlo SSA test . Besides , both communities show a smoother proﬁle after Jan 2011 ( Fig . 4b ) , corresponding to the range t > 600 in Fig . 2 . At that time , both S 5 and C 5 growth starts to decrease . Figure 3 . S 5 ( a ) and C 5 ( b ) dominant spectral components . Original series are shown in orange lines , trends in dotted violet lines , and signiﬁcant signal reconstructions in dashed green lines . A pervasive trend dominates both science and conspiracy communities sizes temporal evolution . The signiﬁcant reconstructed signals , as well , are led by the trends behaviour . We can ﬁnally infer that the trends determine the time evolution of our records , only . Thus , we compare the previous described model ﬁts ( GM , LM3 , LM5 , LLM ) to the S 5 and C 5 trends , only . No particular difference emerges between science and conspiracy communities in terms of their growth , and the linear correlation between both communities trends and each ﬁtted model turns to be very high for all the cases , preventing us to identify a signiﬁcantly favorite ﬁt , in agreement with the results previously reported in Tab . 2 . Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is computed , since no particular signiﬁcant cycle emerges from S 5 and C 5 sizes records spectral analysis , thus reducing the risk of underestimating the presence of an eventual correlation at time - shifted version of the original series . 2 Pre - processing is required since the presence of such a pervasive trend reﬂects in a high peak at zero frequency dominating the shape of power spectrum estimate , and sometimes hiding eventual higher - frequency cycles . 3 In order to help the visual comparison between S 5 and C 5 , both the pre - processed time series shown in Fig . 4b are standardized to zero mean and unit variance . 5 / 14 Figure 4 . Pre - processing procedure . ( a ) Detrended S 5 ( solid pink ) and C 5 ( solid green ) . ( b ) Standardized - by - trend S 5 ( solid pink ) and C 5 ( solid green ) residual time series . In panel b , the pre - processed series are standardized to zero mean and unit variance . Our analysis thus suggests that communities present strong similarities , and that the behavior of users inside each of them is similar . Once they have selected their preferred group , users seem to undergo community dynamics , that are similar in both science and conspiracy case , irrespectively of the content . Users’ Sentiment Analysis Now we zoom in at the level of the emotional dynamics of the polarized groups . We approximate the emotional attitude of users towards one piece of information that they commented by considering the sentiment of the text . We label the sentiment of each comment as : negative ( - 1 ) , neutral ( 0 ) , or positive ( + 1 ) . We perform an automatic sentiment classiﬁcation based on supervised machine learning , refer to Section Materials and Methods or to 9 for more details . Our aim is to characterize the emotional behavior of the users as a function of their involvement inside the community . To do this we deﬁne three new measures , the mean user sentiment ( σ i ) , the mean negative / positive difference of comments ( δ NP ( i ) ) , and the user sentiment polarization ( ρ σ ( i ) ) as it follows : δ NP ( i ) = 1 T i T i ∑ j = 1 ( Neg j ( i ) − Pos j ( i ) ) , ( 1 ) where T i is the number of days in which user i was active , Neg j ( i ) the number of i ’s negative comments in day j , Pos j ( i ) the number of i ’s positive comments in day j ; ρ σ ( i ) = ( N i − 2 k i − h i ) ( N i − h i ) N 2 i , ( 2 ) where N i , k i , h i are respectively the number of all , negative , and neutral comments left by user i , while l i = N i − k i − h i is the number of the positive ones . Note that ρ σ ( i ) ∈ [ − 1 , 1 ] and that it is equal to 0 if and only if l i = k i or h i = N i , it is equal to 1 if and only if k i = N i , and it is equal to − 1 if and only if l i = N i . While σ i is simply deﬁned as the mean of the sentiment of all comments left by user i . Figure 5 shows the average sentiment σ i for all users ( panel a ) , science users ( panel b ) , and conspiracy users ( panel c ) , as a function of the user engagement – i . e . , the total number of comments left by each user . In the insets we report , for each of the three categories , the value of σ i as a function of the number of comments for the most active users , i . e . those users with at least 6 / 14 Figure 5 . Mean ﬁnal sentiment σ i of all users ( a ) , science users ( b ) , and conspiracy users ( c ) , as a function of the user engagement i . e . , the total number of comments left by each user . In the insets we report , for each of the three categories , the value of σ i as a function of the number of comments for those users with at least 100 comments . We regressed the mean user sentiment σ i w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments . 100 comments . We then regress the mean user sentiment σ i w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments . We notice that σ i becomes more negative as the number of comments increases , in all cases . Figure 6 shows the mean negative / positive difference of comments δ NP ( i ) of all users ( panel a ) , science users ( panel b ) , and conspiracy users ( panel c ) , as a function of the user engagement . In the insets we report , for each of the three categories , the value of δ NP ( i ) as a function of the number of comments for those users with at least 100 comments . We regressed the mean negative / positive difference δ NP ( i ) w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments . δ NP ( i ) is a measure of the mean negative shift from a situation of neutral equilibrium for which either the user has only neutral comments or he / she has the same number of positive and negative comments . A positive value of δ NP ( i ) indicates that the user tends to have , on average , more negative than positive comments . From Fig . 6 we notice that δ NP ( i ) tends to increase when the number of comments increases in all cases , underlining the fact that , on average , more active users tend to show a faster shift towards the negativity than less active ones . The rate of this increment in the negativity is higher for users with more than 100 comments and it is also higher for science users w . r . t conspiracy ones . Figure 7 displays the user sentiment polarization ρ σ ( i ) of all users ( panel a ) , science users ( panel b ) , and conspiracy users ( panel b ) , as a function of the user engagement . In the insets we show , for each of the three categories , the value of ρ σ ( i ) as a function of the number of comments for those users with at least 100 comments . We regressed the user sentiment polarization ρ σ ( i ) w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments . The user sentiment polarization ρ σ ( i ) ranges in [ − 1 , 1 ] , and it is equal to 0 either if all comments are neutral or if there is the same number of negative and positive comments , while it tends to 1 ( resp . - 1 ) when l i (cid:29) k i and h i is small enough , i . e . , when the number of positive comments is much bigger than the number of negative ones , ( resp . k i (cid:29) l i and h i is small enough , i . e . , when the number of negative comments is much bigger than the number of positive ones ) . Science users show an higher value of ρ σ ( i ) , however conspiracy users with at least 100 total comments tend to increase it w . r . t . science ones . The engagement within the echo chamber affects users emotional dynamics . The more a user is active , the higher the tendency to express negative emotion when commenting . This feature holds for both users categories . Moreover , for both categories we observe that , on average , more active users show a faster shift towards the negativity than less active ones . The rate of this increment in the negativity is higher for users with more than 100 comments and it is also higher for science users w . r . t conspiracy ones . In terms of the users’ sentiment polarization we observe some differences between the two categories : its value is generally higher for science users , however very active science users tend to decrease their sentiment polarization with the increasing of the activity , while on the contrary conspiracy ones tend to increase it . Evolution of the Sentiment inside the Communities We now focus on the collective sentiment of the two communities , rather than the single user’s one . Similarly to the single user case we deﬁne the community negative / positive difference of comments ( δ C NP ) and the mean community sentiment polarization 7 / 14 Figure 6 . Mean negative / positive difference δ NP ( i ) of all users ( a ) , science users ( b ) , and conspiracy users ( c ) , as a function of the user engagement . In the insets we report , for each of the three categories , the value of δ NP ( i ) as a function of the number of comments for those users with at least 100 comments . We regressed the mean negative / positive difference δ NP ( i ) w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments . ( ρ C σ ) as follows : δ CNP = 1 M C (cid:32) 1 T T ∑ j = 1 ( Neg Cj − Pos Cj ) (cid:33) , ( 3 ) where T is the number of days of observations , Neg Cj the number of negative comments from users belonging to community C during day j , Pos Cj the number of positive comments from users belonging to community C during day j , M C is the maximum daily activity of community C , and C ∈ { Science , Conspiracy } , while ρ C σ = ( N C − 2 k C − h C ) ( N C − h C ) N 2 C , ( 4 ) where N C , k C , h C are respectively the number of all , negative , and neutral comments left by users of community C , while l C = N C − k C − h C is the number of positive ones . Note that ρ C σ ∈ [ − 1 , 1 ] . Figure 8 displays the community negative / positive difference of comments δ CNP as a function of the daily community activity for science users ( left : panels a , c ) and conspiracy users ( right : panels b , d ) . The top ﬁgures ( panels a , b ) show the values considering all users in the communities , while the bottom ones ( panels c , d ) only consider those users with at least 100 comments . We regressed the community negative / positive difference of comments δ C NP ( y - axes ) w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments inside the community at a given time ( x - axes ) . For both communities δ CNP tend to increase , while science one shows an higher increasing rate for the most active case , conspiracy one shows an higher increasing rate for the general case . Figure 9 shows the mean community sentiment polarization ρ C σ as a function of the daily community activity for science users ( left : panels a , c ) and conspiracy users ( right : panels b , d ) . The top ﬁgures display the values considering all users in the communities ( panels a , b ) , while the bottom ones only consider those users with at least 100 comments ( panels c , d ) . As for Fig . 8 , we regressed the mean community sentiment polarization ρ C σ w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments inside the community at a given time . For the conspiracy community we notice a decrement in the value of ρ C σ as the number of comments increases , moreover this decrement is higher for most active users . Science community instead shows a decrement in the value of ρ C σ for the case of most active users and a slight increment for the general case . Also the community sentiment behavior is affected by the cumulative users’ activity ( in terms of comments ) . When either community is more active , the shift towards negative comments is larger . A difference between the two echo chambers comes upon if we restrict our attention only to the most active users , i . e . those with at least 100 comments . In this last case , science users show a higher rate of increment than conspiracy ones , contrary to the general case . Differently from the single user case , the community sentiment polarization shows a deep decrement with higher activity in the conspiracy community , the process is slower for science community , when we consider only most active users , and even reversed in the general case . 8 / 14 Figure 7 . User’s sentiment polarization ρ σ ( i ) of all users ( a ) , science users ( b ) , and conspiracy users ( c ) , as a function of the user engagement . In the insets we report , for each of the three categories , the value of ρ σ ( i ) as a function of the number of comments for those users with at least 100 comments . We regressed the user sentiment polarization ρ σ ( i ) w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments . Conclusions The Facebook environment is particularly suited for the emergence of polarized communities , or echo chambers . The activity inside such echo chambers is limited to only one type of content . In this work , we characterize the behavior of users inside the echo chamber and the structural evolution of the community accounting for both users activity and the sentiment they express . We ﬁrst study the evolution of the size of the two communities by ﬁtting daily resolution data with three growth models , i . e . the Gompertz model , the Logistic model , and the Log - logistic model , and we observe that both communities evolve in a similar way and the behavior of users is similar irrespectively of the difference in contents : after a ﬁrst phase of rapid growth , approximately exponential , both the communities sizes undergo a more gradual growth , till a thresholding value is reached . The lack of communication with the environment can be supposed to associate with the users extreme focusing on a precise topic . Then we notice that both the users’ and the communities’ emotional behavior is affected by the users’ involvement inside the echo chamber . To an higher involvement corresponds a more negative approach . Moreover , for both categories we observe that , on average , more active users show a faster shift towards the negativity than less active ones . The rate of this increment is higher for users with more than 100 comments and higher for science users w . r . t conspiracy ones . The community sentiment polarization shows a deeper decrement with higher activity in the conspiracy community , while the process is slower for science community , when we consider only most active users , and even reversed in the general case . Methods Ethics Statement The data collection process has been carried out using the Facebook Graph application program interface ( API ) , 26 which is publicly available . For the analysis ( according to the speciﬁcation settings of the API ) we only used publicly available data ( thus users with privacy restrictions are not included in the dataset ) . The pages from which we download data are public Facebook entities and can be accessed by anyone . User content contributing to these pages is also public unless the user’s privacy settings specify otherwise , and in that case it is not available to us . Data Collection and Description Using the approach described in , 10 with the support of diverse Facebook groups very active in the debunking of misinformation ( Protesi di Complotto , Che vuol dire reale , La menzogna diventa verit ` a e passa alla storia ) , we identiﬁed two main categories of pages : conspiracy theories , i . e . , pages promoting contents neglected by main stream media , and science information , i . e . , pages diffusing scientiﬁc news and research advances for which it is easy to check the sources . Starting from this basic differentiation , we categorized Facebook pages according to their contents and their self description . The resulting dataset is composed of 73 public Italian Facebook pages , 34 of which were diffusing scientiﬁc information and 39 conspiracy theories , and covers a timespan of 5 years , from 2010 to 2014 . Table 3 summarizes the details of our data collection . 9 / 14 Figure 8 . Community negative / positive difference of comments δ CNP as a function of the daily community activity for science users ( a , c ) and conspiracy users ( b , d ) . The top ﬁgures ( a , b ) show the values of δ CNP considering all users in the communities , while the bottom ones ( c , d ) only consider those users with at least 100 comments . We regressed the community negative / positive difference of comments δ CNP ( y - axes ) w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments inside the community at a given time ( x - axes ) . Growth Models The Gompertz Growth Model is often used to model growth phenomena which are typically characterized by an asymptotic behaviour rather than by a linear increase . In that sense , a Gompertz function has to be intended as a special case of the most general logistic function , and it is nowadays applied in various research ﬁelds , such as biology , ecology , economics , marketing , and medicine . In oncology , in particular , the Gompertz sigmoid function has been used to model tumor growth , 27 , 28 which are interpreted as an expansion of cellular populations developing in a conﬁned space , where the availability of nutrients is limited in a certain sense . As a consequence , the model considers two parameters , a ﬁrst one , a , for the tumor intrinsic growth related to the mitosis rate and a second one , b , for the growth deceleration , due to the antiangiogenic processes . Let x ( t ) be the size of the tumor at time t , then we have : dx ( t ) dt = ax ( t ) − bx ( t ) ln x ( t ) . For a given initial condition x ( 0 ) = x 0 , and known parameters a and b , the solution 27 is : x ( t ) = e a / b + ( ln ( x 0 ) − a / b ) e − bt . ( 5 ) The most general Logistic Growth Model is deﬁned as : x ( t ) = c + d − c ( 1 + e b ( t − f ) ) g . ( 6 ) In that case , the ﬁrst stage of the growth is approximately exponential , then the growth rate decreases till an asymptotic value is reached . That right - hand asymptote is reached less gradually than the left - hand one compared to the behaviour of the Gompertz function . We used two variants of the Logistic model to ﬁt our data : L 3 that considers only parameters ( b , d , f ) in ( 6 ) , and L 5 that is exactly ( 6 ) . 10 / 14 Figure 9 . Mean community sentiment polarization ρ C σ as a function of the daily community activity for science users ( left ) and conspiracy users ( right ) . The top ﬁgures show the values of ρ C σ considering all users in the communities , while the bottom ones only consider those users with at least 100 comments . We regressed the community negative / positive difference of comments ρ C σ ( y - axes ) w . r . t . the logarithm of the number of comments inside the community at a given time ( x - axis ) . Finally , the Log - Logistic Growth Model is deﬁned as : x ( t ) = c + d − c ( 1 + e b ( ln t − ln f ) ) g . ( 7 ) Nonlinear Least Square Fitting and Goodness of Fit We use the Nonlinear Least Squares ( NLS ) 28 to estimate the parameters of the various models while ﬁtting them with our data . Consider a set of n observations ( t 1 , x 1 ) , . . . , ( t n , x n ) and a model function depending on m parameters y = f ( x , βββ ) , where βββ = ( β 1 , . . . , β m ) and n ≥ m . We want to ﬁnd the vector βββ that minimizes the sum of squares : S = n ∑ i = 1 r 2 i , where the residuals errors r i are given by r i = y i − f ( x i , βββ ) , for i = 1 , 2 , . . . , m . We tested the goodness of our ﬁt by means of the Kolmogorov - Smirnov Test . Advanced spectral analysis and trend extraction procedure Singular - spectrum analysis ( SSA ) is a not - conventional spectral analysis method which provides insight into the unknown and / or partially known dynamics of a dynamical system . 22 , 23 More in detail , SSA aims at decomposing the signal as a linear combination of variability modes , which are data - adaptive functions of time . Thus , with respect to more traditional spectral approaches such as the classical Fourier decomposition , SSA doesn’t ground on variability modes which have to be necessarily harmonic components . As a consequence , SSA provides a powerful de - noising ﬁlter , to identify the different components of 11 / 14 Total Science Conspiracy Pages 73 34 39 Posts 271 , 296 62 , 705 208 , 591 Likes 9 , 164 , 781 2 , 505 , 399 6 , 659 , 382 Comments 1 , 017 , 509 180 , 918 836 , 591 Table 3 . Dataset description . the analyzed signal , such as trends , oscillatory patterns , harmonic and / or anharmonic oscillations , quasi - periodic phenomena , without making any assumption about the underlying generating model of the observed signal . 29 Moreover , SSA doesn’t require the assumption of any particular stationarity or ergodicity conditions . In order to distinguish between signiﬁcant signal and random ﬂuctuations ( i . e . background noise ) , Monte - Carlo SSA ( MCSSA ) is applied . MCSSA grounds on a particular Monte Carlo approach to the signal - to - noise separation issue , suited to overcome the limitations of classical signal extraction procedure , i . e . the identiﬁcation of simply a gap in the eigenvalues spectrum . 24 Recent ﬁne - tunings of the method have been proposed to further improve results robustness and reliability in short time series . 25 In the present work , MCSSA is applied to S 5 and C 5 time series , to establish whether our time series are linearly distinguishable from the linear stochastic processes , usually considered as noise . Both white and red noise null - hypotheses are taken into account , since the choice of the most suitable kind of noise in social sciences , when dealing with advanced spectral methodologies , is still under debate . Sentiment Classiﬁcation The sentiment classiﬁcation is carried out as in 9 and refers to the same dataset . We consider three values for the sentiment of each comment : negative ( - 1 ) , neutral ( 0 ) , and positive ( + 1 ) . We perform an automatic sentiment classiﬁcation based on supervised machine learning that consists of the following four steps : ( i ) a sample of texts is manually annotated with sentiment ( in our case 20K randomly selected comments are manually annotated by 22 native Italian speakers ) , ( ii ) the labeled set is used to train and tune a classiﬁer , ( iii ) the classiﬁer is evaluated on an independent test set or by cross - validation , and ( iv ) the classiﬁer is applied to the whole set of texts . For more details on the classiﬁer or on its performance refer to . 9 12 / 14 References 1 . Quattrociocchi , W . How does misinformation spread online ? In WEF Agenda ( World Economic Forum , 2016 ) . 2 . Cacciatore , M . A . , Scheufele , D . A . & Iyengar , S . The end of framing as we know it . . . and the future of media effects . Mass Communication and Society 19 , 7 – 23 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Brown , J . , Broderick , A . J . & Lee , N . Word of mouth communication within online communities : Conceptualizing the online social network . Journal of interactive marketing 21 , 2 – 20 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Kahn , R . & Kellner , D . New media and internet activism : From the’battle of seattle’to blogging . New media & society 6 , 87 – 95 ( 2004 ) . 5 . Quattrociocchi , W . , Conte , R . & Lodi , E . Opinions manipulation : Media , power and gossip . Advances in Complex Systems 14 , 567 – 586 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Quattrociocchi , W . , Caldarelli , G . & Scala , A . Opinion dynamics on interacting networks : media competition and social inﬂuence . Scientiﬁc reports 4 ( 2014 ) . 7 . Kumar , R . , Mahdian , M . & McGlohon , M . Dynamics of conversations . In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , 553 – 562 ( ACM , 2010 ) . 8 . Sunstein , C . R . The law of group polarization . Journal of political philosophy 10 , 175 – 195 ( 2002 ) . 9 . Zollo , F . et al . Emotional dynamics in the age of misinformation . PloS ONE 10 , e0138740 ( 2015 ) . 10 . Bessi , A . et al . Science vs conspiracy : collective narratives in the age of misinformation . PloS one 10 , 02 ( 2015 ) . 11 . Del Vicario , M . et al . The spreading of misinformation online . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 , 554 – 559 ( 2016 ) . URL http : / / www . pnas . org / content / 113 / 3 / 554 . abstract . http : / / www . pnas . org / content / 113 / 3 / 554 . full . pdf . 12 . Bessi , A . , Scala , A . , Rossi , L . , Zhang , Q . & Quattrociocchi , W . The economy of attention in the age of ( mis ) information . Journal of Trust Management ( 2014 ) . 13 . Bessi , A . et al . Viral misinformation : The role of homophily and polarization . In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion , 355 – 356 ( International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee , 2015 ) . 14 . Bessi , A . et al . Homophily and polarization in the age of misinformation . ( to appear on ) Eur . Phys . J . S . T . ( 2016 ) . 15 . Zollo , F . et al . Debunking in a world of tribes ( 2015 ) . URL http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1510 . 04267 . 16 . Ciampaglia , G . L . et al . Computational fact checking from knowledge networks . PloS one 10 , e0128193 ( 2015 ) . 17 . Qazvinian , V . , Rosengren , E . , Radev , D . R . & Mei , Q . Rumor has it : Identifying misinformation in microblogs . In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 1589 – 1599 ( Association for Computational Linguistics , 2011 ) . 18 . Lazer , D . et al . Computational social science . Science 323 , 721 – 723 ( 2009 ) . URL http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / 323 / 5915 / 721 . http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / 323 / 5915 / 721 . full . pdf . 19 . Chambers , J . M . Graphical methods for data analysis ( 1983 ) . 20 . Milotti , E . , Vyshemirsky , V . , Sega , M . & Chignola , R . Interplay between distribution of live cells and growth dynamics of solid tumours . Scientiﬁc reports 2 ( 2012 ) . 21 . Tindall , M . , Please , C . & Peddie , M . Modelling the formation of necrotic regions in avascular tumours . Mathematical biosciences 211 , 34 – 55 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Ghil , M . et al . Advanced spectral methods for climatic time series . Reviews of Geophysics 40 , 1 – 41 ( 2002 ) . 23 . Golyandina , N . & Zhigljavsky , A . A . Singular Spectrum Analysis for Time Series ( Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2013 ) . 24 . Allen , M . R . & Smith , L . A . Monte Carlo SSA : detecting irregular oscillations in the presence of colored noise . Journal of Climate 9 , 3373 – 3404 ( 1996 ) . 25 . Groth , A . & Ghil , M . Monte carlo singular spectrum analysis ( ssa ) revisited : detecting oscillator clusters in multivariate datasets . Journal of Climate 28 , 7873 – 7893 ( 2015 ) . 26 . Facebook . Using the graph api . Website ( 2013 ) . URL https : / / developers . facebook . com / docs / graph - api / using - graph - api / . Last checked : 19 . 01 . 2014 . 13 / 14 27 . L . Ferrante , L . P . L . L . , S . Bompadre . Parameter estimation in a gompertzian stochastic model for tumor growth . Biometrics 56 , 1076 – 1081 ( 2000 ) . URL http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2677039 . 28 . Juki´c , D . , Kralik , G . & Scitovski , R . Least - squares ﬁtting gompertz curve . Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 169 , 359 – 375 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Alessio , S . M . Digital Signal Processing and Spectral Analysis for Scientists : Concepts and Applications ( Springer , 2016 ) . Acknowledgements Funding for this work was provided by EU FET project MULTIPLEX nr . 317532 , SIMPOL nr . 610704 , DOLFINS nr . 640772 , SOBIGDATA nr . 654024 . The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . We want to thank Geoff Hall and “Skepti Forum” for providing fundamental support in deﬁning the atlas of conspiracy news sources in the US Facebook . Additional information Competing ﬁnancial interests The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests . 14 / 14