OPEN Vinculin is required to maintain glomerular barrier integrity Franziska Lausecker 1 , 7 , Xuefei Tian 2 , 7 , Kazunori Inoue 2 , Zhen Wang 2 , Christopher E . Pedigo 2 , Hossam Hassan 2 , Chang Liu 2 , Margaret Zimmer 2 , Stephanie Jinno 2 , Abby L . Huckle 1 , Hellyeh Hamidi 1 , Robert S . Ross 3 , Roy Zent 4 , 5 , Christoph Ballestrem 1 , Rachel Lennon 1 , 6 and Shuta Ishibe 2 1 Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell - Matrix Research , Faculty of Biology , Medicine and Health , University of Manchester , Manchester , UK ; 2 Department of Internal Medicine , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , Connecticut , USA ; 3 Department of Medicine / Cardiology , University of California , San Diego , School of Medicine , La Jolla , California , USA and Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System , San Diego , California , USA ; 4 Department of Medicine , Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Nashville , Tennessee , USA ; 5 Veterans Affairs Hospital , Nashville , Tennessee , USA ; and 6 School of Biology , Faculty of Biology , Medicine and Health , University of Medicine , Manchester Academic Health Science Centre , UK Cell - matrix interactions and podocyte intercellular junctions are key for maintaining the glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier . Vinculin , a cytoplasmic protein , couples actin ﬁ laments to integrin - mediated cell - matrix adhesions and to cadherin - based intercellular junctions . Here , we examined the role of vinculin in podocytes by the generation of a podocyte - speci ﬁ c knockout mouse . Mice lacking podocyte vinculin had increased albuminuria and foot process effacement following injury in vivo . Analysis of primary podocytes isolated from the mutant mice revealed defects in cell protrusions , altered focal adhesion size and signaling , as well as impaired cell migration . Furthermore , we found a marked mislocalization of the intercellular junction protein zonula occludens - 1 . In kidney sections from patients with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis , minimal change disease and membranous nephropathy , we observed dramatic differences in the expression levels and localization of vinculin . Thus , our results suggest that vinculin is necessary to maintain the integrity of the glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier by modulating podocyte foot processes and stabilizing intercellular junctions . Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . kint . 2017 . 09 . 021 KEYWORDS : cell adhesion ; glomerular disease ; glomerular filtration barrier ; podocyte ; vinculin Copyright ª 2017 , International Society of Nephrology . Published by Elsevier Inc . This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . T he glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier is composed of highly specialized visceral epithelial cells ( podocytes ) , the glomerular basement membrane ( GBM ) , and fenes - trated endothelial cells . The barrier prevents macromolecules in the blood from traversing into the urine , and defects in the barrier result in albuminuria and nephrotic syndrome . Recent evidence has demonstrated the importance of cell – matrix interactions in podocytes . 1 These interactions are mediated by cell surface integrin receptors binding to ligands in the GBM . Human and mouse genetic studies have shown that ablation or mutations in a 3 b 1 integrin , 2 – 4 along with its ligand , b 2 laminin , 5 result in severe proteinuria , and that genetic abla - tion of integrin binding proteins — integrin linked kinase ( ILK ) , 6 talin1 , 7 and tetraspanin CD151 8 — leads to phenoco - pying of integrin loss , emphasizing the importance of cell – matrix interactions for barrier function . Furthermore , the integrity of the ﬁ ltration barrier is also governed by the podocyte slit diaphragm , a modi ﬁ ed tight junction that connects interdigitating foot processes , and serves as the terminal barrier in the glomerulus . 9 Patients harboring ge - netic mutations in slit diaphragm proteins , such as nephrin , FAT1 , or podocin , present with severe , steroid - resistant nephrotic syndrome . 10 Vinculin is an adapter protein that localizes at cell – matrix adhesions ( also known as focal adhesions [ FAs ] ) 11 and at cell – cell junctions . 12 It comprises an N - terminal head domain , a proline - rich linker , and a C - terminal tail domain . The head domain binds to talin at cell – matrix adhesions and pre - dominantly to a - catenin at cell – cell junctions . 13 The tail domain has been shown to bind paxillin , F - actin , and phos - phatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . 14 – 16 Vinculin has a well characterized function of stabilizing cell – matrix adhesions by orchestrating the recruitment and release of other cell – matrix adhesion proteins , thereby controlling the strength of adhe - sion binding to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . 17 – 19 Vinculin also has been shown to regulate cell migration , 20 which is determined by the adhesive state of cells mediated by FAs and their dynamic turnover . 21 Although it is clear that vinculin modulates cell adhesion , its role in the glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier is unclear . Correspondence : Shuta Ishibe , Section of Nephrology , Yale University School of Medicine , PO Box 208029 , 333 Cedar St , New Haven , CT 06520 - 8029 . E - mail : shuta . ishibe @ yale . edu or Rachel Lennon or Christoph Ballestrem , Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell - Matrix Research , Michael Smith Bldg , University of Manchester , Manchester M13 9PT , UK . E - mail : Rachel . Lennon @ manchester . ac . uk or Christoph . Ballestrem @ manchester . ac . uk 7 FL and XT contributed equally to this article . Received 10 May 2017 ; revised 23 August 2017 ; accepted 14 September 2017 ; published online 12 December 2017 www . kidney - international . org basic research Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 643 Aside from its function in cell – matrix adhesions , vinculin is an important regulator of cell – cell junctions . 22 , 23 Mice lacking vinculin , speci ﬁ cally in cardiomyocytes , die suddenly of ventricular arrhythmias due to disruption of gap junctions containing intercalated disks at cell – cell junctions . If they survive this early vulnerable period , such mice later succumb to heart failure from a dilated cardiomyopathy , caused by disruption of both cell – matrix and cell – cell junctions . 24 , 25 Vinculin also is known to interact with zonula occludens ( ZO ) - 1 in the cardiac myocyte ; with vinculin de ﬁ ciency , an associated reduction in ZO - 1 occurs . 25 The importance of ZO - 1 in the function of podocytes is best illustrated by Tjp1 ( or ZO - 1 ) knockout ( KO ) studies , as mice lacking this gene develop severe proteinuria . 26 Given that vinculin ( Vcl ) plays a pivotal role in regulating cell – matrix and cell – cell adhesion , and that it binds ZO - 1 , we hypothesized that it has a critical role in glomerular ﬁ ltration . To circumvent the embryonic lethality seen in the global Vcl KO mouse , 21 we generated a podocyte - speci ﬁ c Vcl KO mouse using the Podocin - Cre and Vcl ﬂ ox / ﬂ ox system ( Pod - Vcl - KO ) . These mice were generally healthy , with only mild protein - uria . However , Pod - Vcl - KO mice were more susceptible to proteinuria and foot process effacement after injury . Isolated Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes demonstrated an altered FA size , increased phosphorylation levels of FA protein FAK , and increased cell migration . Additionally , marked mislocalization of the junctional protein ZO - 1 occurred after injury . Finally , in kidney biopsies from patients with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis ( FSGS ) , minimal change disease ( MCD ) , and membranous nephropathy ( MN ) , marked differences were found in vinculin localization that correlated with the level of nephrin localization in capillary loops . Our ﬁ ndings indicate that vinculin plays a critical role in maintaining the glomerular barrier by regulating podocyte foot process morphology and localizing ZO - 1 at the plasma membrane . RESULTSGeneration of the podocyte - speci ﬁ c Vcl - KO mouse To study the role of vinculin in podocytes , we generated a podocyte - speci ﬁ c vinculin KO mouse ( Pod - Vcl - KO ) using the Cre – Lox system based on podocin cre , which is expressed at E14 27 , and vinculin ﬂ oxed transgenic mice 24 ( Figure 1a ) . The Pod - Vcl - KO mice were born in the normal Mendelian fre - quency as identi ﬁ ed by tail genotyping ( Figure 1b ) . Isolated , enriched primary podocytes , harvested from the Pod - Vcl - KO mouse and identi ﬁ ed by the podocyte - speci ﬁ c marker Wilms Tumor - 1 ( WT1 ) , showed reduced vinculin expression , as determined by western blot analysis ( Figure 1c ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 1d ) and immunocytochemistry ( Figure 1e ) . Kidneys from Pod - Vcl - KO mice and control littermates ( termed control mice ) were immunostained for vinculin and the podocyte - speci ﬁ c marker nephrin , which con ﬁ rmed that the observed loss of vinculin was podocyte speci ﬁ c , as co - localization of the markers was lost in the Pod - Vcl - KO ( Figure 1f ) . In summary these data demonstrate the successful elimination of vinculin from podocytes in the Pod - Vcl - KO mouse . Vinculin is required for podocyte integrity after injury As evidence of the rigorous and reproducible results from this animal model , Pod - Vcl - KO mice were generated indepen - dently in our two laboratories , and most ( approximately 90 % ) of the mice were normal ( studied to age 10 months ) . No differences were observed between Pod - Vcl - KO and control mice , with respect to kidney morphometry ( weight or size ) ( Supplementary Figure 1A ; quanti ﬁ ed in Supplementary Figure 1B ) , nor was there evidence of alteration in serum creatinine levels in the Pod - Vcl - KO ( data not shown ) . Renal histology demonstrated normal glomerular architecture , with no evidence of ﬁ brosis compared with age - matched control mice ( Figure 2a ) . A total of 38 % of aged Pod - Vcl - KO mice ( age $ 9 months ) kidneys had large glomerular cysts ( Supplementary Figure 1C ) . These cysts were not observed in any of the younger Pod - Vcl - KO mice . Given that basal ﬁ ndings of the Pod - Vcl - KO mice showed only minor abnormalities , we next challenged these mice by administering rabbit anti - mouse GBM ( nephrotoxic serum [ NTS ] ) . At 7 days after NTS injection , the Pod - Vcl - KO mice exhibited glomerular damage characterized by increased mesangial matrix accumulation ( Figure 2b ) . Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) revealed more foot process effacement in the Pod - Vcl - KO mice treated with NTS , compared with control mice ( Figure 2c ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of mesangial matrix accumulation and foot process effacement reveals signi ﬁ cant differences between NTS - treated Pod - Vcl - KO mice and control mice treated with NTS ( Figure 2d and e ) . We also challenged the mice with i . p . lipopolysac - charide ( LPS ) , which is considered to be an animal model for minimal change disease , and we observed no histologic dif - ferences using light microscopy ( Figure 2b ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 2d ) . Ultrastructural examination by TEM showed an increase in podocyte injury , as evidenced by foot process effacement in the Pod - Vcl - KO compared with control mice ( Figure 2c ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 2e ) . Lastly , functional analysis demonstrated that after either NTS - or LPS - induced glomerular injury , the Pod - Vcl - KO mice had signi ﬁ cantly more albuminuria compared with age - matched control mice treated with the same agents at various time points ( Figure 2f and g ) . Together , these ﬁ ndings indicate that Pod - Vcl - KO mice are more susceptible to glomerular injury . The loss of vinculin alters podocyte foot process morphology Podocytes form long , interdigitating foot processes in vivo , and these are indispensable for intact barrier function . To investigate whether vinculin plays a role in the regulation of podocyte morphology , we examined the number and length of podocyte foot processes in Pod - Vcl - KO mice in vivo , per - forming serial block - face scanning electron microscopy ( SBFSEM ) . Feature tracking of intact podocytes revealed the complex morphology of these cells ( Supplementary Figure S2A and Supplementary Movie S1 ) . In contrast to control podocytes , we found that Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes had smaller cell bodies , with a branching phenotype in which processes merged soon after branching occurred ( Figure 3a , basic research F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function 644 Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 white arrowhead ; Supplementary Movies S2 and S3 ) . Although the average length of the major protrusions was not different ( Figure 3b ) , foot process length was signi ﬁ cantly increased in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes compared with control cells ( Figure 3b , yellow arrowhead ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 3c ) . This increase in foot process length and the branching phenotype was exacerbated upon treatment with NTS ( Supplementary Figure S2B – D ) . These data reveal that vin - culin is required for maintenance of normal cellular pro - trusions and foot processes in the podocyte . Loss of vinculin increases FAK tyrosine phosphorylation in podocyte focal adhesions Vinculin is a known component of the consensus adhesome 28 and plays a critical role in signal transduction from FAs 3 to the actin cytoskeleton . 29 , 30 To investigate the role of vinculin in the regulation of podocyte FAs , we analyzed control and Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes , cultured on the GBM substrate collagen IV . Paxillin immuno ﬂ uorescence revealed that the FAs of nephrin - positive control podocytes had an average area of 5 m m 2 , whereas those from Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes were signi ﬁ cantly smaller , with an average size of 3 m m 2 ( Figure 4a ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 4b ) . Western blotting analysis revealed no differences in total cellular expression levels of FA proteins between control and Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes ( Supplementary Figure S3A ) . Next , we examined whether the decreased FA size in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes was associated with altered FA signaling , by comparing the ratio of phosphorylated FAK ( pFAK ) at tyrosine 397 to endogenous paxillin in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes and control podocytes , using ratiometric imag - ing . 31 These images revealed increased pFAK to paxillin levels in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes , compared with ratios in control podocytes ( Figure 4c ; Supplementary Figure S3B ) . The total cellular protein levels of pFAK remained unchanged in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes ( Supplementary Figure S3A ) , highlighting the fact that vinculin - dependent FAK phosphorylation and signaling is site - speci ﬁ c . Both vinculin and FAK have been shown to regulate the strength of adhesion of cells to ECM . 32 , 33 To investigate whether vinculin regulates adhesion strength in podocytes , we Figure 1 | Generation of podocyte - speci ﬁ c Vcl - KO mice . Schematic demonstrating the breeding of the Podocin - Cre mice with Vcl ﬂ ow / ﬂ ow mice to generate the podocyte - speci ﬁ c Vcl - KO mice ( Pod - Vcl - KO ; a ) . Identi ﬁ cation of Vcl ﬂ / ﬂ and Podocin - Cre by tail genotyping ( b ) . Representative vinculin protein level in puri ﬁ ed control ( Ctrl ) podocytes and loss of immunoreactivity of vinculin in podocytes harvested from Pod - Vcl - KO mice as detected by Western blotting ; n ¼ 3 independent experiments ( c ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of vinculin protein levels relative to WT1 protein levels : N ¼ 5 ; * P < 0 . 001 ( d ) . Localization of vinculin and wild type ( WT ) 1 in control and Pod - Vcl - KO primary podocytes by immuno ﬂ uorescence ( bar ¼ 10 m m ; e ) . Double immuno ﬂ uorescence of nephrin and vinculin on kidney sections of the indicated genotypes ( f ) . In the merged image , vinculin is shown in green ; nephrin is shown in the red channel ( bar ¼ 10 m m ) . To optimize viewing of this image , please see the online version of this article at www . kidney - international . org . F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function basic research Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 645 Figure 2 | Loss of Vcl in podocytes results in worsened albuminuria and foot process effacement . Representative light microscopy images of glomeruli from control and Pod - Vcl - KO mice at age 8 weeks , stained with hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) , periodic acid – Schiff ( PAS ) , and Trichrome ( Tri ) , which reveal no signi ﬁ cant differences ( bar ¼ 20 m m ; a ) . Representative images of control ( Ctrl ) and Pod - Vcl - KO mice at age 8 weeks after nephrotoxic serum ( NTS ) injection at 7 days and lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) treatment after 24 hours ( bar ¼ 20 m m ; b ) . Transmission electron micrographs revealing foot process effacement in Ctrl and Pod - Vcl - KO mice after LPS treatment ( 24 hours ) and NTS injection ( 7 days ) ( bar ¼ 150 nm ; c ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of ( b ) ; mesangial expansion was assessed with a score from 0 to 4 , with 0 representing no detectable mesanigal expansion , and 4 being severe , by blinded pathologist . A total of 15 – 20 glomeruli were analyzed from n ¼ 4 mice ; * P < 0 . 01 ( d ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of ( c ) , the number of foot processes per micrometer of glomerular basement membrane in the Ctrl and Pod - Vcl - KO mice after NTS or LPS injection . N ¼ 3 mice were used at each time point . * P < 0 . 001 ( e ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of urinary albumin normalized to creatinine at 0 , 1 , 7 , 14 , and 28 days after NTS . N ¼ 10 mice at each time point ; * P < 0 . 001 . Error bars show SEM ( f ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of urinary albumin normalized to creatinine at 0 , 12 , 24 , 48 , and 72 hours after LPS treatment . N ¼ 10 mice at each time point ; * P < 0 . 001 . Error bars show SEM ( g ) . To optimize viewing of this image , please see the online version of this article at www . kidney - international . org . basic research F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function 646 Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 performed adhesion assays , plating Pod - Vcl - KO and control podocytes on collagen I , laminin , and ﬁ bronectin . Regardless of the substrate , no signi ﬁ cant difference in adhesion was detected between control and Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes ( Figure 4d ) . Signals from FAs control a diverse repertoire of cellular functions , such as migration and proliferation . 21 , 34 Vinculin , as well as FAK , has been shown to in ﬂ uence the motile behavior of cells . 32 , 35 Therefore , to investigate whether vinculin affects podocyte cell migration , we performed a wounding assay using electrical cell - substrate impedance sensing . In this assay , the transepithelial resistance of a cell monolayer against an applied current is measured . Inducing a wound to the cell monolayer by applying a high current locally induces cell death in a de ﬁ ned area . The induced wound led to a rapid drop in transepithelial resistance , which was followed by an increase in resistance as cells migrated and repopulated the gap . Filling the gap resulted in a resistance plateau when the epithelial barrier was fully re - established ( Supplementary Figure S3C ) . Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes showed decreased half - times following the rise of resistance after wounding ( Figure 4e ) , indicating faster migration compared with control podocytes . Loss of vinculin impairs podocyte mechanosensing The kidney is a force - loaded organ , requiring appropriate mechanosensing to facilitate normal ﬁ ltration . FAs are critical for sensing of external stimuli , and vinculin has been pro - posed to have a key role in this process . To investigate the extent to which vinculin is involved in sensing and adapting to varying forces in podocytes , we performed force - sensing assays whereby immortalized human podocytes , transfected with small interfering ( si ) RNA targeting vinculin , were seeded on ﬂ exible polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) membranes and exposed to cyclic stretching for 25 minutes ( 10 % strain at 1 Hz ) . Cellular responses were recorded , and the cellular re - orientation with respect to the direction of stretch was analyzed ( Supplementary Figure S3D ) by measuring the cosine of the measured angle ( Figure 4f ) . Measurements revealed that podocytes transfected with scrambled siRNA ( siCtrl ) re - organized perpendicular to the stretch axis , as has been reported for other cell types 36 ( Figure 4g ) . Podocytes transfected with siRNA targeting vinculin ( siVcl ) ( Supplementary Figure S3E ) resulted in a signi ﬁ cantly reduced ability to respond to stretching forces ( Figure 4g ) . From these data , we conclude that vinculin plays an impor - tant role in the response of podocytes to stretching forces . ZO - 1 localization at cell – cell junctions is impaired in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes after injury As vinculin also plays an important role at sites other than FAs , we next examined how vinculin modulates intercellular adhesions . Given that ZO - 1 , a tight junction protein , has been shown to be required in podocyte health , and to interact with vinculin , we investigated whether vinculin helps to properly localize ZO - 1 . Using immuno ﬂ uorescence , we found that vinculin co - localizes with ZO - 1 both in vivo and in vitro ( Figure 5a , white arrowhead ) . Vinculin co - localization was not found along the entire length of intercellular junctions but rather at discrete contact areas between two cells ( Figure 5a , white arrowhead , lower panel ) . Additionally , vinculin immunoprecipitation revealed binding of ZO - 1 to vinculin in control podocytes ( Supplementary Figure S4A ) . Figure 3 | Podocytes from Pod - Vcl - KO mice showed altered morphology of cellular protrusions in vivo . 3View tracking of podocytes in vivo using serial block face scanning electron microscopy . White arrowhead highlights the rejoining of cellular protrusions . Yellow arrow - heads highlight the foot process lengths . Bar ¼ 10 um in the bigger images on the left , and 1 um in smaller images on the right ( a ) . Length of major protrusions was measured within the modeled podocyte from the ﬁ rst branching point of the cell body to the ﬁ nal tip ; n ¼ 5 protrusions per cell ; 3 podocytes from different animals were analyzed ( b ) . Foot process length was measured from the last branching point to the end of the foot process ( N ¼ 60 processes per cell , N ¼ 3 mice ) . * P < 0 . 001 based on a Student ’ s t - test ( c ) . To optimize viewing of this image , please see the online version of this article at www . kidney - international . org . F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function basic research Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 647 To gain further insight into the potential role of vinculin in the regulation of these intercellular junctions , their integrity was determined by the localization of ZO - 1 at cell – cell ad - hesions of Pod - Vcl - KO and control podocytes that were injured with either LPS or protamine sulfate ( PS ) stimulation . Quantitative immuno ﬂ uorescence staining of primary podo - cytes stimulated with LPS or PS revealed an increased abun - dance of ZO - 1 localization in the cytoplasm of Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes , in comparison with control podocytes ( Figure 5b ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 5c ; Supplementary Figure S4B . ) Addi - tionally , cell fractionation revealed signi ﬁ cantly pronounced ZO - 1 redistribution from the membrane to the cytoplasm after LPS - or PS - induced injury in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes , compared with control podocytes ( Figure 5d ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 5e ) . Further validating our ﬁ ndings , in vivo , podocytes isolated from Pod - Vcl - KO and control mice that were injected with either LPS or NTS revealed a signi ﬁ cantly increased presence of ZO - 1 in the cytoplasm of Pod - Vcl - KO , compared with control podocytes ( Figure 5f ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 5g ) . To further con ﬁ rm the role of vinculin in stabilizing intercellular adhesions in podocytes , we performed rescue experiments and re - expressed vinculin into Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes . Our results reveal that expression of green ﬂ uo - rescent protein – vinculin in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes partially restored ZO - 1 localization at cell – cell junctions even after podocyte injury . Quanti ﬁ cation showed a 25 % reduction of Figure 4 | Loss of vinculin impairs focal adhesion ( FA ) signaling . Podocytes were isolated from control ( Ctrl ) and Pod - Vcl - KO mice and stained for paxillin . Nephrin staining was used to verify podocyte cell identity . Note that the FAs in Ctrl podocytes are bigger than those in vinculin - de ﬁ cient podocytes ( a ) . FA size was quanti ﬁ ed by drawing around the adhesions and measuring the area in ImageJ . A total of 20 – 25 adhesions were analyzed , from 60 cells , in 3 independent experiments . * P < 0 . 001 ( b ) . Phospho FAK ( Y397 ) to paxillin levels were calculated performing ratio imaging . Focal adhesions were analyzed from 60 cells , in 3 independent experiments ; * P < 0 . 01 ( c ) . Adhesions assays , using crystal violet , were performed with Pod - Vcl - KO and Ctrl podocytes plated on collagen I , laminin , and ﬁ bronectin . Optical density ( OD ) was measured at 595 nm . N ¼ 3 for each substrate ( d ) . To investigate cellular migration , we performed a wounding assay using electrical cell substrate impedance sensing ( ECIS ) , in which cells forming a cell monolayer insulate against an applied current . The left image shows a nonlinear regression of the increase in resistance after wounding . Half - time was calculated to compare migratory behavior of podocytes , ﬁ lling the induced wound . The right graph shows quanti ﬁ ed half - times . N ¼ 18 , pooled from 4 independent experiments ( e ) . Cellular orientation of immortalized human podocytes was analyzed by calculating the cosine of the angle of cellular orientation regarding the direction of stretch . Cosine ( angle ) ¼ 0 . 5 represents random cellular organization ; cosine ( angle ) ¼ 1 demonstrates perpendicular orientation toward the stretch direction , whereas cosine ( angle ) ¼ 0 implies a parallel organization of the cells ( f ) . Small interfering ( si ) RNA – mediated knockdown of vinculin and control knockdown using scrambled siRNA was induced in human immortalized podocytes , and the cosine of the angle was calculated . N ¼ 300 from 3 independent experiments ; * P < 0 . 05 ( g ) . To optimize viewing of this image , please see the online version of this article at www . kidney - international . org . basic research F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function 648 Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 ZO - 1 intensity in the cytoplasm of rescued cells in compar - ison with untransfected Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes treated with LPS or PS ( Figure 6a ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 6b ) . Taken together , these experiments reveal that vinculin is pivotal in stabilizing cell – cell adhesions in podocytes after glomerular injury . Vinculin levels are altered in human glomerular disease To investigate the importance of vinculin in human disease processes , we analyzed kidney biopsy sections from patients who had FSGS , MCD , or MN , and compared them to healthy control tissue . The localization of nephrin was similar in control and MCD sections and showed an even distribution across glomeruli ( Figure 7a ) . In contrast , the localization of nephrin in MN and FSGS samples was more focal and punctate , and regions of reduced nephrin expression had increased ECM deposition ( Supplementary Figure S5 ) . Vin - culin localized to nephrin - positive capillary loops in all analyzed disease cases ( Figure 7a , white boxes ) . However , in FSGS , we detected reduced vinculin localization to nephrin - positive capillary loops , compared with capillary loops , with reduced nephrin staining ( Figure 7a — compare white and yellow boxes ) . To analyze overall vinculin localization to capillary loops in glomerular diseases , we performed ratio - metric imaging , quantifying vinculin levels relative to nephrin levels speci ﬁ cally in nephrin - positive areas ( Figure 7b ) . The blue - colored nephrin - positive masks , in both FSGS and MN sections , indicate a low vinculin - to - nephrin ratio , whereas in control and MCD sections , we detected red / white color pat - terns , indicating a higher vinculin - to - nephrin ratio in these glomeruli ( Figure 7b ; quanti ﬁ ed in Figure 7c ) . Taken together , these data demonstrate that with human glomerular disease , marked differences are present in the level and localization of vinculin . DISCUSSION Vinculin is known as a mechanosensitive regulator of cell – matrix adhesions and cell – cell junctions . In this study , we found that vinculin has a role in maintaining podocyte barrier integrity both in vivo and in vitro . We report the following : ( i ) Pod - Vcl - KO mice develop proteinuria upon challenge ; ( ii ) defects in podocyte cell protrusion / foot process morphology occur in Pod - Vcl - KO mice ; ( iii ) altered adhesion signaling with impaired FAK phosphorylation occurs in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes ; ( iv ) disrupted intercellular junctions with mislocalization of the key junctional protein ZO - 1 are detected in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes ; and ( v ) analysis of human kidney sections revealed that vinculin localization is altered in glomeruli of FSGS , MCD , and MN samples , compared with control samples . Overall , our ﬁ ndings highlight the importance of vinculin in the regulation of the glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier in response to injury in both mouse and human kidneys . Vinculin is a core component of the FA protein complex , where it is exposed to tension . 15 In this study , we show that vinculin is a critical regulator of tension - sensing in podocytes ; vinculin - de ﬁ cient podocytes showed a signi ﬁ cant decrease in ability to respond to cyclic stretching . These data are in keeping with studies in ﬁ broblasts showing that vinculin ( and its link to the actin cytoskeleton ) is important for not only sensing of stretching forces 30 but also transduction of forces in FAs . 20 , 37 , 38 In addition to mechanotransduction , vinculin controls adhesion signaling by coordinating adhesion signaling proteins . 30 This ability largely depends on its inti - mate relationship with talin , 39 , 40 which also is required to maintain glomerular barrier integrity ; podocyte - speci ﬁ c KO of talin 1 causes severe glomerular dysfunction and early kidney failure . 7 FAK is also a core constituent of FAs , binding to talin 41 and regulating FA turnover . 42 , 43 In this study , we found that FAK phosphorylation ( Y397 ) is increased in FAs of Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes ( Figure 4c ) . This increase in FAK phosphorylation may explain the increase we observed in cell motility in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes , because increased FAK phosphorylation ( in conjunction with Src and paxillin phosphorylation ) has been associated with an increase in protrusive activity 44 through increased Rac1 activity . 45 , 46 We observed signi ﬁ cant differences in the organization of cellular protrusions between Pod - Vcl - KO and control podocytes in vivo , in which we observed an increased number of foot processes in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes . This highlights the role of vinculin in the organization of the actin - dependent cellular extensions . Furthermore , LPS / PS - induced injuries in vivo were associated with more proteinuria in the Pod - Vcl - KO , compared with control mice expressing vinculin , sug - gesting its importance in maintaining the integrity of the barrier function . Vinculin not only controls FA stability , but also regulates cell – cell adhesions . 12 In epithelial cells , vinculin localization to cell – cell junctions is driven in a force - dependent manner . 47 Considering the consistently high transcapillary pressure that podocytes endure as they encounter 180L of plasma daily , we suggest that vinculin functions in a force - dependent way in podocytes , where its recruitment helps to maintain the integ - rity of the glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier . In this regard , the mild phenotype observed in the Pod - Vcl - KO mice was initially surprising . This ﬁ nding suggests that vinculin is dispensable during development of the kidney but plays a more important role at later stages , or when the kidney is challenged and needs to recover after ( or be protected from ) injury . This possibility is in line with our observations showing that defects in barrier function become more evident upon challenge with LPS and NTS ( Figure 2e and f ) . This hypothesis is also consistent with reports showing that cells are able to form cell – matrix adhe - sions and cell – cell junctions in the absence of vinculin and that de ﬁ ciencies in cellular responses become evident only upon challenge ( e . g . , application of forces ) . 30 , 47 , 48 In addition , we found that 38 % of aged mice had large glomerular cysts . Cystic kidney disease is associated with a growing number of muta - tions in the components of primary cilia . Glomerulocystic disease overlaps with this disease spectrum , and the absence of vinculin may be relevant for normal mechanosensing of ﬂ ow in the glomerulus in aged mice . Intercellular junctions are critical for the maintenance of glomerular ﬁ ltration , 49 and we detected decreased glomerular F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function basic research Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 649 Figure 5 | Loss of Vcl in podocytes results in the redistribution of adherens junction protein zonula occludens ( ZO ) - 1 to the cytosol . Vinculin colocalizes with ZO - 1 at cell – cell junctions ( arrow ) in wild - type mouse kidney tissue at age 8 weeks , and in primary podocytes ( arrowheads ) isolated from wild - type mice ( a ) . Lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) or protamine sulfate ( PS ) treatment in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes results in an increase in cytosolic ZO - 1 , compared with control ( Ctrl ) podocytes . Arrowheads depict mislocalization of ZO - 1 in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes . Bar ¼ 10 m m ( b ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of the distribution of ZO - 1 by ﬂ uorescence intensity ; n ¼ 3 ; * P < 0 . 05 ; intensity was normalized to untreated conditions ( c ) . Treatment with LPS or PS results in relocalization of ZO - 1 to the cytosolic fraction in podocytes that lack vinculin ( d ) . Quanti - ﬁ cation by densitometry of ( d ) ; n ¼ 5 ; * P < 0 . 01 ( e ) . Western blot of membrane and cytosolic fractions from podocytes isolated from ( continued ) basic research F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function 650 Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 Figure 6 | Re - expression of green ﬂ uorescent protein ( GFP ) – Vcl in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes rescues zonula occludens ( ZO ) - 1 mislocalization after either lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) or protamine sulfate ( PS ) treatment . Representative image of Pod - Vcl - KO primary podocytes re - expressing GFP - vinculin shows that zonula occludens ( ZO ) - 1 is at the cell – cell junctions , and this persists after the LPS challenge ( white arrowheads ) . Note the ZO - 1 mislocalization in adjacent , untransfected Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes serving as an internal control ( arrowhead ) . Bar ¼ 10 m m . GFP alone transfection was also performed as a control ( ctrl ) . Note that the bottom panel stimulated with LPS is at x100 ( a ) . Quantitative analysis of the redistribution of ZO - 1 is represented by comparing the cytoplasmic to the total cellular immuno ﬂ uorescence in - tensity after either LPS or PS treatment in mouse GFP – vinculin expressing and nonexpressing primary podocytes ; n ¼ 3 ; * P < 0 . 05 ( b ) . To optimize viewing of this image , please see the online version of this article at www . kidney - international . org . = Figure 5 | ( continued ) Ctrl and Pod - Vcl - KO mice after treatment ( in vivo ) with LPS or NTS ( f ) . Quanti ﬁ cation by densitometry of ( f ) ; n ¼ 5 ; * P < 0 . 01 . Intensity was normalized to untreated conditions ( g ) . C , cytoplasm ; GAPDH , glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ; M , membrane ; NTS , nephrotoxic serum . To optimize viewing of this image , please see the online version of this article at www . kidney - international . org . F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function basic research Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 651 basic research F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function 652 Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 barrier function upon glomerular injury in Pod - Vcl - KO mice ( Figure 2 ) , suggesting that vinculin contributes to these junc - tions in podocytes . The junctional protein ZO - 1 appears to have a particular role in the cell – cell junctional mediated bar - rier function , as our data show that in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes , ZO - 1 , upon induction of injury , fails to localize to intercellular junctions , a phenotype that can be rescued by the re - expression of vinculin in these cells ( Figure 6 ) . The regulatory effect in cell – cell adhesions would be in line with other reports , inwhich vinculin was found to have a role in the communication be - tween cells by binding to ZO - 1 , thus stabilizing gap junction formation . 25 Podocyte - speci ﬁ c loss of ZO - 1 in mice results in severe proteinuria , foot process effacement , and glomerulo - sclerosis . 26 Hence , the altered localization of ZO - 1 in our ex - periments could be a factor in the reduction of barrier function after LPS and NTS challenge ( Figure 5 ) . The signi ﬁ cance of vinculin localization to speci ﬁ c areas along a cell – cell contact in podocytes is yet to be determined , but it could represent a contribution to an “ adhesion zipper , ” previously described as an initial step in adherens junction formation of keratino - cytes . 50 Additional experiments are needed to test this model and further dissect the mechanism by which vinculin con - tributes to glomerular barrier function . In conclusion , we report that vinculin has a key role in the regulation of podocyte - mediated glomerular ﬁ ltration . Our data suggest that vinculin has a protective function and is important for maintenance of the barrier function after injury . This model is in line with our data from human biopsies demonstrating that vinculin localization is altered in glomer - ular disease . With the advent of whole - exome and whole - genome sequencing across an ever - increasing number of clinical cohorts with kidney disease , genetic variants in vinculin may shed further light on the role of vinculin in human disease . CONCISE METHODS Mice Podocin - Cre recombinase mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory , Bar Harbor , Maine ( B6 . Cg - Tg ( NPHS2 - Cre ) 295Lbh / J , stock number 008205 ) . The mice carrying the ﬂ oxed vinculin construct were obtained from Robert Ross , University of California , San Diego . 24 Analyzed Pod - Vcl - KO and control littermate mice were on a C57 / Bl6 background , which is relatively resistant to glomerular disease . Urine samples were collected from the Pod - Vcl - KO and littermate Vcl ﬂ / ﬂ controls at indicated time . NTS and LPS treatment Treatment of mice with rabbit anti - mouse GBM antibody ( NTS ) , generated by Lampire Biological Laboratories , was performed as previously described in our laboratory . 7 , 51 Brie ﬂ y , mice were pre - immunized 6 days prior to administration of NTS , via i . p . injection of 250 m g of rabbit IgG ( Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories , Bar Harbor , ME ) in 250 m l of 1 : 1 emulsion with complete Freund ’ s adjuvant ( Sigma - Aldrich , St Louis , MO ) . Glomerulonephritis was induced with 200 m g of NTS using retro - orbital injection as previ - ously described . 7 , 51 Preimmune rabbit serum was used as a negative control . For the LPS - induced animal model , mice were given an i . p . injection either with or without LPS ( 10 m g / g body weight , 1mg / ml in sterile phosphate buffered saline ) . Animal perfusions with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) were carried out as previously described . 51 Pod - Vcl - KO mice and control mice ( age 6 to 8 weeks ) were used for these experiments . Urinary albumin excretion was measured at various time points . Electron microscopy As previously described , 52 we used transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) and serial block - face scanning EM ( SBF - SEM ) to investigate glomerular ultrastructure . Tissue samples were ﬁ xed for at least 1 hour in a mix of 2 % formaldehyde and 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M so - dium cacodylate buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) . The samples were post - ﬁ xed with reduced osmium ( 1 % OsO 4 and 1 . 5 % K 4 Fe ( CN ) 6 ) for 1 hour , then with 1 % tannic acid in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer for 1 hour , and ﬁ nally with 1 % uranyl acetate in water overnight . The specimens were dehydrated with alcohols , in ﬁ ltrated with resin ( TAAB LV , Taab Lab - oratories , Reading , United Kingdom ) , and polymerized for 12 hours at 60 (cid:2) C . Ultrathin 70 - nm sections were cut with a Leica Ultracut S ultramicrotome ( Leica , Wetzlar , Germany ) and placed on formvar / carbon - coated slot grids . The grids were observed in a Tecnai 12 Biotwin transmission electron microscope ( ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c , Waltham , MA ) at 80 kV . EM data were screened for matrix charac - teristics using Fiji / ImageJ software ( version 1 . 46r ; National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) . GBM thickness was quanti ﬁ ed in ﬁ ve re - gions per observation and reported as mean values . For SBF - SEM , the polymerized samples were trimmed , glued to aluminum pins , and sputter coated with gold / palladium ( 60 seconds at standard settings ) . Automated sectioning ( 60 nm ) was completed in a Gatan 3View ( Gatan Inc , Pleasanton , CA ) . The images were taken with FEI Quanta 250 FEG SEM ( ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c ) at 3 . 8kVaccelerating voltage and 0 . 4 Torrchamber pressure , with a pixel size of 12 nm . Models were generatedfromSBF - SEMusing IMOD3Dmod software ( http : / / bio3d . colorado . edu / imod / download . html . ) , developed by David Mas - tronade and coworkers at the Boulder ( CO ) Laboratory for 3 - D Electron Microscopy . Study approval All animal experiments were approved by the relevant institutional regulatory board as follows : the University Committee on the Use and Care of Animals Institutional Review Board approved work at Yale University , and all work was conducted in accordance with the principles and procedures outlined in the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals ( 8th = Figure 7 | Vinculin is reduced in human glomerular disease . Panels show localization of nephrin and vinculin in human kidney biopsy sections from patients with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis ( FSGS ) , minimal change disease ( MCD ) , or membranous nephropathy ( MN ) . The altered localization of vinculin and nephrin is shown in zoomed - in images at the bottom of the panel . In FSGS and MN in particular , there appeared to be less vinculin in capillary loops with positive nephrin staining , compared with regions where nephrin localization was reduced , and here vinculin was increased ( yellow boxes ) . Bar ¼ 20 m m ( a ) . Ratiometric imaging was performed by selecting the nephrin signal as a mask and then relating vinculin to nephrin intensity . Bar ¼ 30 m m ( b ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of ( b ) : All histological subtypes were analyzed from n ¼ 3 biopsy samples . * P < 0 . 001 ( c ) . To optimize viewing of this image , please see the online version of this article at www . kidney - international . org . F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function basic research Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 653 edition , 2011 ) . In Manchester , the project license 40 / 3409 was reviewed and approved by the University of Manchester Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Board , and all procedures were carried out in accordance with the European Directive 2010 / 63 / EU governed by the Home of ﬁ ce in the United Kingdom . Ethical approval was obtained to use archival pediatric biopsy samples ( REC reference : 14 / WA / 0083 ) , normal human tissue , and archival adult biopsy samples ( REC reference : 16 / NW / 0119 ) . Statistical analysis All measurements are shown as mean (cid:3) SEM . Box plots indicate maximum and minimum data points ( whiskers ) . Bar chart error bars represent SEM . Statistical analysis was performed using 2 - tailed Student ’ s t - test or 1 - way analysis of variance ( SigmaStat , version 3 . 1 . 1 ) . P < 0 . 05 was considered statistically signi ﬁ cant . Antibodies and reagents and all other methodology are described in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . DISCLOSURE All the authors declared no competing interests . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS In the USA , this study was supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grants DK083294 and DK093629 and P30DK079310 . RSR was supported by grants from NIH ( HL115933 and HL127806 ) and a Veterans Affairs Merit Grant . In the UK , this work was supported by a Wellcome Trust Intermediate Fellowship award ( 090006 ) to RL , and a Kids Kidney Research grant awarded to RL and CB to support a PhD studentship for F . L . The authors also acknowledge core funding from the Wellcome Trust ( 088785 / Z / 09 / Z ) , awarded to the Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell - Matrix Research , University of Manchester , Manchester , UK . The microscopes used in this study were purchased with grants from the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council , Wellcome Trust , and the University of Manchester Strategic Fund . The authors acknowledge the staff of the Bioimaging and EM facility in Manchester for their support . XT , SI , FL , RL , and CB planned the studies and designed the experiments and wrote the article . XT , FL , KI , HH , MZ , SJ , FZ , CP , CL , and HH performed experiments . RZ and RSR provided reagents and contributed to the preparation of the article . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Antibodies and reagents , urinary albumin and creatinine quanti ﬁ cation , isolation of murine glomeruli and cell culture , knockdown experiments , Electric Cell - substrate Impedance Sensing ( ECIS ) , measurement of albumin ﬂ ux , stretching assay , analysis of membrane to cytosol transfer of ZO - 1 , Western blotting , PCR , quanti ﬁ cation of the number of foot processes from electron micrographs , immuno ﬂ uorescence , ratiometric imaging analysis , and immunoprecipitation . Figure S1 . Kidney abnormalities are detected in mice of advanced age . Most kidneys from Vcl KO and control ( Ctrl ) mice did not a reveal a morphologic difference ( A ) . Kidney weight ( g ) was analyzed relative to kidney size ( cm ) ( B ) . Hematoxylin and eosin staining of Pod - Vcl - KO mice shows sporadic cystic abnormalities . Left image shows multiple cysts within the kidney of a Pod - Vcl - KO mouse . The bar ¼ 2 mm . The middle image shows cystic abnormalities within the glomerular Bowman ’ s capsule . Bar ¼ 200 m m . The right image shows crystallization of protein in tubular structures . Bar ¼ 100 m m ( C ) . Figure S2 . 3View serial block - face scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) . Generation of a 3 - dimensional model of podocytes using serial block - face SEM ( A ) . 3D models of control ( Ctrl ) and Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes after challenge with nephrotoxic serum ( NTS ) . White arrowhead highlights the branching defect , and the yellow arrow - head shows the difference in length of the foot processes . Note the branching defect in the ctrl podocytes after treatment with NTS ( B ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of major protrusion length ( C ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of foot process length ; N ¼ 3 cells modeled from different animals ( D ) . Figure S3 . Vinculin de ﬁ ciency increases phospho – focal adhesion kinase ( pFAK ) levels speci ﬁ cally at focal adhesions ( FAs ) . Primary podocytes were isolated from control and Pod - Vcl - KO mice and treated with lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) and protamine sulfate ( PS ) . Western blot was performed to determine protein levels of FA proteins , vinculin , talin1 , FAK , paxillin , pFAK , phospho - Paxillin ( pPax - ilin ) , and the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate de - hydrogenase ( GAPDH ; A ) . Immuno ﬂ uoresecence ratio imaging was performed to determine phopho - FAK levels relative to paxillin protein levels speci ﬁ cally at FAs . Line pro ﬁ le highlights elevated phospho - FAK levels to paxillin levels at FAs in podocytes isolated from Pod - Vcl - KO mice compared to control ( Ctrl ) podocytes ( B ) . Schematic illustration of a wounding assay : A single electrical cell substrate impedance sensing ( ECIS ) well carries 10 electrodes , where resistance is measured . Following cell plating , resistance increases ( 1 . ) and ﬁ nally plateaus ( 2 . ) when cells form a monolayer . Cells located on the electrode are wounded by application of a high current , leading to local cell death and a drop in resistance ( 3 . ) . Increased migration and proliferation result in increasing resistance ( 4 . ) . When a con ﬂ uent cell monolayer is re - established , resistance plateaus ( 5 . ) . The lower graph shows a representative curve progression of the ECIS resistance measurement , including a wounding assay ( C ) . Schematic demon - stration of the analysis of the stretching assay : After application of the stretching cycles , cells were ﬁ xed and stained with 4 0 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole DAPI and phalloidin . An ellipse was constructed into the cells , and the angle was measured using ImagJ ( D ) . Small interfering ( si ) RNA - induced knockdown of vinculin was veri ﬁ ed using western blot analysis ( E ) . a - tubulin was used as loading control . Upon stretch application , cells organize themselves so that they are perpendicular to the direction of stretch . Figure S4 . Vinculin controls zonula occludens ( ZO ) - 1 localization upon injury . Co - immunoprecipitation of control and Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes shows vinculin association with ZO - 1 in controls ( ctrl ) , but not in IgG or vinculin KO podocytes ( A ) . Representative XY and XZ images show that ZO - 1 - colocalization with membrane marker E - cadherin is reduced in Pod - Vcl - KO podocytes after lipopolysaccha - ride ( LPS ) and protamine sulfate ( PS ) stimulation ( B ) . Figure S5 . Membranous nephropathy ( MN ) and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis ( FSGS ) sections show altered hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) and nephrin staining . Serial sections from patients with MN , minimal change disease ( MCD ) , and FSGS were stained for H & E and in parallel for nephrin and vinculin . Bar ¼ 20 m m ( A ) . Movie S1 . Modeling of podocytes in vivo . Three adjacent podocytes from a control mouse were modeled from 800 sections captured by serial block - face scanning electron microscopy . The movie illustrates the complex cellular architecture of podocytes and their interdigi - tating foot processes . Movie S2 . Control podocyte . Serial block - face scanning electron microscopy and modeling were used to generate this 3D model of a control podocyte . It demonstrates the branch hierarchy of the cell body , from major protrusions to ﬁ ne foot processes . Movie S3 . Podocyte - Vcl - knockout ( Pod - Vcl - KO ) podocyte . Serial block - face scanning electron microscopy and modeling were used to generate this 3D model of a Pod - Vcl - KO podocyte . Defects were detected in the branching of major protrusions , and foot processes appeared longer in the KO podocytes than in control cells . Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at www . kidney - international . org . basic research F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function 654 Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 REFERENCES 1 . Sachs N , Sonnenberg A . Cell - matrix adhesion of podocytes in physiology and disease . Nat Rev Nephrol . 2013 ; 9 : 200 – 210 . 2 . Kreidberg JA , Donovan MJ , Goldstein SL , et al . Alpha 3 beta 1 integrin has a crucial role in kidney and lung organogenesis . Development . 1996 ; 122 : 3537 – 3547 . 3 . Pozzi A , Jarad G , Moeckel GW , et al . Beta1 integrin expression by podocytes is required to maintain glomerular structural integrity . Dev Biol . 2008 ; 316 : 288 – 301 . 4 . Kanasaki K , Kanda Y , Palmsten K , et al . Integrin beta1 - mediated matrix assembly and signaling are critical for the normal development and function of the kidney glomerulus . Dev Biol . 2008 ; 313 : 584 – 593 . 5 . Jarad G , Cunningham J , Shaw AS , et al . Proteinuria precedes podocyte abnormalities inLamb2 - / - mice , implicating the glomerular basement membrane as an albumin barrier . J Clin Invest . 2006 ; 116 : 2272 – 2279 . 6 . El - Aouni C , Herbach N , Blattner SM , et al . Podocyte - speci ﬁ c deletion of integrin - linked kinase results in severe glomerular basement membrane alterations and progressive glomerulosclerosis . J Am Soc Nephrol . 2006 ; 17 : 1334 – 1344 . 7 . Tian X , Kim JJ , Monkley SM , et al . Podocyte - associated talin1 is critical for glomerular ﬁ ltrationbarriermaintenance . JClinInvest . 2014 ; 124 : 1098 – 1113 . 8 . Sachs N , Kreft M , van den Bergh Weerman MA , et al . Kidney failure in mice lacking the tetraspanin CD151 . J Cell Biol . 2006 ; 175 : 33 – 39 . 9 . Hausmann R , Grepl M , Knecht V , et al . The glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier function : new concepts . Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens . 2012 ; 21 : 441 – 449 . 10 . Lovric S , Ashraf S , Tan W , Hildebrandt F . Genetic testing in steroid - resistant nephrotic syndrome : When and how ? Nephrol Dial Transplant . 2016 ; 31 : 1802 – 1813 . 11 . Hernandez - Varas P , Berge U , Lock JG , Strömblad S . A plastic relationship between vinculin - mediated tension and adhesion complex area de ﬁ nes adhesion size and lifetime . Nat Commun . 2015 ; 6 : 7524 . 12 . Bays JL , DeMali KA . Vinculin in cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesions . Cell Mol Life Sci . 2017 ; 74 : 2999 – 3009 . 13 . Peng X , Maiers JL , Choudhury D , et al . Alpha - catenin uses a novel mechanism to activate vinculin . J Biol Chem . 2012 ; 287 : 7728 – 7737 . 14 . Gilmore AP , Burridge K . Cell adhesion . Cryptic sites in vinculin . Nature . 1995 ; 373 : 197 . 15 . Grashoff C , Hoffman BD , Brenner MD , et al . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature . 2010 ; 466 : 263 – 266 . 16 . Hemmings L , Rees DJ , Ohanian V , et al . Talin contains three actin - binding sites each of which is adjacent to a vinculin - binding site . J Cell Sci . 1996 ; 109 : 2715 – 2726 . 17 . Austen K , Ringer P , Mehlich A , et al . Extracellular rigidity sensing by talin isoform - speci ﬁ c mechanical linkages . Nat Cell Biol . 2015 ; 17 : 1597 – 1606 . 18 . Izard T , Brown DT . Mechanisms and functions of vinculin interactions with phospholipids at cell adhesion sites . J Biol . Chem . 2016 ; 291 : 2548 – 2555 . 19 . Goldmann WH . Role of vinculin in cellular mechanotransduction . Cell BiolInt . 2016 ; 40 : 241 – 256 . 20 . Jannie KM , Ellerbroek SM , Zhou DW , et al . Vinculin - dependent actin bundling regulates cell migration and traction forces . Biochem J . 2015 ; 465 : 383 – 393 . 21 . Ridley AJ , Schwartz MA , Burridge K , et al . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science . 2003 ; 302 : 1704 – 1709 . 22 . Birukova AA , Shah AS , Tian Y , et al . Dual role of vinculin in barrier - disruptive and barrier - enhancing endothelial cell responses . Cell Signal . 2016 ; 28 : 541 – 551 . 23 . Huveneers S , Oldenburg J , Spanjaard E , et al . Vinculin associates with endothelial VE - cadherin junctions to control force - dependent remodeling . J Cell Biol . 2012 ; 196 : 641 – 652 . 24 . Zemljic - Harpf AE , Miller JC , Henderson SA , et al . Cardiac - myocyte - speci ﬁ c excision of the vinculin gene disrupts cellular junctions , causing sudden death or dilated cardiomyopathy . Mol Cell Biol . 2007 ; 27 : 7522 – 7537 . 25 . Zemljic - Harpf AE , Godoy JC , Platoshyn O , et al . Vinculin directly binds zonulaoccludens - 1 andisessentialforstabilizingconnexin - 43 - containing gap junctions in cardiac myocytes . J Cell Sci . 2014 ; 127 : 1104 – 1116 . 26 . Itoh M , Nakadate K , Horibata Y , et al . The structural and functional organization of the podocyte ﬁ ltration slits is regulated by Tjp1 / ZO - 1 . PLoS One . 2014 ; 9 : e106621 . 27 . Moeller MJ , Sanden SK , Soo ﬁ A , Wiggins RC , Holzman LB . Podocyte - speci ﬁ c expression of cre recombinase in transgenic mice . Genesis . 2003 ; 35 : 39 – 42 . 28 . Horton ER , Byron A , Askari JA , et al . De ﬁ nition of a consensus integrin adhesome and its dynamics during adhesion complex assembly and disassembly . Nat Cell Biol . 2015 ; 17 : 1577 – 1587 . 29 . Carisey A , Ballestrem C . Vinculin , an adapter protein in control of cell adhesion signalling . Eur J Cell Biol . 2011 ; 90 : 157 – 163 . 30 . Carisey A , Tsang R , Greiner AM , et al . Vinculin regulates the recruitment and release of core focal adhesion proteins in a force - dependent manner . Curr Biol . 2013 ; 23 : 271 – 281 . 31 . Zaidel - Bar R , Ballestrem C , Kam Z , et al . Early molecular events in the assembly of matrix adhesions at the leading edge of migrating cells . J Cell Sci . 2003 ; 116 : 4605 – 4613 . 32 . Xu W , Baribault H , Adamson ED . Vinculin knockout results in heart and brain defects during embryonic development . Development . 1998 ; 125 : 327 – 337 . 33 . Michael KE , Dumbauld DW , Burns KL , et al . Focal adhesion kinase modulates cell adhesion strengthening via integrin activation . Mol Biol Cell . 2009 ; 20 : 2508 – 2519 . 34 . Provenzano PP , Keely PJ . Mechanical signaling through the cytoskeleton regulates cell proliferation by coordinated focal adhesion and Rho GTPase signaling . J Cell Sci . 2011 ; 124 : 1195 – 1205 . 35 . Gilmore AP , Romer LH . Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) signaling in focal adhesions decreases cell motility and proliferation . Mol Biol Cell . 1996 ; 7 : 1209 – 1224 . 36 . Jungbauer S , Gao H , Spatz JP , et al . Two characteristic regimes in frequency - dependent dynamic reorientation of ﬁ broblasts on cyclically stretched substrates . Biophys J . 2008 ; 95 : 3470 – 3478 . 37 . Humphries JD , Wang P , Streuli C , et al . Vinculin controls focal adhesion formation by direct interactions with talin and actin . J Cell Biol . 2007 ; 179 : 1043 – 1057 . 38 . Thievessen I , Thompson PM , Berlemont S , et al . Vinculin - actin interaction couples actin retrograde ﬂ ow to focal adhesions , but is dispensable for focal adhesion growth . J Cell Biol . 2013 ; 202 : 163 – 177 . 39 . Atherton P , Stutchbury B , Wang DY , et al . Vinculin controls talin engagement with the actomyosin machinery . Nat Commun . 2015 ; 6 : 10038 . 40 . Atherton P , Stutchbury B , Jethwa D , et al . Mechanosensitive components of integrin adhesions : role of vinculin . Exp Cell Res . 2016 ; 343 : 21 – 27 . 41 . Lawson C , Lim ST , Uryu S , et al . FAK promotes recruitment of talin to nascent adhesions to control cell motility . J Cell Biol . 2012 ; 196 : 223 – 232 . 42 . Webb DJ , Donais K , Whitmore LA , et al . FAK - Src signalling through paxillin , ERK and MLCK regulates adhesion disassembly . Nat Cell Biol . 2004 ; 6 : 154 – 161 . 43 . Hamadi A , Bouali M , Dontenwill M , et al . Regulation of focal adhesion dynamics and disassembly by phosphorylation of FAK at tyrosine 397 . J Cell Sci . 2005 ; 118 : 4415 – 4425 . 44 . Stutchbury B , Atherton P , Tsang R , Wang DY , Ballestrem C . Distinct focal adhesion protein modules control different aspects of mechanotransduction . J Cell Sci . 2017 ; 130 : 1612 – 1624 . 45 . Machacek M , Hodgson L , Welch C , et al . Coordination of Rho GTPase activities during cell protrusion . Nature . 2009 ; 461 : 99 – 103 . 46 . Chang F , Lemmon CA , Park D , et al . FAK potentiates Rac1 activation and localization to matrix adhesion sites : a role for betaPIX . Mol Biol Cell . 2007 ; 18 : 253 – 264 . 47 . Bays JL , Peng X , Tolbert CE , et al . Vinculin phosphorylation differentially regulates mechanotransduction at cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesions . J Cell Biol . 2014 ; 205 : 251 – 263 . 48 . Zemljic - Harpf AE , Ponrartana S , Avalos RT , et al . Heterozygous inactivation of the vinculin gene predisposes to stress - induced cardiomyopathy . Am J Pathol . 2004 ; 165 : 1033 – 1044 . 49 . Lennon R , Randles MJ , Humphries MJ . The importance of podocyte adhesion for a healthy glomerulus . Front Endocrinol ( Lausanne ) . 2014 ; 5 : 160 . 50 . Vasioukhin V , Bauer C , Yin M , et al . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Cell . 2000 ; 100 : 209 – 219 . 51 . Ma H , Togawa A , Soda K , et al . Inhibition of podocyte FAK protects against proteinuria and foot process effacement . J Am Soc Nephrol . 2010 ; 21 : 1145 – 1156 . 52 . Randles MJ , Woolf AS , Huang JL , et al . Genetic background is a key determinant of glomerular extracellular matrix composition and organization . J Am Soc Nephrol . 2015 ; 26 : 3021 – 3034 . F Lausecker et al . : Vinculin required for glomerular function basic research Kidney International ( 2018 ) 93 , 643 – 655 655