Seeing What We Want to See : Conﬁrmation Bias in Animal Behavior Research David M . Marsh & Teresa J . Hanlon Department of Biology , Washington and Lee University , Lexington , VA , USA Introduction The science of ethology has long contended with biases that may render behavioral observations less than completely objective ( Altmann 1974 ; Jordan & Burghardt 1986 ; Caine 1990 ; Kelly 2006 ) . One important type of bias encountered in behavioral research is conﬁrmation bias , also sometimes referred to as conﬁrmatory bias or expectation bias . Conﬁrmation bias refers to the tendency of observers to see what they expect to see when making obser - vations ( Rosenthal 1966 ; Nickerson 1998 ) . Conﬁr - mation bias has been well - documented in the human psychology literature , particularly with respect to the way that people’s pre - conceptions can inﬂuence their subjective judgment about other people ( see Rosenthal 1994 ; Nickerson 1998 for reviews ) . Conﬁrmation bias may also underlie some of the placebo effect in medicine , in the sense that both patients and clinicians may have a tendency to report the treatment outcomes that they hope to see ( Gracely et al . 1985 ; Kirsch & Weixel 1988 ; Pollo et al . 2001 ) . Ideally , most quantitative observations of animal behavior are less subjective than the Correspondence David M . Marsh , Department of Biology , Washington and Lee University , 204 West Washington St . , Lexington , VA 24450 , USA . E - mail : marshd @ wlu . edu Received : April 11 , 2007 Initial acceptance : June 14 , 2007 Final acceptance : July 10 , 2007 ( S . A . Foster ) doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1439 - 0310 . 2007 . 01406 . x Abstract Conﬁrmation bias is the tendency of observers to see what they expect to see while conducting scientiﬁc research . Although conﬁrmation bias has been well - studied by psychologists in the context of qualitative judgments , it has been much less studied with respect to the kinds of quantitative observations made by behavioral biologists . We carried out two experiments that used multiple observers of the aggression and for - aging behaviors of red - backed salamanders ( Plethodon cinereus ) to deter - mine whether behavioral observations were inﬂuenced by the a priori expectations of observers . In both experiments , one group of observers was given a speciﬁc set of expectations with respect to sex differences in salamander behavior , while a second group was given the opposite set of expectations . In one experiment , observers collected data on variable sets of live salamanders , while in the other experiment , observers col - lected data from identical videotaped trials . Across experiments and observed behaviors , the expectations of observers did appear to bias observations , but only to a small or moderate degree . Conﬁrmation bias never accounted for more than 13 % of the observed variation in behav - ior , and was generally equivalent to < 20 % of the mean value of each variable . The estimated magnitude of conﬁrmation bias was quite similar for men and women , suggesting no relationship between observer gen - der and susceptibility to conﬁrmation bias . We believe that these results are largely optimistic with respect to conﬁrmation bias in behavioral ecology , in that they suggest the bias may often be small relative to indi - vidual variation in behavior , even for relatively inexperienced observers . Ethology Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin 1089 qualitative judgments common in human psychol - ogy research , and thus , should also be less suscepti - ble to conﬁrmation bias . Indeed , placebo effects in medicine have been suggested to be common only for more subjective measures such as pain and dis - comfort ( Hrobjartsson & Gotzsche 2001 , 2004 ) . Nev - ertheless , the extent to which various kinds of behavioral observations are prone to bias is not always obvious a priori ( Marsh & Hanlon 2004 ) . Ultimately , designing experiments in which observ - ers are blind to the treatment assignments of their subjects is really the only way to ensure that conﬁr - mation bias cannot inﬂuence behavioral data . Unfortunately , the realities of ethological research may often prevent researchers from conducting blind experiments . Many studies necessarily compare the behavior of different sexes , age classes , morphotypes , or species that may be obviously distinct in appear - ance . When observers are unavoidably aware of the classiﬁcation of their subjects , it may be difﬁcult for them to make observations that are completely free of conﬁrmation bias . If the magnitude of conﬁrma - tion bias in behavioral observations is large , it could interfere with our interpretation of research results and our understanding of animal behavior . Only one study that we know of has directly addressed the question of conﬁrmation bias in ani - mal behavior research . Several decades ago , Rosen - thal & Fode ( 1963 ) asked 12 student observers to record the success of rats in running a T - maze over the course of 5 d . Observers were told that one group of rats was ‘maze - dull’ and the other group was ‘maze - bright’ , though in reality all the rats had been randomly selected for the experiment . Rosen - thal and Fode reported that observers did in fact ﬁnd the supposed ‘bright’ rats to be more successful than the supposed ‘dull’ rats in running the maze , partic - ularly later in the experiment . However , the mecha - nism proposed to explain this conﬁrmation bias – differential reinforcement of bright and dull rats by observers – probably would not apply to most behavioral studies because observers usually do not interact with their subjects in ways that would allow reinforcement to be a factor . In previous research on the biases inherent in the collection of behavioral data on red - backed salaman - ders , we examined conﬁrmation bias in an indirect manner ( Marsh & Hanlon 2004 ) . We attempted to correlate observers’ a priori predictions about sex dif - ferences in salamander behavior with the data they actually collected . Across a range of aggressive and foraging behaviors , we found little evidence for con - ﬁrmation bias . However , several factors limited the strength of our tests . First , observers made predic - tions about expected differences between male and female salamanders , yet each observer collected data on only one salamander . Thus , observers had no opportunity to directly compare the behavior of the two sexes . Secondly , some speciﬁc predictions in our previous trials were quite rare ( e . g . very few observ - ers expected that female salamanders would be more aggressive than male salamanders ) . This reduced our power to detect the effects of differential expecta - tions on the data collected . In the present study , we used two experiments to directly test the effects of conﬁrmation bias on the observation of aggression and foraging behaviors of red - backed salamanders . In the ﬁrst experiment , multiple observers collected data on one male sala - mander and one female salamander in both aggres - sion and foraging trials . One group of observers was told that male salamanders were thought to be more aggressive and more active foragers and those female salamanders were thought to be more efﬁcient for - agers . The other group of observers was given the opposite set of predictions with respect to sex differ - ences , and neither group was aware that the predic - tions varied among observers . This experiment thereby evaluated conﬁrmation bias in the context of trials with multiple animals that vary in behavior . In the second experiment , we used videotaped aggression and foraging trials to allow multiple observers to record the behaviors of the same sala - manders at the same time . Once again , two groups of observers were given opposite predictions about the expected differences between male and female salamanders . This second experiment , in contrast to the ﬁrst , allowed us to quantify the magnitude of conﬁrmation bias in situations where there was no true variation in the behavior of the salamanders observed . For each experiment , we estimated the magnitude of conﬁrmation bias from the difference between the observational data collected by the two groups . We also used the interaction between each observer’s gender and their a priori prediction to ask whether genders differed in their susceptibility to conﬁrmation bias . Methods Study System Red - backed salamanders are a terrestrial , lungless , plethodontid salamander found in woodlands throughout the eastern USA and Canada . Their social behavior has been well - studied in both the laboratory Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors 1090 Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin and the ﬁeld ( see Jaeger & Forester 1993 for review ) . Previous studies have determined that both male and female red - backed salamanders defend territories during at least part of the year ( Mathis 1990 ) . Aggressive behavior is also displayed by both sexes , and territorial residents may bite intruders or engage in aggressive displays ( Jaeger 1984 ) . Foraging behav - ior in red - backed salamanders has also been detailed in previous studies ( Jaeger et al . 1981 , 1982 ) . Red - backed salamanders appear to forage primarily by sight , though they can also use smell to locate non - motile prey ( David & Jaeger 1981 ) . We collected sexually mature red - backed salaman - ders ( snout - vent length 3 . 3 – 4 . 3 cm ) from the Jeffer - son National Forest in Giles County , Virginia in Aug . of 2004 for the ﬁrst set of experiments and in Aug . of 2005 for the second set of experiments . Salamanders from this population have been used in much of the previous behavioral work on red - backed salamanders ( e . g . Thomas et al . 1989 ; Mathis 1990 ) . We sexed sal - amanders by holding them up to a ﬁber - optic light and using the presence of pigmented testes or eggs as diagnostic for males and females ( Gillette & Peterson 2001 ) . We then placed salamanders in a 15 cm diam - eter Petri dish lined with ﬁlter paper and moistened with declorinated tap water . Experiments described below were carried out in these same Petri dishes . We changed ﬁlter paper once per week , at which time salamanders were fed 15 – 25 wingless Drosophila melanogaster . Feeding was stopped 2 wk prior to the start of the experiment to ensure that salamanders would be motivated to forage . Experimental observers consisted primarily of ﬁrst and second year university students at Washington and Lee University ( Lexington , VA , USA ) between the ages of 18 and 21 yr . Of the 186 total observers , 73 were male and 113 were female . We refer to male and female observers as ‘men’ and ‘women’ , and hereafter restrict the use of the terms ‘male’ and ‘female’ to refer to the sex of the salamanders stud - ied . For clarity , we use the term ‘gender’ for men and women only , and ‘sex’ for salamanders only . Observers collected behavioral data on salaman - ders within the Petri dishes during the day , and video clips were also recorded under ambient light . Red - backed salamanders in nature are primarily active at night and more realistic experiments are carried out in the dark and with less disturbance to focal animals . However , our primary interest was not in the behavior of red - backed salamanders , which has been the subject of numerous , detailed behavioral studies ( see Jaeger & Forester 1993 ; Petr - anka 1998 for reviews ) . Rather , we were interested in the susceptibility of the observers to conﬁrmation bias as they recorded their observations . Thus , we assume only that red - backed salamanders exhibit classiﬁable behaviors under the conditions of the experiment , not that these behaviors are representa - tive of red - backed salamanders in nature or in other laboratory experiments . Live Interactions The observations of live salamanders took place from Nov . 15 – 18 , 2004 . Observers were divided among ﬁve groups that ranged in size from 13 to 17 and there were a total of 74 observers . When observers arrived for the experiment , we asked them to read materials that outlined the experimental procedures . These materials included the following statement about the behavioral differences between male and female salamanders : Why would males and females differ ? Females carry eggs , and as such , may have different requirements , preferences , and limitations than males . Males of course do not have eggs , but are concerned with getting enough food to last them through the winter , when they’ll be largely inac - tive . Red - backed salamanders are known to defend territories ( probably they defend individ - ual rocks or logs ) , though they rarely ﬁght . One version went on to state : ‘theory suggests that ( 1 ) females will be more aggressive than males , ( 2 ) males will be more efﬁcient foragers , ( 3 ) females will be more active foragers . Our data will allow us to verify these predictions . ’ In contrast , a second ver - sion stated : ‘theory suggests that ( 1 ) males will be more aggressive than females , ( 2 ) females will be more efﬁcient foragers , ( 3 ) males will be more active foragers . Our data will allow us to verify these pre - dictions . ’ Observers were randomly assigned one of these two versions subject to the constraint that equal numbers of each version were used with each group . The statement that ‘our data will allow us to verify these predictions’ might be construed as par - ticularly likely to elicit conﬁrmation bias . However , it was our goal to evaluate conﬁrmation bias in something approaching a worst - case scenario . For a similar reason , we elected not to use a control treat - ment in which no biasing statement was given . Pre - vious trials without such a biasing statement found no meaningful behavioral differences between male and female salamanders under experimental condi - tions ( Marsh & Hanlon 2004 ) , so we sought to allo - cate maximal sample sizes to the variably biased treatments . D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin 1091 At the beginning of each set of trials , we described the relevant aggressive and foraging behaviors to all observers as a group . Prior to initiating observations , observers were asked to note their predictions as to which sex they expected to be more aggressive , to be more efﬁcient foragers , and to be more active for - agers . These responses were used to verify that the observers had in fact read and understood the pre - dictions that they had been given . Data from observ - ers whose noted predictions did not match the predictions they had read were eliminated prior to analysis – this occurred in seven cases across all four trials and no more than three times in any one trial . In the ﬁrst set of trials , observers attempted to determine whether male or female salamanders would be more aggressive toward an intruder . To measure aggression , observers were asked to record the frequency of four behaviors that may be associated with aggression in plethodontid salaman - ders . These behaviors likely vary in subjectivity , though all have been used in published works on aggressive behavior in plethodontids ( Jaeger 1984 ; Nishikawa 1987 ; Lancaster & Jaeger 1995 ; Rissler et al . 2000 ; Marsh & Hanlon 2004 ) . The behaviors recorded were : 1 . Resident initiates a touch of intruder ( ‘touches’ ) . 2 . Resident moves toward intruder ( ‘moves’ ) . 3 . Resident turns to look toward the intruder ( ‘looks’ ) . 4 . Resident in all - trunk - raised posture ( ‘ATR’ ) , in which its entire trunk is lifted off the substrate . For these trials , each observer was given four sala - manders in separate Petri dishes . Two dishes were labeled ‘R’ for resident and two were labeled ‘I’ for intruder . Each observer had one female resident and one male resident , and these were labeled ‘F’ and ‘M’ . The sex of the intruder salamander was not speciﬁed . Salamanders were randomly assigned to observers and the order in which male and female residents were run was alternated between observ - ers . Observers were asked to record the sex of each resident salamander before each trial to ensure that they were indeed aware of the sex of the salamander being observed . Aggression trials began when observers picked up the ﬁrst intruder from its dish and placed it in the dish of the resident . Observers then watched the resident salamander for 20 min divided into 40 intervals of 30 s each . Within each 30 s interval , observers recorded whether each of the aggressive behaviors occurred . Observers then ran an identical trial with the resident salamander of the other sex and with the second intruder . Throughout these trials observers handled only the intruders and not the resident animals on which data were collected . In the second set of trials , observers collected data on foraging behavior . New salamanders were used for the foraging trials and these salamanders were assigned randomly to observers . Again , each obser - ver collected data on one male salamander and one female salamander in a random order . At the begin - ning of the trial , observers introduced 10 wingless fruit ﬂies ( D . melanogaster ) into the Petri dish con - taining the focal salamander . Observers were asked to record three foraging behaviors : 1 . Time to eat seven out of 10 introduced ﬂies ( ‘time’ ) . 2 . The number of steps taken with the front fore - limbs during the trial ( ‘steps’ ) . We deﬁned a step as any time a forelimb was lifted and then lowered back to the surface of the Petri dish . 3 . Lunges made by salamanders in the attempt to capture fruit ﬂies ( ‘lunges’ ) . Observers also recorded whether or not each lunge was successful in captur - ing a fruit ﬂy . For the variables ‘lunges’ and ‘steps’ , observers recorded the total number of behaviors observed until seven of the 10 ﬂies were consumed . If seven out of 10 ﬂies were not consumed within 10 min , the trial was terminated at this point . If salamanders consumed three or fewer ﬂies they were considered non - responsive ( n = 10 ) and eliminated from the dataset . We used the number of steps per minute as an index of foraging activity . We used the propor - tion of lunges that resulted in the capture of a ﬂy ( ‘accuracy’ ) as an index of foraging efﬁciency for each salamander . We used a total of 176 red - backed salamanders in the live interactions , and no salamander was used more than once in each type of trial . Most of the sal - amanders used in the aggression trials were also used in the foraging trials . For consistency , these sal - amanders were all used in the aggression trial ﬁrst , then given at least 48 h before their subsequent use in the foraging trials . Observers were not permitted to talk to one another during or between the trials to avoid comparisons of observations or predictions . Informal questioning of observers after the trials found no evidence that any observers were aware that different observers had been given different pre - dictions for the trials . Videotaped Interactions From Oct . 24 – 27 , 2005 , we carried out a follow - up experiment using videotapes of red - backed Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors 1092 Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin salamander behavior . Videos were made using a Sony DCR - DVD 403 digital video camera ( Sony Elec - tronics , Inc . , New York , NY , USA ) positioned approx . 0 . 3 m above each focal salamander . Salamanders were recorded in 20 min aggression trials and 10 min foraging trials as in the ﬁrst experiment . We selected four taped aggression trials and four taped foraging trials for use in this experiment . These eight trials were selected because salamanders were active and clearly visible for the full time period . Observers were divided into four groups that ran - ged in size from 14 to 26 , and there were a total of 77 observers . Each observer within a group watched the videotaped trials on his ⁄ her own computer mon - itor , and each group collected data from a different set of aggression and foraging videos . As before , all observers collected data on one male salamander and on one female salamander . In general , the procedure used with the videos was identical to the procedure used for the live interactions . There were , however , a few changes . First , in an effort to obtain more accurate observations , we reduced the number of behaviors recorded . In the aggression trials , observers were not asked to record the variable ‘looks toward’ as they did in the live interactions . In the foraging trials , observers were not asked to record the number of ‘steps’ , and only foraging efﬁciency was estimated . Secondly , to avoid confusion with video ﬁles , the order in which male and female salamanders were observed was kept constant within a group , though it was alternated from one group to the next . Finally , we note that the aggression variable ‘ATR’ could not be reliably scored from the videos , as it is normally observed by looking beneath the animal to conﬁrm that its trunk is off the substrate . Nevertheless , we asked observers to attempt to record ATR to test the effects of conﬁrmation bias on a variable that was known to be somewhat subjective . Data Analysis We analyzed the data separately for the live interac - tions and the videotaped interactions , and within each of these , we analyzed the data separately for aggression and foraging trials . For each trial , the experimental unit was the recorded difference between the behavior of the male salamander and the behavior of the female salamander for each observer . In the aggression trials , we divided the number of intervals in which each behavior occurred by the total number of intervals . We then calculated the difference between the observed fre - quency of the behavior in the male salamander and the frequency in the female salamander . This was performed for ‘looks’ , ‘moves’ , ‘touches’ , and ‘ATR’ in the live interactions and ‘moves’ , ‘touches’ , and ‘ATR’ in the videotaped trials . In the foraging trials , we divided the total number of steps by the duration of the foraging bout before calculating each male – female difference . For foraging accuracy , male – female difference was calculated without any adjust - ment for time . For each male – female difference , we used a gen - eral linear model to test the main effect of the a pri - ori prediction that was given to each observer . For example , we tested whether observers who were told that males were more aggressive recorded a higher male – female difference than observers who were told that females were more aggressive . Each model also included a term for the interaction between the a priori prediction and the gender of the observer . A signiﬁcant interaction would indicate that one gender was more or less prone to conﬁrma - tion bias than the other . Finally , for the videotaped trials , we included a block effect for day , as observers watched different sets of videos on different days . For the live trials , we did not include a day effect because salamanders were randomized across days and preliminary analyses conﬁrmed that the day effect did not approach statistical signiﬁcance in any models ( p > 0 . 25 in all cases ) . Thus , each linear model took the form : sex difference = prediction = prediction · gender + day + error , with day included only in the analyses of the videotaped trials . After eliminating samples in which stated expectations were inconsistent with the treatment group , in which necessary data were missing , or in which sala - manders were considered non - responsive , ﬁnal sam - ple sizes ( i . e . total sets of paired observations ) were n = 66 ( error df = 63 ) for the live aggression trials , n = 53 ( df = 50 ) for the live foraging trials , n = 71 ( df = 65 ) for the videotaped aggression trials , and n = 71 ( df = 65 ) for the videotaped foraging trials . For validation purposes , we also ran all analyses on the entire dataset ( i . e . with no data eliminated ) and our results were qualitatively unchanged . Because the difference between male and female behavioral frequencies does not necessarily follow a known statistical distribution , we tested the signiﬁ - cance of each term by bootstrapping , rather than with conventional statistical tests that require assumptions about the underlying distribution of the response variable . We ﬁt the general linear model ( GLM ) coefﬁcients for each term in the model using maximum likelihood and used these coefﬁcients , rather than F - statistics , for statistical inference . D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin 1093 We bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals ( CI ) on GLM coefﬁcients by re - sampling independent variables with replacement . When the 95 % CI for a coefﬁ - cient did not overlap zero , we concluded that each term was statistically signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level . We also calculated CI in which we adjusted alpha levels for the number of variables measured in each experiment ( i . e . a = 0 . 0125 for the live aggression trials , a = 0 . 0167 for the taped aggression trials , and a = 0 . 025 for the of live foraging trials ) . We suggest that the 95 % CI be taken as a more liberal criteria and the adjusted CI used as a more conservative benchmark . In any case , our primary goal was to estimate the magnitude ( i . e . effect size ) of conﬁrma - tion bias in each trial , not to test the largely trivial null hypothesis that observers are subject to no con - ﬁrmation bias whatsoever . We estimated effect size in three ways . First , we calculated effect size as the mean difference between the treatments as a percentage of each variable . For example , an effect size of 10 % would mean that the difference between the groups that were given dif - ferent predictions ( i . e . the magnitude of the conﬁr - mation bias ) was equivalent to 10 % of the mean value of each variable . Secondly , we estimated effect size as the standardized mean difference between treatments , which is calculated as the difference between treatment means divided by their pooled standard deviation ( SD ) . Thirdly , we estimated effect size as the proportion of the sum of squares in each GLM that was explained by the main effect for pre - diction bias . For the videotaped trials , we ﬁrst removed day - to - day variation ( i . e . variation among the videos themselves ) so that the live interactions and the videotaped trials could be directly compared with respect to effect size . We ﬁt models , performed bootstrapping , and calculated effect sizes using mat - lab 7 . 3 ( Mathworks , Inc . , Natick , MA , USA ) . Results Conﬁrmation Bias in Live Interactions For the aggression variables , conﬁrmation bias was never statistically signiﬁcant , though in three of four cases the direction of the effect was consistent with small - to - moderate conﬁrmation bias ( Table 1 ; Fig 1a ) . Estimated effect sizes for conﬁrmation bias ranged from ) 3 % for moves to 32 % for looks , and conﬁrmation bias explained at most 2 . 3 % of the var - iation in each response variable ( Table 2 ) . For the foraging variables , steps per minute ( i . e . foraging activity ) was not subject to signiﬁcant conﬁrmation bias ( Table 1 ; Fig 1b ) , though difference between treatments was equal to approx . 65 % of the mean steps per minute ( Table 2 ) . For foraging accuracy ( i . e . efﬁciency ) , there was a statistically signiﬁcant conﬁrmation bias at a = 0 . 05 equivalent to approx . 30 % of the mean accuracy ( Fig 1b ) . Using an alpha adjusted for multiple response variables ( a = 0 . 025 ) , CI just overlapped zero ( b = ) 0 . 002 to 0 . 48 ) indicat - ing a non - signiﬁcant result . Observers’ predictions explained approx . 1 % of the variation in steps per minute and 13 % of the variation in foraging accu - racy ( Table 2 ) . Conﬁrmation Bias in Videotaped Trials For the aggression variables , male – female differences in moves and touches were not signiﬁcantly affected by conﬁrmation bias ( Table 1 ; Fig 1c ) . Effect sizes were small ( 2 % for touches and 15 % for moves ) and these explained < 0 . 5 % of the variation in each response variable ( Table 2 ) . ATR , which was often not clearly visible during videotaped trials , was signif - icantly affected by conﬁrmation bias , with bias equiv - alent to 17 % of the mean ATR . This result remained signiﬁcant after adjusting for multiple response vari - ables ( b = 0 . 02 – 0 . 38 , 98 . 3 % CI ) . For foraging accu - racy , there was no signiﬁcant conﬁrmation bias ( Table 1 ; Fig 1d ) . Conﬁrmation bias represented only 0 . 4 % of the mean accuracy and this explained only 1 % of the variation in this variable ( Table 2 ) . Observer Gender Across all variables , no gender by prediction interac - tions were statistically signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level , Table 1 : Parameter values and 95 % CI for the main effect of conﬁrma - tion bias Variable Trial type Parameter value 95 % CI Touches Live 0 . 009 ) 0 . 088 to 0 . 150 Moves Live ) 0 . 022 ) 0 . 270 to 0 . 214 Looks Live 0 . 083 ) 0 . 030 to 0 . 231 ATR Live 0 . 107 ) 0 . 078 to 0 . 379 Accuracy Live 0 . 247 * 0 . 021 to 0 . 443 * Steps ⁄ min Live 0 . 406 ) 3 . 368 to 4 . 072 Touches Videotaped 0 . 014 ) 0 . 049 to 0 . 067 Moves Videotaped 0 . 015 ) 0 . 057 to 0 . 098 ATR Videotaped 0 . 141 * * 0 . 023 to 0 . 293 * * Accuracy Videotaped 0 . 004 ) 0 . 112 to 0 . 049 CI , conﬁdence interval ; ATR , all - trunk - raised . * Indicates statistical signiﬁcance at the 0 . 05 level . * * Indicates statistical signiﬁcance after adjustment for multiple response variables . Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors 1094 Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin suggesting that neither gender tended to be more susceptible to conﬁrmation bias ( Table 3 ) . Two gen - der by prediction interactions did approach signiﬁ - cance , having model coefﬁcients that just overlapped zero ( Table 3 ) . For one of these , men were more affected by conﬁrmation bias whereas for the other , women were more affected . Discussion Our results suggest that some conﬁrmation bias was indeed apparent in behavioral observations of red - backed salamanders . For nine of the 10 behaviors recorded , the difference between the prediction treatments was in the direction expected with con - ﬁrmation bias . In two cases , these differences were statistically signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level , and in one case this difference was signiﬁcant after adjusting for multiple response variables . However , the magnitude - 0 . 15 - 0 . 10 - 0 . 05 0 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 Touches Moves ATR Looks males more aggressive females more aggressive ( a ) ( b ) ( d ) ( b ) M ean m a l e - f e m a l e d i ff e r en c e ( n = 66 ) ( n = 53 ) - 0 . 4 - 0 . 3 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Accuracy ( flies / lunge ) males better foragers females better foragers Activity ( ( steps / min ) / 20 ) - 0 . 1 - 0 . 075 - 0 . 05 - 0 . 025 0 0 . 0250 . 05 0 . 0750 . 1 0 . 1250 . 15 0 . 175 Touches Moves ATR males more aggressive females more aggressive M ean m a l e - f e m a l e d i ff e r en c e ( n = 71 ) ( n = 71 ) - 0 . 02 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 0 . 1 Accuracy ( flies / lunge ) males better foragers females better foragers Fig . 1 : Conﬁrmation bias in : ( a ) Live aggres - sion trials . ( b ) Live foraging trials . ( c ) Video - taped aggression trials . ( d ) Videotaped foraging trials . In all cases , male – female differ - ences are predicted to be greater for trials in which observers were told that male salaman - ders were more aggressive or better foragers ( dark symbols ) than for trials in which observ - ers were told that females were more aggres - sive or better foragers ( open symbols ) . In nine of 10 cases , the observed differences were in the direction consistent with conﬁrmation bias , but only foraging accuracy in the live interactions ( panel b ) and all - trunk - raised ( ATR ) in the videotaped trials ( panel c ) were signiﬁ - cantly biased . Table 2 : Conﬁrmation bias in the assessment of red - backed salaman - der aggression and foraging behavior Variable Mean difference ( % ) Standardized mean difference Variation explained ( % ) Live aggression trials Touches 5 0 . 035 0 . 3 Moves ) 3 ) 0 . 026 0 . 02 Looks 32 0 . 29 2 . 3 All - trunk - raised 16 0 . 10 0 . 2 Live foraging trials Steps ⁄ min 65 0 . 28 1 . 2 Accuracy 30 * 0 . 61 * 13 . 1 * Videotaped aggression trials Touches 2 0 . 05 0 . 3 Moves 15 0 . 33 0 . 2 All - trunk - raised 17 * * 0 . 54 * * 6 . 8 * * Videotaped foraging trials Accuracy 0 . 4 0 . 02 1 . 0 Effect sizes were measured as : ( 1 ) the difference between treatment means as a percentage of the mean value of each variable ( ‘mean dif - ference’ ) , ( 2 ) the difference between treatment means divided by the pooled SD ( ‘standardized mean difference’ ) , ( 3 ) the proportion of the variation in each male – female difference explained by the main effect for conﬁrmation bias ( ‘variation explained’ ) . * Indicates statistical signiﬁcance at the 0 . 05 level . * * Indicates statistical signiﬁcance after adjustment for multiple response variables . Table 3 : Parameter values and 95 % CI for interactions between con - ﬁrmation bias and observer gender Variable Trial type Parameter value 95 % CI Touches Live ) 0 . 004 ) 0 . 149 to 0 . 107 Moves Live 0 . 021 ) 0 . 234 to 0 . 281 Looks Live 0 . 001 ) 0 . 142 to 0 . 139 All - trunk - raised Live ) 0 . 111 ) 0 . 365 to 0 . 076 Accuracy Live ) 0 . 176 ) 0 . 402 to 0 . 059 Steps ⁄ min Live ) 7 . 36 ) 39 . 434 to 1 . 807 Touches Videotaped 0 . 014 ) 0 . 039 to 0 . 074 Moves Videotaped ) 0 . 044 ) 0 . 127 to 0 . 040 All - trunk - raised Videotaped 0 . 058 ) 0 . 059 to 0 . 175 Accuracy Videotaped ) 0 . 062 ) 0 . 160 to 0 . 020 D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin 1095 of this conﬁrmation bias appeared to generally be small relative to individual variation in behavior . The effect size for conﬁrmation bias ranged from ) 3 % to 65 % of the mean value of each variable , with most effect sizes < 20 % . In terms of variation explained , conﬁrmation bias accounted for < 14 % of the overall variation in all cases and < 3 % of the var - iation in all but the two signiﬁcant results . Further - more , the only case of conﬁrmation bias that remained signiﬁcant after adjustment for multiple response variables was ATR in the videotaped trials , which we knew to be strongly subjective before the trials were run . Because of the high degree of inter - individual var - iation in behavior , trials with live salamanders likely had only moderate power to detect signiﬁcant effects of conﬁrmation bias . Using a post hoc power analy - sis , we estimate that the magnitude of conﬁrmation bias needed for 80 % power would range from 0 . 06 SD ( for looks ) to 0 . 41 SD ( for touches ) . However , in a sense , this low - to - moderate power is exactly the point : because individual variation in behavior was generally large , conﬁrmation bias would have to be quite strong to substantially inﬂuence these kinds of results . Certainly our sample sizes , which ranged from 53 to 71 pairs of animals , are not unusually low for a behavioral study . The videotaped trials controlled for this individual variation in behavior and thus yielded higher statistical power . The esti - mated effect size required for 80 % power ranged from 0 . 03 SD ( foraging accuracy ) to 0 . 23 SD ( moves ) . The obvious question about our research is the extent to which the conﬁrmation biases of university students are representative of the biases of practicing scientists . Undergraduate students are often involved in collecting data for published research , so the dis - tinction between these student observers and prac - ticing scientists is not necessarily as clear as it might seem . In general , though , most behavioral research is conducted by graduate students and PhD - level sci - entists , and these more experienced researchers might be subject to very different levels of conﬁrma - tion bias . In general , there are good reasons to view our results as something of a worst - case scenario with respect to conﬁrmation bias . Experienced researchers should be better observers than the naı¨ve observers used in our study , and thus may be subject to even less conﬁrmation bias than we detected . In addition , we used a biasing statement that was quite strong – it suggested that we were examining predictions that were already largely established and that our observations were merely designed to ‘verify’ these predictions . Finally , we compared trials with opposing biases rather than comparing a biased treatment to a non - biased con - trol . Given this , it could be taken as particularly encouraging that conﬁrmation bias appeared to be generally small in these trials . There is one important sense , though , in which our results may not represent a worst - case scenario . Our observers had very little stake in the outcome of their observations , as compared with practicing sci - entists under pressure to publish or get grants . Therefore , it is at least possible that experienced researchers would show more , rather than less con - ﬁrmation bias , than did our naı¨ve observers . A recent review of conﬁrmation bias in physics sug - gested that the history of that science is replete with examples of leading researchers being biased toward conﬁrming the predictions of prevailing theories , even when those theories have actually been incor - rect ( Jeng 2006 ) . Unfortunately , it would be difﬁcult to conduct a research study such as ours with large numbers of PhD scientists who are naı¨ve to the pur - pose of the study . It may be more feasible to use meta - analysis to evaluate conﬁrmation bias , perhaps by comparing studies where observation were made blind to treatment with similar studies where blind - ing was not part of the experimental design . A further question about our research is the extent to which the behaviors of plethodontid sala - manders might be subject to more or less conﬁrma - tion bias than the behaviors of other animals . Some have suggested that many observation biases may be particularly an issue when animals are behaviorally similar to humans , as in the ﬁeld of primatology ( Hrdy 1981 ; Zuk 2002 ) . Because salamander behav - iors are fairly distinct from human behaviors , it may be easier for observers to make unbiased observa - tions on salamanders . However , until we have com - parable studies with other taxa , this remains speculative . Finally , to the extent that we did ﬁnd some evi - dence of conﬁrmation bias , the question arises as to the mechanism by which the data may have been biased . Rosenthal & Fode ( 1963 ) suggested that the mechanism for conﬁrmation bias in their study of maze running by rats was unconscious reinforce - ment by observers that differed in magnitude between rats that were falsely labeled ‘bright’ or ‘dull’ . In our study , there were no repeated interac - tions between observers and subjects that could have produced reinforcement . This leaves two main possibilities for the source of the bias . One possibility is that observers could have actually added or Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors 1096 Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin subtracted observations from their original totals in an attempt to produce the predicted results . The other possibility is that observers could have used criteria for scoring behaviors that may have been biased depending on their a priori expectations . We believe that observers had no incentive to knowingly alter their data , and we did not note any erasures or changes in the raw data . We feel the second possibil - ity , that observers scored behaviors differently depending on their expectations , is much more likely . This interpretation is consistent with the fact that the most subjective behavior recorded ( ATR in the videotaped trials ) was one of the only two statis - tically signiﬁcant biases detected . With respect to observer gender , we found very similar levels of conﬁrmation bias for men and women . Overall , women showed slightly less conﬁr - mation bias for six of 10 behaviors , and men showed slightly less bias on four of 10 ; none of these differ - ences were statistically signiﬁcant . The subject of gen - der differences in the way scientiﬁc research is conducted is certainly a controversial one , in part because there is little actual data to bear on this issue . In the ﬁeld of animal behavior , researchers have shown that men and women may tend to choose dif - ferent study organisms ( Holmes & Hitchcock 1997 ) , and may interpret the same data in subtly different ways ( Pierrotti et al . 1997 ) . In addition , men and women may have different expectations with respect to sex differences in animal behavior ( Marsh & Han - lon 2004 ) . However , given that expectations had only small effects on observed outcomes and that men and women were similarly susceptible to these small biases , we ﬁnd nothing to suggest that men or women might reach differential conclusions about salamander behavior as a result of conﬁrmation bias . Although our results are somewhat narrow with respect to lar - ger arguments about gender differences in scientiﬁc methodology , we ﬁnd little to support any suggestion of substantial gender differences in the tendency of observers to see what they expect to see . Acknowledgements We thank the 2004 and 2005 General Biology labo - ratory students , the 2004 Animal Behavior students , and the 2005 Behavioral Ecology students for their participation in this research . Mary Jo Kricorian helped set up and carry out the 2005 videotaped tri - als . Animal care and research methods were covered under IACUC protocol 0204A - DM , and salamanders were collected under Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries permit no . 021066 . Use of human subjects was passed by the Institutional Review Board of Washington and Lee University , and all experiments comply with current U . S . Laws . Literature Cited Altmann , J . 1974 : Observational study of behaviour : sampling methods . Behaviour 49 , 227—267 . Caine , N . G . 1990 : Unrecognized anti - predator behaviour can bias observational data . Anim . Behav . 39 , 195—197 . David , R . S . & Jaeger , R . G . 1981 : Prey location through chemical cues by a terrestrial salamander . Copeia 1981 , 435—440 . Gillette , J . R . & Peterson , M . G . 2001 : The beneﬁts of transparency : candling as a simple method for determin - ing sex in red - backed salamanders ( Plethodon cinereus ) . Herp . Rev . 32 , 233—235 . Gracely , R . H . , Dubner , R . , Deeter , W . R . & Wolskee , P . J . 1985 : Clinician’s expectations inﬂuence placebo analgesia . Lancet 325 , 43 . Holmes , D . J . & Hitchcock , C . L . 1997 : A feeling for the organism ? An empirical look at gender and research choices of animal behaviorists . In : Feminism and Evolutionary Biology ( Gowaty , P . A . , ed . ) . Springer , New York , pp . 184—204 . Hrdy , S . B . 1981 : The Woman That Never Evolved . Harvard Univ . Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts . Hrobjartsson , A . & Gotzsche , P . C . 2001 : Is the placebo powerless ? An analysis of clinical trials comparing placebo with no treatment . N . Engl . J . Med . 344 , 1594—1602 . Hrobjartsson , A . & Gotzsche , P . C . 2004 : Is the placebo powerless ? Update of a systematic review with 52 new randomized trials comparing placebo with no treat - ment . J . Intern . Med . 256 , 91—100 . Jaeger , R . G . 1984 : Agonistic behavior of the red - backed salamander . Copeia 1984 , 309—314 . Jaeger , R . G . & Forester , D . C . 1993 : Social behavior of plethodontid salamanders . Herpetologica 49 , 163—175 . Jaeger , R . G . , Joseph , R . G . & Barnard , D . E . 1981 : Forag - ing tactics of a terrestrial salamander : sustained yield in territories . Anim . Behav . 29 , 1100—1105 . Jaeger , R . G . , Barnard , D . E . & Joseph , R . G . 1982 : Forag - ing tactics of a terrestrial salamander : assessing prey density . Am . Nat . 119 , 885—890 . Jeng , M . 2006 : A selected history of expectation bias in physics . Am . J . Phys . 74 , 578—583 . Jordan , R . H . & Burghardt , G . M . 1986 : Employing an ethogram to detect reactivity of black bears to the pres - ence of humans . Ethology 73 , 89—115 . Kelly , C . D . 2006 : Replicating empirical research in behavioral ecology : how and why it should be done but rarely ever is . Q . Rev . Biol . 81 , 221—236 . D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin 1097 Kirsch , I . & Weixel , L . J . 1988 : Double - blind versus deceptive administration of a placebo . Behav . Neurosci . 102 , 319—323 . Lancaster , D . L . & Jaeger , R . G . 1995 : Rules of engage - ment for adult salamanders in territorial conﬂicts with heterospeciﬁc juveniles . Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 37 , 25—29 . Marsh , D . M . & Hanlon , T . J . 2004 : Observer gender and observation bias in animal behaviour research : experi - mental tests with red - backed salamanders . Anim . Behav . 68 , 1425—1433 . Mathis , A . 1990 : Territoriality in a terrestrial salamander : the inﬂuence of resource quality and body size . Behav - iour 112 , 162—174 . Nickerson , R . S . 1998 : Conﬁrmation bias : a ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises . Rev . Gen . Psych . 2 , 175—220 . Nishikawa , K . C . 1987 : Interspeciﬁc aggressive behaviour is salamanders – species - speciﬁc interference or mis - identiﬁcation ? Anim . Behav . 35 , 263—270 . Petranka , J . W . 1998 : Salamanders of the United States and Canada . Smithsonian Institution Press , Washing - ton DC . Pierrotti , R . , Annett , C . A . & Hand , J . L . 1997 : Male and female perceptions of pair - bond dynamics : monogamy in western gulls , Larus occidentalis . In : Feminism and Evolutionary Biology ( Gowaty , P . A . , ed . ) . Springer , New York , pp . 261—275 . Pollo , A . , Amanzio , M . , Arslanian , A . , Casadio , C . , Maggi , G . & Benedetti , F . 2001 : Response expectancies in pla - cebo analgesia and their clinical relevance . Pain 93 , 77—84 . Rissler , L . J . , Barber , A . M . & Wilbur , H . M . 2000 : Spatial and behavioural interactions between a native and introduced salamander species . Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 48 , 61—68 . Rosenthal , R . 1966 : Experimenter Effects in Behavioural Research . Appleton - Century - Crofts , New York . Rosenthal , R . 1994 : Interpersonal expectancy effects : a 30 - year perspective . Curr . Dir . Psych . Sci . 3 , 176—179 . Rosenthal , R . & Fode , K . L . 1963 : The effect of experi - menter bias on the performance of the albino rat . Behav . Sci . 8 , 183—189 . Thomas , J . S . , Jaeger , R . G . & Horne , E . A . 1989 : Are all females welcome ? Agonistic behavior of male red - backed salamanders . Copeia 1989 , 915—920 . Zuk , M . 2002 : Sexual Selections . Univ . of California Press , Berkeley , CA . Conﬁrmation Bias in Behavioral Research D . M . Marsh & T . J . Hanlon Ethology 113 ( 2007 ) 1089 – 1098 ª 2007 The Authors 1098 Journal compilation ª 2007 Blackwell Verlag , Berlin