1 NaMemo2 : Facilitating Teacher - Student Interaction with Theory - Based Design and Student Autonomy Consideration 1 Guang Jiang , School of Telecommunications Engineering , Xidian University , Xi’an , China , gjiang @ mail . xidian . edu . cn Jiahui Zhu , School of Telecommunications Engineering , Xidian University , Xi’an , China , 20011210497 @ stu . xidian . edu . cn Yunsong Li , School of Telecommunications Engineering , Xidian University , Xi’an , China , ysli @ mail . xidian . edu . cn Pengcheng An , School of Design , Southern University of Science and Technology , Shenzhen , China , anpc @ sustech . edu . cn Yunlong Wang , Institute of High Performance Computing ( IHPC ) , Agency for Science , Technology and Research ( A * STAR ) , Singapore , wang _ yunlong @ ihpc . a - star . edu . sg Abstract : Teacher - student interaction ( TSI ) is essential for learning efficiency and harmonious teacher - student interpersonal relationships . However , studies on TSI support tools often focus on teacher needs while neglecting student needs and autonomy . To enhance both lecturer competence in delivering interpersonal interaction and student autonomy in TSI , we developed NaMemo2 , a novel augmented - reality system that allows students to express their willingness to TSI and displays student information to teachers during lectures . The design and evaluation process follows a new framework , STUDIER , which can facilitate the development of theory - based ethnics - aware TSI support tools in general . The quantitative results of our four - week field study with four classes in a university suggested that NaMemo2 can improve 1 ) TSI in the classroom from both teacher and student perspectives , 2 ) student attitudes and willingness to TSI , and 3 ) student attitudes to the deployment of NaMemo2 . The qualitative feedback from students and teachers indicated that improving TSI may be responsible for improved attention in students and a better classroom atmosphere during lectures . Keywords : education technology ; field study ; human - computer interaction ; name - indicating system ; smart classroom ; teacher - student interaction ; university students . This paper has been accepted in July 2023 for publication in Education and Information Technologies . 2 Introduction Research on smart classroom technologies has sought to empower teachers to better understand and improve teaching - learning activities ( Saini & Goel , 2019 ) , e . g . , tracking student learning states ( Ahuja et al . , 2019 ; Holstein , McLaren , & Aleven , 2018 ) and enhancing teacher interaction with students in the classroom ( An et al . , 2019 ; Saquib , Bose , George , & Kamvar , 2018 ) . Studies also focused on online virtual classes to tackle challenges such as maintaining student engagement ( Dumford & Miller , 2018 ) . The teacher - student interaction ( TSI ) is a fundamental aspect of pedagogy that influences student behavioral engagement ( Nguyen , Cannata , & Miller , 2018 ) , autonomous motivation of learning ( Opdenakker , Maulana , & den Brok , 2012 ) , resilience ( Liebenberg et al . , 2016 ) , and learning achievement ( Pianta , 2016 ; Sun et al . , 2022 ) . In this paper , we focus on technology design and development to support TSI in university classrooms . Although there have been studies exploring the use of TSI support tools in university classrooms ( Ahuja et al . , 2019 ; Alavi & Dillenbourg , 2012 ; Alavi , Dillenbourg , & Kaplan , 2009 ; Fernandez - Nieto , An , Zhao , Buckingham Shum , & Martinez - Maldonado , 2022 ) , there remain many unanswered research questions and technical needs from teachers and students for improving TSI in the university context . TSI primarily takes the forms of physical proximity , conversation , body language , eye contact , or communication through shared ( digital ) media . Appropriate TSI contributes to efficient learning and a positive climate in the classroom and harmonious teacher - student interpersonal relationships ( Hagenauer & Volet , 2014 ; Li & Yang , 2021 ; Sun et al . , 2022 ) . A classic yet effective way for teachers to bond with students is to address them by their names in teaching practice ( Cooper , Haney , Krieg , & Brownell , 2017 ; Glenz , 2014 ; Tanner , 2011 , 2013 ) . However , this method has become challenging for university 3 teachers , given the large number of students in a class . A teacher in a university typically only remembers the names of a few students for the entire duration of a course , which affords these students better chances for interactive participation in the course and subconsciously missed personal engagement with many of the rest students . On the other hand , student needs , willingness , and autonomy for interpersonal interaction with teachers during lectures have not been explicitly conveyed to the teachers , which may also hinder teacher efforts to interact with students . These challenges and demands have been highlighted by researchers in recent years ( Cooper et al . , 2017 ; Tanner , 2013 ; Wubbels & Brekelmans , 2005 ) . Therefore , there is a need for novel tools to support teachers in recalling student information ( e . g . , names ) and student expression of personal needs ( e . g . , the willingness toward and preference for interacting with teachers during lectures ) for better TSI . We found a theory - based design framework for the development of TSI support tools to be absent in the literature . Without integrating theories into the design and evaluation process , it is difficult to accumulate knowledge and identify opportunities in the research domain . Therefore , in addition to developing a TSI support tool , we also explore a holistic approach to guide the development of TSI support tools , which leads to our proposal of the new framework , STUDIER ( i . e . , Sparking , Targeting & Understanding , Designing & Implementing , Evaluating & Refining ) . In STUDIER , we integrate theoretical models of TSI ( Pianta & Hamre , 2009 ) and behavioral theories ( Michie , van Stralen , & West , 2011a ) to guide the design of TSI support tools towards discipline progress , and avoid research that merely focus on improving user experience ( Long , 2021 ) . 4 We also emphasize the consideration of ethics and accessibility principles to frame the design to be accountable and responsible . Following the STUDIER framework , we developed an augmented - reality TSI support tool , NaMemo2 , that allows students to convey their willingness to interact to the teacher as well as show their names to the teacher in physical classrooms . This information can help teachers reduce their cognitive load of having to remember many names and increase their awareness of student needs and willingness to interact during lectures . As the system uses facial recognition technology , we carefully considered ethics in our use case and integrated student control of facial photos and interaction willingness into the system . Our system , NaMemo2 , was developed by redesigning the hardware platform and software pipeline of its predecessor , NaMemo ( Jiang et al . , 2020 ) . Following the privacy and autonomy principles of facial recognition technology use ( Doberstein , Charbonneau , Morin , & Despatie , 2022 ; Smith & Miller , 2022 ) , we designed new features for student control and autonomy to explore the ethical application of facial recognition in schools ( Andrejevic & Selwyn , 2020 ) . Using the system UI , once the teacher attempts to interact with a student , they can obtain each student’s name and willingness to interact using the NaMemo2 user interface ( Figure 2 ) . The results of our intervention study suggest that our method can improve both student attitudes to TSI and the deployment of NaMemo2 in the classroom . In the subsequent sections , we will first review related work in the literature . Next , we describe the development of NaMemo2 using the STUDIER framework . We next report on the evaluation of NaMemo2 , followed by discussions of our evaluation results and the lessons we learned through our study . 5 Related Work To illustrate the foundations of and challenges in developing TSI support tools , we review research on the theories of TSI , frameworks for designing TSI support tools , and existing TSI support tools . Theories of Teacher - Student Interaction Prior empirical studies showed that TSI can influence student behavioral engagement ( Nguyen et al . , 2018 ) , autonomous motivation in learning ( Opdenakker et al . , 2012 ) , resilience ( Liebenberg et al . , 2016 ) , and learning achievement ( Pianta , 2016 ; Sun et al . , 2022 ) . Drawing on theories and empirical studies ( Brophy , 1999 ; J . S . Eccles & R . W . Roeser , 1999 ; Pressley et al . , 2003 ) , Hamre and Pianta proposed the Teaching through Interactions ( TTI ) model that describe three domains of classroom teacher - student interaction : emotional support , classroom organization , and instructional support ( Hamre et al . , 2013 ; Pianta & Hamre , 2009 ) . Each domain includes multiple dimensions ( e . g . , positive climate and teacher sensitivity for emotional support ) , and each dimension is described by explicit indicators ( e . g . , positive communications and respect for a positive climate ) . Each indicator is eventually linked to specific behaviors ( e . g . , physical proximity and peer assistance ) that can be observed and measured . The TTI model presents a Domain - Dimension - Indicator - Behavior structure to conceptualize and operationalize teacher - student interaction . Following the TTI model , researchers and practitioners can design experiments to investigate how specific interactions contribute to teaching outcomes or realize appropriate strategies to optimize certain interactions . With a similar concept ( teacher - student contact ) , Korthagen et al . examined the opinions of teachers and students on timing , characteristics , and the meaning of good teacher - student contact ( Korthagen , 6 Attema - Noordewier , & Zwart , 2014 ) . The TTI model and related empirical studies provide a solid foundation that can inspire and frame the design and development of technologies to properly support TTI . Meanwhile , translating the theories and their implications to real - world technologies for improving TSI remains challenging . In another research line of Dynamic Assessment ( DA ) ( Poehner & Wang , 2021 ) , rooted in Sociocultural Theory ( Vygotsky , 1978 ) and the Mediated Learning Experience framework ( Feuerstein , Rand , Hoffman , & Vig , 1979 ) , researchers developed methods that allow teachers to mediate students’ performance and understand their learning potential ( Poehner & Wang , 2021 ; Swanson & Lussier , 2001 ) . Between the two major types of DA ( interactionist and interventionist ) , interactionist methods emphasize dialogic interaction between teachers and students to improve student performance , which is more malleable and challenging to teachers ( Ghonsooly & Hassanzadeh , 2019 ) . However , technologies to support teachers in identifying opportune moments for interaction during DA are underexplored . Our work can also benefit this domain by informing the design of tools for interactionist DA . Frameworks for Developing TSI Support Tools To facilitate the co - design of learning analytics systems with stakeholders , Holstein et al . summarized a five - step process : initial needs analysis and concept generation , initial concept validation , iterative lower - fidelity prototyping , iterative higher - fidelity prototyping , and iterative classroom piloting and experimental evaluation ( Holstein , McLaren , & Aleven , 2019 ) . From the scope of teaching augmentation , the TA framework frames the design space into five dimensions , namely target ( teacher abilities ) , attentional level , social visibility level , presence over time , and interpretation ( An , Holstein , D’Anjou , 7 Eggen , & Bakker , 2020 ) . These design frameworks provide practical tools to design and analyze smart classroom technologies but lack direct connections to the theories and principles of teacher - student interaction . Integrating and elaborating on existing theories can help researchers to accumulate knowledge and identify opportunities in this research domain . For instance , TSI studies can incorporate the taxonomy in the TTI model to avoid using different terms for the same concepts when reporting the study results . On the other hand , developing technologies for a specific domain ideally requires the cooperation of interdisciplinary teams of designers , developers , end - users , and domain experts . Therefore , holistic design frameworks are necessary to synthesize considerations and best practices from different disciplines to guide the development of TSI support tools . In this paper , we propose a new design framework for developing such TSI support tools and demonstrate how it has been applied in the development of a new TSI support tool . TSI Support Tools and Student Autonomy in TSI Along with the development of information and communication technologies in the last few decades , we have seen many digital tools being developed and applied to school classrooms to support teacher - student interaction and other teaching practices ( Harper , 2018 ; Saini & Goel , 2019 ) . However , our literature review revealed most existing tools to focus on sensing TSI , e . g . , applying distributed sensor networks ( Saquib et al . , 2018 ) , indoor positioning ( Martinez - Maldonado et al . , 2020 ) , and using computer vision technology ( Ahuja et al . , 2019 ) to track teacher proximity and student behavior in the classroom . The tracked data can provide real - time feedback to teachers on their attention and time distribution for the students in the classroom ( An , Bakker , Ordanovski , Taconis , & Eggen , 2018 ; An et al . , 2019 ; Saquib et al . , 2018 ) , student attention and emotion ( Saquib 8 et al . , 2018 ) , and student learning states ( Holstein et al . , 2018 ) . We identified a gap between sensing technologies and the use of student autonomy for TSI support in previous studies . Existing TSI support tools emphasize the role of the teachers in the interaction while neglecting the student expression of their need and autonomy . In this study , we therefore develop a new TSI support tool to show student names and TSI willingness to teachers during lectures , which helps teachers to overcome the difficulty of remembering many names and increases their awareness of student needs and willingness to interact during lectures . Methodology : Developing NaMemo2 with STUDIER In this section , we present our new design framework for developing TSI support tools and illustrate how we applied it to develop a new TSI support tool . A design framework is not a theoretical model illustrating relations between factors ; instead , it is a guideline that highlights key steps and design elements to help practitioners plan , design , develop , and evaluate a target product . Design frameworks are well established in many domains , e . g . , health behavior change ( Michie et al . , 2011a ; Mohr , Schueller , Montague , Burns , & Rashidi , 2014 ; Mummah , Robinson , King , Gardner , & Sutton , 2016 ) , user - centric explainable AI ( Miller , 2019 ; D . Wang , Yang , Abdul , & Lim , 2019 ) , and collective intelligence and creativity ( Cox , Wang , Abdul , Weth , & Lim , 2021 ; Malone , Laubacher , & Dellarocas , 2009 ) . These design frameworks are especially useful for interdisciplinary and emerging research fields , where the design process involves multi - aspect factors and considerations . 9 The development process of NaMemo2 consists of Sparking , Targeting & Understanding , Designing & Implementing , and Evaluating & Refining ( STUDIER ) , which we conceptualize into a design framework . Inspired by frameworks and reviews in other domains , e . g . , Creativity Support Tools ( Frich , Biskjaer , & Dalsgaard , 2018 ) and Behavior Change Support Tools ( Oinas - Kukkonen , 2013 ; Y . Wang , Fadhil , Lange , & Reiterer , 2019 ) , this framework emphasizes the explicit integration of relevant theories and design principles to encourage holistic thinking , and theory - driven and ethics - aware design . In this section , we illustrate each part of STUDIER ( Figure 1 ) and demonstrate the design process for NaMemo2 . Figure 1 : The diagram of STUDIER . The arrows with solid lines connect the major steps . The arrows with dotted lines show the connections between strongly relevant elements across the major steps . Sparking The initial problem may be identified by teachers , students , or other stakeholders of the education ecosystem in their daily practice of teaching , learning , or organizing teaching - learning activities . We use spark to indicate the process of realizing a pain point and 10 initiating an intention to solve the problem in TSI . In this stage , one needs to describe the scenario of the identified problem as richly as possible with contextual information . In the sparking stage of NaMemo2 , one author ( Teacher T ) found it challenging to remember many student names when interacting with students during lectures . As he described : “I teach an engineering subject in a university . I believe that teachers interacting with students in class is essential for inquiring about students’ learning states , drawing students’ attention , and improving the classroom atmosphere . However , I find it inefficient and sometimes frustrating to address students when I don’t know their names in class . It’s quite challenging to remember so many students’ names with two lectures per week . I need to point to the student with my hand , count the row and column numbers of the seat , or describe the cloth color or hairstyle of the student . All these methods take more time than I expect and break the class fluency . In addition , using the pointing gesture or describing students’ appearance is not polite and respectful to students . ” Targeting & Understanding Given the described scenario , we next need to define the scope of the target user group and interaction problem , which will help us articulate the overarching goal . This targeting process complements the process of understanding the problem context and characteristics of the user group . In Teacher T’s scenario , the target user group is intuitively the university teachers , because they have limited interaction time to be familiar with the students . K - 12 teachers may not have such difficulty because they have more time for teaching and only need to pay attention to small groups of students . To confirm the generalization of the 11 proposed problem , the design team discussed the described scenario with five of Teacher T’s colleagues , who all agreed on the significance of the problem in the discussion . The primary need of the teachers is to address students by their names during lectures in the classroom . Meanwhile , we should not ignore the need and autonomy of students in our design . Given that TSI is reciprocal by nature , and that student needs for TSI can be highly personal , it would be meaningful to allow student input for their preferences and willingness for TSI over time . Therefore , we need to develop a system that allows the teachers to know student names in real time , at the same time allowing the students to express their needs and willingness for interaction , which serves as the design goal . In addition , we also need an intervention goal that defines the expected effect of the target users using our system . We refer to the TTI model as a taxonomy to understand and conceptualize the potential effect of resolving the target interaction problem ( Pianta & Hamre , 2009 ) . For Teacher T’s case of knowing student names , we found two relevant dimensions : 1 ) positive climate through improved respect and communication , and 2 ) better productivity through efficient transitions . Therefore , we should examine if the system could increase the quantity and quality of teacher - student interaction in empirical studies . Informed by behavioral theories ( Michie , van Stralen , & West , 2011b ) , the behavior of the teachers in interacting with students should be driven by their motivation of TSI . Therefore , we should clarify that we design the system to support teachers who have the motivation for TSI , instead of those that need to be motivated . While we design the tool for teachers as the primary users , the students are the passive users who need to be considered and respected . Student attitudes to system deployment , as well as the change in 12 their attitudes to TSI after using the system , should thus be important measures for system evaluation . Designing & Implementing Following the design and intervention goals , we then design the user interface ( UI ) , select devices , and define the system workflow . We found that the most intuitive way to indicate student names in real - time is to use augmented reality ( AR ) technology based on facial recognition , which displays student information on top of the real - time captured panorama in the UI ( Figure 2 ) . The facial recognition function requires students to upload photos of their faces taken from different angles . Even though all students had previously submitted their biometric face photos for their university student ID card , some of them may still hesitate to upload face photos for identification . We therefore studied and followed the recently discussed ethical principles of using facial recognition technology ( Smith & Miller , 2022 ) . First , we limited our use of student photos to the name indication function in NaMemo2 . Second , we granted students full control of photo usage : Students uploaded their photos after informed consent and could withdraw their permission at any time . Furthermore , to support student expression of willingness to interact in class , we included the Willingness to Interact ( WtoI ) score , which is set by the students when showing their names . Eventually , the system workflow involves 1 ) students uploading photos and setting their willingness to interact before lectures , 2 ) teachers setting up the system in the classroom before each lecture , and 3 ) teachers interacting with the UI in class when requiring student names . 13 Figure 2 : A showcase of NaMemo2 UI a teacher used in a class . The boxes locate the recognized student faces . The bar colors on top of the boxes show student willingness to interact ( WtoI ) . Green means high , yellow means moderate , and red indicates low willingness . The student’s name with WtoI will appear when the box surrounding their face is clicked . The image is obscured and an alias is used to protect student privacy , and the original Chinese text in the UI is replaced with English for demonstration . Our system consists of three hardware parts : a pan - tilt camera capturing real - time images , a terminal ( PCs , tablets , or smartphones ) accessing the user interface , and an edge computing unit ( ECU ) running the backend server to connect the camera and user terminal . The pan - tilt camera is placed in the front area of the classroom to scan all the students and send the images to the server , while the server hosted in the ECU runs the face recognition algorithm and renders the UI . Using any terminal with a web browser , the teacher can access the UI and obtain student names and willingness to interact by clicking on the UI . According to the design dimensions in the TA framework ( An et al . , 2020 ) , we tend to build a low - attentional ( for both teachers and students ) , low - social visibility ( only teachers see the UI ) , and real - time system that accurately recognizes students in a large classroom and minimizes interruption to the teaching flow . We iterate our solutions by 14 stepwise resolving the design requirements . ( 1 ) We could use a camera with a telephoto lens to maintain the resolution of faces in images so that students sitting in the last row can also be recognized . However , the telephoto lens cannot cover the whole classroom in one frame . ( 2 ) Therefore , we chose a PTZ camera , which can rotate the camera for a broader view . However , the camera’s movement and affiliated noise may distract students . ( 3 ) To minimize the obtrusiveness , we limited the rotation speed to 10 degrees / second while pausing the camera when snapping to prevent motion - induced image blur . The reduced speed may cause a delay in the UI update , but the delay will not harm the ease of identifying students through the UI in normal classroom settings where students do not change positions in general during the lecture . The key challenge is to accurately recognize multiple faces at different viewing angles since students may be looking at the teacher , blackboard , and book on the table during the lecture . To achieve a high recognition accuracy to avoid adverse impacts on the teacher experience , we developed an algorithm pipeline combining a few computer vision methods , including image stitching ( Brown & Lowe , 2007 ) , instance segmentation ( He , Gkioxari , Dollar , & Girshick , 2017 ) to avoid stitching - caused artifacts , and face recognition ( Deng , Guo , Ververas , Kotsia , & Zafeiriou , 2020 ) . Evaluating and Refining The final stage of our design framework is evaluating the effectiveness of the developed system and refining it when necessary . A series of feasibility tests ( for system function testing ) , formative studies ( for usability testing ) , and summative studies ( for answering research questions ) can be conducted . Upon major revision of the system functions and UI , the process can be iterated across stages to adjust the elements accordingly . Ideally , the 15 findings from the evaluation results should be compared with existing theories and contribute to our understanding of TSI . Before conducting a summative evaluation of the system , we conducted a feasibility study with one university teacher and 161 students in two classes for ten lectures , which we reported previously ( Jiang et al . , 2020 ) . The primary aim was to collect enough data to test facial recognition in a large classroom with many students . We therefore selected a teacher participant who 1 ) had a good relationship with students and 2 ) actively interacted with students in class . The teacher helped us motivate the students to participate in the study , and eventually , all 161 students participated in the feasibility study . The facial recognition accuracy in our test was 99 . 2 % . In the next section , we report on our follow - up study to explore the effects of NaMemo2 on TSI in the classroom , in addressing our intervention goal . Evaluation of NaMemo2 We have illustrated the development process for NaMemo2 along with an illustration of the STUDIER framework . In the section “Targeting & Understanding” , we defined the design goal ( i . e . , reminding teachers of student names and supporting students to express interaction needs and willingness ) and the intervention goal ( i . e . , quantity and quality of TSI ) , which guided the realization of NaMemo2 . In this section , we report on the summative evaluation of the interventional goal in our design . We plan to answer three research questions in this evaluation study : 16 ( 1 ) Can NaMemo2 support teachers for TSI ? We expect teachers to find NaMemo2 useful in reminding them of student names , to make classroom TSI more fluent and frequent . ( 2 ) Will student attitudes to and willingness for TSI change after using NaMemo2 in their class ? Student attitudes to TSI refer to their general assessment ( positive vs . negative ) of the TSI in a particular class , while willingness refers to their intention to get involved in TSI . Both factors have been investigated in public administration , e . g . , payment for public safety ( Donahue & Miller , 2006 ) , recycling e - waste ( Song , Wang , & Li , 2012 ) , and participation in research studies ( Trauth , Jewell , Ricci , Musa , & Siminoff , 2000 ) . We adopt the two factors to reflect student perception of the potential increase in TSI during class . ( 3 ) Will student attitudes to NaMemo2 change after using NaMemo2 in their class ? Even though there are privacy protection strategies in NaMemo2 through data access control and limiting the use of facial recognition to name indication , some students may still show concerns about the use of facial recognition . We expect student attitudes to NaMemo2 to be improved after its deployment . Participants To answer our research questions , we deployed NaMemo2 in four classes for four weeks at a university in China during November and December 2021 . The institutional ethics committee approved the study . We next advertised our study plan via the university mail list and the social media accounts of the authors . This recruitment method was convenient and commonly used for exploratory evaluation in HCI studies ( e . g . , ( Luo et al . , 2018 ; Y . Wang , König , & Reiterer , 2021 ; Y . Wang & Reiterer , 2019 ) ) . Six teachers contacted us for 17 participation , and two of them were randomly selected for participation in this study due to the limited availability of our hardware . Each teacher taught two classes of the course “Micro - Controllers : Theory and Applications” to second - year undergraduate students . Study Procedure and Metrics The study began in the middle of the 2021 winter semester , so that we could apply a single - arm study design with pre - intervention measures and post - intervention measures . The pre - intervention measures served as the baseline for the post - intervention measures . Before field deployment , we introduced the workflow and UI of NaMemo2 to the teacher participants , who then helped us introduce the system to their students in class . Immediately after the introduction to students , we delivered a pre - study survey to the students in the four classes via their WeChat groups to obtain their informed consent , demographics , and baseline measurements of the metrics ( Table 1 ) . To help students think through the survey questions and avoid poorly thought out ratings , we designed open - ended questions to describe their interactive experience with the teachers during lectures and their rationale for their rating scores . We did not provide any incentive for the participants to avoid potentially confounding effects in their responses . The students volunteered to anonymously fill out the survey . Meanwhile , we posted the link in the WeChat group for students to upload at least three photographs of their faces ( i . e . , one taken from the front and two taken from the side ) to the NaMemo2 system for the study . The students who uploaded photos needed to provide their actual names and willingness for interaction ( High , Medium , Low ) to be shown in the NaMemo2 UI ( Figure 2 ) . During the four - week field deployment , the students were allowed to log in to the system to change their willingness level . Before each lecture , a teaching assistant set up 18 the hardware in the classroom to allow the teacher to log in to the system with their device for access to NaMemo2 UI . After the field deployment , we conducted post - study surveys for both students and teachers . In the student survey , we added the perceived change of TSI in class ( see Table 1 ) to the metrics used in the pre - study survey . In the teacher survey , we measured the perceived helpfulness of NaMemo2 ( on a 7 - point Likert scale ) and collected teacher feedback on suggestions to refine NaMemo2 . Table 1 : The metrics in the pre - study and post - study student surveys . The survey questions were originally in Chinese . We have translated them into English in this table . Metric Description Survey Attitudes to TSI - What is your general attitude to TSI in class ? [ 7 - point Likert scale ( - 3 to 3 ) : Very negative , Negative , Somewhat negative , Neither negative nor positive , Somewhat positive , Agree , Strongly positive ] - Why ? [ Free text ] Pre - Study & Post - Study Willingness to TSI - Do you hope to have more interaction with your teacher during the lecture ? [ 7 - point Likert scale ( - 3 to 3 ) : Strongly disagree , Disagree , Somewhat disagree , Neither disagree nor agree , Somewhat agree , Agree , Strongly Agree ] - Why ? [ Free text ] Pre - Study & Post - Study Attitudes to NaMemo2 - What is your general attitude towards using NaMemo2 to support TSI in the classroom ? [ 7 - point Likert scale ( - 3 to 3 ) : Very negative , Negative , Somewhat negative , Neither negative nor positive , Somewhat positive , Positive , Strongly positive ] - Why ? [ Free text ] Pre - Study & Post - Study Perceived Change of TSI - What is the change in TSI after your teacher used NaMemo2 in the classroom ? [ 7 - point Likert scale : Decreased a lot , Decreased a little , No change , Increased a little , Increased a lot ] - And any other changes during the lecture , e . g . , class atmosphere ? [ Free text ] Post - Study 19 Data Collection and Analysis A total of 118 students ( 71 % ) uploaded their photos into our system . We collected 105 and 126 valid entries in the pre - study and post - study student surveys , respectively . The participants were 21 . 9 % female , between 18 and 22 years old ( M = 19 . 3 ) . We applied both quantitative and qualitative methods to analyze the collected data . We used Pearson’s r to evaluate correlations between variables , two - tailed t - test for the mean difference between groups , and Cohen’s d for the effect size ( Nakagawa & Cuthill , 2007 ) . All statistical tests were conducted in JMP Pro 15 . 2 . 0 ( SAS , 2022 ) , which is a frequently used tool in scientific research ( e . g . , in ( Cox et al . , 2021 ; Kelkar , Boushey , & Okos , 2015 ; Y . Wang , Venkatesh , & Lim , 2022 ) ) . The significance level was set to 0 . 05 . We are aware of the debate on using statistical methods to analyze Likert scale responses . and chose to use parametric tests as they are generally more robust than non - parametric tests ( Fagerland , 2012 ; Sullivan & Artino , 2013 ) . For the qualitative analysis , we performed a thematic analysis to accumulate evidence to further explain the statistical results . We used open coding in grounded theory ( Glaser & Strauss , 2006 ) to derive categories and affinity diagramming ( Beyer & Holtzblatt , 1998 ) to consolidate categories to themes supporting the understanding and explanation of our research questions . Two authors coded the free - text answers in the surveys independently , then resolved the inconsistency among the coding themes by discussion . 20 Results ( RQ1 ) Can NaMemo2 support teachers for TSI ? We examined how the students perceived changes in TSI and what the teachers perceived of NaMemo2 after using it in order to answer this question . We found that 67 % of the students surveyed regarded TSI to have increased a little , while 11 % of the students perceived a large increase after the deployment of NaMemo2 ( Figure 3 ) . In the free - text responses of students to the question of “other changes in class , ” the dominant themes were higher focus in class ( n = 82 ) and livelier atmosphere ( n = 33 ) . Some students additionally mentioned that student attendance rate seemed higher ( n = 5 ) and there were fewer students sitting in the back rows ( n = 3 ) . But there remained a number of students who either felt that TSI did not change ( n = 30 ) or felt that they did not pay attention if it changed ( n = 9 ) . Figure 3 : The rating distribution of student perceived change in TSI . The two teachers consistently reported that they often used NaMemo2 during lectures and found the system helpful for interacting with students . We identified three main themes from the teacher feedback : better focus and engagement of students , better 1 % 1 % 20 % 67 % 11 % 21 classroom atmosphere , and higher teacher - student respect . “ I felt my students paid more attention to my lecture , and the engagement improved the class atmosphere , ” said T1 ( Teacher Participant 1 ) . T2 commented that “ I used the [ NaMemo2 ] system to call on a student by name to start a conversation , which showed my respect to my students ; I hope they could feel the respect and have a better impression of me . ” ( RQ2 ) Will student attitudes and willingness to TSI change after using NaMemo2 in their class ? Figure 4 : Results of student ratings on attitudes to TSI , willingness to TSI , and attitudes to NaMemo2 from the pre - study and post - study surveys . The results showed a significant improvement in student attitudes toward TSI ( t ( 229 ) = - 3 . 73 , p < . 001 , d = 0 . 46 ) and willingness to engage in TSI ( t ( 229 ) = - 2 . 20 , p = . 029 , d = 0 . 29 ) over the course of the study ( Figure 4 ) . The key themes behind the positive attitudes and willingness to engage in TSI included higher focus in class ( n = 80 ) , better learning efficiency ( n = 34 ) , and higher sense of participation ( n = 17 ) . Student Participant 8 ( S8 ) pointed out that “ even though I felt a bit nervous , but I know this could force me to be more focus in class , ” while S102 explained that “ I felt my teacher cares about us when he asked several students if I understand that part . ” These examples indicated a change in the classroom atmosphere , which might have improved student attitudes to TSI . We also found 22 the increasing willingness to engage in TSI to be possibly due to the improvement in the classroom atmosphere . “ I didn’t want to interact with my teacher before because I didn’t follow the lecture ; later when I became more focused , I understand more and become more willing to interact in class because I feel more confident , ” said S23 . Some students even became more active to deliberately interact with the teacher , as S40 stated , “ my teacher did not call me quite often . Instead , I deliberately asked questions for clarification . Not sure if she knows my name , but I feel good interacting with my teacher in class . It will be better if she knows me . ” On the other hand , we found the main reasons for negative attitudes and low willingness to TSI include worry of failing to answer questions ( n = 11 ) , shyness of speaking in class ( n = 7 ) , and nervousness ( n = 4 ) . From the correlation test , student attitudes to TSI are closely related to their willingness for TSI , r = . 558 , p < . 001 , d = 0 . 92 , which is consistent with evidence in other domains of behavior change research , including participation in research studies ( Trauth et al . , 2000 ) and paying for public safety ( Donahue & Miller , 2006 ) . ( RQ3 ) Will student attitudes to NaMemo2 change after using NaMemo2 in their class ? We found a significant improvement of student attitudes to NaMemo2 over the course of the study , t ( 229 ) = - 7 . 66 , p < . 001 , ( Figure 4 ) . From the pre - study survey , we identified the main reasons for negative attitudes to NaMemo2 as disliking facial recognition ( n = 8 ) , the perception that teachers knowing names would not be necessary for TSI ( n = 8 ) , disliking TSI ( n = 4 ) , and worry over the failure to answer questions ( n = 3 ) . Some students reported a positive change in their attitude toward NaMemo2 after using it . As S55 commented , “ I don’t see any harm when using face recognition in this case . I do feel the 23 change after my teacher used this system that we became more focused and much less checking my phone . So my attitude to the system is more positive than before . ” Importantly , students appreciated that teachers cared and knew their names . S17 additionally reported , “ I really appreciate it that the teacher cares about our names , ” and S61 commented “ The system can help my teacher know my name anytime in class , so it’s easier for my teacher to remember me . I think there are not many ways to improve teacher - student communication , but this could be a good way . ” These findings align with a study on the use of name tents to identify students to teachers , where students were more willing to use name tents after realizing the benefits of having their names known to teachers ( Cooper et al . , 2017 ) . Summary and Implications for Refinement The perceptions of both students and teachers suggest that NaMemo2 can support TSI by increasing both the quantity and quality of TSI . Comparing the results of the pre - and post - study surveys , we observed a significant improvement in student attitudes and willingness for TSI , as well as their receptiveness to the use of NaMemo2 . In response to the open - ended question about the expected improvement of NaMemo2 in the post - study survey , both teachers expressed a desire for more supportive functions for TSI . One participant pointed out the need and difficulty of knowing student learning status during lectures , which can help the teacher arrange the timing of interaction with students . “ … for example , if the system can remind me when the percentage of ‘head - down’ students is getting higher , I will slow down and interact more with students . ” Another participant wanted to see the relationship between where the students sat and their willingness to interact , so that he could direct more attention to the less active “area” in the 24 classroom . This participant also wanted to have reminders for interaction , because “ when the lecture is dense , I may forget to interact with students ” . These suggestions for refining NaMemo2 could inform our follow - up studies . We demonstrated each step in STUDIER along with the development of NaMemo2 . As a design framework , STUDIER could also be used to guide the review of relevant studies of TSI support tools . Discussion Perspectives from Behavioral Theories Our results suggest that the deployment of NaMemo2 can improve TSI during lectures by indicating student names for teachers on demand . We refer to behavioral theories to explain this effect . According to Fogg’s behavior model ( Fogg , 2009 ) and the Capability , Opportunity , and Motivation Model of Behavior ( Michie et al . , 2011b ) , motivation , ability , and triggers ( opportunity ) are the three components that generate a target behavior that in turn influences those components . When NaMemo2 reduces the difficulty of remembering many student names , which is a barrier for teachers , teachers became more likely to interact with students . The positive perception of TSI from students , as a reward , could increase teacher motivation for TSI . As suggested by the teacher participant feedback , future work may also consider providing context - aware timely reminders for TSI , because teachers might not necessarily realize opportunities to interact with students or forget to do so when focusing too much on the teaching material . The requirement of additional functions from teacher participants also implies the need for technical support for teachers regarding Dynamic Assessment methods . Besides the timely reminders , NaMemo2 can also enable 25 post - lecture data analysis to identify students’ status ( e . g . , “ head - down ” patterns ) along the lecture slides , which may inform the teacher to add questions or pauses in the complex parts for students to understand better . Encouraging Participation with Student Autonomy The positive outcome of deploying NaMemo2 would not be possible without carefully considering the privacy and autonomy of the students . This was not a problem in previous studies on TSI , since these were conducted in K - 12 schools , where the student concerns about privacy and autonomy were not often obvious problems ( Hafen et al . , 2015 ; Hamre et al . , 2013 ) . However , the teacher - student relationship , student - student relationship , as well as classroom culture / atmosphere in university classrooms are all different from the K - 12 setting . As such , we need to understand the context and address student concerns . In the case of NaMemo2 , we understand the concerns of using facial recognition technology ( Ahuja et al . , 2019 ; Andrejevic & Selwyn , 2020 ; Doberstein et al . , 2022 ) . Even though we hope to apply this powerful tool to benefit students , we limit its use to only indicate names . Our study thus illustrates an exploration of ethical use of facial recognition technology in schools : 1 ) participants were informed about the usage of their data ( i . e . , only for name - indicating in NaMemo2 ) ; 2 ) we granted participants full control of the data collection ( i . e . , they were given the choice of whether their photos were uploaded or not ) ; and 3 ) participant willingness and right ( for TSI in our case ) was well - respected even if they did not provide data for the system . As system developers , we hope for target users to accept and benefit from the system . Our ethics consideration provides an option for hesitant students to gradually learn and appreciate the system before they accept and participate in it . 26 Besides mitigating the privacy concerns of students , we observed that other groups of students who tend to be introverted ( Kriegel , 2022 ) or face more difficulty in learning the course material than other students ( Noble , 2022 ) also hesitated to participate , according to the qualitative analysis of student feedback . NaMemo2 thus provides these students with a platform to express their willingness to interact , which prompt them to think about the benefits of TSI and to observe the behavior of their peers during TSI . We feel that allowing the students to express themselves can promote the fair treatment of students in the classroom ( Bernard E . Whitley , Jr . & Deborah Ware Balogh , Patricia Keith - Spiegel , 2000 ) . Future studies are warranted to confirm the effect of NaMemo2 on classroom fairness for students . Limitations and Generalization Despite positive results , our evaluation study suffers from a few limitations . Firstly , the sample size of participants is small , and the type of lecture studied is not diverse . Therefore , generalizing the findings to broader target users should be treated with caution . Secondly , the measure of TSI is based on participant recall and perception in the post - study survey . Despite the importance of user perception , solely using subjective metrics may be prone to cognitive bias and recall accuracy . Future studies should consider objective measures of TSI , which may need to integrate technologies like visual scene understanding and audio recognition into the system ( Ahuja et al . , 2019 ) . Thirdly , the metrics of student attitudes to TSI and NaMemo2 are summary perceptions , while dividing attitudes into different aspects may lead to more comprehensive measures ( Donahue & Miller , 2006 ) . Lastly , the NaMemo2 platform includes additional hardware ( i . e . , a pan - tilt camera and edge computing unit ) in traditional classrooms , which can be inconvenient to use . 27 While our evaluation covered only a small aspect of the broad domain of TSI , the demonstrated STUDIER framework could be applied to many other topics that are relevant within this domain . By explicitly including the TTI model ( Hafen et al . , 2015 ; Hamre et al . , 2013 ; Pianta & Hamre , 2009 ) , behavioral theories ( Fogg , 2009 ; Michie et al . , 2011b ; Schwarzer , 2008 ; Y . Wang et al . , 2019 ) , and the TA framework ( An et al . , 2020 ) in the design process , we aim to better review , relate , and accumulate relevant studies of TSI support tools . Conclusion In this paper , we presented the development and evaluation of NaMemo2 , an augmented - reality system to support teacher - student interaction ( TSI ) in the university classroom by 1 ) applying computer vision methods to indicate student names to teachers , and 2 ) empowering students to express their interaction willingness to teachers through a real - time interface . Through the design process of NaMemo2 , this paper demonstrated STUDIER ( Sparking , Targeting & Understanding , Designing & Implementing , Evaluating & Refining ) , a design framework for the domain of TSI support tools , emphasizing design in a theory - driven and ethics - aware manner towards principled progress in this domain . NaMemo2 granted students TSI autonomy in class , which provided an ethics - aware use case of facial recognition in the university setting . The evaluation results suggest that NaMemo2 can improve TSI quantity and quality , student attitudes and willingness to TSI , and their attitudes to technology deployment in classrooms . Acknowledgement Pengcheng An acknowledges funding support from Shenzhen Grant for Universities 28 Stability Support Program ( Grant Number : 2022081517130800 ) . References Ahuja , K . , Kim , D . , Xhakaj , F . , Varga , V . , Xie , A . , Zhang , S . , … Agarwal , Y . ( 2019 ) . EduSense : Practical Classroom Sensing at Scale . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies , 3 ( 3 ) , 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3351229 Alavi , H . S . , & Dillenbourg , P . ( 2012 ) . An ambient awareness tool for supporting supervised collaborative problem solving . IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies , 5 ( 3 ) , 264 – 274 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TLT . 2012 . 7 Alavi , H . S . , Dillenbourg , P . , & Kaplan , F . ( 2009 ) . Distributed awareness for class orchestration . Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics ) , 5794 LNCS , 211 – 225 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 04636 - 0 _ 21 An , P . , Bakker , S . , Ordanovski , S . , Taconis , R . , & Eggen , B . ( 2018 ) . ClassBeacons : Designing distributed visualization of teachers’ physical proximity in the classroom . Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction - TEI ’18 , 357 – 367 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173225 . 3173243 An , P . , Bakker , S . , Ordanovski , S . , Taconis , R . , Paffen , C . L . E . , & Eggen , B . ( 2019 ) . Unobtrusively enhancing reflection - in - action of teachers through spatially distributed ambient information . CHI 2019 , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300321 An , P . , Holstein , K . , D’Anjou , B . , Eggen , B . , & Bakker , S . ( 2020 ) . The TA Framework : Designing Real - time Teaching Augmentation for K - 12 Classrooms . CHI 2020 , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376277 Andrejevic , M . , & Selwyn , N . ( 2020 ) . Facial recognition technology in schools : critical questions and concerns . Learning , Media and Technology , 45 ( 2 ) , 115 – 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17439884 . 2020 . 1686014 Bernard E . Whitley , Jr . , D . V . P . , & Deborah Ware Balogh , Patricia Keith - Spiegel , A . F . 29 W . ( 2000 ) . Fairness in the Classroom . APS Observer . Retrieved from http : / / www . psychologicalscience . org / teaching / tips / tips _ 0700 . html Beyer , H . , & Holtzblatt , K . ( 1998 ) . Contextual design : defining customer - centered systems . Morgan Kaufmann . Brophy , J . ( 1999 ) . Toward a model of the value aspects of motivation in education : Developing appreciation for particular learning domains and activities . Educational Psychologist , 34 ( 2 ) , 75 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15326985ep3402 _ 1 Brown , M . , & Lowe , D . G . ( 2007 ) . Automatic Panoramic Image Stitching Automatic 2D Stitching . International Journal of Computer Vision , 74 ( 1 ) , 59 - - 73 . Retrieved from http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11263 - 006 - 0002 - 3 Cooper , K . M . , Haney , B . , Krieg , A . , & Brownell , S . E . ( 2017 ) . What’s in a Name ? The Importance of Students Perceiving That an Instructor Knows Their Names in a High - Enrollment Biology Classroom . CBE—Life Sciences Education , 16 ( 1 ) , ar8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1187 / cbe . 16 - 08 - 0265 Cox , S . R . , Wang , Y . , Abdul , A . , Weth , C . Von Der , & Lim , B . Y . ( 2021 ) . Directed diversity : Leveraging language embedding distances for collective creativity in crowd ideation . CHI’21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445782 Deng , J . , Guo , J . , Ververas , E . , Kotsia , I . , & Zafeiriou , S . ( 2020 ) . Retinaface : Single - shot multi - level face localisation in the wild . Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 5202 – 5211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CVPR42600 . 2020 . 00525 Doberstein , C . , Charbonneau , É . , Morin , G . , & Despatie , S . ( 2022 ) . Measuring the Acceptability of Facial Recognition - Enabled Work Surveillance Cameras in the Public and Private Sector . Public Performance and Management Review , 45 ( 1 ) , 198 – 227 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15309576 . 2021 . 1931374 Donahue , A . K . , & Miller , J . M . ( 2006 ) . Experience , attitudes , and willingness to pay for public safety . American Review of Public Administration , 36 ( 4 ) , 395 – 418 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0275074005285666 30 Dumford , A . D . , & Miller , A . L . ( 2018 ) . Online learning in higher education : exploring advantages and disadvantages for engagement . Journal of Computing in Higher Education , 30 ( 3 ) , 452 – 465 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12528 - 018 - 9179 - z Fagerland , M . W . ( 2012 ) . t - tests , non - parametric tests , and large studies—a paradox of statistical practice ? BMC Medical Research Methodology , 12 ( 78 ) . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2288 - 12 - 78 Fernandez - Nieto , G . , An , P . , Zhao , J . , Buckingham Shum , S . , & Martinez - Maldonado , R . ( 2022 ) . Classroom Dandelions : Visualising Participant Position , Trajectory and Body Orientation Augments Teachers’ Sensemaking . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517736 Feuerstein , R . , Rand , Y . , Hoffman , M . B . , & Vig , E . ( 1979 ) . The dynamic assessment of retarded performers : the learning potential assessment device , theory , instruments , and techniques . 413 . Fogg , B . J . ( 2009 ) . A behavior model for persuasive design . Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology - Persuasive ’09 , 40 : 1 - 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1541948 . 1541999 Frich , J . , Biskjaer , M . M . , & Dalsgaard , P . ( 2018 ) . Twenty years of creativity research in human - computer interaction : Current state and future directions . DIS 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 1235 – 1258 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196732 Ghonsooly , B . , & Hassanzadeh , T . ( 2019 ) . Effect of interactionist dynamic assessment on English vocabulary learning : Cultural perspectives in focus . Issues in Educational Research , 29 ( 1 ) . Glaser , B . G . , & Strauss , A . L . ( 2006 ) . The Discovery of grounded theory : strategies for qualitative research . AldineTransaction . Glenz , T . ( 2014 ) . The Importance of Learning Students’ Names . Journal on Best Teaching Practices , 1 ( 1 ) , 21 – 22 . Hafen , C . A . , Hamre , B . K . , Allen , J . P . , Bell , C . A . , Gitomer , D . H . , & Pianta , R . C . ( 2015 ) . 31 Teaching Through Interactions in Secondary School Classrooms : Revisiting the Factor Structure and Practical Application of the Classroom Assessment Scoring System – Secondary . Journal of Early Adolescence , 35 ( 5 – 6 ) , 651 – 680 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0272431614537117 Hagenauer , G . , & Volet , S . E . ( 2014 ) . Teacher - student relationship at university : an important yet under - researched field . Oxford Review of Education , 40 ( 3 ) , 370 – 388 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03054985 . 2014 . 921613 Hamre , B . K . , Pianta , R . C . , Downer , J . T . , DeCoster , J . , Mashburn , A . J . , Jones , S . M . , … Hamagami , A . ( 2013 ) . Teaching through Interactions : Testing a Developmental Framework ofTeacher Ef fectiveness in over 4 , 000 Classrooms . The Elementary School Journal , 113 ( 4 ) , 461 – 487 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 669616 Harper , B . ( 2018 ) . Technology and Teacher – Student Interactions : A Review of Empirical Research . Journal of Research on Technology in Education , 50 ( 3 ) , 214 – 225 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15391523 . 2018 . 1450690 He , K . , Gkioxari , G . , Dollar , P . , & Girshick , R . ( 2017 ) . Mask R - CNN . ICCV 2017 . Holstein , K . , McLaren , B . M . , & Aleven , V . ( 2018 ) . Student learning benefits of a mixed - reality teacher awareness tool in AI - enhanced classrooms . International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education , 154 – 168 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 93843 - 1 _ 12 Holstein , K . , McLaren , B . M . , & Aleven , V . ( 2019 ) . Co - Designing a Real - Time Classroom Orchestration Tool to Support Teacher – AI Complementarity . Journal of Learning Analytics , 6 ( 2 ) , 27 – 52 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18608 / jla . 2019 . 62 . 3 J . S . Eccles , & R . W . Roeser . ( 1999 ) . School and community influences on human development . In M . H . Bornstein & M . E . Lamb ( Eds . ) , Developmental psychology : An advanced textbook ( 4th ed . , pp . 503 – 554 ) . L . Erlbaum . Jiang , G . , Shi , M . , An , P . , Su , Y . , Wang , Y . , & Lim , B . Y . ( 2020 ) . NaMemo : Enhancing lecturers’ interpersonal competence of remembering students’ names . DIS 2020 Companion - Companion Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3393914 . 3395860 32 Kelkar , S . , Boushey , C . J . , & Okos , M . ( 2015 ) . A method to determine the density of foods using X - ray imaging . Journal of Food Engineering , 159 , 36 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jfoodeng . 2015 . 03 . 012 Korthagen , F . A . J . , Attema - Noordewier , S . , & Zwart , R . C . ( 2014 ) . Teacher - student contact : Exploring a basic but complicated concept . Teaching and Teacher Education , 40 , 22 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tate . 2014 . 01 . 006 Kriegel , O . ( 2022 ) . Encouraging Students to Participate : How to Help Shy Students Speak Up . Retrieved May 28 , 2022 , from https : / / www . wgu . edu / heyteach / article / encouraging - students - participate - how - help - shy - students - speak1809 . html Li , L . , & Yang , S . ( 2021 ) . Exploring the Influence of Teacher - Student Interaction on University Students’ Self - Efficacy in the Flipped Classroom . Journal of Education and Learning , 10 ( 2 ) , 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5539 / jel . v10n2p84 Liebenberg , L . , Theron , L . , Sanders , J . , Munford , R . , van Rensburg , A . , Rothmann , S . , & Ungar , M . ( 2016 ) . Bolstering resilience through teacher - student interaction : Lessons for school psychologists . School Psychology International , 37 ( 2 ) , 140 – 154 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0143034315614689 Long , J . ( 2021 ) . Frameworks for HCI Research . In Approaches and Frameworks for HCI Research ( pp . 13 – 22 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / 9781108754972 . 004 Luo , Y . , Lee , B . , Yvette Wohn , D . , Rebar , A . L . , Conroy , D . E . , & Kyoung Choe , E . ( 2018 ) . Time for Break : Understanding Information Workers’ Sedentary Behavior Through a Break Prompting System . CHI ’18 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173701 Malone , T . W . , Laubacher , R . , & Dellarocas , C . N . ( 2009 ) . Harnessing Crowds : Mapping the Genome of Collective Intelligence . In MIT Sloan Research Paper No . 4732 - 09 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 1381502 Martinez - Maldonado , R . , Mangaroska , K . , Schulte , J . , Elliott , D . , Axisa , C . , & Shum , S . B . ( 2020 ) . Teacher tracking with integrity : What indoor positioning can reveal about instructional proxemics . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable 33 and Ubiquitous Technologies , 4 ( 1 ) , 1 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3381017 Michie , S . , van Stralen , M . M . , & West , R . ( 2011a ) . The behaviour change wheel : A new method for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions . Implementation Science , 6 ( 1 ) , 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1748 - 5908 - 6 - 42 Michie , S . , van Stralen , M . M . , & West , R . ( 2011b ) . The behaviour change wheel : A new method for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions . Implementation Science , 6 ( 1 ) , 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1748 - 5908 - 6 - 42 Miller , T . ( 2019 ) . Explanation in artificial intelligence : Insights from the social sciences . Artificial Intelligence , 267 , 1 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . artint . 2018 . 07 . 007 Mohr , D . C . , Schueller , S . M . , Montague , E . , Burns , M . N . , & Rashidi , P . ( 2014 ) . The Behavioral Intervention Technology Model : An Integrated Conceptual and Technological Framework for eHealth and mHealth Interventions . Journal of Medical Internet Research , 16 ( 6 ) , e146 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 3077 Mummah , S . A . , Robinson , T . N . , King , A . C . , Gardner , C . D . , & Sutton , S . ( 2016 ) . IDEAS ( Integrate , Design , Assess , and Share ) : A Framework and Toolkit of Strategies for the Development of More Effective Digital Interventions to Change Health Behavior . Journal of Medical Internet Research , 18 ( 12 ) , e317 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 5927 Nakagawa , S . , & Cuthill , I . C . ( 2007 ) . Effect size , confidence interval and statistical significance : A practical guide for biologists . Biological Reviews , 82 ( 4 ) , 591 – 605 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1469 - 185X . 2007 . 00027 . x Nguyen , T . D . , Cannata , M . , & Miller , J . ( 2018 ) . Understanding student behavioral engagement : Importance of student interaction with peers and teachers . Journal of Educational Research , 111 ( 2 ) , 163 – 174 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00220671 . 2016 . 1220359 Noble , D . ( 2022 ) . Signs of a “Slow Learner” and Tips to Help Him / Her Excel . Retrieved from https : / / sg . theasianparent . com / slow - learners - tips - on - how - to - deal - with - a - slow - learner - child 34 Oinas - Kukkonen , H . ( 2013 ) . A foundation for the study of behavior change support systems . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing , 17 ( 6 ) , 1223 – 1235 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 012 - 0591 - 5 Opdenakker , M . - C . , Maulana , R . , & den Brok , P . ( 2012 ) . Teacher – student interpersonal relationships and academic motivation within one school year : developmental changes and linkage . School Effectiveness and School Improvement , 23 ( 1 ) , 95 – 119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09243453 . 2011 . 619198 Pianta , R . C . ( 2016 ) . Teacher – Student Interactions : Measurement , Impacts , Improvement , and Policy . Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 3 ( 1 ) , 98 – 105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2372732215622457 Pianta , R . C . , & Hamre , B . K . ( 2009 ) . Conceptualization , measurement , and improvement of classroom processes : Standardized observation can leverage capacity . Educational Researcher , 38 ( 2 ) , 109 – 119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 0013189X09332374 Poehner , M . E . , & Wang , Z . ( 2021 , October 1 ) . Dynamic Assessment and second language development . Language Teaching , Vol . 54 , pp . 472 – 490 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0261444820000555 Pressley , M . , Roehrig , A . D . , Raphael , L . , Dolezal , S . , Bohn , C . , Mohan , L . , … Hogan , K . ( 2003 ) . Teaching Processes in Elementary and Secondary Education . Handbook of Psychology , 153 – 175 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 0471264385 . WEI0708 Saini , M . K . , & Goel , N . ( 2019 ) . How smart are smart classrooms ? A review of smart classroom technologies . ACM Computing Surveys , 52 ( 6 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3365757 Saquib , N . , Bose , A . , George , D . , & Kamvar , S . ( 2018 ) . Sensei : Sensing Educational Interaction . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies , 1 ( 4 ) , 1 – 27 . SAS . ( 2022 ) . JMP . Retrieved from https : / / www . jmp . com / Schwarzer , R . ( 2008 ) . Modeling Health Behavior Change : How to Predict and Modify the Adoption and Maintenance of Health Behaviors . Applied Psychology : An 35 International Review , 57 ( 1 ) , 1 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 14640597 . 2007 . 00325 . x Smith , M . , & Miller , S . ( 2022 ) . The ethical application of biometric facial recognition technology . AI and Society , 37 ( 1 ) , 167 – 175 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00146 - 021 - 01199 - 9 Song , Q . , Wang , Z . , & Li , J . ( 2012 ) . Residents’ behaviors , attitudes , and willingness to pay for recycling e - waste in Macau . Journal of Environmental Management , 106 , 8 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jenvman . 2012 . 03 . 036 Sullivan , G . M . , & Artino , A . R . ( 2013 ) . Analyzing and Interpreting Data From Likert - Type Scales . Journal of Graduate Medical Education , 5 ( 4 ) , 541 – 542 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4300 / jgme - 5 - 4 - 18 Sun , H . - L . , Sun , T . , Sha , F . - Y . , Gu , X . - Y . , Hou , X . - R . , Zhu , F . - Y . , & Fang , P . - T . ( 2022 ) . The Influence of Teacher – Student Interaction on the Effects of Online Learning : Based on a Serial Mediating Model . Frontiers in Psychology , 13 ( March ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2022 . 779217 Swanson , H . L . , & Lussier , C . M . ( 2001 ) . A Selective Synthesis of the Experimental Literature on Dynamic Assessment . Review of Educational Research , 71 ( 2 ) , 321 – 363 . Tanner , K . D . ( 2011 ) . Moving theory into practice : A reflection on teaching a large , introductory biology course for majors . CBE Life Sciences Education , 10 ( 2 ) , 113 – 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1187 / cbe . 11 - 03 - 0029 Tanner , K . D . ( 2013 ) . Structure matters : Twenty - one teaching strategies to promote student engagement and cultivate classroom equity . CBE Life Sciences Education , 12 ( 3 ) , 322 – 331 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1187 / cbe . 13 - 06 - 0115 Trauth , J . M . , Jewell , I . K . , Ricci , E . , Musa , D . , & Siminoff , L . ( 2000 ) . Public attitudes regarding willingness to participate in medical research studies . Journal of Health and Social Policy , 12 ( 2 ) , 23 – 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1300 / J045v12n02 _ 02 Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1978 ) . Mind in Society . The Development of Higher Psychological Processes ( M . Cole , V . John - Steiner , S . Scribner , & E . Souberman , Eds . ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1421493 36 Wang , D . , Yang , Q . , Abdul , A . , & Lim , B . Y . ( 2019 ) . Designing Theory - Driven User - Centric Explainable AI . CHi ’19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300831 Wang , Y . , Fadhil , A . , Lange , J . - P . , & Reiterer , H . ( 2019 ) . Integrating Taxonomies Into Theory - Based Digital Health Interventions for Behavior Change : A Holistic Framework . JMIR Research Protocols , 8 ( 1 ) , e8055 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / resprot . 8055 Wang , Y . , König , L . M . , & Reiterer , H . ( 2021 ) . A Smartphone App to Support Sedentary Behavior Change by Visualizing Personal Mobility Patterns and Action Planning ( SedVis ) : Development and Pilot Study . JMIR Formative Research , 5 ( 1 ) , e15369 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 15369 Wang , Y . , & Reiterer , H . ( 2019 ) . The point - of - choice prompt or the always - on progress bar ? : A pilot study of reminders for prolonged sedentary behavior change . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3313050 Wang , Y . , Venkatesh , P . , & Lim , B . Y . ( 2022 ) . Interpretable Directed Diversity : Leveraging Model Explanations for Iterative Crowd Ideation . CHI 2022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517551 Wubbels , T . , & Brekelmans , M . ( 2005 ) . Two decades of research on teacher - student relationships in class . International Journal of Educational Research , 43 ( 1 – 2 ) , 6 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijer . 2006 . 03 . 003