Cell Metabolism Review Exercise Metabolism and the Molecular Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Adaptation Brendan Egan 1 , 2 and Juleen R . Zierath 2 , 3 , 4 , * 1 Institute for Sport and Health , School of Public Health , Physiotherapy and Population Science , University College Dublin , Belﬁeld , Dublin 4 , Ireland 2 Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery 3 Department of Physiology and Pharmacology , Section of Integrative Physiology Karolinska Institute , Stockholm SE - 171 77 , Sweden 4 Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research , Faculty of Health Sciences , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen DK - 2200 , Denmark * Correspondence : juleen . zierath @ ki . se http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cmet . 2012 . 12 . 012 Preservation of aerobic ﬁtness and skeletal muscle strength through exercise training can ameliorate meta - bolic dysfunction and prevent chronic disease . These beneﬁts are mediated in part by extensive metabolic and molecular remodeling of skeletal muscle by exercise . Aerobic and resistance exercise represent extremes on the exercise continuum and elicit markedly different training responses that are mediated by a complex interplay between a myriad of signaling pathways coupled to downstream regulators of transcrip - tion and translation . Here , we review the metabolic responses and molecular mechanisms that underpin the adaptatation of skeletal muscle to acute exercise and exercise training . Introduction Physical inactivity is a known , but modiﬁable , risk factor that contributes to lifestyle - related diseases , including many causes of ‘‘preventable death’’ ( Booth et al . , 2012 ) . Worldwide , approx - imately one in three adults and four in ﬁve adolescents do not achieve the recommended quantity and quality of daily exer - cise ( Hallal et al . , 2012 ) . Current public health recommenda - tions recognize regular exercise and physical activity as a cornerstone in the prevention , management , and treatment of numerous chronic conditions , including hypertension , coro - nary heart disease , obesity , type 2 diabetes mellitus ( T2DM ) , and age - related muscle wasting ( sarcopenia ) ( Haskell et al . , 2007 ; Colberg et al . , 2010 ) . This acknowledgment predicates the axiomatic understanding that ‘‘exercise is medicine . ’’ For instance , short - term exercise training partially reverses the progression of metabolic disease ( O’Gorman et al . , 2006 ) , whereas lifestyle interventions incorporating increased physical activity remain the primary preventive approach for metabolic disease ( Knowler et al . , 2002 ) . In fact , regular exercise combined with dietary intervention is more successful than pharmacological intervention in the treatment and prevention of T2DM ( Knowler et al . , 2002 ) and sarcopenia ( Borst , 2004 ) . While the beneﬁts of and adaptations to regular exercise are long known , molecular biologists have recently uncovered networks of signaling pathways and regulatory molecules that coordinate adaptive responses to exercise . The purpose of this review is to describe the metabolic and molecular responses to a single ( acute ) bout of exercise and chronic exercise training , while contrasting the adaptive response to aerobic and resistance exercise . Key mechanistic studies that utilize transgenic mice and in vitro models of plasticity are also considered . Due to space limitations , this review focuses primarily on skeletal muscle , given its hierarchical role in loco - motion , exercise performance , and metabolic responses , as well as the pivotal function in the regulation of metabolic homeostasis . The Molecular Basis of Skeletal Muscle Adaptation to Exercise Repeated , episodic bouts of muscle contraction , associated with frequent exercise training , are potent stimuli for physio - logical adaptation . Over time , skeletal muscle demonstrates remarkable malleability in functional adaptation and remodel - ing in response to contractile activity ( Flu¨ck and Hoppeler , 2003 ; Coffey and Hawley , 2007 ) . Training - induced adaptations are reﬂected by changes in contractile protein and function ( Adams et al . , 1993 ; Widrick et al . , 2002 ) , mitochondrial function ( Spina et al . , 1996 ) , metabolic regulation ( Green et al . , 1992 ) , intracellular signaling ( Benziane et al . , 2008 ) , and transcriptional responses ( Pilegaard et al . , 2003 ) . The widely accepted molecular mechanisms that govern the adaptation to exercise training involve a gradual alteration in protein content and enzyme activities . These progressive changes reﬂect activa - tion and / or repression of speciﬁc signaling pathways that regulate transcription and translation , and exercise - responsive gene expression ( Figure 1 ) . Transient postexercise changes in gene transcription include immediate early genes , myogenic regulators , genes of carbohydrate ( CHO ) metabolism , lipid mobilization , transport and oxidation , mitochondrial metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation , and transcriptional regulators of gene expression and mitochondrial biogenesis ( Pilegaard et al . , 2003 ; Mahoney et al . , 2005 ; Coffey et al . , 2006a ; Louis et al . , 2007 ) . On a regulatory level , a single bout of exercise alters the DNA binding activity of a variety of transcription factors , including MEF2 ( Yu et al . , 2001 ) , HDACs ( McGee et al . , 2009 ) , and NRFs ( Baar et al . , 2002 ; Wright et al . , 2007 ) . Protein stability and subcellular localization of transcriptional factor complexes within the nucleus and mitochondrion are 162 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . also affected ( McGee and Hargreaves , 2004 ; Little et al . , 2011 ; Safdar et al . , 2011b ) . Moreover , we have recently shown that transient DNA hypomethylation of gene - speciﬁc promoter regions precedes increases in mRNA expression in response to acute exercise ( Barre ` s et al . , 2012 ) . In turn , these pulses of elevated mRNA during recovery from acute exercise facilitate the synthesis of respective proteins , and provoke gradual structural remodeling and long - term functional adjustments ( Perry et al . , 2010 ) . In general , these adaptations are intrinsic to the working skeletal muscle , and collectively contribute toward maximizing substrate delivery , mitochondrial respiratory capacity , and contractile function during exercise . The net effect is to promote optimal performance during a future exercise challenge , resulting in a robust defense of homeostasis in the face of metabolic perturbation , and consequently , enhanced resistance to fatigue ( Holloszy and Coyle , 1984 ; Booth and Thomason , 1991 ) . Skeletal Muscle Biology and Metabolism Skeletal muscle comprises (cid:1) 40 % of total body mass in mammals and accounts for (cid:1) 30 % of the resting metabolic rate in adult humans ( Zurlo et al . , 1990 ) . Skeletal muscle has a critical role in glycemic control and metabolic homeostasis and is the predominant ( (cid:1) 80 % ) site of glucose disposal under insulin - stimulated conditions ( DeFronzo et al . , 1981 ) . Additionally , skeletal muscle is the largest glycogen storage organ , with / having (cid:1) 4 - fold the capacity of the liver . Remarkably , a single bout of acute exercise improves whole - body insulin sensitivity for up to 48 hr after exercise cessation ( Mikines et al . , 1988 ; Koopman et al . , 2005 ) . Furthermore , exercise increases skeletal muscle glucose uptake through an insulin - independent pathway ( Lee et al . , 1995 ) , indicating that muscle contraction directly impacts glucose homeostasis . Mammalian skeletal muscles are comprised of several ﬁber types , of which the major classiﬁcations and biochemical properties have been reviewed in greater detail elsewhere ( Schiafﬁno and Reggiani , 2011 ) . Skeletal muscle ﬁbers are deﬁned as slow - or fast - twitch based on the contractile property of ‘‘time - to - peak tension’’ or ‘‘twitch’’ characteristics ( Table 1 ) . This classiﬁcation coincides with histochemical staining for myoﬁbrillar ( myosin ) ATPase as type I ( slow - twitch ) and type II ( fast - twitch , highest ATPase activity ) . A subclassiﬁcation of type IIa and type IIx exists in humans , while type IIb is primarily found in rodents . Type I muscle ﬁbers are classically red in appearance , type IIx and IIb ﬁbers are white in appearance , and type IIa ﬁbers have an intermediate color . This difference in color reﬂects the abundance of the oxygen transport protein myoglobin , which is closely related to mitochondrial density and the relative contribution of oxidative metabolism in the respective ﬁber types ( each highest in type I ﬁbers ) . Immunohis - tochemical staining and electrophoretic protein separation can independently determine myosin heavy chain ( MHC ) isoform protein expression , another key criterion of ﬁber type classiﬁca - tion . Each isoform displays distinct contractile properties that parallel ATPase activity and twitch characteristics . Uniform ﬁbers containing MHC1 , 2A , and 2X exist , while hybrid ﬁbers containing 1 - 2A and 2A - 2X isoforms have also been reported . Muscle ﬁber type is genetically determined during development , but the adaptive ‘‘transformation’’ of muscle ﬁbers from one type to another is still hotly debated ( Booth et al . , 2010 ) . Given an appropriate training stimulus , the plasticity of muscle permits changes in metabolic potential and morphology irrespective of whether a transformation of muscle ﬁber type measured by change in MHC expression is observed ( Phillips et al . , 1996 ; Leblanc et al . , 2004 ) . One striking physiological characteristic of skeletal muscle is a capacity to rapidly modulate rate of energy production , blood ﬂow , and substrate utilization in response to locomotion . Locomotion is powered by actin - myosin crossbridge cycling according to the sliding ﬁlament theory of skeletal muscle contraction ( Podolsky and Schoenberg , 1983 ) . Hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) by myosin ATPase provides the immediate energy source for crossbridge cycling but is also consumed to a large extent by dynamics of sodium - potassium and calcium exchange necessary for contraction . Skeletal muscle is the principal contributor to exercise - induced changes in metabolism . Maximal exercise can induce a 20 - fold increase Figure 1 . The Molecular Basis of Adaptation to Exercise Schematic representation of changes in mRNA expression ( bottom panel ) and protein content ( middle panel ) over time as a consequence of acute exercise and chronic ( repetitive ) exercise training . Although each individual bout of exercise is necessary as a stimulus for adaptation , it alone is insufﬁ - cient to alter the muscle phenotype—training - induced phenotypic adaptation is the consequence of repetition of the stimulus of individual exercise bouts . In order for a gene upregulated by exercise and training , an individual exercise bout elicits a rapid , but transient , increase in relative mRNA expression of a given gene during recovery . Alterations in mRNA expression several - fold from basal levels are typically greatest at 3 – 12 hr after cessation of exercise and generally return to basal levels within 24 hr . The temporal pattern is speciﬁc to a given gene and the exercise challenge . Translational processing and an elevated rate of postexercise protein synthesis result in a modest , same - directional change in protein content . Superimposition of repeated exercise bouts results in the gradual accumulation of protein in response to repeated , pulsed increases in relative mRNA expression . Thus , long - term adaptation to training is due to the cumulative effects of each acute exercise bout leading to a new functional threshold . Training - induced changes in protein content or enzyme function alter metabolic responses to exercise at the level of substrate metabolism , resulting in improved exercise perfor - mance ( upper panel ) . As protein half - lives are usually much longer than those of mRNA , changes in protein content are more readily observed than changes in transcript expression in response to training as opposed to acute exercise . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 163 Cell Metabolism Review in whole - body metabolic rate over resting values , whereas the ATP turnover rate within the working skeletal muscle can be more than 100 - fold greater than at rest ( Gaitanos et al . , 1993 ) . Although resting intramuscular stores of ATP are small ( due to the four negative charges and hydrophilic nature of free ATP ) , activation of metabolic pathways that drive ATP generation maintains intracellular levels ( Figure 2 ) . Skeletal muscle is richly endowed with mitochondria and heavily reliant on oxidative phosphorylation for energy production . During stren - uous exercise , dramatic ( > 30 - fold ) increases in intramuscular oxygen consumption and local blood ﬂow occur ( Andersen and Saltin , 1985 ; Gibala et al . , 1998 ) . Estimated TCA cycle ﬂux increases by (cid:1) 70 - to 100 - fold under the same conditions ( Gibala et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , skeletal muscle is the primary site for CHO and lipid metabolism for energy production . Impor - tantly , the biochemical consequences of contractile bioener - getics can regulate molecular processes governing skeletal muscle adaptation . Table 1 . Contractile , Metabolic , and Morphological Characteristics of Human Skeletal Muscle Fiber Types Type I Type II Type IIa Type IIx General Properties Alternative nomenclature SO , ST FOG , FTa FG , FTb Myosin heavy - chain isoform MHC1 MHC2A MHC2X Contractile and metabolic characteristics Slow twitch , high oxidative , fatigue resistant Fast twitch , oxidative - glycolytic , fatigue resistant Fast twitch , glycolytic , fast fatigable Force production ( power output ) Weak Intermediate Strong Endurance capacity High Intermediate Low Appearance / myoglobin content Red / high Red / intermediate White / low Time to peak tension a 80 30 Ca 2 + actomyosin ATPase activity b 0 . 16 0 . 48 Mg2 + actomyosin ATPase activity c 0 . 30 0 . 84 Recruitment threshold All intensities > 40 % VO 2max > 75 % VO 2max Morphological Properties Capillary density ( capillaries per ﬁber ) 4 . 2 4 . 0 3 . 2 Mitochondrial density High Intermediate Low Fiber size ( cross - sectional area ) d 5310 6110 5600 Percent distribution in whole muscle 54 . 0 ± 12 . 2 ( 50 – 55 ) 32 . 3 ± 9 . 1 ( 30 – 35 ) 13 . 0 ± 7 . 6 ( 10 – 20 ) Myonuclear domain size Small Intermediate Large Glycolytic and Oxidative Enzyme Activities e Creatine kinase 13 . 1 16 . 6 Phosphofructokinase 7 . 5 13 . 7 17 . 5 Glycogen phosphorylase 2 . 8 5 . 8 8 . 8 Lactate dehydrogenase 94 179 211 Citrate synthase 10 . 8 8 . 6 6 . 5 Succinate dehydrogenase 7 . 1 4 . 8 2 . 5 3 - hydroxyl - CoA dehydrogenase 14 . 8 11 . 6 7 . 1 Metabolic and Substrate Properties Oxidative potential High Intermediate - high Low Glycolytic potential Low Intermediate - high High [ Phosphocreatine ] f 12 . 6 14 . 5 14 . 8 [ Glycogen ] f 77 . 8 83 . 1 89 . 2 [ IMTG ] f 7 . 1 4 . 2 Exercise - type dominance Prolonged low intensity Moderate duration , high intensity Short duration , maximal effort AdaptedfromSaltinandGollnick ( 1983 ) . Relationshipbetweenskeletalmuscleﬁbertypeandtheindicated properties . Dataarefromm . vastuslateralis from untrained men . a msec . b mmol min (cid:3) 1 mg myosin (cid:3) 1 . c mmol min (cid:3) 1 g protein (cid:3) 1 . d m m 2 . e mmol kg (cid:3) 1 min (cid:3) 1 except creatine kinase in mmol min (cid:3) 1 g (cid:3) 1 . f mmol kg (cid:3) 1 wet weight . 164 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review Modalities of Exercise Exercise is represented by a potential disruption to homeostasis by muscle activity that is either exclusively or in combina - tion concentric , isometric , or eccentric . The use of the term ‘‘exercise’’ in scientiﬁc research often encompasses several modiﬁable variables . These include the modality ( e . g . , aerobic versus resistance ) and the frequency , intensity , and duration of exercise sessions—each of which are mitigating factors Figure 2 . Energy Provision in Skeletal Muscle during Exercise ATP hydrolysis , catalyzed by myosin ATPase , powers skeletalmuscle contraction . Metabolic pathways of ATP generation in skeletal muscle include ( 1 ) theATP - phosphagen system wherein the degradation of PCr by creatine kinase ( CK ) produces free Cr and P i , which is transferred to ADP to re - form ATP ; the adenylate kinase ( AK ) ( myokinase ) reactioncatalyzestheformationofATPandAMPfromtwoADPmolecules ; ( 2 ) anaerobicglycolysis , whereglucose - 6 - phosphatederived from muscle glycogen ( GLY ) ( catalyzed by glycogen phosphorylase , PHOS ) or circulating blood glucose ( GLU ) ( catalyzed by hexokinase , HK ) , is catabolized to pyruvate ( PYR ) , which is reduced to lactate ( LAC ) by lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) , and produces ATP by substrate level phosphorylation ; ( 3 ) processes of carbohydrate ( glycolysis ) and lipid ( b - oxidation ) metabolism producing acetyl - CoA ( Ac - CoA ) , which enters the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle in the mitochondria , coupled to oxidative phosphorylation in the electron transport chain ( ETC ) . The two main metabolic pathways , i . e . , glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation , are linkedbytheenzymecomplexpyruvatedehydrogenase ( PDH ) . GLUT4facilitatesglucoseuptaketothesarcoplasm , whichmayundergoglycolysisorduringrest / inactivity , bestoredasglycogenviaglycogensynthase ( GS ) . Fattyacyltranslocase ( FAT / CD36 ) facilitateslong - chainfattyacidtransportatthesarcolemma , and , in concert with fatty acid binding protein ( FABP pm ) and carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 ( CPT1 ) , across the mitochondrial membrane . FFAs entering the cell may be oxidized via b - oxidation or be diverted for storage as IMTG via esteriﬁcation by monoacylglycerol acyltransferase ( MGAT ) and diacylglycerol acyltransferase ( DGAT ) . Liberation of FFAs from IMTG stores via lipolysis in skeletal muscle during exercise occurs via the activities of HSL and ATGL . All pathways of ATP generation are active during exercise , but the relative contribution of each is determined by the intensity and duration of contraction , as a function of the relative power ( rate of ATP production ) and capacity ( potential amount of ATP produced ) . CS , citrate synthase ; Cyt c , cytochrome c ; PFK , phosphofructokinase . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 165 Cell Metabolism Review impacting the metabolic and molecular responses . Aerobic ( or endurance - based ) and resistance ( or strength - based ) activities represent two extremes of the exercise continuum ( Table 2 ) . Aerobic exercise imposes a high - frequency ( repetition ) , low - power output ( load ) demand on muscular contraction , whereas resistance exercise imposes a low - frequency , high - resistance demand . Consequently , the metabolic and molecular responses to the different modalities are distinct , and the speciﬁcity of a given molecular response is coupled to a functional outcome . This is illustrated by divergent molecular signatures in response to aerobic versus resistance exercise ( Coffey et al . , 2006a , 2006b ) , or similar conditions simulated in vitro ( Nader and Esser , 2001 ; Atherton et al . , 2005 ) , which is consistent with the divergent physiological and functional adaptations to the respective exercise modalities , e . g . , endurance versus hyper - trophy phenotype ( Booth and Thomason , 1991 ) . Although both aerobic exercise and resistance training can individually pro - mote substantial health beneﬁts ( Table 2 ) , divergent effects are observed depending on the parameter of interest . For example , aerobic training more effectively modiﬁes cardiovascular risk factors , whereas resistance training more effectively maintains basal metabolic rate , muscle mass , and physical function in the elderly . However , compared to either modality alone , a combination of aerobic and resistance training is more effective for reducing the insulin resistance and functional limitations in obesity and the metabolic syndrome ( Davidson et al . , 2009 ) , and improving glycemic control in T2DM ( Sigal et al . , 2007 ) . The efﬁcacy of combined aerobic and resistance exercise as part of lifestyle intervention is reﬂected in the recent exercise guidelines ( Colberg et al . , 2010 ) . The Metabolic Response to an Acute Bout of Exercise Substrate Utilization during Exercise During acute exercise , the contribution of various metabolic pathways to energy provision is determined by the relative inten - sity and absolute power output of the exercise bout ( Figure 3 ) . The absolute power output determines the rate of ATP demand and energy expenditure , whereas the relative exercise intensity inﬂuences the relative contributions of CHO and lipid sources , and circulating ( extramuscular ) and intramuscular fuel stores , to energy provision . The use of indirect calorimetry combined with isotope tracer methodology permitted the assessment of substrate utilization during exercise ( Romijn et al . , 1993 ; van Loon et al . , 2001 ) . The partitioning of fuel sources utilized from extra - or intramuscular substrates is coordinated quantitatively and temporally to meet the metabolic demands of exercise . At low - to - moderate intensities of exercise , the primary fuel sources supplying skeletal muscle are glucose , derived from hepatic glycogenolysis ( or gluconeogenesis ) or oral ingestion , and free fatty acids ( FFAs ) liberated by adipose tissue lipolysis . The contributions of liver and adipose tissue to substrate provi - sion to contracting muscle during exercise are described in detail elsewhere ( Kjaer , 2006 ; Horowitz , 2006 ) and are largely under the inﬂuence of hormonal responses to the onset of exer - cise ( e . g . , adrenaline , noradrenalin , glucagon , insulin , cortisol ) ( Galbo , 1983 ) . With respect to extramuscular fuel sources , as exercise intensity increases , muscle utilization of circulating FFAs declines modestly , whereas utilization of circulating glucose increases progressively up to near - maximal intensities ( van Loon et al . , 2001 ) . This coincides with increasing absolute rates of CHO oxidation and relative contribution to energy provi - sion ( Figure 3A ) , with a majority of energy at high intensities of exercise being provided by muscle glycogen . When exercise at Table2 . AdaptationsandHealthBeneﬁtsofAerobicComparedto Resistance Exercise Aerobic ( Endurance ) Resistance ( Strength ) Skeletal Muscle Morphology and Exercise Performance Muscle hypertrophy 4 [ [ [ Muscle strength and power 4 Y [ [ [ Muscle ﬁber size 4 [ [ [ [ Neural adaptations 4 [ [ [ [ Anaerobic capacity [ [ [ Myoﬁbrillar protein synthesis 4 [ [ [ [ Mitochondrial protein synthesis [ [ 4 [ Lactate tolerance [ [ 4 [ Capillarisation [ [ 4 Mitochondrial density and oxidative function [ [ [ 4 [ Endurance capacity [ [ [ 4 [ Whole - Body and Metabolic Health Bone mineral density [ [ [ [ Body composition Percent body fat Y Y Y Lean body mass 4 [ [ Glucose metabolism Resting insulin levels Y Y Insulin response to glucose challenge Y Y Y Y Insulin sensitivity [ [ [ [ Inﬂammatory markers Y Y Y Resting heart rate Y Y 4 Stroke volume , resting and maximal [ [ 4 Blood pressure at rest Systolic 4 Y 4 Diastolic 4 Y 4 Y Cardiovascular risk proﬁle Y Y Y Y Basal metabolic rate [ [ [ Flexibility [ [ Posture 4 [ Ability in activities of daily living 4 [ [ [ Aerobic exercise training generally encompasses exercise durations of several minutes up to several hours at various exercise intensities , incor - porating repetitive , low - resistance exercise such as cycling , running , and swimming . Resistance training generally encompasses short - duration activity at high or maximal exercise intensities , and increases the capacity to perform high - intensity , high - resistance exercise of a single or relatively few repetitions such as Olympic weightlifting , bodybuilding , and throwing events . [ , values increase ; Y , values decrease ; 4 , values remainunchanged ; [ or Y , small effect ; [ [ or Y [ , medium effect ; [ [ [ or YYY , large effect ; 4 [ or 4Y , no change or slight change . 166 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review a ﬁxed intensity is prolonged ( > 60 min ) ( Figure 3B ) , an increasing energy contribution is derived from lipid oxidation . Conse - quently , the proportion of energy derived from muscle glycogen declines and is replaced by a progressive increase in plasma FFA oxidation ( Romijn et al . , 1993 ) . Muscle glycogen is the predominant CHO source during moderate to intense exercise , and the rate of degradation ( glyco - genolysis ) is proportional to the relative exercise intensity . Increased glycogenolysis during exercise occurs via activa - tion of glycogen phosphorylase , which reﬂects alterations in [ calcium ] i , [ inorganic phosphate ( P i ) ] , cAMP - dependent b - adren - ergic stimulation , and allosteric modulation by AMP and IMP ( Hargreaves , 2006 ) . Higher rates of glycogenolysis occur when initial muscle glycogen concentrations are high , but as exercise proceeds , degradation rates parallel declining glycogen levels and associated glycogen phosphorylase activity . Conversely , intramuscular triglycerides ( IMTGs ) constitute only a fraction ( (cid:1) 1 % – 2 % ) of whole - body lipid stores but are the subject of intense research in exercise metabolism and metabolic disease ( Kiens , 2006 ) . IMTGs are an important fuel source during pro - longed ( > 90 min ) , moderate intensity exercise and provide (cid:1) 25 % of total energy , but tend to contribute less at either higher or lower intensities of exercise ( Romijn et al . , 1993 ; van Loon et al . , 2001 ) . Following exercise , IMTG stores are reduced by (cid:1) 60 % , predominantly in type I muscle ﬁbers ( van Loon et al . , 2003 ; Stellingwerff et al . , 2007 ) . IMTG breakdown occurs primarily via hormone - sensitive lipase ( HSL ) and adipose triglyc - eride lipase ( ATGL ) ( Watt and Spriet , 2010 ) , although the regu - lation of exercise - mediated lipase activity is incompletely described . As with aerobic exercise , both muscle glycogen and IMTG contribute to energy provision during resistance exercise ( Koopman et al . , 2006 ) . However , questions remain regarding regulatory control of CHO and lipid utilization during exercise . In summary , skeletal muscle substrate utilization during exercise is inﬂuenced by ( 1 ) intrinsic exercise - related factors including intensity , duration , and mode of exercise ; ( 2 ) metabolic factors including muscle recruitment patterns , enzy - matic capacities , rates of substrate delivery , energy charge status , and activity of substrate cycles ; and ( 3 ) external factors including environmental conditions , nutritional status , age , and Figure 3 . The Effect of Exercise Intensity and Exercise Duration on Substrate Metabolism and Muscle Recruitment during Acute Exercise The respiratory exchange ratio ( RER ) is a ratio of CO 2 production ( VCO 2 ) to O 2 consumption ( VO 2 ) . A value of 0 . 707 indicates 100 % contribution from lipid sources , whereas a value of 1 . 0 or greater indicates 100 % contribution from CHO sources . ( A ) and ( B ) are representative of the metabolic responses to exercise in fasted , physically active humans . ( A ) Substrate contribution to exercise of increasing intensity . Up to (cid:1) 30 % VO 2max , oxidation of lipid sources ( mostly plasma FFAs ) accounts for the majority of energy provision . As exercise intensity increases , absolute CHO oxidation rate and relative contribution toenergy provisionincreases . Thelipid oxidation rate increases up to (cid:1) 60 % – 70 % VO 2max , after which it declines as intensity increases . In relative terms , the contribution of lipid oxidation to energy provision decreases proportionally with increasing exercise intensity , as reﬂected by a steady rise in RER . ( B ) Substrate contribution to exercise at a ﬁxed intensity ( e . g . , 65 % VO 2max ) for an extended duration . An initial rise in RER occurs at the onset of exercise , reﬂecting the increase in relative contribution of CHO to energy provision comparedtorestingmetabolism . Thereafter , asmallbutsteadydeclineinRER isobservedwithextendeddurationofexercise , reﬂectingthedecliningrelative contribution of CHO to energy provision as a function of the increasing relative contribution of lipid . ( C ) Recruitment of muscle ﬁbers is dependent on the intensity and duration of contraction . A hierarchal recruitment pattern of type I to IIa to IIx / b occurs as force output of the muscle increases from low to high . During low - intensity exercise , slow - twitch , typeIﬁbersarerecruited , whichhaveahighcapacityfor fat oxidation and a low capacity for glycogenolysis - glycolysis . An increase in contraction intensity results in a proportional increase in the recruitment of typeIImuscleﬁbers , whichbytheirintrinsiccharacteristicsgeneratemoreATP fromglycolyticpathways . ThemetabolicadvantageisthattheseCHO - derived pathways produce ATP at a higher power ( mol ATP s (cid:3) 1 ) and at a lower rate of oxygen consumption ( ATP mol O 2 (cid:3) 1 ) . Increasing rates of ATP turnover have a feedforward effect on rates of muscle glycogenolysis through a decrease in cellular energy charge . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 167 Cell Metabolism Review body composition ( reviewed in Brooks , 1998 ; Spriet and Watt , 2003 ) . Free amino acid ﬂux during exercise reﬂects dynamic activity in de novo synthesis , transamination , deamination , oxidation , and irreversible catabolism of speciﬁc amino acids . Several amino acids ( alanine , aspartate , glutamate , glutamine , and the branched - chain amino acids [ BCAAs ] valine , leucine , and isoleu - cine ) contribute to energy production in skeletal muscle ( Gibala , 2006 ) , whereas other amino acids contribute to gluconeogenesis during prolonged exercise ( Ahlborg et al . , 1974 ) . Calculations of substrate utilization during exercise generally assume that the contribution of protein is constant , or alternatively use a nonpro - tein respiratory exchange ratio ( RER ) . Protein - based energy provision during moderate intensity exercise is estimated at 5 % – 15 % , while energy - compromised states , such as glycogen depletion , demand higher contributions ( Wagenmakers et al . , 1991 ; Horton et al . , 1998 ) . This energy is obtained from intra - muscular protein degradation and oxidation of BCAAs by the branched - chain a - keto acid dehydrogenase complex ( Wagen - makers et al . , 1991 ) . Substrate Metabolism during the Postexercise Recovery Period After the cessation of exercise , the metabolic rate declines but remains slightly elevated ( < 10 % ) for up to 24 hr . The extent of this ‘‘excess postexercise oxygen consumption’’ ( EPOC ) is proportional to the metabolic stress and determined by the intensity , duration , and type of exercise bout ( Børsheim and Bahr , 2003 ) . This recovery period is characterized by two major phases : ( 1 ) recovery of myocellular homeostasis in the imme - diate hours after exercise , and ( 2 ) cellular contributions to adaptation to exercise . Moreover , the global restitution of homeostasis includes the replenishment of oxygen stores , resynthesis of ATP and phosphocreatine ( PCr ) , lactate oxidation and removal , restoration of ﬂuid balance and fuel stores , and inﬂammatory and anti - inﬂammatory responses ( Børsheim and Bahr , 2003 ) . In contrast to the reliance on CHO metabolism during exercise , an increase in lipid oxidation and ‘‘sparing’’ of CHO sources for energy provision occurs during the recovery period ( Kiens and Richter , 1998 ) . This shift accommodates the high metabolic priority for muscle glycogen resynthesis , whereas the oxidation of lipid from both IMTG and circulating FFA sources is elevated to meet fuel requirements . The prolonged elevation in lipid oxidation in the postexercise period represents a key event in exercise - mediated effects on whole - body lipid meta - bolism . Lipid oxidation rates can reach 25 % of that reported during exercise , and contribute greater than 60 % of oxidative metabolism during recovery ( Horton et al . , 1998 ) . Several other biosynthetic processes contribute to homeostatic recovery at a local level , including elevated rates of mitochondrial and myoﬁbrillar protein synthesis ( Wilkinson et al . , 2008 ) , lipid rees - teriﬁcation of previously liberated FFAs ( Wolfe et al . , 1990 ) , and IMTG and glycogen resynthesis ( Kiens and Richter , 1998 ; Schenk and Horowitz , 2007 ) . These largely anabolic events are dichotomous to the catabolic nature of acute exercise . In contrast to the rapid glycogen depletion during heavy or prolonged exercise , the replenishment of muscle glycogen to pre - exercise levels requires 24 – 48 hr . This timeline is readily altered by dietary manipulation . High CHO intake often produces a ‘‘supercompensation’’ effect such that glycogen repletion markedly exceeds pre - exercise concentrations . Replenishment of muscle glycogen stores is primarily dependent on ( 1 ) the availability of substrates , both glucose and nonglucose sources including lactate and alanine , and ( 2 ) noninsulin - and insulin - dependent enzymatic activity of glycogen synthase ( Jentjens and Jeukendrup , 2003 ) . Similarly , IMTG replenishment via skeletal muscle lipogenesis is inﬂuenced by both nutrient status and activation of triglyceride synthesis via mGPAT , DGAT , and SCD1 ( Schenk and Horowitz , 2007 ) . Lipid intermediaries such as diacylglycerol ( DAG ) and ceramides are reduced in skeletal muscle after exercise , suggesting their incorporation into IMTG during recovery ( Schenk and Horowitz , 2007 ) . Contraction - Induced Signal Transduction Pathways in Skeletal Muscle Contraction - induced changes in mechanical strain , ATP turn - over , calcium ﬂux , redox balance , reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) production , and intracellular oxygen pressure have all been implicated in the activation of signal transduction cascades regulating skeletal muscle plasticity ( Figure 4 ) . In turn , various cellular sensors transduce these homeostatic perturbations to couple contraction and transcriptional processes . The nature of the exercise challenge determines the acute metabolic and molecular responses , which are latterly contiguous with long - term physiological adaptation of exercise training . This provides a framework , known as excitation - transcription coupling , for the continuity and integration between signaling events regulated by cellular bioenergetics and the expression of genes that dictate skeletal muscle phenotype . Local Tissue Oxygenation and Hypoxia - Inducible Factors Oxygen sensing is long established in the regulation of adaptive processes in cells . The major signal transduction pathway sensi - tive to the intracellular partial pressure of oxygen ( P i O 2 ) is regu - lated through hypoxia - inducible factor ( HIF ) , a heterodimeric transcription factor composed of two subunits , HIF - 1 a and HIF - 1 b . Under normoxic conditions , hydroxylation of HIF - 1 a occurs by prolyl hydroxylase ( PHD ) enzymes which act as sensors of cellular oxygen tension . This triggers the binding of the E3 ubiquitin ligase von Hippel Lindau tumor - suppressor protein ( pVHL ) to HIF - 1 a and targets it for proteasomal degrada - tion ( Maxwell et al . , 1999 ) . During hypoxia or conditions of reduced P i O 2 , the hydroxylase activity of PHD enzymes is in - hibited , allowing stabilization of HIF - 1 a , which translocates to the nucleus to form an active complex with HIF - 1 b . Activation of HIF - 1 induces transcription of target genes involved in eryth - ropoiesis , angiogenesis , glycolysis , and energy metabolism ( Taylor , 2008 ) in a manner analogous to exercise ( Mahoney et al . , 2005 ; Schmutz et al . , 2006 ) . HIF - dependent transcriptional regulation augments survival during low O 2 tension either by increasing O 2 delivery and extraction or by enhancing the ability to obtain ATP from O 2 - independent pathways . HIF - 1 activates transcription by binding to hypoxia response elements within target genes and recruiting transacting coactivators such as p300 and CBP ( CREB - binding protein ) ( Jiang et al . , 1996 ) . Although the P i O 2 in resting skeletal muscle is (cid:1) 1 / 5th of the oxygen pressure of inhaled air , acute exercise reduces P i O 2 in contracting muscle to (cid:1) 1 / 40th of that of inhaled air ( Richardson et al . , 1995 ) . Unsurprisingly , HIF - 1 a protein abundance is 168 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review increased during acute exercise , accumulates in the nucleus , and shows enhanced DNA binding , coincident with a decrease in pVHL expression ( Ameln et al . , 2005 ) . HIF - related processes are relevant to exercise - induced skeletal muscle metabolism and adaptation ( Mason et al . , 2004 ; Formenti et al . , 2010 ) and likely regulate the beneﬁcial effects of simulated altitude training practiced by athletes ( Vogt et al . , 2001 ) . Cellular Energy Status , ATP Turnover , and AMP - Activated Protein Kinase Signaling AMP - activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) is a serine / threonine kinase that modulates cellular metabolism acutely through phosphorylation of metabolic enzymes ( Carling and Hardie , 1989 ) and , over time , via transcriptional regulation ( Bergeron et al . , 2001 ; Ja¨ger et al . , 2007 ) . AMPK activation is regulated allosterically by a cellular energy deﬁcit , which is reﬂected by increases in the AMP / ATP and Cr / PCr ratios ( Kahn et al . , 2005 ) . In addition to intense exercise ( Green et al . , 1992 ; Howlett et al . , 1998 ) , cellular stresses that deplete ATP ( such as meta - bolic poisons ) or increase the cellular AMP / ATP ratio ( such as glucose deprivation or oxidative stress ) also activate AMPK ( Kahn et al . , 2005 ) . Given the rate of ATP turnover during muscle contraction , AMPK acts as a signal transducer for metabolic adaptations by responding to an altered cellular energy status . Acute exercise increases AMPK phosphorylation and enzymatic activity in an intensity - dependent manner ( Wojtaszewski et al . , 2000 ; Egan et al . , 2010 ) , reﬂecting intensity - dependent effects of exercise on ATP turnover and adenine nucleotide concen - trations ( Howlett et al . , 1998 ) . Overall , AMPK activation acts to conserve ATP by inhibiting biosynthetic pathways and anabolic pathways , while simulta - neously stimulating catabolic pathways to restore cellular energy stores ( Kahn et al . , 2005 ) . In skeletal muscle , acute AMPK acti - vation suppresses glycogen synthesis ( Carling and Hardie , 1989 ) and protein synthesis ( Bolster et al . , 2002 ) , but promotes Figure 4 . Schematic of Excitation - Transcription Coupling in Skeletal Muscle The onset of myoﬁbrillar activity via shortening ( concentric ) and lengthening ( eccentric ) contractions during exercise results in a milieu of biochemical and biophysical stimuli localized within the contracting muscle . These perturbations in skeletal muscle homeostasis lead the activation of networks of signaling molecules including protein kinases , phosphatases , and deacetylases , which are integrated into physiological processes by downstream targets , including transcription factors and transcriptional coregulators . These events occur in a temporal manner , such that kinase activation and pretranscriptional regulation occur rapidlyduringexerciseandrecovery , whereastranscriptalterationsare subsequently observed . Therelative activation , contribution , andmagnitudeofthe described pathways and downstream targets are dependent on the intensity , duration , and mode of the exercise stimulus , and on imposed environmental variables . Here , linear pathways are depicted , but in fact , these pathways demonstrate some degree of dependence , crosstalk , interference , and redundancy in their regulation , making the exact contribution of each signaling pathway to measured changes in gene expression difﬁcult to isolate . A multiple signal trans - duction - to - transcription - coupled control system with inherent redundancy allows for ﬁne - tuning of the adaptive responses to exercise training . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 169 Cell Metabolism Review glucose transport ( Merrill et al . , 1997 ) and lipid metabolism ( Winder and Hardie , 1996 ) . Chronic AMPK activation alters metabolic gene expression and induces mitochondrial biogen - esis ( Bergeron et al . , 2001 ) , partly via AMPK - induced modulation of the DNA binding activity of transcription factors including NRF - 1 , MEF2 , and HDACs ( Bergeron et al . , 2001 ; McGee et al . , 2008 ) . Calcium Flux and Calcium / Calmodulin - Dependent Protein Kinase Signaling Calcium is essential for facilitating the crossbridge interaction between myosin and actin during myoﬁbrillar contraction . During contraction , calcium oscillations , whose amplitude and duration are a function of the level of force output by the muscle , are translated into discrete signals that modulate the kinase activity of calmodulin - dependent protein kinases ( CaMKs ) , a class of multifunctional serine / threonine protein kinases implicated in muscle plasticity ( Chin , 2010 ) . CaMKII is the dominant isoform in human skeletal muscle ( Rose et al . , 2006 ) . Exercise increases CaMKII phosphorylation in an intensity - dependent manner ( Rose et al . , 2006 ; Egan et al . , 2010 ) , possibly due to additional muscle ﬁber recruitment ( Sale , 1987 ) or to higher calcium concentrations expected at greater force outputs ( Howlett et al . , 1998 ) . Intensity - dependent CaMKII activation may func - tion as a stimulation - frequency decoder ( Chin , 2010 ) . Thus , calcium signaling is sensitive to different types of contraction ( i . e . , aerobic versus resistance ) and could , based on the relative amplitude and frequency of calcium transients depending on the contractile stimulus , thereby result in dramatically different signal transduction patterns ( Dolmetsch et al . , 1997 ) . CaMKs and calcium signaling inﬂuence glucose transport ( Wright et al . , 2004 ) , lipid uptake and oxidation ( Raney and Turcotte , 2008 ) , and skeletal muscle plasticity ( Wu et al . , 2002 ) . Transcription factors , such as CREB , MEF2 , and HDACs , are CaMK targets implicated in the regulation of skeletal muscle gene expression . For instance , the activation of CaMKII leads to phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion of HDAC4 , which relieves repression of MEF2 ( Liu et al . , 2005 ) . This model couples contraction - induced calcium signaling to an increased rate of transcription of MEF2 target genes such as PGC - 1 a and GLUT4 ( Chin , 2010 ) . Mechanical Stress and Mitogen - Activated Protein Kinase Signaling Growth factors , cytokines , and cellular stress impact the activity of the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) family . Presum - ably because of the wide variety of biochemical and biophysical processes activated by muscle contraction , acute exercise acti - vates three main MAPK subfamilies in human skeletal muscle : ( 1 ) the extracellular - regulated kinase ( ERK1 / 2 ) , ( 2 ) c - jun N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) , and ( 3 ) p38 MAPK . The level of p38 MAPK activa - tion is dependent on exercise status ( Yu et al . , 2003 ; Coffey et al . , 2006b ) , while the predominance of eccentric or concentric contractions can inﬂuence other MAPK activation patterns ( Wretman et al . , 2001 ) . MAPKs regulate transcriptional events by phosphorylation of diverse substrates localized in the cyto - plasm or nucleus , including transcription factors and coactiva - tors , and thereby regulate a variety of physiological processes such as differentiation , hypertrophy , inﬂammation , and gene expression ( Long et al . , 2004 ) . For example , during contraction , p38 MAPK can stimulate upstream transcription factors of the PGC - 1 a gene , such as ATF2 and MEF2 ( Table 3 ) ( Akimoto et al . , 2005 ) , which coincides with an increase in PGC - 1 a ex - pression ( Akimoto et al . , 2005 ; Wright et al . , 2007 ; Egan et al . , 2010 ) . Constitutive activation of p38 MAPK increases markers of mitochondrial adaptation in skeletal muscle ( Akimoto et al . , 2005 ) , whereas deletion of the p38 g isoform , but not p38 a or p38 b , prevents training - induced increases in mitochondrial biogenesis and angiogenesis ( Pogozelski et al . , 2009 ) . During contraction , skeletal muscle is a potent site of ROS production via generation of superoxides by electron transport chain complexes I and III , and the activity of NADPH oxidase and xanthine oxidase . ROS activate MAPK signaling and the transcription factor nuclear factor - k B , thereby linking signal transduction to transcriptional processes ( Powers et al . , 2010 ) . Acute exercise activates JNK signaling in a ROS - dependent manner , as evidenced by attenuated JNK signaling during exer - cise with infusion of the antioxidant N - acetylcysteine ( Petersen et al . , 2012 ) . Moreover , contraction - induced increases in inter - leukin - 6 ( IL - 6 ) secretion , a exercise - associated cytokine with potent multiorgan metabolic effects ( Pedersen and Febbraio , 2012 ) , is JNK dependent ( Whitham et al . , 2012 ) , which attests to the likely importance of JNK signaling in mediating metabolic adaptation to exercise . Redox Balance , NAD + : NADH , and Sirtuins NAD + is an electron carrier that plays a critical role in fuel metab - olism . NAD + couples ATP synthesis with the electron transport chain , through its reduction during glycolysis and reoxidation by lactate generation in the cytosol or mitochondrial shuttle activity , as well as reduction reactions of the TCA cycle . Of interest , the regulation of the sirtuin ( SIRT ) family of protein de - acetylases is NAD + dependent ( Schwer and Verdin , 2008 ) . The deacetylase activity of SIRT1 ( cytoplasmic , nuclear ) and SIRT3 ( mitochondrial ) is sensitive to elevations in [ NAD + ] and NAD + / NADH ratio . The subsequent deacetylation of lysine residues on transcriptional regulators ( Nemoto et al . , 2005 ) and mitochon - drial enzymes ( Hirschey et al . , 2010 ) allows the coupling of alter - ations in the cellular redox state to the adaptive changes in gene expression and cellular metabolism ( Lagouge et al . , 2006 ; Canto´ et al . , 2009 ) . Enhanced SIRT activity is associated with favorable adaptations in skeletal muscle metabolism , including enhanced mitochondrial function , exercise performance , and protection against obesogenic feeding ( Lagouge et al . , 2006 ; Gerhart - Hines et al . , 2007 ) . Dynamic ﬂuctuations in the NAD + / NADH ratio occur in response to stimuli such as acute exercise and fasting ( Sahlin et al . , 1987 ; Canto´ et al . , 2009 ) . With increasing exercise inten - sity , the cytosolic NAD + / NADH ratio declines as the lactate / pyruvate ratio increases ( Sahlin et al . , 1987 ; Green et al . , 1992 ) . In rodents , elevations in SIRT1 activity peak around 3 hr into recovery ( Canto´ et al . , 2009 ) , which coincides with a dramatic elevation in the NAD + / NADH ratio , predominantly due to an increase in [ NAD + ] . The aforementioned glucose sparing during postexercise recovery coincides with an increase in b - oxidation and reoxidation of NADH to NAD + . SIRT activation is therefore in contrast to phosphorylation of various protein kinases that tend to be elevated immediately after exercise , and return rapidly to basal values . Conversely , short - term interval training increases SIRT1 expression in skeletal muscle ( Little et al . , 2010 ) , while higher SIRT3 protein is reported in 170 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review Table 3 . Evidence Base for Regulatory Roles of Signaling Molecules and Transcriptional Regulators in Skeletal Muscle Metabolic and Mitochondrial Adaptation to Exercise Gene or Family Function and Evidence for Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Phenotype a Effect of Acute Exercise and / or Exercise Training on Regulation and Expression in Skeletal Muscle b ATF2 d Activated at p - Thr 69 / 71 by p38 MAPK and interacts with CREs present in metabolic and mitochondrial genes d AEX : [ p - ATF2 in humans and rodents ( intensity dependent ) d DN ATF2 : ablates contraction - induced increase in PGC - 1 a gene transcription d p38 MAPK effects on gene expression via p . a . or by c . a . of MKK3 / 6 are ATF2 dependent AMPK d Chronic AMPK activation by AICAR or b - GPA feeding : [ metabolic gene expression and mtBIOG d AEX : [ p - AMPK in humans and rodents ( intensity dependent ) d Effects abolished in AMPK a 2 KO or KD mice d [ a 2 AMPK activity in most AEX models d c . a . AMPK ( AMPK g 1R70Q and AMPK g 3R225Q ) : [ glycogen storage , mitochondrial gene expression , and EXC d [ a 1 AMPK activity during high - intensity / sprint AEX d Similar phenotype in HSMCs with human mutation PRKAG3 R225W d [ p - AMPK during AEX is blunted after EXT d LKB1 KO and AMPK a 2 KO : Y basal levels of mitochondrial genes d AMPK a 2 and g 3 KO : AEX - induced changes in gene expression attenuated , but adaptive response to EXT is similar to WT CaMKs d c . a . CaMKIV : [ mtBIOG , FAO / ETC gene expression , and fatigue resistance during contraction d AEX : [ p - CaMKII in humans and rodents ( intensity dependent ) d CaMKII inhibition : attenuates gene expression induced by contraction or [ Ca 2 + ] - releasing agents d EXT : [ CaMKII expression and enzymatic activity , but [ p - CaMKII during AEX is similar CREB d Activated by p - Ser 133 by PKA , CaMKs , and AMPK and regulates gene expression through CRE interaction d AEX : biphasic response , Y p - CREB on exercise cessation , [ p - CREB during recovery ( intensity dependent ) d Critical to PKA - dependent regulation of myogenesis d DN CREB : dystrophic phenotype , Y MEF2 activity ERRs d ERR a KO : Y FAO gene expression ; ablates ANG in response to 14 day VWR d AEX : [ ERR a mRNA during recovery d ERR g OE : more oxidative ﬁbers , [ mitochondrial enzyme activity , ANG , and EXC d EXT : [ ERR a protein d ERR g + / (cid:3) : Y mitochondrial function , FAO gene expression , and EXC d Data for ERR g have not been reported FOXOs d FOXO1 KO : [ MyoD and percentage type II ﬁbers , Y EXC d AEX : [ FOXO1 and FOXO3 mRNA during recovery d FOXO1 OE : causes ﬁber atrophy , marked Y in muscle mass and locomotor activity d Resistance EXT : [ p - FOXO3 and Y FOXO1 protein d c . a . FOXO3 drives atrophy through upregulation of the ubiquitin ligases atrogin - 1 / MAFbx and MuRF1 HATs and HDACs d Combinatorial KO of HDAC isoforms ( 4 , 5 , 9 ) : [ percentage type I ﬁbers and oxidative gene expression d AEX : [ p - HDAC ( class IIa ) in humans ( intensity dependent ) d c . a . HDAC5 : ablates increase in percentage type I and IIa ﬁbers in response to 4 weeks VWR d Y repressive activity of HDAC4 and 5 by p - induced nuclear exclusion d HDAC inhibition : variety of effects on myogenesis and mtBIOG d Coincides with Y HDAC - association with MEF2 , [ MEF2 - PGC - 1 a association , and [ GLUT4 HIFs d HIF - 1 a mKO : Y glycolytic ﬂux , but [ oxidative enzyme activity , ANG , and EXC d AEX : [ total and nuclear stabilization of HIF - 1 a , Y Pvhl , and [ HIF - 1 a DNA binding activity d HIF - 1 a OE : [ percentage type IIa ﬁbers and ﬁber CSA and Y oxidative enzyme activity d AEX : [ HIF - 1 a and HIF - 2 a mRNA during recovery d HIF - 2 a mKO : [ percentage type IIb ﬁbers ; Y percentage type I ﬁbers , ANG , and antioxidant gene expression d EXT : Y HIF - 1 a and HIF - 2 a mRNA at rest d In CP patients ( HIF degradation impaired ) : [ mRNA levels of PDK4 , PFK , and PK ; marked PCr depletion and acidosis during exercise and Y maximal exercise capacity d HIF - 1 a mKO : adaptive response to EXT is similar to WT ( Continued on next page ) Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 171 Cell Metabolism Review Table 3 . Continued Gene or Family Function and Evidence for Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Phenotype a Effect of Acute Exercise and / or Exercise Training on Regulation and Expression in Skeletal Muscle b MEF2 d MEF2 mKO : Y oxidative enzyme activity and percentage type I ﬁbers d AEX : [ MEF2 nuclear abundance and DNA binding activity d c . a . MEF2 : [ percentage type I ﬁbers , markers of oxidative metabolism including myoglobin and PGC - 1 a and doubles EXC d AEX : [ nuclear association of MEF2 with PGC - 1 a and p - p38 MAPK NRFs d NRF - 1 mOE : [ GLUT4 and oxidative gene expression , but muscle respiratory capacity is unchanged d AEX : [ NRF - 1 and NRF - 2 mRNA during recovery in rodents , but results are equivocal in humans d DN NRF - 2 : Y COX expression d AEX : [ DNA binding activities of NRF - 1 and NRF - 2 ( to cyt c and COXIV promoters , respectively ) d NRF - 2 shRNA : Y expression of all ten nucleus - encoded COX subunits p38 MAPK d c . a . MKK3 / 6 upstream of p38 MAPK [ PGC - 1 a transcription ; effect ablated by DN p38 MAPK or p38 inhibition d AEX : [ p - p38 MAPK in response to cycle and running d c . a . MKK6 : [ PGC - 1 a and COXIV in type II ﬁbers d Level of activation is dependent on training status d p38 g , but not p38 a or p38 b , mKO : attenuates ANG and [ mitochondrial gene expression after 4 weeks VWR d EXT : [ p - p38 MAPK during unaccustomed exercise , i . e . , aerobic - trained perform resistance , or resistance - trained perform aerobic d Alterations in ﬁber characteristics after 4 weeks VWR similar in all mKOs PPARs d PPAR d agonists ( 4 week ) : [ FAO gene expression and oxidative proﬁle of type II ﬁbers d AEX : [ PPAR d mRNA during recovery d PPAR d agonist combined with 4 weeks EXT : greater [ in oxidative gene expression and EXC compared to EXT alone d EXT : [ PPAR d mRNA after 16 weeks of low - intensity EXT d c . a . PPAR d : [ percentage type I ﬁbers , oxidative gene expression , mtBIOG , and EXC d PPAR d mOE mice : [ state 3 respiration and performance during sprint - type exercise PGC Family d PGC - 1 a OE in muscle cells : [ mtDNA copy number , mtBIOG , and respiratory capacity d AEX : [ in PGC - 1 a mRNA during recovery ( intensity dependent ) d PGC - 1 b and PRC OE : similar effects ; also important for antioxidant and anti - inﬂammatory processes , respectively d AEX : stabilizes PGC - 1 a protein , [ PGC - 1 a activity ( de - Ac ) , and subcellular localization to the nucleus and mitochondrion d PGC - 1 a mOE : [ mtBIOG , respiratory capacity , and antioxidant defense in type II ﬁbers and [ EXC d EXT : [ PGC - 1 a protein in health and disease d PGC - 1 a mKO : ﬁbers with [ glycolytic phenotype , Y mitochondrial respiration , EXC and recovery from AEX d PGC - 1 a mKO : adaptive response to EXT is similar to WT in most parameters except ANG , which is ablated d PGC - 1 a / b dKO : similar derangements , but in the absence of changes in ﬁber type proportions RIP140 d Transcriptional corepressor acting as scaffold protein recruiting chromatin - remodeling enzymes d AEX : [ RIP140 mRNA during recovery d RIP140 KO : [ mitochondrial oxidative capacity , gene expression , and percentage type IIa / x ﬁbers at expense of type IIb d EXT : RIP140 protein or mRNA unchanged d RIP140 OE : Y SDH activity and myoglobin in type II ﬁbers d RIP140 OE : adaptive response to 6 weeks VWR is similar to WT SIRTs d SIRT1 activation with resveratrol : [ oxidative gene expression and capacity , mtBIOG , and EXC d AEX : [ SIRT1 mRNA , protein , and enzymatic activity d SIRT1 mKO and SIRT3 mKO : no obvious muscle phenotype d EXT : [ SIRT1 mRNA , protein , and enzymatic activity d SIRT1 mKO : PGC - 1 a de - Ac after AEX is similar to WT d EXT : [ SIRT3 mRNA and protein d SIRT3 KO : Y mitochondrial capacity and [ oxidative stress d SIRT1 mKO : adaptive response to 3 weeks VWR is similar to WT ( Continuedonnext page ) 172 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review trained individuals versus sedentary counterparts ( Lanza et al . , 2008 ) . Interestingly , a reduction in SIRT3 expression has been implicated in the development of skeletal muscle insulin resis - tance ( Jing et al . , 2011 ) . This raises the possibility that exer - cise - induced increases in SIRT3 and associated effects on mitochondrial function may partially explain the therapeutic effects of exercise . Whether changes in SIRTs and NAD + metab - olism are causative factors or occur in parallel with remodeling of skeletal muscle by exercise training remains to be clariﬁed . High - Force Stimuli and Mechanosensory Signal Transduction All forms of muscular contraction result in the application of tension ( force ) through an active muscle . However , the adaptive muscle growth ( hypertrophy ) consequent to high mechanical loads present during resistance exercise is largely determined by the activation of skeletal muscle protein synthesis ( MPS ) consequent to the activation of mTOR , ribosomal protein S6K ( p70 S6K ) , and downstream targets ( Bodine et al . , 2001 ) . p70 S6K is a key regulator of MPS through canonical pathways of protein translation and ribosome biogenesis involving eukaryotic trans - lation initiation factor 4E ( eIF4E ) binding protein ( 4E - BP1 ) and elongation factor 2 ( eEF2 ) . Phosphorylation of 4E - BP1 by mTOR suppresses binding and inhibition of eIF4E by 4E - BP1 . This derepression allows eIF4E to directly bind the 5 0 end of mRNA to ultimately form an active eIF4F complex , a rate - limiting step in translation initiation . Phosphorylation of S6K leads to the phosphorylation of the 40S ribosomal protein S6 ( rpS6 ) and eIF4B . Collectively these events lead to the formation of the translation initiation complex and activate protein synthesis for cellular hypertrophy ( Sandri , 2008 ) . Mechanosensory regulation of MPS is determined by high - force contractions during resistance - type exercise ( Philp et al . , 2011 ) . Such contractions transiently disrupt the sarcolemma ( the lipid bilayer that surrounds a muscle cell ) , which increases the concentration of membrane phospholipid phosphatidic acid ( PA ) through activation of phospholipase D ( PLD ) . PA acti - vates mTOR through interaction with its FRB domain ( Fang et al . , 2001 ) , resulting in the activation of mTOR and MPS ( O’Neil et al . , 2009 ) . Conversely , a contraction - induced increase in PA and mTOR activation is attenuated in the presence of PLD inhibition ( Hornberger et al . , 2006 ; O’Neil et al . , 2009 ) . Mechanosensory regulation of MPS also involves focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) proteins , a class of transmembrane receptors that act as protein tyrosine kinases . FAK proteins are key elements for the transmission of contractile force through the skeletal muscle architecture and a central component of integrin signaling . The expression and activity of FAK in skeletal muscle are related to the relative loading ( Klossner et al . , 2009 ; Durieux et al . , 2009 ) , and contraction results in conformational changes and activation of FAK phosphotransferase activity ( Wilkinson et al . , 2008 ; Klossner et al . , 2009 ) , which can activate MPS through mTOR - dependent and - independent mechanisms ( Philp et al . , 2011 ) . Molecular Regulation of the Endurance Phenotype Aerobic Exercise—Metabolic and Mitochondrial Adaptations Mitochondrial biogenesis is a well - established response to aerobic exercise training ( Howald et al . , 1985 ) and is deﬁned by an increase in muscle mitochondrial number and volume , as well as concomitant changes in organelle composition . In response to increased contractile activity , half - lives of approxi - mately 1 week are observed for mitochondrial proteins ( Booth , 1977 ; Henriksson and Reitman , 1977 ) . After 6 weeks of exercise training , muscle mitochondrial density increases (cid:1) 50 % – 100 % ( Hood , 2001 ) . Changes occur in all three ﬁber types , with the difference being somewhat greater in type IIa than in type I and type IIx ﬁbers ( Howald et al . , 1985 ) . Improvements in exercise performance during the same time frame outpace the relatively small ( typically 5 % – 20 % ) increases in whole - body aerobic ﬁt - ness measured by maximal oxygen uptake ( VO 2max ) , and reﬂect enhancements in the intrinsic oxidative capacity of muscle , and the delivery and utilization of substrates in working muscle during subsequent exercise bouts ( Phillips et al . , 1996 ; Vollaard et al . , 2009 ) . Speciﬁcally , these metabolic adaptations reﬂect increased abundance of proteins involved in mitochondrial ATP production ( Holloszy , 1967 ) , the TCA cycle ( Egan et al . , 2011 ) , mobilization , transport and oxidation of fatty acids ( Talanian Table 3 . Continued Gene or Family Function and Evidence for Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Phenotype a Effect of Acute Exercise and / or Exercise Training on Regulation and Expression in Skeletal Muscle b Tfam d Tfam mKO : [ mitochondrial myopathy and ragged - red ﬁbers d AEX : [ Tfam mRNA during recovery d Compensatory [ in mitochondrial mass maintain normal rates of ATP generation d AEX : [ mitochondrial PGC - 1 a - Tfam bound to mtDNA D loop d Rates of fatigue development similar to WT , but Y force - generating capacity d EXT : [ Tfam mRNA and protein Models included in the table are based on demonstration of phenotype related to skeletal muscle ﬁber characteristics , or the molecular response to exercise and / or training , when compared to noninduced or wild - type ( WT ) counterparts . [ , increases ; Y , decreases ; + / (cid:3) , heterozygous ; Ac - , acet - ylation ; AEX , acute exercise ; ANG , angiogenesis ; c . a . , constitutive activation ; CaM , calmodulin ; CP , Chuvash polycythemia ; DN , dominant - negative ; ETC , electron transport chain ; EXC , endurance exercise capacity ; EXT , exercise training ; FAO , fatty acid oxidation ; HSMCs , human skeletal muscle cells ; KD , kinase - dead ; KO , knockout ; OE , overexpression ; MKK , MAPK kinase ; mKO , skeletal muscle - speciﬁc KO ; mOE , skeletal muscle - speciﬁc OE ; p - , phosphorylation ; VWR , voluntary wheel running . a Evidence refers totransgenicmousemodels in vivo , and / or in vitromanipulation in muscle cells , unlessotherwisestated . Invivoand invitro models of hypertrophic regulation are described elsewhere ( Schiafﬁno and Reggiani , 2011 ) . b Aerobic exercise unless otherwise stated . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 173 Cell Metabolism Review etal . , 2010 ) , glycolyticmetabolism ( Tremblayetal . , 1994 ) , antiox - idant capacity ( Powers et al . , 1994 ) , glucose transport and glycogen synthesis ( Perseghin et al . , 1996 ) , and oxygen delivery to and extraction from skeletal muscle ( Gavin et al . , 2007 ) . Training - induced increases in metabolic enzyme activities and mitochondrial density result in enhanced respiratory control sensitivity such that a lower [ ADP ] is required to achieve the same level of oxygen consumption per gram of muscle . Thus , the same cellular rate of oxidative metabolism is attained with less perturbation of adenine nucleotides and a lower rate of oxidative phosphorylation per mitochondrion ( Holloszy and Coyle , 1984 ; Dudley et al . , 1987 ) . After training , smaller declines in [ ATP ] and [ PCr ] , and smaller increases in free [ ADP ] , are observed at the same absolute power output in muscle with increased mitochondrial density ( Dudley et al . , 1987 ; Phillips et al . , 1996 ) . This reduces the formation of AMP , IMP , P i , and ammonia and thereby attenuates the allosteric regulation of the rates of glycogenolysis and glycolysis ( and lactate produc - tion ) after training , concomitant with an increase in the fraction of ATP provision from oxidative metabolism . Enhanced respira - tory control sensitivity coupled to decreased ﬂux through glycogen phosphorylase and attenuated exercise - induced acti - vation of PDH ( Leblanc et al . , 2004 ) results in a reduction of CHO utilization after training , whereas the overall capacity for lipid oxidation is markedly increased ( Talanian et al . , 2010 ) . Conse - quently , decreased CHO utilization during exercise in the trained state is compensated for by a proportional increase in lipid oxidation rates at the same absolute and relative intensity ( Hol - loszy and Coyle , 1984 ) . Thus , increased endurance performance observed after training is attributed to enhanced fatigue resis - tance by virtue of reduced muscle glycogen depletion , tighter coupling of ATP supply and demand , and , thereby , smaller disturbances to homeostasis combined with a consequent reduction in metabolic byproducts . Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Gene Expression and Adaptation An increasingly well - deﬁned network of transcription factors and coregulator proteins has emerged that regulates the skeletal muscle phenotype by integrating signals from physiological stimuli and coordinating metabolic adaptation ( Figure 5 ) . This network exerts molecular control over contractile , metabolic , and mitochondrial adaptation , illustrated by an ability to alter the expression of key enzymes in CHO and lipid metabolism , and the coordination of myogenesis and mitochondrial biogen - esis in response to exercise ( Hood , 2001 ; Flu¨ck and Hoppeler , 2003 ; Coffey and Hawley , 2007 ) . The process of mitochondrial biogenesis is complex and highly regulated , requiring the co - ordination and coexpression of both the nuclear and the mito - chondrial genomes for the assembly and expansion of the reticulum , and the generation of a dynamic mitochondrial network . Appropriate synchronization includes the transcription of nuclear genes , translation of newly formed mRNAs and import of proteins into mitochondria , replication of mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) , transcription and translation of mitochondrial genes , biosynthesis of mitochondrial membrane phospholipids , and assembly of the enzyme complexes ( Essig , 1996 ; Hood , 2001 ) . For instance , nuclear - encoded mitochondrial proteins are chaperoned to the mitochondrion , imported into the different organelle compartments , and assembled with mtDNA - encoded proteins to form multisubunit enzyme complexes required for oxygen consumption and ATP synthesis . Mechanistic studies using transgenic animals and pharmaco - logical manipulation have explored the roles of key regulators of skeletal muscle phenotype ( Table 3 ) . Many regulators are sufﬁcient to stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis , ﬁber - type transformation , and reprogramming of skeletal muscle metabo - lism , but many are not necessary for exercise - induced skeletal muscle adaptation . For example , PGC - 1 a acts as a transcrip - tional coactivator through recruitment and coregulation of mul - tiple transcription factors that regulate skeletal muscle gene expression , including NRF - 1 , NRF - 2 , ERR a , and Tfam ( Lin et al . , 2005 ) . PGC - 1 a activity is highly regulated by numerous posttranslational modiﬁcations including phosphorylation and deacetylation ( Puigserver et al . , 2001 ; Ja¨ger et al . , 2007 ; Canto´ et al . , 2009 ) . Key upstream kinases and deacetylases regulating these modiﬁcations are activated by acute exercise ( Wright et al . , 2007 ; Canto´ et al . , 2009 ; Egan et al . , 2010 ) , coincident with alterations in protein stability , functional activity , and subcellular localization ( Little et al . , 2011 ; Safdar et al . , 2011b ) . Ectopic expression of PGC - 1 a in muscle cells increases mtDNA expression and mitochondrial biogenesis ( Wu et al . , 1999 ) , whereas altering the activity of PGC - 1 a induces molecular adap - tations that equip the cell to meet the energy demands of a changing environment , including augmentation of cellular respiration rates and substrate utilization ( Wu et al . , 1999 ; Wende etal . , 2007 ) . Overexpression ofPGC - 1 a inrodentskeletalmuscle produces a phenotype remarkably similar to aerobically trained muscle , illustrated by increased mitochondrial density , respira - tory capacity , ATP synthesis , antioxidant defense in type II muscle ﬁbers , and improved exercise performance ( Wende et al . , 2007 ; Calvo et al . , 2008 ) . In muscle - speciﬁc PGC - 1 a KO mice , manyoftheseadaptationsarereversed , e . g . , muscleﬁbers exhibit a more glycolytic phenotype , impaired mitochondrial respiratory function , reduced exercise capacity , and impaired recovery from exercise ( Handschin et al . , 2007 ; Wende et al . , 2007 ) . However , after exercise training , the adaptive increases in myoglobin , metabolic gene expression , and mitochondrial biogenesis are similar to those of wild - type animals ( Leick et al . , 2008 ; Geng et al . , 2010 ) , whereas training - induced changes in mitochondrial enzyme expression are only modestly reduced ( Geng et al . , 2010 ) . Notably , exercise - induced angio - genesis is blunted in PGC - 1 a KO mice ( Chinsomboon et al . , 2009 ; Geng et al . , 2010 ) . Therefore , despite robust effects on skeletal muscle phenotype , PGC - 1 a is not necessary for the majority of adaptive responses to exercise training . Several proteins have established roles in the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and metabolic gene expression in skeletal muscle ( Table 3 ) , but a paucity of information exists regarding the causal involvement of these molecules in exer - cising human skeletal muscle beyond transient , but robust , changes in expression after a single bout of exercise ( Pilegaard et al . , 2003 ; Cartoni et al . , 2005 ) or exercise training ( Perry et al . , 2010 ) . However , exercise - induced modulation of these path - ways is still proposed to be critical to skeletal muscle adaptation and modulation of the mitochondrial phenotype ( Hood , 2001 ; Flu¨ck and Hoppeler , 2003 ; Coffey and Hawley , 2007 ) . Dysfunc - tional mitochondria have been implicated in sarcopenia ( Bua et al . , 2002 ) and insulin resistance ( Lowell and Shulman , 2005 ) , 174 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review but long - term aerobic exercise training may reverse the age - related declines in health that occur as a function of mtDNA mutations , as recently demonstrated in mtDNA mutator mice ( Safdar et al . , 2011a ) . Thus , mitochondrial biogenesis and adaptation with regular exercise are now recognized to have implications for a broader range of health issues , rather than only the enhancement of exercise performance . Molecular Regulation of the Hypertrophy Phenotype Resistance Exercise—Myoﬁbrillar Adaptation and Adaptive Hypertrophy Resistance exercise training elicits a range of morphological and neurological adaptations that contribute to changes in muscle function with respect to size , strength , and power ( Booth and Thomason , 1991 ; Folland and Williams , 2007 ) . Muscle hyper - trophy refers to an increase in muscle size , whereas strength refers to the capacity to move an external load but is related to muscle size . These adaptations can support improvements in athletic performance but also improve health - related musculo - skeletal function and offset loss of muscle and strength in pathological states ( Macaluso and De Vito , 2004 ) . The major morphological adaptations include ( 1 ) an increase in muscle crosssectional area ( CSA ) , often preferentially occurring in type IIa ﬁbers ( Adams et al . , 1993 ) , ( 2 ) a change in the angle of pennation of individual muscle ﬁbers , and ( 3 ) increases in the proportion of noncontractile tissue such as collagen ( Folland Figure 5 . Transcriptional Regulators of Metabolism and Adaptation in Skeletal Muscle Transcriptionfactors and coregulator proteins canbeactivated orinducedinresponse tospeciﬁccellularsignals , cocomplex withavarietyof otherfactors , and / ordemonstrateselectiveactivationofspeciﬁcgenepromoterscontainingbindingsitesforthegiventranscriptionfactor . Apartfrombeingcrucialtotheregulation of gene expression in response to cellular signals , coregulator proteins can be primary targets for contraction - induced signal transduction pathways ( Figure 4 ) . Regulation of this transcriptional activity occurs via change in the protein content , subcellular localization , or activity ( e . g . , posttranslational modiﬁcations ) of transcriptional regulators . Transcription factors , nuclear receptors , and their transcriptional coregulators integrate contractile stimuli into molecular re - programming . The interactions of transcriptional coregulators with their cognate transcription factor targets are shown linked to speciﬁc adaptive outcomes . These target interactions are not exclusive , and other factors are likely to contribute to a given adaptive program . CREB , cyclic AMP response element binding protein ; ERR , estrogen - related receptor ; FOXO1 , forkheadtranscription factor , O box subfamily ; GEF , GLUT4 enhancer factor ; HDAC , histonedeacetylase ; HIF , hypoxia - inducible factor ; MEF2 , myocyte enhancer factor 2 ; MRFs , myogenic regulatory factors ; mtDNA , mitochondrial DNA ; MyoG , myogenin ; NRF , nuclear respiratory factor ; PGC - 1 , PPAR g coactivator 1 ; PPAR , peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor ; PRC , PGC - 1 - related coactivator ; RIP140 , nuclear receptor interacting protein 1 ; Tfam , mitochondrial transcription factor A ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . p , phosphorylation ; Ac , acetylation . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 175 Cell Metabolism Review and Williams , 2007 ) . Neurological adaptations favor increased muscle strength via improvements in motor unit activation , ﬁring frequency , and synchrony of high - threshold motor units ( Sale , 1988 ) . Neural adaptations occur rapidly and tend to precede hypertrophic adaptations ( Moritani and deVries , 1979 ) , which occur at a slower rate since the rate of muscle protein synthesis must exceed degradation for an extended period of time before accretion of contractile protein occurs ( Wong and Booth , 1990 ) . An acute bout of resistance exercise results in an increased rate of mixed , mitochondrial , and myoﬁbrillar protein synthesis during recovery ( Biolo et al . , 1995 ; Phillips et al . , 1997 ; Wilkinson et al . , 2008 ) and a proportionately smaller increase in the protein degradation rate ( Biolo et al . , 1995 ) . The net protein synthetic response is critical to exercise - induced skeletal muscle adap - tation and is the mechanistic basis for adaptive hypertrophy ( Rennie et al . , 2004 ) . Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Protein Synthesis by Contraction During the exercise - induced adaptive hypertrophy response , the control of protein translation and synthesis drives protein accretion , while the activation and incorporation of satellite cells facilitate the addition of newly formed myoﬁbrils to the contractile machinery . Due to the importance of protein synthesis exceeding breakdown over an extended period of time , the degree of muscle hypertrophy induced by resistance exercise is strongly associated with the degree of p70 S6K phos - phorylation ( Baar and Esser , 1999 ; Terzis et al . , 2008 ) . Contrac - tion - induced p70 S6K activation is dependent on mTOR , which integrates nutrient and metabolic stimuli to regulate cell growth and proliferation . Activation of this pathway by contraction through the aforementioned mechanosensory pathway drives translational processes , increases the rate of MPS , and medi - ates muscle hypertrophy through protein accretion ( Rennie et al . , 2004 ) . mTOR activation is critical to load - induced muscle growth , as demonstrated by the attenuation of hypertrophic responses and protein synthesis by the mTOR inhibitor , rapa - mycin ( Bodine et al . , 2001 ) . The mTOR pathway controls mechanisms of protein synthesis at several levels ( e . g . , transla - tion capacity , translation efﬁciency ) through increases of trans - lation of speciﬁc mRNAs , which culminate in skeletal muscle ﬁber enlargement . mTOR exists as part of two multiprotein complexes : mTORC1 , which contains raptor and confers rapamycin sensitivity , is required for signaling to p70 S6K and 4E - BP1 , whereas mTORC2 , which contains rictor and is rapa - mycin insensitive , is required for signaling to Akt - FOXO ( Sandri , 2008 ) . The effect of mTOR activity on downstream regulators of protein synthesis is principally achieved through contraction - induced regulation of mTORC1 ( Philp et al . , 2011 ) . Early work on adaptive hypertrophy focused on the ( transient ) postexer - cise rise in blood - borne anabolic hormones such as growth hormone and insulin - like growth factor ( IGF ) - I , and consequent activation of a signaling cascade through phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinases ( PI3K ) - Akt - mTOR by IGF - I interaction with insulin and IGF receptors ( Adams and McCue , 1998 ) . Recently , the muscle growth paradigm has shifted focus to IGF - I - indepen - dent mechanisms of mTOR activation and adaptive hyper - trophy through mechanosensory regulation ( Philp et al . , 2011 ) . Nutrient - dependent regulation of muscle growth is achieved through insulin - and Akt - dependent activation of the mTOR pathway . These pathways exhibit synergy to promote muscle growth in athletes and disease states and can be augmented by appropriate nutritional intake such as postexer - cise CHO and amino acid ingestion or increased dietary protein ( Rennie et al . , 2004 ) . Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Protein Degradation The regulation of skeletal muscle protein degradation is primarily dependent on the activity of the ubiquitin - proteasome pathway . This occurs via two muscle - speciﬁc E3 ubiquitin ligases , muscle atrophy F box ( atrogin - 1 / MAFbx ) and muscle RING ﬁnger 1 ( MuRF1 ) , which are key regulators of skeletal muscle proteolysis under catabolic conditions ( Sandri , 2008 ) . For instance , MHC degradation is regulated by MuRF1 - dependent ubiquitination ( Clarke et al . , 2007 ) . In this model , activation ( dephosphorylation ) of FOXO transcription factors leads to the transcriptional upre - gulation of MAFbx / atrogin - 1 and MuRF1 ( Sandri et al . , 2004 ) . The translocation and activation of FOXO members are neces - sary for the upregulation of atrogin - 1 / MAFbx and MuRF1 , whereas FOXO3 is sufﬁcient to promote atrogin - 1 / MAFbx expression and muscle atrophy in vivo ( Sandri et al . , 2004 ) . FOXO activity is primarily regulated by posttranslational modiﬁcations that determine its subcellular localization , i . e . , phosphorylation by Akt promotes nuclear export of FOXOs to the cytoplasm . Therefore , Akt acts as a critical node at the balance of muscle protein synthesis and degradation . The role of this pathway is ﬁrmly established in muscle atrophy but less well established with respect to protein breakdown during adap - tive hypertrophy , or to transient changes in protein turnover during and after a single bout of exercise . Acute exercise studies that examine proteolytic gene expression in response to either aerobic or resistance exercise show MuRF1 mRNA expression to be elevated 2 – 4 hr into recovery , whereas atrogin - 1 / MAFbx mRNA tends to be elevated early in recovery and decreased later ( > 12 hr ) into recovery ( Coffey et al . , 2006a ; Louis et al . , 2007 ) . The induction pattern of these proteolytic genes corroborates well with the biphasic response of muscle protein degradation following resistance exercise ( Phillips et al . , 1997 ) , although the direct link between these phenomena has not been established in vivo . Role of Skeletal Muscle Satellite Cells in Adaptive Hypertrophy While the role of satellite cells in muscle regeneration is well established , the role of satellite cells in hypertrophy of adult skeletal muscle is debated ( O’Connor et al . , 2007 ) . Skeletal muscle satellite cells are quiescent cells located adjacent to muscle ﬁbers and beneath the ﬁber basal lamina , which can be induced to divide during conditions of muscle damage or increased activation . Subsequent fusion with an existing myoﬁber results in the addition of a myonucleus to the ﬁber syncytium . The proposed role of the satellite cells in muscle hypertrophy revolves around the concept of a myonuclear domain—a theoretical volume of cytoplasm associated with a single myonucleus—and each myoﬁber being composed of many myonuclear domains ( Allen et al . , 1999 ) . Satellite cells provide a source for new myonuclei at a rate sufﬁcient to main - tain a constant myonuclear domain size during normal skeletal muscle growth , thereby increasing the total number of myonu - clei , and thus the total amount of genetic machinery available for protein production with little alteration in the kinetics of 176 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review protein synthesis for each nucleus . Nevertheless , in various experimental models including satellite cell depletion ( McCarthy et al . , 2011 ) and myostatin inhibition ( Wang and McPherron , 2012 ) , skeletal muscle ﬁber hypertrophy is observed without obligatory satellite cell incorporation . For instance , in skeletal muscle with 90 % of the satellite cell population depleted , over - load - induced muscle hypertrophy is normal , whereas regenera - tion from acute muscle injury is impaired , suggesting that the role of satellite cells is markedly different between the two muscle growth paradigms ( McCarthy et al . , 2011 ) . However , rodent models of adaptive hypertrophy produce supraphysiological gains in muscle size in a short time frame , e . g . , functional over - load induced by synergist ablation , and may not adequately represent human adaptation ( Booth and Thomason , 1991 ) . In human skeletal muscle , large ranges of interindividual variability in the magnitude of hypertrophic response to resistance exercise training are explained by the relative ability to mobilize satellite cells and add myonuclei to existing muscle ﬁbers ( Petrella et al . , 2006 ; Petrella et al . , 2008 ) . New Vistas in Molecular Exercise Physiology Skeletal Muscle as a Secretory Organ Over half a century ago , a humoral factor associated with exer - cise but whose source was unknown was speculated to act in an endocrine manner to regulate glycemia independent of insulin ( Goldstein , 1961 ) . Although it is unlikely that only a single factor regulated this effect , accumulating evidence today suggests that skeletal muscle itself acts as a secretory organ during exer - cise , such that cytokines and other metabolically active peptides are produced and released into circulation ( collectively known as ‘‘myokines’’ ) . In turn , these proteins exert wider metabolic effects on organs including fat , liver , gut , and pancreas and act locally on muscle in an autocrine / paracrine manner ( Pedersen and Febbraio , 2012 ) . For instance , IL - 6 is a cytokine that can regulate glycemia directly by stimulating glucose uptake in skeletal muscle ( Glund et al . , 2007 ) , and indirectly by acting on L cells in the intestine and a cells in the pancreas to improve b cell function and insulin secretion ( Ellingsgaard et al . , 2011 ) . Additionally , the exercise - induced effect on postexercise insulin sensitivity is ablated in IL - 6 - deﬁcient mice ( Ellingsgaard et al . , 2011 ) . IL - 6 is one of many muscle - associated cytokines that elicit a variety of effects potentially involved in exercise adapta - tion , including hypertrophy and angiogenesis ( Pedersen and Febbraio , 2012 ) . However , even at rest , the metabolic status of skeletal muscle impacts whole - body metabolic homeostasis . In vitro studies reveal that glucose - stimulated insulin release from b cells is impaired when exposed to secretions from insulin - resistant muscle cells , but not by secretions from insulin - sensitive cells ( Bouzakri et al . , 2011 ) . Recently , a novel myokine irisin was discovered to activate the ‘‘browning’’ of white fat , increase energy expenditure , and attenuate diet - induced insulin resistance ( Bostro¨m et al . , 2012 ) . While the initial discovery was in response to supraphysiological PGC - 1 a expression in skeletal muscle rather than contraction per se , subsequent experiments demonstrated that circulating irisin is modestly elevated in human and rodent training studies , whereas blocking irisin action impairs the adaptive effects of exercise on white adipose tissue remodeling ( Bostro¨m et al . , 2012 ) . Clearly , skeletal muscle as a secretory organ represents a fertile avenue for future research in translational medicine and exploration of interorgan crosstalk in response to exercise , but the extent of this regulation is unknown at present . Using a computational approach to examine all genes expressed in human skeletal muscle , > 300 putative secretory proteins have been detected based on the presence of signal peptides for endoplasmic reticulum targeting and transmembrane segments in protein sequences ( Bortoluzzi et al . , 2006 ) . Almost one - quarter of these proteins remain uncharacterized . Moreover , since transcripts from resting muscle were used to generate these cDNA libraries , other lowly expressed but exercise - responsive transcripts ( e . g . , IL - 6 ) may have been missed as false negatives . Thus , given the abundance of potential secretory proteins , new targets are likely on the horizon . Posttranscriptional Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Gene Expression An emerging paradigm of molecular regulation involves the action of microRNAs ( miRNA ) . This class of short ( (cid:1) 18 – 24 nt ) , noncoding RNA sequences regulate gene expression posttran - scriptionally by inhibiting protein translation or augmenting mRNA degradation through the canonical RNA interference pathway ( Ambros , 2004 ) . miRNAs typically bind to complimen - tary sequences within the 3 0 UTR of a target gene to initiate this process , but individual miRNAs have multiple gene targets , and each gene target may be regulated by multiple miRNAs , thereby intensifying the complexity of regulation . miRNAs have been implicated in a range of metabolic processes and develop - ment . For instance , miR - 499 , a muscle - enriched miRNA en - coded within an intron of the MHC - I gene ( Myh7b ) , is part of a miRNA network proposed to regulate muscle ﬁber type via downregulation of Sox6 , Pur b , and Sp3 , repressors of MHC - I expression ( van Rooij et al . , 2009 ) . In mice overexpressing miR - 499 , a conversion of type II ﬁbers to predominantly type I ﬁbers is observed , which coincides with enhanced oxidative metabolism and improved treadmill running capacity ( van Rooij et al . , 2009 ) . Furthermore , miRNA expression in skeletal muscle is altered in response to atrophy ( McCarthy et al . , 2009 ) , over - load - induced hypertrophy ( McCarthy and Esser , 2007 ) , a single bout of exercise ( Nielsen et al . , 2010 ) , and exercise training ( Davidsen et al . , 2011 ; Keller et al . , 2011 ) . The implications for regulation of adaptive changes in skeletal muscle gene expres - sion and function are unclear and require additional mechanistic studies . Large - scale bioinformatics , based on prediction algo - rithms and reciprocal relationships between miRNAs and their target mRNAs , may prove fruitful for deriving nonobvious hypotheses to investigate the molecular regulation of skeletal muscle adaptation ( Davidsen et al . , 2011 ; Keller et al . , 2011 ) . Heterogeneity in the Training Response : Personalized Exercise Medicine Even when participants engage in carefully controlled exercise training regimens , the nature of the training response is remark - ably heterogeneous , allowing the classiﬁcation of non - , low , and high responders ( Bouchard et al . , 1999 ; Hubal et al . , 2005 ) , and even adverse responders ( Bouchard et al . , 2012 ) . This interindi - vidual variability includes a strong genetic component with , for instance , a maximal heritability estimate of (cid:1) 50 % for the response of VO 2max when adjusted for age , sex , baseline VO 2max , and body composition ( Bouchard et al . , 1999 ) . Candi - date gene studies have demonstrated only modest predictive Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 177 Cell Metabolism Review value ( reviewed in Bouchard , 2012 ) , but recent work using unbi - ased , combined transcriptomic and genomic approaches to examine the relationship between molecular responses and physiological outcomes in response to exercise training have yielded promising results for both aerobic ( Timmons et al . , 2010 ) and resistance ( Raue et al . , 2012 ) training interventions . For example , using this approach , a ‘‘predictor’’ gene set of 29 transcripts and 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) explained (cid:1) 50 % of the aforementioned genetic contribution to the gain in VO 2max in response to training ( Timmons et al . , 2010 ) . The key point is that these transcripts were not responsive to training , but rather higher basal expression levels were pre - dictive of greater gains in VO 2max . Therefore , an attractive hypothesis is that the exercise response ( e . g . , aerobic ﬁtness , strength , insulin sensitivity ) can be predicted and understood through combined molecular and physiological classiﬁcations as a function of the individual and the exercise model ( Timmons et al . , 2010 ; Raue et al . , 2012 ) . In essence , this would represent the advent of personalized exercise medicine in which the exer - cise prescription is matched to the individual and the condition or desired outcome , as opposed to the currently broad public health guidelines . Similarly , a personalized exercise prescription could be used to address factors such as a lack of time and lack of motivation , which are among the most frequently cited barriers to exercise participation ( Booth et al . , 1997 ) . A lack of time may be addressed by prescribing low - volume , short - duration , high - intensity interval training . Even when total training time and energy expenditure have been reduced by (cid:1) 80 % and (cid:1) 90 % , respectively , improvements of VO 2max , muscle oxidative capacity , and insulin sensitivity are comparable to traditional aerobic training ( Burgomaster et al . , 2008 ; Babraj et al . , 2009 ) . A lack of motivation to exercise represents a more complex phenomenon . Emerging evidence from mice selectively bred for low versus high voluntary physical activity shows that peripheral differences in metabolism and physiological function are minimal between groups , and the majority of this biological variation is explained by central factors , most likely at the level of the dopaminergic system ( reviewed in Knab and Lightfoot , 2010 ; Garland et al . , 2011 ) . Dissecting the molecular pathways that regulate the motivation and perceived reward from exercise may present a major avenue of future research , which may in turn present new therapeutic targets to enhance exercise participation . Exercise Mimetics : Fact or Fallacy ? The observation of aerobic training - like phenotypes in trans - genic mice ( Wang et al . , 2004 ; Calvo et al . , 2008 ; Garcia - Roves et al . , 2008 ) , or similar effects produced pharmacologically ( Lagouge et al . , 2006 ; Narkar et al . , 2008 ) , has ignited interest in developing so - called exercise ‘‘mimetics , ’’ i . e . , pharmaco - therapy to replicate the metabolic effects of exercise . The ‘‘exercise in a pill’’ approach has been evaluated in detail elsewhere ( Booth and Laye , 2009 ; Carey and Kingwell , 2009 ) and highlights that the complexities of the molecular response and systemic multiorgan effects of exercise are beyond the faculty of currently available monotherapeutic approaches . With regard to ‘‘mimicking’’ exercise , a single pill is unlikely to produce the myriad of acute physiological and metabolic responses and consequent beneﬁts . Thus , the term exercise mimetic is a misnomer ( Booth and Laye , 2009 ) . Muscle contrac - tion per se , an elevation in energy expenditure , and the turnover of substrates are key features of exercise - mediated effects on metabolic health and the initiation of signal transduction cascades regulating adaptation . A true exercise mimetic would therefore be akin to neuromuscular electrical stimulation , which can bring about adaptive changes through involuntary exercise ( Banerjee et al . , 2005 ) . Due to the episodic nature of exercise , metabolic homeostasis is maintained through cycling of meta - bolic proteins in response to this intermittent stimulus . Moreover , transgenic models with supraphysiological expression levels of single proteins , e . g . , PGC - 1 a , may well demonstrate an endur - ance - like phenotype in skeletal muscle ( Calvo et al . , 2008 ) but conversely exhibit insulin resistance and impaired glucose toler - ance on a whole - body level ( Choi et al . , 2008 ) . Nevertheless , the value of pharmacotherapy in exercise - related interventions should not be fully discounted . Pharmacological compounds could serve as adjunct treatment to exercise to potentiate or augment the adaptive response in exercisers . For instance , pharmacotherapy could help overcome adaptive limitations in insulin - resistant individuals with ‘‘exercise - resistant’’ skeletal muscle ( De Filippis et al . , 2008 ) , or in elderly individuals reported to demonstrate ‘‘anabolic resistance’’ with respect to exercise - induced MPS ( Kumar et al . , 2009 ) . Concluding Remarks The metabolic and therapeutic effects of regular exercise on lifestyle - related chronic disease are long established , but the molecular bases for adaptive changes in skeletal muscle mass and metabolic function remain an area of intense research . The pleiotropic effects of exercise and the complexity of responses at both a metabolic and a molecular level suggest that there is no singular pathway mediating exercise training adaptation . Mechanistic investigations have established many key players in regulation of a healthy skeletal muscle phenotype , but the viablility of these pathways as pharmaceutical entry points remains to be determined . Alternatively , future therapeutic potential may exist in optimizing targeted exercise interventions and training prescription . From a translational perspective , this would mean establishing the molecular signatures of targeted exercise interventions based on factors such as mode , intensity , or duration to optimize aerobic or strength adaptations , despite presence of speciﬁc metabolic or muscular dysfunction . In this sense , personalized , targeted exercise interventions may one day complement the existing broad recommendations for exer - cise in public health policy to address molecular defects present in lifestyle - related chronic disease . This marriage between complementary ﬁelds of research represents a new vista in exer - cise science and illustrates the translational merit in utilizing molecular approaches to explore the mechanistic bases of training adaptation so as to inform exercise prescription . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Limitations of space preclude the inclusion of many excellent publications from past half century , so wehavechosen to reference seminalreviews where appropriate . Moreover , we were unable to cite a vast number of outstanding contributions from authors that have enhanced the ﬁelds of exercise metabo - lismandmuscleplasticity , andweapologizeaccordinglyinadvance . Wethank Eoin Winston and colleagues at The Science Picture Company for assisting in 178 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review the production of the illustrations , and Dr . Megan Osler for helpful comments . The authors are supported by funding from The European Research Council Advanced Grant Ideas Program , Swedish Research Council , Swedish Dia - betes Association , Novo Nordisk Foundation , Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation , The Strategic Diabetes Program at Karolinska Institutet , and UCD Seed Funding for Dissemination and Outputs . REFERENCES Adams , G . R . , and McCue , S . A . ( 1998 ) . Localized infusion of IGF - I results in skeletal muscle hypertrophy in rats . J . Appl . Physiol . 84 , 1716 – 1722 . Adams , G . R . , Hather , B . M . , Baldwin , K . M . , and Dudley , G . A . ( 1993 ) . Skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain composition and resistance training . J . Appl . Physiol . 74 , 911 – 915 . Ahlborg , G . , Felig , P . , Hagenfeldt , L . , Hendler , R . , and Wahren , J . ( 1974 ) . Substrate turnover during prolonged exercise in man . Splanchnic and leg metabolism of glucose , free fatty acids , and amino acids . J . Clin . Invest . 53 , 1080 – 1090 . Akimoto , T . , Pohnert , S . C . , Li , P . , Zhang , M . , Gumbs , C . , Rosenberg , P . B . , Williams , R . S . , and Yan , Z . ( 2005 ) . Exercise stimulates Pgc - 1alpha transcrip - tion in skeletal muscle through activation of the p38 MAPK pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 19587 – 19593 . Allen , D . L . , Roy , R . R . , and Edgerton , V . R . ( 1999 ) . Myonuclear domains in muscle adaptation and disease . Muscle Nerve 22 , 1350 – 1360 . Ambros , V . ( 2004 ) . The functions of animal microRNAs . Nature 431 , 350 – 355 . Ameln , H . , Gustafsson , T . , Sundberg , C . J . , Okamoto , K . , Jansson , E . , Poellin - ger , L . , and Makino , Y . ( 2005 ) . Physiological activation of hypoxia inducible factor - 1 in human skeletal muscle . FASEB J . 19 , 1009 – 1011 . Andersen , P . , and Saltin , B . ( 1985 ) . Maximal perfusion of skeletal muscle in man . J . Physiol . 366 , 233 – 249 . Atherton , P . J . , Babraj , J . , Smith , K . , Singh , J . , Rennie , M . J . , and Wackerhage , H . ( 2005 ) . Selective activation of AMPK - PGC - 1alpha or PKB - TSC2 - mTOR signaling can explain speciﬁc adaptive responses to endurance or resistance training - like electrical muscle stimulation . FASEB J . 19 , 786 – 788 . Baar , K . , and Esser , K . ( 1999 ) . Phosphorylation of p70 ( S6k ) correlates with increased skeletal muscle mass following resistance exercise . Am . J . Physiol . 276 , C120 – C127 . Baar , K . , Wende , A . R . , Jones , T . E . , Marison , M . , Nolte , L . A . , Chen , M . , Kelly , D . P . , and Holloszy , J . O . ( 2002 ) . Adaptations of skeletal muscle to exercise : rapid increase in the transcriptional coactivator PGC - 1 . FASEB J . 16 , 1879 – 1886 . Babraj , J . A . , Vollaard , N . B . , Keast , C . , Guppy , F . M . , Cottrell , G . , andTimmons , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Extremely short duration high intensity interval training substan - tially improves insulin action in young healthy males . BMC Endocr . Disord . 9 , 3 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1472 - 6823 - 9 - 3 . Banerjee , P . , Caulﬁeld , B . , Crowe , L . , andClark , A . ( 2005 ) . Prolongedelectrical musclestimulation exercise improvesstrengthandaerobiccapacityinhealthy sedentary adults . J . Appl . Physiol . 99 , 2307 – 2311 . Barre ` s , R . , Yan , J . , Egan , B . , Treebak , J . T . , Rasmussen , M . , Fritz , T . , Caidahl , K . , Krook , A . , O’Gorman , D . J . , and Zierath , J . R . ( 2012 ) . Acute exercise remodels promoter methylation in human skeletal muscle . Cell Metab . 15 , 405 – 411 . Benziane , B . , Burton , T . J . , Scanlan , B . , Galuska , D . , Canny , B . J . , Chibalin , A . V . , Zierath , J . R . , and Stepto , N . K . ( 2008 ) . Divergent cell signaling after short - term intensiﬁed endurance training in human skeletal muscle . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 295 , E1427 – E1438 . Bergeron , R . , Ren , J . M . , Cadman , K . S . , Moore , I . K . , Perret , P . , Pypaert , M . , Young , L . H . , Semenkovich , C . F . , and Shulman , G . I . ( 2001 ) . Chronic activation of AMP kinase results in NRF - 1 activation and mitochondrial biogenesis . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 281 , E1340 – E1346 . Biolo , G . , Maggi , S . P . , Williams , B . D . , Tipton , K . D . , and Wolfe , R . R . ( 1995 ) . Increased rates of muscle protein turnover and amino acid transport after resistance exercise in humans . Am . J . Physiol . 268 , E514 – E520 . Bodine , S . C . , Stitt , T . N . , Gonzalez , M . , Kline , W . O . , Stover , G . L . , Bauerlein , R . , Zlotchenko , E . , Scrimgeour , A . , Lawrence , J . C . , Glass , D . J . , andYancopoulos , G . D . ( 2001 ) . Akt / mTORpathwayisacrucialregulatorofskeletalmusclehyper - trophy and can prevent muscle atrophy in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 1014 – 1019 . Bolster , D . R . , Crozier , S . J . , Kimball , S . R . , andJefferson , L . S . ( 2002 ) . AMP - acti - vated protein kinase suppresses protein synthesis in rat skeletal muscle through down - regulated mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 23977 – 23980 . Booth , F . ( 1977 ) . Effects of endurance exercise on cytochrome C turnover in skeletal muscle . Ann . N Y Acad . Sci . 301 , 431 – 439 . Booth , F . W . , and Laye , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Lack of adequate appreciation of physical exercise’s complexities can pre - empt appropriate design and interpretation in scientiﬁc discovery . J . Physiol . 587 , 5527 – 5539 . Booth , F . W . , and Thomason , D . B . ( 1991 ) . Molecular and cellular adaptation of muscle in response to exercise : perspectives of various models . Physiol . Rev . 71 , 541 – 585 . Booth , M . L . , Bauman , A . , Owen , N . , and Gore , C . J . ( 1997 ) . Physical activity preferences , preferred sources of assistance , and perceived barriers to increased activity among physically inactive Australians . Prev . Med . 26 , 131 – 137 . Booth , F . W . , Laye , M . J . , and Spangenburg , E . E . ( 2010 ) . Gold standards for scientistswhoareconductinganimal - basedexercisestudies . J . Appl . Physiol . 108 , 219 – 221 . Booth , F . W . , Roberts , C . K . , and Laye , M . J . ( 2012 ) . Lack of exercise is a major cause of chronic disease . Comp . Physiol . 2 , 1143 – 1211 . Børsheim , E . , and Bahr , R . ( 2003 ) . Effect of exercise intensity , duration and mode on post - exercise oxygen consumption . Sports Med . 33 , 1037 – 1060 . Borst , S . E . ( 2004 ) . Interventions for sarcopenia and muscle weakness in older people . Age Ageing 33 , 548 – 555 . Bortoluzzi , S . , Scannapieco , P . , Cestaro , A . , Danieli , G . A . , and Schiafﬁno , S . ( 2006 ) . Computational reconstruction of the human skeletal muscle secre - tome . Proteins 62 , 776 – 792 . Bostro¨m , P . , Wu , J . , Jedrychowski , M . P . , Korde , A . , Ye , L . , Lo , J . C . , Rasbach , K . A . , Bostro¨m , E . A . , Choi , J . H . , Long , J . Z . , et al . ( 2012 ) . A PGC1 - a - dependent myokine that drives brown - fat - like development of white fat and thermogene - sis . Nature 481 , 463 – 468 . Bouchard , C . ( 2012 ) . Genomic predictors of trainability . Exp . Physiol . 97 , 347 – 352 . Bouchard , C . , An , P . , Rice , T . , Skinner , J . S . , Wilmore , J . H . , Gagnon , J . , Pe´russe , L . , Leon , A . S . , and Rao , D . C . ( 1999 ) . Familial aggregation of VO ( 2max ) response to exercise training : results from the HERITAGE Family Study . J . Appl . Physiol . 87 , 1003 – 1008 . Bouchard , C . , Blair , S . N . , Church , T . S . , Earnest , C . P . , Hagberg , J . M . , Ha¨kki - nen , K . , Jenkins , N . T . , Karavirta , L . , Kraus , W . E . , Leon , A . S . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Adverse metabolic response to regular exercise : is it a rare or common occur - rence ? PLoS ONE 7 , e37887 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0037887 . Bouzakri , K . , Plomgaard , P . , Berney , T . , Donath , M . Y . , Pedersen , B . K . , and Halban , P . A . ( 2011 ) . Bimodaleffectonpancreatic b - cellsofsecretoryproducts from normal or insulin - resistant human skeletal muscle . Diabetes 60 , 1111 – 1121 . Brooks , G . A . ( 1998 ) . Mammalian fuel utilization during sustained exercise . Comp . Biochem . Physiol . B Biochem . Mol . Biol . 120 , 89 – 107 . Bua , E . A . , McKiernan , S . H . , Wanagat , J . , McKenzie , D . , andAiken , J . M . ( 2002 ) . Mitochondrial abnormalities are more frequent in muscles undergoing sarco - penia . J . Appl . Physiol . 92 , 2617 – 2624 . Burgomaster , K . A . , Howarth , K . R . , Phillips , S . M . , Rakobowchuk , M . , Macdon - ald , M . J . , McGee , S . L . , and Gibala , M . J . ( 2008 ) . Similar metabolic adaptations during exercise after low volume sprint interval and traditional endurance training in humans . J . Physiol . 586 , 151 – 160 . Calvo , J . A . , Daniels , T . G . , Wang , X . , Paul , A . , Lin , J . , Spiegelman , B . M . , Ste - venson , S . C . , and Rangwala , S . M . ( 2008 ) . Muscle - speciﬁc expression of PPARgamma coactivator - 1alpha improves exercise performance and increases peak oxygen uptake . J . Appl . Physiol . 104 , 1304 – 1312 . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 179 Cell Metabolism Review Canto´ , C . , Gerhart - Hines , Z . , Feige , J . N . , Lagouge , M . , Noriega , L . , Milne , J . C . , Elliott , P . J . , Puigserver , P . , and Auwerx , J . ( 2009 ) . AMPK regulates energy expenditure by modulating NAD + metabolism and SIRT1 activity . Nature 458 , 1056 – 1060 . Carey , A . L . , and Kingwell , B . A . ( 2009 ) . Novel pharmacological approaches to combatobesityandinsulinresistance : targetingskeletalmusclewith‘exercise mimetics’ . Diabetologia 52 , 2015 – 2026 . Carling , D . , and Hardie , D . G . ( 1989 ) . Thesubstrateand sequence speciﬁcityof the AMP - activated protein kinase . Phosphorylation of glycogen synthase and phosphorylase kinase . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1012 , 81 – 86 . Cartoni , R . , Le´ger , B . , Hock , M . B . , Praz , M . , Crettenand , A . , Pich , S . , Ziltener , J . L . , Luthi , F . , De´riaz , O . , Zorzano , A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Mitofusins 1 / 2 and ERRalpha expression are increased in human skeletal muscle after physical exercise . J . Physiol . 567 , 349 – 358 . Chin , E . R . ( 2010 ) . Intracellular Ca2 + signaling in skeletal muscle : decoding a complex message . Exerc . Sport Sci . Rev . 38 , 76 – 85 . Chinsomboon , J . , Ruas , J . , Gupta , R . K . , Thom , R . , Shoag , J . , Rowe , G . C . , Sawada , N . , Raghuram , S . , and Arany , Z . ( 2009 ) . The transcriptional coactiva - tor PGC - 1alpha mediates exercise - induced angiogenesis in skeletal muscle . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 21401 – 21406 . Choi , C . S . , Befroy , D . E . , Codella , R . , Kim , S . , Reznick , R . M . , Hwang , Y . J . , Liu , Z . X . , Lee , H . Y . , Distefano , A . , Samuel , V . T . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Paradoxical effects of increased expression of PGC - 1alpha on muscle mitochondrial function and insulin - stimulated muscle glucose metabolism . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 19926 – 19931 . Clarke , B . A . , Drujan , D . , Willis , M . S . , Murphy , L . O . , Corpina , R . A . , Burova , E . , Rakhilin , S . V . , Stitt , T . N . , Patterson , C . , Latres , E . , and Glass , D . J . ( 2007 ) . The E3 Ligase MuRF1 degrades myosin heavy chain protein in dexamethasone - treated skeletal muscle . Cell Metab . 6 , 376 – 385 . Coffey , V . G . , and Hawley , J . A . ( 2007 ) . The molecular bases of training adapta - tion . Sports Med . 37 , 737 – 763 . Coffey , V . G . , Shield , A . , Canny , B . J . , Carey , K . A . , Cameron - Smith , D . , and Hawley , J . A . ( 2006a ) . Interaction of contractile activity and training history on mRNA abundance in skeletal muscle from trained athletes . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 290 , E849 – E855 . Coffey , V . G . , Zhong , Z . , Shield , A . , Canny , B . J . , Chibalin , A . V . , Zierath , J . R . , and Hawley , J . A . ( 2006b ) . Early signaling responses to divergent exercise stimuli in skeletal muscle from well - trained humans . FASEB J . 20 , 190 – 192 . Colberg , S . R . , Sigal , R . J . , Fernhall , B . , Regensteiner , J . G . , Blissmer , B . J . , Rubin , R . R . , Chasan - Taber , L . , Albright , A . L . , and Braun , B . American College of Sports Medicine ; American Diabetes Association . ( 2010 ) . Exercise and type 2 diabetes : the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Diabetes Association : joint position statement . Diabetes Care 33 , e147 – e167 . Davidsen , P . K . , Gallagher , I . J . , Hartman , J . W . , Tarnopolsky , M . A . , Dela , F . , Helge , J . W . , Timmons , J . A . , and Phillips , S . M . ( 2011 ) . High responders to resistance exercise training demonstrate differential regulation of skeletal muscle microRNA expression . J . Appl . Physiol . 110 , 309 – 317 . Davidson , L . E . , Hudson , R . , Kilpatrick , K . , Kuk , J . L . , McMillan , K . , Janiszewski , P . M . , Lee , S . , Lam , M . , and Ross , R . ( 2009 ) . Effects of exercise modality on insulin resistance and functional limitation in older adults : a randomized controlled trial . Arch . Intern . Med . 169 , 122 – 131 . De Filippis , E . , Alvarez , G . , Berria , R . , Cusi , K . , Everman , S . , Meyer , C . , and Mandarino , L . J . ( 2008 ) . Insulin - resistantmuscle isexerciseresistant : evidence for reduced response of nuclear - encoded mitochondrial genes to exercise . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 294 , E607 – E614 . DeFronzo , R . A . , Jacot , E . , Jequier , E . , Maeder , E . , Wahren , J . , and Felber , J . P . ( 1981 ) . The effect of insulin on the disposal of intravenous glucose . Results from indirect calorimetry and hepatic and femoral venous catheterization . Dia - betes 30 , 1000 – 1007 . Dolmetsch , R . E . , Lewis , R . S . , Goodnow , C . C . , and Healy , J . I . ( 1997 ) . Differen - tial activation of transcription factors induced by Ca2 + response amplitude and duration . Nature 386 , 855 – 858 . Dudley , G . A . , Tullson , P . C . , and Terjung , R . L . ( 1987 ) . Inﬂuence of mitochon - drial content on the sensitivity of respiratory control . J . Biol . Chem . 262 , 9109 – 9114 . Durieux , A . C . , D’Antona , G . , Desplanches , D . , Freyssenet , D . , Klossner , S . , Bottinelli , R . , and Flu¨ck , M . ( 2009 ) . Focal adhesion kinase is a load - dependent governor of the slow contractile and oxidative muscle phenotype . J . Physiol . 587 , 3703 – 3717 . Egan , B . , Carson , B . P . , Garcia - Roves , P . M . , Chibalin , A . V . , Sarsﬁeld , F . M . , Barron , N . , McCaffrey , N . , Moyna , N . M . , Zierath , J . R . , and O’Gorman , D . J . ( 2010 ) . Exercise intensity - dependent regulation of peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor coactivator - 1 mRNA abundance is associated with differ - ential activation of upstream signalling kinases in human skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 588 , 1779 – 1790 . Egan , B . , Dowling , P . , O’Connor , P . L . , Henry , M . , Meleady , P . , Zierath , J . R . , and O’Gorman , D . J . ( 2011 ) . 2 - D DIGE analysis of the mitochondrial proteome from human skeletal muscle reveals time course - dependent remodelling in response to 14 consecutive days of endurance exercise training . Proteomics 11 , 1413 – 1428 . Ellingsgaard , H . , Hauselmann , I . , Schuler , B . , Habib , A . M . , Baggio , L . L . , Meier , D . T . , Eppler , E . , Bouzakri , K . , Wueest , S . , Muller , Y . D . , etal . ( 2011 ) . Interleukin - 6 enhances insulin secretion by increasing glucagon - like peptide - 1 secretion from L cells and alpha cells . Nat . Med . 17 , 1481 – 1489 . Essig , D . A . ( 1996 ) . Contractile activity - induced mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle . Exerc . Sport Sci . Rev . 24 , 289 – 319 . Fang , Y . , Vilella - Bach , M . , Bachmann , R . , Flanigan , A . , and Chen , J . ( 2001 ) . Phosphatidic acid - mediated mitogenic activation of mTOR signaling . Science 294 , 1942 – 1945 . Flu¨ck , M . , and Hoppeler , H . ( 2003 ) . Molecular basis of skeletal muscle plas - ticity—from gene to form and function . Rev . Physiol . Biochem . Pharmacol . 146 , 159 – 216 . Folland , J . P . , and Williams , A . G . ( 2007 ) . The adaptations to strength training : morphological and neurological contributions to increased strength . Sports Med . 37 , 145 – 168 . Formenti , F . , Constantin - Teodosiu , D . , Emmanuel , Y . , Cheeseman , J . , Dorrington , K . L . , Edwards , L . M . , Humphreys , S . M . , Lappin , T . R . , McMullin , M . F . , McNamara , C . J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Regulation of human metabolism by hypoxia - inducible factor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 12722 – 12727 . Gaitanos , G . C . , Williams , C . , Boobis , L . H . , and Brooks , S . ( 1993 ) . Human muscle metabolism during intermittent maximal exercise . J . Appl . Physiol . 75 , 712 – 719 . Galbo , H . ( 1983 ) . Hormonal and Metabolic Adaptation to Exercise ( Stuttgart : Georg Thieme Verlag ) . Garcia - Roves , P . M . , Osler , M . E . , Holmstro¨m , M . H . , and Zierath , J . R . ( 2008 ) . Gain - of - function R225Q mutation in AMP - activated protein kinase gamma3 subunit increases mitochondrial biogenesis in glycolytic skeletal muscle . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 35724 – 35734 . Garland , T . , Jr . , Schutz , H . , Chappell , M . A . , Keeney , B . K . , Meek , T . H . , Copes , L . E . , Acosta , W . , Drenowatz , C . , Maciel , R . C . , van Dijk , G . , et al . ( 2011 ) . The biological control of voluntary exercise , spontaneous physical activity and daily energy expenditure in relation to obesity : human and rodent perspec - tives . J . Exp . Biol . 214 , 206 – 229 . Gavin , T . P . , Ruster , R . S . , Carrithers , J . A . , Zwetsloot , K . A . , Kraus , R . M . , Evans , C . A . , Knapp , D . J . , Drew , J . L . , McCartney , J . S . , Garry , J . P . , and Hickner , R . C . ( 2007 ) . No difference in the skeletal muscle angiogenic response to aerobic exercise training between young and aged men . J . Physiol . 585 , 231 – 239 . Geng , T . , Li , P . , Okutsu , M . , Yin , X . , Kwek , J . , Zhang , M . , and Yan , Z . ( 2010 ) . PGC - 1alpha plays a functional role in exercise - induced mitochondrial biogen - esis and angiogenesis but not ﬁber - type transformation in mouse skeletal muscle . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 298 , C572 – C579 . Gerhart - Hines , Z . , Rodgers , J . T . , Bare , O . , Lerin , C . , Kim , S . H . , Mostoslavsky , R . , Alt , F . W . , Wu , Z . , and Puigserver , P . ( 2007 ) . Metabolic control of muscle mitochondrial function and fatty acid oxidation through SIRT1 / PGC - 1alpha . EMBO J . 26 , 1913 – 1923 . Gibala , M . J . ( 2006 ) . Effect of exercise on skeletal muscle protein and amino acid metabolism in humans . In Exercise Metabolism , M . Hargreaves and L . L . Spriet , eds . ( Champagne , IL : Human Kinetics ) , pp . 137 – 162 . Gibala , M . J . , MacLean , D . A . , Graham , T . E . , and Saltin , B . ( 1998 ) . Tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediate pool size and estimated cycle ﬂux in human muscle during exercise . Am . J . Physiol . 275 , E235 – E242 . 180 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review Glund , S . , Deshmukh , A . , Long , Y . C . , Moller , T . , Koistinen , H . A . , Caidahl , K . , Zierath , J . R . , and Krook , A . ( 2007 ) . Interleukin - 6 directly increases glucose metabolism in resting human skeletal muscle . Diabetes 56 , 1630 – 1637 . Goldstein , M . S . ( 1961 ) . Humoral nature of hypoglycemia in muscular exercise . Am . J . Physiol . 200 , 67 – 70 . Green , H . J . , Helyar , R . , Ball - Burnett , M . , Kowalchuk , N . , Symon , S . , and Farrance , B . ( 1992 ) . Metabolic adaptations to training precede changes in muscle mitochondrial capacity . J . Appl . Physiol . 72 , 484 – 491 . Hallal , P . C . , Andersen , L . B . , Bull , F . C . , Guthold , R . , Haskell , W . , and Ekelund , U . ; Lancet Physical Activity Series Working Group . ( 2012 ) . Global physical activity levels : surveillance progress , pitfalls , and prospects . Lancet 380 , 247 – 257 . Handschin , C . , Chin , S . , Li , P . , Liu , F . , Maratos - Flier , E . , Lebrasseur , N . K . , Yan , Z . , and Spiegelman , B . M . ( 2007 ) . Skeletal muscle ﬁber - type switching , exercise intolerance , and myopathy in PGC - 1alpha muscle - speciﬁc knock - out animals . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 30014 – 30021 . Hargreaves , M . ( 2006 ) . Skeletal muscle carbohydrate metabolism during exercise . In Exercise Metabolism , M . Hargreaves and L . L . Spriet , eds . ( Champaign , IL : Human Kinetics ) , pp . 29 – 44 . Haskell , W . L . , Lee , I . M . , Pate , R . R . , Powell , K . E . , Blair , S . N . , Franklin , B . A . , Macera , C . A . , Heath , G . W . , Thompson , P . D . , and Bauman , A . ( 2007 ) . Physical activity and public health : updated recommendation for adults from the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association . Med . Sci . Sports Exerc . 39 , 1423 – 1434 . Henriksson , J . , and Reitman , J . S . ( 1977 ) . Time course of changes in human skeletal muscle succinate dehydrogenase and cytochrome oxidase activities and maximal oxygen uptake with physical activity and inactivity . Acta Physiol . Scand . 99 , 91 – 97 . Hirschey , M . D . , Shimazu , T . , Goetzman , E . , Jing , E . , Schwer , B . , Lombard , D . B . , Grueter , C . A . , Harris , C . , Biddinger , S . , Ilkayeva , O . R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . SIRT3 regulates mitochondrial fatty - acid oxidation by reversible enzyme deacetylation . Nature 464 , 121 – 125 . Holloszy , J . O . ( 1967 ) . Biochemical adaptations in muscle . Effects of exercise on mitochondrial oxygen uptake and respiratory enzyme activity in skeletal muscle . J . Biol . Chem . 242 , 2278 – 2282 . Holloszy , J . O . , and Coyle , E . F . ( 1984 ) . Adaptations of skeletal muscle to endurance exercise and their metabolic consequences . J . Appl . Physiol . 56 , 831 – 838 . Hood , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Invited Review : contractile activity - induced mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle . J . Appl . Physiol . 90 , 1137 – 1157 . Hornberger , T . A . , Chu , W . K . , Mak , Y . W . , Hsiung , J . W . , Huang , S . A . , andChien , S . ( 2006 ) . TheroleofphospholipaseDandphosphatidicacidinthemechanical activation of mTOR signaling in skeletal muscle . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 4741 – 4746 . Horowitz , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Adipose tissue lipid mobilization during exercise . In Exercise Metabolism , M . Hargreaves and L . L . Spriet , eds . ( Champaign , IL : Human Kinetics ) , pp . 89 – 104 . Horton , T . J . , Pagliassotti , M . J . , Hobbs , K . , and Hill , J . O . ( 1998 ) . Fuel metabo - lisminmenand women during andafter long - duration exercise . J . Appl . Phys - iol . 85 , 1823 – 1832 . Howald , H . , Hoppeler , H . , Claassen , H . , Mathieu , O . , and Straub , R . ( 1985 ) . Inﬂuences of endurance training on the ultrastructural composition of the different muscle ﬁber types in humans . Pﬂugers Arch . 403 , 369 – 376 . Howlett , R . A . , Parolin , M . L . , Dyck , D . J . , Hultman , E . , Jones , N . L . , Heigen - hauser , G . J . , and Spriet , L . L . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of skeletal muscle glycogen phosphorylase and PDH at varying exercise power outputs . Am . J . Physiol . 275 , R418 – R425 . Hubal , M . J . , Gordish - Dressman , H . , Thompson , P . D . , Price , T . B . , Hoffman , E . P . , Angelopoulos , T . J . , Gordon , P . M . , Moyna , N . M . , Pescatello , L . S . , Visich , P . S . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Variability in muscle size and strength gain after unilateral resistance training . Med . Sci . Sports Exerc . 37 , 964 – 972 . Ja¨ger , S . , Handschin , C . , St - Pierre , J . , and Spiegelman , B . M . ( 2007 ) . AMP - activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) action in skeletal muscle via direct phosphor - ylation of PGC - 1alpha . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 12017 – 12022 . Jentjens , R . , and Jeukendrup , A . ( 2003 ) . Determinants of post - exercise glycogen synthesis during short - term recovery . Sports Med . 33 , 117 – 144 . Jiang , B . H . , Rue , E . , Wang , G . L . , Roe , R . , andSemenza , G . L . ( 1996 ) . Dimeriza - tion , DNAbinding , andtransactivationpropertiesofhypoxia - induciblefactor1 . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 17771 – 17778 . Jing , E . , Emanuelli , B . , Hirschey , M . D . , Boucher , J . , Lee , K . Y . , Lombard , D . , Verdin , E . M . , and Kahn , C . R . ( 2011 ) . Sirtuin - 3 ( Sirt3 ) regulates skeletal muscle metabolism and insulin signaling via altered mitochondrial oxidation and reac - tiveoxygenspeciesproduction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 14608 – 14613 . Kahn , B . B . , Alquier , T . , Carling , D . , and Hardie , D . G . ( 2005 ) . AMP - activated protein kinase : ancient energy gauge provides clues tomodern understanding of metabolism . Cell Metab . 1 , 15 – 25 . Keller , P . , Vollaard , N . B . , Gustafsson , T . , Gallagher , I . J . , Sundberg , C . J . , Ran - kinen , T . , Britton , S . L . , Bouchard , C . , Koch , L . G . , and Timmons , J . A . ( 2011 ) . A transcriptional map of the impact of endurance exercise training on skeletal muscle phenotype . J . Appl . Physiol . 110 , 46 – 59 . Kiens , B . ( 2006 ) . Skeletalmusclelipidmetabolisminexerciseandinsulinresis - tance . Physiol . Rev . 86 , 205 – 243 . Kiens , B . , and Richter , E . A . ( 1998 ) . Utilization of skeletal muscle triacylglycerol during postexercise recovery in humans . Am . J . Physiol . 275 , E332 – E337 . Kjaer , M . ( 2006 ) . Hepatic metabolism during exercise . In Exercise Metabo - lism , M . Hargreaves and L . L . Spriet , eds . ( Champaign , IL : Human Kinetics ) , pp . 45 – 70 . Klossner , S . , Durieux , A . C . , Freyssenet , D . , and Flueck , M . ( 2009 ) . Mechano - transduction to muscle protein synthesis is modulated by FAK . Eur . J . Appl . Physiol . 106 , 389 – 398 . Knab , A . M . , and Lightfoot , J . T . ( 2010 ) . Does the difference between physically active and couch potato lie in the dopamine system ? Int . J . Biol . Sci . 6 , 133 – 150 . Knowler , W . C . , Barrett - Connor , E . , Fowler , S . E . , Hamman , R . F . , Lachin , J . M . , Walker , E . A . , and Nathan , D . M . ; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group . ( 2002 ) . Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin . N . Engl . J . Med . 346 , 393 – 403 . Koopman , R . , Manders , R . J . , Zorenc , A . H . , Hul , G . B . , Kuipers , H . , Keizer , H . A . , and van Loon , L . J . ( 2005 ) . A single session of resistance exercise enhances insulin sensitivity for at least 24 h in healthy men . Eur . J . Appl . Physiol . 94 , 180 – 187 . Koopman , R . , Manders , R . J . , Jonkers , R . A . , Hul , G . B . , Kuipers , H . , and van Loon , L . J . ( 2006 ) . Intramyocellular lipid and glycogen content are reduced following resistance exercise in untrained healthy males . Eur . J . Appl . Physiol . 96 , 525 – 534 . Kumar , V . , Selby , A . , Rankin , D . , Patel , R . , Atherton , P . , Hildebrandt , W . , Williams , J . , Smith , K . , Seynnes , O . , Hiscock , N . , and Rennie , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Age - related differences in the dose - response relationship of muscle protein synthesis to resistance exercise in young and old men . J . Physiol . 587 , 211 – 217 . Lagouge , M . , Argmann , C . , Gerhart - Hines , Z . , Meziane , H . , Lerin , C . , Daussin , F . , Messadeq , N . , Milne , J . , Lambert , P . , Elliott , P . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Resveratrol improves mitochondrial function and protects against metabolic disease by activating SIRT1 and PGC - 1alpha . Cell 127 , 1109 – 1122 . Lanza , I . R . , Short , D . K . , Short , K . R . , Raghavakaimal , S . , Basu , R . , Joyner , M . J . , McConnell , J . P . , and Nair , K . S . ( 2008 ) . Endurance exercise as a countermea - sure for aging . Diabetes 57 , 2933 – 2942 . Leblanc , P . J . , Howarth , K . R . , Gibala , M . J . , and Heigenhauser , G . J . ( 2004 ) . Effects of 7 wk of endurance training on human skeletal muscle metabolism during submaximal exercise . J . Appl . Physiol . 97 , 2148 – 2153 . Lee , A . D . , Hansen , P . A . , andHolloszy , J . O . ( 1995 ) . Wortmannininhibitsinsulin - stimulatedbut not contraction - stimulated glucose transport activity in skeletal muscle . FEBS Lett . 361 , 51 – 54 . Leick , L . , Wojtaszewski , J . F . , Johansen , S . T . , Kiilerich , K . , Comes , G . , Hells - ten , Y . , Hidalgo , J . , and Pilegaard , H . ( 2008 ) . PGC - 1alpha is not mandatory for exercise - and training - induced adaptive gene responses in mouse skeletal muscle . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 294 , E463 – E474 . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 181 Cell Metabolism Review Lin , J . , Handschin , C . , andSpiegelman , B . M . ( 2005 ) . Metaboliccontrolthrough the PGC - 1 family of transcription coactivators . Cell Metab . 1 , 361 – 370 . Little , J . P . , Safdar , A . , Wilkin , G . P . , Tarnopolsky , M . A . , andGibala , M . J . ( 2010 ) . A practical model of low - volume high - intensity interval training induces mitochondrial biogenesis in human skeletal muscle : potential mechanisms . J . Physiol . 588 , 1011 – 1022 . Little , J . P . , Safdar , A . , Bishop , D . , Tarnopolsky , M . A . , and Gibala , M . J . ( 2011 ) . An acute bout of high - intensity interval training increases the nuclear abun - dance of PGC - 1 a and activates mitochondrial biogenesis in human skeletal muscle . Am . J . Physiol . Regul . Integr . Comp . Physiol . 300 , R1303 – R1310 . Liu , Y . , Randall , W . R . , and Schneider , M . F . ( 2005 ) . Activity - dependent and - independent nuclear ﬂuxes of HDAC4 mediated by different kinases in adult skeletal muscle . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 887 – 897 . Long , Y . C . , Widegren , U . , and Zierath , J . R . ( 2004 ) . Exercise - induced mitogen - activated protein kinase signalling in skeletal muscle . Proc . Nutr . Soc . 63 , 227 – 232 . Louis , E . , Raue , U . , Yang , Y . , Jemiolo , B . , and Trappe , S . ( 2007 ) . Time course of proteolytic , cytokine , and myostatin gene expressionafter acute exercise in human skeletal muscle . J . Appl . Physiol . 103 , 1744 – 1751 . Lowell , B . B . , and Shulman , G . I . ( 2005 ) . Mitochondrial dysfunction and type 2 diabetes . Science 307 , 384 – 387 . Macaluso , A . , and De Vito , G . ( 2004 ) . Muscle strength , power and adaptations to resistance training in older people . Eur . J . Appl . Physiol . 91 , 450 – 472 . Mahoney , D . J . , Parise , G . , Melov , S . , Safdar , A . , andTarnopolsky , M . A . ( 2005 ) . Analysisofglobal mRNAexpressioninhuman skeletal muscleduringrecovery from endurance exercise . FASEB J . 19 , 1498 – 1500 . Mason , S . D . , Howlett , R . A . , Kim , M . J . , Olfert , I . M . , Hogan , M . C . , McNulty , W . , Hickey , R . P . , Wagner , P . D . , Kahn , C . R . , Giordano , F . J . , and Johnson , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Loss of skeletal muscle HIF - 1alpha results in altered exercise endur - ance . PLoS Biol . 2 , e288 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020288 . Maxwell , P . H . , Wiesener , M . S . , Chang , G . W . , Clifford , S . C . , Vaux , E . C . , Cock - man , M . E . , Wykoff , C . C . , Pugh , C . W . , Maher , E . R . , and Ratcliffe , P . J . ( 1999 ) . The tumour suppressor protein VHL targets hypoxia - inducible factors for oxygen - dependent proteolysis . Nature 399 , 271 – 275 . McCarthy , J . J . , and Esser , K . A . ( 2007 ) . MicroRNA - 1 and microRNA - 133a expression are decreased during skeletal muscle hypertrophy . J . Appl . Phys - iol . 102 , 306 – 313 . McCarthy , J . J . , Esser , K . A . , Peterson , C . A . , and Dupont - Versteegden , E . E . ( 2009 ) . Evidence of MyomiR network regulation of beta - myosin heavy chain gene expression during skeletal muscle atrophy . Physiol . Genomics 39 , 219 – 226 . McCarthy , J . J . , Mula , J . , Miyazaki , M . , Erfani , R . , Garrison , K . , Farooqui , A . B . , Srikuea , R . , Lawson , B . A . , Grimes , B . , Keller , C . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Effective ﬁber hypertrophy in satellite cell - depleted skeletal muscle . Development 138 , 3657 – 3666 . McGee , S . L . , and Hargreaves , M . ( 2004 ) . Exercise and myocyte enhancer factor 2 regulation in human skeletal muscle . Diabetes 53 , 1208 – 1214 . McGee , S . L . , van Denderen , B . J . , Howlett , K . F . , Mollica , J . , Schertzer , J . D . , Kemp , B . E . , and Hargreaves , M . ( 2008 ) . AMP - activated protein kinase regu - latesGLUT4 transcription by phosphorylatinghistone deacetylase 5 . Diabetes 57 , 860 – 867 . McGee , S . L . , Fairlie , E . , Garnham , A . P . , and Hargreaves , M . ( 2009 ) . Exercise - induced histone modiﬁcations in human skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 587 , 5951 – 5958 . Merrill , G . F . , Kurth , E . J . , Hardie , D . G . , and Winder , W . W . ( 1997 ) . AICA riboside increases AMP - activated protein kinase , fatty acid oxidation , and glucose uptake in rat muscle . Am . J . Physiol . 273 , E1107 – E1112 . Mikines , K . J . , Sonne , B . , Farrell , P . A . , Tronier , B . , and Galbo , H . ( 1988 ) . Effect of physical exercise on sensitivity and responsiveness to insulin in humans . Am . J . Physiol . 254 , E248 – E259 . Moritani , T . , and deVries , H . A . ( 1979 ) . Neural factors versus hypertrophy in the time course of muscle strength gain . Am . J . Phys . Med . 58 , 115 – 130 . Nader , G . A . , andEsser , K . A . ( 2001 ) . Intracellularsignalingspeciﬁcityinskeletal muscle in response to different modes of exercise . J . Appl . Physiol . 90 , 1936 – 1942 . Narkar , V . A . , Downes , M . , Yu , R . T . , Embler , E . , Wang , Y . X . , Banayo , E . , Mihaylova , M . M . , Nelson , M . C . , Zou , Y . , Juguilon , H . , et al . ( 2008 ) . AMPK and PPARdelta agonists are exercise mimetics . Cell 134 , 405 – 415 . Nemoto , S . , Fergusson , M . M . , and Finkel , T . ( 2005 ) . SIRT1 functionally inter - acts with the metabolic regulator and transcriptional coactivator PGC - 1alpha . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 16456 – 16460 . Nielsen , S . , Scheele , C . , Yfanti , C . , Akerstro¨m , T . , Nielsen , A . R . , Pedersen , B . K . , and Laye , M . J . ( 2010 ) . Muscle speciﬁc microRNAs are regulated by endurance exercise in human skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 588 , 4029 – 4037 . O’Connor , R . S . , Pavlath , G . K . , McCarthy , J . J . , and Esser , K . A . ( 2007 ) . Last word on point : counterpoint : satellite cell addition is / is not obligatory for skel - etal muscle hypertrophy . J . Appl . Physiol . 103 , 1107 . O’Gorman , D . J . , Karlsson , H . K . , McQuaid , S . , Yousif , O . , Rahman , Y . , Gasparro , D . , Glund , S . , Chibalin , A . V . , Zierath , J . R . , and Nolan , J . J . ( 2006 ) . Exercise training increases insulin - stimulated glucose disposal and GLUT4 ( SLC2A4 ) protein content in patients with type 2 diabetes . Diabetologia 49 , 2983 – 2992 . O’Neil , T . K . , Duffy , L . R . , Frey , J . W . , and Hornberger , T . A . ( 2009 ) . The role of phosphoinositide3 - kinaseand phosphatidic acidintheregulationof mamma - lian target of rapamycin following eccentric contractions . J . Physiol . 587 , 3691 – 3701 . Pedersen , B . K . , and Febbraio , M . A . ( 2012 ) . Muscles , exercise and obesity : skeletal muscle as a secretory organ . Nat . Rev . Endocrinol . 8 , 457 – 465 . Perry , C . G . , Lally , J . , Holloway , G . P . , Heigenhauser , G . J . , Bonen , A . , and Spriet , L . L . ( 2010 ) . RepeatedtransientmRNAburstsprecedeincreasesintran - scriptional and mitochondrial proteins during training in human skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 588 , 4795 – 4810 . Perseghin , G . , Price , T . B . , Petersen , K . F . , Roden , M . , Cline , G . W . , Gerow , K . , Rothman , D . L . , and Shulman , G . I . ( 1996 ) . Increased glucose transport - phos - phorylation and muscle glycogen synthesis after exercise training in insulin - resistant subjects . N . Engl . J . Med . 335 , 1357 – 1362 . Petersen , A . C . , McKenna , M . J . , Medved , I . , Murphy , K . T . , Brown , M . J . , Della Gatta , P . , and Cameron - Smith , D . ( 2012 ) . Infusion with the antioxidant N - acetylcysteine attenuates early adaptive responses to exercise in human skeletal muscle . Acta Physiol . ( Oxf . ) 204 , 382 – 392 . Petrella , J . K . , Kim , J . S . , Cross , J . M . , Kosek , D . J . , and Bamman , M . M . ( 2006 ) . Efﬁcacy of myonuclear addition may explain differential myoﬁber growth among resistance - trained young and older men and women . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 291 , E937 – E946 . Petrella , J . K . , Kim , J . S . , Mayhew , D . L . , Cross , J . M . , and Bamman , M . M . ( 2008 ) . Potent myoﬁber hypertrophy during resistance training in humans is associatedwithsatellitecell - mediatedmyonuclearaddition : aclusteranalysis . J . Appl . Physiol . 104 , 1736 – 1742 . Phillips , S . M . , Green , H . J . , Tarnopolsky , M . A . , Heigenhauser , G . J . , and Grant , S . M . ( 1996 ) . Progressiveeffectofendurancetrainingonmetabolicadaptations in working skeletal muscle . Am . J . Physiol . 270 , E265 – E272 . Phillips , S . M . , Tipton , K . D . , Aarsland , A . , Wolf , S . E . , and Wolfe , R . R . ( 1997 ) . Mixed muscle protein synthesis and breakdown after resistance exercise in humans . Am . J . Physiol . 273 , E99 – E107 . Philp , A . , Hamilton , D . L . , and Baar , K . ( 2011 ) . Signals mediating skeletal muscle remodeling by resistance exercise : PI3 - kinase independent activation of mTORC1 . J . Appl . Physiol . 110 , 561 – 568 . Pilegaard , H . , Saltin , B . , and Neufer , P . D . ( 2003 ) . Exercise induces transient transcriptional activation of the PGC - 1alpha gene in human skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 546 , 851 – 858 . Podolsky , R . J . , and Schoenberg , M . ( 1983 ) . Force generation and shortening in skeletal muscle . In Handbook of Physiology , Section 10 : Skeletal Muscle , L . D . Peachy , R . H . Adrian , and S . R . Geiger , eds . ( Bethesda , MD : American Physiological Society ) , pp . 173 – 188 . Pogozelski , A . R . , Geng , T . , Li , P . , Yin , X . , Lira , V . A . , Zhang , M . , Chi , J . T . , and Yan , Z . ( 2009 ) . p38gamma mitogen - activated protein kinase is a key regulator 182 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review inskeletalmusclemetabolicadaptationinmice . PLoSONE 4 , e7934 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0007934 . Powers , S . K . , Criswell , D . , Lawler , J . , Ji , L . L . , Martin , D . , Herb , R . A . , and Dudley , G . ( 1994 ) . Inﬂuence of exercise and ﬁber type on antioxidant enzyme activity in rat skeletal muscle . Am . J . Physiol . 266 , R375 – R380 . Powers , S . K . , Duarte , J . , Kavazis , A . N . , and Talbert , E . E . ( 2010 ) . Reactive oxygen species are signalling molecules for skeletal muscle adaptation . Exp . Physiol . 95 , 1 – 9 . Puigserver , P . , Rhee , J . , Lin , J . , Wu , Z . , Yoon , J . C . , Zhang , C . Y . , Krauss , S . , Mootha , V . K . , Lowell , B . B . , andSpiegelman , B . M . ( 2001 ) . Cytokinestimulation of energy expenditure through p38 MAP kinase activation of PPARgamma coactivator - 1 . Mol . Cell 8 , 971 – 982 . Raney , M . A . , andTurcotte , L . P . ( 2008 ) . EvidencefortheinvolvementofCaMKII and AMPK in Ca2 + - dependent signaling pathways regulating FA uptake and oxidation in contracting rodent muscle . J . Appl . Physiol . 104 , 1366 – 1373 . Raue , U . , Trappe , T . A . , Estrem , S . T . , Qian , H . R . , Helvering , L . M . , Smith , R . C . , andTrappe , S . ( 2012 ) . Transcriptomesignatureofresistanceexercise adapta - tions : mixed muscle and ﬁber type speciﬁc proﬁles in young and old adults . J . Appl . Physiol . 112 , 1625 – 1636 . Rennie , M . J . , Wackerhage , H . , Spangenburg , E . E . , and Booth , F . W . ( 2004 ) . Control of the size of the human muscle mass . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 66 , 799 – 828 . Richardson , R . S . , Noyszewski , E . A . , Kendrick , K . F . , Leigh , J . S . , and Wagner , P . D . ( 1995 ) . Myoglobin O2 desaturation during exercise . Evidence of limited O2 transport . J . Clin . Invest . 96 , 1916 – 1926 . Romijn , J . A . , Coyle , E . F . , Sidossis , L . S . , Gastaldelli , A . , Horowitz , J . F . , Endert , E . , and Wolfe , R . R . ( 1993 ) . Regulation of endogenous fat and carbohydrate metabolism in relation to exercise intensity and duration . Am . J . Physiol . 265 , E380 – E391 . Rose , A . J . , Kiens , B . , and Richter , E . A . ( 2006 ) . Ca2 + - calmodulin - dependent protein kinase expression and signalling in skeletal muscle during exercise . J . Physiol . 574 , 889 – 903 . Safdar , A . , Bourgeois , J . M . , Ogborn , D . I . , Little , J . P . , Hettinga , B . P . , Akhtar , M . , Thompson , J . E . , Melov , S . , Mocellin , N . J . , Kujoth , G . C . , et al . ( 2011a ) . Enduranceexerciserescuesprogeroidagingandinduces systemicmitochon - drial rejuvenation in mtDNA mutator mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 4135 – 4140 . Safdar , A . , Little , J . P . , Stokl , A . J . , Hettinga , B . P . , Akhtar , M . , and Tarnopolsky , M . A . ( 2011b ) . Exercise increases mitochondrial PGC - 1alpha content and promotes nuclear - mitochondrial cross - talk to coordinate mitochondrial biogenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 10605 – 10617 . Sahlin , K . , Katz , A . , and Henriksson , J . ( 1987 ) . Redox state and lactate accu - mulation in human skeletal muscle during dynamic exercise . Biochem . J . 245 , 551 – 556 . Sale , D . G . ( 1987 ) . Inﬂuence of exercise and training on motor unit activation . Exerc . Sport Sci . Rev . 15 , 95 – 151 . Sale , D . G . ( 1988 ) . Neural adaptation to resistance training . Med . Sci . Sports Exerc . 20 ( Suppl . ) , S135 – S145 . Saltin , B . , and Gollnick , P . D . ( 1983 ) . Skeletal muscle adaptability : signiﬁcance for metabolism and performance . In Handbook of Physiology , Section 10 : Skeletal Muscle , L . D . Peachy , R . H . Adrian , and S . R . Geiger , eds . ( Bethesda , MD : American Physiological Society ) , pp . 555 – 631 . Sandri , M . ( 2008 ) . Signaling in muscle atrophy and hypertrophy . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 23 , 160 – 170 . Sandri , M . , Sandri , C . , Gilbert , A . , Skurk , C . , Calabria , E . , Picard , A . , Walsh , K . , Schiafﬁno , S . , Lecker , S . H . , and Goldberg , A . L . ( 2004 ) . Foxo transcription factorsinducetheatrophy - relatedubiquitinligaseatrogin - 1andcauseskeletal muscle atrophy . Cell 117 , 399 – 412 . Schenk , S . , and Horowitz , J . F . ( 2007 ) . Acute exercise increases triglyceride synthesis in skeletal muscle and prevents fatty acid - induced insulin resis - tance . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 1690 – 1698 . Schiafﬁno , S . , and Reggiani , C . ( 2011 ) . Fiber types in mammalian skeletal muscles . Physiol . Rev . 91 , 1447 – 1531 . Schmutz , S . , Da¨pp , C . , Wittwer , M . , Vogt , M . , Hoppeler , H . , and Flu¨ck , M . ( 2006 ) . Endurance training modulates the muscular transcriptome response to acute exercise . Pﬂugers Arch . 451 , 678 – 687 . Schwer , B . , and Verdin , E . ( 2008 ) . Conserved metabolic regulatory functions of sirtuins . Cell Metab . 7 , 104 – 112 . Sigal , R . J . , Kenny , G . P . , Boule´ , N . G . , Wells , G . A . , Prud’homme , D . , Fortier , M . , Reid , R . D . , Tulloch , H . , Coyle , D . , Phillips , P . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Effects of aerobic training , resistance training , or both on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes : a randomized trial . Ann . Intern . Med . 147 , 357 – 369 . Spina , R . J . , Chi , M . M . , Hopkins , M . G . , Nemeth , P . M . , Lowry , O . H . , and Holloszy , J . O . ( 1996 ) . Mitochondrial enzymes increase in muscle in response to 7 – 10 days of cycle exercise . J . Appl . Physiol . 80 , 2250 – 2254 . Spriet , L . L . , and Watt , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Regulatory mechanisms in the interaction between carbohydrate and lipid oxidation during exercise . Acta Physiol . Scand . 178 , 443 – 452 . Stellingwerff , T . , Boon , H . , Jonkers , R . A . , Senden , J . M . , Spriet , L . L . , Koopman , R . , and van Loon , L . J . ( 2007 ) . Signiﬁcant intramyocellular lipid use during pro - longed cycling in endurance - trained males as assessed by three different methodologies . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 292 , E1715 – E1723 . Talanian , J . L . , Holloway , G . P . , Snook , L . A . , Heigenhauser , G . J . , Bonen , A . , and Spriet , L . L . ( 2010 ) . Exercise training increases sarcolemmal and mitochondrial fattyacidtransportproteinsinhumanskeletalmuscle . Am . J . Physiol . Endocri - nol . Metab . 299 , E180 – E188 . Taylor , C . T . ( 2008 ) . Mitochondria and cellular oxygen sensing in the HIF pathway . Biochem . J . 409 , 19 – 26 . Terzis , G . , Georgiadis , G . , Stratakos , G . , Vogiatzis , I . , Kavouras , S . , Manta , P . , Mascher , H . , and Blomstrand , E . ( 2008 ) . Resistance exercise - induced increase in muscle mass correlates with p70S6 kinase phosphorylation in human subjects . Eur . J . Appl . Physiol . 102 , 145 – 152 . Timmons , J . A . , Knudsen , S . , Rankinen , T . , Koch , L . G . , Sarzynski , M . , Jensen , T . , Keller , P . , Scheele , C . , Vollaard , N . B . , Nielsen , S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Using molecular classiﬁcation to predict gains in maximal aerobic capacity following endurance exercise training in humans . J . Appl . Physiol . 108 , 1487 – 1496 . Tremblay , A . , Simoneau , J . A . , and Bouchard , C . ( 1994 ) . Impact of exercise intensity on body fatness and skeletal muscle metabolism . Metabolism 43 , 814 – 818 . van Loon , L . J . , Greenhaff , P . L . , Constantin - Teodosiu , D . , Saris , W . H . , and Wagenmakers , A . J . ( 2001 ) . The effects of increasing exercise intensity on muscle fuel utilisation in humans . J . Physiol . 536 , 295 – 304 . van Loon , L . J . , Koopman , R . , Stegen , J . H . , Wagenmakers , A . J . , Keizer , H . A . , and Saris , W . H . ( 2003 ) . Intramyocellular lipids form an important substrate source during moderate intensity exercise in endurance - trained males in a fasted state . J . Physiol . 553 , 611 – 625 . van Rooij , E . , Quiat , D . , Johnson , B . A . , Sutherland , L . B . , Qi , X . , Richardson , J . A . , Kelm , R . J . , Jr . , and Olson , E . N . ( 2009 ) . A family of microRNAs encoded by myosin genes governs myosin expression and muscle performance . Dev . Cell 17 , 662 – 673 . Vogt , M . , Puntschart , A . , Geiser , J . , Zuleger , C . , Billeter , R . , and Hoppeler , H . ( 2001 ) . Molecular adaptations in human skeletal muscle to endurance training under simulated hypoxic conditions . J . Appl . Physiol . 91 , 173 – 182 . Vollaard , N . B . , Constantin - Teodosiu , D . , Fredriksson , K . , Rooyackers , O . , Jansson , E . , Greenhaff , P . L . , Timmons , J . A . , and Sundberg , C . J . ( 2009 ) . Systematic analysis of adaptations in aerobic capacity and submaximal energy metabolism provides a unique insight into determinants of human aerobic performance . J . Appl . Physiol . 106 , 1479 – 1486 . Wagenmakers , A . J . , Beckers , E . J . , Brouns , F . , Kuipers , H . , Soeters , P . B . , van der Vusse , G . J . , and Saris , W . H . ( 1991 ) . Carbohydrate supplementation , glycogen depletion , and amino acid metabolism during exercise . Am . J . Phys - iol . 260 , E883 – E890 . Wang , Q . , and McPherron , A . C . ( 2012 ) . Myostatin inhibition induces muscle ﬁbre hypertrophy prior to satellite cell activation . J . Physiol . 590 , 2151 – 2165 . Wang , Y . X . , Zhang , C . L . , Yu , R . T . , Cho , H . K . , Nelson , M . C . , Bayuga - Ocampo , C . R . , Ham , J . , Kang , H . , and Evans , R . M . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of muscle ﬁber type and running endurance by PPARdelta . PLoS Biol . 2 , e294 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020294 . Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 183 Cell Metabolism Review Watt , M . J . , and Spriet , L . L . ( 2010 ) . Triacylglycerol lipases and metabolic control : implicationsforhealthanddisease . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 299 , E162 – E168 . Wende , A . R . , Schaeffer , P . J . , Parker , G . J . , Zechner , C . , Han , D . H . , Chen , M . M . , Hancock , C . R . , Lehman , J . J . , Huss , J . M . , McClain , D . A . , et al . ( 2007 ) . A role for the transcriptional coactivator PGC - 1alpha in muscle refueling . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 36642 – 36651 . Whitham , M . , Chan , M . H . , Pal , M . , Matthews , V . B . , Prelovsek , O . , Lunke , S . , El - Osta , A . , Broenneke , H . , Alber , J . , Bru¨ning , J . C . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Contrac - tion - induced interleukin - 6 gene transcription in skeletal muscle is regulated byc - Junterminalkinase / activatorprotein - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 10771 – 10779 . Widrick , J . J . , Stelzer , J . E . , Shoepe , T . C . , and Garner , D . P . ( 2002 ) . Functional properties of human muscle ﬁbers after short - term resistance exercise training . Am . J . Physiol . Regul . Integr . Comp . Physiol . 283 , R408 – R416 . Wilkinson , S . B . , Phillips , S . M . , Atherton , P . J . , Patel , R . , Yarasheski , K . E . , Tarnopolsky , M . A . , and Rennie , M . J . ( 2008 ) . Differential effects of resistance and endurance exercise in the fed state on signalling molecule phosphoryla - tion and protein synthesis in human muscle . J . Physiol . 586 , 3701 – 3717 . Winder , W . W . , andHardie , D . G . ( 1996 ) . Inactivationofacetyl - CoAcarboxylase and activation ofAMP - activatedprotein kinase inmuscle duringexercise . Am . J . Physiol . 270 , E299 – E304 . Wojtaszewski , J . F . , Nielsen , P . , Hansen , B . F . , Richter , E . A . , and Kiens , B . ( 2000 ) . Isoform - speciﬁc and exercise intensity - dependent activation of 5 0 - AMP - activated protein kinase in human skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 528 , 221 – 226 . Wolfe , R . R . , Klein , S . , Carraro , F . , and Weber , J . M . ( 1990 ) . Role of triglyceride - fatty acid cycle in controlling fat metabolism in humans during and after exer - cise . Am . J . Physiol . 258 , E382 – E389 . Wong , T . S . , and Booth , F . W . ( 1990 ) . Protein metabolism in rat gastrocnemius muscle after stimulated chronic concentric exercise . J . Appl . Physiol . 69 , 1709 – 1717 . Wretman , C . , Lionikas , A . , Widegren , U . , La¨nnergren , J . , Westerblad , H . , and Henriksson , J . ( 2001 ) . Effects of concentric and eccentric contractions on phosphorylation of MAPK ( erk1 / 2 ) and MAPK ( p38 ) in isolated rat skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 535 , 155 – 164 . Wright , D . C . , Hucker , K . A . , Holloszy , J . O . , and Han , D . H . ( 2004 ) . Ca2 + and AMPK both mediate stimulation of glucose transport by muscle contractions . Diabetes 53 , 330 – 335 . Wright , D . C . , Han , D . H . , Garcia - Roves , P . M . , Geiger , P . C . , Jones , T . E . , and Holloszy , J . O . ( 2007 ) . Exercise - induced mitochondrial biogenesis begins before the increase in muscle PGC - 1alpha expression . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 194 – 199 . Wu , Z . , Puigserver , P . , Andersson , U . , Zhang , C . , Adelmant , G . , Mootha , V . , Troy , A . , Cinti , S . , Lowell , B . , Scarpulla , R . C . , and Spiegelman , B . M . ( 1999 ) . Mechanisms controlling mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration through the thermogenic coactivator PGC - 1 . Cell 98 , 115 – 124 . Wu , H . , Kanatous , S . B . , Thurmond , F . A . , Gallardo , T . , Isotani , E . , Bassel - Duby , R . , and Williams , R . S . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle by CaMK . Science 296 , 349 – 352 . Yu , M . , Blomstrand , E . , Chibalin , A . V . , Krook , A . , and Zierath , J . R . ( 2001 ) . Marathon running increases ERK1 / 2 and p38 MAP kinase signalling to down - stream targets in human skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 536 , 273 – 282 . Yu , M . , Stepto , N . K . , Chibalin , A . V . , Fryer , L . G . , Carling , D . , Krook , A . , Hawley , J . A . , and Zierath , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Metabolic and mitogenic signal transduction in humanskeletalmuscleafterintensecyclingexercise . J . Physiol . 546 , 327 – 335 . Zurlo , F . , Larson , K . , Bogardus , C . , and Ravussin , E . ( 1990 ) . Skeletal muscle metabolism is a major determinant of resting energy expenditure . J . Clin . Invest . 86 , 1423 – 1427 . 184 Cell Metabolism 17 , February 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Cell Metabolism Review