Review Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior Jane X . Wang a , Neal J . Cohen b , Joel L . Voss a , ⇑ a Department of Medical Social Sciences , Ken & Ruth Davee Department of Neurology , and Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program , Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine , Chicago , IL , United States b Department of Psychology , Neuroscience Program , and Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology , University of Illinois Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , IL , United States a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 16 September 2013 Revised 4 March 2014 Accepted 3 April 2014 Available online xxxx Keywords : Learning Memory Decision - making Hippocampus Prefrontal cortex Simulation Imagination Adaptive function a b s t r a c t Effective choices generally require memory , yet little is known regarding the cognitive or neural mechanisms that allow memory to inﬂuence choices . We outline a new framework proposing that covert memory processing of hippocampus interacts with action - generation processing of prefrontal cortex in order to arrive at optimal , memory - guided choices . Covert , rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) is proposed here as a framework for understanding cognitive and / or behavioral choices , whereby prefrontal – hippocampal interactions quickly provide multiple simulations of potential outcomes used to evaluate the set of possible choices . We hypothesize that this CRAMS process is automatic , obligatory , and covert , meaning that many cycles of action - memory simulation occur in response to choice conﬂict without an individual’s necessary intention and generally without awareness of the simulations , leading to adaptive behavior with little perceived effort . CRAMS is thus distinct from inﬂuential proposals that adaptive memory - based behavior in humans requires consciously experienced memory - based construction of possible future scenarios and deliberate decisions among possible future constructions . CRAMS provides an account of why hippocampus has been shown to make critical contributions to the short - term control of behavior , and it motivates several new experimental approaches and hypotheses that could be used to better understand the ubiquitous role of prefrontal – hippocampal interactions in situations that require adaptively using memory to guide choices . Importantly , this framework provides a perspective that allows for testing decision - making mechanisms in a manner that translates well across human and nonhuman animal model systems . (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . 1 . Overview Although people often consider memory as merely the capabil - ity that allows us to relive past experiences and recognize whether other individuals or places are familiar , the utility of memory is far greater . Knowledge of past experiences is critical for deciding how to behave in the present and perhaps how plan for the future . Indeed , many current theories emphasize the role of memory in constructing , imagining , and preparing for future events ( Addis & Schacter , 2011 ; Buckner , 2010 ; Buckner & Carroll , 2007 ; Eichenbaum & Fortin , 2009 ; Schacter et al . , 2012 ; van der Meer , Kurth - Nelson , & Redish , 2012 ) . Memory thus allows us to tailor our current and future behavior based on our personal history . Indeed , damage to structures that support memory , such as the hippocampus , can seriously impair the ability to plan for and imag - ine the future ( Maguire , Vargha - Khadem , & Hassabis , 2010 ; Race , Keane , & Verfaellie , 2013 , but see Squire et al . , 2010 ) . This review will extend this line of thinking a step further by proposing a mechanism whereby memory is critical to the translation of past experience into current adaptive behavior . We propose that the hippocampus makes necessary contributions to the determination of how to behave ‘‘in the moment’’ , and that it does so via iterative interactivity with prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) that unfolds as choices are made to determine immediately forthcoming behavior . Fur - ther , as described below , we propose that this process can occur covertly , without conscious awareness of memory retrieval or the feeling of deliberate control of choices , such that memory can be rapidly accessed and used to make in - the - moment choices without encumbrance by conscious memory recollection or by deliberation . The essence of our proposal is that , when faced with uncer - tainty about how to behave , such as when one cannot decide http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 1074 - 7427 / (cid:2) 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author . Address : Laboratory for Human Neuroscience , Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine , 303 E . Chicago Ave , 19th Floor , Chicago , IL 60611 , United States . E - mail address : joel - voss @ northwestern . edu ( J . L . Voss ) . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Neurobiology of Learning and Memory journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / ynlme Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 whether to take a leftward versus a rightward path to a goal loca - tion , the PFC ( particularly anterior and / or lateral PFC ) bombards the hippocampus with possible plans for action ( e . g . , turn left or turn right ) . Subsequently , these action plans serve as signals to hippocampus that cue simulated outcomes of each possible action , in the form of covertly retrieved previous experiences or associated memories . For example , simulated outcomes might be based on memory that a leftward turn from the current point led home once before , on memory for other experiences that occurred in proxim - ity to home and therefore provide relevant directional information , or on general spatial or experiential knowledge regarding the loca - tion of home . The behavior that is selected is thus based on the match between the outcome of simulated experiences and current desired goals ( e . g . , getting home in a reasonable time ) . Further - more , because most real - world behavioral choices involve ongoing selections among numerous competing options , each with many associated past experiences , this process would entail extremely rapid simulation of many options before arriving at the choice . Our proposal is thus that PFC and hippocampus interact via covert , rapid action - memory simulation , or ‘‘ CRAMS ’’ in order to arrive at ongoing behavioral choices , and that this process is automatic , obligatory , and covert ( or ‘‘implicit’’ ) in most circumstances . We particularly emphasize the covert nature of this simulation . Many have previously considered the role of PFC and hippocampus in various forms of simulation , including self - projection and con - struction of future events using elements of previous experiences in memory ( Buckner & Carroll , 2007 ; Schacter & Addis , 2007 ; Schacter , Addis , & Buckner , 2008 ) . In CRAMS , ‘‘simulation’’ is cov - ert , including hippocampal - dependent covert retrieval and con - struction of possible event outcomes based on PFC action cues . Therefore , in contrast to a psychological experience , we thus refer to ‘‘simulation’’ as the covert activation of neural ensembles involved in episodic memory that can be rapidly generated and evaluated on the short timescales necessary to support decisions during ongoing behavior . CRAMS thus provides an account of why the hippocampus is so crucial to the performance of mem - ory - guided behaviors transpiring entirely within these brief time - frames that occur more rapidly and with different dynamics than the psychological experience of imagining future events . In addi - tion , it encapsulates how the PFC is able to judiciously exert ‘‘top - down’’ control of behavior when contextual or rule - based responding is required . Substantial evidence implicates the hippocampus and PFC in guiding ongoing behavior . We will ﬁrst review this evidence and offer some suggestions about how the properties of these struc - tures are particularly well suited to the kind of rapid , automatic , obligatory , and covert processing that we envision as necessary for CRAMS . We will then explicate the CRAMS proposal and give speciﬁc examples of the adaptive behaviors that it can support in humans and in nonhuman animals . Finally , we will describe sev - eral ramiﬁcations of the CRAMS proposal for theories of memory and decision - making and describe possible experimental routes for testing the key tenets of CRAMS . 2 . The hippocampus : Obligatory relational binding and retrieval supporting multiple cognitive functions The hippocampus has long been known as a critical site for pro - cessing relevant to explicit , or declarative , memory ( Baddeley & Warrington , 1970 ; Cohen & Squire , 1980 ; Scoville & Milner , 1957 ) . The relational theory of hippocampal function ( Cohen & Eichenbaum , 1993 ; Eichenbaum & Cohen , 2001 ; Konkel & Cohen , 2009 ; Konkel , Warren , Duff , Tranel , & Cohen , 2008 ) provides a neurobiological mechanism for the role of the hippocampus in memory and has received broad experimental support . In short , relational memory theory proposes that the hippocampus binds the elements of experience into relational / associative representa - tions . That is , discrete , perceptually distinct components of experi - ence ( such as the features of a scene or the individual occurrences that comprise an episode ) are linked into a network of arbitrary associations that can be partially or fully reconstituted at a later time ( Konkel & Cohen , 2009 ; for similar theories , see Mayes , Montaldi , & Migo , 2007 ; Ranganath , 2010 ; Yonelinas , 2013 ) . Because of its fundamental role in relational binding , the hippo - campus is important for all manner of cognitive functions that require handling of relations among elements , including language , attention , high - level perception , etc . ( reviewed in Olsen , Moses , Riggs , & Ryan , 2012 ) . Recent experiments have demonstrated an important extension of the role of the hippocampus in relational binding that is relevant to our proposal of hippocampal involvement in ongoing control of behavior and the nature of its interaction with PFC . These experi - ments have indicated that the hippocampus is necessary for short - term or ‘‘in - the - moment’’ memory processing . Early work in this area showed the role of the hippocampus in expressions of short - term memory . For instance , hippocampal activity corre - lates with maintenance of new associations over short delays ( Ranganath & D’Esposito , 2001 ) , and hippocampal lesions produce relational memory deﬁcits even for delays as brief as several sec - onds ( Hannula , Tranel , & Cohen , 2006 ) . More recent evidence has shown critical hippocampal involvement at even shorter delays and evidence for ‘‘in the moment’’ impairment . Warren , Duff , Tranel , and Cohen ( 2010 ) tested MTL amnesic patients and matched controls on a perceptual search and match task with sim - ple visual stimuli . They showed that when the target object and search array were presented simultaneously , amnesics performed no differently from control subjects . However , when a brief 6 - s delay was introduced between the target object and search array , amnesics were signiﬁcantly impaired compared to controls , sug - gesting that MTL contributes to the maintenance of even very sim - ple stimuli over short delays and that this maintenance begins to decay almost immediately . Further work by Watson , Voss , Warren , Tranel , and Cohen ( 2013 ) indicated that the short - term deﬁcits of hippocampal amnesics are especially pronounced for arbitrary relations among features of an experience . Amnesic subjects displayed profound deﬁcits in spatial reconstruction of object conﬁgurations a mere four seconds after study . By analyzing the different types of errors that could be made during reconstruction , Watson et al . found evidence for disproportionate impairment in ‘‘swap’’ errors that indicate poor relational memory . That is , errors during the recon - struction of the spatial layout of several objects can include mis - placing objects such that they occupy generally incorrect spatial conﬁgurations ( e . g . , if three objects were studied with locations that form the vertices of a right triangle , general location errors could include expansion of the size of the triangle or placing objects to form an equilateral triangle ) . Hippocampal amnesics were mildly impaired in general spatial conﬁguration reconstruc - tion relative to controls . In contrast , ‘‘swap’’ errors occurred when conﬁgurations were generally correct , but two or more objects switched locations . For instance , if objects A , B , and C were studied at triangle vertices V 1 , V 2 , and V 3 , respectively , reconstruction of vertex locations would be accurate such that the same triangle conﬁguration resulted , yet object A would occupy V 2 and object B would occupy V 1 , thus indicating a ‘‘swap’’ of objects A and B . This error type is especially indicative of a deﬁcit in relational memory because the overall spatial layout is intact , yet the subject fails to demonstrate memory for the arbitrary binding between each object and each possible location ( e . g . , between A and V 1 and between B and V 2 , despite accurate memory for V 1 and V 2 loca - tions ) . Swap errors were signiﬁcantly disproportionate relative to 2 J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 general conﬁguration errors in hippocampal amnesics even when only two objects were studied and then tested four seconds later . In contrast , control subjects rarely made swap errors . Taken with the evidence reviewed above , these ﬁndings constitute compelling evidence for the necessary role of the hippocampus and MTL in the short - term maintenance of relational information . An additional aspect of hippocampal function relevant to our proposed role of the hippocampus in ongoing control of behavior is that all manner of event elements are bound automatically and obligatorily by hippocampus into relational representations , and are then retrieved automatically and obligatorily when given appropriate cues . For instance , Wimmer and Shohamy ( 2012 ) found that the hippocampus can support object preferences via ‘‘guilt by associa - tion . ’’ That is , objects that were never rewarded but had been cov - ertly associated with other objects that were rewarded were later valued more highly than if these objects were covertly associated with other unrewarded objects . Hippocampal activity supported the binding and retrieval of this covert associative value , despite lack of awareness on the part of participants that there was any association with reward . Thus , the hippocampus bound value to objects despite only indirect association , and this value was retrieved when given the associative cue , despite no possible intention on the part of the subject to retrieve this information ( due to lack of awareness ) . Importantly , partial cues ( i . e . , one frag - ment of the several information sources that were bound into a relational representation ) were sufﬁcient to retrieve any and all associated information , presumably via pattern completion ( Norman & O’Reilly , 2003 ; Rolls , 1996 ) . Other similar demonstra - tions of automatic and obligatory hippocampal processing have been demonstrated for the binding and covert retrieval of hidden statistical regularities ( Schapiro , Kustner , & Turk - Browne , 2012 ; Turk - Browne , Scholl , Johnson , & Chun , 2010 ) and associations between arbitrary stimulus pairings ( Hannula & Ranganath , 2009 ; Hannula , Ryan , Tranel , & Cohen , 2007 ; Hannula et al . , 2006 ) . The emerging conclusion from these studies is that the hip - pocampus binds all associative / relational information automati - cally and obligatorily , and then retrieves these associations when given a cue , without any necessary intention or awareness on the part of the experimental subject ( Hannula & Greene , 2012 ) . Here we propose that the automatic , obligatory , and covert binding and retrieval processing by the hippocampus results in its critical participation in many aspects of ongoing behavior . Hip - pocampal - dependent memory , accumulated from past experi - ences , can be brought to bear on the current behavioral choice that must be made . Furthermore , because relevant cues , even par - tial ones , can elicit this information from hippocampus obligatorily ( via processes such as pattern completion ) and because retrieval can occur covertly , the information needed for simulation of future possible events can be obtained in a manner that is seamless with behavior and without deliberate retrieval of conscious experience . Indeed , it is unlikely that hippocampal contributions to ongoing behavior rely on deliberate choices made based on overt retrieval , given that choices must be made on timescales too rapid for such deliberation based on conscious awareness of memory retrieval . Although the hippocampus can rapidly and covertly provide access to relevant information during ongoing behavior , appropriate sig - nals must be established elsewhere to automatically and obligato - rily cue this information , and next we consider the role of PFC in providing such signals . 3 . Role of PFC in rule - based , contextual , and other adaptive behaviors The lateral and anterior / frontopolar PFC ( referred to here as ‘‘PFC’’ ) has long been recognized as the seat of ‘‘executive’’ functions such as decision - making ( Fuster , 2008 ) , working mem - ory ( Goldman - Rakic , 1987 ; Miller , 2000 ; Miller & Cohen , 2001 ) , supervisory attentional control ( Shallice & Burgess , 1991 ) , inhibi - tory control ( Shimamura , 1995 ) , temporal ordering and organiza - tion ( Fuster , 1995 , 1997 ; Kesner , Hopkins , & Fineman , 1994 ; Milner , Petrides , & Smith , 1985 ) , organization and monitoring of information ( Johnson , Hashtroudi , & Lindsay , 1993 ; Petrides , 1996 ) , and the implementation of context - dependent or abstract rules ( Wallis , Anderson , & Miller , 2001 ; White & Wise , 1999 ) . Fur - ther , PFC has been heavily implicated in maintenance of task - rele - vant information in a manner resistant to distraction irrelevant to behavioral goals ( Miller , Erickson , & Desimone , 1996 ) . Lesions of PFC cause deﬁcits in tasks that require cognitive ﬂexibility , such as set shifting ( Dias , Robbins , & Roberts , 1996 ; Moore , Schettler , Killiany , Rosene , & Moss , 2009 ; Rossi , Bichot , Desimone , & Ungerleider , 2007 ) . Patients with PFC damage do not generally have severe memory impairments , but deﬁcits are apparent when memory for target information must be obtained under a variety of conditions of interference or distraction ( Kuhl & Wagner , 2009 ) . Miller and Cohen ( 2001 ) proposed an inﬂuential theory that PFC supports context - dependent or rule - based responding by exerting context - speciﬁc top - down inﬂuence on other brain regions via selective excitation . This context - speciﬁc excitation can sustain task - relevant information and ﬁlter task - irrelevant information processed by other more specialized systems . For instance , PFC deactivation via cortical cooling attenuates the response of parietal cortex to task - relevant cues ( Chafee & Goldman - Rakic , 2000 ) , indi - cating that PFC normally enhances parietal responsivity to these cues ( Lee & D’Esposito , 2012 ) . Context - speciﬁcity and top - down control by PFC is important for the acquisition and expression of context - and rule - based responding that shapes perception ( Rainer , Rao , & Miller , 1999 ) , action ( Asaad , Rainer , & Miller , 2000 ) , and cognitive choices ( Asaad et al . , 2000 ; Wallis et al . , 2001 ; White & Wise , 1999 ) . For instance , in an experiment con - ducted by White and Wise ( 1999 ) , a rhesus monkey was trained on two types of cued target - selection trials , one governed by a spa - tial rule ( cue location predicted target location ) and the other guided by an associative rule ( cue identity predicted target loca - tion , regardless of cue location ) . A signiﬁcant fraction of neurons recorded in the PFC showed selectivity for the rule condition , indi - cating that PFC represents abstract rules of behavior rather than speciﬁc stimuli or motor acts ( Asaad et al . , 2000 ) . Substantial evidence thus indicates that PFC can guide context - or rule - dependent behavior ; i . e . , the PFC is critically involved in sorting among the many possible behaviors available in order to select the action most likely to produce a positive outcome in a given circumstance . It is important to emphasize , however , that in studies of rule - and context - based responding by lateral PFC neurons , nonhuman animals require extensive training ( typically months in nonhuman primates ) to establish these response prop - erties . Likewise , rule - and context - based responding in humans is generally demonstrated in circumstances with which the individ - ual has substantial prior general experience . Some evidence sug - gests that PFC learns rule - and context - based responding through integration of action - outcome relationships over multiple experi - ences , such as when subjects are required to integrate across either time or multiple outcomes in a goal - oriented task or when making a decision ( Asaad , Rainer , & Miller , 1998 ; Cohen et al . , 1997 ) . Inte - gration over multiple contingencies allows the PFC to discern sta - tistical regularities in order to extract general principles or rules . Some regions of PFC ( e . g . , frontopolar cortex ) are particularly involved in integrating information across multiple examples of a similar event in order to support this kind of learning ( Badre & Wagner , 2004 ; Crescentini et al . , 2011 ; Green , Fugelsang , Kraemer , Shamosh , & Dunbar , 2006 ; Yarkoni , Braver , Gray , & Green , 2005a ; Yarkoni et al . , 2005b ) . Indeed , PFC networks appear J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 3 Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 to be in a constant state of spatiotemporal evolution , capable of integrating and processing incoming information in an online fash - ion in the service of goal - relevant decision - making ( Buonomano & Maass , 2009 ) . Nonetheless , there is relatively little work showing how PFC functions before rule - and context - based action - outcome associa - tions have been learned via extensive training . That is , how does PFC contribute to the online guidance of behavior before context - dependent rules have been strongly learned ? Thus , we next consider a putative means by which PFC processing could contribute to ongoing behavior without prior establishment of rules for respond - ing in a given situation ( i . e . in a relatively novel situation ) . Although PFC is often discussed in light of executive function and deliberate ‘‘top - down’’ responding , we emphasize that , as an extension of the cortical motor control system , it is also involved more directly in the planning and execution of complex actions ( Fuster , 2008 ; Tanji & Hoshi , 2008 ) . It is in this capacity that we consider PFC to take part in ongoing behavioral control without any strong prior establishment of rule - and context - based responding . Lateral PFC neurons are critically involved in generat - ing actions that lead to goal states ( Mushiake , Saito , Sakamoto , Itoyama , & Tanji , 2006 ; Tanji & Hoshi , 2001 ) , and action - planning capabilities have been proposed as the core ‘‘building blocks’’ by which executive functions are supported ( Hoshi & Tanji , 2004 ; Tanji & Hoshi , 2008 ) . Indeed , there is strong evidence for organiza - tion of human PFC according to the representation of actions , with a posterior to anterior gradient along the lateral surface reﬂecting increased complexity and / or novelty of action complexity ( Badre & D’Esposito , 2009 ; Wood & Grafman , 2003 ) . Critically , during the preparatory period preceding a complex , sequential action , lateral PFC neurons display sequential activity of each action component ( i . e . , ﬁring related to the movements required at each step of the action ) , and furthermore this activity reﬂects many possible forth - coming actions , not just the one action that will be ultimately per - formed ( Mushiake et al . , 2006 ) . This response proﬁle indicates that action - planning neurons of lateral PFC generate possible behav - ioral options during periods of forced quiescence before behavior , suggesting that , under normal circumstances , PFC neurons engage in the generation of multiple possible behaviors prior to a behav - ioral choice . We propose that this ability to plan and generate activity pat - terns of potential forthcoming actions prior to actual behavior pro - vides a means by which PFC can coordinate ongoing behavior . That is , even as rule - or context - based responses are in the process of being established via the reinforcement that occurs during exten - sive training , PFC likely must simulate potential actions from the large set of possibilities afforded by the situation . When faced with several competing behaviors that could be performed in order to obtain a goal ( e . g . , moving left versus right into a corridor ) , PFC neurons can generate relevant action plans before the behavior occurs ( as in Mushiake et al . , 2006 ; see also Saito , Mushiake , Sakamoto , Itoyama , & Tanji , 2005 ) . Before execution , in order to arrive at a decision for action , evidence must be used to evaluate and compare the multiple generated action plans in terms of how likely they are to produce the desired goal . In the case of a lab - oratory task involving a small set of actions that have been per - formed previously and individually associated with different rewards or outcomes , these experiences provide a repertoire of knowledge regarding action - outcome contingencies that could be easily used to select the best action ( see Kurth - Nelson , Bickel , & Redish , 2012 for an account of search among options in action - reward learning ) . In circumstances with higher novelty or uncertainty , another source of evidence is the collection of past experiences that involve similar / associated events , contexts , and actions . Therefore , in these cases , the generated action plans would need to interact with memory of experiences that are only indirectly related to the current situation in order to support the selection of the best action . 4 . The CRAMS proposal Our CRAMS proposal brings together these two lines of thinking about the role of hippocampus and PFC in adaptive behavior as fol - lows : By virtue of its automatic and obligatory role in binding rela - tions and covertly retrieving any and all relevant relational representations in response to a cue ( or partial cue ) , the hippocam - pus serves as a vast resource of knowledge relevant to the choices that must be made during behavior . The PFC solicits this informa - tion by providing the hippocampus with multiple cues that are rel - evant to the current choice in the form of potential action plans generated prior to action execution . In a situation requiring a choice among multiple alternatives , the PFC sequentially generates the action plans that would be needed in order to pursue each alternative ( see above ) . These multiple action plans serve to sequentially bombard the hippocampus with cues that activate any related information in memory , due to the automatic and obligatory nature of relational retrieval by hippocampus . Further , because hippocampal reactivation can be covert , i . e . , without awareness , experiences can be retrieved covertly . Thus , they serve as covert event simulations for the various alternative action plans that can be used to select the one that is most advantageous in terms of goal obtainment , without requiring awareness . The main aspects of this proposed rapid action - memory simulation cycle are outlined in Fig . 1 . As reviewed below , we propose that this cycle is rapid ( occurring many times per second ) and covert ( occurs with - out necessary intentionality or awareness ) , making it distinct from other accounts of simulation - related hippocampal function , such as processing in the service of the generation of conscious mental imagery and future event construction ( Addis & Schacter , 2011 ; Bird & Burgess , 2008 ; Buckner , 2010 ) . Functional and structural properties of PFC , hippocampus , and their interactivity are consistent with the CRAMS proposal . PFC is extensively and reciprocally connected with hippocampus and sur - rounding structures of the medial temporal lobe ( Amaral & Witter , 1989 ; Fuster , 2008 ; Simons & Spiers , 2003 ) . Furthermore , hippo - campus and PFC are often co - active during learning ( Simons & Spiers , 2003 ) , and long - term potentiation and depression of hippo - campal – prefrontal connections can be induced during learning ( Doyere , Burette , Negro , & Laroche , 1993 ) . The lateral PFC , which is proximal to motor cortex , is most heavily involved in the gener - ation of action plans ( Fuster , 1997 ; Mushiake et al . , 2006 ; Saito et al . , 2005 ; Tanji & Hoshi , 2008 ) . It can thus generate multiple action plans prior to action execution ( Mushiake et al . , 2006 ; Saito et al . , 2005 ) . Dorsolateral PFC could provide this information as input to the hippocampus via its direct connections with retro - splenial and parahippocampal cortex ( Simons & Spiers , 2003 ) and could also cue hippocampus indirectly with action plans via effer - ence copy signals reaching hippocampus through connections with the dorsal neocortical ‘‘where’’ stream ( Fuster , 1997 ; see Cullen , 2004 for overview of efference copy for action ; see Bird & Burgess , 2008 for a proposed role of PFC efference copy in the gen - eration of mental imagery by hippocampus ) . Likewise , action plans generated by ventrolateral PFC could cue hippocampus through direct connections with perirhinal and parahippocampal cortex ( Simons & Spiers , 2003 ) or via efference copy through its extensive connectivity with the ‘‘where’’ pathway . Importantly , the hippo - campus is a convergence zone for the dorsal and ventral ‘‘where’’ and ‘‘what’’ pathways ( Insausti , Amaral , & Cowan , 1987 ; Squire & Zola - Morgan , 1991 ; Van Hoesen , Rosene , & Mesulam , 1979 ) and therefore could receive action cues from lateral PFC cortex through multiple routes . Given these cues , the hippocampus can then 4 J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 covertly retrieve related experiences , comprising action - memory simulations . The simulated outcomes of actions in CRAMS are presumably based on two sources of memory : ( 1 ) previous experiences in the same environment and associated outcomes ( i . e . , to prevent exploring the same region of the environment twice or making the same incorrect choice again ) , and ( 2 ) similar experiences that have occurred previously in different but nonetheless associated environmental contexts . As described above , two aspects of hippo - campal function make it well suited for supporting this kind of memory simulation . First , the hippocampus is important for short - term expressions of memory ( e . g . , brief retention intervals ) , especially for complex and / or novel relational information ( Hannula & Greene , 2012 ; Hannula & Ranganath , 2009 ; Hannula et al . , 2006 , 2007 ; Jeneson , Mauldin , Hopkins , & Squire , 2011 ; Ranganath & D’Esposito , 2001 ; Warren et al . , 2010 ; Watson et al . , 2013 ) , allowing it to participate in ‘‘in the moment’’ decision - mak - ing processes . Second , hippocampal representations are richly rela - tional and associative . Given a cue or partial cue , even distantly associated or goal - irrelevant information ( that nonetheless involve at least surface - level similarity to the current environment ) could be obligatorily retrieved ( Turk - Browne et al . , 2010 ; Wimmer & Shohamy , 2012 ) . Further , awake replay of previous experiences have been found in the rat hippocampus during quiet waking states ( Karlsson & Frank , 2009 ) , in the absence of overt environ - mental input ( but possibly due to internally generated action cues from PFC ) . Thus , given action plans as cues , the hippocampus is able to generate simulated outcomes of potential future actions ; i . e . , information retrieved covertly in response to each cue . We refer to these as ‘‘action - memory simulations’’ to distinguish them from psychological experiences involved in various forms of pro - spection ( Buckner & Carroll , 2007 ; Hassabis & Maguire , 2009 ; Schacter & Addis , 2007 ; Schacter et al . , 2008 ; Zeithamova , Schlichting , & Preston , 2012 ) . In order to select among the multiple hippocampal - generated simulations cued by PFC during a decision period , simulation infor - mation is likely evaluated by medial PFC . Medial PFC receives major input from hippocampus via fornix ( Jay , Thierry , Wiklund , & Glowinski , 1992 ) and potentially also monosynaptic input ( Parent , Wang , Su , Netoff , & Yuan , 2010 ) , and therefore could read - ily receive the contents of simulated action outcomes produced by hippocampus in response to action plan cues . The medial PFC , especially ventromedial PFC , is densely interconnected with other brain regions that could represent and signal current goals and value representations , such as various neuromodulatory systems , ventral and medial striatum , and amygdala ( Hoover & Vertes , 2007 ; Rudebeck , Bannerman , & Rushworth , 2008 ; Rushworth & Behrens , 2008 ) . Indeed , the medial PFC has been characterized as a site of action - outcome prediction ( Alexander & Brown , 2011 ) . CRAMS could act in service of this predictive function , as prediction is one outcome of action - memory simulation ( as discussed below ) . This hypothesized contribution from medial PFC also accords with functional neuroanatomical studies in rodents . That is , ventrome - dial PFC is densely interconnected with the rostral anterior cingu - late area ( Brodmann Area 32 ) that is the hypothesized homologue of rodent prelimibic cortex ( Wise , 2008 ) . Studies of prelimibic cor - tex in rodents have identiﬁed critical roles in complex working memory tasks and value - based decision - making ( Kesner & Churchwell , 2011 ) , providing a potential rodent homologue of the evaluative functions of medial PFC proposed for CRAMS . In summary , our CRAMS proposal can be tied to the functional neuroanatomy of PFC and hippocampus as follows ( Fig . 2 ) : When a conﬂict exists regarding the behavior that should be performed at any moment ( i . e . , a choice or decision must be made among alternative possible behaviors ) , lateral PFC sequentially generates various relevant action plans ( Saito et al . , 2005 ) . Signals of these potential action plans are transmitted either directly or indirectly to hippocampus via the connectivity of lateral PFC to hippocampus described above . Each potential action plan signal serves as a retrieval cue causing hippocampus to automatically , obligatorily , and covertly retrieve relevant contents of relational memory repre - sentations stored in distributed cortical modules , via the dense and reciprocal interconnectivity of hippocampus with widespread cor - tical and subcortical structures ( Insausti et al . , 1987 ; Munoz & Insausti , 2005 ; Van Hoesen et al . , 1979 ) . These retrieved experi - ences comprise covert action - memory simulations of the outcome Low uncertainty or fewer options High uncertainty or more options TERMINATION Cycle 2 Cycle 3 Cycle 1 Cycle 1 Cycle 2 Cycle 3 . . . Cycle n INITIATION INITIATION TERMINATION I N I T I A T I O N ( Response conflict ) Action simulation Covert memory retrieval Evaluation ( comparison to goals ) TERMINATION ( Perform action ) No Yes Above goal threshold ? A B Fig . 1 . Overview of CRAMS . ( A ) CRAMS is initiated by response conﬂict , such as occurs when choices must be made between various options ( i . e . , decision - making ) . This conﬂict generates action plans that could be executed given the constraints of the environment ( i . e . , affordances ) . One action plan is covertly generated , leading in turn to covert retrieval of memory related to experiences that were similar to the simulated action in the current situation . The contents of covert retrieval constitute simulated action outcomes that are then evaluated relative to current goals , an ‘‘action - memory simulation . ’’ This process of action generation , covert retrieval , and evaluation of the simulated outcome continues iteratively until the value of a simulation exceeds a threshold of proximity to the goal , at which point the cycle ends and the currently selected action is thus performed . ( B ) The number of CRAMS cycles that would be needed in a given situation is hypothesized to depend on three primary factors : familiarity , uncertainty , and environmental affordances . In highly familiar situations , situations with low uncertainty ( i . e . , high contrast among simulated outcomes ) , and when the environment affords few possible options , CRAMS proceeds for relatively few cycles before reaching a satisfactory selection . In contrast , in highly novel situations , situations with high uncertainty ( i . e . , low contrast among simulated outcomes ) , and when the environment affords many possible options , relatively more CRAMS cycles are required to systematically test many options before arriving at a selection . J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 5 Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 for each potential action , which reach medial PFC via direct inputs from hippocampus . Medial PFC can then interface with other regions that represent goals and rewards in order to compare action - memory simulations to desired goals , allowing selection of the action that brings the organism into closest alignment with goals . Choice among multiple action - memory simulations by med - ial PFC could furthermore be aided by frontopolar cortex , which is involved in integrating information over time ( Badre & Wagner , 2004 ; Crescentini et al . , 2011 ; Green et al . , 2006 ; Yarkoni et al . , 2005a , 2005b ) and is densely and reciprocally interconnected with most of the PFC ( Liu et al . , 2013 ) . Finally , the selected action gen - erated by lateral PFC drives behavior via standard pathways for motor output . Importantly , we do not envision these interactions as the direct transmission of information from one region to another ; rather , the phrase ‘‘information transmission’’ is intended to only metaphori - cally describe the nature of the interactions of these brain regions . The same function described could be readily obtained via a com - bination of neuronal properties that are well documented in PFC ( Miller & Cohen , 2001 ) , including excitation , inhibition , and thresh - old setting . For instance , inhibition of lateral PFC motor output until a suitably large reward signal is generated in medial PFC would provide opportunity for excitatory interactions of lateral PFC action - related activity and covert hippocampal retrieval , and lifting of inhibition when the reward threshold is reached would allow performance of the appropriate action . Generation of multi - ple possible action plans given action uncertainty is also envi - sioned as an automatic process that derives from the theorized auto - associative and attractor - dynamic properties of PFC circuits ( Durstewitz , Seamans , & Sejnowski , 2000 ; Wilson & Cowan , 1972 ) . When there is conﬂict between multiple possible response options , network activity that is subthreshold for producing motor output could be generated until task - related inﬂuences temporar - ily shift network tuning proﬁles to permit suprathreshold motor signaling ( Buonomano & Maass , 2009 ; Duncan , 2001 ) . There are several possible sources of inﬂuence on PFC response selection . Recent theoretical accounts of decision - making emphasize dopaminergic neuromodulation ( Lo & Wang , 2006 ) , most likely provided via cortico - striatal connections and the medial PFC regions that compare simulated outcomes to goal states , as pro - posed above . In general , synaptic facilitation of both afferent path - ways and recurrent intra - network circuits likely affect the evolution of PFC networks toward attractor states in the absence of sensory stimulation ( Wang , 2008 ) in a process of cognitive search ( Kurth - Nelson et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , the initiation of CRAMS need not be under deliberate control , but instead could come about simply by virtue of the automatic response of lateral PFC to conﬂict among different possible actions due to uncertainty regarding action - outcome associations . Indeed , other ﬁndings have also emphasized the ability for PFC , including especially lateral PFC , to generate motor control signals without an individual’s intention or awareness ( Lau & Passingham , 2007 ; van Gaal , Ridderinkhof , Scholte , & Lamme , 2010 ) . Because hippocampal representations can be cued automatically given such cues , complex information processing operations could be solved by relatively simple dynam - ics within and between PFC and hippocampus within the CRAMS framework . 5 . Connecting CRAMS to ongoing choices : Behavior and neurophysiology In this section , we further explicate the CRAMS proposal by describing its relevance to a behaviorally simple form of decision - making that can be observed experimentally at choice points among various behavioral options . Vicarious trial - and - error behavior ( VTE ) was ﬁrst described by Tolman and Meunzinger ( Muenzinger , 1938 ; Tolman , 1932 , 1938 , 1939 ) , and comprises an iterative , back - and - forth viewing pattern when confronted with two behavioral choices . They hypothesized that VTE reﬂects covert simulation of the two possible choices before action ( hence ‘‘vicarious’’ ) , and is thus similar in outcome to the process we hypothesize for CRAMS . VTE is high early in learning and when the choice is most uncertain , reﬂecting difﬁculty at arriving at a conclusion based on simulation , and becomes less frequent with learning and increased certainty ( Tolman , 1932 , 1938 , 1939 ) . Fig . 2 . Hypothesized functional neuroanatomy for CRAMS . Regions hypothesized to contribute to each portion of the CRAMS cycle are shown superimposed on medial and lateral views of the human brain . Response conﬂict initiates CRAMS , causing lateral PFC ( green oval ) to generate action plans that cue hippocampus ( blue oval ) to engage covert memory retrieval of relevant experience . Medial PFC ( red oval ) supports evaluation of the action - memory simulation by comparing the simulated outcome to current goals . This cycle is repeated for multiple generated actions until the goal threshold is reached ( brown diamond ) , at which point CRAMS terminates and motor systems ( black oval ) are engaged to perform the selected action . Putative contributions from other regions include inputs from striatum and amygdala to medial PFC that aid in goal maintenance and evaluation , as well as interactions between lateral PFC and frontopolar cortex that aid in maintenance of the outcomes that have already been simulated across time . Anatomical images adapted with permission from ( Martin , 1996 ) . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) 6 J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 Furthermore , several experiments have shown that VTE is reduced with lesions of the hippocampus ( Hu & Amsel , 1995 ) , especially when VTE is generated in tasks requiring the use of memory of pre - vious episodes to select between the two behavioral choices , such as in two - arm maze tasks as opposed to two - choice perceptual dis - crimination tasks ( Bett et al . , 2012 ) . Johnson and Redish ( 2007 ) found that hippocampal CA1 neurons generate non - local ﬁring pat - terns at the choice point in a T - maze , where VTE is generated . This non - local ﬁring reﬂects ‘‘preplay’’ or ‘‘prospective coding’’ of the two possible forthcoming routes . Furthermore , preplay of one potential route was uncorrelated with preplay of the other , indicat - ing distinct hippocampal simulation of each possibility , and there was a bias for higher preplay of the route that had been previously paired with reward and that was subsequently selected following the preplay events . More recently , hippocampal place cells have been shown to encode spatial trajectories predicting future paths taken toward a goal location in an open arena ( Pfeiffer & Foster , 2013 ) . Taken together , these data provide compelling evidence that goal - relevant simulation is occurring prior to behavior , consistent with the CRAMS proposal . In humans , an analogous behavior to VTE was identiﬁed recently ( Voss et al . , 2011b ) . Participants explored an array of objects on a computer screen through a controllable semi - transparent viewer that allowed viewing of one object at a time . Individuals exhibited spontaneous revisitation of recently seen objects during visual exploration , a behavior highly reminiscent of VTE behavior seen in rodents in terms of the ‘‘back - and - forth’’ pattern of viewing . In this particular paradigm , advantageous choices concerned what to study for a future memory test , and therefore the VTE - like revisitation strategy correlated with better memory performance upon subsequent test . Furthermore , sponta - neous revisitation covaried linearly with activation in hippocam - pus and PFC . Even more telling , hippocampal amnesics who performed the same memory task rarely exhibited spontaneous revisitation , and it did not improve later memory when performed . Thus , in addition to the surface - level similarities of VTE in rodents and this revisitation strategy in humans , there were also strong similarities in functional properties ( i . e . , ‘‘strategic’’ and beneﬁcial to performance ) as well as relevant functional neuroanatomy ( hippocampal dependence ) . These deeper similarities suggest that the same processes that support VTE in the rodent could be operative in support of decisions about how to explore novel environments in humans . Notably , the paradigms used to study VTE in rodents and revis - itation in humans differ fundamentally , especially in terms of the number of options for behavior that are available and thus the degrees of freedom inherent in the choice . A novel hypothesis that derives from our CRAMS proposal is that the amount of action - memory simulation iterations that must be performed before a choice is reached will scale with the number of response options available as well as with the uncertainty involved in weighing the simulation outcomes against one another ( Fig . 1B ) . These two factors , the number of response options and the uncertainty , oper - ate independently and derive from different sources of informa - tion . The number of possible response options is determined by environmental or external constraints ( i . e . number of paths at a choice junction ) , while uncertainty or difﬁculty of weighing out - comes derives from either inadequate previous experience ( highly novel ) or inadequate information on which to base discrimination among the choice options ( highly uncertain ) . Thus , early in learn - ing in a highly novel situation involving even a small number of choices , such as in the VTE testing apparatus , no single simulation outcome would rise above the rest , and therefore the animal would be expected to engage in many action - behavior simulations in a ( futile ) attempt to select the best action ( Fig . 1B ) . As learning progresses , previous experiences would provide information for weighing different options , thereby decreasing uncertainty , and less simulation iterations would be performed . Interestingly , this decline in VTE is exactly what is observed as animals acquire task knowledge , and , furthermore , the amount of initial VTE scales with the difﬁculty of the discrimination and hence with uncertainty ( Tolman , 1932 , 1938 , 1939 ) . Likewise , we would expect that more complex decision situa - tions , with more possible actions than in two - choice tasks , would involve more simulation , but to date there are few relevant data - points on more complicated discrete - choice tasks . However , open - ended exploration of novel environments is a scenario that requires ongoing choices and that is likely heavily dependent on CRAMS . Even though this situation lacks discrete ( e . g . , experi - menter - deﬁned ) choice points , we hypothesize that CRAMS occurs continuously during exploration . During exploration , choices must be made continuously regarding where to explore , when , and for how long . Fig . 3 highlights that CRAMS could be similarly involved in simple , discrete selections at choice points as well as in the moment - to - moment decisions that are necessary for effective exploration . Indeed , we have found that the hippocampus makes a necessary contribution to exploration of novel information even over brief timescales ( Yee et al . , 2013 ) . In this study , amnesic indi - viduals with bilateral hippocampal damage generated inefﬁcient visual search paths of novel scenes , whereby they frequently engaged in path - crossing and repeated visitation of the same loca - tions while searching for hidden targets . Consistent with our CRAMS proposal , this suggests that the hippocampus must be called upon during the course of exploration to provide informa - tion regarding what has been explored in the recent past in order to support optimally efﬁcient continued exploration . The rapid and iterative nature of PFC - hippocampal interactions that are a central component of CRAMS is indirectly supported by ﬁndings of rhythmic activity of PFC and hippocampus in situations that require selection among behavioral choices . Theta - modulated phase - locking between PFC and hippocampus occurs during exploration ( Brockmann , Poschel , Cichon , & Hanganu - Opatz , 2011 ) and , importantly , at choice points after task rule acquisition ( Benchenane et al . , 2010 ) . Further , comodulation of cortical gamma and hippocampal theta predicts memory retrieval for recent spatial exploration events ( Shirvalkar , Rapp , & Shapiro , 2010 ) . This rhyth - mic coupling of PFC and hippocampal neurons could reﬂect the CRAMS iterative cycle of action - memory simulation . Interestingly , each ‘‘sweep’’ of hippocampal preplay in the Johnson and Redish ( 2007 ) study lasted for 0 . 15 s , and therefore would generate an approximately 7 - Hz rhythm ( in the range of hippocampal theta ) if cued iteratively for difﬁcult and / or multiple - possibility choices . Furthermore , exploratory behaviors such as eye movements tend to occur at theta frequency ( Landau & Fries , 2012 ) , and theta - band hippocampal activity occurs with exploratory eye movement in the primate hippocampus ( Jutras , Fries , & Buffalo , 2013 ) . Thus , itera - tive covert simulation of these exploration events would also be expected to occur with similar timing ( Mushiake et al . , 2006 ) . We speculate that most decision - making tasks fall somewhere between the two - choice VTE scenario and open - ended environ - mental exploration in terms of the number of simulations that are required for each choice . This is due to the different levels of constraints on the number of choices that must be considered imposed by the environment and by previous learning ( i . e . , con - strained versus unconstrained environments , familiar versus novel situations , and high versus low uncertainty , as described above and emphasized in Figs . 1B and 3 ) . Consequently , we would expect theta to vary accordingly to the extent that it is an indicator of CRAMS . Although hippocampal theta has been characterized as unreliable and difﬁcult to identify in primates , Guitart - Masip et al . ( 2013 ) recently identiﬁed evidence for theta synchrony of PFC and hippocampus in humans during a decision - making task . J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 7 Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 Furthermore , Stokes et al . ( 2013 ) found that PFC transitions from a high - activity , stimulus - speciﬁc network state to a low - activity net - work state that is associated with the rule that will be subse - quently applied within 150 – 300 ms of the rule cue . The temporal evolution of this effect suggests that each of the two possible rule options could have been simulated at theta frequency before the rule - speciﬁc network state was achieved . In rodents , hippocampal theta is a dominant frequency , although it is important to note that rodents spend most time engaged in exploratory movements , and exploration is a strong modulator of hippocampal theta in rodents ( Buzsaki , 2011 ; O’Keefe & Nadel , 1978 ) . Emerging evidence from primate eye - movement studies suggests that likewise hippocam - pal theta is robust during visual exploration ( Jutras et al . , 2013 ; Killian , Jutras , & Buffalo , 2012 ) . These studies provide tentative links showing that expected variation in the amount of CRAMS cycles that would be necessary in a given situation ( e . g . , Fig . 1B ) corresponds roughly to the amount of theta that is generated in that situation , providing indirect support for the notion that theta is a neurophysiological marker of simulation cycles during CRAMS . It is important to clarify that although we provide the example of decision - making during the exploration of physical space , the CRAMS framework proposes no special role for spatial processing by either PFC or hippocampus . We propose that the processes involved in CRAMS are as relevant when one is making a cognitive decision among multiple competing mental representations as when making a choice among multiple competing routes or direc - tions to explore in space . Indeed , there are many parallels between exploration of physical and cognitive spaces . For instance , Hills , Todd , and Goldstone ( 2008 , 2010 ) have shown that the mode of searching physical space ( e . g . , for a visual target ) alters the mode of searching cognitive space ( e . g . , searching for a word to retrieve ) . Furthermore , Metcalfe and Jacobs ( 2010 ) drew several interesting parallels between students’ allocation time during studying verbal materials and animals’ food - foraging behaviors . For instance , animals utilize external cues such as scent markings to tag already - visited locations , whereas humans use self - assessment cues for similar purposes . In general , although experimental para - digms often lend themselves to testing spatial questions , especially in nonhuman animals , considerable evidence and theorizing sug - gests that similar processing can be used to support decisions in both physical and cognitive spaces ( Shapiro & Eichenbaum , 1999 ) . Indeed , with respect to lateral PFC control of action , Fuster has suggested that similar mechanisms are used to generate and select thoughts ( cognitive actions ) as motoric actions ( Fuster , 1997 , 2008 ; see also Wood & Grafman , 2003 ) . We therefore pro - pose that the action - memory simulation processing involved in CRAMS operates similarly for cognitive decisions as with decisions regarding where and how to traverse space ( Fig . 4 ) . 6 . Relationship to other theoretical frameworks Our CRAMS proposal offers a way of conceptualizing how ‘‘top - down’’ control by PFC is established . Although many ﬁndings have conﬁrmed that PFC inﬂuences other brain regions in order to select behaviors that are context - dependent and rule - based ( Chafee & Goldman - Rakic , 2000 ; Lee & D’Esposito , 2012 ; Miller & Cohen , 2001 ) , and neurophysiological studies have shown that this is based on context - dependent responsivity of PFC neurons ( Asaad et al . , 2000 ; Stokes et al . , 2013 ; Wallis et al . , 2001 ; White & Wise , 1999 ) , little information has been obtained regarding how this top - down control comes to exist . One ramiﬁcation of CRAMS is that the repetition of a ‘‘dumb’’ ( i . e . , automatic , obligatory , and covert ) iterative process that arises whenever conﬂict occurs among various choices could produce over time what appears to be very ‘‘smart’’ behavior ( i . e . , rule - based decisions ) . That is , with - out effort or intention , CRAMS leads the organism to make its best guess using all available information in moments of choice conﬂict , and , over time , learning reﬁnes the set of options in order to pro - duce adaptive rule - based or context - dependent responding . Based Fig . 3 . CRAMSvaries among environmentsbasedonthe richnessof options . ( A ) Thestandard VTEapparatusinvolves a choice pointwithtwo options . Rodentsthus iteratively simulate the two options before choosing . Early in training , alternation between the two options is high because of high novelty and high uncertainty , whereas alternation decreases with training ( Fig . 1B ) . ( B ) Similar choice behavior occurs in a more complex environment such as an arena , although the number of options available at every moment is much higher . Iteration thus occurs continuously among many options . Previous experiences with the same arena and with similar arenas , objects , and situations leads to more distinction among the various options during simulation ( indicated by darker versus lighter arrows ) and thus more efﬁcient testing of the various options via CRAMS . ( C and D ) Humans are faced with similar challenges at discrete choice points as well as in more complex environments , and we hypothesize that similar CRAMS mechanisms guide choices . 8 J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 partially on our evidence for similar neural mechanisms for VTE in humans ( Voss et al . , 2011b ) as compared to animals ( Johnson & Redish , 2007 ; Johnson , Varberg , Benhardus , Maahs , & Schrater , 2012 ; Muenzinger , 1938 ; Tolman , 1932 , 1938 , 1939 ) , we suggest that processes involved in CRAMS might serve as common mecha - nisms for the development of complex rule - based decisions that are analogous across humans and other mammals . That is , despite the seemingly vast differences in how decisions appear to be made and experienced by humans versus nonhuman animals , critical underlying mechanisms involving CRAMS could be present in both cases . The disproportionately greater PFC in humans might thus confer greater ability to make and test a larger set of appropriate actions during choice periods , but perhaps mediated by very sim - ilar PFC - hippocampal mechanisms . Brain regions and mechanisms other than those we have described are certainly important for adaptive function . For instance , Hills ( 2006 ) reviews the substantial evidence for the role of basal ganglia in the strategic decisions involved in foraging , pri - marily obtained in studies of rodents . Indeed , basal ganglia contri - butions to reward learning have also been emphasized in human decision - making ( Delgado & Dickerson , 2012 ) . With respect to CRAMS , it is possible that basal ganglia networks ( via their interac - tivity with PFC ) help compute the relative costs and beneﬁts asso - ciated with simulated actions ( Hwang , 2013 ) . As an animal learns the mappings between simulated actions and outcomes , decisions that initially rely on CRAMS - related contributions from PFC and hippocampus could become automatic and dependent on basal ganglia . Thus , in rodents , many strategic decisions could be sup - ported by basal ganglia , consistent with the relative inﬂexibility and paucity of novel behaviors generated in the face of novel chal - lenges in rodents versus mammals with more highly developed PFC . Indeed , increased PFC development is generally associated with greater consideration and performance of a wider range of behaviors in response to novel challenges . For instance , cats will make varied attempts to escape from a puzzle box whereas rats make less - varied attempts , nonhuman primates attempt novel actions with objects in order to acquire goals , and humans display greater and more varied attempts to solve novel problems as PFC increases throughout childhood development . Action - memory sim - ulation involved in CRAMS could be central to these varied instances of adaptive behavior and problem solving generated to varying degrees in accordance with the degree of PFC and hippo - campal development . A key distinction between the PFC - hippo - campal interactivity proposed for CRAMS versus contributions that other brain regions might make to adaptive function is that CRAMS is especially relevant to novel situations . That is , the ﬂexi - ble , relational representations supported by hippocampus are par - ticularly suitable to simulating potential outcomes in situations that are only mildly related to past experiences . In this case , hippo - campus is able to simulate outcomes based on its ability to retrieve many aspects of associated experiences given a cue that is only par - tially related to those circumstances ( as described above ) . In con - trast , structures such as basal ganglia would be better suited to providing speciﬁc action - outcome associations in response to action cues from PFC , and are likely more involved when strong action - outcome associations already exist for a given circumstance . As mentioned above , CRAMS bears some similarity to other con - siderations of how hippocampal processing is related to the gener - ation of visual mental imagery and future planning ( Bird & Burgess , 2008 ; Buckner , 2010 ; Buckner & Carroll , 2007 ; Eichenbaum & Fortin , 2009 ; Hassabis & Maguire , 2009 ; Schacter & Addis , 2007 ; Schacter et al . , 2008 ) . The main novelty of CRAMS is the notion that simulation in the service of behavioral choices and decisions is highly rapid and iterative as well as covert / implicit . CRAMS in no way requires that any form of deliberate or executive control be intentionally exerted by an individual . That is , the iterative PFC interactions with hippocampus do not need to be initiated by a conscious or willful central executive . Just as we conceive of the role of hippocampus in retrieving relational information as auto - matic , obligatory , and covert , so too we propose that the action generation operations of PFC are likewise automatic , obligatory , and covert . Covert simulation of hippocampal activity ( e . g . , ‘‘preplay’’ by hippocampal primary neurons ) has been considered as a precursor or component of visual mental imagery and the Fig . 4 . Similar mechanisms for exploration of cognitive and physical spaces . A depiction of the mental search involved in name recall given a face is provided in order to highlight that CRAMS could be as relevant for choices among mental possibilities as it is for choices among action possibilities . For instance , face - cued name recall can involve search among different places , events , and situations in which the person could have been encountered . Similar to choices encountered in a physical space , one can encounter constraints in choices and variability in novelty and uncertainty imposed by the ‘‘cognitive’’ environment that can dictate the number of logical options to be considered , as well as the amount of time required to converge on a solution . Thus , choices that are considered more purely ‘‘mental’’ than choices regarding how to act could nonetheless rely on similar CRAMS mechanisms . J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 9 Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 construction of future scenarios based on memory ( Bird & Burgess , 2008 ; Buckner , 2010 ) . However , our characterization of hippocam - pal involvement in CRAMS differs from its hypothesized contribu - tions to mental imagery and mental simulation of future events based on memory ( as in Addis & Schacter , 2011 ; Bird & Burgess , 2008 ; Buckner , 2010 ; Eichenbaum & Fortin , 2009 ) . We emphasize prefrontal – hippocampal interactivity , and propose that PFC cues retrieval , and hence preplay - like phenomena , by providing signals of possible actions to the hippocampus . In the case of VTE in rodents , this is accompanied by iterative viewing of the two choices . In most decision - making circumstances , myriad possible choices for action are possible , and thus the PFC iteratively bom - bards hippocampus with many possible actions and obtains simu - lated outcomes until the best choice is reached . Thus , there is little room for mental imagery in this scenario , given that rapid genera - tion of multiple mental images would be disorienting , and it is not commonly reported as part of psychological experiences in cases of ongoing decision - making in situations such as exploration . Instead , we propose that action - cued hippocampal simulation is a covert process , whereby the contents of hippocampal retrieval are not experienced consciously , but instead can be used without neces - sary conscious awareness to guide the choice . In the case of VTE at a two - choice decision point in a well - learned apparatus , the pos - sible response options have been limited ( through experience and by the nature of the apparatus ) to only two , and so simulation options have been considerably restricted . Thus , the animal alter - nates between them until a decision is reached . In this limited sce - nario , iterative simulation occurs for a relatively small number of options , which could promote conscious awareness in some cir - cumstances ( for instance , because repeat simulation could enhance stable and synchronous neural responses that have been associated in other contexts with visual awareness , e . g . , Pollen , 1999 ) . In con - trast , covert simulation is especially relevant for situations in which there is need to rapidly test multiple possible options , such as during more open - ended exploration . CRAMS is thus also distinct from other proposals of PFC in pre - dictive function ( Henson & Gagnepain , 2010 ) . Although one rami - ﬁcation of CRAMS is that PFC supports predictive function ( i . e . likely forthcoming actions and their outcomes will be generated in advance of behavior ) , CRAMS is mechanistically distinct from other proposals in that predictive function is based on simple iter - ative communication with hippocampus . Due to its iterative com - ponent , CRAMS has surface - level similarities with other iterative models such as T . O . T . E . ( Miller , Galanter , & Pribram , 1960 ) . How - ever unlike existing models of iterative PFC functions for decision making , such as the proposed iteration of goal setting , planning , plan execution , and monitoring ( Mushiake et al . , 2009 ) , CRAMS considers the critical role of memory - retrieval functions of hippo - campus , which are essential to evaluating different possible actions before they are performed based on previous experiences . 7 . Future directions , summary , and implications Future experiments will be needed to test various aspects of the CRAMS proposal . One simple prediction of CRAMS is that the num - ber of action - memory simulations will vary according to factors such as the number of possible alternative choices presented at decision points as well as the relative strength of any one alterna - tive with predicted outcomes ( i . e . uncertainty ) . We therefore consider exploration of the problem space between two - choice VTE - like scenarios and open - ended exploration as a promising experimental route for testing CRAMS . We expect that as the number of possible options or outcome uncertainty increases , the iterative nature of the CRAMS processes will result in higher cognitive load and therefore increase the time needed to make a decision or decrease the relative accuracy of selecting the optimal decision . Manipulating the relative proportion of uncertainty asso - ciated with different speciﬁc actions might be expected to also affect the ability to simulate future outcomes and arrive at optimal decisions . Furthermore , we expect that lesions to critical areas such as lateral PFC or hippocampus will profoundly affect expres - sion of CRAMS and the timing of interactions between these regions . The role of theta frequency in mediating these interactions also warrants further investigation . We have proposed a framework of learning and decision - mak - ing that incorporates and is supported by key recent ﬁndings regarding strategic and adaptive behavior . Our model easily cap - tures various aspects of exploratory learning such as the beneﬁts of volitional control in humans ( Voss , Gonsalves , Federmeier , Tranel , & Cohen , 2011a ; Voss et al . , 2011b ) and animals ( Song , Kim , Kim , & Jung , 2005 ) to later memory performance . An impor - tant feature of CRAMS is the ability to account for decision - making despite lack of necessary conscious awareness or a central execu - tive , allowing it to extend beyond human cognitive theory and encompass animal models of behavioral control and adaptation . We also emphasize the importance of iterative interaction between PFC and hippocampus during action selection , rather than localized functions employed separately . More detailed exploration of CRAMS is important for understanding the detailed mechanisms of these functions and , based on the considerations we review , could motivate powerful comparisons of higher - order cognition in humans and animal models . Acknowledgments Financial support was provided by Award Numbers R00 - NS069788 and F32 - NS083340 from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke , and R01 - MH062500 and P50 - MH094263 from the National Institute of Mental Health . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the National Institutes of Health . References Addis , D . R . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 2011 ) . The hippocampus and imagining the future : Where do we stand ? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 5 , 173 . Alexander , W . H . , & Brown , J . W . ( 2011 ) . Medial prefrontal cortex as an action - outcome predictor . Nature Neuroscience , 14 , 1338 – 1344 . Amaral , D . G . , & Witter , M . P . ( 1989 ) . The three - dimensional organization of the hippocampal formation : A review of anatomical data . Neuroscience , 31 , 571 – 591 . Asaad , W . F . , Rainer , G . , & Miller , E . K . ( 1998 ) . Neural activity in the primate prefrontal cortex during associative learning . Neuron , 21 , 1399 – 1407 . Asaad , W . F . , Rainer , G . , & Miller , E . K . ( 2000 ) . Task - speciﬁc neural activity in the primate prefrontal cortex . Journal of Neurophysiology , 84 , 451 – 459 . Baddeley , A . D . , & Warrington , N . M . ( 1970 ) . Amnesia and distinction between long - and short - term memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 9 , 176 – 189 . Badre , D . , & D’Esposito , M . ( 2009 ) . Is the rostro - caudal axis of the frontal lobe hierarchical ? Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 10 , 659 – 669 . Badre , D . , & Wagner , A . D . ( 2004 ) . Selection , integration , and conﬂict monitoring ; assessing the nature and generality of prefrontal cognitive control mechanisms . Neuron , 41 , 473 – 487 . Benchenane , K . , Peyrache , A . , Khamassi , M . , Tierney , P . L . , Gioanni , Y . , Battaglia , F . P . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Coherent theta oscillations and reorganization of spike timing in the hippocampal – prefrontal network upon learning . Neuron , 66 , 921 – 936 . Bett , D . , Allison , E . , Murdoch , L . H . , Kaefer , K . , Wood , E . R . , & Dudchenko , P . A . ( 2012 ) . The neural substrates of deliberative decision making : Contrasting effects of hippocampus lesions on performance and vicarious trial - and - error behavior in a spatial memory task and a visual discrimination task . Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience , 6 , 70 . Bird , C . M . , & Burgess , N . ( 2008 ) . The hippocampus and memory : Insights from spatial processing . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 9 , 182 – 194 . Brockmann , M . D . , Poschel , B . , Cichon , N . , & Hanganu - Opatz , I . L . ( 2011 ) . Coupled oscillations mediate directed interactions between prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of the neonatal rat . Neuron , 71 , 332 – 347 . Buckner , R . L . ( 2010 ) . The role of the hippocampus in prediction and imagination . Annual Review of Psychology , 61 ( 27 – 48 ) , C21 – C28 . 10 J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 Buckner , R . L . , & Carroll , D . C . ( 2007 ) . Self - projection and the brain . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 11 , 49 – 57 . Buonomano , D . V . , & Maass , W . ( 2009 ) . State - dependent computations : Spatiotemporal processing in cortical networks . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 10 , 113 – 125 . Buzsaki , G . ( 2011 ) . Rhythms of the brain . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Chafee , M . V . , & Goldman - Rakic , P . S . ( 2000 ) . Inactivation of parietal and prefrontal cortex reveals interdependence of neural activity during memory - guided saccades . Journal of Neurophysiology , 83 , 1550 – 1566 . Cohen , N . J . , & Eichenbaum , H . ( 1993 ) . Memory , amnesia , and the hippocampal system . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Cohen , J . D . , Perlstein , W . M . , Braver , T . S . , Nystrom , L . E . , Noll , D . C . , Jonides , J . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Temporal dynamics of brain activation during a working memory task . Nature , 386 , 604 – 608 . Cohen , N . J . , & Squire , L . R . ( 1980 ) . Preserved learning and retention of pattern - analyzing skill in amnesia – Dissociation of knowing how and knowing that . Science , 210 , 207 – 210 . Crescentini , C . , Seyed - Allaei , S . , De Pisapia , N . , Jovicich , J . , Amati , D . , & Shallice , T . ( 2011 ) . Mechanisms of rule acquisition and rule following in inductive reasoning . Journal of Neuroscience , 31 , 7763 – 7774 . Cullen , K . E . ( 2004 ) . Sensory signals during active versus passive movement . Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 14 , 698 – 706 . Delgado , M . R . , & Dickerson , K . C . ( 2012 ) . Reward - related learning via multiple memory systems . Biological Psychiatry , 72 , 134 – 141 . Dias , R . , Robbins , T . W . , & Roberts , A . C . ( 1996 ) . Primate analogue of the wisconsin card sorting test : Effects of excitotoxic lesions of the prefrontal cortex in the marmoset . Behavioral Neuroscience , 110 , 872 – 886 . Doyere , V . , Burette , F . , Negro , C . R . , & Laroche , S . ( 1993 ) . Long - term potentiation of hippocampal afferents and efferents to prefrontal cortex : Implications for associative learning . Neuropsychologia , 31 , 1031 – 1053 . Duncan , J . ( 2001 ) . An adaptive coding model of neural function in prefrontal cortex . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 2 , 820 – 829 . Durstewitz , D . , Seamans , J . K . , & Sejnowski , T . J . ( 2000 ) . Neurocomputational models of working memory . Nature Neuroscience , 3 , 1184 – 1191 . Eichenbaum , H . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2001 ) . From conditioning to conscious recollection : Memory systems of the brain . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Eichenbaum , H . , & Fortin , N . J . ( 2009 ) . The neurobiology of memory based predictions . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London . Series B , Biological sciences , 364 , 1183 – 1191 . Fuster , J . M . ( 1995 ) . Memory in the cerebal cortex . Cambridge : MIT Press . Fuster , J . M . ( 1997 ) . The prefrontal cortex : Anatomy , physiology , and neurpsychology of the frontal lobes ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : Raven Press . Fuster , J . M . ( 2008 ) . The prefrontal cortex . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Goldman - Rakic , P . S . ( 1987 ) . Circuitry of the prefrontal cortex and the regulation of behavior by representational memory . In F . Plum & V . Mountcastle ( Eds . ) , Handbook of physiology ( pp . 373 – 417 ) . Bethesda : American Physiological Society . Green , A . E . , Fugelsang , J . A . , Kraemer , D . J . , Shamosh , N . A . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2006 ) . Frontopolar cortex mediates abstract integration in analogy . Brain Research , 1096 , 125 – 137 . Guitart - Masip , M . , Barnes , G . R . , Horner , A . , Bauer , M . , Dolan , R . J . , & Duzel , E . ( 2013 ) . Synchronization of medial temporal lobe and prefrontal rhythms in human decision making . Journal of Neuroscience , 33 , 442 – 451 . Hannula , D . E . , & Greene , A . J . ( 2012 ) . The hippocampus reevaluated in unconscious learning and memory : At a tipping point ? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 6 , 80 . Hannula , D . E . , & Ranganath , C . ( 2009 ) . The eyes have it : Hippocampal activity predicts expression of memory in eye movements . Neuron , 63 , 592 – 599 . Hannula , D . E . , Ryan , J . D . , Tranel , D . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2007 ) . Rapid onset relational memory effects are evident in eye movement behavior , but not in hippocampal amnesia . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 19 , 1690 – 1705 . Hannula , D . E . , Tranel , D . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2006 ) . The long and the short of it : Relational memory impairments in amnesia , even at short lags . Journal of Neuroscience , 26 , 8352 – 8359 . Hassabis , D . , & Maguire , E . A . ( 2009 ) . The construction system of the brain . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London . Series B , Biological sciences , 364 , 1263 – 1271 . Henson , R . N . , & Gagnepain , P . ( 2010 ) . Predictive , interactive multiple memory systems . Hippocampus , 20 , 1315 – 1326 . Hills , T . T . ( 2006 ) . Animal foraging and the evolution of goal - directed cognition . Cognitive Science , 30 , 3 – 41 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2008 ) . Search in external and internal spaces : Evidence for generalized cognitive search processes . Psychological Science , 19 , 802 – 808 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2010 ) . The central executive as a search process : Priming exploration and exploitation across domains . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 139 , 590 – 609 . Hoover , W . B . , & Vertes , R . P . ( 2007 ) . Anatomical analysis of afferent projections to the medial prefrontal cortex in the rat . Brain Structure and Function , 212 , 149 – 179 . Hoshi , E . , & Tanji , J . ( 2004 ) . Area - selective neuronal activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex for information retrieval and action planning . Journal of Neurophysiology , 91 , 2707 – 2722 . Hu , D . , & Amsel , A . ( 1995 ) . A simple test of the vicarious trial - and - error hypothesis of hippocampal function . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 92 , 5506 – 5509 . Hwang , E . J . ( 2013 ) . The basal ganglia , the ideal machinery for the cost - beneﬁt analysis of action plans . Frontiers in Neural Circuits , 7 , 121 . Insausti , R . , Amaral , D . G . , & Cowan , W . M . ( 1987 ) . The entorhinal cortex of the monkey : II . Cortical afferents . Journal of Comparative Neurology , 264 , 356 – 395 . Jay , T . M . , Thierry , A . M . , Wiklund , L . , & Glowinski , J . ( 1992 ) . Excitatory amino acid pathway from the hippocampus to the prefrontal cortex . Contribution of ampa receptors in hippocampo – prefrontal cortex transmission . European Journal of Neuroscience , 4 , 1285 – 1295 . Jeneson , A . , Mauldin , K . N . , Hopkins , R . O . , & Squire , L . R . ( 2011 ) . The role of the hippocampus in retaining relational information across short delays : The importance of memory load . Learning & Memory , 18 , 301 – 305 . Johnson , M . K . , Hashtroudi , S . , & Lindsay , D . S . ( 1993 ) . Source monitoring . Psychological Bulletin , 114 , 3 – 28 . Johnson , A . , & Redish , A . D . ( 2007 ) . Neural ensembles in ca3 transiently encode paths forward of the animal at a decision point . Journal of Neuroscience , 27 , 12176 – 12189 . Johnson , A . , Varberg , Z . , Benhardus , J . , Maahs , A . , & Schrater , P . ( 2012 ) . The hippocampus and exploration : Dynamically evolving behavior and neural representations . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 6 , 216 . Jutras , M . J . , Fries , P . , & Buffalo , E . A . ( 2013 ) . Oscillatory activity in the monkey hippocampus during visual exploration and memory formation . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 110 , 13144 – 13149 . Karlsson , M . P . , & Frank , L . M . ( 2009 ) . Awake replay of remote experiences in the hippocampus . Nature Neuroscience , 12 , 913 – 918 . Kesner , R . P . , & Churchwell , J . C . ( 2011 ) . An analysis of rat prefrontal cortex in mediating executive function . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory , 96 , 417 – 431 . Kesner , R . P . , Hopkins , R . O . , & Fineman , B . ( 1994 ) . Item and order dissociation in humans with prefrontal cortex damage . Neuropsychologia , 32 , 881 – 891 . Killian , N . J . , Jutras , M . J . , & Buffalo , E . A . ( 2012 ) . A map of visual space in the primate entorhinal cortex . Nature , 491 , 761 – 764 . Konkel , A . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2009 ) . Relational memory and the hippocampus : Representations and methods . Frontiers in Neuroscience , 3 , 166 – 174 . Konkel , A . , Warren , D . E . , Duff , M . C . , Tranel , D . N . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2008 ) . Hippocampal amnesia impairs all manner of relational memory . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 2 , 15 . Kuhl , B . A . , & Wagner , A . D . ( 2009 ) . Strategic control of memory . In L . R . Squire ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of neuroscience ( pp . 437 – 444 ) . Oxford : Academic Press . Kurth - Nelson , Z . , Bickel , W . , & Redish , A . D . ( 2012 ) . Atheoreticalaccountofcognitive effects in delay discounting . European Journal of Neuroscience , 35 , 1052 – 1064 . Landau , A . N . , & Fries , P . ( 2012 ) . Attention samples stimuli rhythmically . Current Biology , 22 , 1000 – 1004 . Lau , H . C . , & Passingham , R . E . ( 2007 ) . Unconscious activation of the cognitive control system in the human prefrontal cortex . Journal of Neuroscience , 27 , 5805 – 5811 . Lee , T . G . , & D’Esposito , M . ( 2012 ) . The dynamic nature of top - down signals originating from prefrontal cortex : A combined fmri - tms study . Journal of Neuroscience , 32 , 15458 – 15466 . Liu , H . , Qin , W . , Li , W . , Fan , L . , Wang , J . , Jiang , T . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Connectivity - based parcellation of the human frontal pole with diffusion tensor imaging . Journal of Neuroscience , 33 , 6782 – 6790 . Lo , C . C . , & Wang , X . J . ( 2006 ) . Cortico - basal ganglia circuit mechanism for a decision threshold in reaction time tasks . Nature Neuroscience , 9 , 956 – 963 . Maguire , E . A . , Vargha - Khadem , F . , & Hassabis , D . ( 2010 ) . Imagining ﬁctitious and future experiences : Evidence from developmental amnesia . Neuropsychologia , 48 , 3187 – 3192 . Martin , J . H . ( 1996 ) . Neuroanatomy : Text and atlas ( 2nd ed . ) . Stamford , Connecticut : Appleton & Lange . Mayes , A . , Montaldi , D . , & Migo , E . ( 2007 ) . Associative memory and the medial temporal lobes . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 11 , 126 – 135 . Metcalfe , J . , & Jacobs , W . J . ( 2010 ) . People’s study time allocation and its relation to animal foraging . Behavioural Processes , 83 , 213 – 221 . Miller , E . K . ( 2000 ) . The prefrontal cortex and cognitive control . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 1 , 59 – 65 . Miller , E . K . , & Cohen , J . D . ( 2001 ) . An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 24 , 167 – 202 . Miller , E . K . , Erickson , C . A . , & Desimone , R . ( 1996 ) . Neural mechanisms of visual working memory in prefrontal cortex of the macaque . Journal of Neuroscience , 16 , 5154 – 5167 . Miller , G . A . , Galanter , E . , & Pribram , K . H . ( 1960 ) . Plans and the structure of behavior . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . Milner , B . , Petrides , M . , & Smith , M . L . ( 1985 ) . Frontal lobes and the temporal organization of memory . Human Neurobiology , 4 , 137 – 142 . Moore , T . L . , Schettler , S . P . , Killiany , R . J . , Rosene , D . L . , & Moss , M . B . ( 2009 ) . Effects on executive function following damage to the prefrontal cortex in the rhesus monkey ( macaca mulatta ) . Behavioral Neuroscience , 123 , 231 – 241 . Muenzinger , K . F . ( 1938 ) . Vicarious trial and error at a point of choice . I . A general survey of its relation to learning efﬁciency . Journal of Genetic Psychology , 53 , 75 – 86 . Munoz , M . , & Insausti , R . ( 2005 ) . Cortical efferents of the entorhinal cortex and the adjacent parahippocampal region in the monkey ( macaca fascicularis ) . European Journal of Neuroscience , 22 , 1368 – 1388 . Mushiake , H . , Saito , N . , Sakamoto , K . , Itoyama , Y . , & Tanji , J . ( 2006 ) . Activity in the lateral prefrontal cortex reﬂects multiple steps of future events in action plans . Neuron , 50 , 631 – 641 . J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 11 Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003 Mushiake , H . , Sakamoto , K . , Saito , N . , Inui , T . , Aihara , K . , & Tanji , J . ( 2009 ) . Involvement of the prefrontal cortex in problem solving . International Review of Neurobiology , 85 , 1 – 11 . Norman , K . A . , & O’Reilly , R . C . ( 2003 ) . Modeling hippocampal and neocortical contributions to recognition memory : A complementary - learning - systems approach . Psychological Review , 110 , 611 – 646 . O’Keefe , J . , & Nadel , L . ( 1978 ) . The hippocampus as a cognitive map . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Olsen , R . K . , Moses , S . N . , Riggs , L . , & Ryan , J . D . ( 2012 ) . The hippocampus supports multiple cognitive processes through relational binding and comparison . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 6 , 146 . Parent , M . A . , Wang , L . , Su , J . , Netoff , T . , & Yuan , L . L . ( 2010 ) . Identiﬁcation of the hippocampal input to medial prefrontal cortex in vitro . Cerebral Cortex , 20 , 393 – 403 . Petrides , M . ( 1996 ) . Specialized systems for the processing of mnemonic information within the primate frontal cortex . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London . Series B , Biological sciences , 351 , 1455 – 1461 . Pfeiffer , B . E . , & Foster , D . J . ( 2013 ) . Hippocampal place - cell sequences depict future paths to remembered goals . Nature , 497 , 74 – 79 . Pollen , D . A . ( 1999 ) . On the neural correlates of visual perception . Cerebral Cortex , 9 , 4 – 19 . Race , E . , Keane , M . M . , & Verfaellie , M . ( 2013 ) . Losing sight of the future : Impaired semantic prospection following medial temporal lobe lesions . Hippocampus , 23 , 268 – 277 . Rainer , G . , Rao , S . C . , & Miller , E . K . ( 1999 ) . Prospective coding for objects in primate prefrontal cortex . Journal of Neuroscience , 19 , 5493 – 5505 . Ranganath , C . ( 2010 ) . A uniﬁed framework for the functional organization of the medial temporal lobes and the phenomenology of episodic memory . Hippocampus , 20 , 1263 – 1290 . Ranganath , C . , & D’Esposito , M . ( 2001 ) . Medial temporal lobe activity associated with active maintenance of novel information . Neuron , 31 , 865 – 873 . Rolls , E . T . ( 1996 ) . A theory of hippocampal function in memory . Hippocampus , 6 , 601 – 620 . Rossi , A . F . , Bichot , N . P . , Desimone , R . , & Ungerleider , L . G . ( 2007 ) . Top down attentional deﬁcits in macaques with lesions of lateral prefrontal cortex . Journal of Neuroscience , 27 , 11306 – 11314 . Rudebeck , P . H . , Bannerman , D . M . , & Rushworth , M . F . ( 2008 ) . The contribution of distinct subregions of the ventromedial frontal cortex to emotion , social behavior , and decision making . Cognitive , Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience , 8 , 485 – 497 . Rushworth , M . F . , & Behrens , T . E . ( 2008 ) . Choice , uncertainty and valueinprefrontal and cingulate cortex . Nature Neuroscience , 11 , 389 – 397 . Saito , N . , Mushiake , H . , Sakamoto , K . , Itoyama , Y . , & Tanji , J . ( 2005 ) . Representation of immediate and ﬁnal behavioral goals in the monkey prefrontal cortex during an instructed delay period . Cerebral Cortex , 15 , 1535 – 1546 . Schacter , D . L . , & Addis , D . R . ( 2007 ) . The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory : Remembering the past and imagining the future . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London . Series B , Biological sciences , 362 , 773 – 786 . Schacter , D . L . , Addis , D . R . , & Buckner , R . L . ( 2008 ) . Episodic simulation of future events : Concepts , data , and applications . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 1124 , 39 – 60 . Schacter , D . L . , Addis , D . R . , Hassabis , D . , Martin , V . C . , Spreng , R . N . , & Szpunar , K . K . ( 2012 ) . The future of memory : Remembering , imagining , and the brain . Neuron , 76 , 677 – 694 . Schapiro , A . C . , Kustner , L . V . , & Turk - Browne , N . B . ( 2012 ) . Shaping of object representations in the human medial temporal lobe based on temporal regularities . Current Biology , 22 , 1622 – 1627 . Scoville , W . B . , & Milner , B . ( 1957 ) . Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions . Journal of Neurology , Neurosurgery and Psychiatry , 20 , 11 – 21 . Shallice , T . , & Burgess , P . W . ( 1991 ) . Deﬁcits in strategy application following frontal - lobe damage in man . Brain , 114 , 727 – 741 . Shapiro , M . L . , & Eichenbaum , H . ( 1999 ) . Hippocampus as a memory map : Synaptic plasticity and memory encoding by hippocampal neurons . Hippocampus , 9 , 365 – 384 . Shimamura , A . P . ( 1995 ) . Memory and the prefrontal cortex . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 769 , 151 – 159 . Shirvalkar , P . R . , Rapp , P . R . , & Shapiro , M . L . ( 2010 ) . Bidirectional changes to hippocampal theta - gamma comodulation predict memory for recent spatial episodes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 107 , 7054 – 7059 . Simons , J . S . , & Spiers , H . J . ( 2003 ) . Prefrontal and medial temporal lobe interactions in long - term memory . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4 , 637 – 648 . Song , E . Y . , Kim , Y . B . , Kim , Y . H . , & Jung , M . W . ( 2005 ) . Role of active movement in place - speciﬁc ﬁring of hippocampal neurons . Hippocampus , 15 , 8 – 17 . Squire , L . R . , van der Horst , A . S . , McDuff , S . G . , Frascino , J . C . , Hopkins , R . O . , & Mauldin , K . N . ( 2010 ) . Role of the hippocampus in remembering the past and imagining the future . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 107 , 19044 – 19048 . Squire , L . R . , & Zola - Morgan , S . ( 1991 ) . The medial temporal lobe memory system . Science , 253 , 1380 – 1386 . Stokes , M . G . , Kusunoki , M . , Sigala , N . , Nili , H . , Gaffan , D . , & Duncan , J . ( 2013 ) . Dynamic coding for cognitive control in prefrontal cortex . Neuron , 78 , 364 – 375 . Tanji , J . , & Hoshi , E . ( 2001 ) . Behavioral planning in the prefrontal cortex . Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 11 , 164 – 170 . Tanji , J . , & Hoshi , E . ( 2008 ) . Role of the lateral prefrontal cortex in executive behavioral control . Physiological Reviews , 88 , 37 – 57 . Tolman , E . C . ( 1932 ) . Purposive behavior in animals and men . New York : Century . Tolman , E . C . ( 1938 ) . The determinants of behavior at a choice point . Psychological Review , 45 , 1 – 41 . Tolman , E . C . ( 1939 ) . Prediction of vicarious trial - and - error by means of the schematic sow - bug . Psychological Review , 46 , 318 – 336 . Turk - Browne , N . B . , Scholl , B . J . , Johnson , M . K . , & Chun , M . M . ( 2010 ) . Implicit perceptual anticipation triggered by statistical learning . Journal of Neuroscience , 30 , 11177 – 11187 . van der Meer , M . , Kurth - Nelson , Z . , & Redish , A . D . ( 2012 ) . Information processing in decision - making systems . Neuroscientist , 18 , 342 – 359 . van Gaal , S . , Ridderinkhof , K . R . , Scholte , H . S . , & Lamme , V . A . ( 2010 ) . Unconscious activation of the prefrontal no - go network . Journal of Neuroscience , 30 , 4143 – 4150 . Van Hoesen , G . W . , Rosene , D . L . , & Mesulam , M . M . ( 1979 ) . Subicular input from temporal cortex in the rhesus monkey . Science , 205 , 608 – 610 . Voss , J . L . , Gonsalves , B . D . , Federmeier , K . D . , Tranel , D . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2011a ) . Hippocampal brain - network coordination during volitional exploratory behavior enhances learning . Nature Neuroscience , 14 , 115 – 120 . Voss , J . L . , Warren , D . E . , Gonsalves , B . D . , Federmeier , K . D . , Tranel , D . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2011b ) . Spontaneous revisitation during visual exploration as a link among strategic behavior , learning , and the hippocampus . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 108 , E402 – E409 . Wallis , J . D . , Anderson , K . C . , & Miller , E . K . ( 2001 ) . Single neurons in prefrontal cortex encode abstract rules . Nature , 411 , 953 – 956 . Wang , X . J . ( 2008 ) . Decision making in recurrent neuronal circuits . Neuron , 60 , 215 – 234 . Warren , D . E . , Duff , M . C . , Tranel , D . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2010 ) . Medial temporal lobe damage impairs representation of simple stimuli . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 4 , 35 . Watson , P . D . , Voss , J . L . , Warren , D . E . , Tranel , D . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2013 ) . Spatial reconstruction by patients with hippocampal damage is dominated by relational memory errors . Hippocampus , 23 , 570 – 580 . White , I . M . , & Wise , S . P . ( 1999 ) . Rule - dependent neuronal activity in the prefrontal cortex . Experimental Brain Research , 126 , 315 – 335 . Wilson , H . R . , & Cowan , J . D . ( 1972 ) . Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in localized populations of model neurons . Biophysical Journal , 12 , 1 – 24 . Wimmer , G . E . , & Shohamy , D . ( 2012 ) . Preference by association : How memory mechanisms in the hippocampus bias decisions . Science , 338 , 270 – 273 . Wise , S . P . ( 2008 ) . Forward frontal ﬁelds : Phylogeny and fundamental function . Trends in Neurosciences , 31 , 599 – 608 . Wood , J . N . , & Grafman , J . ( 2003 ) . Human prefrontal cortex : Processing and representational perspectives . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4 , 139 – 147 . Yarkoni , T . , Braver , T . S . , Gray , J . R . , & Green , L . ( 2005a ) . Prefrontal brain activity predicts temporally extended decision - making behavior . Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior , 84 , 537 – 554 . Yarkoni , T . , Gray , J . R . , Chrastil , E . R . , Barch , D . M . , Green , L . , & Braver , T . S . ( 2005b ) . Sustained neural activity associated with cognitive control during temporally extended decision making . Brain Research Cognitive Brain Research , 23 , 71 – 84 . Yee , L . T . S . , Warren , D . E . , Voss , J . L . , Duff , M . C . , Tranel , D . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2013 ) . The hippocampus uses information just encountered to guide efﬁcient ongoing behavior . Hippocampus , 24 , 154 – 164 . Yonelinas , A . P . ( 2013 ) . The hippocampus supports high - resolution binding in the service of perception , working memory and long - term memory . Behavioural Brain Research , 254 , 34 – 44 . Zeithamova , D . , Schlichting , M . L . , & Preston , A . R . ( 2012 ) . The hippocampus and inferential reasoning : Building memories to navigate future decisions . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 6 , 70 . 12 J . X . Wang et al . / Neurobiology of Learning and Memory xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Wang , J . X . , et al . Covert rapid action - memory simulation ( CRAMS ) : A hypothesis of hippocampal – prefrontal interactions for adaptive behavior . Neurobiology of Learning and Memory ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nlm . 2014 . 04 . 003