Exploring the Accessibility and Appeal of Surface Computing for Older Adult Health Care Support Anne Marie Piper , Ross Campbell , James D . Hollan Distributed Cognition and Human - Computer Interaction Lab Department of Cognitive Science , University of California , San Diego 9500 Gilman Dr . , La Jolla , CA 92093 - 0515 { apiper , rwcampbe , hollan } @ ucsd . edu ABSTRACT This paper examines accessibility issues of surface comput - ing with older adults and explores the appeal of surface com - puting for health care support . We present results from a study involving 20 older adults ( age 60 to 88 ) performing gesture - based interactions on a multitouch surface . Older adults were able to successfully perform all actions on the surface computer , but some gestures that required two ﬁ ngers ( resize ) and ﬁ ne motor movement ( rotate ) were problematic . Ratings for ease of use and ease of performing each action as well as time required to ﬁ gure out an action were similar to that of younger adults . Older adults reported that the sur - face computer was less intimidating , less frustrating , and less overwhelming than a traditional computer . The idea of using a surface computer for health care support was well - received by participants . We conclude with a discussion of design is - sues involving surface computing for older adults and use of this technology for health care . Author Keywords Health Care , Multitouch , Older Adults , Surface Computing ACM Classi ﬁ cation Keywords H . 5 . 2 User Interfaces : input devices and strategies General Terms Design , Experimentation , Human Factors INTRODUCTION Globally , the proportion of people over age 60 compared to younger population segments is growing at a rapid rate [ 21 ] . As we age , we experience an increase in health care issues that require ongoing medical attention . Managing medical care is challenging for everyone , but this is particularly dif ﬁ - cult for older adults with declining physical , visual , hearing , or cognitive abilities . As medical practices begin to adopt digital patient record systems , communication of health care issues may be further complicated for older adults who are Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for pro ﬁ t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁ rst page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speci ﬁ c permission and / or a fee . CHI 2010 , April 10 - 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , Georgia , USA . Copyright 2010 ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 929 - 9 / 10 / 04 . . . . $ 10 . 00 . intimidated or overwhelmed by technology . The introduc - tion of computer display systems into doctor - patient interac - tion presents opportunities to develop interfaces that are ap - propriate for older patients . While many older adults use tra - ditional computer workstations , new interaction devices may be more suitable for the challenges inherent in older adult - hood . Large multitouch surfaces seem particularly appropri - ate for older adults . Touch interaction is thought to have a low - barrier of entry . Interacting with digital media is accom - plished in a direct and natural way without the encumbrance of a keyboard or mouse . We regularly use our bare hands to manipulate physical objects in the world , and touch interac - tion draws on this experience . The horizontal form factor of a tabletop is also familiar and affords sitting with other people while interacting with shared media simultaneously . Finally , projection permits enlarging visual information . While these characteristics of surface computing seem well - suited for older populations , it is unclear how the physical nature of interaction , the setup of the device , and system nov - elty may affect older users . This paper examines the acces - sibility and appeal of surface technology for the older adult population within the context of health care support . In a laboratory study we assess the following : ( 1 ) whether the implementation of current surface gestures and interface ele - ments match the expectations of older users , ( 2 ) how well older adults are able to physically perform actions on the multitouch surface , ( 3 ) the range of accessibility issues that may affect interaction , and ( 4 ) how older adults feel about using a surface computer for health care support . This study is part of a larger initiative to explore the role of surface com - puting in health care support for the older adult population . The long term goal for this research is to design and install a surface computer for use within the health care center of a retirement community ; however , a critical ﬁ rst step in this process is to understand the appropriateness of surface com - puting for this context and population . BACKGROUND Surface Computing for Older Adults Multitouch surface technology is increasingly available . The decreasing cost of projection technologyalong with the grow - ing availability of multitouch software toolkits encourages research on surface computing . Commercially available mul - titouch technology ( e . g . , Microsoft and SMART Technolo - gies ) enables exploration of surface computing in settings outside of the lab such as of ﬁ ces , schools , retail stores , ho - CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 907 tels , restaurants , and even hospitals . The proliferation of sur - face technology makes it important to understand how older adults , a large , growing , and yet relatively unaddressed user group , interact with and react to such technology . While a range of research studies examine surface comput - ing for general audiences , only a few studies examine the technology for older adults . Apted et al . created SharePic , a tabletop photo sharing application for older adults [ 3 ] . The older adult participants were able to learn to use SharePic and enjoyed using the tabletop display . The authors present a set of a priori principles for the design of a tabletop ap - plication for older adults , most of which focus on the task of photo sharing but some are applicable to other tabletop applications ( e . g . , focus on learnability and memorability ) . Similarly , Mahmud et al . designed a tabletop game for older adults [ 15 ] . They tested the tabletop game against a tra - ditional board game and report that older adults found the tabletop game more engaging . Gabrielli et al . also created a single - user tabletop card game for older adults [ 8 ] . Identifying best practices for the design of surface comput - ing and subsequent interaction is a persistent research ques - tion . A key contribution toward this effort is work by Wob - brock et al . that identi ﬁ es a set of gestures for surface com - puting based on user expectations [ 22 ] . This work has im - portant implications for accessibility of tabletop technology , as gesture - based interaction should be ﬂ exible and accom - modate variations in touch input . The authors state , “ . . . the number of ﬁ ngers rarely matters and the ﬁ ngers , palms , or edges of the hands can often be used interchangeably . ” In - deed , older users with declining physical abilities are likely to need a range of alternatives for interacting with a touch - sensitive display . Recent research has also examined reading text [ 16 ] and text entry [ 11 ] on a horizontal display , yet this work focuses on the abilities of younger users . The Effects of Aging on Interaction Whether or not a multitouch surface computer is an appro - priate interaction device for older adults is a relatively un - explored question . To begin evaluating the potential advan - tages and drawbacks of the technology for this population , we present a brief review of challenges inherent in aging and the implications of each for surface computing . One of the most notable characteristics of aging is a change in one’s physical or motor ability . Older adults experience an overall slowing of movement as well as dif ﬁ culty with ﬁ ne motor activity and coordination [ 12 ] . Arthritis , a chronic and degenerative disease , is highly prevalent among older adults in the United States and is the leading cause of disability [ 13 ] . Physical limitations due to arthritis and general effects of ag - ing stand to impact how well older adults are able to interact with a large , and perhaps physically demanding , multitouch surface . For example , are older adults comfortable reaching across the display ? How do they manage ﬁ ne motor move - ment on the touch - screen ? Is touch interaction manageable for individuals with hand tremors ? Loss of or reduced vision is common for older adults , and 6 . 5 million Americans over the age of 65 have a severe visual im - pairment [ 14 ] . Enlarging visual information on a multitouch surface may be an advantage of the technology ; however , software design should account for age - related change in vi - sual abilities such as requiring more illumination for reading , decreased sensitivity to color and contrast , and issues with glare and depth perception [ 2 ] . Furthermore , it is currently unclear what text size is ideal for reading items at different locations on the surface and whether reading text on the hor - izontal display is problematic with bifocal lenses . Loss of hearing is another common consequence of aging . About one - third of Americans between the age of 65 and 74 have severe hearing problems , and about half of Amer - icans who are 85 and older have severe hearing loss [ 18 ] . Individuals with hearing loss rely on interpersonal cues to understand face - to - face conversation ( i . e . , watching the ges - tures and facial expressions of other people ) . How might the shared digital workspace support communication challenges due to hearing loss ? Finally , aging often results in a decline in memory . Changes in memory can be observed in how people encode new mem - ories as well as the short - term maintenance and manipula - tion of information involved in working memory [ 6 , 9 ] . One memory loss condition is Mild Cognitive Impairment ( MCI ) , which effects approximately 5 . 4 million Americans over the age of 70 [ 1 ] . While aging in general decreases memory ca - pabilities , people with MCI may more often misplace things , forget to go to important events and appointments , and have trouble coming up with desired words . General changes in memory necessitate that surface interaction is easy and quick to learn , a characteristic of surface technology that is as - sessed in the present study . Technology for Health Care Support As we grow older , we experience an increase in health care concerns . According to the Center for Disease Control ( CDC ) , arthritis , heart disease , cancer , and diabetes are chief chronic diseases among older adults [ 5 ] . They are persistent con - ditions that require regular medical attention . Managing a chronic medical condition is a familiar yet challenging task for many older adults . Various computer display systems have been explored to help a patient self - manage their con - dition and care needs ( e . g . , [ 4 ] ) . Many medical facilities are now transitioning to digital med - ical record systems . While this undoubtedly changes prac - tices for health care teams [ 10 ] , the introduction of digital record systems also affects medical interactions for patients [ 19 ] . For example , the doctor may have a computer work - station that displays the patient’s medical history . This can change the interaction between physician and patient in mul - tiple ways . For example , the physician must now attend to both patient and workstation and the patient may need to look over the doctor’s shoulder to ensure the accuracy of their chart , verify a prescription , or view other data . As electronic medical records become more integrated into the process of meeting with a doctor , there is a need to ex - plore computer interfaces that facilitate sharing this infor - mation . A large multiuser display system seems inherently CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 908 Paper Card Practice Activity Nutrition Discussion X - Ray Viewer Medical Chart Viewer Reach : manipulate paper cards by reaching across computer surface Move : touch object with one or more ﬁ ngers and drag Resize : place two ﬁ ngers or more on object and move apart / together Rotate : touch object corner with one ﬁ nger and move Medication Viewer Pain Management Diagram Side Effects Information Sign - In Terminal Pan : move one or more ﬁ ngers hor - izontally across display Draw : touch and move along sur - face with single ﬁ nger Read Text : touch buttons to increase and reduce text size Enter Text : touch virtual keyboard keys with at least one ﬁ nger Figure 1 . Basic surface interaction activities . All tasks focus on health care issues for older adults . well - suited for this context and the older adult population . The form factor of a tabletop display provides medical staff and patients with a shared workspace where they may lay out and manipulate medical materials such as patient charts , x - ray images , and other visuals pertinent to conversation . In August 2009 , this idea was put into practice at the Microsoft Medical Media Lab located within a Washington D . C . hos - pital . At this hospital , doctors may use a Microsoft Surface to share x - ray images with patients . Our research agenda in - volves installing a similar system at a health care center of a local retirement community . Results reported in this paper guide the design of the system we plan to deploy . ACTIVITY DESIGN AND PROTOTYPE We devised a series of basic activities to assess the follow - ing forms of interaction with the multitouch table : select , move , resize , rotate , pan , draw , read text , and enter text . We focus on these forms of interaction because they are per - vasive in tabletop application design . The functionality and implementation of the gestures was guided by Wobbrock et al . [ 22 ] . For example , users expect to rotate an image by touching on a corner of the image and moving in a circular direction [ 22 ] , therefore the rotate gesture in our study was implemented in this way . To assess the learnability and ease of performing each action , one gesture was presented per ac - tivity . Multiple gestures were not activated at the same time ( e . g . , users could not resize and rotate an image within the same activity ) . We implemented seven basic applications using a Diamond - Touch table [ 7 ] and the corresponding Flash development toolkit . This is a large ( 75 cm x 60 cm ) top - projected capaci - tive tabletop system with a display resolution of 1280x1024 . Figure 1 illustrates interface designs and gesture - based in - teraction for each activity . The design of each activity was intentionally minimalistic so that we were able to assess how much and what type of support older users would need to successfully perform each action . All tasks were set in the context of health care support . Ideas for tasks were derived from observations made during our ongoing ﬁ eld work , feed - back from health care professionals , and our research team’s prior experience designing technologies for health care sup - port . The goal of each activity was to solicit a particular type of interaction from the participant in a task that was realistic but not too personal . For example , our ﬁ eld work and con - versations with health care professionals revealed that older adults often forget which medications they are taking . To test the pan gesture , we presented participants with a basic appli - cation that allows them to look through a series of medicine brands and pill shapes . All activities were determined and designed in a similar fashion . METHOD We conducted a usability study involving 20 older adults ( age 60 to 88 ; mean age = 73 . 4 , stdev = 9 . 9 ; 13 females ) to understand the accessibility and appeal of surface comput - ing . All participants came into our laboratory to partici - pate in the study . Table 1 presents background data for each older adult participant . In our sample of older adults , 18 had corrected vision , 10 had arthritis , and one person had severe hand tremors . To better understand the interactions of older adults , 10 young adults ( age 19 to 26 ; mean age = 20 . 7 , stdev = 2 . 2 ; 6 females ) performed the same set of tasks and gave feedback on interaction . All young adults had prior ex - perience with computers , but none owned or had extended experience with a multitouch device or tabletop . While we recruited younger adults without multitouch experience , we were unable to control for their prior exposure through media CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 909 Age Gender Computer Own Touch - Screen Select Move Resize Rotate Pan Draw Read Enter Use Computer Experience Text Text 60 M Daily PC Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 60 M Yearly None Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 61 F Daily PC Single - touch , Multitouch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 62 F Daily PC Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 64 M Daily Both Single - touch , Multitouch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 65 F Daily PC Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 67 F Daily PC Single - touch , Multitouch (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 68 F Daily PC Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) 70 F Daily Mac Single - touch , Multitouch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 72 F Daily Mac Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 74 F Daily PC Single - touch , Multitouch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 75 M Never None None (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 77 F Monthly None Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint 78 F Daily Mac Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) Demo Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) 84 F Daily PC Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint 84 M Daily PC None (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Demo (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint 85 M Daily PC Single - touch , Multitouch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) 86 F Daily PC Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 88 F Daily PC Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Hint 88 M Daily PC Single - touch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) Table 1 . Computer experience for participants and whether participants ﬁ gured out each action on their own ( checkmark ) , needed a hint about interaction ( hint ) , or required a demonstration of the action ( demo ) . Touch - screen experience : ( single - touch ) prior experience with devices such as point - of - sale systems and bank automatic teller machines and ( multitouch ) prior experience with devices like the iPhone or Microsoft Surface . and social channels ( e . g . , commercial advertisements , watch - ing a friend use a multitouch cell phone ) . Observations and data below focus on older adults except where noted . A researcher followed a written script to guide participants through a series of tasks . The ﬁ rst task involved getting the participant comfortable in an adjustable of ﬁ ce chair and situ - ated at the table . The participant then manipulated paper in - formation cards spread out on the table surface ( at this point the display was off , see Figure 2 ) . The goal of this ﬁ rst activ - ity was to ensure that the participant was comfortable at the table while interacting with the entire surface . After the paper - based task , each participant completed seven brief activities ( each lasting about 5 minutes ) on the mul - titouch surface . The ordering of activities was randomized between subjects . For each activity , the moderator ﬁ rst ex - plained the context of activity ( e . g . , “Suppose the doctor took Figure 2 . Participant ( age 88 ) getting situated at the computer and in the adjustable chair during the paper card task . an x - ray of your hand and now wants to review it with you . ” ) . Then she asked the participant how they would perform the task ( e . g . , “If you want to make this x - ray larger , how might you do that ? ” ) and observed their behavior . Participants were given a hint if necessary ( e . g . , “You need to use two ﬁ ngers or two hands to make the x - ray larger . ” ) . If the participant still had trouble ﬁ guring out the action , the moderator gave them explicit instructions and demonstrated the action for them . The participant was encouraged to try the action sev - eral times . Then the participant rated on a seven - point Likert scale the level of dif ﬁ culty for ﬁ guring out the action and the level of dif ﬁ culty for physically performing the action . Af - ter completing all activities , we used a structured interview to examine each participant’s reaction to surface computing as well as ideas for using this technology in a medical set - ting . Participants performed activities individually , but if two or three participants came to the study together , we allowed them to do the structured interview as a group to encourage discussion . Two researchers were present for all sessions and took detailed notes . Each session was video recorded by two cameras , one mounted directly above the table and another positioned in the corner of the testing room . RESULTS The majority of older adults independently ﬁ gured out how to perform touch - based interaction with the surface computer ( see Table 1 ) and found the various forms of interaction phys - ically manageable . The idea of using surface computing to support health care interactions was also well - received by participants . Touch - Based Interaction After performing each task , participants rated the ease of learning and ease of performance for that particular task ( see Figure 3 ) . Some types of interaction ( e . g . , panning and draw - ing ) were harder for participants to ﬁ gure out than to phys - ically perform . In contrast , reading text on the surface was CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 910 Figure 3 . Self - report data for ease of learning ( left ) and ease of performing ( center ) each type of interaction . Data was collected via a seven - point Likert scale ( extremely hard = - 3 , extremely easy = 3 ) . On average , older adults rated all interactions as “somewhat easy” or better for learning and physical performance . Graph on the right indicates individual participant data ( translucent bar overlay is average ) for time to ﬁ gure out each task . Results were not signi ﬁ cantly different between older and young adults except where denoted with a star ( calculated with Mann - Whitney U test ; learning to enter text , U = 148 . 0 , p < 0 . 017 ; performing draw , U = 150 . 0 , p < 0 . 014 ; time to ﬁ gure out pan , U = 158 . 5 , p < 0 . 0003 ; time to ﬁ gure out enter text , U = 131 . 0 p < 0 . 028 ) . Error bars show standard error . rated as easy to ﬁ gure out but slightly harder to perform be - cause of issues such as the angle of the display , which is dis - cussed further below . Figure 3 ( right ) illustrates the time it took each participant to ﬁ gure out each action . Importantly , the average score by older adults for ease of learning and ease of performance for all tasks is “somewhat easy” or better , and the average time it took older adults to ﬁ gure out each form of interaction was less than 10 seconds . Select While participants did not complete an activity that explic - itly examined selecting , they performed the select gesture on a variety of objects within several activities ( e . g . , touching a button to enlarge text for reading , pressing a key on a vir - tual keyboard , choosing a paint color before drawing ) . Ob - servations throughout the study indicate that selecting was straight - forward and physically manageable for participants . For smaller buttons ( 1” by 1” ) , participants typically used a single ﬁ nger to select . Occasionly participants used two or three ﬁ ngers grouped together to select larger buttons ( 2” by 2” ) such as the paint color in the drawing activity . Finally , the prototypes in this study are basic in terms of visual design , and subsequent designs should provide visual con ﬁ rmation that a button or object was selected . Move : arranging foods by cholesterol content The move gesture was examined by asking participants to arrange images of foods along a continuum depending on how each item affects cholesterol levels . Food images were scattered throughout the top region of the display to exam - ine issues of reaching and moving across the surface . Figur - ing out how to move objects around the surface was trivial for participants ( mean rating = 2 . 50 , SE = 0 . 17 ; mean time = 2 . 2 sec , SE = 0 . 54 ) , and physically performing this gesture was equally as easy ( mean rating = 2 . 55 , SE = 0 . 14 ) . We anticipated that some participants would have dif ﬁ culty reaching objects in the far corners of the display , but this was not an issue as their position at the table enabled full range of motion across the surface ( we elaborate the importance of this point in the discussion below ) . Most often participants used one ﬁ nger for this action , but occasionally people used two ﬁ ngers or a whole hand to move an object across the display . A couple participants experienced hand tremors while dragging , but these participants were still able to successfully move objects across the display . One complication participants with hand tremors experienced is that an additional ﬁ nger ( the thumb or little ﬁ nger ) would occasionally touch the surface and make the object jump around under their hand . Resize : adjusting the size of an x - ray image Participants were asked to resize an x - ray image ( perform enlarge and shrink gestures ) . Figuring out how to resize the image was not straight - forward for many older adults ( mean rating = 1 . 15 , SE = 0 . 39 ; mean time = 9 . 6 sec , SE = 2 . 2 ) . Only eight participants used two ﬁ ngers or hands to enlarge the image on their ﬁ rst attempt . Seven participants ﬁ rst tried to enlarge the image by tapping on it , and eight ( some of whom also tapped ) tried enlarging the image by dragging one cor - ner of the image outward with a single ﬁ nger ( see Figure 4 , left ) . One lady ( age 84 ) asked , “I don’t see any buttons . Just tap on it ? ” Another woman ( age 70 ) said , “I’m expecting this to work because on my computer you can pull out from a corner to make the window larger . ” Because this particular task focuses on resizing , not dragging , the image remained in CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 911 the same position when a single ﬁ nger moved across it . An implementation that combines moving and dragging would likely help participants realize that dragging with a single ﬁ nger moves the image instead of resizing it . At the begin - ning of the study , participants were told that the computer is a touch - screen and that some activities might require more than one ﬁ nger or hand ; yet some participants were hesi - tant to involve a second hand in this task . Six participants needed a hint that this activity involved more than one ﬁ n - ger or hand . When participants did use two hands to resize the image , they tended to place their ﬁ ngers on the edges of the image and move outward horizontally . Most people did this with two index ﬁ ngers , but some people used several ﬁ n - gers or their whole hands to “spread out” the image . Some participants suggested adding a visual cue ( e . g . , handles on the image edges ) to help people understand that a two - ﬁ nger action is required . Once participants ﬁ gured out how to en - large the image ( move ﬁ ngers apart ) , it was trivial for them to determine how to shrink the image ( move ﬁ ngers together ) . Figure 4 . Many participants tried to enlarge the image by touching on a corner with a single ﬁ nger and moving outward ( left ) but some immediately touched with two ﬁ ngers ( right ) . Rotate : turning a medical graph toward oneself To examine a rotate gesture , we presented users with a graph of blood pressure levels over a period of time , but the image was initially oriented toward the moderator . We asked par - ticipants to turn the graph / chart toward themselves so they could view it . Rotation was possible by touching on a cor - ner of the image with a single ﬁ nger and moving in a cir - cular direction , and nine participants immediately touched a corner with a single ﬁ nger and began rotating the image . One participant ﬁ rst touched an edge and attempted rotate . The other ten participants ﬁ rst used their whole hand or two hands to rotate the image before realizing that a single ﬁ nger on the corner was the desired action . One lady ( age 74 ) said , “My instinct was to turn it like a regular paper , physically with two hands . ” With two ﬁ nger rotation , participants ex - pected one ﬁ nger to serve as an anchor point while the other Figure 5 . Some participants had dif ﬁ culty rotating because they used their whole hand ( left ) or two ﬁ ngers ( right ) to perform this action . ﬁ nger rotated the object around . Rotate tied with resize as the most dif ﬁ cult to learn ( mean rating = 1 . 15 , SE = 0 . 41 ) , and rotate was rated as the most dif ﬁ cult to perform ( mean rat - ing = 1 . 25 , SE = 0 . 37 ) . Regardless of how participants started rotating , they were all able to independently ﬁ gure out how to rotate the image . However , almost everyone had problems stopping the image in the exact orientation they wanted . For example , one man ( age 84 ) summarized this common prob - lem , “More damping would be helpful . This is a little jumpy . I tend to overshoot . ” Overall , rotating by touching on the corner of an image was not intuitive for everyone , and the implementation requires smoothing and slowing to enhance usability with older adults . Pan : viewing medication types and dosages Participants performed a right and left pan gesture to look through various brand packaging and pill shapes for ten over - the - counter medications . This activity started with four brands of medicine on the display , two of which were partially off the screen to provide a cue that content extended beyond the current view ( see Figure 6 ) . Participants could use any num - ber of ﬁ ngers to pan . On average participants rated the ease of learning for panning as “very easy” ( mean rating = 1 . 95 , SE = 0 . 30 ) , but ironically participants took the longest time to ﬁ gure out the action ( mean time = 9 . 6 sec , SE = 2 . 6 ; tied with resize ) . Physically performing a panning gesture was not a problem for participants ( mean rating = 2 . 40 , SE = 0 . 17 ) . Sev - eral participants who quickly understood this form of inter - action referenced their experience with traditional window - like scrollbars . For example , one lady ( age 70 ) commented , “This is easy for someone who has computer experience be - cause we scroll all the time . ” As another woman ( age 77 ) contemplated the task , she said “On other computers you can scroll up or down , ” and then successfully performed the hori - zontal pan gesture . Five participants needed a hint or explicit instructions to understand the panning action . Some partic - ipants who had dif ﬁ culty ﬁ guring out the panning metaphor said they wanted a clear indicator that off - screen content ex - ists ( e . g . , arrows ) . Draw : indicating pain points on a body diagram To examine whether participants were able to draw with the tip of their ﬁ nger on the surface , we asked participants to se - Figure 6 . Participant ( age 85 ) uses his whole hand to pan through vari - ous medications . CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 912 lect a paint color and draw on a human body diagram to indi - cate areas where pain has improved ( green ) , stayed the same ( yellow ) , or gotten worse ( red ) . While all participants were immediately successful at drawing with their ﬁ nger , seven people touched a paint color and attempted to drag the col - ored circle up to the ﬁ gure ( hence the lower rating for ease of learning : mean rating = 1 . 30 , SE = 0 . 24 ) . It was not clear to them that they were able to select a color , release their ﬁ nger , and then draw with that color on the diagram . One reason for this is likely the implementation of our prototype , as it was minimalistic and did not provide users with feedback about which color was selected . The point of this activity was to examine the feasibility of drawing with a ﬁ nger tip , and all participants understood the concept of drawing with their ﬁ nger and were able to perform this action with ease ( mean rating = 2 . 20 , SE = 0 . 16 ) . After performing this task , a man ( age 64 ) said , “I would say it’s extremely easy . It’s like ﬁ nger painting . ” Read Text : reviewing side effects of a medication Participants viewed a text description of the side effects of generic aspirin and were asked to adjust the text ( presented in a sans - serif font ) to a comfortable size for reading . This activity had a “larger” and “smaller” button at the bottom of the display that participants used to increase and reduce the text size . Average preferred text size for reading text close to the user is 1 / 4” ( measured by capital letter height ) and for reading text far away is 5 / 16” . Figuring out how to change the text size was not problematic for participants ( mean rat - ing = 2 . 40 , SE = 0 . 13 ) ; however , some participants said the hor - izontal orientation of the display made it dif ﬁ cult to read text ( in agreement with [ 16 ] ) . Nine of 20 participants said that they wanted the display to tilt slightly so that reading text would be easier . Participants liked the idea of dynamically adjusting the text size , and future designs should consider this option . About half of participants brought two pair of glasses to the study . One woman ( age 70 ) who brought bi - focals and magnifying glasses read text on the display with each pair of glasses , and stated , “it works ﬁ ne with bifocals . ” Other participants wearing bifocals echoed this sentiment . Enter Text : signing in at the medical facility We examined participant reactions to and ability to use a virtual keyboard through an activity that simulated a sign - in terminal in the reception area of a medical center . The QWERTY keyboard was designed larger than necessary to ensure that participants could accurately touch each key . En - tering text on the virtual keyboard was straight - forward for all but four participants . In fact , many participants began en - tering their name before the task was explained to them . Par - ticipants who had dif ﬁ culty ﬁ guring out this activity looked for a stylus to write their name . One man ( age 85 ) said , “I’d look for a wand for signing in . ” Over half of participants rec - ommended that the keyboard be made slightly smaller so that touch typing is possible and to increase the contrast of the let - ters on each key . For example , one lady ( age 88 ) looked at the display and said , “Ok , this is a typewriter but the spac - ing is not right . ” After typing her name , she explained , “I would say that’s not easy because I’m used to touch typing . The spacing is different . If it were like a keyboard it would be very easy . ” Typing errors most often occurred when peo - ple used their ﬁ ngernail , instead of their ﬁ ngertip , to touch the keyboard ( this surface is capitative and requires contact with a ﬁ ngertip ) . Finally , several participants could not ﬁ nd the space bar , so labeling it as such would be helpful . Over - all , the virtual keyboard was suitable for brief text entry , and once participants ﬁ gured out how to use the keyboard , all said that it was ﬁ ne for this task compared to a traditional keyboard . Feedback on Health Care Scenarios The goal of situating this laboratory - based study within the context of health care was to explore a variety of application ideas with older adults . It is important to note that partici - pants’ success with a particular form of interaction did not appear to interfere with their ability to understand the pro - posed scenario , as the rotate gesture was most challenging yet the application idea was rated second highest and all ideas received an average score of “somewhat useful” or better ( see Figure 7 ) . The top three ideas include reading through med - ication side effect information with your doctor , viewing a graph / chart of your medical history ( e . g . , blood pressure ) , and drawing on a diagram of a human ﬁ gure to discuss pain management with your doctor . Viewing a shared description of the side effects of a med - ication received high ratings from participants . They liked the idea of reviewing text - based information with a doctor to point out areas of concern . Also , participants stated that they liked the adjustable nature of the text in this activity . The medical chart viewer was well - received as participants wanted to have a shared visual representation of their medi - cal history . Regarding drawing , participants thought the ap - plication would be useful for clarifying to the doctor exactly where pain is located . One lady ( age 84 ) said , “ . . . it speci ﬁ es exactly where the pain is and that’s a lot easier than saying ‘doctor , I feel it over here or over here’ . . . it’s very graphic , a good idea . ” In general , participants wanted to have visuals Figure 7 . Older adult ratings for perceived usefulness of each health care scenario . CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 913 to augment conversation with the doctor such as medicine labels , pill sizes and shapes , x - rays , and food choices . One man ( age 60 ) said , “I like the visuals . . . the pictures help . . . if you have the pictures there , [ the doctor can ] say ‘ok , now I know what you want . ”’ Attitude Toward Surface Computing An important aspect of surface computing for the older adult population is how the technology affects people’s percep - tions of their ability to interact with a computer . To assess this , at the beginning of the study participants rated their agreement with six statements pertaining to computers in general . After using the surface computer for about 30 min - utes , participants rated their agreement with the same six statements pertaining to this particular experience . Figure 8 illustrates the results . For older adults , the difference be - tween positive statements about general computing and the surface computer was not statistically different . However , older adults tended to disagree more strongly with negative statements about their experience with surface computing ( all three are statistically signi ﬁ cant with the Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - ranks test : W = 9 , p < 0 . 004 ; W = 16 . 5 , p < 0 . 003 ; W = 11 , p < 0 . 007 , respectively ) . One man ( age 60 ) who rarely uses a computer explained , “I’m not intimidated by this be - cause I can use my hands and move things around . . . I can play with it and ﬁ gure it out . ” In summary , the surface com - puter appears to be less intimidating , less frustrating , and less overwhelming than participants’ usual experience with com - puters . Interestingly , young adults’ attitudes toward general computers compared to the surface computer were not statis - tically different for positive or negative statements . Figure 8 . Agreement ratings for statements about attitude toward com - puter use . For older adults , the difference between general computers and the surface computer for negative statements is signi ﬁ cant . No sig - ni ﬁ cant difference in attitude was found for young adults . Generational Differences Comparing interaction between older and younger adults re - veals several important similarities and differences . First , many younger participants had the same expectations for in - teraction as the older participants ( e . g . , resizing an image by tapping or moving outward with a single ﬁ nger , rotating with two ﬁ ngers ) . However , young adults quickly tried various ways of interacting until they ﬁ gured out the desired gesture . Only one young user said they could not ﬁ gure out an action ( resize ) and requested a hint , whereas older users were more likely to wait for a hint rather than exploring until they ﬁ g - ured out the action . There was also a certain reticence or hes - itancy in interaction for older adults . This can be observed in the way they touched the display lightly with a single ﬁ nger tip , as if to minimize impact to the system . Another differ - ence is that even though young adults in this study had min - imal exposure to a multitouch device , they had high expec - tations for the quality of interaction ( i . e . , low tolerance for an image not rotating smoothly ) . In fact , younger users rated the ease of performing rotation lower than the older adults ( see Figure 3 ) . Finally , younger users bring to bear computer experience that may work against them with the simplistic interaction presented in this study . For example , four young users had initial dif ﬁ culty with the text entry activity because they wanted to ensure that the cursor was in the correct spot before entering their name . There was no cursor to manage in this scenario , which confused some younger users but went unnoticed by all older users . SUMMARY OF FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Interaction Design While touch - based interactions were relatively easy for par - ticipants to ﬁ gure out and perform , we discuss several ways in which interaction can be improved to better accommodate the needs of older adults . Touch interaction is manageable and preferred . Overall , we were surprised by how well older adults performed each type of interaction . Participants enjoyed multitouch interaction and called it “fun” and “engaging . ” We suspected that cer - tain actions , speci ﬁ cally panning , might be tiresome for par - ticipants , yet all but one person said they prefer to use their hand to pan across the surface compared to having buttons to scroll through options . We encouraged participants to per - form each gesture multiple times , especially actions that have a high level of arm movement such as the pan and move ges - tures . While our data do not assess whether these gestures will fatigue users over time , not a single older adult men - tioned that an action might become tiresome . Nevertheless , future work in which such a system is placed in a real world setting for extended use should address these aspects of in - teraction . Provide cues for interaction . For many participants , the in - teraction with virtual objects on the multitouch surface was intuitive . However , providing more explicit cues for inter - action would help facilitate initial learning and perhaps sub - sequent use of the technology . For example , many partici - pants did not immediately know whether an object was se - lectable , dragable , resizable , and / or rotatable . Indicating this functionality visually would aid usability . Participants also CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 914 wanted to know when they needed to use more than one ﬁ n - ger ( or more than one hand ) for a particular action . While en - larging and shrinking an image was trivial once users ﬁ gured out the action , the two ﬁ nger ( or two - handed ) resize gesture caused initial confusion for over half of users . One way to in - dicate a multitouch gesture is by adding visual touch points ( e . g . , grips or handles ) to the side of a resizable image . Slow down interaction . The rate at which virtual objects ad - just based on subtle hand movements , particularly during re - sizing and rotating actions , needs to be slowed down . Partic - ipants appeared to be more concerned with accuracy in ma - nipulating objects than the speed of interaction . This was observed in the way many participants spent time carefully adjusting the rotatable chart so that it was exactly horizontal and faced them perfectly . Subsequent multitouch systems for older adults should include easing or damping in interaction . Objects that snap in place ( perhaps at regular angles for the rotate gesture ) would help older users avoid the challenges of ﬁ ne motor movement required to align an object . Avoid ﬁ ne motor input . The ability for the interface to allow whole - handed and multi ﬁ nger input is critical . This is partic - ularly important for individuals with hand tremors or arthitis . In fact , one lady ( age 70 ) with arthritis in her hands said the technology “would be very good for people with arthritis or who have hands that don’t work right . ” The drawing activity required a single ﬁ nger for interaction , and this was challeng - ing for some participants who accidentally touched the dis - play with other ﬁ ngers . Dragging allowed input through any number of ﬁ ngers , but the image jumped around when other ﬁ ngers unintentionally touched the display background . For this example , the gesture recognizer could mitigate the im - pact of additional unwanted ﬁ ngers contacting the display during an action . A ﬁ ngertip is a blunt and imprecise in - put device , and the effects of imprecision with touch input are exasperated for older adults with limited dexterity . Three people in this study ( all men in their 80s ) suggested that we enable interaction through a stylus . One man ( age 84 ) who experienced hand tremors said , “I would be more comfort - able if I had a pen in my hand . . . I’d have more control . ” Form Factor and Industrial Design The size , height , and adjustability of the surface computer are important to consider in the design of subsequent systems for older adults . Positioning at the surface is critical . Our study examined a 75 cm by 60 cm horizontal surface computer . Reaching the far corners of this surface was not problematic for any par - ticipant . No participant complained about back or neck pain during the 30 minute session of use . Furthermore , observa - tions of participants’ posture in the chair and movement at the table did not indicate issues of discomfort . A primary reason for this is the setup of the table and chair . The thin form factor of the DiamondTouch table on a pedestal stand allowed people to position their legs under the table . Partic - ipants were able to adjust the chair height to a comfortable position for interacting throughout the surface . The lack of leg room and low positioning of other tabletop models ( e . g . , Microsoft Surface ) may present problems for older users . Consider a tilted or adjustable display . Almost half of par - ticipants ( 9 total ) suggested that the surface should be at an angle to improve usability . “This is weird . Canted would be so much easier . . . My vision is not wonderful . If it were raised at a 30 degree angle . . . it would be much easier for me , ” com - mented one lady ( age 78 ) . Another lady ( age 84 ) explained , “I think it should be at an angle so the doctor can see it bet - ter and also the patient can see it better . . . the patient would have to sit along side the doctor . ” “It’s funny that it’s ﬂ at . I would expect it to be on an angle . . . almost like an easel , ” said another woman ( age 67 ) . While participants were keen on tilting the surface , the tradeoffs in terms of usability and co - operative work should be considered carefully ( see [ 16 , 17 ] ) . Display size may be intimidating . Many participants liked the large display for sharing information with medical pro - fessionals , but a few participants mentioned that the size of the display may be intimidating in a doctor’s of ﬁ ce . “I’m not sure that the screen has to be quite so large . . . The pa - tient might feel intimidated by the size of the screen , ” com - mented one woman ( age 84 ) . Some people said that a smaller display , about half the size of the current surface computer , would be suf ﬁ cient and less intimidating . The most appro - priate size for a display needs further exploration , as smaller multitouch surfaces are less expensive and increasingly avail - able ( e . g . , HP TouchSmart ) . Exploring the Domain of Health Care Overall , participants talked enthusiastically about using a sur - face computer in a medical setting and gave positive feed - back on the idea . Participants articulated , from a patient’s perspective , how the computer would ﬁ t into the work ﬂ ow of a medical visit . Several people referenced their current expe - rience with digital patient records . One woman ( age 65 ) re - counted an experience where there were several mistakes on her record , but she did not notice because the notes were on the doctor’s small computer display . “You go to [ a medical provider ] and the doctor is over here looking at the computer screen . . . we’d have to get behind the doctor to look at the computer screen , ” she said . Her friend ( age 67 ) replied , “You have to be practically on top of them and get in his space . ” With respect to the shared nature of the surface computer , the ﬁ rst woman explained , “The opportunity to catch mis - takes would be doubled when you have two people . ” Having a shared view of one’s medical records was perceived as a strong bene ﬁ t of the surface computer . Participants also expressed concern about using a surface computer in a medical context . Several people mentioned that patients have a right to view their medical information , but at the same time , not everything should be modi ﬁ able . Shared display systems for health care need mechanisms to control access to certain information . One woman ( age 67 ) was concerned that patients might “reach in and mess things up . ” She said , “They’d almost have to lock it . ” Another lady ( age 65 ) commented on her willingness to interact with the shared computer surface , “It’s owned by the doctor . . . We’d at least ask permission , or we’d have to be invited [ to use it ] . ” Technologies such as the DiamondTouch that can detect individual users would be helpful for controlling access to various parts of the shared display in a medical setting . CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 915 CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS This paper reports results from an exploratory study involv - ing older adults using a multitouch surface computer . Older adults were able to perform all actions on the surface , but several aspects of software and hardware design need to be reconsidered to improve usability for this population . The present study provides insights about older users’ conceptual expectations and physical demands of various gestures . Fu - ture work should examine the integration of individual ges - tures into a single application ( i . e . , where users can resize , rotate , draw on a single image ) . While this study examined touch input directly to the surface , light - weight physical con - trols ( e . g . , SLAP Widgets [ 20 ] ) stand to bene ﬁ t the unique needs of older users . For example , individuals with hand tremors might ﬁ nd physical controls easier to manage than touch input . Lastly , an evaluation of surface technology for health care support must be conducted in an authentic setting . People act differently under emotional stress due to an illness or may be more limited when they are sick or hurt . Other factors such as surface hygiene will be important when the device is installed in a medical facility . Several participants were concerned that doctors are already limited by time , and the surface computer might slow down the medical interview process . Ease of learning for novice users is crucial if the technology is placed in a time - critical setting such as a med - ical facility . Our ongoing work involves installing a surface computer in an authentic medical setting to assess these is - sues . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Research is supported by NSF grant 0729013 and a NSF graduate fellowship . We thank MERL for donating a Dia - mondTouch table and our study participants . REFERENCES 1 . AA . Alzheimer’s association . Alzheimers Disease Facts and Figures ( http : / / www . alz . org ) . 2 . AFB . American foundation for the blind . What is Nor - mal Vision ? ( http : / / www . afb . org / seniorsite ) . 3 . Apted , T . , Kay , J . , and Quigley , A . Tabletop sharing of digital photographs for the elderly . In Proc . of CHI ’06 , New York : ACM Press , 781 - 790 . 4 . Bhachu , A . S . , Hine , N . , and Arnott , J . Technology de - vices for older adults to aid self management of chronic health conditions . In Proc . of Assets ’08 , New York : ACM Press , 59 - 66 . 5 . CDC . The center for disease control . Health Information for Older Adults ( http : / / www . cdc . gov / Aging / info . htm ) . 6 . Craik , F . Memory changes in normal aging . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 3 . 7 . Dietz , P . and Leigh , D . Diamondtouch : a multi - user touch technology . In Proc . of UIST ’01 , New York : ACM Press , 219 - 226 . 8 . Gabrielli , S . , Bellutti , S . , Jameson , A . , Leonardi , C . , and Zancanaro , M . A single - user tabletop card game system for older persons : General lessons learned from an in - situ study . In Proc . of TABLETOP ’08 , 85 - 88 . 9 . Gregorie , J . and der Linden , M . V . Effect of age on for - ward and backward digit spans . Aging Neuropsychol . Cogn . 4 . 10 . Hardstone , G . , Hartswood , M . , Procter , R . , Slack , R . , Voss , A . , and Rees , G . Supporting informality : team working and integrated care records . In Proc . of CSCW ’04 , New York : ACM Press , 142 - 151 . 11 . Hinrichs , U . , Hancock , M . , Collins , C . , and Carpendale , S . Examination of text - entry methods for tabletop dis - plays . In Proc . of TABLETOP ’07 , 105 - 112 . 12 . Holmes , J . , Powell - Griner , E . , Lethbridge - Cejku , M . , and Heyman , K . Aging differ - ently : Physical limitations among adults aged 50 years and over . Center for Disease Control , http : / / www . cdc . gov / nchs / data / databriefs / db20 . htm . 13 . Hootman , J . and Helmick , C . Projections of us preva - lence of arthritis and associated activity limitations . Arthritis Rheum 54 . 14 . Lee , P . , Feldman , Z . , Ostermann , J . , Brown , D . , and Sloan , F . Longitudinal prevalence of major eye diseases . Arch Ophthalmol . 121 . 15 . Mahmud , A . A . , Mubin , O . , Shahid , S . , and Martens , J . Designing and evaluating the tabletop game experience for senior citizens . In Proc . of NordiCHI ’08 , New York : ACM Press , 403 - 406 . 16 . Morris , M . , Brush , A . , and Meyers , B . Reading revisited : Evaluating the usability of digital display surfaces for active reading tasks . In Proc . of TABLETOP ’07 , 79 - 86 . 17 . Muller - Tomfelde , C . , Wessels , A . , and Schremmer , C . Tilted tabletops : In between horizontal and vertical workspaces . In Proc . of TABLETOP ’08 , 49 - 56 . 18 . NIA . National institute on aging . national institutes of health ( http : / / www . nia . nih . gov ) . 19 . Stroetmann , K . A . , Pieper , M . , and Stroetmann , V . N . Un - derstanding patients : participatory approaches for the user evaluation of vital data presentation . In Proc . of CUU ’03 , New York : ACM Press , 93 - 97 . 20 . Weiss , M . , Wagner , J . , Jansen , Y . , Jennings , R . , Khoshabeh , R . , Hollan , J . D . , and Borchers , J . Slap wid - gets : bridging the gap between virtual and physical con - trols on tabletops . In Proceedings of CHI ’09 , New York : ACM Press , 481 - 490 . 21 . WHO . World health organization . Ageing and Life Course ( http : / / www . who . int / ageing / en ) . 22 . Wobbrock , J . O . , Morris , M . R . , and Wilson , A . D . User - de ﬁ ned gestures for surface computing . In Proc . of CHI ’09 , New York : ACM Press , 1083 - 1092 . CHI 2010 : Medical Exploration April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 916