196 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 10 “From Clicks to Taps and Swipes” : Translating User Needs to a Mobile Knowledge Management Experience ABSTRACT Organizations constantly strive to improve the richness and reach of their knowledge resources to ensure optimal performance of their employees in their job functions . Some of the techniques that organizations have used in the past have included state - of - the - art search engines , creating a directed navigation by mapping content to employee transactions , and incorporating user experience design heuristics . Search engine improvement is reputed to be the most used technique , even though its effectiveness in organizational knowledge management systems has not been confirmed . With more and more organizations now having a mobile employee base , there is now a need to provide employees access to organizational resources anytime and anywhere . This chapter provides insight into some of the challenges in organizational knowledge management systems and the implications of designing a mobile system . It proposes some heuristics on designing a knowledge management system for mobile systems and proposes a framework to validate it against available user acceptance models . INTRODUCTION Knowledge management systems can be defined as systems that support creation , transfer and ap - plication of knowledge in organizations ( Alavi & Leidner , 2001 ) . To make a knowledge management system effective , it has to be easy to access , and provide accurate information in a timely manner . For a long time , organizations have depended on a good knowledge management system for the learning and training needs of their employees . In the context of an organizational knowledge management system , knowledge resources include reference content and learning content that em - ployees use to maintain and improve their explicit knowledge ( Collins , 2012 ) . A good knowledge management system also helps to capture the tacit knowledge of its user base . The success of an organizational knowledge management system depends on how effectively it can be used by its user base at the time of need . Madhavi M . Chakrabarty Verizon Wireless , USA DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 4666 - 4566 - 0 . ch010 197 “From Clicks to Taps and Swipes” : Translating User Needs to a Mobile Knowledge Management Experience The improvements over time in knowledge management systems were geared towards im - proving ease of access , time to access information and the accuracy of information accessed from the knowledge management systems ( Becerra - Fernandez , Gonzalez , & Sabherwal , 2004 ) . These three parameters are the major driving factors for all the research related to the design , implementa - tion and management of knowledge management systems in general and organizational knowledge management systems in particular . Improving ease of access in design of knowledge management sys - tems have been based on principles and guidelines of usability and user experience design ( Karner & Droschl , 2002 ) . The design of the navigation and menus reflect guidelines from user experience handbooks and experts and the influence of these experts on the design of organizational knowledge management systems . Search engine integration to existing knowledge management systems helped to improve time to access information in large knowledge bases ( Becerra - Fernandez et al . , 2004 ; Robertson , 2006 ) . The search engines varied from a basic keyword only search engine to more intelligent and smarter search engines ( Bughin et al . , July 2011 ) . Directed navigation was another attempt to design the system so that it mimicked the behavior of the users and presented the right information at the time of need , thereby attempting to improve the accuracy as well as ease of access of information . Directed navigation required the knowledge managers to understand the different transactions and inquiries that were performed by the users of the system and then design a system that categorized the content based on the type of transactions and where the user was in the trans - action . All the above improvements resulted in a progressive and steady improvement in the design , development , implementation and performance of the knowledge management systems over time . One important factor that enabled the evolution of knowledge management systems was the evo - lution in the areas of system hardware , software , and other performance driving measures . These factors have impacted the development of IT sys - tems in general . Even as knowledge management systems were becoming more efficient with the right hardware choices , another change that was happening was in the organizational landscapes . More and more organizations were incorporat - ing faster computing resources to handle their IT needs ( Chase , 2008 ) . Many organizations were going global and their organizational knowledge needs were growing exponentially with it . Cur - rently , organizations are also becoming mobile , and along with the organizations , the workforce is also becoming mobile ( Antill , 2013 ; Citrix White paper , Oct 2012 ) . Overall , over the last decade , the improving computational resources resulted in the organizations ability to implement more robust and efficient systems and mobilization of the organizations has generated the need for these organizations to create a knowledge management system that can be accessed anywhere and anytime by the user base so that the users can continue being effective in their job requirements . Many organizations are seeking the solution for a mobile knowledge management system by using traditional usability and user feedback tech - niques to gather requirements . But preliminary implementations and results have shown that while users know what they want , they sometimes do not know what they need ( Churchville , 2008 ) . Many organizations have reported that in going back to the users , the top feedback received was the need for a “Google” search engine . While Google works perfectly in the chaotic Internet world , a search engine implementation does not solve all the issues and requirements of a mobile knowledge management system . Therefore , the need arises to discover the needs of the mobile employees and how they can be resolved when designing a tool that helps them perform their job responsibilities in a mobile environment . This chapter discusses the progressive improve - ment of organizational knowledge management systems and the drivers that prompted these changes . The background section discusses the 18 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / from - clicks - to - taps - and - swipes / 81175 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in Advances in Human and Social Aspects of Technology Book Series , Advances in Human and Social Aspects of Technology Book Series , InfoSci - Books , InfoSci - Media and Communications , Communications , Social Science , and Healthcare , InfoSci - Computer Science and Information Technology , Science , Engineering , and Information Technology , InfoSci - Social Sciences and Humanities , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 93 Related Content Analyzing the Discourse of E - mail Communication Yasemin Kirkgöz ( 2010 ) . Handbook of Research on Discourse Behavior and Digital Communication : Language Structures and Social Interaction ( pp . 335 - 348 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / analyzing - discourse - mail - communication / 42789 ? camid = 4v1a Identity and Language Use Online : Stories from Syria Naseem Hallajow ( 2016 ) . International Journal of Cyber Behavior , Psychology and Learning ( pp . 73 - 87 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / identity - and - language - use - online / 149172 ? camid = 4v1a Prevalence and Correlates of Internet Addiction in Undergraduate Students : Assessing with Two Major Measures Daniel Schoenfeld and Zheng Yan ( 2012 ) . International Journal of Cyber Behavior , Psychology and Learning ( pp . 16 - 34 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / prevalence - correlates - internet - addiction - undergraduate / 67340 ? camid = 4v1a How Do Technology Application and Equity Impact Student Achievement ? Tak Cheung Chan ( 2011 ) . International Journal of Cyber Ethics in Education ( pp . 1 - 14 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / technology - application - equity - impact - student / 54449 ? camid = 4v1a