Crafting Mechatronic Percussion with Everyday Materials Hyunjoo Oh 1 , Jiffer Harriman 1 , Abhishek Narula 1 , Mark D . Gross 1 , 2 , Michael Eisenberg 1 , 2 , Sherry Hsi 3 1 ATLAS Institute , 2 Computer Science University of Colorado Boulder , CO USA 3 Concord Consortium Emeryville , CA USA { hyunjoo . oh , jeffrey . harriman , abhishek . narula , mdgross , duck } @ colorado . edu shsi @ concord . org ABSTRACT We present a kit comprising cardboard mechanical components and a custom printed circuit board , designed to support novices in building computational percussive instruments with everyday materials . We set three design criteria : accessibility , adaptability , and expressivity . We conducted two workshops with experts and novices to assess the usability of our kit and observe the variety of constructions that users make . The kit enabled both experts and novices to build working instruments and to explore creative experimentation with different materials and objects . Author Keywords DIY technology ; creative play ; tangible learning ; prototyping ; paper mechatronics ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 . [ Information interfaces and presentation ] : User Interfaces – Input devices and strategies interaction styles ; K . 3 . 1 [ Computers and Education ] : Computers Uses in Education INTRODUCTION Every material has its own sound . By rustling a plastic bag , crumpling a newspaper and ripping cardboard , we make different sounds ; shaking an empty bottle containing marbles or pebbles is a common form of play . Today , computing and DIY electronics adds a digital layer to a physical world . Integrating electronics and computing components with physical materials , we can build creative computational percussion instruments using diverse materials . Beyond the aesthetic and technical quality of the outcome , the activity encourages us to observe and experiment with technologies and everyday materials and discover related science phenomena surrounding motion , sound , and materials . We can foster creativity and ingenuity through creating and engineering , in short , by making things [ 13 , 19 ] . Figure 1 . Mechatronic percussion with everyday materials The field of tangible embedded , and embodied interaction has shown a wide spectrum of promising applications [ 15 ] in facilitating making things to motivate creative play and learning . The advantage of tangibility in cognitive development [ 2 , 16 , 18 ] and playfulness [ 9 , 11 ] has been reflected in diverse construction kits that invite hobbyists and tinkerers , children and adults , to build and learn in hands - on ways . We have been working on kits that allow novices to integrate mechanical , electrical , and computing components with accessible materials to craft their own creations , for instance , clothing and jewelry , an alarm clock , a smart toy – – in short , anything motivates one’s interest - driven DIY activity . We present a kit ( cardboard mechanical components and a custom printed circuit board ) to design and construct creative computationally enhanced percussive instruments . We wanted to support hands - on activity , encouraging beginners to experiment with integrating everyday objects and materials with basic electronics components and computing without requiring technical skills , and to support people to become more fluent and expressive with new technologies [ 14 ] . Hence , our design decisions in developing the kit are based on three criteria : 1 ) whether the kit – – including both cardboard assembly and the electronics – – is easy to use for novices ( accessibility ) , 2 ) whether the kit is crafting - friendly , easily integrated with other objects and materials ( adaptability ) , and 3 ) whether the devices that people built with the kit are diversely expressive ( expressivity ) . In the following sections , we first review related work . Then we introduce our kit and its key design concepts and describe two workshops in which we used the kit . We conclude with a discussion of future work . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . TEI ' 16 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , Netherlands © 2016 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3582 - 9 / 16 / 02 (cid:1) $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839474 Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 340 RELATED WORK Our kit is rooted in three well - established domains : computational construction kits and craft , DIY technology , and computational instruments . Crafting with Computational Construction Kits Recent computational construction kits not only encourage playful learning but also extend the activity beyond the kit . Users can start from a kit to build certain behaviors and embed their construction into crafts made of other materials . The littleBits [ 4 ] circuit building kit includes a variety of small electronic modules . Users snap them together to build circuits , design certain behaviors , and embed it in their creations . The Handmate [ 17 ] cyber - physical construction kit allows users to build functional electromechanical structures and control them through hand gestures . Velcro joint modules make it easy to attach to other crafts made of different materials . In the same spirit of ‘open system’ , our cardboard assembly is designed to offer users an accessible scaffolding medium to build a mechanical structure and employ it in their creations . Do - It - Yourself ( DIY ) Technology A driving force behind the maker movement is the growing field of technology DIY , including open - source and hobbyist - friendly electronics and programming environments . A prominent example is the Arduino open - source electronics platform that has gained popularity within the maker community by reducing the entry barrier to building circuits and software to control them [ 3 ] . A diverse array of Arduino microcontrollers with different physical forms enables selecting a model that fits a particular project . For instance , the LilyPad Arduino microcontroller [ 10 ] offers an accessible platform for e - textiles and computational wearables . It can be sewn onto fabric , and connected with sensors and actuators with conductive thread . Makey Makey [ 5 ] also increasingly lowers the entry bar for beginners . It enables users to clip objects made of conductive materials to the board to make an interface . Similarly , the electronics component of our kit , the Rhythm Board , is intended to support beginners by simple connecting components , but to control servos and solenoids embedded in their physical crafts . Computational Musical Instruments Automated instruments have a rich history from the player pianos and mechanical orchestrions of the 18 th to 20 th centuries to more recent examples using computation and modern manufacturing techniques [ 6 ] . Singer et al . [ 7 ] presented LEMUR’s instruments including a four stringed slide guitar bot , a Tibetan singing bowl controller as well as ModBots , “modular instruments” that can be affixed to various physical objects . Kapur et al [ 1 ] also described the Machine Orchestra , a hybrid ensemble of humans and robots . They considered both the visual and sonic aesthetics of the ensemble . Our approach enables novices to explore this exciting field with a DIY aesthetic . A KIT FOR CRAFTING COMPUTATIONAL PERCUSSION We designed our kit with three considerations : accessibility ( immediate motor control and working mechanism ) , adaptability ( integration with other materials ) , and expressivity ( diversity of the outcomes ) . We present the kit and describe how we applied these design considerations . Figure 2 . Cardboard parts and models : rack and pinion gears , quick return , and Geneva drive ( from top ) Figure 3 . How mechanisms work : rack and pinion gears , quick return , and Geneva drive ( from top ) . Black and blue arrows illustrate driving and driven movements respectively . Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 341 Cardboard Mechanical Components Our kit contains cardboard components for three mechanisms : rack and pinion gears , quick return , and Geneva drive , and assembly instructions ( see Figures 2 , 3 ) . We laser - cut all the parts from recycled cardboard boxes ( except the rack and pinion gears , which require precisely cut interlocking teeth to operate and are therefore cut from illustration board ) . The assembly package also included wood sticks . The critical part of building cardboard mechanisms lies in the setting of moving and fixed joints . Along with small cardboard tubes , wood sticks can connect parts as a moving pivot in the quick return and the Geneva drive sets ( see Figure 4 ) . To build fixed joints , we designed the parts to attach to each other and fix their relative positions using hot - glue . Figure 4 . Wood sticks and tube - figure cardboard pieces are used to generate moving joints . Rhythm Board : A Custom Electronic Board We also designed the Rhythm Board , a preassembled and preprogrammed circuit board with built - in controls for manipulating rhythms or manually playing mechanical instruments on three channels . The interface consists of a tempo knob , play / pause buttons , and buttons to set different patterns or manually play the instruments . LEDs indicate the mode status and the rhythm configured for each channel ( See Figure 5 ) . Rhythm Board Hardware The Rhythm Board is based on an Arduino Uno platform ( ATmega328 ) . Its built in controller circuits are ready to use with the motors , solenoids , and sensors we provide with the kit . As the different mechanisms and motors have different requirements to create percussive sounds , each of the board’s three channels is configured for a particular mechanism . Channel 1 is programmed to drive a 180 - degree servo , channel 2 for a continuous rotation servo and channel 3 for solenoids . Servomotors plug directly onto the board ; solenoids connect with two jumper wires . When channel 1 is triggered , the servo changes positions to and fro . Applying this movement to the rack and pinion gears generates a striking or scratching motion . Channel 2 is configured to control the speed of a continuous rotation servo . This can automate quick return or Geneva gears to generate a shaking motion . Lastly , channel 3 uses a short pulse ( ~ 20ms ) to trigger the solenoid . It can create a hitting motion . Sensors Each channel has its own sensor input and button . A 10k Ω reference resistor on the board creates a voltage divider with a sensor input , which allows a variety of variable resistors to be used , such as photocells , bend sensors , and force sensitive resistors . Any of these sensors can be employed by plugging them into the two pins of sensor header . Then the associated button is used to tell the Rhythm Board to retain the sensor value for that channel : when the button is released , the Rhythm Board holds the last input value , which is used to control the tempo of that channel . Interface The Rhythm Board is preprogrammed to control the servos and solenoid and to enable hardware control over various parameters . The board has two modes : play and manual . In play mode the motors are controlled by software according to the channel settings and master tempo control , whereas in manual mode you can play the instruments directly by pressing the channel buttons . Play Mode vs . Manual Mode Pressing the play / manual mode button switches the mode status . In manual mode the user triggers percussion events by pressing the corresponding channel button . In play mode the tempo LED blinks at the master tempo , the fastest any channel may trigger . ( The knob potentiometer at the top of the board controls the master tempo . ) Each channel LED blinks at the rhythm configured for that channel : Press the channel button to read the sensor and set the count for that channel between 1 and 8 master counts . When set to 1 the channel triggers on every beat ; when set to 2 it triggers every second beat and so on . This allows interesting polyrhythms to be created simply ( and without knowing what a polyrhythm is ) . For instance , one channel triggers every 3 beats and another every 5 , creating a pattern that repeats every 15 master tempo counts . The Rhythm Board self - calibrates its sensors by tracking the minimum and maximum values seen at the sensor inputs and mapping these to a usable range ( 1 to 8 beats ) . This allows different sensors to be employed despite different resistance ranges . Design Considerations in Development Cardboard Mechanical Components We chose to use cardboard is because it is crafting - friendly , easily integrated with other objects and materials such as paper cups , beads , bottles , or thread , via glue or tape . Also , to motivate risk - taking , revising , and re - building in making things , the low cost and ubiquity of cardboard plays a critical role to encourage experimentation by making it easy to replace pieces in the assembly with different ones , or to add more pieces . Our cardboard assembly reflects this point . Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 342 Through iterative prototyping , we designed the cardboard parts and assembly instructions to enable people to build easily . We also wanted to avoid using knives during the workshop for safety , especially for children . We developed all pieces to be mounted and assembled using hot - glue . Importantly , the adaptability of cardboard also affects the expressiveness of outcomes using the kit . Because novices can cut , fold , or attach cardboard to other objects and materials , they can easily modify and customize the basic mechanisms we provide . Rhythm Board Our design goal of the Rhythm Board was to support novices in exploring rhythmic patterns without requiring technical skills ( e . g . , building circuits or debugging software ) and to keep their focus on hands - on prototyping . The Rhythm Board enables users to select sensors for servo and solenoid control and to control rhythms using the knob and the buttons on the board . In allowing different sensors for servos and solenoid control , we wanted to encourage users to explore novel control paradigms in their instruments such as shading a light sensor to control tempo . Figure 5 . The Rhythm Board controls servo - motors and solenoids to support physical prototyping without programming . TWO WORKSHOPS WITH THE KIT We conducted two workshops to assess the usability of our kit and to observe the variety of constructions that users make . The first workshop was with experts ( adults ) and the second one was with novices ( children ) . In the first workshop , we wanted to see the potential of overall activity with the kit , what people would explore using the kit , and get feedback from experts to improve the workshop design as well as the kit . Then in the second workshop , we focused testing our design goals ( accessibility , adaptability , and expressivity ) by observing the novices’ hands - on prototyping and outcomes . Procedure We recruited thirteen expert - adults ( ages 20s – 50s , two women and eleven men ) , from a music - and - technology focused conference , and eight novice - children ( ages 15 - 16 ) , two girls and eleven boys ) , from a university based “Science Discovery” summer camp . In both workshops we started by explaining the workshop concept and three mechanisms , and demonstrating , with examples , how to use the Rhythm Board . Then , we provided the kit including the cardboard components , the Rhythm Board , and the printed instructions . Depending on which mechanism the participants chose to build , we provided matching servomotors ( a 180 - degree servo for rack and pinion gears : a continuous servomotor for quick return and Geneva drive ) . We also set out a variety of objects including kitchenware ( spoons , fork , chopsticks , cups , or dishes ) and materials ( plastic bags , paper , Styrofoam , cardboards , or extra cardboard assembly pieces ) on the shared table , and urged participants to experiment with them . Figure 6 . Constructing Computational Percussion at the first ( top ) and the second ( bottom , photo by Ira G . Liss ) workshops First Workshop with Experts The first workshop at the technology music conference was designed on a three - hour timeline . All participants volunteered for the workshop and had basic knowledge and experience with music and technology . We suggested that participants work in pairs , but we allowed them to work independently . Five pairs voluntarily formed and three people worked independently ; each pair worked on two mechanisms and each individual built one mechanism . After a twenty - minute introduction , we organized two hours for prototyping , ten minutes for preparing the demo - session , and last thirty minutes for demonstrations and discussion . During prototyping , we suggested that participants follow instructions to first build working mechanisms . After assembling a mechanism , we asked participants to build percussive instruments using materials and objects around them . They wandered around the workroom and tested objects and materials to make sounds by shaking or crumpling things . Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 343 Second Workshop with Novices Our second workshop comprised two two - hour sessions over two days . We followed the first workshop timeline with minor revisions based on our observation and feedback from the earlier workshop . For instance , all participants were teamed up in the second workshop , because in the first workshop teams produced , in general , more dynamic outcomes than individuals . Also , whereas we included a solenoid in our kit in the first workshop , we only used servomotors in the second workshop . Compared to the instruments made with cardboard mechanical components , participants tended to deploy solenoids in relatively simple and less interesting ways—attaching the solenoid to a hard object . This is likely related to the limited workshop time as well as the inherent range of expressivity of solenoids . Additionally , in light of the first workshop attendees’ comments on the importance of having individual supplies such as hot - glue and a power source to run the rhythm board , we provided these for each team . During the first day , we spent 20 minutes for the introduction , 10 minutes for sketch brainstorming about mechanical inventions combining with electrical and computational components , and 90 minutes to build working mechanisms . The next day , participants spent 80 minutes building their own creations , 20 minutes for showing their work , and 10 minutes for a second brainstorming session about mechanical , electrical and computational inventions . Results All 21 participants , both experts and novices , successfully built working instruments using the kit ( accessibility ) . They also customized the kit by integrating other materials and objects ( adaptability ) . They were able to construct mechanical assembly , embed servos , and experiment to build a broad range of instruments ( expressivity ) . First Workshop Instruments Figure 7 A - H shows the instruments that music - technology experts built in the first workshop . ( A ) As the Geneva gear turns , a cup linked to the top also rotates . The rack and pinion hits a cup hanging from the top of the instrument ; ( B ) While the quick return shakes the box containing beads , the rack and pinion hits a cup with beads ; ( C ) While the modified Geneva driver wheel rotates , the performer adds beads to the smiley face cup , and turns the cup manually using the Rhythm Board to throw out the beads ; ( D ) As the Geneva gear rotates , a cup attached to the top containing beads makes sound ; ( E ) A cup connected to the rack and pinion contains beads and hits a glass cup ; ( F ) A stainless steel chopstick attached to the quick return hits a glass cup to make sound ; ( G1 ) The customized rack and pinion scratches two plastic cup covers : one next to the circular gear and the other next to the linear gear . It also causes the pen connected with thread to scratch the bottom of a cup ; ( G2 ) The quick return movement causes dropping and pulling of the connected thread holding a bunch of beads and a clip to make sound when it drops ; ( H1 ) As the quick Figure 7 . Crafted instruments from the first workshop ( A – H ) and the second workshop ( I – L ) . Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 344 return moves , a hot - glue stick attached through a wood stick hits the bottom of the paper cup , and the beads woven with thread also moves ; ( H2 ) The customized quick return has a long arm made of a wood stick and a hot - glue stick that hits the surface of the plastic cup covers on the top and a cup having beads at the bottom as the arm moves . Second Workshop Outcomes Figure 7 I - L shows the instruments children built in the second workshop . ( I1 ) As the Geneva gear rotates , the connected pipe cleaners hits a cat figure in front ; ( I2 ) A wood chopstick connected to the quick return hits the glass cup ; ( J ) As the quick return moves , the basketball player connected to the mechanism resembles dunk - shooting motion ; ( K1 ) As the Geneva driver rotates , the flower decoration attached on the top rotates too ; ( K2 ) The quick return shakes the closed cup holding beads inside ; ( L ) The quick return shoots a ping pong ball into a bottomless cup , and then the rack and pinion hits the ball passing through the cup again to shoot into another cup . Overall , in the first workshop several participants ( experts ) explained their design motivations related to sound components ( e . g . , Figure 7 - B : “A guy playing a guitar and a base drum” , or G2 : “A crane drummer” ) , and the outcomes reflected a focus on sound ; unsurprisingly these music - technology experts focused on building percussive instruments . In contrast the second workshop participants ( novices ) didn’t attend to percussion except Figure 7 - K2 , which resembled a maraca , a traditional percussion instrument of Latin America . Rather , they were generally more engaged and motivated in illustrating a story or narrative tied to their personal interests ( e . g . , cats , basketball , etc . ) , then crafting their vision in the visual appearance . All paired teams in the first workshop included two mechanisms in their instruments whereas individuals ( D , E , F ) built with one mechanism . They assembled the mechanisms , and either integrated them within one instrument ( A , B , C ) or customized each independently ( G1 / G2 , H1 / H2 ) . Similarly , except for one team ( J ) , all teams in the second workshop also assembled two mechanisms , and then either combined them within one instrument ( L ) or two entirely separate instruments ( Figure I1 / I2 , K1 / K2 ) . Even when they customized the mechanisms separately , they still tended to affect one another’s crafting process such as using the same part ( a long arm having a hook using a wood stick with a hot - glue stick , H1 / H2 ) , or applying same materials ( I1 / I2 ) . REFLECTIONS ON THE WORKSHOPS Physicality Encourages Problem Solving & Prototyping Embodied engagement augments learning by doing and thinking through prototyping [ 18 ] . The physicality of the kit supported problem solving in building working mechanisms and making sound using diverse materials , and physical prototyping . The mechanical component of the kit , the theme of the activity ( making percussive instruments ) , and the rhythm board supporting motor - control without programming are closely linked to this physicality . Mechanical components inherently include some physicality , and physical problem solving matches well with the mechanical components of the kit . For example , in order to build a working mechanism , one must test the tightness of interlocking gears and the stability of the gear and motor setting . This hands - on process led the participants to observe and grasp the fundamental structure of mechanisms . Also , construction often requires improvisation due to errors in assembling mechanisms , the uneven thicknesses of cardboard , and variations and modifications of the given mechanisms . In both workshops , participants solved those problems by adding layers to the gears or stacking cardboard layers to build the needed height of the mechanisms ( see Figure 8 - A ) . In addition , our workshop theme , building percussion instruments , motivated participants to experiment with objects and materials . Every material has its own inherent sounds , but only by interacting physically with the material in different ways are these sounds revealed . This naturally led participants to explore things and the unique sounds they make by shaking , ripping , or scratching them to get ideas about what to build . The workshops filled the studio with mixed sounds made by various hand - motions with materials and objects ( Figure 8 - B ) . Lastly , the Rhythm Board , which supports motor - control without programming , enabled participants to focus on physical objects and not screens , during the workshops . Especially , since our intended user group , novices , included children , we wanted to avoid potential distractions such as opening unrelated ( e . g . , Facebook ) windows ( Figure 8 - C ) . Figure 8 . The mechanical components , the theme of making percussive instruments , and the Rhythm Board supporting motor control without programming encouraged hands - on activity . Live Performance via Manual Motor - Control The quick and easy motor - control of the rhythm board also opened another creative possibility . Using manual motor control some participants presented their work as a performance , in which they responded to feedback from humans or machines . For instance , in the first workshop demo - session , one member described his team’s concept as “defeating the Geneva gear” , based on their prototyping process , in which they had difficulty to construct a working Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 345 Geneva drive . The driver wheel and the driven wheel didn’t interlock properly so they used only driver wheel part . He said , “So , we decided to defeat it” , and added a cup of beads to their instrument . Then his partner ran the first mechanism ( with a smiley face drawing ) manually using the knob of the rhythm board to throw the beads towards the Geneva - driver wheel , which was rotating like a watermill . The audience laughed and he repeated the motion faster , over and over again to throw out the rest of beads ( see Figure 9 - A ) . In the second workshop one team built an instrument employing a Ping - Pong ball and the quick return and the rack and pinion mechanisms . In their collaborative performance one partner ran the quick return to shoot the ball using the button on the rhythm board . As the ball passed through a bottomless paper cup in their instrument , the other partner operated the rack and pinion to launch the ball again ( see Figure 9 - B ) . Figure 9 . Using the manual mode of the rhythm board , participants presented their work as a live performance . High Adaptability and Expressivity : Beyond Given Parts The high adaptability of the cardboard components enabled a variety of crafting expressions . The low cost and ubiquity of cardboard gave participants license to make mistakes and so they were willing to try diverse expressions . They wove parts with beads and thread ( See figure 10 - A , B ) , drew on parts ( figure 10 - C , D ) , coiled colored pipe cleaners ( figure 10 - E , F ) , and attached objects with hot - glue or tape ( figure 10 - G , H , I ) . They were highly engaged in hands - on exploring with materials and eagerly shared their experiments with others . In both workshops , moreover , most participants extended the given mechanical assembly to build their instruments . Perhaps most impressive were the stories they told around their instruments . For instance , in the first workshop , one member , a musician , illustrated his team’s instrument “like a guy who plays a guitar and a bass - drum at the same time” ( See figure 7 - B ) . In the second workshop , a girl , who mentioned that she is a cat person , built the Geneva driver mechanism to “hit the cat” ( figure 7 - I1 ) . On the other side of the table , a pair of boys talked about their favorite baseball players during the workshop ( figure 7 - J ) . They created a basketball player by applying the quick return set . In the demo - session , they simulated the action of dunk shooting by pressing the button on the rhythm board to control the servomotor they had embedded in their creation . Figure 10 . The cardboard assembly was easily integrated with a variety of crafting - expressions . Tinkerability of Cardboard The tinkerability of cardboard contributed to the expressivity of the kit . Participants were willing to eliminate , destroy , or change the parts we provided in order to modify the mechanisms . One team , which started with building the quick return set , removed most parts while experimenting with other materials . Then , using a wood stick and a hot - glue stick they built their own version of the quick return based instrument with a long arm , and called it “punching face” ( figure 7 - H2 ) . Similarly , another team ( Figure 7 - C , 9 - A ) started with the Geneva gear , applied only the driver wheel part to the motor like a watermill and broke down the driven wheel part into pieces and attached them as fixed parts to the instrument . They used the given parts but tinkered with them in their own structure . Also , by adding more assembly pieces and tweaking the parts , some participants customized the given mechanisms to build Figure 7 - G1 and G2 . SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK Our cardboard assembly and Rhythm Board kit supports novices and experts in building computational percussive instruments . In developing the kit we addressed three design criteria : ease of use for novices ( accessibility ) , easy integration with other objects and materials ( adaptability ) , and the wide range of constructions that the kit makes possible for both adults and kids ( expressivity ) . Using the kit in two workshops , we achieved encouraging results . In both , participants not only quickly built working instruments , but also actively explored creative experimentations with different materials . Looking ahead , we see three categories of next steps . First , we can explore more features of the Rhythm Board . Although the board offers an option to control motors with Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 346 analog sensors such as photocells or bend sensors , due to limited time participants didn’t experiment with this option in either workshop . To address this we plan longer sessions to focus on exploring the rhythm board in depth . Applying sensors to control servos might enhance understanding about basic physical computing and support exploration with novel interfaces . Second , considering the concept of our kit ( building musical instruments ) , the outcomes we found are limited . Although our research focuses on the process of prototyping and experimenting that the kit affords , the technical quality of the musical instruments might be improved by reframing the workshop . For example , we might encourage participants to try a collaborative orchestra - like performance using their percussion instruments . Or , they can generate simple tunes using a group of percussive instruments such as striking cups containing different amounts of water to produce melody . Lastly , adding more mechanisms such as a cam or a ratchet can extend the scope of prototyping . Offering three mechanisms already showed more than three kinds of motions . By modifying mechanism or combining mechanisms , people presented 9 - 10 different instrument structures . For instance , several participants developed their own mechanisms by modifying the parts we provided , or by adding more parts to the given sets . This motivates us to consider adding more mechanisms in the kit to widen the spectrum of the creations using the kit . Honey and Kanter [ 12 ] argue the importance of leveraging children’s innate curiosity about the world around them via design , make , and play . Our kit supporting mechatronic percussion constructions lies in the same spirit . We aim to explore the potential of playful hands - on kits as scaffolding media to encourage observation and experimentation with technologies and things around them to discover science in everyday life . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This material is based upon work supported by the ATLAS micro grant of University of Colorado Boulder and National Science Foundation under Grant No . IS1451463 . We thank workshop attendees and organizers of NIME ’15 conference , and students and staff of CU Science discovery summer camp . REFERENCES 1 . Ajay Kapur , Michael Darling , Dimitri Diakopoulos , Jim W . Murphy , Jordan Hochenbaum , Owen Vallis , and Curtis Bahn . 2011 . The machine orchestra : An ensemble of human laptop performers and robotic musical instruments . Comput . Music J . 35 , 4 : 49 - 63 . 2 . Alissa N . Antle , Milena Droumeva , and Daniel Ha . 2009 . Hands on what ? : comparing children ' s mouse - based and tangible - based interaction . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 80 - 88 . 3 . Arduino . https : / / www . arduino . cc 4 . Ayah Bdeir and Ted Ullrich . 2010 . Electronics as material : littleBits . In Proceedings of the fifth international conference on Tangible , embedded , and embodied interaction ( TEI ' 11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 341 - 344 . 5 . Beginner ' s Mind Collective and David Shaw . 2012 . Makey Makey : improvising tangible and nature - based user interfaces . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ' 12 ) , Stephen N . Spencer ( Ed . ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 367 - 370 . 6 . Charles B . Fowler . 1967 . The Museum of Music : A History of Mechanical Instruments . Music Educators Journal 54 , 2 : 45 - 49 . 7 . Eric Singer , Jeff Feddersen , Chad Redmon , and Bil Bowen . 2004 . LEMUR ' s musical robots . In Proceedings of the international conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression ( NIME ' 04 ) . National University of Singapore , Singapore , 181 - 184 . 8 . Five Hundred and Seven Mechanical Movements : http : / / 507movements . com / 9 . Frank Feltham , Frank Vetere , and Stephan Wensveen . 2007 . Designing tangible artefacts for playful interactions and dialogues . In Proceedings of the 2007 conference on Designing pleasurable products and interfaces ( DPPI ' 07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 61 - 75 . 10 . Leah Buechley and Eisenberg , M . 2008 . The LilyPad Arduino : Toward Wearable Engineering for Everyone . IEEE Pervasive Computing 7 , 2 : 12 - 15 . 11 . Lesley Xie , Alissa N . Antle , and Nima Motamedi . 2008 . Are tangibles more fun ? : comparing children ' s enjoyment and engagement using physical , graphical and tangible user interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Tangible and embedded interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 191 - 198 . 12 . Margaret Honey and David E . Kanter . 2013 . Design , Make , Play : Growing the Next Generation of STEM Innovators . Taylor & Francis . 13 . Mark D Gross and Michael Eisenberg . 2007 . Why Toys Shouldn ' t Work " Like Magic " : children ' s technology and the values of construction and control , In Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on Digital Game and Intelligent Toy Enhanced Learning ( DIGITEL ’07 ) , IEEE , Jhongli , Taiwan , 25 - 32 . 14 . Mitchel Resnick and Brian Silverman . 2005 . Some reflections on designing construction kits for kids . In Proceedings of the 4th conference on Interaction Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 347 design and children ( IDC ' 05 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 117 - 122 . 15 . Orit Shaer and Eva Hornecker . Tangible User Interfaces : Past , Present , and Future Directions . Found . Trends Hum - Comput . Interact . 3 , 1 - 2 : 1 - 137 . 16 . Paul Marshall . 2007 . Do tangible interfaces enhance learning ? . In Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Tangible and embedded interaction ( TEI ' 07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 163 - 170 . 17 . Sang Ho Yoon , Ansh Verma , Kylie Peppler , and Karthik Ramani . 2015 . HandiMate : exploring a modular robotics kit for animating crafted toys . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 - 20 . 18 . Scott R . Klemmer , Björn Hartmann , and Leila Takayama . 2006 . How bodies matter : five themes for interaction design . In Proceedings of the 6th conference on Designing Interactive systems ( DIS ' 06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 140 - 149 . 19 . Seymour Papert . 1980 . Mindstorms : Children , computers , and powerful ideas . Basic Books , Inc . Demos and Posters TEI 2016 , February 14 - 17 , 2016 , Eindhoven , the Netherlands 348