Neuron , Vol . 48 , 63 – 75 , October 6 , 2005 , Copyright ©2005 by Elsevier Inc . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 08 . 033 Dual Functional Activity of Semaphorin 3B Is Required for Positioning the Anterior Commissure Falk Julien , 1 , 2 , 8 Ahmad Bechara , 2 , 8 Roberto Fiore , 3 Homaira Nawabi , 2 Heather Zhou , 5 Carolina Hoyo - Becerra , 3 , 4 Muriel Bozon , 2 Geneviève Rougon , 1 Martin Grumet , 6 Andreas W . Püschel , 3 Joshua R . Sanes , 5 , 7 and Valérie Castellani 2 , * 1 NMDAUMRCNRS 6156 Institut de Biologie du Dèveloppement de Marseille Parc Scientifique de Luminy 13288 Marseille cedex 9 France 2 Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire UMR CNRS 5534 Université Claude Bernard 69622 Villeurbanne France 3 Abteilung Molekularbiologie Institut für Allgemeine Zoologie und Genetik Westfälische Wilhelms - Universität 48149 Münster Germany 4 Departamento de Biologia Celular Genetica y Fisiologia Facultad de Ciencias Universidad de Malaga MalagaSpain 5 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology Washington University Medical School 660 South Euclid Avenue St . Louis , Missouri 63110 6 W . M . Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience Rutgers University , Piscataway , New Jersey 08854 7 Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology Harvard University Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 Summary Chemorepulsion by semaphorins plays a critical role during the development of neuronal projections . Al - though semaphorin - induced chemoattraction has been reported in vitro , the contribution of this activity to axon pathfinding is still unclear . Using genetic and culture models , we provide evidence that both at - traction and repulsion by Sema3B , a secreted sema - phorin , are critical for the positioning of a major brain commissural projection , the anterior commissure ( AC ) . NrCAM , an immunoglobulin superfamily adhesion molecule of the L1 subfamily , associates with neuro - pilin - 2 and is a component of a receptor complex for Sema3B and Sema3F . Finally , we show that activation of the FAK / Src signaling cascade distinguishes Sema3B - * Correspondence : castellani @ cgmc . univ - lyon1 . fr 8 These authors contributed equally to this work . mediated attractive from repulsive axonal responses of neurons forming the AC , revealing a mechanism underlying the dual activity of this guidance cue . Introduction In organisms with bilateral symmetry , commissural ax - ons projecting across the midline convey information from one side of the nervous system to the other . Among the major brain commissural projections , the anterior commissure ( AC ) is a bipartite tract intercon - necting olfactory structures / anterior piriform cortex ( ante - rior pars , ACa ) and posterior piriform cortex of the tempo - ral lobes ( posterior pars , ACp ; Pires - Neto and Lent , 1993 ; Cummings et al . , 1997 ) . During development , the ACa and ACp course at the same dorsoventral plane and converge into a common fascicle for midline crossing . Multiple guidance signals are needed for controlling these steps , as evidenced by the phenotypes of mouse mutants lacking cues of the ephrin , netrin , and sema - phorin families or their receptors , ranging from axon defasciculation and aberrant dorsoventral trajectories to the absence of one or both limbs of the AC ( Henke - meyer et al . , 1996 ; Serafini et al . , 1996 ; Fazeli et al . , 1997 ; Chen et al . , 2000 ; Giger et al . , 2000 ; Kullander et al . , 2001 ; Sahay et al . , 2003 ) . Here , we focus on the roles of semaphorins and their receptors in patterning the AC . In mice lacking the semaphorin receptor neuropilin - 2 ( Nrp2 ) , ACa and ACp axons fail to cross the midline normally , leading to an almost total absence of the AC at adult stages ( Chen et al . , 2000 ; Giger et al . , 2000 ) . Very similar defects were observed in mice with inacti - vation of the Nrp2 ligand Sema3F ( Sahay et al . , 2003 ) . Nrp2 is also the ligand binding subunit of the receptor for two other secreted semaphorins , Sema3B and Sema3C ( Takahashi et al . , 1998 ; Tamagnone and Com - oglio , 2000 ) , but whether these ligands contribute to AC guidance is unclear . In particular , Sema3B has been studied as a tumor suppressor ( Castro - Rivera et al . , 2004 ) and found to exert guidance effects in several in vitro systems ( Takahashi et al . , 1998 ; de Castro et al . , 1999 ; Zou et al . , 2000 ) , but its contribution to the devel - opment of neuronal projections remains unknown . In the present study , we ask whether Sema3B plays a role in the formation of the AC . First , we generated Sema3b knockout mice and show that their AC is de - fective . Then , we show that selective attraction and re - pulsion by Sema3B are required for the proper position - ing of ACa and ACp . We also provide insights into the molecular composition of the semaphorin receptors with the finding that NrCAM associates with Nrp2 and contributes to Sema3B - and Sema3F - induced effects . Finally , our data reveal that attractive but not repulsive responses to Sema3B are characterized by the selec - tive membrane recruitment of the focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) and critically depend upon activation of the Src kinase family . This identifies signaling mechanisms Neuron64 Figure 1 . Sema3B Binding Sites on the AC and Generation of Sema3B Null Mice ( A ) Diagram of the targeting vector . ( B ) Southern blot showing the homologous re - combination in ES clones 1 and 2 . ( C ) PCR genotyping of neonatal pups . ( D ) Coronal brain sections from P5 and P50 mice showing no gross abnormalities in Sema3B null mice . Note that the ventricular enlargement visible in the mutant brain was not a reproducible feature . ( E ) Interference contrast microscopy of horizontal neonatal brain section illustrating the bipartite AC projections converging for midline crossing . 3v , third ventricle . ( F ) Binding of Sema3B - AP but not control AP on ACa and ACp limbs , indicating the presence of Sema3B recep - tors . WT , wild - type allele ; TV , targeting vec - tor ; RL , recombinant locus ; ctx , cortex ; cc , corpus callosum . Scale bar , 1 . 5 mm . discriminating the dual functions of Sema3B in the de - velopment of the AC . Results Defects of AC Positioning in Sema3B Null Mice We generated a Sema3B null mutant by homologous recombination ( Figures 1A – 1C , see Experimental Pro - cedures for details ) . Sema3B homozygous mice were viable and fertile . No obvious morphological differ - ences were seen in sensory projections or in the size and shape of the brain at embryonic , postnatal , or adult stages ( Figure 1D and data not shown ) . Next , we exam - ined the distribution of Sema3B binding sites in the brain . Incubation of AP - Sema3B on horizontal sections revealed the presence of receptors in both ACa and ACp , suggesting that the AC was an appropriate model for exploring the function of Sema3B in axon guidance ( Figures 1E and 1F ) . We therefore reconstructed the commissural pathway from serial horizontal sections of neonatal Sema3B − / − and control brains . Interestingly in Sema3B null mice , the AC expanded ventrally by 82 % ( ±10 % , ten animals ) into regions devoid of fibers in wild - type animals ( Fig - ure 2A ) , showing that Sema3B plays a role in the guid - ance of AC projections . This expansion corresponded to increases of 67 % and 93 % in the ACa and ACp path - ways , respectively ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . An intermediate situation was observed in Sema3b + / − mice , with expan - sion by 41 % ( ±8 % , eight animals ) , corresponding to in - crease of 44 % and 36 % for the ACa and ACp path - ways , respectively ( Figures 2A – 2C ) . This revealed a dose - dependent effect of Sema3b in the dorsoventral positioning of the AC . In addition to expansion , the spatial organization of the AC was altered in Sema3B mutants , as the ACa and ACp no longer grew within the same dorsoventral plane ( Figures 2D and 2E ) . Moreover , the ACa limb labeled with Nrp2 also showed striking defasciculation , with several roots exiting the cortex at lateral positions and forming exuberant ACa bundles ( Figures 2F – 2L ) . At the midline crossing level , we noticed that Nrp2 labeling was not homogenously distributed on the AC in wild - types . Differences were particularly prominent for the ACp , with the lateral but not medial segment express - ing high levels of Nrp2 . Similarly Nrp2 was detected on peripheral but not central fibers at the midline crossing level ( Figure 2M ) . In the Sema3B mutants , the Nrp2 ex - pression pattern was similar except that the segrega - tion between Nrp2 - positive and - negative fibers at the Sema3B and AC Pathfinding 65 Figure 2 . Disorganization of the AC in Sema3B Null Mice ( A ) Drawing of the reconstruction of the AC width . The AC pathway was enlarged to ven - tral territories that were not used for AC navi - gation in wild - types . AC in Sema3B hetero - zygous mice ( fine line ) was also ventrally shifted , although to a lesser extent than in Sema3B null mice . ( B and C ) Measurement of ACa and ACp in null and heterozygous mice ( fine line ) , compared with wild - type . ( D and E ) Interference contrast microscopy of sections showing the dorsoventral AC disor - ganization ( white arrows ) , from ventral ( top ) to dorsal ( bottom ) , with ACa and ACp no longer at the same plane in the mutant , com - pared to wild - type . Midline crossing is also ventrally expanded in Sema3B null mice . The numbers depict the position of the sections in the series . Scale bar , 1 . 5 mm . ( F and G ) Nrp2 immunostaining on horizontal brain sections , illustrating defasciculated Nrp2 - positive AC fibers in the Sema3B mutant , compared to wild - type . ( H – L ) Adjacent sec - tions showing the presence of aberrant ACa roots in the Sema3B mutant . ( M and N ) Het - erogenous localization of Nrp2 labeling on AC fibers at the midline crossing level , with altered segregation between Nrp2 - negative and - positive fibers in Sema3B null mice , compared to wild - types . ( O ) Lack of Nrp1 ex - pression on AC fibers . Scale bar , 1 mm . midline crossing was altered , as illustrated by the pres - ence of Nrp2 - positive fibers growing onto Nrp2 - nega - tive fibers ( Figure 2N ) . Thus , Sema3B regulates the size , shape , and arrangement of AC fibers . Responses of ACa and ACp Neurons to Sema3F and Sema3B The defects observed in Sema3b + / − mice are unlike those induced by Sema3F ablation ( Sahay et al . , 2003 ) . This could reflect different responses of AC neurons to Sema3B and Sema3F and / or distinct expression pat - terns . To test the first possibility , collapse assays were performed with dissociated neurons prepared from neonatal brain tissue containing the anterior olfactory nucleus ( AON ) / anterior piriform cortex ( source of the ACa ) and posterior piriform cortex ( source of the ACp ) ( Figure 3A ) . As expected , Nrp2 was detected on both ACa and ACp axons ( Figure 3B ) . Sema3F treatment in - creased growth cone collapse from a basal level of 33 % to 81 % for ACa neurons ( p < 0 . 001 ) and from 34 % to 78 % for ACp neurons ( p < 0 . 001 ) . In contrast , 75 . 5 % of ACp growth cones were collapsed ( p < 0 . 001 ) by Sema3B , whereas ACa growth cones were unaffected ( 38 % , p > 0 . 05 compared to control ; Figure 3C ) . This difference could be due to a lack of responsive - ness of ACa growth cones to Sema3B but could also reflect attractive rather than repulsive effects of this factor on this population of axons . We examined these possibilities in cocultures of ACa explants with COS7 cell aggregates secreting either Sema3B or Sema3F ( Figures 3D and 3E ) . Sema3F repelled ACa axons , con - sistent with its ability to collapse their growth cones . Neuron66 Figure 3 . ACa and ACp Growth Cone Re - sponses to Sema3B and Sema3F ( A ) ACa ( ant ) and ACp ( post ) regions collected for collapse assays ( boxes ) . ( B ) Immunodetec - tionof Nrp2 along ACa and ACp axons . Scale bar , 20 (cid:1) m . ( C ) Histogram showing the per - centage ± SD of collapsed growth cones . * p < 0 . 001 , ANOVA test . Sema3F collapsed ACa and ACp growth cones , whereas Sema3B only col - lapsed ACp ones . ( D and E ) Illustration and an - alysis of cocultures of ACa explants with AP - control , Sema3B , or Sema3F secreting COS7 cell aggregates . In control conditions , axons extended radially . Sema3B attracted ACa ax - ons ( positive guidance index ) , while Sema3F deflected them away ( negative value ) . The at - tractive effect was abolished by application of anti - Nrp2 antibodies . Ns compared with con - trol condition , not significant . Average score ± SD , * p < 0 . 01 ANOVA test . Scale bar , 30 (cid:1) m . On the contrary , Sema3B attracted ACa axons , showing that this axonal population is also sensitive to the fac - tor . Furthermore , application of Nrp2 antibodies in the culture medium abolished the effect , showing that Nrp2 is required for Sema3B - mediated attraction ( Figures 3D and 3E ) . These findings reveal functional specificities of Sema3B and Sema3F that may explain some of the differences in the phenotypes produced by their inacti - vation in mice . Chemoattraction by Sema3B Derived from the SVZ and Positioning of the ACa As noted above , Sema3B and Sema3F might also differ in their expression patterns . To test this possibility , we examined Sema3B and Sema3F expression at rostral levels where ACa axons develop . In situ hybridization on neonatal coronal brain sections revealed the pres - ence of Sema3B but not Sema3F transcripts in the sub - ventricular zone ( SVZ ) lining the lateral ventricles ( Fig - ures 4A – 4E ) , a major germinal region in the forebrain . We noticed that the ACa was closely apposed to this Sema3B - expressing region . As reported ( Sahay et al . , 2003 ) , moderate Sema3F expression was detected in the striatum ( data not shown ) . To investigate semapho - rin distribution at the protein level , we examined Nrp2 binding sites in the SVZ in binding experiments on co - ronal brain sections from Sema3B − / − and wild - type mice with soluble Nrp2 - Fc chimera ( Figure 4F ) . Nrp2 binding to lateral ventricular walls could be detected in wild - type sections , whereas it was totally abolished in sections from Sema3B null mutants . In binding experi - ments with a control Fc chimera , no labeling could be detected ( data not shown ) . Thus , Nrp2 binding moieties in this zone are likely to be Sema3B . Cocultures of SVZ with ACa explants revealed that the SVZ tissue attracts ACa axons ( p < 0 . 01 , Figure 4G ) . Application of anti - Nrp2 function - blocking antibodies not only abrogated this attraction but unmasked a ro - bust chemorepulsive activity from the SVZ tissue ( p < 0 . 01 , Figure 4G ) . Similarly , the SVZ of Sema3B null mu - tants induced chemorepulsion of ACa fibers instead of attraction as observed with SVZ from Sema3B + / + mice ( p < 0 . 01 , Figure 4H ) . Given its expression pattern in the SVZ , one might expect that Sema3B not only contrib - utes to dorsoventral but also to mediolateral position - ing of the ACa . We therefore examined in further detail the spatial position of the ACa tract . At caudal levels , the ACa was closely apposed to the SVZ in wild - types but was displaced away in the Sema3B mutants . This mispositioning of the ACa is consistent with a loss of chemoattractive influence from the SVZ ( Figures 4I and 4J ) . Regions Controlling the Dorsoventral Position of ACp Fibers Only a minor contribution of the SVZ to the ACp pat - terning would be expected , due to its distance from this zone . However , ACp is mispositioned in Sema3B − / − mice . We therefore sought additional sources of Sema3B in closer proximity to the tract . Incubation of brain sec - tions from the level at which the AC crosses the midline with soluble Nrp2 - Fc revealed binding sites highly en - riched in ventral zones delineating the pathway ( Figure 5A ) . In contrast , the Nrp2 - Fc binding in this ventral zone was sharply reduced in sections from Sema3B − / − brain , whereas Nrp2 - Fc clearly bound to other neighboring re - gions , such as the entorhinal cortex or the striatum ( Figure 5B ) . In situ hybridization at embryonic stage 16 revealed Sema3B expression not only in the SVZ but also at ventral levels ( Figure 5C ) . Cocultures of this ven - tral tissue with ACp explants showed that it secretes chemorepellent for ACp axons ( Figure 5D ) . Addition of soluble Nrp2 - Fc receptors and Nrp2 function - blocking antibodies could abrogate this activity , demonstrating that it is mediated by Nrp2 ( p < 0 . 001 , Figure 5D ) . Fur - thermore , the repulsive guidance activity was abolished in tissue isolated from Sema3B − / − but not Sema3B + / + mice ( p < 0 . 001 , Figure 5D ) . Altogether , these data strongly suggest that Sema3B contributes to confer to this ventral tissue its repulsive properties on ACp axons . Nrp2 / NrCAM Complex Formation and Responses to Sema3B and Sema3F Next we investigated receptor complexes that mediate Sema3B and Sema3F signaling . We showed previously that the IgCAM L1 associates with Nrp1 and is required for the response to Sema3A . Interestingly , multiple Sema3B and AC Pathfinding 67 Figure 4 . Sema3B Expression and Chemoattractive Function on ACa ( A – E ) Sema3B and Sema3F in situ hybridization on neonatal coronal sections . ( A ) Detection of Sema3B transcripts in the SVZ lining the lateral ventricles ( LV ) ; cc , corpus callosum . ( B ) Higher - magnification image showing the ACa ( black arrow ) close apposition . ( C ) Sema3B is not detected in sections from Sema3B null mice . ( D and E ) Sema3F is not detected in the SVZ . Scale bar , 300 (cid:1) m . ( F ) Microphotographs and magnification panels of binding experiments with Nrp2 - Fc on brain sections . Nrp2 binding sites were detected in the SVZ of Sema3B + / + mice but were totally abolished in Sema3B − / − mice ( Nrp2 binding is in green ; bisbenzimide staining is in white ) . ( G and H ) Tissue collected for the cocultures of SVZ and ACa explants . Histograms of the guidance index , showing the attractive effect exerted by the SVZ on ACa axons and the chemorepulsive activity unmasked by anti - Nrp2 antibodies and Sema3B genetic invalidation . * p < 0 . 001 with ANOVA test . Micropho - tographs illustrating chemoattraction of ACa axons by Sema3B + / + SVZ and chemorepulsion by Sema3B − / − SVZ . Scale bar , 30 (cid:1) m . ( I and J ) Coronal sections showing ACa mediolateral shift , with increase of the distance between ACa and SVZ in Sema3B null mice compared with wild - types . Scale bar , 150 (cid:1) m . semaphorins bind to Nrp1 , but L1 was required only for Sema3A responses ( Castellani et al . , 2000 , 2002 ) . We reasoned that another IgCAM might associate with Nrp2 and mediate responses to Sema3B or Sema3F . We searched for interaction between Nrp2 and IgCAMs of the L1 subfamily in cotransfection of HEK293T cells followed by immunoprecipitation . Formation of a com - plex between Nrp2 and NrCAM was observed by using antibodies directed against epitope tags of Nrp2 and NrCAM ( Figure 6A ) . The Nrp2 / NrCAM interaction was detected both in the presence and absence of Sema3B ( Figure 6B ) . We also observed binding of Nrp2 - Fc to NrCAM - expressing COS7 cells ( Figure 6C ) , indicating that the interaction involves their ectodomains . In con - trast , no binding of Nrp2 to other IgCAMs , such as con - tactin , Tag - 1 , or L1 , was detected under similar condi - tions ( Figure 6C ) . Next , E18 embryonic brain extracts were immunoprecipitated with anti - Nrp2 antibodies . Immunoblotting with anti - NrCAM antibodies revealed the presence of Nrp2 / NrCAM complexes in the de - veloping brain ( Figure 6D ) . The Nrp2 / NrCAM interaction was also detected from transfected cells using the same Nrp2 and NrCAM antibodies . Finally , NrCAM could be visualized on ACa and ACp axons , and their growth cones contain binding sites for soluble NrCAM - Fc ( Figures 6E – 6G ) . Next we examined the binding of Sema3F and Sema3B AP fusion proteins to Nrp2 when expressed alone in COS7 cells , complexed to NrCAM or Plex - A , and in the presence or absence of soluble NrCAM ( Fig - ure 6H ) . Sema3B and Sema3F efficiently bound to Nrp2 , Nrp2 / Plex - A , and Nrp2 / NrCAM but not to NrCAM when expressed alone . Soluble NrCAM did not abolish Sema3B and Sema3F binding to Nrp2 / Plex - A ( Figure 6H ) . Thus , NrCAM neither disrupts semaphorin / Nrp2 binding nor prevents Nrp2 / Plex - A interaction . We then examined whether NrCAM is required for ACp responses to Sema3B and Sema3F . Application of anti - Neuron68 Figure 5 . Ventral Surround - Repulsion for ACp Axons Mediated by Semaphorins ( A ) Binding profile of Nrp2 - Fc on bisbenzimide stained coronal brain sections . Nrp2 binding sites concentrate at the AC ventral border . ( B ) In sections from Sema3B − / − mice , Nrp2 binding is decreased in the ventral region , while it is still strongly detected in neighboring cor - tex . ( C ) Sema3B in situ hybridization on E16 coronal brain sections showing the transcript in the SVZ and at ventral levels . ( D ) Ventral tissue collected for the cocultures . Histograms of guidance index , * p < 0 . 001 , ANOVA test ; ns , not significant . The microphotographs and histograms illustrate the chemorepulsion of ACp axons by the ventral tissue , its blockade by Nrp2 - Fc and anti - Nrp2 antibody ap - plication , and the lack of repulsive activity from the tissue collected from Sema3B − / − mice , compared with Sema3B + / + mice . Scale bar , 30 (cid:1) m . NrCAM antibodies ( Lustig et al . , 2001 ) or soluble NrCAM - Fc abolished the ability of Sema3B and Sema3F to elicit ACp growth cone collapse , as reported previously for L1 - Fc on the response to Sema3A ( Castellani et al . , 2000 , 2002 ; p < 0 . 001 , Figure 6I ) . To determine whether NrCAM is required for Sema3B - mediated attraction , cocultures of ACa explants with COS cells secreting Sema3B were performed in the presence of anti - NrCAM antibodies . It resulted in the abrogation of the chemoattractive behavior of ACa axons ( p < 0 . 001 , Fig - ure 6J ) . We next tested whether the physiological responses of AC axons to endogenous semaphorins require NrCAM . In the SVZ / ACa explant cocultures , NrCAM function - blocking antibody was as efficient as anti - Nrp2 anti - body in blocking attractive responses and unmasking the chemorepellent produced by the SVZ ( p < 0 . 01 , Fig - ure 7A ) . In ventral tissue / ACp explant cocultures , solu - ble NrCAM - Fc but not Nrp2 - Fc reversed the chemore - pulsive activity of the ventral tissue to attraction , as indicated by the change of the guidance index from −1 . 2 to 0 . 9 ( p < 0 . 01 , Figures 7B and 7C ) , whereas anti - NrCAM antibodies blocked the chemorepulsive response ( p < 0 . 001 , Figure 7B ) . This suggested that Nrp2 and NrCAM function in a common receptor complex and are required for both the attractive and repulsive activ - ity of Sema3B and Sema3F secreted from endoge - nous tissue . Requirement of NrCAM in AC Formation To determine whether the contribution of NrCAM to axon responses to semaphorins could be observed in vivo , we examined the formation of the AC in NrCAM null mutant mice ( Sakurai et al . , 2001 ) . Both ACa and ACp could be detected in these mice . However , in coro - nal sections , aberrant trajectories were observed with defasciculated fibers growing into ventral territories that were devoid of fibers in wild - types and that we identified as important sources of repulsive semapho - rins for AC navigation ( Figure 7D ) . Observations of the ACa in horizontal sections also revealed striking disor - ganization of the tract , with defasciculated and exuber - ant ACa branches in lateral position to the main fiber tract , a defect that resembled that observed in Sema3B mutant mice ( Figure 7E ) . This analysis therefore re - vealed important similarities to the phenotypic defects of semaphorin / neuropilin mutants ( Figure 7F ) . Membrane Recruitment of FAK / Src Signaling Complex by Sema3B Distinguishes Attractive and Repulsive Condition To obtain insight into the mechanisms by which Sema3B exerts dual guidance effects for the AC , we searched for signaling pathways differently activated under re - pulsion or attraction . Our approach consisted of stimu - lating anterior and posterior tissue collected from neo - natal brain with Sema3B - AP or AP for 5 min , followed by Western blot analysis . We first focused on MAPK activation , as it was shown to be required for axon re - sponses to other class III semaphorins ( Atwal et al . , 2003 ; Campbell and Holt , 2003 ) . Western blot analysis revealed that Sema3B induced Erk1 / 2 phosphorylation , but this activation was detected in both anterior and posterior stimulated tissue ( see Figure S1 in the Sup - plemental Data available online ) . Similarly , in dissoci - ated neuronal cultures , Sema3B induced Erk1 / 2 phos - phorylation in anterior and posterior neurons ( Figure S1 ) . Thus , even though likely involved in semaphorin action generally , MAPK activation was not correlated to one or the other response to Sema3B . We then reasoned that Sema3B could mediate attrac - tion through activation of signaling cascades common to other attractants or growth - promoting factors . We thus focused on kinases of the FAK and Src family , shown to be key mediators of ephrin and netrin func - tions ( Miao et al . , 2000 ; Carter et al . , 2002 ; Knoll and Drescher , 2004 ; Li et al . , 2004 ; Liu et al . , 2004 ; Meriane et al . , 2004 ; Ren et al . , 2004 ) . First , the expression of phosphorylated FAK on tyr397 was examined in ante - rior and posterior neuronal cultures , stimulated with Sema3B - AP or AP control . Strikingly , pFAK labeling was distributed at the membrane of stimulated anterior Sema3B and AC Pathfinding 69 Figure 6 . NrCAM / Nrp2 Association and Axon Responses to Semaphorins ( A ) Western blots showing the coprecipitation of Nrp2 and NrCAM in 293T transfected cells . Experiments were performed with antibodies against the epitope tags of Nrp2 ( HA ) and NrCAM ( VSV ) and with control IgG antibodies . Two protein loadings are shown for the coprecipitation ( 1x and 3x ) . Lysates correspond to 1 / 100 of the total input . ( B ) Coprecipitation in transfected 293T showing NrCAM / Nrp2 complex formation in the presence and absence of Sema3B . ( C ) Clustered Nrp2 - Fc ( bright spots ) bound to NrCAM - expressing COS7 cells . As negative controls , no binding of TAG - 1 , contactin , or L1 to Nrp2 - expressing COS7 cells . Scale bar , 5 (cid:1) m . ( D ) Coprecipitation of Nrp2 and NrCAM from brain extracts and from transfected 293T cells performed with antibodies against native proteins , showing the formation of Nrp2 / NrCAM complex in vivo . ( E ) Phase contrast ( left ) and anti - Fc immunofluorescence ( right ) showing binding sites for NrCAM - Fc on ACp growth cones . Scale bar , 3 (cid:1) m . ( F and G ) Immunodetection of endogenous NrCAM along ACp ( F ) and ACa axons ( G ) . Scale bar , 20 (cid:1) m . ( H ) Binding assays on transfected COS7 cells with AP - Sema3B , AP - Sema3F , and AP . Sema3B and Sema3F - AP did not bind to NrCAM - expressing cells ( NrC ) . Both semaphorins bound to cells expressing Nrp2 alone or complexed with NrCAM . Soluble NrCAM ( Nr ) did not prevent Semaphorin binding to Nrp2 and Nrp2 / Plex - A complex . Scale bar , 5 (cid:1) m . ( I ) Collapse assay on ACp neurons collected as illustrated ( box ) . Histogram showing the percentage ± SD of collapsed growth cones under control ( white ) , Sema3F ( gray ) , and Sema3B ( black ) conditions . Anti - NrCAM ( α - NrC ) or NrCAM - Fc chimera ( NrC - Fc ) combined with semaphorin treatment . * p < 0 . 001 ; ns , nonsignificant , ANOVA test . Both anti - NrCAM antibodies and soluble NrCAM abrogated Sema3B - and Sema3F - induced growth cone collapse . ( J ) Application of anti - NrCAM antibodies abolished the chemoattractive response of ACa axons to Sema3B . * p < 0 . 001 , ANOVA test . neurons , whereas it had a predominantly cytoplasmic localization in stimulated posterior neurons and controls of both populations ( Figure 8A ) . Analysis of the profiles of pFAK labeling across neuronal soma also showed that predominant membrane localization of pFAK was exclusive to the attractive condition ( Figure 8B ) . pFAK labeling in the growth cone structures was also rein - forced in the attractive condition , compared to control . Neuron70 Figure 7 . Implication of NrCAM in AC Responses to Endogenous Semaphorins and Defects of the AC in NrCAM Null Mice ( A and B ) Histograms represent the mean guidance index of the cocultures in control ( white ) , Nrp2 - Fc - treated , or NrCAM - Fc - treated conditions . * p < 0 . 001 ANOVA test . ( A ) Cocultures of ACa / SVZ explants showing that anti - NrCAM mimicked anti - Nrp2 anti - bodies , unmasking SVZ - mediated chemorepulsion , as the guid - ance index shifted to negative value . ( B and C ) In cocultures of ACp / ventral cell ( VC ) explants , soluble NrCAM - Fc reversed the VC - derived chemorepulsion to attraction . Scale bar , 30 (cid:1) m . ( D ) Interfer - ence contrast microscopy of coronal sections of NrCAM null and wild - type mice at the midline crossing levels . In NrCAM null mutant , the AC is split into several bundles , with aberrant ventral growth ( white arrows ) . ( E ) Horizontal sections showing exuberant ACa bun - dles in the NrCAM − / − mice ( middle and right , white arrows ) , at aber - rant mediolateral position . Scale bar , 1 . 5 mm . ( F ) Common defects of the AC in semaphorin / Nrp and NrCAM mutants . AC defascicula - tion and ventral misposition in Nrp2 , Sema3F , and Sema3B mutants are also observed in NrCAM mutants . ACa lateral shift is common to Sema3B and NrCAM mutants . Reduced AC characteristic to Nrp2 and Sema3F is not observed in NrCAM and Sema3B . nd , non - determined . In contrast , it was compacted in the posterior condi - tion , due to the collapsing effect of the cue ( Figure 8C ) . This suggested either that Sema3B induced phosphor - ylation of a membrane pool of FAK in anterior but not posterior neurons or that it induced relocalization of the FAK protein from the cytoplasm to the membrane . To distinguish between these two models , the distribution of FAK was examined with an antibody recognizing all forms of the kinase . The pattern of labeling was similar to that of pFAK ( Figure 8D ) , indicating that Sema3B in - duced FAK relocalization at the cell membrane in the attractive ( anterior neurons ) but not repulsive condition ( posterior neurons ) . We also observed that Sema3F in - duced no membrane relocalization of FAK in anterior neurons ( data not shown ) . Therefore , these findings strongly suggest that FAK recruitment is specific to neurons with attractive responses . Src Kinase Inhibition Converts Attractive Response to Sema3B into Repulsion To further investigate the molecular composition of the signaling complex recruited by Sema3B in the attrac - tive condition , anterior and posterior tissues were stim - ulated with Sema3B - AP or AP control and submitted to membrane purification followed by precipitation with anti - FAK antibodies . Proteins that coprecipitated with FAK were probed with anti - phospho - tyr antibodies . A 60 kD phosphorylated activity that coprecipitated with FAK was enriched by Sema3B stimulation of anterior tissue ( Figure 8E ) . No obvious difference could be seen in the posterior condition . Kinases of the Src family are 60 kD proteins recruited to FAK in various conditions , in particular for axonal responses to the chemoattractant Netrin - 1 ( Li et al . , 2004 ; Liu et al . , 2004 ) . We hypothe - sized that this pathway could also trigger attractive re - sponses to Sema3B . Membrane fractions of anterior tissue stimulated by Sema3B - AP and control - AP were precipitated with anti - FAK antibody , and the presence of associated Src was examined with anti - pan - Src anti - bodies . The analysis revealed that Sema3B - AP stimula - tion induced a membrane recruitment of FAK / Src com - plex in anterior tissue . In contrast , such complexes did not form in posterior tissue treated by Sema3B - AP ( Fig - ure 8F ) . Next we examined whether Sema3B induces Src phosphorylation . Anterior and posterior tissues were stimulated with control - AP or Sema3B - AP , and lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti - pan - Src antibodies . Immunoprecipitated proteins were probed with anti - pY antibodies in Western blot . Phosphorylation of Src ki - nases upon Sema3B - AP treatment was detected in both anterior and posterior tissue ( Figure 8G ) . Thus , to determine whether the Src kinase members activated by Sema3B differ in anterior and posterior tissue , sim - ilar experiments were done to detect one of these ki - nases , fyn . Western blot analysis revealed an increased level of fyn phosphorylation in stimulated anterior tis - sue , compared to the control ( Figure 8H ) . Moreover , stimulation of anterior tissue by Sema3B also led to co - precipitation of FAK with fyn , further confirming the re - cruitment of FAK / Src kinase complex in the attractive condition ( Figure 8H ) . In posterior tissue , the basal level of fyn activation was significantly higher than in anterior tissue . Nevertheless , we could not detect any signifi - cant modification of fyn phosphorylation triggered by Sema3B stimulation in this tissue . Moreover , FAK was not found associated to fyn in this condition . Sema3B and AC Pathfinding 71 Figure 8 . Signaling Pathways Underlying Sema3B - Mediated Attraction and Repulsion ( A ) Immunocytochemical detection of pFAK in anterior and posterior neurons , stimulated by Sema3B - AP and AP treatments , showing the cytoplasmic localization of pFAK in control ( ant : AP ) and repulsive condition ( post : 3B ) and the membrane localization in the attractive condition ( ant : 3B ) . Scale bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( B ) Three typical examples of plot profiles across neuronal soma , as illustrated in ( A ) with white arrows , determined with NIH image for each condition , showing the two picks of fluorescence in the attractive condition and the homogenous distribution in the other conditions . ( C ) Two examples per condition of pFAK labeling of growth cones , illustrating the reinforcement of the growth cones in the attractive condition . Spots of pFAK labeling in the repulsive condition reflect the growth cone collapse induced by Sema3B . Scale bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( D ) Immunocytochemical labeling of FAK and plot profiles showing that the localization of FAK is identical to that of pFAK . Scale bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( E and F ) Immunoprecipitation of FAK from the membrane fraction of control and stimulated anterior and posterior fresh tissue showing the increased tyrosine phosphorylated activity at 60 kd in the attractive condition ( ant 3B ) in ( E ) and the coprecipitation of Src in this condition in ( F ) . The second blot of each panel shows the input . Ant and Post correspond to nonfractionated tissue , Mb Ant and Mb Post to purified membranes . ( G ) Sema3B - induced phosphorylation of Src kinases in nonfractionated anterior and posterior tissue . ( H ) Sema3B - induced increase of fyn phosphorylation and coprecipitation of FAK with fyn in the attractive condition ( anterior tissue ) but not repulsive condition ( posterior tissue ) . ( I ) Pharmacological inhibition of Src kinases in cocultures of anterior and posterior explants with Sema3B - AP and AP - secreting COS7 cell aggregates . Microphotographs and histograms of the guidance index show that application of the Src inhibitor SU6656 ( 2 (cid:1) M ) but not the vehicle alone ( DMSO ) converted the attractive behavior into repulsion , thereby conferring to neurons a posterior - like response . The inhibitor significantly attenuated the chemorepulsive response of posterior neurons to Sema3B . It had no effect on axon trajectory of anterior and posterior explants cultured with AP - secreting agregates . * p < 0 . 001 ; ANOVA test . Neuron72 Finally , we examined whether Src family kinases me - diate functional responses to Sema3B by pharmaco - logical inhibition in our coculture models of anterior and posterior explants with COS7 cell agregates . Strikingly , addition of the Src inhibitor SU 6656 ( 2 (cid:1) M ) not only abolished the attractive response of anterior axons to Sema3B but converted it to repulsion ( p < 0 . 001 , Figure 8I ) . The inhibitor had a different effect on posterior ax - ons , as it only attenuated their repulsive response to Sema3B . Under control conditions , inhibition of Src in cultures did not modify the random axon trajectory characteristic of the cocultures with AP - secreting ag - gregates . Discussion We have demonstrated , by using explant cultures and in knockout mice , that selective chemoattractive and chemorepulsive activities of Sema3B contribute to po - sitioning the ACa and ACp , respectively . We also iden - tified the IgCAM superfamily member NrCAM as a novel coreceptor of Nrp2 for Sema3B and Sema3F guidance activities . Finally , we provided insights into the mecha - nisms underlying the bifunctional activity of secreted semaphorins . Sema3B and Sema3F Display Specific and Not Redundant Guidance Activities Our data show that mutation of the Sema3b gene leads to a ventral shift of ACa and ACp pathways , indicating that Sema3B plays important roles in positioning the two tracts along the dorsoventral axis . Both in vivo analysis and functional assays support a model whereby , at rostral levels , ACa axons are attracted by a dorsal source of Sema3B , emanating from the SVZ . At more caudal levels , ACp axons are repelled by a ventral source of Sema3B , emanating from cells adjacent to the ACp pathway . Thus , even though Sema3B serves as a common dorsoventral determinant for the two limbs , this is achieved through both opposing spatial expression and functional property . The similarity of AC defects induced by genetic abla - tion of Sema3F and Nrp2 suggested that other Nrp2 ligands might not contribute to AC pathfinding ( Sahay et al . , 2003 ) . We show , however , that Sema3F and Sema3B are not redundant but play distinct and not compensable roles on the formation of the AC , due to their different functional properties and expression pat - terns . This is particularly clear for the ACa , for which Sema3F cannot compensate Sema3B attractive prop - erties and expression in the SVZ . Nevertheless , the ACp position is also compromised in Sema3B and Sema3F null mice despite comparable repulsive functional ac - tivities on this class of axons . Several possibilities can be considered . Sema3B and Sema3F may be simply required at different steps of the ACp navigation , con - sistent with their distinct expression pattern . Alterna - tively , Sema3B and Sema3F could diffuse from distinct sources at the ventral border of the commissure to ex - ert additive effects for positioning the tract . This would imply that not only the localization but also the concen - tration of chemorepellents is critical . The defective AC position in Sema3B heterozygous mice together with guidance errors in Nrp2 heterozygous mice ( Zou et al . , 2000 ) support this idea and suggest that the spatial co - ordinates of fiber tracts are dictated by the amount of ligand / receptor interactions . Finally , one cannot ex - clude that Sema3F is sufficient for organizing the ACp trajectory but that fasciculation onto mispositioned ACa that forms earlier would displace the tract ( Pires - Neto and Lent 1993 ; Cummings et al . , 1997 ) . Chemoattraction by Sema3B Serves to Position the ACa Semaphorins and ephrins are major sources of repul - sive guidance cues for axon navigation ( Huber et al . , 2003 ) . Semaphorins also have attractive effects ( Bag - nard et al . , 1998 ; de Castro et al . , 1999 ; Polleux et al . , 2000 ) , but little is known about the biological context in which such attraction is exerted . Recent loss - of - func - tion and misexpression experiments in the zebrafish strongly suggest that Sema3D expressed at the midline attracts AC axons ( Wolman et al . , 2004 ) . We show that the Aca positioning in rodents depends upon specific Sema3B - mediated chemoattraction . Together , these data point to a conserved role for chemoattraction by sema - phorins in the formation of the AC . Our coculture models highlight the importance of germinal zones lining the ventricles in the positioning of the AC . The AC midline crossing occurs in close as - sociation with the ependymal layer of the third ventri - cle , and extracellular matrix molecules and ephrins expressed in this region may provide cell contact guid - ance for AC fibers ( Pires - Neto and Lent , 1993 ; Cum - mings et al . , 1997 ; Henkemeyer et al . , 1996 ; Kullander et al . , 2001 ) . The SVZ also influences the ACa position by secreting cues with opposite guidance effects . This double signaling may be needed for achieving fine con - trol of axonal trajectory and may serve for the pro - gressive lateromedial turning of ACa fibers directing the tract toward the midline . The nature of the cue antago - nizing attraction by Sema3B remains undetermined , al - though our data exclude some candidates . First , bind - ing assays with Nrp2 chimera indicate that Sema3B inactivation totally abrogates Nrp2 binding sites in the SVZ . Furthermore , Nrp2 function - blocking antibodies did not abolish the repulsive activity . Second , Nrp1 was not detected in AC axons . Therefore , the chemorepel - lent is unlikely to be a ligand for neuropilins . Slits may be possible candidates because expression has been reported in the SVZ , at least at adult stages ( Nguyen - Ba - Charvet et al . , 2004 ) . Nrp2 / NrCAM Complex Is Required for the Guidance of AC Projections by Sema3B and Sema3F Adhesive features of the environment shape axon guid - ance responses ( Hopker et al . , 1999 ; Castellani et al . , 2002 ; Suh et al . , 2004 ) . We found here that the immuno - globulin superfamily cell adhesion molecule NrCAM as - sociates with Nrp2 and is required for Sema3B - and Sema3F - induced attractive and repulsive responses . In binding experiments with AP fusion proteins , we did not detect interactions of Sema3B and Sema3F with NrCAM . We also determined that NrCAM association to Nrp2 does not prevent Sema3B and Sema3F binding to Nrp2 . Moreover , soluble NrCAM does not antagonize Sema3B and AC Pathfinding 73 semaphorin binding to Nrp2 when expressed alone or combined with Plex - A . Thus , these data are consistent with NrCAM as a component of a receptor complex for these semaphorins . NrCAM is expressed on developing fiber tracts in - cluding the AC ( Lustig et al . , 2001 ; present data ) and engage in multiple interactions regulating neurite out - growth and fasciculation ( Grumet , 1997 ; Faivre - Sarrailh et al . , 1999 ; Fitzli et al . , 2000 ) . We show that genetic NrCAM ablation induces defasciculation and aberrant dorsoventral and mediolateral trajectories of AC fibers , some phenotypes that are indeed observed in sema - phorin / neuropilin mutants ( Figure 8E ) . The defascicula - tion common to Nrp2 and NrCAM mutants could reflect loss of NrCAM / Nrp2 interactions , as we found here that these proteins can associate in trans . Altered spatial position of the AC is also common to NrCAM , Sema3B , and Sema3F and might therefore reflect a contribution of NrCAM to semaphorin responses . In contrast to Sema3F and Nrp2 , however , NrCAM inactivation does not lead to drastic AC reduction . Thus , it is likely that NrCAM takes part in some but not all the functions served by Sema3F and Nrp2 or that its absence is only compensated in some of these functions . Interestingly , Sema3B and Sema3F were previously found to control the guidance of spinal commissural axons at the mid - line , where NrCAM also plays a critical role in crossing decisions ( Zou et al . , 2000 ; Stoeckli and Landmesser , 1998 ) . Thus , mechanisms described here may be con - served in other systems of projections . FAK / fyn Signaling Underlies Attractive but Not Repulsive Responses to Sema3B Our investigation of attractive and repulsive responses to Sema3B demonstrates that FAK / Src signaling is a critical component of the attractive cascade . Several of our observations support this idea . First , Sema3B induced membrane relocalization of FAK in neurons with attractive but not repulsive responses . Second , investigation of associated phosphorylated activities showed that in the attractive condition Sema3B re - cruited Src kinases to FAK in the membrane compart - ment . Third , Sema3B activated distinct Src family ki - nases in attractive and repulsive condition , with fyn only phosphorylated and associated to FAK under attraction . Finally , pharmacological inhibition of Src ki - nase phosphorylation in functional assays strikingly ev - idenced the distinct requirement for these kinases in attraction and repulsion by Sema3B . Interestingly , by switching attractive behavior of anterior axons to repul - sion , it totally abolished the feature distinguishing ante - rior and posterior neurons , revealing a competence of anterior neurons for repulsion . Several mechanisms may underlie the dual competence . One is that Sema3B binding to its receptor in anterior neurons activates a dual signaling , but the FAK / Src attractive cascade is predominant . Inactivation of this cascade would make the repulsive mechanism unable to operate . The MAPK pathway could be part of such a repulsive cascade , as it was found here to be activated in both populations and its pharmacological inhibition was reported to abolish Sema3A - mediated repulsive effects ( Campbell and Holt , 2003 ) . Other cascades , at least in posterior neurons , also participate in Sema3B - mediated repul - sion , as pharmacological inactivation of Src kinases at - tenuated their repulsive response . FAK is a critical component of cell adhesion sites and displays both signaling and scaffolding properties . Its activation by various extracellular signals controls cell adherence , morphology , and movement ( Mitra et al . , 2005 ) . As shown by several studies , it also acts with Src as downstream of guidance cues from the ephrins , netrins ( Miao et al . , 2000 ; Cowan and Henkemeyer , 2001 ; Carter et al . , 2002 ; Li et al . , 2004 ; Liu et al . , 2004 ; Meriane et al . , 2004 ; Ren et al . , 2004 ) , and secreted semaphorins , as shown here . In all cases , it is recruited for promoting activities of the cues , suggesting that the functional links of FAK with the actin cytoskeleton may be commonly utilized by attractants for stabilizing and / or polarizing growth cone structures . The mechanism by which the FAK / Src complex is selectively recruited to the Sema3B receptor in anterior but not posterior neurons is yet to be determined . Sema3B binding to its receptor may display distinct features in anterior and posterior neurons , or the receptor may be present in distinct membrane subdomains , thereby recruiting dif - ferent signaling effectors . Another interesting possi - bility is that the molecular composition of the Sema3B receptor differs between the attractive and repulsive condition , possibly by distinct combinations of known subunits of the semaphorin receptors or through the recruitment of unidentified partners . NrCAM is unlikely to be the direct mediator specifying the direction of the response , as it is found to be required for both attrac - tive and repulsive behavior . In the zebrafish , dual ef - fects of semaphorins appear to be mediated through different combinations of Nrps ( Wolman et al . , 2004 ) . However , this is not the case for Sema3B in mice , as AC fibers do not express Nrp1 ( Figure 2O ) . Therefore , further investigation is needed for addressing this question and for analyzing in detail the molecular path - ways leading the growth cones from anterior and pos - terior neurons to choose between attraction and re - pulsion . Experimental Procedures Generation of Sema3B Null Mice To generate a Sema3B mutant , we obtained a bacterial artificial chromosome ( BAC ) clone containing the Sema3b locus from Ge - nome Systems ( St . Louis , MO ; clone 439J0I ) . A 1 kb fragment ex - tending upstream from the first codon ( ATG ) was generated by PCR from the BAC and served as the short arm . The long arm was a 9 kb SrfI - BamHI fragment that extended downstream from a carboxy - terminal extension 5 # of the immunoglobulin domain in the last coding exon . A targeting vector was constructed in which these two fragments flanked a β - galactosidase ( LacZ ) gene ( Figure 1A ) . Homologous recombination of this vector in R1 ES cells generated a null mutant of the Sema3B locus in which almost the entire open reading frame was deleted . The structure of the mutated locus was confirmed by Southern blot analysis ( Figure 1B ) . The ES cells were then injected into C57B6 blastocysts at the Mouse Genetics Core ( Washington University , St Louis , MO ) to generate , in turn , germline chimeras , heterozygotes , and homozygotes . The Neo insertion was removed by mating to actin - cre mice ( Lewandoski and Martin , 1997 ) . The mutants were backcrossed to C57B6A mice for more than three generations before use . Genotyping PCR amplification was performed on templates of unpurified tail lysates with the following set of primers : GGTGTGGGTGTGTCTCTG Neuron74 ATTGTGG ( Sema3Ba ) , AGTCACGACGTTGTAAAACGACGGG ( lacZ ) , and GCACCAGCAAGTCTTTCCATATCGG ( Sema3Bb ) . Sema3Ba and b amplified a 435 bp fragment identifying the wild - type allele , while Sema3Ba and lacZ amplified a 320 bp fragment , correspond - ing to the null allele . Cocultures , Neuronal Cultures , and Collapse Assays Pieces of tissues containing anterior piriform cortex and AON ( ACa projection neurons ) and more posteriorly located piriform cortex ( ACp projection neurons ) were separately dissected from P0 mice and cut into 250 (cid:1) m thick slices with a McIlwain tissue chopper . Tissue from the ventral region surrounding the AC pathway and from SVZ was dissected from 300 (cid:1) m thick vibratome sections and manually cut into explants . Cocultures and collapse assays were performed as described in Castellani et al . ( 2000 ) . In some experi - ments , explants were cocultured with COS7 cell aggregates se - creting Sema3B - AP , Sema3F - AP , or control AP . Src kinase inhibitor ( SU 6656 , Sigma , 2 (cid:1) M ) or vehicle ( DMSO ) was added to the culture medium . A qualitative guidance index was attributed to the cocul - tures to assess the degree of repulsive ( negative values ) or attrac - tive ( positive values ) effects . The index ranged from −2 ( when most fibers grew away from the explant ) to + 2 ( when most fibers grew toward the explant ) , with intermediate situations ( index of −1 and + 1 for moderate guidance effects ) . An index of 0 was attributed to the cultures showing no preferential growth ( Castellani et al . , 2000 ) . For collapse assays , ACa and ACp tissue was dissociated and cells were plated onto polylysin - coated glass coverslips ( Sigma , 0 . 001 mg / ml ) in DMEM / F12 supplemented with B27 medium ( Gibco ) . Af - ter 1 or 2 days in vitro , neurons were incubated with control , Sema3B , or Sema3F supernatants for 1 hr at 37°C , fixed , and mounted in Mowiol for analysis of the growth cone morphology . Collapsed growth cones were scored as in Castellani et al . ( 2000 ) . In some assays , Nrp2 - Fc ( a gift from M . Tessier - Lavigne ) , NrCAM - Fc ( 5 (cid:1) g / ml ) , anti - Nrp2 , or anti - NrCAM antibodies ( 50 (cid:1) g / ml ; Lustig et al . , 2001 ) were applied to the medium . For collapse assays , Sema3B - myc and Sema3F - myc were produced for 2 DIV in Opti - MEM ( Gibco ) by transient transfection of COS7 cells . Immunocyto - chemistry was performed with polyclonal anti - NrCAM ( 1 : 100 ) , anti - Nrp2 ( 1 : 100 , R & D ) , anti - FAK ( 1 : 100 , Santa Cruz ) , and anti - pFAK ( Cell Signaling , 1 : 100 ) . In some cases , nuclei were stained with bis - benzimide . Immunoprecipitation 293T cells were transfected with vectors encoding HA - tagged Nrp2 , and VSV - tagged NrCAM by using lipofection ( Fugene - 6 ) . Cells were lysed with immunoprecipitation buffer ( IP buffer : HEPES , 25 mM ; EDTA , 5 mM ; MgCl 2 , 1 mM ; PMSF , 2 mM ; glycerol , 10 % ; and triton X - 100 , 1 % ; pH 7 ) . Lysates were immunoprecipitated with mouse anti - HA ( 3 (cid:1) l , clone 12CA5 , Roche ) , mouse anti - VSV anti - bodies ( 3 (cid:1) l , SIGMA ) , rabbit anti - NrCAM antibodies ( 3 (cid:1) l ) , or rabbit anti - Nrp2 antibodies ( 10 (cid:1) l , a gift from A . Kolodkin ) on protein A preformed complexes ( Castellani et al . , 2000 ) . Samples were ana - lyzed by immunoblot using anti - HA ( 1 : 1000 ) and anti - NrCAM ( 1 : 500 ) , anti - VSV ( 1 : 100 ) , or anti - Nrp2 ( 1 : 500 ) antibodies . Anterior and posterior tissues were collected from neonatal brains , dilascer - ated , and stimulated with AP , Sema3B - AP , and Sema3F - AP super - natants for 5 min . Lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti - Src antibodies ( Santa Cruz ) . In some cases , purification of the mem - brane fraction was done as described in Li et al . ( 2004 ) . Briefly , fresh anterior and posterior tissue from 12 neonatal mouse brains per experiment were Dounce homogenized in PBS containing pro - tease inhibitors , lysates were centrifuged several times at 25 , 000 × g for removing insoluble fraction , and ultracentrifuged at 100 , 000 × g for 40 min . The pellet was washed and centrifuged at 25 , 000 × g for 5 min to remove debris , and the solubilized membrane fraction was immunoprecipitated with anti - FAK antibodies ( Santa Cruz ) . Im - munoblots were performed with anti - pY antibodies ( SIGMA ) , anti - pan - Src ( Santa Cruz ) , anti - Erk and anti - pERK ( Santa Cruz ) , and anti - fyn ( Santa Cruz ) . Binding Assays and In Situ Hybridization Nrp2 - Fc and NrCAM - Fc was cross - linked to rabbit anti - human Fc antibodies ( 50 (cid:1) g / ml , Jackson Immunoresearch ) and incubated onto COS7 cells or neurons ( Castellani et al . , 2002 ) . Bound Fc pro - teins were detected with anti - Fc FITC - conjugated anti - rabbit anti - bodies , NrCAM - vsv and Nrp2 with mouse anti - VSV antibodies ( 1 : 100 ) and anti - Nrp2 ( 1 : 500 ) . In in situ binding assays , preclustered Nrp2 - Fc was incubated on free - floating 60 (cid:1) m thick vibratome sec - tions from neonatal brain for 1 hr at 37°C . Binding assays with Sema3B - AP were performed with unfixed cryostat sections from neonatal brain according to the procedure described in Feiner et al . ( 1997 ) . In situ hybridization was performed on 20 (cid:1) m thick cryostat sections from neonatal wild - type and Sema3B null mice , with dig - oxigenin - labeled anti - sense probes synthesized with T3 / T6 or SP6 RNA polymerase . Supplemental Data The Supplemental Data for this article can be found online at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / 48 / 1 / 63 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments We thank A . Chédotal , C . Faivre - Sarrailh , D . Karakogeos , M . Tes - sier - Lavigne , and A . Kolodkin for gifts of reagents . This work was supported by the CNRS ATIP program and the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale ( FRM ) ( V . C . ) , National Institute of Health ( J . R . S . ) ; grants from the DFG ( A . W . P . ) , and a predoctoral fellowship ( PFPI ) from the Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologia , Spain ( C . H . - B ) . Received : February 16 , 2005 Revised : June 27 , 2005 Accepted : August 23 , 2005 Published : October 5 , 2005 References Atwal , J . K . , Singh , K . K . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , Miller , F . D . , and Kaplan , D . R . ( 2003 ) . Semaphorin 3F antagonizes neurotrophin - induced phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase and mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase signaling : a mechanism for growth cone collapse . J . Neu - rosci . 20 , 7602 – 7609 . Bagnard , D . , Lohrum , M . , Uziel , D . , Puschel , A . W . , and Bolz , J . ( 1998 ) . Semaphorins act as attractive and repulsive guidance sig - nals during the development of cortical projections . Development 125 , 5043 – 5053 . Campbell , D . S . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2003 ) . Apoptotic pathway and MAPKs differentially regulate chemotropic responses of retinal growth cones . Neuron 27 , 939 – 952 . Carter , N . , Nakamoto , T . , Hirai , H . , and Hunter , T . ( 2002 ) . EphrinA1 - induced cytoskeletal re - organization requires FAK and p130 ( cas ) . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 565 – 573 . Castellani , V . , Chedotal , A . , Schachner , M . , Faivre - Sarrailh , C . , and Rougon , G . ( 2000 ) . Analysis of the L1 - deficient mouse phenotype reveals cross - talk between Sema3A and L1 signaling pathways in axonal guidance . Neuron 27 , 237 – 249 . Castellani , V . , De Angelis , E . , Kenwrick , S . , and Rougon , G . ( 2002 ) . Cis and trans interactions of L1 with neuropilin - 1 control axonal responses to semaphorin 3A . EMBO J . 21 , 6348 – 6357 . Castro - Rivera , E . , Ran , S . , Thorpe , P . , and Minna , J . D . ( 2004 ) . Sem - aphorin 3B ( SEMA3B ) induces apoptosis in lung and breast cancer , whereas VEGF165 antagonizes this effect . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 11432 – 11437 . Chen , H . , Bagri , A . , Zupicich , J . A . , Zou , Y . , Stoeckli , E . , Pleasure , S . J . , Lowenstein , D . H . , Skarnes , W . C . , Chedotal , A . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 2000 ) . Neuropilin - 2 regulates the development of se - lective cranial and sensory nerves and hippocampal mossy fiber projections . Neuron 25 , 43 – 56 . Cowan , C . A . , and Henkemeyer , M . ( 2001 ) . The SH2 / SH3 adaptor Grb4 transduces B - ephrin reverse signals . Nature 13 , 174 – 179 . Cummings , D . M . , Malun , D . , and Brunjes , P . C . ( 1997 ) . Development of the anterior commissure in the opossum : midline extracellular space and glia coincide with early axon decussation . J . Neurobiol . 32 , 403 – 414 . de Castro , F . , Hu , L . , Drabkin , H . , Sotelo , C . , and Chedotal , A . Sema3B and AC Pathfinding 75 ( 1999 ) . Chemoattraction and chemorepulsion of olfactory bulb ax - ons by different secreted semaphorins . J . Neurosci . 19 , 4428 – 4436 . Faivre - Sarrailh , C . , Falk , J . , Pollerberg , E . , Schachner , M . , and Rou - gon , G . ( 1999 ) . NrCAM , cerebellar granule cell receptor for the neu - ronal adhesion molecule F3 , displays an actin - dependent mobility in growth cones . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3015 – 3027 . Fazeli , A . , Dickinson , S . L . , Hermiston , M . L . , Tighe , R . V . , Steen , R . G . , Small , C . G . , Stoeckli , E . T . , Keino - Masu , K . , Masu , M . , Rayburn , H . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Phenotype of mice lacking functional Deleted in colo - rectal cancer ( Dcc ) gene . Nature 24 , 796 – 804 . Feiner , L . , Koppel , A . M . , Kobayashi , H . , and Raper , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Secreted chick semaphorins bind recombinant neuropilin with sim - ilar affinities but bind different subsets of neurons in situ . Neuron 19 , 539 – 545 . Fitzli , D . , Stoeckli , E . T . , Kunz , S . , Siribour , K . , Rader , C . , Kunz , B . , Kozlov , S . V . , Buchstaller , A . , Lane , R . P . , Suter , D . M . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Direct interaction of axonin - 1 with NgCAM - related cell adhesion molecule ( NrCAM ) results in guidance , but not growth of commis - sural axons . J . Cell Biol . 15 , 951 – 968 . Giger , R . J . , Cloutier , J . F . , Sahay , A . , Prinjha , R . K . , Levengood , D . V . , Moore , S . E . , Pickering , S . , Simmons , D . , Rastan , S . , Walsh , F . S . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Neuropilin - 2 is required in vivo for selective axon guid - ance responses to secreted semaphorins . Neuron 25 , 29 – 41 . Grumet , M . ( 1997 ) . Nr - CAM : a cell adhesion molecule with ligand and receptor functions . Cell Tissue Res . 290 , 423 – 428 . Henkemeyer , M . , Orioli , D . , Henderson , J . T . , Saxton , T . M . , Roder , J . , Pawson , T . , and Klein , R . ( 1996 ) . Nuk controls pathfinding of commissural axons in the mammalian central nervous system . Cell 86 , 35 – 46 . Hopker , V . H . , Shewan , D . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , Poo , M . , and Holt , C . ( 1999 ) . Growth - cone attraction to netrin - 1 is converted to repul - sion by laminin - 1 . Nature 401 , 69 – 73 . Huber , A . B . , Kolodkin , A . L . , Ginty , D . D . , and Cloutier , J . F . ( 2003 ) . Signaling at the growth cone : ligand - receptor complexes and the control of axon growth and guidance . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 26 , 509 – 563 . Knoll , B . , and Drescher , U . ( 2004 ) . Src family kinases are involved in EphA receptor - mediated retinal axon guidance . J . Neurosci . 14 , 6248 – 6257 . Kullander , K . , Croll , S . D . , Zimmer , M . , Pan , L . , McClain , J . , Hughes , V . , Zabski , S . , DeChiara , T . M . , Klein , R . , Yancopoulos , G . D . , and Gale , N . W . ( 2001 ) . Ephrin - B3 is the midline barrier that prevents corticospinal tract axons from recrossing , allowing for unilateral motor control . Genes Dev . 15 , 877 – 888 . Lewandoski , M . , and Martin , G . R . ( 1997 ) . Cre - mediated chromo - some loss in mice . Nat . Genet . 17 , 223 – 225 . Li , W . , Lee , J . , Vikis , H . G . , Lee , S . H . , Liu , G . , Aurandt , J . , Shen , T . L . , Fearon , E . R . , Guan , J . L . , Han , M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Activation of FAK and Src are receptor - proximal events required for netrin signaling . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 1213 – 1221 . Liu , G . , Beggs , H . , Jurgensen , C . , Park , H . T . , Tang , H . , Gorski , J . , Jones , K . R . , Reichardt , L . F . , Wu , J . , and Rao , Y . ( 2004 ) . Netrin re - quires focal adhesion kinase and Src family kinases for axon out - growth and attraction . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 1222 – 1232 . Lustig , M . , Erskine , L . , Mason , C . A . , Grumet , M . , and Sakurai , T . ( 2001 ) . Nr - CAM expression in the developing mouse nervous sys - tem : ventral midline structures , specific fiber tracts , and neuropilar regions . J . Comp . Neurol . 434 , 13 – 28 . Meriane , M . , Tcherkezian , J . , Webber , C . A . , Danek , E . I . , Triki , I . , McFarlane , S . , Bloch - Gallego , E . , and Lamarche - Vane , N . ( 2004 ) . Phosphorylation of DCC by Fyn mediates Netrin - 1 signaling in growth cone guidance . J . Cell Biol . 22 , 687 – 698 . Miao , H . , Burnett , E . , Kinch , M . , Simon , E . , and Wang , B . ( 2000 ) . Activation of EphA2 kinase suppresses integrin function and causes focal - adhesion - kinase dephosphorylation . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 62 – 69 . Mitra , S . K . , Hanson , D . A . , and Schlaepfer , D . D . ( 2005 ) . Focal adhe - sion kinase : in command and control of cell motility . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 56 – 68 . Nguyen - Ba - Charvet , K . T . , Picard - Riera , N . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , Baron - Van Evercooren , A . , Sotelo , C . , and Chedotal , A . ( 2004 ) . Mul - tiple roles for slits in the control of cell migration in the rostral mi - gratory stream . J . Neurosci . 24 , 1497 – 1506 . Pires - Neto , M . A . , and Lent , R . ( 1993 ) . The prenatal development of the anterior commissure in hamsters : pioneer fibers lead the way . Brain Res . Dev . Brain Res . 72 , 59 – 66 . Polleux , F . , Morrow , T . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2000 ) . Semaphorin 3A is a chemoattractant for cortical apical dendrites . Nature 6 , 567 . Ren , X . R . , Ming , G . L . , Xie , Y . , Hong , Y . , Sun , D . M . , Zhao , Z . Q . , Feng , Z . , Wang , Q . , Shim , S . , Chen , Z . F . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Focal adhesion kinase in netrin - 1 signaling . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 1204 – 1212 . Sahay , A . , Molliver , M . E . , Ginty , D . D . , and Kolodkin , A . L . ( 2003 ) . Semaphorin 3F is critical for development of limbic system circuitry and is required in neurons for selective CNS axon guidance events . J . Neurosci . 23 , 6671 – 6680 . Sakurai , T . , Lustig , M . , Babiarz , J . , Furley , A . J . , Tait , S . , Brophy , P . J . , Brown , S . A . , Brown , L . Y . , Mason , C . A . , and Grumet , M . ( 2001 ) . Overlapping functions of the cell adhesion molecules Nr - CAM and L1 in cerebellar granule cell development . J . Cell Biol . 17 , 1259 – 1267 . Serafini , T . , Colamarino , S . A . , Leonardo , E . D . , Wang , H . , Bedding - ton , R . , Skarnes , W . C . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 1996 ) . Netrin - 1 is required for commissural axon guidance in the developing verte - brate nervous system . Cell 13 , 1001 – 1014 . Stoeckli , E . T . , and Landmesser , L . T . ( 1998 ) . Axon guidance at choice points . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 8 , 73 – 79 . Suh , L . H . , Oster , S . F . , Soehrman , S . S . , Grenningloh , G . , and Sreta - van , D . W . ( 2004 ) . L1 / Laminin modulation of growth cone response to EphB triggers growth pauses and regulates the microtubule de - stabilizing protein SCG10 . J . Neurosci . 24 , 976 – 1986 . Takahashi , T . , Nakamura , F . , Jin , Z . , Kalb , R . G . , and Strittmatter , S . M . ( 1998 ) . Semaphorins A and E act as antagonists of neuropilin - 1 and agonists of neuropilin - 2 receptors . Nat . Neurosci . 1 , 487 – 493 . Tamagnone , L . , and Comoglio , P . M . ( 2000 ) . Signalling by semapho - rin receptors : cell guidance and beyond . Trends Cell Biol . 10 , 377 – 383 . Wolman , M . A . , Liu , Y . , Tawarayama , H . , Shoji , W . , and Halloran , M . C . ( 2004 ) . Repulsion and attraction of axons by Semaphorin3D are mediated by different neuropilins in vivo . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8428 – 8435 . Zou , Y . , Stoeckli , E . , Chen , H . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 2000 ) . Squeezing axons out of the gray matter : a role for slit and sema - phorin proteins from midline and ventral spinal cord . Cell 102 , 363 – 375 .