M e s h N e t w o r k i n g 12 Published by the IEEE Computer Society 1089 - 7801 / 08 / $ 25 . 00 © 2008 IEEE IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING The Rise of People - Centric Sensing Andrew T . Campbell , Nicholas D . Lane , Emiliano Miluzzo , Ronald A . Peterson , Hong Lu , Xiao Zheng , Mirco Musolesi , and Kristóf Fodor Dartmouth College Shane B . Eisenman and Gahng - Seop Ahn Columbia University Technological advances in sensing , computation , storage , and communications will turn the near - ubiquitous mobile phone into a global mobile sensing device . People - centric sensing will help drive this trend by enabling a different way to sense , learn , visualize , and share information about ourselves , friends , communities , the way we live , and the world we live in . It juxtaposes the traditional view of mesh sensor networks with one in which people , carrying mobile devices , enable opportunistic sensing coverage . In the MetroSense Project’s vision of people - centric sensing , users are the key architectural system component , enabling a host of new application areas such as personal , public , and social sensing . T he evolution of sensing , comput - ing , and communication technol - ogy over the past few years has brought us to a tipping point in the field of wireless sensor networking . A decade ago , research prototype hard - ware began to emerge , facilitating the genesis of wireless sensor networks as they exist today : small resource - limit - ed embedded devices that communicate via low - power , low - bandwidth radio . A natural first application of these net - works of custom devices was solving relatively small - scale specialized prob - lems in the scientific and industrial domains , such as forest monitoring and preventative maintenance . Although these problems and ap - plications remain important , the recent miniaturization and subsequent intro - duction of sensors into popular con - sumer electronics like mobile phones ( such as the Apple iPhone ) , PDAs ( such as the Nokia N810 ) , and MP3 players ( such as the Nike + iPod ) has opened the door to a new world of application possibilities . With wireless sensor plat - forms in the hands of the masses , and with the proper architectural support , we can leverage wireless sensor net - works to address urban - scale problems or provide global information access ( such as public - sensing applications ) . At the same time , people as individuals , or in social or special interest groups , can apply these new sensing networks to applications with a more personal focus . We see a continuing push in this direction and the advent of a new era of people - centric sensing . In a people - centric sensing system , humans , rather than trees or machines , Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . JULY / AUGUST 2008 13 People - Centric Sensing become the focal point of sensing and the visu - alization of sensor - based information is for the benefit of common citizens and their friends , rather than domain scientists or plant engineers . Additionally , the users’ aggregate mobility both enables sensing coverage of large public spaces over time and lets individuals , as sensing device custodians , collect targeted information about their daily patterns and interactions . The sensing coverage of spaces , events , and human interac - tions is opportunistic in a people - centric system because the system architecture has no point of control over the human mobility patterns and actions that facilitate this coverage . Although this lack of control can translate into gaps in sensing coverage , the alternative of a world - wide web of static sensors is clearly untenable in terms of monetary cost , scalability , or management . Furthermore , by having people carry the sens - ing devices in their mobile phones , iPods , and so forth , a people - centric sensing system creates a symbiotic relationship between itself and the communities and individuals it serves . In this article , we describe our vision of people - centric sensing and the architectural support we’re developing in the MetroSense Project to realize this vision ( http : / / metrosense . cs . dartmouth . edu ) . 1 People - centric sensing ( Fig - ure 1 ) gives rise to a host of new applications that we classify either as personal sensing , those focused on personal monitoring and ar - chiving ; social sensing , those in which informa - tion is shared within social and special interest groups ; or public sensing , those in which data is shared with everyone for the greater pub - lic good ( such as entertainment or community action ) . Each application focus comes with its own challenges in terms of how to best sample the data , understand it , visualize it , and share it with others . Several prototype applications we’re developing in the MetroSense Project cov - er these sensing scenarios and help us look at how people can best learn from the raw data , meaningfully represent that information , and share it , as appropriate . The MetroSense Vision The MetroSense conception of a people - centric sensing system is based on a three stage Sense , Learn , Share framework . ( See the “Related Work in People - Centric Sensing” sidebar for other ap - proaches and applications . ) In the sense stage , MetroSense leverages mobility - enabled inter - actions between human - carried mobile sensors ( such as mobile phones and personal medical sensing devices ) , static sensors embedded in the civic infrastructure ( such as vehicle - based sensing networks and home medical sensing networks ) , and edge wireless access nodes pro - viding a gateway to the Internet . Together , these support the delivery of application requests to the mobile devices , the sampling of sensors Personal sensing Social sensing Public sensing Figure 1 . People - centric sensing applications can be thought of as having a personal , social , or public focus . Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . Mesh Networking 14 www . computer . org / internet / IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING specified by the request , and the delivery of sampled data back to the application . Applica - tion functions , including generating requests , data analysis , and visualization logic , might be installed directly on the mobile device , run on remote servers ( such as a Web application ) but communicate with the mobile device via wire - less gateway nodes ( such as a General Packet Radio Service [ GPRS ] gateway or Wi - Fi access point ) , or be split between the mobile device and these servers . An application sampling request specifies at least one required sensor type ( such as an accelerometer ) and the required sampling context — that is , the set of conditions required for the sampling to take place , including time of day , location , and sensor orientation . In the learn stage , we analyze the sensed data using simple statistical measures and more involved machine - learning techniques to extract higher - level meaning . We choose the data - analysis techniques to apply and the data features to analyze that best match the avail - ability and characteristics of the sensed data ( such as noisiness or incompleteness ) and the target application visualization . In addition , we leverage the system’s people - centric nature by using social connections between system users when possible to improve the performance of learned models ( such as activity classifiers ) and decrease the time it takes to learn these models . In the share stage , the individual visualizes the learned information and optionally shares it . For example , sharing is possible within so - cial groups or within a global community . Sense : Exploit Mobility , Be Opportunistic From an infrastructural viewpoint , sensing , computing , and communication resources are already widely deployed in the form of end - Related Work in People - Centric Sensing P eople - centric sensing sits at the nexus of several research disciplines , including sensor networking , pervasive com - puting , mobile computing , machine learning , human - computer interfacing , and social networking . Significant research contri - butions made within each discipline have facilitated the rise of people - centric sensing , and research focusing on synthesizing these contributions is now emerging . 1 Several ongoing projects are related to our people - centric sensing initiative in the MetroSense Project . SensorPlanet is a Nokia - initiated global research framework for mobile - device - centric wireless sensor networks . 2 It provides hardware plat - forms and a research environment that helps researchers collect sensor data on a large and heterogeneous scale and es - tablishes a central repository for sharing the data . SenseWeb , 3 a Microsoft Research sponsored project , provides shared sens - ing resources and sensor querying and data - collection mecha - nisms to develop sensing applications . In both of these projects , participating universities develop their own applications and share the collected data to facilitate research on data analysis and mining , visualization , and machine learning . The UCLA Urban Sensing initiative has a vision of equipping users to compose a sensor - based recording of their experiences and environment by leveraging sensors embedded in mobile de - vices and integrating existing public outlets of urban information ( such as weather , traffic , and air quality ) . 4 Urban Sensing is ex - ploring how to coordinate these individual stories of everyday life to document the urban environment , as well as how to fuse them with other sensed data about the city and feed that back into the physical , collective experience in urban public spaces . The Intel - sponsored Urban Atmospheres project is also using sensors to explore the human condition . 5 The Massachu - setts Institute of Technology Cartel project provides a mobile communications infrastructure based on car - mounted commu - nication platforms exploiting open Wi - Fi access points in a city , and it provides urban - sensing information such as traffic condi - tions . 6 The CitySense project , developed by Harvard , the city of Cambridge , and BBN Technologies ( www . bbn . com / technology / networking / citysense ) provides a static sensor mesh offering similar types of urban sensing data feeds . 7 References T . Abdelzaher et al . , “Mobiscopes for Human Spaces , ” IEEE Pervasive Com - puting , vol . 6 , no . 2 , 2007 , pp . 20 – 29 . V . Tuulos , J . Scheible , and H . Nyholm , “Combining Web , Mobile Phones and Public Displays in Large - Scale : Manhattan Story Mashup , ” Proc . 5th Int’l Conf . Pervasive Computing , LNCS 4480 , Springer , 2007 , pp . 37 – 54 . A . Kansal et al . , “SenseWeb : An Infrastructure for Shared Sensing , ” IEEE MultiMedia , vol . 14 , no . 4 , 2007 , pp . 8 – 13 . A . Parker et al . , “Network System Challenges in Selective Sharing and Veri - fication for Personal , Social , and Urban - Scale Sensing Applications , ” Proc . 5th Workshop Hot Topics in Networks ( HotNets - V ) , 2006 . E . Paulos and T . Jenkins , “Urban Probes : Encountering Our Emerging Urban Atmospheres , ” Proc . SIGCHI Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 05 ) , ACM Press , 2005 , pp . 341 – 350 . B . Hull et al . , “CarTel : A Distributed Mobile Sensor Computing System , ” Proc . 4th Int’l Conf . Embedded Networked Sensor Systems ( SENSYS 06 ) , 2006 , ACM Press , pp . 125 – 138 . R . Murty et al . , “CitySense : A Vision for an Urban - Scale Wireless Network - ing Testbed , ” Proc . 2008 IEEE Int’l Conf . Technologies for Homeland Security , IEEE Press , 2008 , pp . 583 – 588 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . JULY / AUGUST 2008 15 People - Centric Sensing user electronics , enterprise and public radio ac - cess networks , and Internet backhaul . Therefore , there’s no longer a need to deploy specialized custom - built hardware to collect and transport people - centric sensor data . Instead , we aim to symbiotically leverage this extant infrastructure to support people - centric applications . We also take advantage of the increasing integration of sensors into off - the - shelf consumer devices ( such as the Nokia N95 mobile phone , Nokia N810 tab - let PCs , and iPod Touch ) to transparently sample the device’s users and their environment . Users’ Roles Using human - carried devices as a fundamental building block of the sensing system raises the question of what roles people , as sensing device custodians , should ( or are willing to ) play in the architecture . Deciding to what extent custodians should be conscious , active participants in meet - ing application sensing requirements has signif - icant design implications , especially in terms of defining the fundamental research challenges to implementing a robust , scalable , and secure sys - tem . We label the two end points of the design spectrum of custodian awareness and involve - ment 2 as opportunistic 1 and participatory . 3 With participatory sensing , the custodian consciously opts to meet an application request out of personal or financial interest . A partici - patory approach incorporates people into sig - nificant decision stages of the sensing system , actively deciding which application requests to accept , what data to share , and to what extent privacy mechanisms should be allowed to im - pact data fidelity . Because humans make most of the tough sensing and privacy decisions , a purely participatory system design focuses on tools that help people share , publish , search , in - terpret , and verify information collected using a device . Purely participatory sensing places many demands on involved device custodi - ans ( for example , prompting via their device GUI for authorization to take a sound sample or share a particular image sample ) , which re - stricts the pool of willing participants . People’s tolerance in enduring interruptions on behalf of applications limits the number and request load of concurrent applications that we can likely support . Furthermore , under the par - ticipatory approach , an application must have a critical mass of community appeal . These factors might combine to limit both an appli - cation’s scale and the diversity of applications that a purely participatory people - centric net - work could support . In the MetroSense Project , we emphasize an opportunistic approach , which shifts the burden of supporting an application from the custodian to the sensing system by automatically deter - mining when devices can be used to meet ap - plication requests . In this paradigm , custodians configure their devices to let applications run ( subject to privacy and resource usage restric - tions ) , but they might not be aware which ap - plications are active at any given time . Instead , a custodian’s device is used whenever its state ( geographic location , body location , and so on ) matches an application’s context requirements . In this way , applications can leverage the sens - ing capabilities of all system users without re - quiring human intervention to actively and consciously participate in the application , low - ering the bar for applications to run in people - centric networks . To support symbiosis between the custodian and the system , sensor sampling occurs only if the privacy and transparency needs of the custodian are met . The main pri - vacy concern is the potential leak of personally sensitive information indirectly when providing sensor data such as the custodian’s location . To maintain transparency , opportunistic use of a device shouldn’t noticeably impact the device’s normal user experience . Challenges of Opportunistic Sensing Along with the aforementioned benefits , the op - portunistic paradigm introduces several chal - lenges . The opportunistic use of sensor custodian devices means that sensing is a secondary , low - priority operation on the mobile device . Conse - quently , the device might only be able to meet the sensing requirements defined by an applica - tion request for short and intermittent periods . Opportunistic systems also take on much more of the decision - making responsibility and are thus more complex and might use more resourc - es . Specific challenges that must be overcome for opportunistic sensing to be feasible include determining the device’s sampling context , adapting to the devices’ changing resource availability and sampling context , achieving sufficient sensing coverage in the face of sensing target mobility , and sustaining custodian privacy . •• • • Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . Mesh Networking 16 www . computer . org / internet / IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING We’re currently investigating methods to ad - dress these challenges . Sensing context . Sensing context is the meta - data that describes the conditions to which the sensing hardware is exposed and affects both the sensor data and its ability to perform the sensing operation . Knowledge of sensing con - text is required as an input to a number of op - erations of an opportunistic sensing system with sensor sharing . It helps evaluate potential candidate sensor devices in terms of a given ap - plication request and , during servicing of appli - cation requests , indicates when sampling should be started and stopped . More generally , the sensing context is important for understand - ing the sampled data , especially from consumer devices in which sensing is largely a second - class citizen and samples might be taken under suboptimal conditions — for example , when the device is in a pocket or purse . Sensor sharing . For an opportunistic sensing system to collect samples that meet a general set of application requirements ( such as sensor type , location , physical orientation , and time ) , it must be able to adapt to the sensing devices’ changing resource availability and sampling context . For example , a mobile phone might run out of memory or power or be placed in the custodian’s pocket before a required light level , sound , GPS , or image sample is taken . To help the sensing system be more robust to these changes , we’re developing a sensor shar - ing mechanism . This approach allows applica - tion requests assigned to a particular device to borrow samples from the best - suited sensors ( those matching the required sensing context and not already in use by another application on the device ) of any available neighboring device . Devices exchange current context information , and data is selected from the device with a con - text that most closely matches the application’s requirements . Given the potentially rapid dyna - mism of sampling context , a research challenge is determining a context - matching metric that , when used for this sharing mechanism , pro - vides samples with high average - case fidelity with respect to the applications requirements . Mobile target sensing . In people - centric sens - ing , we need to support the tracking and sens - ing of mobile targets ( such as a noisy truck or a missing child’s voice ) with mobile sensing de - vices . There are two major challenges in build - ing mobile event sensing systems using mobile sensors that people carry . First , mobile sensors need to be informed about the sensing target ( that is , be “tasked” ) before sensing , but for ef - ficiency , only those near the mobile target . Sec - ond , there’s no guarantee that there will always be enough mobile sensors around the target to maintain sensing coverage . To efficiently establish a sensing area around the target , a mobile sensor that detects the target using its sensors forwards the task to its neighbors . To recover a lost target , we esti - mate the area to which the target is predicted to move based on a distributed Kalman filter and then use a geocast scheme to forward the task to the sensors in the predicted area . Privacy . Opportunistic sensing faces barriers to wide - scale adoption unless users trust the sys - tem to provide privacy guarantees on par with those provided by state - of - the - art systems . Sensing device custodians will fear that sensi - tive personal information will leak from both the collected data samples and the process by which the samples are collected . For example , during sensor sharing , the shared data might reveal information about a device’s context . Also , sensor data such as images , sound , and accelerometer data might contain informa - tion that custodians don’t wish to expose about themselves . Furthermore , even those who aren’t custodians and might not be the primary sens - ing targets are vulnerable to an accidental com - promise of privacy — a “second - hand smoke” of people - centric sensing systems . For example , an application measuring traffic noise might sample a mobile phone’s microphone as the cus - todian stands at a busy city intersection , but the audio sample might also contain fragments of a passerby’s private conversation . Ongoing work in the MetroSense Project has begun to address these issues by providing sensing device custodians with a notion of ano - nymity through k - anonymous tasking . 4 Learn : Understanding Opportunistic Data Once the data has been sampled and delivered to the application , we must extract higher - level meaning from the raw samples . Two main chal - lenges facing data analysis in the people - centric Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . JULY / AUGUST 2008 17 People - Centric Sensing sensing domain 5 — and in constructing accurate inference models in general — are the lack of appropriate sensor data inputs and the time and effort that must be spent in training models that give sufficient classification accuracy . The com - mercial off - the - shelf ( COTS ) devices on which we must build our people - centric applications are heterogeneous in terms of sensing and oth - er resources such as memory , battery capacity , and CPU power , which impacts model construc - tion and usage . The data inputs most useful in generating high - accuracy models might not be available on all devices , requiring users of less capable devices to settle for less accurate mod - els based on other available data features . For example , using the current state of technology , a common approach is to extract data features from a GPS sensor to generate an indoor / out - door classifier . However , only a relatively small percentage of mobile phones in the US market today include GPS . Hence , we must carefully consider where in the architecture classifiers should run . Two possi - ble solutions for model creation are opportunistic feature vector merging and social - network - driven sharing of models and training data . Opportunistic Feature Vector Merging With this approach , we seek to push the per - formance of classification models possible with sensor - poor devices toward that possible with sensor - rich devices . When merging feature vec - tors — that is , multi - element numerical object or activity representations — data features avail - able from more capable devices are borrowed and merged with data features natively available from a less capable device in the model - building stage , letting us build a higher accuracy model even for the less capable device . This borrowing is facilitated by opportunistic interaction , both direct and indirect , between a less capable de - vice and a more capable device in situ . In a direct interaction scenario , as two mo - bile phone users follow their daily routines , a mobile phone without GPS can borrow GPS data features from a mobile phone with GPS as an input to its indoor / outdoor location classifier . For indirect interaction , both devices collect data samples according to their respective capa - bilities . Subsequently , centralized matching be - tween other features collected by both devices might provide for a binding between the feature vector collected by the phone without GPS and the GPS features collected by the GPS - equipped phone . The GPS features can then essentially be borrowed via this binding . Social - Network - Driven Model and Data Sharing Even when devices provide an appropriate set of data features to build accurate models , us - ers might be required to gather a large set of training data ( perhaps manually labeling it ) be - fore the applications using the models’ outputs will perform at their best . The inconvenience in both the labeling of training data and the time required for model training to complete might act as disincentives to the broad - scale adoption of new people - centric applications . We propose sharing training data among users to reduce training time and labeling effort by amortizing the model training cost over all system users . However , this is likely to reduce the resulting model’s accuracy because , for example , people do the same activity in many slightly different ways and might describe the same activity with slightly different labels . With our social - network - driven sharing approach , training data is shared only within social circles , in which , we conjecture , group vo - cabularies and other commonalities lead to more consistent and understandable labeled training data and a higher model accuracy , while still reducing the quantity of per user training data required . Still , a careful consideration of the particular labeling problem is required in de - ciding within which social group sharing might be most effective . Initial results implementing these two techniques are promising . 6 Additional Resource Considerations In addition to model generation , resource limi - tations on mobile devices designed primarily for other purposes require that we carefully consider where data processing takes place . For example , due to CPU power limitations , we’ve noticed that running a full spectrum fast Fou - rier transform on a mobile phone can impact other ongoing operations and can run too slow - ly to keep up with the stream of sampled data . Such behavior violates our tenet of symbio - sis with the device’s primary user experience . Furthermore , due to local storage limitations , analysis that requires access to a large amount of historical data might not be possible without interaction with persistent storage on back - end Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . Mesh Networking 18 www . computer . org / internet / IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING servers . Placing learning functionality requires a systemic view that considers mobile phone resource constraints , communication cost to the back - end servers , and the sampling rate re - quired to detect and characterize the phenom - ena of interest . Share : Enabling Social - Sensing Applications People - centric sensor networking aims to sup - port applications that engage the general public . This potential for interest across a broad seg - ment of the population , in concert with our use of an opportunistic sensing design , facilitates the availability of a massive number of mobile sensing devices , in turn increasing the scope and scale of applications that we can support and im - proving the fidelity of sampled objects , events , and human activities . We’ve developed a number of applications in the MetroSense Project that in - corporate personal , social , and public sensing . CenceMe The growing ubiquity of the Internet provides the opportunity for an unprecedented ex - change of information on a global scale . Those with access to this communication substrate — especially the youth — increasingly incorporate personal information exchange into their daily routines via technologies such as email , blogs , instant messages , SMS , video sharing , social network software , and voice over IP ( VoIP ) . Yet , the question of how to incorporate personal sensing information such as human activity in - ferencing into these applications has remained largely unexplored . Although existing commu - nication forums let users exchange text , photos , and video clips , we believe a more richly tex - tured user experience can be provided by inte - grating automatically harvested , processed , and shared sensor data into the mix . With the CenceMe application , 7 we distill this sensed data ( see Figure 2a ) into what we call a user’s sensing presence , a virtual repre - sentation of users’ status in terms of their ac - tivities ( sitting , walking , or meeting friends ) , disposition ( happy , sad , or okay ) , habits ( at the gym , coffee shop , or at work ) and surroundings ( noisy , hot , or bright ) . We’re evolving a prototype implementa - tion of CenceMe that lets members of social networks access historical traces of their own data and , more powerfully , securely share their sensing presence among their buddies . For us - ers on the go , we’ve implemented a client to show current buddy sensing presence on the GUI - based displays of most new mobile phones , using a set of simple and intuitive icons repre - senting , for example , a user’s activity and loca - tion . We include this sensing presence snapshot , along with a more complete , browseable repre - sentation of users’ sensing presence and their buddies via the CenceMe Web portal . Examples include archived historical traces , comparisons of presence or social attributes with friends and extracted patterns and features of importance in a user’s life routine . The real power of automatically inferencing sensing presence , however , is the ability for a user to configure CenceMe to export this sens - ing presence , without direct intervention , across his or her online social networks . This has only recently been made possible through the release of developer APIs for Facebook , Skype , Pidgin , MSN Messenger , and the like . We’ve implement - ed several widgets users can add to their Face - book account ( see Figure 2b ) to share various representations of sensing presence with their Facebook buddies . CenceMe users share data ac - cording to CenceMe group membership policies set through the Web portal . CenceMe buddies are defined by the combination of buddy lists imported from the social networking applica - tion accounts a user registers with CenceMe . Social networking sites ( Skype , myspace . com , MSN , Facebook ) CenceMe CenceMe APIs CenceMe APIs ( a ) ( b ) Figure 2 . The CenceMe application . ( a ) CenceMe distills a user’s sensing presence from samples taken from sensors embedded in personal mobile devices , sports equipment ( such as running shoes or a bicycle ) , and the civic infrastructure . Users can share sensing presence with their friends through popular social networking applications . ( b ) We’ve built widgets for Facebook that allow expression of sensing presence through the friends list , the mini - feed , and a dedicated Sensor Presence display . Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . JULY / AUGUST 2008 19 People - Centric Sensing Thus , CenceMe inherits group structures us - ers have already created for other applications , but it also lets them specify more sophisticated group privacy policies within CenceMe . Global Sharing in Virtual Worlds Virtual world simulators such as Second Life represent one of the new frontiers in online en - tertainment and business services . People lead virtual lives in these alternative worlds using personal avatars . Bridging real life and these virtual worlds is challenging , but it enables new application scenarios for these systems via pub - lic sensing . We can use the sensors embedded in commercial mobile phones to infer real - world activities , which we can in turn reproduce in public virtual environments , sharing with the ( virtual ) world ( see Figure 3 ) . Although previous research has brought stat - ic objects from the real to the virtual world , we are the first to bring people’s real - world sensing presence to active subjects ( that is , their avatars ) in the virtual world . 8 People’s sensor data can be rendered in the virtual world anywhere on the spectrum between reality and fantasy . That is , arbitrary mappings between sensed physical data and the avatar actions , appearance , and lo - cation are possible . Furthermore , the connection between the physical and virtual worlds need not be only one way , and we envision that users might receive communication ( such as emails , instant messages , or SMS ) or actuation triggers ( such as a mobile phone vibration ) to indicate the status or environment changes experienced by their avatar in the virtual world . As an initial step , we’ve implemented activ - ity recognition and voice - detection classifiers that run on a mobile phone , acting on data from local embedded sensors . We’ve also built a data bridge using available APIs to control a user’s avatar in Second Life ( see Figure 3 ) . BikeNet BikeNet is a recreational application that con - tains elements of personal , social , and public sensing . There’s substantial interest in the main - stream recreational cycling community in col - lecting data quantifying various aspects of the cycling experience , mirroring the broader inter - est in fitness metrics among exercise enthusiasts and other health - conscious individuals . Exist - ing commercial bike - sensing systems targeting this demographic measure and display simple data such as wheel speed and provide simple in - ferences such as distance traveled and calories burned . These systems have become increasing - ly more sophisticated and miniaturized . We’ve designed and implemented a system prototype reflecting a future in which wire - lessly accessible sensors are commonly embed - ded in commercially manufactured bicycles , and the cyclist’s mobile device ( such as a mobile phone ) interacts with these sensors during the ride to quantify aspects of cycling performance and environmental conditions . In terms of per - sonal sensing , we view this system as akin to the Nike + iPod kit , a system for recreational runners that logs exercise history . The BikeNet application measures several metrics to give a holistic picture of the cyclist experience : cur - rent speed , average speed , distance traveled , calories burned , path incline , heart rate , CO 2 level , car density surrounding the cyclist , and galvanic skin response ( a simple indicator of emotional excitement or stress level ) . 9 All data the system senses is stamped with time and lo - cation metadata . This data is provided to the cyclist immediately , for example , via the mobile phone’s LCD , but it’s also uploaded to a personal repository on remote BikeNet servers for long - term archiving and later trend analysis ( such as cycling performance and personal health ) . The BikeView portal ( http : / / bikenet . cs . dartmouth . edu ) provides a personal sensing re - Figure 3 . Second Life integration with the physical world . Accelerometer data is collected from a person’s mobile phone and classified into the activity states of sitting , standing , or running . These states are then injected into Second Life via the mobile phone object the avatar carries ( inset ) . Second Life users define the profile for their avatar to interpret and render these incoming activity states . For example , in the figure , the user has mapped sitting , standing , and running to yoga - floating , standing , and flying , respectively . Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . Mesh Networking 20 www . computer . org / internet / IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING pository for all ride statistics . Additionally , it lets users share information via real - time requests , a function most likely enabled within social groups such as for race - time management within a cycling team or for rough tracking of a family member to know when to order the pizza . Sharing aggregate statistics and route rankings ( optionally stripped of identifying information ) is facilitated within the cycling community group . In addition , BikeNet fa - cilitates public sensing and sharing by letting multiple users merge their individual data , for example , to create pollution , allergen , and noise maps of their city . Such a map not only provides a way to learn about the safest and healthiest ways to get around town , but it also might pro - vide the basis for political action to improve the city . Figure 4 shows such a map , built through the BikeView portal , of CO 2 readings combined from users of our prototype BikeNet system mapping Hanover , New Hampshire . B eyond the applications of people - centric sensing we’ve discussed thus far , we’re working to push the MetroSense vision into other domains . Promising directions include the healthcare industry , where a people - centric sensing approach can facilitate grassroots monitoring and sharing of automatically col - lected health data . We believe this approach can be especially helpful in addressing the healthcare needs of populations currently un - derserved by the existing health infrastruc - ture . We’re also interested in understanding how people use people - centric sensing systems . What types of data are people least comfort - able having automatically gathered , interpret - ed , and shared ? Can the way people use such systems help researchers learn about ( possi - bly hidden ) social structures in the user com - munity ? Visit the MetroSense Project ( http : / / metrosense . cs . dartmouth . edu ) for the latest in people - centric sensing research . Acknowledgments This work is supported in part by Intel , Nokia , US National Science Foundation grant number NCS - 0631289 , the Insti - tute for Security Technology Studies ( ISTS ) at Dartmouth College , and members of the MetroSense Project . ISTS sup - port is provided by the US Department of Homeland Secu - rity under grant number 2006 - CS - 001 - 000001 . The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and don’t necessarily represent the official pol - icies , either expressed or implied , of the US Department of Homeland Security . References A . T . Campbell et al . , “People - Centric Urban Sensing , ” Proc . 2nd ACM / IEEE Int’l Conf . Wireless Internet , 2006 . N . D . Lane et al . , “Urban Sensing Systems : Opportunis - tic or Participatory ? ” Proc . 9th Workshop Mobile Com - puting Systems and Application s ( WMCSA 08 ) , ACM Press , 2008 . A . Parker et al . , “Network System Challenges in Selec - tive Sharing and Verification for Personal , Social , and Urban - Scale Sensing Applications , ” Proc . 5th Work - shop Hot Topics in Networks ( HotNets - V ) , 2006 ; www . sigcomm . org / HotNets - V / parker06network . pdf . A . Kapadia et al . , “AnonySense : Opportunistic and Pri - vacy - Preserving Context Collection , ” Proc . 6th Int’l Conf . Pervasive Computing , LNCS 5013 , Springer , 2008 , pp . 280 – 297 . J . Lester , T . Choudhury , and G . Borriello , “A Practical Approach to Recognizing Physical Activities , ” Proc . 4th Int’l Conf . Pervasive Computing , LNCS 3968 , Springer , 2006 , pp . 1 – 16 . N . D . Lane et al . , “Cooperative Techniques Supporting Sensor - Based People - Centric Inferencing , ” Proc . 6th Int’l Conf . Pervasive Computing , LNCS 5013 , Springer , 2008 , pp . 75 – 92 . E . Miluzzo et al . , “CenceMe — Injecting Sensing Pres - ence into Social Networking Applications , ” Proc . 2nd European Conf . Smart Sensing and Context ( EuroSSC 2007 ) , LNCS 4793 , Springer , 2007 , pp . 1 – 28 . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . Figure 4 . The BikeView application . The portal provides personal access to archived cycling data , which can be socially shared with cyclists or used to support a public sensing initiative . This CO 2 map is the result of multiple users’ data merged to form a complete map of Hanover , New Hampshire . Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . JULY / AUGUST 2008 21 People - Centric Sensing M . Musolesi et al . , “The Second Life of a Sensor Inte - grating Real - World Experience in Virtual Worlds using Mobile Phones , " Proc . 5th Workshop on Embedded Sen - sor Networks ( HotEmNets 08 ) , ACM Press , 2008 ; www . cs . dartmouth . edu / ~ sensorlab / pubs / SL - HotEmnets08 . pdf . S . B . Eisenman et al . , “The BikeNet Mobile Sensing Sys - tem for Cyclist Experience Mapping , ” Proc . 5th ACM Conf . Embedded Networked Sensor Systems , ( SENSYS 07 ) , 2007 , ACM Press , pp . 87 – 101 . Andrew T . Campbell is an associate professor of computer science at Dartmouth College , where he leads the Sen - sor Lab and the MetroSense Project and is a member of the Institute for Security Technology Studies ( ISTS ) . His research interests include people - centric sensing and open spectrum wireless networks . Campbell has a PhD in computer science from Lancaster University , England . He received the US National Science Foun - dation Career Award for his research in program - mable mobile networking . Contact him at campbell @ cs . dartmouth . edu . Shane B . Eisenman is a PhD candidate in the electrical en - gineering department at Columbia University as well as a member of the Control , Management and Tele - media Group and the Armstrong Project at Columbia University and a member of the Sensor Lab and the MetroSense Project at Dartmouth College . His research interests include wireless networking and mobile com - puting , with a particular interest in human - centric sensing , computation , and communication . Eisenman has an MSc in electrical engineering from Columbia University . Contact him at shane @ ee . columbia . edu . Nicholas D . Lane is a PhD candidate in Dartmouth College’s Computer Science Department and a member of the MetroSense project and the Sensor Networks group at Dartmouth . His research interests include wireless sen - sor networks , particularly urban , and people - centric sensing systems . Lane has an MEng in computer sci - ence from Cornell University . Contact him at niclane @ cs . dartmouth . edu . Emiliano Miluzzo is a PhD candidate in the computer sci - ence department at Dartmouth College , a member of the Sensor Networks Group at Dartmouth , and involved in the MetroSense Project . His research interests are in wireless sensor networks , in particular distributed mobile sensing systems as well as architecture and ap - plication design for emerging people - centric sensing systems . Miluzzo has an MSc in electrical engineering from University of Rome La Sapienza . Contact him at miluzzo @ cs . dartmouth . edu . 8 . 9 . Ronald A . Peterson is a senior programmer in the Dart - mouth College Computer Science Department and owner of Peterson Enterprises , a small software com - pany . Peterson has a BA in physics from Lawrence University . Contact him at rapjr @ cs . dartmouth . edu . Hong Lu is a PhD student at Dartmouth College . His re - search interests include networked systems , mo - bile and ubiquitous computing , and wireless sensor networks . Lu has an MS in computer science from Tianjin University , China . Contact him at hong @ cs . dartmouth . edu . Xiao Zheng is a PhD student in computer science at Dart - mouth College . His research interests include mobile networks and wireless sensor networks . Zheng has an MSc in computer science from University of Northern British Columbia , Canada . Contact him at zhengx @ cs . dartmouth . edu . Mirco Musolesi is a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Computer Science at Dartmouth Col - lege and a fellow of the Institute of Security Tech - nology Studies ( ISTS ) at Dartmouth . His research interests include delay tolerant networking , mobile networking and systems , wireless sensor systems , mobility modeling , and social - network - based sys - tems . Musolesi has a PhD in computer science from University College London . Contact him at musolesi @ cs . dartmouth . edu . Kristóf Fodor is a visiting Fulbright PhD student at Dart - mouth College , cosupported by the Institute for Se - curity Technology Studies ( ISTS ) , a PhD candidate in computer science at the Budapest University of Tech - nology and Economics in Hungary , and a graduate student in engineering economics at the University of West Hungary . His research interests include the de - sign of architectures , protocols , and algorithms for self - organizing networks and mobile sensor networks . Fodor has an MSc in computer science from the Buda - pest University of Technology and Economics . Contact him at fodor @ cs . dartmouth . edu . Gahng - Seop Ahn is a PhD candidate in the electrical en - gineering department at Columbia University and in - volved in the MetroSense Project at Dartmouth College . His research interests are in wireless mobile network - ing and mobile sensing including service differentia - tion , medium access control , and mobile sensing and tracking systems . Ahn has an MSc in electrical en - gineering from Columbia University . Contact him at ahngang @ ee . columbia . edu . Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Texas at Arlington . Downloaded on January 12 , 2010 at 19 : 29 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply .