Engaging Gentrification as a Social Justice Issue in HCI Eric Corbett School of Literature , Media , and Communication Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , United States ecorbe tt @ gatech . edu Yanni Loukissas School of Literature , Media , and Communication Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , United States yanni . loukissas @ lmc . gatech . edu ABSTRACT Gentri ﬁ cation — the spatial expression of economic inequality — is fundamentally a ma tt er of social justice . Yet , even as work outside of HCI has begun to discuss how computing can enable or challenge gentri ﬁ cation , HCI’s growing social justice agenda has not engaged with this issue . Th is omission creates an opportunity for HCI to develop a research and design agenda at the intersection of computing , social justice , and gentri ﬁ cation . We begin this work by outlining existing scholarship describing how the consumption side dynamics of gentri ﬁ cation are mediated by contemporary socio - technical systems . Subsequently , we build on the social justice framework introduced by Dombrowski , Harmon , and Fox to discuss how HCI may resist or counter such forces . We o ﬀ er six modes of research that HCI scholars can pursue to engage gentri ﬁ cation . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing ~ HCI theory , concepts and models KEYWORDS Gentri ﬁ cation ; Social Justice ; Design ACM Reference format : Eric Corbe tt & Yanni Loukissas . 2019 . Engaging Gentri ﬁ cation as a Social Justice Issue in HCI . In 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings ( CHI 2019 ) , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glagsow , Scotland , UK . ACM , New York , NY , USA . 16 pages . h tt ps : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300510 1 INTRODUCTION “ One by one , many of the working - class quarters have been invaded by the middle class—upper and lower… . Once this process of ' gentri ﬁ cation ' starts in a district it goes on rapidly until all or most of the working - class occupiers are displaced and the whole social character of the district is changed…” Ruth Glass 1964 [ 45 ] . In recent years researchers have identi ﬁ ed an array of social justice issues that can be addressed by the ﬁ eld of human - computer interaction ( HCI ) including homelessness [ 26 ] , sustainability [ 35 ] , gender dualism [ 54 ] , and colonialism [ 58 ] . Social justice research , which has been bolstered in subsequent years by case studies [ 21 , 59 , 62 , 84 ] , workshops [ 32 , 39 ] , and design strategies [ 12 , 34 ] , has established itself as a major agenda for HCI . Despite the range and depth of this social justice agenda , the issue of gentri ﬁ cation has been given scant a tt ention . Th ere are several reasons why HCI research has not directly addressed gentri ﬁ cation . First , HCI scholars may lack general exposure to issues and impacts of gentri ﬁ cation . Given the average socio - economic and educational background of members of the HCI community [ 4 ] , they are more likely to be “gentri ﬁ ers” rather than the “gentri ﬁ ed . ” Second , the connection between gentri ﬁ cation and technology is not straightforward . Gentri ﬁ cation takes hold through an accumulation of small , seemingly personal choices , which may seem insigni ﬁ cant on their own but cumulatively create devastating e ﬀ ects . For this reason , the exact causes of gentri ﬁ cation are rarely clear—scholarship on gentri ﬁ cation notes it as a “chaotic concept” lacking any one source or solution [ 68 ] . Th ere are three inter - related factors that position gentri ﬁ cation within the purview of HCI’s scholarship : ( 1 ) scholars outside of HCI have begun to discuss and identify how socio - technical systems mediate gentri ﬁ cation [ 85 , 95 , 99 ] which brings gentri ﬁ cation directly into the realm of HCI — whereas previously it might appear to be be tt er le ft to urban studies , sociology , or economics ; ( 2 ) several disparate studies within HCI have engaged with elements Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org ) . CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , Uk . © 2019 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5970 - 2 / 19 / 05… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300510 CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 1 of gentri ﬁ cation [ 6 , 25 , 41 ] —albeit in a piecemeal manner—o ft en without directly engaging with gentri ﬁ cation scholarship ; ( 3 ) outside of academia , there is growing interest in utilizing computing to resist and counter gentri ﬁ cation [ 46 , 74 , 94 ] . Moving forward we see an opportunity for HCI to explore these areas for suggestive models that can inspire research and design practice with gentri ﬁ cation . Th is paper serves as a call to action for HCI on gentri ﬁ cation . Re ﬂ exively , both authors are new residents in areas that are experiencing gentri ﬁ cation in our home city of Atlanta , GA . Indeed , we do not consider ourselves outside of this ongoing gentri ﬁ cation ; rather , we feel an obligation to contest how our own ﬁ eld might be a ﬀ ecting the city and the way we occupy it . Stemming from this personal perspective , our belief is HCI’s engagement with gentri ﬁ cation should be orientated around a social justice perspective due to the negative consequences to the health and well - being of those impacted by it . Th erefore , we ask the following question : How should HCI’s growing social justice agenda engage with the issue of gentri ﬁ cation ? To answer this question , we take the following steps , highlighting the individual contribution through each : • We begin by reviewing scholarship in urban studies and sociology in order to articulate gentri ﬁ cation as a matter of social justice within HCI due to the forced class ( and o ft en race - based ) displacement of existing residents that occurs as the end result of gentri ﬁ cation processes . • Within this review we focus HCI’s attention towards the consumption side perspective of gentri ﬁ cation ( one of two primary perspectives of gentri ﬁ cation causality ) , which argues that gentri ﬁ cation is driven primarily by the accumulated practices of gentri ﬁ ers . • Next , we connect scholarship on discourse , place , and technology in order to describe how the consumption side perspective of gentri ﬁ cation can be understood within HCI . • We then present two existing cases studies on Yelp and Nextdoor , as well as introducing our own ongoing work on Zillow in order to provide three distinct views of how consumption side gentri ﬁ cation can be mediated by socio - technical systems . • Finally , we end by building on Dombrowski , Harmon , and Fox’s social justice framework— while also pointing out some speci ﬁ c limitations—to develop six modes of research engagement HCI can pursue on gentri ﬁ cation moving forward . In all , this work charts a path forward on both how and why HCI’s growing social justice agenda should engage the issue of gentri ﬁ cation . 2 GENTRIFICATION Gentri ﬁ cation is a multi - faceted phenomenon that has been studied and de ﬁ ned by various academic ﬁ elds , including anthropology , geography , sociology , political science , economics and urban planning . Outside of academia , it is a major concern for local and national governments , policy analysts , and urban planners , as well as civil and human rights activists . Given the wide array of disciplines and ways of knowing that are brought to bear on the topic , it is no surprise that the precise de ﬁ nition of gentri ﬁ cation is disputed ( see the “Gentri ﬁ cation Debates” [ 17 ] ) . While it is beyond the scope of this article to engage these debates , for the purposes of our argument we provide the following synthesized de ﬁ nition [ 8 , 17 , 70 , 89 ] : gentri ﬁ cation is a collective process of se tt lement by higher - income people in a low - income area , resulting in the forced class and race - based displacement of existing residents . Displacement , especially when it is rapid or sudden , is perhaps the most signi ﬁ cant impact of gentri ﬁ cation [ 89 ] . In addition to direct and involuntary displacement by increased rent or eviction , low - income residents may voluntarily vacate due to the changes in the cultural , social , and political fabric of the neighborhood . Unfortunately , displacement , and its well - documented ill e ﬀ ects on the health of displaced residents [ 89 ] , can go unseen by incoming gentri ﬁ ers . Th is might explain why some writers naively argue that gentri ﬁ cation can represent a positive change [ 18 ] . Arguing against these claims , gentri ﬁ cation scholar Tom Slater asserts : “ Gentrification is not , as one might be encouraged to think from reading recent scholarship , the saviour of our cities . The term was coined with critical intent to describe the disturbing effects of the middle classes arriving in working - class neighbourhoods and was researched in that critical spirit for many years . It has since been appropriated by those intent on finding and recommending quick - fix ‘solutions’ to complex urban problems , and in extreme cases depoliticized and called something else” [ 89 ] . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 2 Slater adopts this strong normative stance in order to push back against the loss of critical perspective on the social , economic and spatial injustice that once orientated gentri ﬁ cation scholarship . By taking this stance , Slater hopes to reemphasize the social justice implications of rent increases , landlord harassment and working - class displacement which was fundamental to gentri ﬁ cation scholarship ever since it was ﬁ rst identi ﬁ ed in the 1960s by the urban sociologist Ruth Glass [ 45 ] . For this reason , Slater asserts that gentri ﬁ cation should be viewed as the spatial expression of economic inequality [ 89 ] . While both Glass and Slater locate the social justice implications of gentri ﬁ cation primarily through class , we would be remiss to not mention the ways in which race also factors into gentri ﬁ cation . Doing so is especially important as our focus in this article is on gentri ﬁ cation in the US—a country with a long and very problematic history with race and spatial injustice [ 16 , 42 , 63 ] . Con ﬁ ning Black Americans to impoverished , blighted spaces was fundamental in facilitating the institution of slavery [ 27 ] which continued in the era of Jim Crow’s “separate but equal” places [ 96 ] . Even a ft er the civil rights movement was supposed to make spaces equal for all , red - lining and discriminatory loan practices emerged to perpetuate spatialized discrimination [ 77 ] . Th e legacy of this history has calci ﬁ ed into the present day state of spatial economic injustice visible throughout the US [ 16 , 83 ] . Present day gentri ﬁ cation leverages and extends this history as under resourced and physically degraded black spaces o ft en become prime targets for gentri ﬁ cation [ 64 ] . In the end , rather than any single de ﬁ nition—it may be best to locate gentri ﬁ cation as an issue of social justice through its most troubling characteristics [ 7 ] : • Displacement through rent / price increases with secondary psychological costs . • Loss of a ﬀ ordable housing , resulting in unsustainable property price increases and homelessness • Increased cost and changes to local services • Loss of social diversity ( from socially disparate to rich ghe tt os ) 2 . 1 Production vs Consumption Beyond understanding its de ﬁ ning characteristics , researchers in the HCI community should be aware of the lively debate about the various possible causes of gentri ﬁ cation . Generally , these debates fall into two theoretical camps : production and consumption [ 17 ] . Production side theories argue that gentri ﬁ cation is primarily the result of particular alignments of economic and political ( national , state and local ) factors , which create the market conditions for gentri ﬁ cation to occur . For instance , production studies might focus on how federal home loan policies or red - lining by banks can produce a market for gentri ﬁ cation . For production theorists , gentri ﬁ cation cannot be explained entirely by the activity of consumers , as “even the most apparently individual , personal decisions turn out to be bound up with larger social and collective processes” [ 27 : 55 ] . Gentri ﬁ cation , understood in this way , is the result of system level incentives , which then “shape the behavior of individuals , groups and institutions that have a stake in what happens on the urban frontier” [ 27 : 42 ] . In contrast , consumption side theories argue that gentri ﬁ cation is not a purely economic phenomenon . Rather , they argue that gentri ﬁ cation occurs as a result of the accumulated practices of actors : the gentri ﬁ ers . Put simply , “gentri ﬁ cation would not occur without gentri ﬁ ers who wish to participate in the process” [ 6 : 65 ] . Th ese theories depart from production in that they argue markets for gentri ﬁ cation would not be produced without the consumption demand supplied by gentri ﬁ ers . Th us , consumption theorists focus on the culture or collective tastes of the gentri ﬁ ers—arguing that states and markets are responding to these actors . Th ey might ask , what created a newfound desire for city life throughout the United States between the 1950s and 1970s ? How did the “back to the city movement , ” develop and usher in “a switch from suburban to urban aspirations” [ 6 : 27 ] ? Th e key distinction between the two theories is that consumption side theories argue that “markets and states respond to consumer demand for gentri ﬁ cation rather than vice versa” [ 6 : 65 ] . We believe that both sides contribute limited perspectives . Production theories can be economically determinant and thus underplay the importance of the agency in individual choices . While consumption side theories sideline the role of the American capitalist system , as well as institutional , national , and regional actors . Ultimately , we suggest that researchers in HCI consider a combination of both production and consumption side causes . Th at being said , this paper will focus primarily on the consumption side by way of the case studies we draw from . We will explore the ways in which the practices of gentri ﬁ ers are either ampli ﬁ ed or reinforced by social - technical systems . To do so , it is useful to revisit scholarship on place , discourse CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 3 and technology as these provide the theoretical backbone of our argument . 2 . 2 Space , Place , and Discourse To understand how consumption side perspectives of gentri ﬁ cation can be mediated by socio - technical systems , we must ﬁ rst revisit the concepts of space and place . Space and place have been of great importance to geographers and sociologists who seek to understand how people , practices and cultures collide in the process of con ﬁ guring and delineating “spaces” from “places” in the built environment . Spaces are geometrical arrangements that might structure , constrain , and enable certain forms of movement and interaction [ 23 ] . Space is abstract— detached from material form and cultural interpretation [ 44 ] . Space lacks meaning—space is raw , uninterpreted— devoid of memories or a tt achments . In contrast , places are spaces that people have made meaningful . Places have relationships with humans that are subjective and emotional—memories , meanings and history . Th us , the process of placemaking “denotes the ways in which se tt ings acquire recognizable and persistent social meaning in the course of interaction” [ 36 ] . For this reason , “without naming , identi ﬁ cation , or representation by ordinary people , a place is not a place” [ 44 ] . In short , space can be viewed as opportunity whereas place is understood reality [ 36 ] . Discourse plays an important role in placemaking—as discourse has the ability to not only describe places but also construct them . Th e philosopher and social theorist Michel Foucault popularized the study of discourse describing it as an “institutionalized way of speaking or writing about reality that de ﬁ nes what can be intelligibly thought and said about the world and what cannot” [ 38 ] . Discourse has long been an important concept in gentri ﬁ cation scholarship . For instance , as gentri ﬁ cation is generally considered a social ill , those who wish to mobilize the economic and legal mechanisms necessary to rationalize it at the policy level need to produce an alternate discursive framing for the process . Th us , terms like “urban renaissance , ” “urban regeneration , ” and “urban sustainability” are used instead [ 28 ] . Th ese phrases can politely avoid or even cover up the violent nature of change forced on low - income people . Such forms of sanitized discourse seek to create alternate realties : shi ft ing the focus of change from human displacement to physical renewal and regeneration . Gentri ﬁ cation scholar Lore tt a Lees provides a compelling example of place discourse and gentri ﬁ cation in the practice of “Brownstoning” which describes the process of purchasing and restoring homes constructed of light brown bricks ‘brownstone’ in New York [ 68 ] . Brownstoning , an exemplar of consumption side gentri ﬁ cation theory , was a full - blown movement in New York during the 1960s fueled by young white middle - class families who purchased these homes in waves in the “tough parts” of the city o ft en occupied by ethnic minorities [ 36 ] . Brownstoning was framed as an act of love and appreciation for the historic architecture of the buildings . One could take pride in Brownstoning without considering who might have been previously displaced from your brownstone . Th e Brownstoners were media - savvy as well as politically engaged . Th ey created an entire magazine ( the Brownstoner ) which was widely circulated . Th ey also leveraged local political players for zoning , permits and tax breaks to facilitate their endeavors . Together , these e ﬀ orts of the Brownstoners allowed the practice of gentri ﬁ cation to be re - presented through discourse . But regardless of how gentri ﬁ cation is presented , the loss of place has “devastating implications for individual and collective identity , memory , and history - and for psychological well - being” of those being displaced [ 44 ] . One of the goals of this paper is to explore how consumption side practices like Brownstoning might be mediated by social - technical systems . Existing scholarship on the relationship between place and technology provides useful sca ﬀ olding for this goal . 2 . 3 Place and Technology One early and in ﬂ uential work in HCI on the relationships of place and technology came from Harrision and Dourish who argued “the technologically mediated world does not stand apart from the physical world within which it is embedded ; rather , it provides a new set of ways for that physical world to be understood and appropriated” [ 50 ] . By utilizing data on people’s behaviors and locations— technology helps people exploit the meanings and relationships between a tt ributes in place . In this way , rather than simply guiding navigation through space , technologies are engaged in making places by transforming the way people use and assign meaning to space [ 43 ] . Th ese views on the relationship of place and technology push back against claims of place being irrelevant in the current age of networked societies [ 19 ] . If we accept these arguments on the relationship between place and technology , then we must ask : Whose place is rei ﬁ ed ? Whose place is replaced ? Understanding the ways in which some actors are a ﬀ orded more power than others in representing place is a key element of CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 4 consumption side theory of gentri ﬁ cation . In particular how “the social values of existing users—for example , working - class residents and small manufacturers—exert a weaker claim to the center than cultural values of potential gentri ﬁ ers” [ 33 : 193 ] . Taken together , this scholarship on place , discourse and technology provides the background for understanding how the consumption side perspective of gentri ﬁ cation can be mediated by socio - technical systems . We use this background to support our argument—calling for HCI to engage with gentri ﬁ cation . To illustrate how HCI might accomplish this , we present existing scholarship outside of HCI that has already begun to engage the intersection of gentri ﬁ cation and technology . We present two existing case studies of consumption side gentri ﬁ cation on Yelp and Nextdoor , as well as introducing our own ongoing work in Zillow . We choose Yelp and Nextdoor not because of any particular features or aspects of the platforms , but rather due to there being existing scholarship on how gentri ﬁ cation is mediated and in ﬂ uenced through them [ 85 , 99 ] . Aside from the dearth of similar scholarship—this decision was expedient in our e ﬀ ort to sca ﬀ old how HCI might begin to engage gentri ﬁ cation . Th erefore , the following case studies should be read as examples of how scholarship outside of HCI has engaged the intersection of technology and gentri ﬁ cation . 3 YELP : NARRATING NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE To illustrate how consumption side gentri ﬁ cation can be mediated by socio - technical systems , we turn to an established study of Yelp conducted by noted sociologist and gentri ﬁ cation scholar Sharon Zukin [ 99 ] . In our analysis of Zukin’s work , we draw a tt ention to how places are collectively represented in technology and the subsequent impact these representations can have on gentri ﬁ cation . Overall , Zukin’s work shows how technology can empower ( and disempower ) di ﬀ ering claims to place through digital representations . Th is raises the question : whose place is being represented ? How does technology ( in this case Yelp ) factor into the larger , structural power struggles between gentri ﬁ ers and gentri ﬁ ed ? Zukin’s work on Yelp provides a compelling case study to answer this question . Zukin’s study is a discourse analysis of restaurant reviews on Yelp in two communities in New York ; both are currently experiencing gentri ﬁ cation , but one is historically African American and the other is Polish American . Th e focus of the discourse analysis is not on the quality of the food or service at these restaurants , but rather on how the surrounding communities are described . Th e reviews of restaurants in the African American community were almost three times as likely to mention the surrounding neighborhood in comparison to the Polish community . Moreover , when the neighborhoods were mentioned the reviewers tended to have a negative view of the African American neighborhood and thus tended to praise the ongoing gentri ﬁ cation as positive and needed change to the community . In contrast , the reviews in the Polish community that did mention the surrounding neighborhood had a negative perspective to the ongoing gentri ﬁ cation . Based on these ﬁ ndings , Zukin argued the racial identities of the neighborhoods factor signi ﬁ cantly into how reviewers perceived and described neighborhoods . Zukin thus asserts that the reviewers are superimposing racialized ideologies onto places via Yelp’s map . Th e map interface overlaid with the discursive investments of the reviews combine to have a powerful e ﬀ ect on gentri ﬁ cation , as Zukin describes : “ Like media coverage of new art galleries and dive bars , favorable reviews not only boost the image of a speci ﬁ c restaurant but may also change the image of its neighborhood . Th is a tt racts more visitors , especially a ﬄ uent , adventurous consumers , and , eventually , brings chain stores , higher rents , and real estate developers . What is special about Yelp reviewers is that they participate publicly and discursively , with no ﬁ nancial reward , in the process of making place” [ 99 ] . Zukin’s focus on the power of Yelp’s map parallels a similar argument made by Laura Kurgan on the power of representation in digital maps generally [ 67 ] . According to Kurgan , representational power is enacted in mapping technology by “imposing a quiet tyranny of orientation” [ 67 ] . Th is orientation is o ft en achieved by omi tt ing “invisible lines of people , place , and networks that create the most common spaces we live in today . ” Th ese omissions give representations the appearance of neutrality : a “view from nowhere” [ 49 ] . As a result , these spatial representations tend to avoid political or moral inquiry—presenting “the reality” rather than “a reality” when in fact the use of any single representation is one of many possibilities . Th e work of the reviews performs a similar type of orientation Kurgan describes on the image of a neighborhood through promoting a particular representation informed by the ideological frame of the young white , a ﬄ uent users that make up the majority of reviewers . Th eir particular representation is empowered CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 5 while the social values of existing residents end up exerting weaker claims to the center than the values of the gentri ﬁ ers . In summation , this study on Yelp provides the ﬁ rst example of how consumption side gentri ﬁ cation can be mediated in socio - technical systems . Gentri ﬁ cation is a cooperative process that “persists as a collective e ﬀ ort to appropriate the center for elements of the new urban class” [ 6 : 37 ] . Th e importance of “collective e ﬀ orts” is particularly important in a social media platform like Yelp where discourse is generated in a decentralized manner . Th ough the contributions are from individuals rather than organizations or government—gentri ﬁ cation as a process is the culmination of “small events and individual decisions [ that ] makes up a speci ﬁ c spatial process of gentri ﬁ cation” [ 34 : 187 ] . Th is process of gentri ﬁ cation is facilitated via Yelp Zukin argues as eventually what counts as “real” are the depictions of neighborhoods that amass in individual reviews “which continually redraw cognitive maps of consumer choice , which sets the stage for economic investment” [ 99 ] . Th us , representations have cumulative e ﬀ ects , in turn mobilizing the larger economic and cultural engines that drive gentri ﬁ cation . Of particular interest for the HCI community ( and CSCW in particular ) is in how this work is supported through social computing as collective work of geographically organized reviews by users . 4 NEXTDOOR : REDEFINING THE “NEIGHBORHOOD” Our second example is drawn from the Geographer Will Payne’s article on Nextdoor which provides an insightful view of how seemingly technical mapping decisions can support the “everyday processes of gentri ﬁ cation” characterized by the gradual change of social character of place : “the sound of hammers and saws as workmen refurbish houses , the individuals seated a new co ﬀ ee shop or bistro , campaign posters for a pro - gentri ﬁ cation mayoral candidate that color shops windows , or terse words between neighbors who come from distinct economic backgrounds” [ 6 : 14 ] . In contrast to the Yelp example , where the implications for gentri ﬁ cation occurred indirectly through representations created by Yelp reviewers , in this example the impact on gentri ﬁ cation occurs directly by way of particular a ﬀ ordances that mediate place between gentri ﬁ ers and the gentri ﬁ ed . Payne’s article , entitled “Welcome to the Polygon , ” draws a tt ention to the unintended social consequences of the way neighborhoods are de ﬁ ned on many maps : “the discrete , non - overlapping , named polygons , composed of linear boundaries closing homogenous areas” [ 39 ] . Th e article traces the history of this style of neighborhood de ﬁ nition to the desires and interests of real - estate developers , politicians and a ﬄ uent homeowners who all have vested interest in creating ( and maintaining ) “governable spaces . ” Technology can make space governable by creating data structures that sort every aspect of urban space into discrete , searchable , sortable variables . Th is allows one to “see the city like a data - base . ” It is a powerful and problematic strategy , Payne argues , as it “has the potential to cut o ﬀ debate about the diverse character of urban space and presents a mostly unnoticed arrogation of authority” [ 39 ] . Payne takes this argument to Nextdoor , one of many placemaking technologies ( Zillow , Yelp , Foursquare , etc ) that relies on named , discrete polygons to represent urban space . However , Nextdoor is unusual in that the site allows users to de ﬁ ne their own neighborhoods through a process of address veri ﬁ cation via mail . Th ese neighborhoods can be as small as a single condominium , an entire block , or even several blocks . Th e ﬁ rst user that registers a neighborhood serves as its administrator— moderating discussion boards , adding new members and controlling neighborhood boundaries . Other residents live within these arbitrarily de ﬁ ned extents in order to contribute to the shaping of the neighborhood on Nextdoor , which has been legitimized in recent years by local city o ﬃ cials who use the platform as a tool for community engagement [ 76 ] . Nextdoor’s revenue model works primarily through selling advertisement space to businesses who wish to market to speci ﬁ c communities on the platform . Th e named boundaries erected by Nextdoor users can produce a series of social e ﬀ ects . Th e ﬁ rst of these e ﬀ ects is spatial - economic fragmentation . Drawing from examples of neighborhoods created in the birthplace of Nextdoor , San Francisco , Payne shows how wealthier residents tend to self - segregate—creating fewer , smaller neighborhoods ( in this case two single luxury condominiums ) in otherwise mixed - income areas in the city . Nextdoor neighborhoods are private ; people outside are not allowed to even view discussions that happen within . Th is results in a myriad of “elite enclaves” that insulate the newer , more a ﬄ uent residents from existing , less a ﬄ uent residents . Th us , digital neighborhoods become spatial - economic ﬁ lter bubbles which further exacerbates the fragmentation of the larger community . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 6 Th is spatial - economic fragmentation can create challenges for social equity in services and resources of communities . A by - product of fragmentation is how it can concentrate the social capital of wealthy , tech savvy users , many of which already tend to have greater in ﬂ uence over civic services and resources [ 76 ] . Th is concentrated capital is operationalized in Nextdoor in powerful ways as many municipal entities maintain a presence on the site—for instance law - enforcement and city council have access to neighborhoods within their jurisdictions . Th is gives Nextdoor members the ability to use their digitally concentrated social capital to commandeer resources . Payne described an instance of this with the Sea tt le Police Department’s partnership with the site : “Sea tt le Mayor Ed Murray noted his frustration with how most complaints on Nextdoor are not from areas that have signi ﬁ cant crime problems , which tend to be our communities in the south part of the city” [ 85 ] . Spatial - economic fragmentation points to the ways in which some actors are a ﬀ orded more power than others in making the built environment amendable to their needs over others . Of course , this may or may not lead to displacement—but it does support the everyday process of gentri ﬁ cation : the slow , mundane changes to social character of place . To illustrate , consider the following scenario : in an e ﬀ ort to stay in business , a local corner store in the communities Payne described in his study may start to sell organic milk in order to cater to the tastes of a ﬄ uent newcomers . Moreover , if the business eventually failed , a new business ( a yoga studio or artisan cheese shop ) also looking to cater to the newcomers might take its place . Th ese changes are the everyday process of gentri ﬁ cation that “alienate or price - out long - time patrons , and even more pressingly , long - time residents who worked in the corner store lose their jobs and part of their social support network” [ 17 ] . In all , Payne’s work provides another view on how consumption side gentri ﬁ cation can be mediated by socio - technical systems : the creation of spatial - economic boundaries . Th ese boundaries work by “reinforce [ ing ] existing class and racial boundaries in increasingly divided cities , drawing lines between ‘us’ and ‘them’ and amplifying the voices of neighbors who want to use the site to pro ﬁ le people they consider outsiders , even those who may have lived the area for generations” [ 85 ] . Ultimately , whether Nextdoor is simply amplifying existing class and racial barriers or if the a ﬀ ordances of the platform are enabling entirely new divisions is unclear . However , it is clear , that the digitally de ﬁ ned neighborhoods on Nextdoor “do not stand apart from the physical world within which [ they are ] embedded” [ 50 ] . 5 ZILLOW : SELLING THE NEIGHBORHOOD In this section , we present some of our own ongoing research on Zillow in order to provide a third view on how consumption side gentri ﬁ cation can be mediated in socio - technical systems . For the past several years , we have been examining Zillow [ 71 , 72 ] , an online real estate marketplace that acts as a point of access to housing - related information for potential home buyers , sellers , and renters while providing real estate agents , lenders , and landlords access to these users as potential customers . Th e work of real - estate that Zillow mediates has a strong discursive element . As the creators of Zillow mentioned in their book “when it comes to real - estate listings , words ma tt er” [ 86 ] . In the chapter “Magic Words and Dangerous Descriptors” , they describe how words and texts used in real - estate listings are “loaded with hidden meanings . ” Th ey report on experiments conducted on how word choices e ﬀ ect ﬁ nal sell prices of homes as well as how initial perceptions of homes are formed . While most of the discussion in the book is based on individual units of property—we were motivated by the Yelp study to consider how these discourses might also be applied to the surrounding neighborhoods of homes . Th is would raise similar questions that Zukin had regarding discourse and neighborhood changes mediated in Yelp reviews . Th us , our goal in this project is to determine if a “discourse of gentri ﬁ cation” exists within Zillow . Our discourse analysis focuses on the language in Zillow home listings : descriptive text created by real estate professionals and independent home owners seeking to sell or rent properties on the market . We focused on two neighborhoods in our home city of Atlanta , GA : Reynoldstown and Cabbagetown . Th ese neighborhoods have similar dynamics to Bedford - Stuyvesant and Greenpoint in the Yelp study . Additionally , Atlanta has a rich history of housing discrimination , red - lining , and other forms of housing justice related issues [ 63 , 66 ] . Additionally , new large scale infrastructure developments are also introducing rapid gentri ﬁ cation to areas of the city [ 56 , 57 ] . Our methods follow a similar approach to Zukin’s Yelp study . We manually collected all of the listing from 2012 - 2015 resulting in a total of 492 listings ( 246 each from Reynoldstown and Cabbagetown ) . Of all the listings for Cabbagetown , 88 mentioned the neighborhood and 68 of those characterized the neighborhood in social terms CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 7 relating to discourses of gentri ﬁ cation . Th at is a 26 % mention rate . Meanwhile , Reynoldstown listings mentioned the neighborhood 82 times , 65 of which characterized the neighborhood in speci ﬁ c terms . Th at is a 27 % mention rate . However , the descriptors used in listings in these neighborhoods were not equivalent . Cabbagetown was described as “historic” in 17 separate listings . Th e same term showed up only two times for Reynoldstown . Meanwhile , terms such as “new” and “hot” were much more prevalent in Reynoldstown . While these listings do not use the term gentri ﬁ cation , they gesture to related market pa tt erns and use coded language to refer to gentri ﬁ cation . Some listings emphasize what sellers interpret as a newfound stability in a previously low - income neighborhood : “excellent location in established neighborhood but with all the modern conveniences and ﬁ nishes of a new home” ( emphasis added ) . Others sell the transformation : “ Th is authentic urban lo ft in hot Reynoldstown boasts soaring ceilings , concrete ﬂ oors , brick walls , skylights & amazing open space ! ” ( emphasis added ) . Such language does not simply re ﬂ ect market conditions ; rather it is an active component of how gentri ﬁ cation can be encouraged through broadly circulated online representations . Actively celebrating or guarding against neighborhood change in online discourses is a well - studied strategy for dealing with gentri ﬁ cation [ 61 ] . Th is can have real consequences : welcoming more wealthy residents into the neighborhood ; pu tt ing pressure on low - income residents to somehow conform to a new normal or leave ; drawing a tt ention from speculators , which can raise the home values in a neighborhood even further . Our ﬁ ndings in this work thus far reinforce and add empirical evidence to communication scholar Joshua Hanan’s critique of real estate culture in neo - capitalist society [ 48 ] . Hanan links the proliferation of online housing markets , such as Zillow , with the transformation of the home from being a “place of social and economic reproduction ” to a “site of social and economic production ” [ 48 ] . While this transformation has been long in the making , Zillow exempli ﬁ es and exacerbates the commodi ﬁ cation fetish of the home through “the various tools designed to make real estate more ‘‘assessable’’ to the mapping so ft ware which represents the home in the form of a home / dollar sign . Th is “transforms housing from that of a private space of interiority to that of a public space of ﬁ xation that can be consumed , viewed , and expropriated by all” [ 48 ] . In this light , Zillow does not simply present existing home values ; it contributes to the social production of value in real estate . In seeking to enable buyers , sellers and renters to participate in the housing market at an increased speed and scope , Zillow’s interface , inadvertently , or not , can o ﬀ er a platform for users to do the work of gentri ﬁ cation . 6 DISCUSSION We end by discussing how the growing social justice agenda in HCI might engage gentri ﬁ cation . To do so , we propose learning from Dombrowski , Harmon , and Fox’s social justice framework [ 34 ] . According to this framework the pursuit of social justice in HCI requires a commitment to con ﬂ ict , participation and politics in order to address “the ways that individuals experience oppression , including how bene ﬁ ts , burdens , obligations , power , opportunity , and privilege have been ( in ) equitably distributed within society” [ 34 ] . Rather than a singular method or approach ( such as participatory or value sensitive design ) , Dombrowski , Harmon , and Fox view social justice in HCI as an “constellation of modes and sensitivities” that can be brought to bear on design and research practice . Th e framework describes the following six dimensions of social justice : recognition , reciprocity , enablement , accountability , distribution and transformation . We explore the potential and the pitfalls in engaging gentri ﬁ cation along these six dimensions . In order to do so , we use examples from three areas of ongoing work : ( 1 ) established scholarship from outside of HCI on computing platforms that enable gentri ﬁ cation ; ( 2 ) nascent work within HCI that could be made to engage gentri ﬁ cation more strongly ; ( 3 ) e ﬀ orts from outside of academia that utilize computing to resist or counter gentri ﬁ cation . We see these areas as highly suggestive for how HCI researchers and designers might further engage with gentri ﬁ cation as a social justice issue . 6 . 1 Recognition We begin with recognition : the ways in which “unjust practices , policies , laws and other phenomena” can be recognized in the lives of those who are negatively impacted . In the case of gentri ﬁ cation those impacted are the gentri ﬁ ed . We suggest the following straight - forward form of engagement : Recognize the experiences of people undergoing gentri ﬁ cation . Recognition themed scholarship can extend research in HCI to illuminate the experiences of gentri ﬁ ed populations . In doing so , HCI can provide much needed empirical balance to gentri ﬁ cation scholarship which tends to focus largely on understanding gentri ﬁ ers . In fact , gentri ﬁ cation scholar Tom Slater once remarked , “there is CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 8 next to nothing published on the experiences of non - gentrifying groups living in the neighborhoods into which the much - researched cosmopolitan middle classes are arriving en masse” [ 89 ] . Unfortunately , our work in this paper ( by way of the studies we discussed ) , perpetuates the empirical unbalance Slater describes , as we have only mentioned the gentri ﬁ ed in reference to their experience of gentri ﬁ cation . But it will be vital to give voice to these experiences , as doing so is perhaps the ﬁ rst step towards identifying what types of “counter - work” can push back against gentri ﬁ cation ? What are the “everyday practices“ – the strategies and tactics of the gentri ﬁ ed [ 20 ] ? One key challenge recognition themed scholarship will need to contend with is identifying the displaced—a notoriously di ﬃ cult task as “it is di ﬃ cult to ﬁ nd people who have been displaced , particularly if those people are poor… By de ﬁ nition , displaced residents have disappeared from the very places where researchers and census - takers go to look for them” [ 79 ] . Th is is why the eminent gentri ﬁ cation scholar Roland Atkinson once likened measuring the displaced to “measuring the invisible” [ 8 ] . Th is presents a challenge for HCI methods in terms of locating and revealing the displaced but also an opportunity to explore the design of inventive methods that can operate in the constraints of research with the displaced [ 73 ] . Th e anti - eviction mapping project [ 74 ] provides a compelling example of HCI might pursue recognition research moving forward . Th is project utilizes a series of data - visualizations and storytelling to recognize the experiences of gentrifying communities . A key aspect of this work is the collection of oral histories of the gentri ﬁ ed . By collecting these histories—documenting both the dispossession and resistance of the gentri ﬁ ed— the project recognizes and ampli ﬁ es the experiences of the gentri ﬁ ed across various communities . Drawing from these challenges and opportunities for recognition we ask : How can HCI design improve mediation of the lived experiences of the gentri ﬁ ed ? How can we design new forms of storytelling utilizing digital media to evoke the public conscious towards empathy and action ? 6 . 2 Reciprocity Following recognition , reciprocity describes changes that need to occur in the relationships between those who are owed justice and the means of enabling those changes . Reciprocity is predicated on there being some form of agreement ( implicit or explicit ) between those who have su ﬀ ered injustice and those who might be responsible . Th is dimension suggests the following engagement with gentri ﬁ cation in HCI moving forward : Identify and recon ﬁ gure relationships in gentrifying spaces towards reciprocity . Th e ﬁ rst challenge reciprocity themed scholarship will need to address will be identifying the relevant relationships . By working from within the consumption side perspective of gentri ﬁ cation , this paper only focuses on one particular set of relationships : gentri ﬁ ers and gentri ﬁ ed . However , if we were to consider the production side perspective , several other sets of relationships are revealed . For instance , one of the most popular production side theories of gentri ﬁ cation is Neil Smith’s rent - gap hypothesis [ 90 ] which argues that gentri ﬁ cation starts when a large enough divergence in current rent earned by landlords ( with current land use ) and the maximum possible rent that could be earned ( based on di ﬀ erent land uses i . e . changing to lo ft s or high - end retail to a tt ract higher income tents ) . Gentri ﬁ cation is produced once this gap becomes high enough . Moreover , this production side perspective can be extended to socio - technical systems . To illustrate , recent scholarship has identi ﬁ ed how Airbnb exacerbates rent - gap gentri ﬁ cation by facilitating rapid transformation of a ﬀ ordable long - term rental units into the more lucrative short - term rentals for Airbnb renters [ 95 ] . In this light , which set of relationships require recon ﬁ guration towards reciprocity ? Is it the relationships with those who move into these new units ( the would be gentri ﬁ ers ) or the relationships with landlords ? Or is it the relationship between Airbnb and the communities being transformed into de facto tourist districts ? On the la tt er , what does it mean to have a relationship with a socio - technical system [ 61 , 80 , 88 ] ? What does it mean to form an agreement about injustice perpetuated by , for instance , Yelp’s discursive map or Zillow’s proprietary algorithm , the “Zestimate , ” when these support indi ﬀ erence to , if not an ampli ﬁ cation of the e ﬀ ects of a rising market on low - income residents ? Th e end goal of reciprocity themed scholarship is to recon ﬁ gure relationships towards reciprocity such that injustice is reduced or eliminated . One possible approach to recon ﬁ guration is one which the lead author has been involved with through working with a social innovation incubator located in Atlanta , “Goodie Nation” [ 46 ] . Goodie Nation is currently a tt empting to “hack” gentri ﬁ cation by providing resources to local entrepreneurs in e ﬀ orts to connect people in gentrifying areas to economic opportunities introduced by gentri ﬁ cation . Th eir approach CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 9 is interesting ( and somewhat problematic ) in that rather than trying to combat gentri ﬁ cation by opposing it , they instead focus on using technical innovation to create viable businesses that would leverage the in ﬂ ux of capital created by gentri ﬁ cation in ways that would bene ﬁ t those being gentri ﬁ ed . In this way , Goodie Nation believes it can achieve recon ﬁ guration of the relationships in gentrifying spaces such that the gentri ﬁ ed can bene ﬁ t from ongoing gentri ﬁ cation . On the whole , Goodie Nation’s approach maybe a capitulation in terms of achieving social justice but nonetheless it is worth noting and documenting . Outside of this particular instance , the overall approach from the standpoint of the researcher is that of action— participating as both volunteer and researcher directly . Th is approach re ﬂ ects the traditions of activist , interventionist style research popular in existing social justice oriented work in HCI [ 5 , 40 , 51 ] . Drawing from the challenges and opportunities for reciprocity we ask : How can HCI design systems or research interventions that recon ﬁ gure relationships between the gentri ﬁ ed and those responsible ( directly or indirectly ) ? How can HCI action style research participate in the work of recon ﬁ guration towards reciprocity ? 6 . 3 Enablement Enablement focuses on “fostering human capacity or helping people take advantage of opportunities by creating platforms for participation and self - determination” [ 34 ] . Th is dimension suggests the following engagement with gentri ﬁ cation in HCI moving forward : Enable the gentri ﬁ ed to bene ﬁ t from the socio - technical forces at play in gentri ﬁ cation processes . While not speci ﬁ cally focusing on gentri ﬁ cation , HCI has several examples of scholarship that has engaged issues of enabling participation in placemaking [ 24 , 25 , 65 ] . For instance , Crivellaro et al [ 25 ] showed how residents of a public housing complex ( who were in danger of being displaced ) used histories of place to develop social capital and engage with change processes underway . Crivellaro’s team designed a briefcase ﬁtt ed with audio recording and playback mechanisms . Th is briefcase was passed around the community , from resident to resident , in order to accumulate stories of place . Th is design intervention enables resident agency in placemaking “by amassing a heterogeneous collection of stories tied to speci ﬁ c times and places on the estate . ” In this way , the design intervention performed a similar kind work as the collections of discourses on Yelp or Zillow . Th e challenge for design interventions like Crivellaro’s in the context of gentri ﬁ cation is in the sustainability of experimental and o ft en temporary research engagements . What happens to those in danger of being gentri ﬁ ed when a research project ends [ 93 ] ? Perhaps even more problematic for enablement is how we have shown throughout the examples of Yelp , Nextdoor , and Zillow that gentri ﬁ cation is operationalized through the collective actions of some users mobilizing the larger economic and cultural engines that drive gentri ﬁ cation . For instance , in Yelp this was how the cultural capital of some users ( young , a ﬄ uent , white according to Zukin ) enhances the ﬂ ow of visitors and developers to neighborhoods . In Zillow , this was in how the economic capital of some users ( real estate agents and home owners ) are able drive up local housing markets . Both of these examples point back to consumption side theories of gentri ﬁ cation : markets respond to the cultural and economic capital of these users . Comparing these users to those in Crivellaro’s study ( who do not possess the cultural or economic capital ) raises the question of how research practice aimed at enablement can succeed given the unequal starting point of socio - economic status . Th is challenge was illustrated in Erete and Burrell’s recent ethnographic work on how socioeconomic class impacts a community’s ability to engage with their local government [ 37 ] . Th ey found that neither technical ability nor access to technology increases political e ﬃ cacy necessary to enact meaningful transformation of systemic issues facing the community [ 37 ] . Erete’s work exempli ﬁ es the limitations of design interventions to overcome the larger , structural challenges underserved communities face . HCI is growing more cognizant of the challenges facing enablement Erete has raised given recent work [ 30 – 33 ] , yet solutions to this challenge remain an ongoing question . Drawing from these challenges and opportunities for enablement we ask : How can HCI design sustainable socio - technical systems that enable participation in placemaking ? How can we design from within the constraints of socio - economic status ? 6 . 4 Accountability Accountability describes the ways in which we might hold responsible those “who foster or unduly bene ﬁ t from the oppression of others” [ 34 ] . In their original paper , Dombroski , Harmon , and Fox acknowledge that HCI has limited capacity for leveling sanctions , penalties and punishments on those responsible for social injustices . But CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 10 can the ﬁ eld help focus a tt ention and scrutiny on oppressive groups and systems ? Th is dimension suggests the following engagement with gentri ﬁ cation in HCI moving forward : Participate in e ﬀ orts to reveal the layer and levels of accountability in gentri ﬁ cation processes . Because of the complex factors underlying gentri ﬁ cation—introduced earlier in the paper— accountability is di ﬃ cult to prove . Gentri ﬁ cation scholar Robert Beauregard once wrote , “no one or even two factors are determinant . Conversely , the absence of anyone factor does not mean that gentri ﬁ cation will not occur " [ 13 ] . Moreover , gentri ﬁ cation has inconsistent e ﬀ ects and many , such as displacement , are not directly perceptible . Th ese e ﬀ ects might be thought of as what John Dewey calls indirect consequences ; they are “ felt rather than perceived " [ 28 ] . Th is is particularly true of the spatial - economic fracturing created by Nextdoor . Its user designated “neighborhoods” are imperceptible by anyone not within their network . In this light , accountability is only possible when the indirect consequences of gentri ﬁ cation are made perceptible and susceptible to criticism . As of this writing , there are few examples from the work of HCI which address accountability for gentri ﬁ cation and those that do are modest . We would like to highlight one such e ﬀ ort , developed by the second author in collaboration with a local , resident - led housing rights organization , the Housing Justice League [ 52 ] . Th ese e ﬀ orts have focused on illuminating the social and economic e ﬀ ects of the Atlanta BeltLine Project , one of the most visible ongoing works of urban redevelopment in Atlanta [ 2 ] . Th e Atlanta BeltLine Project is currently under construction along a loop of disused railroad tracks that circumvent the city , stitching together some of Atlanta’s most historic neighborhoods and bringing with it new facilities for recreation , transportation , and housing greatly needed by a population on the rise [ 47 ] . But the BeltLine is also transforming existing communities along its path . In response to concerns about these changes from members of the Housing Justice League , the second author has led the development of an online interactive map that explores indicators of gentri ﬁ cation along the current and proposed path of the Atlanta BeltLine Project [ 1 ] . Th e online interactive map allows audiences to investigate a ﬀ ected neighborhoods in terms of three demographic factors selected by a team of residents and researchers working together : percent change in median income , percent change in college educated residents , and percent change in “white share” of the population . Th e ﬁ nal indicator tells us , inversely , the percentage of people of color who have le ft the area . Th ese data show changes over a six - year period , from 2010 - 2015 , and were a tt ained from the American Community Survey . Th e neighborhoods depicted are de ﬁ ned by census tracts . Although scholars have already shown the in ﬂ uence of the Atlanta BeltLine Project on rising property values within a half mile of it’s line of development [ 57 ] , those ﬁ ndings only hint at the possibility of displacement and other ill e ﬀ ects , which we consider direct evidence of gentri ﬁ cation . Moreover , in order to support accountability , such research needs to be embraced by local residents—those who are subject to oppressive changes in the city . Th e Housing Justice League’s report [ 14 ] , of which the interactive visualization is a just one part , connects existing quantitative scholarship to qualitative accounts of fear and anxiety —the felt e ﬀ ects of indirect consequences—in low - income neighborhoods along the path of the BeltLine’s development . Th e report was delivered to local media and civic leaders in a press conference on the steps of city hall . It is di ﬃ cult to say what e ﬀ ects , if any , the report has had as a whole . However , it was part of a wave of scrutiny which did turn the tide in public opinion about the Atlanta BeltLine Project [ 10 ] . In subsequent years , amid widespread criticism , the leadership of the BeltLine has stepped down [ 9 ] . Th at change was certainly not a direct result of the Housing Justice League’s report . However , the project demonstrated the potential for accountability in HCI ; it helped residents to focus their discussions about how to make gentri ﬁ cation visible . We believe that such e ﬀ orts can be important components of larger and more far reaching organizing e ﬀ orts necessary to bring accountability to the forces behind gentri ﬁ cation . Drawing from this example , we prompt HCI to ask : How can HCI make the consequences of gentri ﬁ cation perceptible ? How can we raise questions about accountability by illuminating the pa tt erns in gentri ﬁ cation ? 6 . 5 Distribution Distribution focuses on how equity can be achieved in distributing both bene ﬁ ts and burdens throughout society . Th is dimension suggests the following engagement with gentri ﬁ cation in HCI moving forward : Design socio - technical systems that equitably distribute placemaking . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 11 Within HCI , Le Dantec and Fox’s community historians project [ 41 ] provides an excellent example of distribution . Th e project utilized a series of participatory design encounters within an underserved community in order to facilitate the creation of shared identity of place . While not explicitly about gentri ﬁ cation , the community historians project did take place in the backdrop of inequities being perpetuated by large scale sport stadiums being developed in the area [ 29 ] . Distribution of placemaking in the community historians project was achieved through participatorily designed sensing technologies which were used by community members to explore how they might further goals , communicate values , and utilize social capital in resisting the forces of gentri ﬁ cation . A series of public presentations a ft er the project allowed the design activities to be projected out towards the larger community in order to further distribute the conversations about ongoing displacement and loss of community identify . One important characteristic of the project is the longevity and community ownership it achieves by existing as an ongoing collaboration to explore socio - technical engagements with placemaking as partnership between university and community organizations [ 22 ] . It also engages with discourse—as one of the objectives of the project was to enable the community to construct their own counter - narratives of place . Th is focus on counter - narrative is key—as the forces of gentri ﬁ cation acting upon the community have quite o ft en done so under the guise of “revitalization” [ 29 ] . Outside of HCI , counter - mapping is another good example to draw inspiration for pursuing distribution themed scholarship . Originating from critical cartography , counter - mapping describes how oppressed populations appropriate mapping techniques of those in power in order to represent oppositional claims to place [ 87 ] . While initially counter - mapping was popularized based on historical studies of indigenous populations using analogue maps , counter - mapping has also been explored extensively in digital maps of modern , urban se tt ings [ 3 ] . Th e values of counter - mapping are being taken up in interdisciplinary projects known as “Map Rooms” in two large US cities : St Louis [ 92 ] and Atlanta [ 11 ] . Th ese map rooms operate as open design spaces for communities to reinterpret space and place within their cities . Much like the discursive maps of Yelp—these projects realize the representational power of maps . Th ey confront the “view from nowhere” objectivity of existing orientations of city space by facilitating design practice around alternative ways of seeing and knowing the city . While neither of these are explicitly about gentri ﬁ cation—the Atlanta Map Room in particular has been initiated under a sense of urgency as the identity of the city is in ﬂ ux due to rapid development . Acknowledging these stakes , the Atlanta map room hopes to position itself as a design space to enable critical discourse on the future of the built environment . To further build upon these existing examples of distribution , HCI will need to consider how to evaluate the e ﬃ cacy of these a tt empts at placemaking . In particular , how do these interact ( and potentially con ﬂ ict ) with institutional placemaking as it exists in o ﬃ cial planning and development e ﬀ orts ? What happens when these alternate modes of placemaking a ﬀ orded by map rooms clash with city planning or private developers ? Drawing from these challenges and opportunities for distribution we ask : How can HCI design interventions for equitable placemaking that confront and resist gentri ﬁ cation directly ? How can HCI research develop methods to evaluate the e ﬃ cacy of participatory placemaking ? 6 . 6 Transformation Transformation requires a signi ﬁ cant change in the focus of HCI : from short - term opportunities for innovation to the long - term consequences of structural conditions ( i . e . the cultural milieu , education systems , and regulation ) . Reforming structural inequalities that perpetuate social injustice demands the most intense form of engagement . Engaging spatialized inequalities through the mechanism of “transformation” suggests the following : Challenging long - standing institutions and conventions that create the conditions for gentri ﬁ cation . E ﬀ orts to bring about such transformation in HCI might take one of two paths : Th e ﬁ rst path focuses on in ﬂ uencing policy , following the guidelines set out by Jackson et al [ 60 ] . Policy , argue Jackson et al , o ft en precedes and pre ﬁ gures design interventions . In following , they advocate viewing the ties between research , design and policy ﬁ guratively as a “knot” in order to convey how all three of these elements are inherently tied “as strands woven together , ” necessitating an integrated approach . A “kno tt ed approach” to gentri ﬁ cation might mean supporting the development of rent - controls [ 55 ] , creating incentives for a ﬀ ordable housing development [ 57 ] or encouraging anti - displacement legislation [ 75 ] ; all of which strike at the structural root of gentri ﬁ cation . Several of the projects mentioned earlier , such as the Anti - CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 12 Eviction Mapping Project , aspire towards such changes in regulatory structures . Th e second path is more re ﬂ exive . It requires that we take a hard look at how the successes of HCI—a ﬁ eld situated within the larger high - technology movement— creates the conditions for gentri ﬁ cation by consolidating wealth in high - tech centers and therefore increase property values in those areas [ 82 ] . Th is is not only a problem in Silicon Valley [ 78 ] , where media coverage has focused its a tt ention , but in many other cities in the United States and around the world [ 81 ] . Indeed , the success of HCI has indirectly contributed to the demographic transformation of centers for innovation , by creating markets for housing that are now inaccessible for a broad spectrum of the population [ 53 ] . For HCI to engage transformation at the deepest level , it must contend with its own good fortune and consider how that fortune might be fairly redistributed . In either case , engaging transformation in HCI will require adopting a long - term perspective . Even in its more rapid manifestations , gentri ﬁ cation can take several years to unfold [ 56 ] . During that time gentri ﬁ cation processes can adapt to changes in the market and culture [ 98 ] , they can evolve ( see “super gentri ﬁ cation” [ 69 ] ) , and they can become stubbornly durable [ 91 ] . A typical PhD research project which lasts one or two years can scarcely gain perspective on such slow - moving processes . Moreover , by the time the indicators of gentri ﬁ cation become visible ( displacement , loss of a ﬀ ordable housing and social diversity ) it is o ft en too late for meaningful intervention [ 57 ] . Facing down these daunting challenges requires asking : How might HCI confront the underlying political and economic systems that produce the conditions for gentri ﬁ cation , particularly when the ﬁ eld indirectly bene ﬁ ts from those conditions ? 7 CONCLUSION In this paper we posed the following question : How should HCI’s growing social justice agenda engage with the issue of gentri ﬁ cation ? To answer this question , we ﬁ rst articulated why gentri ﬁ cation is an issue of social justice and focused in particular on the consumption side of the debate . From within the consumption side , we discussed the role of discourse in gentri ﬁ cation . We tied discourse to the shaping of space and place as well as how place is acted on through technology . Th en we provided three distinct examples of how consumption side gentri ﬁ cation can be mediated in socio - technical systems by discussing existing scholarship on Yelp and Nextdoor as well as presenting our own ongoing work in Zillow . Overall , our work is less about evincing a direct causal link between these platforms and gentri ﬁ cation . In fact , much of the existing social justice agenda is not predicated on the causality of technology in perpetuating social justice issues . Rather , more o ft en it is about discovering the ways in which HCI research could ( and should ) engage with an issue . To this end , we have provided six modes of research engagement that HCI can pursue on gentri ﬁ cation moving forward . Let us now acknowledge the limitations of this work . Th ere is the trade - o ﬀ in our case - study selections and methods . We took a narrow , deep dive into three platforms covered by two papers and our own work ; rather than a more expansive , wide - ranging review of scholarship on gentri ﬁ cation and computing platforms . Moreover , these three platforms highlight only consumption side theories ( tastes , behaviors and actions of gentri ﬁ ers ) . Future research on the connections between HCI and gentri ﬁ cation need not be limited to studies of cultural consumption or the kind of qualitative interpretive analysis we model here . Indeed quantitative , statistical analysis might yet support a be tt er understanding of production side causes of gentri ﬁ cation . Th is could in fact lead to a whole other set of engagements for HCI with gentri ﬁ cation . Indeed , we believe there is much more to learn about what engaging gentri ﬁ cation in HCI could bring . Most important is the need for more research on what ( if any ) is the essential nature of digitally mediated gentri ﬁ cation ? Recall that the consumption side practice of Brownstoning discussed earlier in this paper occurred in the 1960s , predating the digital media platforms we reviewed . Yet , even in the 60s brownstoner’s utilized non - digital media ( they created an entire magazine ‘ Th e Brownstoner’ ) . Th is raises the question of whether gentri ﬁ cation is changing along with new media [ 15 ] ? In summary , we believe that the HCI community—a community of socially conscious technologists—bears responsibility for engaging with gentri ﬁ cation as it intersects with a range of contemporary computing platforms . As HCI designers and researchers , we have the ability to publicly challenge and perhaps transform the spatial expression of economic inequality that surrounds us [ 89 ] . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Lynn Dombrowski , Javier Arbona , Phoebe Sengers , Tawanna Dillahunt , and Carl DiSalvo for CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 13 their valuable comments and helpful suggestions for this paper . REFERENCES [ 1 ] A BeltLine for All ? – Yanni Alexander Loukissas : 2018 . http : / / loukissas . lmc . gatech . edu / uncategorized / a - beltline - for - all / . Accessed : 2019 - 01 - 04 . [ 2 ] A Glorified Sidewalk , and the Path to Transform Atlanta - The New York Times : https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2016 / 09 / 12 / us / atlanta - beltline . html . Accessed : 2019 - 01 - 05 . [ 3 ] About | Counter Map Collection : http : / / countermapcollection . org / about / . Accessed : 2018 - 08 - 30 . [ 4 ] Ames , M . G . et al . 2011 . Understanding technology choices and values through social class . Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’11 ( New York , New York , USA , 2011 ) , 55 . [ 5 ] Asad , M . and Le Dantec , C . a . 2015 . Illegitimate civic participation : supporting community activists on the ground . Cscw 2015 . ( 2015 ) , 1694 – 1703 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675156 . [ 6 ] Asad , M . and Le Dantec , C . A . 2015 . Illegitimate Civic Participation : Supporting Community Activists on the Ground . CSCW ’15 : Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( New York , New York , USA , Feb . 2015 ) , 1694 – 1703 . [ 7 ] Atkinson , R . 2002 . Does gentrification help or harm urban neighbourhoods ? : An assessment of the evidence - base in the context of the new urban agenda ( CNR paper 5 ) . ESRC Centre for Neighbourhood Research . June ( 2002 ) , 27 . [ 8 ] Atkinson , R . 2000 . Measuring gentrification and displacement in Greater London . Urban studies . 37 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 149 – 165 . [ 9 ] Atlanta Beltline CEO Paul Morris steps down from post : https : / / www . ajc . com / news / local - govt - - politics / beltline - ceo - steps - down - new - head - focus - affordable - housing / RoWS3022b1qYl8eWAoBa6M / . Accessed : 2019 - 01 - 04 . [ 10 ] Atlanta Beltline fails to deliver on promise for affordable housing : https : / / www . ajc . com / news / local / how - the - atlanta - beltline - broke - its - promise - affordable - housing / 0VXnu1BlYC0IbA9U4u2CEM / . Accessed : 2019 - 01 - 04 . [ 11 ] Atlanta Map Room | Digital Integrative Liberal Arts Center : https : / / dilac . iac . gatech . edu / node / 55 . Accessed : 2018 - 09 - 07 . [ 12 ] Bardzell and Shaowen 2010 . Feminist HCI : taking stock and outlining an agenda for design . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ( 2010 ) , 1301 – 1310 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 . [ 13 ] Beauregard , R . A . 2013 . The chaos and complexity of gentrification . Gentrification of the City . Routledge . 51 – 71 . [ 14 ] BeltLining : Gentrification , Broken Promises , and Hope on Atlanta’s Southside : 2017 . https : / / www . housingjusticeleague . org / b4all - report / . Accessed : 2019 - 01 - 04 . [ 15 ] Bolter , J . D . et al . 2000 . Remediation : Understanding new media . mit Press . [ 16 ] Bonam , C . M . et al . 2016 . Polluting Black Space . Journal of experimental psychology . General . 145 , 11 ( 2016 ) , 1561 – 1582 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / xge0000226 . [ 17 ] Brown - Saracino , J . 2013 . The gentrification debates : a reader . Routledge . [ 18 ] Byrne , J . 2003 . Two Cheers for Gentrification . Georgetown Law Faculty Publications and Other Works . ( Jan . 2003 ) . [ 19 ] Castells , M . 1996 . The Rise of the Network Society . The Information Age : Economy , Society , and Culture Volume I ( Information Age Series ) . London : Blackwell . [ 20 ] Certeau , M . de 1984 . The practice of everyday life . Berkeley . CA : University of California Press . [ 21 ] Clarke , R . et al . 2013 . Digital portraits : Photo - sharing after domestic violence . Proc . CHI ’13 . ( 2013 ) , 2517 – 2526 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481348 . [ 22 ] Community Historians & amp ; Westside Soul | Christopher A . Le Dantec : https : / / ledantec . net / research / community - historians - westside - soul / . Accessed : 2018 - 09 - 07 . [ 23 ] Cresswell , T . 2004 . Place : A Short Introduction . The Professional Geographer . 58 , February ( 2004 ) , 153 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1139 / h2012 - 055 . [ 24 ] Crivellaro , C . et al . 2015 . Contesting the city : enacting the pollitical through digitally supported urban walks . CHI ’15 : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ( 2015 ) , 2853 – 2862 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702176 . [ 25 ] Crivellaro , C . et al . 2016 . Re - Making Places : HCI , ’Community Building’and Change . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2016 ) , 2958 – 2969 . [ 26 ] Le Dantec , C . A . et al . 2011 . Publics in practice : Ubiquitous computing at a shelter for homeless mothers . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2011 ) , 1687 – 1696 . [ 27 ] Delaney , D . 2002 . The space that race makes . The professional geographer . 54 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 6 – 14 . [ 28 ] Dewey , J . and Rogers , M . L . 2012 . The public and its problems : An essay in political inquiry . Penn State Press . [ 29 ] Diedrick , K . and Dantec , C . A . Le 2017 . Atlanta’s Westside residents challenge the rules of sport mega - development . Third World Thematics : A TWQ Journal . 2 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 54 – 68 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 23802014 . 2017 . 1367261 . [ 30 ] DILLAHUNT , T . 2017 . Everyday Resilience : Supporting Resilient Strategies among Low - socioeconomic - status Communities DHAVAL VYAS , Queensland University of Technology ( QUT ) . ( 2017 ) . [ 31 ] Dillahunt , T . R . 2014 . Fostering Social Capital in Economically Distressed Communities . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2014 ) , 531 – 540 . [ 32 ] Dillahunt , T . R . et al . 2017 . Reflections on Design Methods for Underserved Communities . Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing - CSCW ’17 Companion ( New York , New York , USA , CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 14 2017 ) , 409 – 413 . [ 33 ] Dillahunt , T . R . and Malone , A . R . 2015 . The Promise of the Sharing Economy among Disadvantaged Communities . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15 . ( 2015 ) , 2285 – 2294 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702189 . [ 34 ] Dombrowski , L . et al . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design . Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’16 . ( 2016 ) , 656 – 671 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901861 . [ 35 ] Dourish , P . 2010 . HCI and environmental sustainability : the politics of design and the design of politics . Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . ACM . ( 2010 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 36 ] Dourish , P . 2006 . Re - Space - ing Place : “Place” and “Space” Ten Years On . Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’06 . ( 2006 ) , 299 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180921 . [ 37 ] Erete , S . and Burrell , J . O . 2017 . Empowered Participation : How Citizens Use Technology in Local Governance . Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 . ( 2017 ) , 2307 – 2319 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025996 . [ 38 ] Foucault , M . 1972 . The discourse on language . Truth : Engagements across philosophical traditions . ( 1972 ) , 315 – 335 . [ 39 ] Fox , S . et al . 2016 . Exploring Social Justice , Design , and HCI . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’16 ( New York , New York , USA , 2016 ) , 3293 – 3300 . [ 40 ] Fox , S . 2015 . Feminist Hackerspaces as Sites for Feminist Design . C & C ’15 . Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ( 2015 ) , 341 – 342 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2764771 . [ 41 ] Fox , S . and Le Dantec , C . 2014 . Community historians : scaffolding community engagement through culture and heritage . Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems ( 2014 ) , 785 – 794 . [ 42 ] Gates , H . L . et al . 1999 . The souls of Black folk . By WEB Du Bois . New York : VV VV Norton . ( 1999 ) . [ 43 ] Gay , G . 2009 . Context - Aware Mobile Computing : Affordances of Space , Social Awareness , and Social Influence . [ 44 ] Gieryn , T . F . 2000 . A Space for Place in Sociology . Annual Review of Sociology . 26 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 463 – 496 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . soc . 26 . 1 . 463 . [ 45 ] Glass , R . L . 1964 . London : aspects of change . MacGibbon & Kee . [ 46 ] Goodie Nation | A Tribe of Changemakers & amp ; Entrepreneurs Using Innovation to Help Under - Served Communities : http : / / goodienation . org / . Accessed : 2017 - 01 - 07 . [ 47 ] Gravel , R . A . 1999 . Belt line - Atlanta : design of infrastructure as a reflection of public policy . Georgia Institute of Technology . [ 48 ] Hanan , J . S . 2010 . Home is Where the Capital is : The Culture of Real Estate in an Era of Control Societies . Communication and Critical / Cultural Studies . 7 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 176 – 201 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14791421003759166 . [ 49 ] Haraway , D . J . 1988 . Situated Knowledges : The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective . Feminist Studies . 14 , 3 ( 1988 ) , 575 – 599 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3178066 . [ 50 ] Harrison , S . and Dourish , P . 1996 . Re - place - ing space : the roles of place and space in collaborative systems . Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( 1996 ) , 67 – 76 . [ 51 ] Hayes , G . R . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction . 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 20 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1993060 . 1993065 . [ 52 ] Housing Justice League : https : / / www . housingjusticeleague . org / . Accessed : 2018 - 08 - 30 . [ 53 ] Hutton , T . A . 2004 . The new economy of the inner city . Cities . 21 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 89 – 108 . [ 54 ] Ignazio , C . D . and Klein , L . F . 2016 . Feminist Data Visualization . IEEE Vis conference . ( 2016 ) . [ 55 ] Imbroscio , D . 2004 . Can We Grant a Right to Place ? Politics & Society . 32 , 4 ( 2004 ) , 575 – 609 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0032329204269981 . [ 56 ] Immergluck , D . 2009 . Large redevelopment initiatives , housing values and gentrification : the case of the Atlanta Beltline . Urban Studies . 46 , 8 ( 2009 ) , 1723 – 1745 . [ 57 ] Immergluck , D . and Tech , G . 2016 . Affordability First : Concerns about Preserving Housing Options for Existing and New Residents on Atlanta’s Westside . ( 2016 ) , 1 – 5 . [ 58 ] Irani , L . et al . 2010 . Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems ( 2010 ) , 1311 – 1320 . [ 59 ] Irani , L . C . and Silberman , M . S . 2013 . Turkopticon . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13 . ( 2013 ) , 611 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470742 . [ 60 ] Jackson , S . J . et al . 2014 . The policy knot . Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing - CSCW ’14 ( 2014 ) . [ 61 ] Jenkins , T . et al . 2016 . Object - Oriented Publics . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2016 ) , 827 – 839 . [ 62 ] Jönsson , L . et al . 2010 . Watt - Lite . Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’10 ( New York , New York , USA , 2010 ) , 240 . [ 63 ] Keating , L . 2010 . Atlanta : Race , class and urban expansion . Temple University Press . [ 64 ] Kirkland , E . 2008 . What’s Race Got to Do With it ? Looking for the Racial Dimensions of Gentrification . Western Journal of Black Studies . 32 , 2 ( 2008 ) . [ 65 ] Korn , M . and Back , J . 2012 . Talking it further : from feelings and memories to civic discussions in and about places . Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Making Sense Through Design . ( 2012 ) , 189 – 198 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2399016 . 2399046 . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 15 [ 66 ] Kruse , K . M . 2013 . White flight : Atlanta and the making of modern conservatism . Princeton University Press . [ 67 ] Kurgan , L . 2013 . Close Up At a Distance . [ 68 ] Lees , L . et al . 2013 . Gentrification . Routledge . [ 69 ] Lees , L . 2003 . Super - gentrification : The case of Brooklyn heights , New York city . Urban studies . 40 , 12 ( 2003 ) , 2487 – 2509 . [ 70 ] Lees , L . et al . 2010 . The gentrification reader . Routledge London . [ 71 ] Loukissas , Y . 2018 . All the Homes : Zillow and the Operational Context of Data . International Conference on Information ( 2018 ) , 272 – 281 . [ 72 ] Loukissas , Y . A . 2017 . Taking Big Data apart : local readings of composite media collections . Information , Communication & Society . 20 , 5 ( 2017 ) , 651 – 664 . [ 73 ] Lury , C . and Wakeford , N . 2012 . Inventive methods : The happening of the social . Routledge . [ 74 ] Maharawal , M . M . and McElroy , E . 2018 . The Anti - Eviction Mapping Project : Counter Mapping and Oral History toward Bay Area Housing Justice . Annals of the American Association of Geographers . 108 , 2 ( Mar . 2018 ) , 380 – 389 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 24694452 . 2017 . 1365583 . [ 75 ] Marcuse , P . 1984 . To control gentrification : anti - displacement zoning and planning for stable residential districts . NYU Rev . L . & Soc . Change . 13 , ( 1984 ) , 931 . [ 76 ] Masden , C . A . et al . 2014 . Tensions in scaling - up community social media : a multi - neighborhood study of nextdoor . Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems ( 2014 ) , 3239 – 3248 . [ 77 ] Massey , D . S . and Denton , N . A . 1993 . American apartheid : Segregation and the making of the underclass . Harvard University Press . [ 78 ] McNeill , D . 2016 . Governing a city of unicorns : technology capital and the urban politics of San Francisco . Urban geography . 37 , 4 ( 2016 ) , 494 – 513 . [ 79 ] Newman , K . and Wyly , E . K . 2006 . The right to stay put , revisited : gentrification and resistance to displacement in New York City . Urban Studies . 43 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 23 – 57 . [ 80 ] Noble , S . U . 2018 . Algorithms of Oppression : How search engines reinforce racism . NYU Press . [ 81 ] O’Mara , M . 2017 . Silicon Dreams : States , Markets , and the Transnational High - Tech Suburb . Making Cities Global : The Transnational Turn in Urban History . University of Pennsylvania Press . 17 – 47 . [ 82 ] O’Mara , M . 2014 . The environmental contradictions of high - tech urbanism . Now Urbanism . Routledge . 40 – 56 . [ 83 ] Oliver , M . and Shapiro , T . 2013 . Black wealth / white wealth : A new perspective on racial inequality . Routledge . [ 84 ] Parker , A . et al . 2012 . Health promotion as activism . Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 ( New York , New York , USA , 2012 ) , 99 . [ 85 ] Payne , W . 2017 . Welcome to the Polygon : Contested Digital Neighborhoods and Spatialized Segregation on Nextdoor . Computational Culture . ( 2017 ) . [ 86 ] Rascoff , S . and Humphries , and S . 2015 . Zillow Talk : Rewriting the Rules of Real Estate . Grand Central Publishing . [ 87 ] Rundstrom , R . 2009 . Counter - Mapping . International Encyclopedia of Human Geography . Elsevier . 314 – 318 . [ 88 ] Sandvig , C . et al . Can an Algorithm be Unethical ? [ 89 ] Slater , T . 2006 . The Eviction of Criticial Perspectives from Gentrification Research . International Journal of Urban and Regional Research . 30 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 737 – 757 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2427 . 2008 . 00772 . x . [ 90 ] Smith , N . 1987 . Gentrification and the rent gap . Annals of the Association of American geographers . 77 , 3 ( 1987 ) , 462 – 465 . [ 91 ] Smith , N . and Williams , P . 2013 . Gentrification of the City . Routledge . [ 92 ] St . Louis MapRoom : http : / / stlmaproom . org / . Accessed : 2018 - 09 - 07 . [ 93 ] Taylor , N . et al . 2013 . Leaving the wild : lessons from community technology handovers . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2013 ) , 1549 – 1558 . [ 94 ] Using Mapping to Understand Gentrification , Prevent Displacement : 2017 . http : / / www . govtech . com / data / Using - Mapping - to - Understand - Gentrification - Prevent - Displacement . html ? r . Accessed : 2018 - 08 - 28 . [ 95 ] Wachsmuth , D . and Weisler , A . 2018 . Airbnb and the Rent Gap : Gentrification Through the Sharing Economy . Environment and Planning A : Economy and Space . ( 2018 ) . [ 96 ] Woodward , C . V . 2002 . The strange career of Jim Crow . Oxford University Press , USA . [ 97 ] Zukin , S . 1993 . Landscapes of power : from Detroit to Disney World . Univ of California Press . [ 98 ] Zukin , S . 1989 . Loft living : culture and capital in urban change . Rutgers University Press . [ 99 ] Zukin , S . et al . 2015 . The omnivore’s neighborhood ? Online restaurant reviews , race , and gentrification . Journal of Consumer Culture . ( 2015 ) , 1 – 21 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1469540515611203 . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 280 Page 16