Idea Visibility , Information Diversity , and Idea Integration in Electronic Brainstorming Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu University of Illinois , Urbana , IL 61801 ejavadi2 / wfu @ illinois . edu Abstract . Despite the pervasive use of electronic media for idea generation and idea sharing , the extent and quality of idea integration and use is relatively understudied . Idea integration and use depends on information saliency but little is known about how idea integration may be facilitated by user interface features that influence information saliency . This paper examines the effect of idea visibility on idea integration and how that relationship is moderated by information diversity . Our laboratory experiment showed that although the basic level of idea integration , i . e . mere reference to partners’ ideas increased when visibility increased , higher levels of idea integration decreased as visibility increased . Information diversity was found to be a significant moderator of the relationship between visibility and idea integration . Keywords : Idea integration , visibility , information diversity , brainstorming 1 Introduction Research and practice shows that electronic brainstorming systems ( EBSs ) may have created an illusion of productivity as they seem to offer limited benefits in terms of quantity or quality of the ideas generated by individuals during brainstorming [ 4 , 10 ] ; and an underpinning thesis for losses during electronic brainstorming is associated with the lack of idea integration and use . Although many experimental studies have addressed individual’s idea - sharing behavior in electronic settings [ 3 ] little research have been done to examine the extent to which individuals build on the ideas shared by others . To bridge this gap in the research literature , the current paper focuses on the effect of visibility on idea integration . Since individual’s idea integration behavior depends on the extent and quality of attention allocated to the shared ideas and since user interface is the point of access to the shared ideas , we posit that channeling attention through manipulation of visibility of the ideas ( i . e . , information saliency ) will influence idea integration behavior of the individuals . 2 Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu 1 . 1 Idea integration in electronic brainstorming Idea integration ( also referred to as adoption , exploitation , combination or synthesis ) is often considered the most fruitful phase of the creative process [ 9 ] . Integration occurs when dimensions of more than one individual’s ideas are combined to create new ideas [ 5 ] . Assuming that no one individual has sufficient information to generate the best idea , idea integration becomes a key to realizing more fully the value of the individually generated ideas [ 11 ] . Idea is defined as a statement that consists of at least one testable proposition [ 12 ] . Idea dimensions , which are building blocks of idea integration , are defined as “unique testable propositions” . Thus , an idea is called a multi - dimensional idea if it includes more than one unique testable proposition . Some examples from our experimental study follow . An example of a one - dimensional idea is “I think some sort of tarp would be useful for shade and shelter” . A multi - dimensional idea could be “some sort of outer shell jacket that is water proof , can be used to collect water if it rains , covers body at night” . “We have to stick together though” is an example of a value statement which is not counted as an idea . 1 . 2 Idea visibility , Information diversity and Idea integration For idea integration , individuals must attend to the ideas shared by others so as to discover new perspectives . Visibility of the ideas on user interface facilitates members’ exposure to the different dimensions and is a predictor of the idea being used in an integration activity . With the shift from information scarcity to information richness in modern organizations , visibility of ideas becomes even more important [ 6 ] . Visibility identifies the extent to which ideas generated by members of the group are exposed to other members . Visibility is defined by the portion of the idea pool that is visible . Increased visibility leads to an increased number of cues made available by visible ideas , which activates knowledge items in memory . Activation of more items in memory increases the possibility of the individuals’ discovering and articulating connections among different ideas’ dimensions . Thus , we derive the first proposition : Proposition 1 : idea integration is positively associated with idea visibility . 3 Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu 1 . 3 Information Diversity As ideas that are attended to become more diverse , the potential for integration increases because information diversity will by itself stimulate integration [ 13 ] . Information diversity here represents variety of the ideas or more precisely difference in information contained in the ideas generated and shared by individuals within the group . Diversity of the ideas leads to increased diversity of cues , which in turn , facilitates knowledge activation and retrieval of more information from memory . As such , we propose that diversity moderates the relationship between visibility and idea integration : Proposition 2 : Information diversity moderates the relationship between idea visibility and idea integration . For higher the levels of information diversity , the extent to which visibility influences idea integration will be higher . 1 . 4 METHOD Our hypotheses were tested in the laboratory using an open idea generation task . Participants in our experiments discussed electronically within groups using an experimental software system that allows for manipulations of visibility . The software system presents users with a screen split horizontally with the posted ideas displayed across the top . The user types in an idea in the lower section of the screen and submit the idea with a function key . The users can rank other posts and also refer to other posts as well . The software ( at ideation - experiment . org ) then generates the transcripts are used for measuring idea integration . 1 . 5 Participant Participants were recruited from two upper - level business courses at a large Mid - Western university in the United States . Participated were awarded extra credits with an additional opportunity to win a lottery ( for $ 50 ) . Participants assigned to different experimental conditions randomly and all participants in a particular session participated in the same condition . Idea Visibility Idea Integration + Information Diversity + Figure 1 : Research Model 4 Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu 1 . 6 Task We used a modified version of the desert survival task [ 7 ] which is an open - ended idea generation task was . The task posed a survival problem in a desert and participants were asked to discuss and generate ideas on the items they wished to take to help them survive . An idea could include a new item , a new use for an already proposed item , or follow - ups to and counter - arguments of ideas that had already been suggested . Participants were instructed that the suggested items ( a ) should be portable , and ( b ) participants should explain why the suggested items were important for surviving in the situation provided . 1 . 7 Procedures Each session was approximately thirty minutes long . The experimenter briefed participants on the experiment for about five minutes . The participants then read four instructions pages on computers for about ten minutes and were allowed to ask questions of clarification . Participants then used the discussion forum of the system to generate and exchange ideas and discuss the actual survival situation for fifteen minutes . 1 . 8 Treatments This experiment used a three ( Visibility low , medium , and high ) by two ( small groups , large group ) factorial design . Visibility is varied by setting the number of posts that are displayed on the screen at any given time . Users can view other posts by navigating through different pages . Pilots revealed that five posts on screen are considered low , twelve posts medium and twenty - five , high visibility . 1 . 8 . 1 Group Size Like in most of the theoretical and empirical studies of electronic brainstorming , size of the group is included for possible moderation or predictive effect . Small groups in our experiments involved 2 - 3 participants and large groups involved 4 - 6 participants . 1 . 9 Scoring System To motivate active participation during the experiment , each participant had a score that would increase for different activities that contribute to the group discussion including posting an idea , rating other participants’ ideas and referring to other participants’ ideas . The score of the individual then would influence individuals’ chance of winning the lottery . 5 Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu 2 Analysis and Results 2 . 1 Measurements Idea integration measurement is described in the next section and information diversity is measured by latent semantic analysis ( LSA ) [ 8 ] . For each experimental session we computed LSA measure between any two posts using the system available at http : / / lsa . colorado . edu / . The average of all binary LSA measures in a session was used as information diversity measure . 2 . 2 Identifying Unique Ideas and Idea Integration Levels Two external coders who were blind to experimental conditions were asked to code the transcripts of experimental sessions . The coders were asked to first read the entire transcript to understand how the discussion flowed among the individuals in the group . The coders then were asked to read each statement that was exchanged by individuals and coded them as idea generation or integration , as shown in Table 3 . Examples of each of the following categories are available in Table 3 . For each experimental session we computed the total number of level 1 , level 2 and level 3 idea integration . Our three levels coding of idea integration is a simplified version of the seven - level integrative complexity coding [ 1 ] . And normalized the total number of idea integration over the total number of posts exchanged during that experimental section . 2 . 3 Testing for Visibility and Group Size Effect and Combining Low and Medium Visibility Groups Our 2 - way ANOVA of sum of levels 1 - 3 idea integration on visibility ( L , M , H ) or group size ( S , L ) showed no significant effect for visibility or group size . Similarly , our two 2 - way ANOVA of sum of levels 1 - 3 idea integration on visibility ( L , M ) and group size ( S , L ) showed no significant effect for visibility or group size . Therefore we decided to examine each level of idea integration separately . The next step was to conduct three 2 - way ANOVA for different levels of idea integration ( levels 1 - 3 ) integration on Visibility ( L , M ) and Size ( S , L ) and three 2 - way ANOVA on , Visibility ( M , H ) and Size ( S , L ) . The above 2 - way analyses of variance showed that group size is not a statically significant predictor for any of the three levels of idea integration ( Figure 2 ) . Furthermore the first three 2 - way ANOVA models showed that there was significant difference among three levels of idea integration between medium and high visibility groups but no significant difference between three integration levels between low visibility groups and medium visibility ( Figure 2 ) . As such for further analysis , we combined the low and medium visibility groups . 6 Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu Table 1 . Levels of Idea Integration We then conducted three ANCOVA to examine the influence of idea visibility and group size on the three levels of idea integration when information diversity was included as a covariate . The three ANCOVA models consisted of two visibility levels ( L + M , H ) and two group sizes ( S , L ) . Consistent with the findings of ANOVA ( Figure 3 ) , ANCOVA showed even lesser effect for group size after taking out the variance accounted by information diversity . The results are summarized in Table 5 . The difference between idea integration level 1 , level 2 and levels 3 was different with visibility levels ( L + M ) and ( H ) at 0 . 05 . The direction of the difference is depicted in Figures 2 and Figure 3 . Description Definition Example from Experimental Sessions Idea Generation Item without reason Suggesting an item without providing any reason Flare gun Item with reasons Suggesting an item with reason ( s ) . We should bring thick gloves , because we will need to work with the cacti ( they often have water in them ) Idea Integration Level 1 Challenge without reason Challenge of , query to someone else’s idea without providing any reason P1 : Take a cooler P2 : why ? Approve without additional reason Approving somebody else’s idea without providing any additional P1 : maybe some kind of solar powered flashlight to use with the compass for nighttime travel P2 : I think the flashlight idea is good Level 2 Challenge with reason Challenge of , query to someone else’s idea : with reason but without P1 : Medical first aid kit from plan P2 : but they said we weren’t hurt Approve with reason Approving somebody else’s idea and providing additional P1 : I think in the middle of nowhere map might be better P2 : yes , especially if we are in a zone with no reception Level 3 Alternative Alternative to or improvement of an existing idea P1 : maybe some kind of solar powered flashlight to use with the compass for nighttime travel P2 : I think the flashlight idea is good 7 Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu 2 . 4 Visibility and the Moderating Effect of Information Diversity Based on the findings from ANOVA and ANCOVA , we left out group size as a predictor and combined groups with low and medium visibility . We then conducted a regression analysis on the sum of level 2 and Level 3 idea integration to test for idea visibility effect with moderating effect of information diversity . The regression results are shown in Table 6 . As depicted in Table 6 the coefficient for the interaction term was statistically significant . The negative coefficient indicates the favorability of smaller idea visibility and more information diversity for level 2 and level 3 idea integration The interaction coefficient is negative because the LSA score is lower for higher information diversity . Similarly our analyses of integration at level 1 showed positive relationship with visibility ( p < 0 . 05 ) with a marginally significant effect of diversity . Therefore as hypothesized earlier in this paper level 1 idea integration was found to be positively associated with idea visibility but because of cognitive overload , level 2 and level 3 idea integration were found to be negatively associated with visibility thus the coefficient is negative for idea visibility . Also information diversity was not 8 Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu expected to have any particular relationship with idea integration , and only the interaction of information diversity and idea visibility found to have an effect . Predictor Model 1 Without interaction Model 2 With interaction Visibility -­‐0 . 074 * 0-­‐ . 80 * Information Diversity . 002 . 473 Visibility * Information Diversity -­‐1 . 383 * * Constant 0 . 017 * 0 . 018 * N 65 65 * p < 0 . 05 * * p < 0 . 01 Table 6 : Regression Model 3 Discussion and Conclusion In this paper we empirically examined the influence of idea visibility as a user interface feature on idea integration . In our experimental we found that the basic levels of idea integration when individuals only refer to each others’ ideas , either approving or challenging , without any reason or justification , was higher for higher levels of idea visibility . We also found that higher levels of idea integration where more cognitive effort is required are diminished when idea visibility is high . We explained this diminishing effect by adverse effect of cognitive overload in higher visibility groups . Since idea integration plays an important role in creativity , our findings have implications for the extent to which creativity support tools and systems alike expose individuals to the ideas generated in the group . Depending on the level of idea integration that is required for specific purposes , designers may adaptively expose participants to more or less visibility of ideas . Idea visibility , which was manifested in form of the number of visible ideas on the screen in our study , can take other forms . Our analysis on information diversity suggests that , for example , one could selectively present more diverse ideas ( e . g . , based on semantic analysis ) to mitigate the effect of cognitive load . Future research can be directed to understand how cognitive load and semantic interpretation may interact in idea integration . 9 Elahe Javadi & Wai - Tat Fu References 1 . Baker - Brown , G . , Ballard , E . J . , Bluck , S . , deVries , B . , Suedfeld , P . & Tetlock , P . ( 1992 ) . The integrative complexity coding manual . In C . Smith ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Thematic Analysis , ( pp . 605 - 611 ) . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . 2 . Davidson , G . , Dornburg , C . , Stevens , S . , Hendrickson , S . , Bauer , T . , & Forsythe C . ( 2007 ) . Sandia Research Team Studies Best Way to Solve Wicked Problems , Sandia National Laboratories : http : / / www . sandia . gov / news / resources / releases / - 2007 / wickedproblems . html 3 . Dennis , A . R . ( 1996 ) . Information Exchange and Use in Group Decision Making : You Can Lead a Group to Information , But You Can ' t Make it Think , MIS Quarterly , 20 ( 4 ) , 433 - 457 . 4 . de Vreede , G . J . , Davison , R . M . , & Briggs , R . O . ( 2003 ) . How a silver bullet may lose its shine . Communications of the ACM , 46 ( 8 ) : 96 - 101 . 5 . Gruenfeld , D . H . , & Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1993 ) . Sociocognition in Work Groups – The Evolution of Group Integrative Complexity and its Relations to Task - Performance , Small Group Research , 24 ( 3 ) , 383 - 405 . 6 . Hansen , M . T . , & Haas , M . R . ( 2001 ) . Competing for attention in knowledge markets : Electronic document dissemination in a management consulting company . Administrative Science Quarterly , 46 ( 1 ) : 1 - 28 . 7 . Homan AC , van Knippenberg D , Van Kleef GA , De Dreu CKW . ( 2007 ) . Bridging faultlines by valuing diversity : Diversity beliefs , information elaboration , and performance in diverse work groups . Journal of Applied Psychology 92 ( 5 ) : 1189 - 1199 8 . Landauer , T . K . , Foltz , P . & Laham , D . ( 1998 ) . Introduction to latent semantic analysis . Discourse Processes , 25 ( 2 ) : 259 - 284 . 9 . Osborn , A . F . ( 1953 ) . Applied imagination ; principles and procedures of creative thinking , Scribner , New York , NY . 10 . Pinsonneault , A . , Barki , H . , Gallupe , R . B . , & Hoppen , N . ( 1999 ) . Electronic brainstorming : The illusion of productivity . Information Systems Research , 10 ( 2 ) : 110 - 133 . 11 . Robert , L . P . , Dennis , A . R . , & Ahuja , M . K . ( 2008 ) . Social capital and knowledge integration in digitally enabled teams , Information Systems Research , 19 ( 3 ) , 314 - 334 . 12 . Simon , H . A . ( 1947 ) . Administrative Behavior : A Study of Decision - Making Processes in Administrative Organization . Macmillan Co , New York , NY . 13 . van Knippenberg , D . , De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Homan , A . C . ( 2004 ) . Work group diversity and group performance : An integrative model and research agenda . Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 ( 6 ) : 1008 - 1022 .