brief communications NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 JUNE 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 607 Direct , high - resolution measurement of furrow stiffening during division of adherent cells Rainer Matzke * , Ken Jacobson†‡ and Manfred Radmacher § * Center for Nanoscience , Ludwig Maximilians Universität München , Amalienstrasse 54 , D - 80799 München , Germany †Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Research Center , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , North Carolina 27599 – 7090 , USA § Drittes Physikalisches Institut , Georg - August - Universität Göttingen , Bürgerstrasse 42 , D - 37073 Göttingen , Germany ‡e - mail : frap @ med . unc . edu It is unclear whether cell division is driven by cortical relaxation outside the equatorial region or cortical con - tractility within the developing furrow alone . To approach this question , a technique is required that can monitor spatially - resolved changes in cortical stiffness with good time resolution . We employed atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , in force - mapping mode , to track dynamic changes in the stiffness of the cortex of adherent cultured cells along a single scan - line during M phase , from metaphase to cytokinesis . Video microscopy , which we used to cor - relate the AFM data with mitotic events identified by light microscopy , indicated that the AFM force - mapping tech - nique does not perturb dividing cells . Here we show that cortical stiffening occurs over the equatorial region about 160 seconds before any furrow appears , and that this stiffening markedly increases as the furrow starts . By contrast , polar relaxation of cells does not seem to be an obligatory event for cell division to occur . M itosis and cytokinesis of animal cells are characterized by a complex coordinated sequence of cytoskeletal changes that give rise to major morphological changes 1 – 3 . Dividing cells round up , and actin and myosin are directed into the cleavage fur - row , which forms a transient contractile belt that constricts the cell and leads to its division . In animal cells , the position of the furrow is dictated by the mitotic spindle 4 and the formation of the con - tractile ring starts at the end of anaphase . It is thought that the mitotic spindle and / or the spindle asters communicate with the cell cortex to direct the contractile proteins to the position of the fur - row , but the signalling mechanism is unknown . To assist with the identification of specific signals , it will be helpful to know where and when they may act with the best possible spatial and temporal resolution . Mechanically speaking , the cell cortex is contractile and generates tension over the whole cell surface , but during cytokine - sis , contractility is highest in the furrow . This relative increase in tension might arise either from a local increase at the furrow 4 or from a relaxation at the poles of the cell 5 , 6 . To address this question , one needs a technique that can spatially monitor resolved changes in cortical stiffness with good time resolution 7 . AFM 8 , operated in the force - mapping mode 9 , can be used to measure the local elastic properties , or Young’s modulus ( E ) , of a sample with a spatial res - olution of about 100 nm ( ref . 10 ) . The Young’s modulus results from a combination ( not directly separable ) of cortical stiffness , a function of the material properties of the cytoskeleton , and , when it is present , of active cortical tension . Thus , using AFM , dynamic changes of cellular cytoarchitecture can be locally monitored dur - ing cell migration 11 and mitosis 12 . Mitotic events including metaphase , anaphase and the onset of furrowing ( Fig . 1a – g ) were clearly identified using AFM , although the quality of the bright field light microscopy images was limited by the lack of a condenser . Many normal rat kidney ( NRK ) and potorous triactylis kidney ( PtK ) cells in culture remain relatively adherent and flat during M phase and , thus , are suitable candidates for AFM force - mapping . Cell cultures were recorded overnight on Table 1 A measure of cortical stiffness , Young’s modulus ( E ) , during the cell cycle of PtK2 cells Phases of the cell cycle E ( kPa ± s . e . m . ) * Number of cells Time and space measurement Interphase 1 . 0 ± 0 . 4 9 Data taken in a 5 · 5 m m ( ~ 60 data points ) region on top of the cells ( above the nucleus ; estimated from the optical image ) ; this region was higher than 4 m m . Metaphase 1 . 7 ± 0 . 9 19 Data were averaged over 5 m m ( ~ 5 datapoints ) in the upper region of the cell , and over ~ 65 s ( 5 scanlines at 13 s ) . Onset of furrowing * 3 . 9 ± 2 . 5 19 Data were averaged over 5 m m ( ~ 5 datapoints ) and taken from the scanline that showed the first dip as an indicator for the onset of furrowing . Maximal E - value 10 . 1 ± 5 . 5 19 Data were averaged over 5 m m ( ~ 5 datapoints ) in the furrow region . during cytokinesis† * Stiffening starts 160 s ± 74 s before the onset of furrowing in dividing PtK2 cells . †The s . e . m . is large because the time at which the measurement was stopped was variable . In measurements carried through cytokinesis , the maximal Ewas as high as 20 kPa . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd brief communications NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 JUNE 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 608 time - lapse video ( without force - mapping ) to verify that the interval from metaphase to the end of cell division ( a ~ 30 - min interval ) was not altered by continuous force - mapping during cell division . To track dynamic changes in the elastic properties of the cell cortex during division , we recorded successive line scans of force curves . The scan - line was positioned over the middle of the cell and paral - lel to its long axis ( Fig . 1a ) . Force - mapping was usually performed from prometaphase or metaphase until the end of the cleavage fur - row . After force - mapping , cells completed cytokinesis and respread on the substrate and hence could be imaged in contact mode AFM ( Fig . 2 ) . An important prerequisite for imaging living cells in con - tact mode is that cells must be adherent to the substrate so that they cannot be displaced by the probe . As mitotic cells round up and are less adherent than interphase cells , it is difficult to obtain contact - mode images of a dividing cell . By contrast , in the force - mapping mode , lateral forces are negligible and force curves can be recorded without any displacement of the cell . Force - mapping permits the simultaneous acquisition of topog - raphy and elasticity information so that certain structural features can be correlated with elastic properties . Figure 1 presents evi - dence for furrow stiffening in PtK2 cells . Similar behaviour was found for PtK1 and NRK cells . We recorded paired , single height and elasticity profiles of a single cell during various phases of mitosis . In metaphase , the highest region of the cell corresponds to the location of the metaphase plate as seen in the optical image ( Fig . 1a ) . This is the position of the future cleavage furrow . Comparison of height and elasticity profiles showed that the high - est region was also the softest region of the cell , with Young’s mod - uli of about 2 kPa . However , the Young’s modulus , on average , at the top of interphase cells was even lower ( Table 1 ) . The peripher - al areas were stiffer with an average Young’s modulus of 3 kPa . As M phase progressed and cytokinesis ensued , the cleavage furrow was clearly seen as a dip in the centre of the height profile ( Fig . 1e ) . The furrow region of the cell became much stiffer than the rest of the cell and E values increased 10 - to 20 - fold compared with values for this region during metaphase ( Table 1 ) . This family of curves showed that furrow stiffening in the nascent furrow region ( ~ 10 m m ) preceded any morphological indication of furrowing by about 200 s ( Fig . 1d – g ; the first indication of stiffening can be seen in Fig . 1c ) . This stiffening is unambiguous and did not arise from changes in the angle of incidence between the tip axis and the cell surface ( see Methods ) . Whereas no indication of the furrow was seen when early stiffening occurred , the top of the cell flattened ( Fig . 1d , e ) over about a 15 - m m region roughly centred where the furrow will emerge . From the height profiles , we determined any given point with submicrometre precision , and we tracked temporal changes of the elasticity at this given point . Figure 3 shows height and elasticity as a function of time at one point in the equatorial region of a divid - ing PtK1 cell . This presentation shows clearly the dramatic increase in furrow stiffness as the thickness of the cell decreased due to furrow and contractile ring formation . The nascent furrow region had begun stiffening ~ 100 s ( blue arrow ) before the visible morphological onset of furrowing ( red arrow ) . Similar observa - tions were made with PtK1 ( 3 cells ) , NRK ( 18 cells ) and PtK2 ( 19 cells ) cells . The micrographs in Fig . 3 show typical rhodamine - phalloidin stained confocal sections of a metaphase cell and the furrow region of a cell undergoing cytokinesis . These micrographs show qualitatively the increase of F - actin in the furrow 12 – 15 . Addition of 10 m M nocodazole blocked the increases in both height and stiffness that occur before furrowing and cell division ( data not shown ) . A complete sequence of height profiles , recorded from metaphase to respreading , is given for a dividing PtK2 cell in Fig . 4 . These profiles were recorded with an instrument that enabled 2 1 40 30 20 10 0 Lateral position ( µ m ) 2 1 4 2 0 4 2 8 4 0 20 10 30 10 1 0 40 30 20 10 0 Lateral position ( µ m ) 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 210 R e l a t i v e he i gh t ( µ m ) Y oung ' s m odu l u s ( k P a ) Height M - phase ( time ) Young ' s modulus a Metaphase ( 0 s ) b Anaphase ( 288 s ) c Anaphase ( 393 s ) d Anaphase ( 590 s ) e Anaphase ( 629 s ) f Telophase ( 760 s ) g Cytokinesis ( 930 s ) Onset of furrowing First increase in stiffness Figure 1 Paired , single height and elasticity profiles of a PtK2 cell during M phase . Left column , micrographs from video records corresponding to the time when the scan - line was taken . The dotted line in a represents the extension of the scan line . The black triangle on the left side of the micrographs is the cantilever that overlaid the mitotic cell . The red arrows point to the chromosomes . In metaphase ( a ) , the chromosomes are aligned in the middle of the cell , perpendicu - lar to the scan - line . In anaphase , the two sets of chromatids are separated and pulled towards the spindle poles ( b – e ) . In late anaphase – telophase , the first indica - tion of the cleavage furrow is visible ( f , blue arrows ) . The formation of the furrow then proceeds and is clearly visible in cytokinesis ( g , blue arrows ) . Middle column , Furrow formation can also be monitored in the height profiles . The first indicator of the onset of furrowing is a dip in the height profile ( arrow ) , which occurred during late anaphase ( e ) . The elasticity profiles ( right column ) show the stiffening of the furrow region . Connected arrows define the region where pronounced stiffening occurs , from mid - anaphase to cytokinesis ( d – g ) . Early stiffening ( c ) precedes the onset of furrowing ( e ) by over 200 s . 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Deflection ( nm ) 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Height ( µ m ) Figure 2 An AFM contact - mode image of conjoined NRK daughter cells . Deflection image ( left panel ) ; height image ( right panel ) . The image was recorded about 30 min after cytokinesis . Scale bar , 20 µm . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd brief communications NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 JUNE 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 609 complete pole - to - pole scans . The profiles are displayed with dif - ferent x and y offsets as a pseudo three - dimensional plot . Each height profile is also encoded with the corresponding elasticity val - ues using a pseudocolour scale . The shape of cells did not change in metaphase and became flatter in anaphase , that is , when the two sets of chromosomes were pulled towards the spindle poles . At the end of anaphase , the formation of the cleavage furrow was observed . The softest part of the cell in metaphase was the region of the metaphase mid - plate . The cortex above the chromosomes maintained its soft - ness and the movement of the chromosomes towards the spindle poles can be seen by following the soft regions ( Fig . 4 ) . The biggest change in stiffness was observed in the equatorial region . These changes were observed by monitoring the central line along the nas - cent furrow and the central furrow from metaphase to cytokinesis ( Fig . 4 ) . The colours along this line gradually changed from yellow ( low stiffness ) to green , and then predominantly to purple ( high stiffness ) during development of the furrow . Occasional softening in the distal regions of the cell was observed in pole - to - pole scans with a modified Bioscope ( see Methods ) but usually in one polar region only ( see arrow in Fig . 4 ) . Such softening was not reproducible , in contrast with the com - pletely replicable pattern of stiffening observed in the equatorial region . Furthermore , with the Bioscope instrument , a number of single poles were scanned in which the scan - line could not be extended from pole to equator ( 10 NRK cells and 10 PtK2 cells ) . There was sometimes a softening in the vicinity of the pole , but cell division could occur when softening was not observed . These epithelial - like cells in culture divide surrounded by or partially surrounded by contact with neighbouring cells . It is likely that the softening is related to the seemingly stochastic rupture of contacts with neighbouring cells and with the substratum as the cell rounds up in preparation for division . Such rupture may be expected tran - siently to relax the cortex in the vicinity of the broken contact . Our work , which shows consistent and pronounced furrow stiff - ening , is in agreement with the notion that at least a 20 - fold increase in contractility in the furrow region ( along the direction of the fur - row ) is required to overcome the cortical tension associated with the small radii of curvature found across it 7 . Our study is in accordance with a global cortical stiffness that is modulated by an increase in cortical contractility occurring in the equatorial region during cytokinesis 2 . Thus , the present data could be used to support a sim - ple equatorial stimulation model in which signals , perhaps originat - ing from the spindle midzone 16 , 17 , are delivered to the equatorial region in early anaphase , and lead eventually to stiffening of the cor - tex in the vicinity of the nascent furrow . Although the origin of the signals is unsure , this mechanical event takes place before the first morphological indication of furrow development . Alternatively , tension at the poles could be radically relaxed so that the forces required to draw in the cleavage furrow would be reduced . However , whereas occasional softening was observed , often in one pole only , in M - phase cells in regions distal to the furrow , this was not a gen - eral event , in contrast to furrow stiffening . Thus , our work is consis - tent with traction patterns observed in dividing 3T3 cells that did not provide evidence for polar relaxation 18 . Cytokinesis Metaphase Metaphase Anaphase Cytokinesis 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 R e l a t i v e he i gh t ( µ m ) 500 400 300 200 100 0 Time ( s ) 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Y oung ' s m odu l u s ( k P a ) Relative height Young ' s modulus First increase in stiffness Onset of furrowing ~ 100 s Figure 3 Time evolution of height ( red ) and elasticity ( blue ) of one point in the equatorial region of a dividing PtK1 cell . The increase in stiffening ( blue arrow ) started ~ 100 s before the onset of furrowing ( red arrow ) . To calculate these time traces , a window was chosen along the time sequence of profiles and was placed at the presumptive location of the furrow . As the position of the furrow is determined by the position of the spindle in metaphase , the highest point of the cell during metaphase was chosen . In anaphase , the window was placed at the estimat - ed midpoint between the two sets of chromosomes and , after the onset of cleav - age , the window was positioned at the deepest point of the furrow . As the lateral resolution of the AFM force - mapping mode is in the range of 100 nm , the elasticity values reflect real local elasticity , and it is possible that a slight motion of the cell could bring structures with different elasticities to the point of observation . Thus , averaging over a few data points ( 3 points , corresponding to 1 . 2 µm for a 25 m m scan - line with 64 data points ) reduces noise without unacceptably reducing spatial resolution . Insets , representative confocal sections of rhodamine - phalloidin stained cells in metaphase and during cytokinesis . Confocal images represent the average of 45 slices separated by 200 nm in z . Scale bar , 10 m m . 5 µ m 10 µ m 10 . 0 6 . 5 4 . 0 2 . 5 Young ' s modulus ( kPa ) Onset of furrowing Time ( s ) 400 0 Anaphase Figure 4 Sequence of pole - to - pole height profiles over the central region of a dividing PtK2 cell . The profiles are displayed with different x and y offsets as a pseudo 3D plot . The abscissa is a distance scale along the direction of the profile ; the y - axis represents time when the subphases of M phase were video recorded ; the z - axis represents the height of the dividing cell along the selected line scan . Each height profile is encoded in a colour scale that corresponds to elasticity val - ues . A thin dotted line is placed along the furrow from metaphase to cytokinesis . The colours along this line gradually change from red ( low stiffness ) to green and then to predominantly purple ( high stiffness ) during cytokinesis . A polar softening ( arrow ) occasionally occurred in M phase . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd brief communications NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 3 JUNE 2001 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 610 Methods Cell culture . NRK fibroblasts ( ATCC ) were cultured in Dulbecco´s Modified Eagle´s Medium ( Biochrom ) supple - mented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ; Biochrom ) , 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ( Biochrom ) and 1 % non - essential amino acids ( Gibco - BRL ) . PtK1 and PtK2 cells ( ATCC ) were cultured in Ham´s F - 12 medium ( Biochrom ) supplemented with 2mM glutamine ( Biochrom ) , 1 % non - essential amino acids ( Gibco ) , 1mM sodium pyruvate ( Sigma ) , 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ( Biochrom ) and 10 % FCS ( Biochrom ) . All cell lines were cultured following standard procedures . Cells were plated in 35mm plastic Petri dishes and cultured in a humidified incubator at 37 (cid:176) C in a 5 % CO 2 air atmosphere . Typically , cells were subcultured at low density , 1 or 2 days before the experiment , and formed a sub - confluent layer . To block cells in metaphase , a 10 - mM nocodazole ( Sigma ) stock solution was prepared in dimethylsulphoxide ( Sigma ) and diluted to 10µM in medium for use . The Petri dishes were imme - diately mounted for AFM and force - mapping experiments with blocked cells started after a 15 - min thermal equilibration . Atomic force microscopy and video microscopy . We used a commercial stand - alone AFM ( Bioscope , Digital Instruments ) combined with an inverted optical microscope ( Axiovert 135TV , Zeiss ) for these studies 11 . To correlate the AFM data off - line with the various mitotic events , the optical image was recorded with a time - lapse video recorder ( TL700 , Panasonic ) in parallel with the AFM data . We used soft silicon nitride cantilevers ( Microlever , ThermoMicroscopes ) that have a measured force constant of 8mNm – 1 ( ref . 19 ) . The pyramidal tip , with an opening angle of 35 (cid:176) , projects 3 m m downwards from the cantilever itself ; and the radius of curvature of that point of the tip that touches the cell is 30 – 50nm . For most of the studies reported here , a limitation was that the scan - line could not be extended over the whole cell as the height of a dividing cell exceeds the range of the z - piezo ( 4 . 5 m m for a 1 . 5 - m m long force curve ) . Thus , the furrow and pole regions could not be studied simultaneously . For the furrow , scan - lines spread roughly from one spindle pole to the other ; the spindle pole was defined as the point where chromosomes focus in anaphase . However , for measurements in the later stages of this project , we employed an AFM instru - ment with improved design . The commercial Bioscope scan head was used only as a detector , and the entire stage was moved in x , y and z by a high precision piezo - electric actuator controlled by a capaci - tive - position sensitive detector ( P - 527 . 3CL , Physik Instruments ) . This instrument had a 20 - µm z - piezo range and permitted furrows and poles to be examined in the same scan . Data acquisition and analysis . The AFM was operated in the force - mapping mode to measure the local , laterally resolved Young’s modulus ( E ) and height of the cell using methods that have been described 20 , 21 . Controlled indentation of the cell cortex provides a measure of its stiffness , and the point of contact of the cantilever tip with the cell gives a measure of its height . The speed of data acquisition is limited mainly by hydrodynamic effects as the cantilever is deflected when it is dragged through the viscous medium 22 . With a typical rate of 10 force curves per second , it takes ~ 13min to record a map of 64 · 64 force curves . Because the length of cell division from metaphase to the end of cleavage was ~ 30min , two - dimensional force - mapping did not provide sufficient time resolution . Therefore , the slow scan axis was disabled to sup - press two - dimensional resolution . In this mode , force curves were continuously recorded along the same line , and it took ~ 6 . 5s to record one line ; the time between subsequent lines was 13s as the retrace motion of the cantilever , although not recorded , took as long . The analysis then yields time sequences of height and elasticity profiles along a single line . All height values recorded with the earlier version of the AFM are relative because , for high sam - ples , with the z - piezo range , the cantilever tip did not reach the substrate . There were pronounced changes in cell height during M - phase of the cell cycle . Therefore , it was necessary to adjust the z - posi - tion of the cantilever with the AFM stepper motor to avoid the z - piezo reaching its limits . The scan - line was positioned with reference to the light microscope image . Displacements of the scan - line due to motion of the cell were corrected by adjusting the lateral offsets of the scanner . Such corrections were made during the retrace motion of the cantilever when no force curve was acquired . However , with the improved design ( Fig . 4 ) , the substrate could always be accessed and no adjustments of the z - position of the cantilever were required during measurements . To calculate Young’s modulus from the force curves , the data were fit with Sneddon’s modification of the Hertz model for the indentation of a completely elastic soft sample by a stiff cone 23 . The Hertz model has been derived for an infinitely thick sample . Data can be fitted if the indentation is small compared with the thickness of the sample . The data were usually analysed in a force range from 250 to 650pN . Such forces , for E values of about 1kPa , resulted in typical indentations of about 500nm , which was small compared with the heights of dividing cells , which are about 10 m m ( the heights were higher than the 6 m m z - scan range of the AFM ) . In this case , the E values were not significantly influ - enced by the underlying stiff substrate 21 . Data were analysed with self - written macros for the software IGOR PRO ( WaveMetrics ) . The angle of incidence between the tip axis and the rounded cell surface did not contribute appre - ciably to the calculated E values . The angles of inclination of the dorsal cell surface with the substra - tum were not as severe as depicted in Fig . 1 because the scale of the ordinate was expanded . Moreover , the key changes in Young’s modulus were measured and compared in regions of zero or very low slope ( < 10 (cid:176) ) . We also find that there is little correlation between calculated stiffness and tip incident angle ( data not shown ) . Confocal microscopy . Cells were stained for F - actin using ~ 3 m gml – 1 rhodamine – phalloidin ( Fluka ) , fixed in fresh 4 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilized with 0 . 3 % Triton - X - 100 and blocked with 2 . 5 % bovine serum albu - min . Specimens were mounted in 50 % glycerol - PBS and examined with a Zeiss LSM confocal micro - scope . RECEIVED 17 JULY 2000 ; REVISED 13 FEBRUARY 2001 ; ACCEPTED 2 APRIL 2001 ; PUBLISHED 14 MAY 2001 . 1 . Glotzer , M . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 815 – 823 ( 1997 ) . 2 . Robinson , D . N . & Spudich , J . A . Trends Cell Biol . 10 , 228 – 237 ( 2000 ) . 3 . Wolf , W . A . , Chew , T . - L . & Chisholm , R . L . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 55 , 108 – 120 ( 1999 ) . 4 . Rappaport , R . Intl Rev . Cytol . 31 , 169 – 213 ( 1971 ) . 5 . Wolpert , L . Intl Rev . Cytol . 10 , 163 – 216 ( 1960 ) . 6 . White , J . G . & Borisy , G . G . J . Theor . Biol . 101 , 289 – 316 ( 1983 ) . 7 . Harris , A . K . NATO ASI Series H 84 , 37 – 66 ( 1994 ) . 8 . Binnig , G . , Quate , C . F . & Gerber , C . Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 , 930 – 933 ( 1986 ) . 9 . Radmacher , M . , Cleveland , J . P . , Fritz , M . , Hansma , H . G . & Hansma , P . K . Biophys . J . 66 , 2159 – 2165 ( 1994 ) . 10 . Radmacher , M . IEEE Eng . Med . Biol . 16 , 47 – 57 ( 1997 ) . 11 . Rotsch , C . , Jacobson , K . & Radmacher , M . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 921 – 926 ( 1999 ) . 12 . Dvorak , J . A . & Nagao , E . Exp . Cell Res . 242 , 69 – 74 ( 1998 ) . 13 . Fishkind , D . J . & Wang , Y . - l . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 837 – 848 ( 1993 ) . 14 . Cao , L . - g . & Wang , Y . - l . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 1905 – 1911 ( 1990 ) . 15 . Sanger , J . M . & Sanger , J . W . Microscopy Res . Techn . 49 , 190 – 201 ( 2000 ) . 16 . Fishkind , D . J . & Wang , Y . - l . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 23 – 31 ( 1995 ) . 17 . Cao , L . - g . & Wang , Y . - l . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 225 – 232 ( 1996 ) . 18 . Burton , K . & Taylor , L . Nature 385 , 450 – 454 ( 1997 ) . 19 . Butt , H . - J . & Jaschke , M . Nanotechnology 6 , 1 – 7 ( 1995 ) . 20 . Domke , J . et al . Colloids and Surfaces B : Biointerfaces 19 , 367 – 379 ( 2000 ) . 21 . Domke , J . & Radmacher , M . Langmuir 14 , 3320 – 3325 ( 1998 ) . 22 . Radmacher , M . , Fritz , M . , Kacher , C . M . , Cleveland , J . P . & Hansma , P . K . Biophys . J . 70 , 556 – 567 ( 1996 ) . 23 . Sneddon , I . N . Int . J . Eng . Sci . 3 , 47 – 57 ( 1965 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank J . Canman , A . Harris and T . Salmon ( University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill ) , Y . Wang ( University of Massachusetts ) , and J . White ( University of Wisconsin ) for advice . We also thank B . Bement ( University of Wisconsin - Madison ) and D . Fishkind ( University of Notre Dame ) for criticism . We thank S . Bolz and T . Gloe ( Ludwig - Maximilians University ) for help with confocal microscopy and A . Kardinal for technical assistance . K . J . also thanks H . Gaub ( Ludwig - Maximilians University ) for hospitality . This work was partially supported by an NIH grant ( to K . J . ) and by the Deutsche Forschungs - meinscraft ( to R . M . and M . R . ) . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K . J . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd