Advanced Review Systems biology of cellular membranes : a convergence with biophysics Morgan Chabanon , 1 Jeanne C . Stachowiak 2 and Padmini Rangamani 1 * Systems biology and systems medicine have played an important role in the last two decades in shaping our understanding of biological processes . While sys - tems biology is synonymous with network maps and ‘ - omics ’ approaches , it is not often associated with mechanical processes . Here , we make the case for con - sidering the mechanical and geometrical aspects of biological membranes as a key step in pushing the frontiers of systems biology of cellular membranes for - ward . We begin by introducing the basic components of cellular membranes , and highlight their dynamical aspects . We then survey the functions of the plasma membrane and the endomembrane system in signaling , and discuss the role and origin of membrane curvature in these diverse cellular processes . We further give an overview of the experimental and modeling approaches to study membrane phenomena . We close with a perspective on the converging futures of systems biology and membrane biophysics , invoking the need to include physical variables such as location and geometry in the study of cellular mem - branes . © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . How to cite this article : WIREs Syst Biol Med 2017 , e01386 . doi : 10 . 1002 / wsbm . 1386 INTRODUCTION S ystems biology , an emerging interdisciplinary ﬁ eld aimed at understanding biological systems holistically , is often associated with network maps of protein – protein interactions , proteomic , genomic , and bioinformatics approaches . 1 – 3 A quick Google search on systems biology leads us to the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) de ﬁ nition , which includes contributions in computational modeling , proteom - ics , bioinformatics , genomics , and even immunology . These efforts have been used successfully to identify potential drug targets and genes related to various diseases . 4 – 6 One common feature of these network and gene maps and their interactions is that they occur in compartmentalized regions within the cell that are separated by a lipid bilayer . Systems biology approaches have made signi ﬁ cant contributions to the different aspects of cellular membrane functions . Lipidomics , the mapping of cellular lipids , heralded the era of ‘ - omics ’ into membrane biology . 7 – 11 Using methods such as liquid chromatography 12 – 14 and mass spectrometry , 15 – 17 researchers have been able to extract lipids from distinct cellular compartments , and characterize and classify them into their speci ﬁ c molecular species . While each extraction and charac - terization method has different strengths and weaknesses , 18 these approaches announced the era of quantitative knowledge of lipids , lipid metabolites , and their role in the metabolome . Coupled with stud - ies that highlighted the role of lipid signaling in health and disease 19 and signaling processes that reg - ulate cellular membranes , 20 – 22 it has become increas - ingly evident that systems biology of cellular membranes has come of age . This progression has also led to increasingly complex dynamical models * Correspondence to : prangamani @ eng . ucsd . edu 1 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , University of California San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology , University of Texas at Austin , Austin , TX , USA Con ﬂ ict of interest : The authors have declared no con ﬂ icts of inter - est for this article . © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 1 of 21 that include compartments to represent the plasma membrane , 23 – 27 calcium ﬂ uxes through the endoplas - mic reticulum ( ER ) membrane , 28 , 29 and signaling at the Golgi membrane . 30 – 32 What then is the future of systems approaches for the study of cellular membranes ? We propose that the next era of systems approaches in cellular membranes stems from combining the existing knowledge base of lipid diversity and function with spatial and mechanical aspects of cellular mem - branes , which impact diverse membrane processes from the assembly of traf ﬁ cking vesicles to the func - tion of organelles and cell invasion by pathogens . In this review , we make the case for an important role played by lipid bilayer mechanics in systems biology . Given the rather broad nature of this undertaking , we present a few important examples of membrane regulation of cellular processes and discuss experimental and modeling methods to study these processes . We propose that membrane curvature is a governing principle of biological function and sug - gest that the mechanics of lipid membranes cannot be neglected . We close with a perspective on the con - verging futures of systems biology and membrane biophysics , invoking the need to include physical variables such as location and geometry in the study of cellular membranes . LIPID BILAYERS AND CELLULAR FUNCTION Lipid membranes are ubiquitous in the cellular environ - ment , and not only mark cellular boundaries , but also separate the organelles from the cellular interior and from one another . Although compartmentalization of FIGURE 1 | The function of cellular membranes is tied closely to their geometry . Membranes are important not only for protecting the cytosolic components but also for organelle function and cytoskeletal remodeling . ( a ) Scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) image of lamellipodia and ﬁ lopodia in Aplysia growth cone ( Reprinted with permission from Ref 33 . Copyright 2015 ASCB ) ; ( b ) Micrographs of clathrin - mediated endocytosis at different stages of budding ( Reprinted with permission from Ref 34 . Copyright 1979 Company of Biologists Ltd . ) ; ( c ) Membrane - bound receptors , G - protein coupled receptors , and receptor tyrosine kinases cause Ras GTPase activation at the plasma membrane and endomembranes ( Reprinted with permission from Ref 35 . Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . ) ; ( d ) Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) images of mitochondrial membrane in amoebae Chaos carolinensis show triply periodic minimal structures ( Reprinted with permission from Ref 36 . Copyright 1998 Springer - Verlag ) ; ( e ) TEM image of a nuclear membrane shaped as a catenoid by the nuclear pore complex ( Reprinted from Ref . 34 , with permission from Worner W . Franke and Ulrich Scheer ) ; ( f ) Three - dimensional ( 3D ) reconstruction from SEM endoplasmic reticulum in an acinar cells of mouse salivary gland , showing stacks of parallel membrane sheets connected by helicoidal ramps . ( Reprinted with permission from Ref 38 . Copyright 2013 Elsevier Inc . ) Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 2 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . cellular features is one of the most recognized roles of the cellular membranes , membranes also perform essential biological functions through signaling , inter - action with the cytoskeleton , and close regulation of organelle activity by modulating their shapes ( Figure 1 ) . Cell membranes also provide substrates for surface reactions in signaling , an important feature that uses the local surface - to - volume ratio to tune the signal strength . 39 – 41 Cellular membranes achieve this wide range of function through a heterogeneous lipid and protein composition and their range of functionality is further enhanced by dynamic rearrangements of lipids through traf ﬁ cking and lipidsynthesis . 42 Dynamic Membrane Composition Although about six nanometers thick , cellular mem - branes are fascinatingly complex in their heterogene - ity ( Figure 2 ) . Phospholipids are the predominant type of lipid found in cellular membranes . In mam - malian cells , lipid membranes are also enriched locally in cholesterol and sphingolipids . Phosphati - dylcholine ( PC ) is one of the key components of cel - lular membranes , often occupying half of the entire phospholipid content . However , lipid distribution varies across the different organelle membranes , with different endomembranes containing different ratios of phospholipid to cholesterol and small amounts of signaling lipids . Membrane composition not only varies across organelles but also varies across organisms , cell types , differentiation and development stages , and in disease states . 43 – 46 A comprehensive review of different membrane lipids , their role , and composition is given in Ref 42 , while a constantly updated database on lipids , lipidomics , and the role of lipids in different diseases can be found in the LIPID MAPS project ( www . lipidmaps . org ) . These resources serve to highlight the complex - ity of cellular membranes , the role of lipids in regu - lating cellular function in health and disease , and the contributions of systems biology approaches to membrane biology . The rich heterogeneous composition of cellular membranes is constantly regulated in a dynamic manner . This dynamic in - plane architecture of the plasma membrane was ﬁ rst discussed in the ‘ ﬂ uid - FIGURE 2 | Biological membranes are complex in both lipid composition and protein inclusion , as illustrated by this schematic of a mammalian plasma membrane . Varying membrane composition can lead to a change in membrane thickness and other mechanical properties , which in turn affect their function . FIGURE 3 | Membrane curvature can be induced by different mechanisms . ( a ) Owing to the tail and head chemistry , lipids can have cylindrical , conic , or reversed conic shapes , therefore inducing curvature when the lipid composition is different between the two lipid layers . ( b ) Large intrinsically curved proteins , such as BAR domain family of proteins , can scaffold and bend the membrane . ( c ) Insertion of amphipathic α - helices in one lea ﬂ et induces membrane curvature . ( d ) Oligomerization of several monomers can scaffold and curve the membrane . ( e ) High surface concentration of membrane - binding proteins produces a steric pressure that can bend the lipid bilayer . WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 3 of 21 mosaic ’ model , 47 where the proteins were thought to randomly diffuse in a sea of lipids . Subsequently , the ‘ lipid - raft ’ hypothesis was proposed by Simons et al . 48 This hypothesis suggested that the lipids organize laterally in the plane of the plasma mem - brane , and this organization can result in functional microdomains that are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids ( Figure 2 ) . While this hypothesis is still the subject of considerable debate nearly 20 years since it was ﬁ rst proposed , it has played an important role in our understanding of the dynamics of lipid membranes . We now acknowledge that lipids undergo dynamic rearrangement in both model and cellular membranes 49 – 57 and are not passive back - ground components but active participants that pro - mote the activity and functionality of membrane proteins . The lateral organization of lipids in cellular membranes can be understood in terms of phase sep - aration in synthetic vesicles . Recent analyses have shown that a synthetic vesicle made of multicompo - nent membranes can phase separate into liquid - ordered and liquid - disordered domains in the presence of cholesterol . 56 The dynamics of phase sep - aration depend on temperature and membrane stress , 54 – 59 and provide a biophysical and thermody - namic interpretation of the raft hypothesis . These studies show that microdomain formation and disso - lution is an inherent part of membrane dynamics . Within cells , however , the dynamics of formation and dissipation of heterogeneities in the plasma mem - brane are driven by several complex inter - related processes such as the compositional variation of the lipids and proteins present in the membrane , curva - ture stresses that can be induced by membrane heter - ogeneity , and the out - of - equilibrium nature of the extracellular environment . Whether these heterogene - ities form signaling corrals or pinning structures to the cytoskeleton , and what , if any , is their function in cells , is still a matter of debate and investigation . Signaling at Cellular Membranes , Geometry , and Mechanics Cellular membranes play a critical role in informa - tion transfer through signal transduction , which serves as a cornerstone of biological function . 37 Some examples of signal transduction at the plasma mem - brane include ligand – receptor binding and the bind - ing of scaffolding molecules and coat proteins to the plasma membrane from the cytoplasm , 21 , 22 , 60 – 62 and regulation of ion channels and pumps , many of which are known to be mechanosensitive . 63 – 68 Canonical signaling through receptor – ligand pathways has been well studied in vitro and in vivo in many model systems . 69 – 73 Recent studies have shown that signal strength and lifetime at the plasma membrane are regulated by receptor levels , availabil - ity of receptors , and ligand accessibility . 74 , 75 Live cell imaging and data analysis using simultaneous detec - tion of the endocytic machinery and cargo have shown that the dynamics of the clathrin - coated pits depend on the cargo , which in turn regulate the for - mation and maturation of the endocytic pits . 76 These studies indicate that the time available for receptor clustering at the plasma membrane and for the initia - tion of productive signaling depends on the interplay between receptor – ligand interaction and the endocy - tic pathway . 76 For example , in EGFR signaling , clathrin - mediated endocytosis is associated predomi - nantly with receptor recycling and sustained signal - ing , whereas clathrin - independent endocytosis controls receptor degradation and signal extinction . 77 Endocytosis also controls the graded response of sig - naling intensity to EGF concentration through com - partmental regulation . 77 Thus , the dynamic response of a signaling pathway at the plasma membrane is intricately tied to the geometry and mechanics of the cellular membranes . Network analyses , mathematical modeling , and other systems approaches to signaling have comple - mented experimental investigations of signal trans - duction in cells . There have been many modeling efforts focused on developing large interaction net - works of proteins for a given process ; 6 , 78 these approaches have helped identify the key players and their relation with one another in the regulation of cellular phenomena . Recent advances in spatiotempo - ral dynamics of signaling activity emphasized the cru - cial role of cell shape , 39 , 41 , 79 showing in particular that local membrane curvature can govern the kinet - ics of biochemical reactions . 39 , 41 , 80 , 81 These studies highlight for instance the effect of cell geometry on the signaling activity of second messengers like cAMP 40 and of kinases such as MAP - kinase . 39 Signaling is not solely limited to the plasma mem - brane ; indeed a large part of cell signaling occurs within the cell at the endomembranes . Using siRNA screens , identi ﬁ ed the kinases and phosphatases involved Farhan et al . 82 in traf ﬁ cking . 82 , 83 In particu - lar , the Raf MEK pathway was shown to regulate Sec16 , which is an upstream regulator of COPII vesicle biogenesis . Growth factor signaling through endo - somes is well - known for the EGFR family of receptors 69 – 71 and dysregulation of endosomal signal - ing is implicated in several diseases . 84 – 86 The siRNA Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 4 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . screening and bioinformatics approaches were also used to identify the signaling networks that regulate the Golgi apparatus and revealed that a large propor - tion of signaling genes , in fact , regulated Golgi archi - tecture . 87 , 88 Another siRNA screen showed a previously unknown link between secretory pathways , actin cytoskeleton reorganization , growth factor sig - naling , and small G - protein regulation . 89 Intracellular signaling also occurs between organelles ; KDEL recep - tors on the Golgi membrane are activated by traf ﬁ c chaperones released from the ER . The binding of chap - erone molecules to the KDEL receptors on the Golgi membranes leads to the activation of the Src family of kinases . 90 – 92 Subsequently , the same group of research - ers showed that the activation of Src kinase was through dynamin 2 , 93 a protein that is implicated in vesiculation at the Golgi . 92 The dynamin family of pro - teins plays an important role in membrane ﬁ ssion in mammalian endocytosis . 60 , 94 Thus , the spatial orches - tration of Src activation through multiple intracellular compartments and its relation to dynamin suggests that signaling at intracellular membranes is closely tied to geometry and mechanical maintenance of the organ - elle equilibrium . Interestingly , over the variety of approaches used to identify the signaling networks and the pro - teins involved in endomembrane signaling , a com - mon thread exists — that is , the signaling proteins seem to closely regulate the secretory pathways and vesicle generation capability , indicating that coupling signaling with geometry and membrane mechanics is the next step toward putting these network maps in their proper biophysical context . Membrane Curvature Generation Not only do membranes serve as platforms for cell signaling , but they also are capable of supporting curvature stresses due to their low bending resistance to external load . On the other hand , cellular mem - branes have high stretching modulus , and membrane area expansion is energetically expensive . 95 Cellular membranes use the curvature generating feature in many different biological functions such as traf ﬁ ck - ing , ﬁ ssion , fusion , and three - dimensional ( 3D ) organization ( e . g . , caveolae ) . 96 The mechanical aspect of membrane organization and conformation has motivated the development of many biophysical models over the years , experimental as well as theo - retical , ranging from lipid to continuum scales . Theo - retical and numerical contributions to the ﬁ eld are reviewed below in the section on Modeling Cellular Membrane Processes . Many biological processes are regulated by membrane – protein interactions . An example that highlights the importance of protein - induced mem - brane bending is clathrin - mediated endocytosis , where a multicomponent protein coat forms to clus - ter cargo and bends the membrane into a budded morphology ( see Figure 1 ( b ) ) . Clathrin assembles into a lattice - like cage on the plasma membrane with the assistance of adaptor proteins that directly bind lipids , cargo proteins , other adaptors , and clathrin itself . 97 , 98 This assembly is generally thought to act as a scaffold that imposes its spontaneous curvature on the underlying membrane . 99 Recent work suggests that other components of the coat can also contribute to membrane bending via scaffolding by F - BAR domains , amphipathic helix insertion into the bilayer , and adaptor protein crowding . 97 , 100 – 103 The contri - butions from each of these membrane bending mechanisms , summarized in Figure 3 , can be com - bined into a single measure of the curvature generat - ing capability of the coat , or spontaneous curvature , with an effective strength that depends on its compo - sition , density , and area coverage . 104 , 105 In addition to bending in response to curvature - inducing proteins , curved membranes can also serve as interfaces that facilitate the binding of curvature - sensing proteins . This relation between protein - curvature generation and curvature sensing can be illustrated by the mechanism of binding of antimicro - bial peptides ( AMPs ) to lipid membranes . AMPs are multifunctional molecules involved in the host defense system , which have been shown to generate negative Gaussian curvature in model bacterial mem - branes . 106 , 107 On the other hand , certain AMPs such as tritrpticin , duramycin , and cinnamycin , bond pref - erentially to highly curved membranes . 108 , 109 These curvature - mediated binding events can be utilized in therapeutic applications , for instance using nanopar - ticles coated with native red blood cell ( RBC ) mem - branes that sequester and neutralize protein toxins in the blood stream . 110 Cytoskeleton Membrane Interactions Cell shape is controlled by the physical properties of the plasma membrane , the biochemical reactions involving membrane components , and the underlying cytoskeleton . 111 – 113 . Upon activation by extracellular ligand binding to receptors in the plasma membrane , multiple signaling pathways containing small GTPases regulate the actin network dynamics and thus cell shape . 27 Actin has long been known to be intimately associated with membranes , and two major forms of actin regulation have been linked to WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 5 of 21 the plasma membrane : ( 1 ) modulation of the actin monomer pool by phosphoinositides ( PIs ) and ( 2 ) modulation of actin assembly factors by membrane - associated small GTPases , membrane - associated proteins , and direct binding of assembly factors to the plasma membrane . PI lipids associate with diverse types of actin - binding proteins , and either inhibit or stimulate their activity . 114 The actin nucleation promotion factors WAVE and WASP facilitate actin polymerization via the Arp2 / 3 complex upon binding PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 lipids , and play important roles in endocytosis . 115 In con - trast , actin - capping protein , the F - actin - severing protein ADF / Co ﬁ lin , and the G - actin - binding protein pro ﬁ lin , are all inhibited by binding to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2114 and upstream signaling networks . 27 Membrane – cytoskeletal interactions also regulate critical biologi - cal processes such as clathrin - mediated endocytosis , where F - BAR proteins recruit and modulate the activ - ity of nucleation - promoting factors for the Arp2 / 3 complex . 116 – 122 These associations regulate WASP activity and myosin contractile activity in yeast and cytoskeleton assembly in endocytic patches . 115 , 123 , 124 Thus , the role of the cytoskeleton cannot be ignored while studying membrane processes and vice versa . EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS FOR THE STUDY OF LIPID BILAYERS The overwhelming diversity , complexity , and variabil - ity of lipid membranes in mammalian cells make the study of their biophysical and biochemical properties particularly challenging . In order to study membranes in relatively simpli ﬁ ed conditions , one can either fol - low a top - down approach , deconstructing the cellular membrane complexity into simpler systems , or adopt a bottom - up approach , building up increasingly com - plex membrane models ( Figure 4 ) . While we are quite far from building arti ﬁ cial cells , the past few decades have been rich in successes in constructing biomimetic model membranes which enable the study of structure , composition , dynamics , and interactions of lipid mem - branes . Here , we review the main membrane systems from a biophysical perspective ; reviews more focused on preparation protocols can be found , for instance , in Ref 125 , while reviews on lipid monolayer systems are available in Refs 126 and 127 . Top - Down Approach Although some membrane chemical and physical properties can be directly studied in living cells , 62 , 128 , 129 an approach that is especially popular in the study of endocytosis from the plasma membrane , 130 , 131 this approach presents several dif ﬁ - culties . First , there is an inherent lack of control of most biological processes that can in ﬂ uence mem - brane behavior . Second , acting on the plasma mem - brane , its inner lea ﬂ et , or endomembranes , is not feasible without altering several other cell functions , and therefore introducing additional doubt about the origin of the measured phenomena . Finally , most cel - lular membranes are highly curved , 132 limiting the use of diffusion measurement such as single - particle tracking , which , with the exception of 3D particle tracking microscopes 133 cannot resolve the plasma membrane folds and is based on the assumption of a ﬂ at cell surface . 134 These dif ﬁ culties can be partially overcome by isolating cellular material to facilitate detailed study . Giant plasma membrane vesicles ( GPMVs ) can be extracted from living cells by inducing chemical bleb - bing . 49 , 135 This system enables the study of the plasma membrane in isolation from the cytoskeleton and organelles . GPMVs have been primary employed to investigate the formation of membranes heteroge - neities such as lipid rafts in membranes of cell - like compositional complexity . 49 , 136 , 137 Interestingly , par - titioning between two ﬂ uid membrane phases in cell - derived GPMVs has been observed at relatively low temperatures between 15 and 25 (cid:1) C , 49 , 50 suggesting that at physiological conditions , cell plasma mem - branes are in the vicinity of a critical point , allowing compositional ﬂ uctuations to maintain heterogene - ities of approximately 20 nm in size . 50 , 138 Alternatively , stable membrane patches origi - nating from cells adhering to a support coated with adhesive proteins can be isolated by detaching the cell from the patch , either by sonication 139 or mechanically disrupting the plasma membrane . 140 , 141 This technique provides direct access to the inner lea ﬂ et and its associated proteins . Moreover , it gives control on the geometry of membrane sheet , allowing the use of surface sensitive techniques to measure dif - fusion properties or lipid – protein interactions . 142 , 143 Bottom - Up Approach to Lipid Bilayer Study An alternative approach to cell - based investigation is the use of reconstituted membrane systems , where many relevant parameters such as concentration , composition , mechanical , or geometrical properties can be controlled with precision . Such reconstituted systems have been particularly successful in studying the mechanical and dynamic properties of lipid bilayers , membrane – protein interactions , and phase separation , as discussed below . Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 6 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . One of the conceptually simplest membrane sys - tems is the supported lipid bilayer ( SLB ) , which con - sists of a single lipid bilayer spread over an hydrophobic solid support , typically glass , mica , or silica . 144 – 146 Variations of this con ﬁ guration include polymer or protein layer between the support and the bilayer , 147 – 149 porous supports to produce suspended membranes , 150 and patterned supports to induce membrane curvature . 51 Supported and suspended lipid bilayers are relatively easy to prepare , and can be used to regulate the chemical and physical environ - ment on both sides of the bilayer . Furthermore , the control on the conformation of the membranes greatly facilitates the use of surface - based methods to measure and manipulate with high resolution its mor - phology ( thickness , area per lipid , and organization ) , composition ( domain , raft , and heterogeneities ) , and dynamics ( ﬂ uidity and diffusivity ) . 151 – 153 SLBs are also a system of choice for the study of actin - membrane interactions . 154 – 158 In order to get closer to a 3D cell geometry , lipid bilayers can be coated over a solid bead instead of a planar surface . 159 One of the most popular assays of this coated bead system is the supported membrane with excess reservoir ( SUPER ) , which allows the study of protein - induced tubulation and ﬁ ssion of negatively charged lipid mix - tures in high - ionic strength conditions . 61 , 160 , 161 In the absence of a solid support , suspended vesicles of sizes ranging from ten nanometers to micrometers can be produced arti ﬁ cially from de ﬁ ned lipid mixture solutions . Thermodynamically , multila - mellar vesicles are more stable that unilamellar vesicles , 162 necessitating the addition of mechanical energy to produce unilamellar vesicles . For instance , large unilamellar vesicles ( LUVs ) — several hundred nanometers in diameter — can be formed by sonica - tion or extrusion , while further high frequency soni - cation can break LUVs into small unilamellar vesicles ( SUVs ) — ten to hundreds nanometers large . SUVs can also be produced by extrusion through ﬁ lters of the desired pore diameter . 163 Giant unilamellar vesi - cles ( GUVs ) , which are around 10 μ m in diameter , are most often produced by electroformation , 164 , 165 although micro ﬂ uidic techniques have recently emerged , allowing a better control on the inner content . 166 – 168 Because they have low curvature , and can be micromanipulated , GUVs offer a convenient platform to probe the physical properties of quasi - ﬂ at membranes . Owing to their micron size , GUVs are particularly well suited for ﬂ uorescence microscopy observations , and mechanical micromanipulation techniques . Early mechanical investigations of lipid vesicles were carried with micropipette aspiration techniques by Evans et al . , 95 , 169 – 174 allowing the measurement of the viscoelastic properties of mem - branes of various lipid compositions . The capability to measure or control membrane tension by micropi - pette aspiration is also useful when combined with other methods . For instance , tube or tether pulling , either with molecular motors , 175 micropipiette , 176 or FIGURE 4 | Model systems for the study of cellular membranes . In the top - down approach , the cellular structural complexity is simpli ﬁ ed to some or one of its parts by extracting membrane components from the cell . In the bottom - up approach on the other hand , increasingly complex membrane systems are built up from synthetic materials . WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 7 of 21 an optical trap 177 can be used to study curvature sen - sitive processes such as lipid sorting or protein bind - ing . 178 , 179 However , a drawback of micropipette aspiration experiments is the heterogeneity of applied membrane tension due to contact with the pipette tip . Alternatively , membrane tension can be modu - lated by varying the osmolarity of the system . In hypotonic conditions ( lower solute concentration outside of the vesicle than inside ) , an osmotic pres - sure proportional to the concentration differential will be established in the vesicle , homogeneously increasing membrane tension according to Laplace law . 59 , 180 , 181 Yet , estimations of osmotically induced membrane tension can only be indirectly deduced from the size variation of the GUV , assuming a knowledge of the resting radius of the GUV . On the other hand , decreasing the volume to area ratio , and therefore lowering membrane tension , either by pro - viding a membrane reservoir , applying hypertonic conditions , 182 or photo - oxidation , 183 produces intri - guing shapes driven by a thermodynamic balance between curvature energy and geometrical constraints . 184 , 185 Combined with ﬂ uorescent probes that have af ﬁ nities to either liquid - ordered or disordered phases , 186 LUVs and GUVs are powerful systems to study the phase behavior of lipid mixtures under var - ious thermodynamic conditions . 52 – 54 Phase diagrams for several composition of ternary mixtures were determined by Veatch and Keller , 55 – 57 emphasizing the importance of the miscibility transition tempera - ture between homogeneous and phase - separated states . 187 Although it is well established that the mis - cibility temperature depends on membrane tension , contradictory observations have been reported depending on the experimental method . While ten - sion induced by micropipette aspiration decreases the miscibility temperature over which the membrane is homogeneous , 58 osmotically tense GUVs favor the formation of domains . 59 , 188 These studies highlight the complexity and often nonintuitive behavior of lipid membranes due to the intricate coupling between their chemical and physical properties . Unilamellar vesicles are also a system of choice for the study of curvature - inducing proteins on lipid membranes . The main mechanisms by which proteins interact with lipid membranes to create curvature are illustrated in Figure 3 , and include scaffolding , asym - metric insertion , clustering , and steric repulsion by crowding . 132 , 189 Typically , GUVs at low membrane tension incubated with suf ﬁ ciently high concentrations of curvature - inducing protein display membrane tubules or invaginations . 190 – 192 Curvature sensing by proteins can be quantitatively measured using microtubules pulled out from GUVs , and simultane - ously monitoring protein binding as a function of the tube radius ( or curvature ) and concentration . 191 , 193 , 194 A step further in complex membrane interac - tion studies is the incorporation of cytoskeletal com - ponents . 195 GUVs are a particularly interesting system for the study of membrane – cytoskeleton inter - action because they resemble cell compartments in size and shape , and can allow an interdependent dynamic between network polymerization and mem - brane shape . Pioneering work on encapsulating actin ﬁ laments inside GUVs showed vesicles exhibiting morphological changes due to actin polymerization , leading to various shapes by varying actin activity , concentrations , and binding af ﬁ nities . 196 – 200 Yet these early studies where limited by the maximum concentration of actin and ions that could be encap - sulated without compromising the integrity of the GUV . A better control on the actin polymerization and binding components can be achieved by generat - ing a network on the outer side of the membrane . 201 – 203 Liu and Fletcher produced den - dritic actin network growth toward the inside of GUVs by activating the Arp2 / 3 complex through N - WASP and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding . Recently , N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 complex were successfully encapsulated with actin ﬁ laments in GUVs , forming an actin shell ( or cortex ) inside the vesicle . 204 – 206 These various membrane – cytoskeleton systems offer interesting platforms to study force generation by actin polymer - ization occurring in cell motility and cytokinesis . Despite the complexity and variety of biological membrane behavior , several membrane systems have been successfully developed to understand the key design principles that govern membrane processes . In the next section , we review and discuss how mathemat - ical and computational modeling has helped this process . MODELING CELLULAR MEMBRANE PROCESSES While the building blocks of biological membranes ( lipids , proteins ) are of the length scale of the mem - brane thickness ( ~ 3 – 6 nm ) , many biological pro - cesses occur simultaneously over several length scales ( ~ 100 nm – μ m ) . 207 When developing membrane mod - els , this length scale separation represents both a challenge and an opportunity . First it is a challenge , because representing all the known biophysical and biochemical interactions in large systems is quite expensive , and often practically impossible from a Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 8 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . computational point of view . 207 , 208 On the other hand , details at the atomic scale of the lipid are rarely required to study relevant membrane phenomena . Therefore , length scale separation gives us the oppor - tunity to deal with homogenized quantities , allowing for the description of the membrane as a continuum surface with average properties . 207 As shown in Figure 5 , these two approaches , namely discrete and continuum approaches , are interdependent , as the quality of the continuum approach relies on the physical relevance of its parameters , which are obtained from small scale analysis . In what follows , we discuss both continuum and discrete modeling approaches of biological membranes , with a particu - lar focus on continuum approaches as they allow for the representation of cellular scale geometries . We conclude by discussing multiscale modeling approaches that attempt to bridge the small and large length scale of cellular membranes . Discrete Membrane Models Atomistic molecular dynamic simulations trace the motion and energy of each atom through an empiri - cal force ﬁ eld . 209 , 210 The biggest advantage of these models is that they output information at the molecu - lar level of the lipid – lipid and lipid – protein interac - tions that are dif ﬁ cult to obtain experimentally . 211 – 214 One of the drawbacks with these approaches , however , is the large number of degrees of freedom that have to be computed , limit - ing atomistic simulations to represent phenomena on nano to microseconds for domains between 10 and 100 nm . 208 , 215 To overcome these limitations , coarse grained ( CG ) methods have been developed . In this approach , the interactions between effective groups of atoms are considered instead of the individual atoms . 216 Such methods , including the MARTINI model 217 and the dissipative particle dynamics , 218 lose some details at the scale of the atom but allow larger computational domains and longer time scales . CG methods have been successful in modeling domain formation by lipid demixing and protein inclusion . 219 , 220 These models are also well suited to study local topological changes of lipid bilayers . For instance , membrane fusion has been modeled using dissipative particle dynamics , 221 , 222 showing that when two fusing membranes are in close proximity , the lipids tilt , splay , and ﬂ ip from one monolayer to another . 221 – 223 Recently , lipid – protein interactions have been successfully studied using CG simulations to evaluate the bending ability of membrane proteins , as well the interrelations between membrane tension and protein – membrane association . 224 , 225 Continuum Membrane Models For biological phenomena spanning over hundreds of nanometers , the discrete modeling approaches dis - cussed above become computationally expensive and impracticable . Continuum models of bilayer mem - branes have been used to study the deformation of membranes and to explain many biological phenom - ena . The most widely used model of lipid bilayers is the Helfrich model , 104 where the energy per unit area depends only on the mean and Gaussian curvatures of the membrane . This model has been extensively applied to study the shape of RBCs 226 , 227 and to explain biological phenomena such as endocytic processes , 228 the formation of membrane tubes , 229 and the shapes of lipid vesicles . 230 – 233 The Helfrich model assumes that the lipids are aligned normal to the membrane surface at all times and that curvatures are of the order of the bilayer thermal wavelength ( ≈ 20 nm ) . This approach captures the changes in membrane shape that occur at length scales larger than the thickness of the bilayer ( ≈ 5 nm ) . FIGURE 5 | Different computational methods developed to study cellular membranes are valid in different length and time scales . Although some methods have attempted to bridge these scales , no unifying multiscale framework currently exists . This provides an opportunity for future model development . WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 9 of 21 Subsequently , models including the area - difference across the lea ﬂ ets 234 – 236 have been developed , pro - viding further detail for curvature generation . Incorporation of in - plane transport , including diffusion and lipid ﬂ ow is an important feature of membrane curvature generation and maintenance . Saffron and Delbruck developed a framework for Brownian motion in biological membranes , which has been the cornerstone of protein diffusion in mem - branes . 237 Yet , the Saffman – Delbruck model is valid for ﬂ at surfaces and breaks down for highly curved membranes . More recently , a few models describing the ﬂ ow and diffusion of lipids and proteins have been proposed . 238 , 239 The role of lipid ﬂ ow in gov - erning the deformation of membranes was analyzed by modeling the membrane as a viscoelastic mate - rial . 234 , 238 These efforts demonstrated how the lipid ﬂ ow velocity is coupled to the changes in membrane shape , and showed that the membrane velocity ﬁ eld satis ﬁ es a Killing vector ﬁ eld on minimal surfaces . 240 We subsequently showed that lipid ﬂ ow plays an important role in governing local membrane tension in response to protein - induced spontaneous curva - ture . 241 The coupling of membrane diffusion and elasticity results in membrane shapes that are either diffusion dominated or curvature dominated . 239 The elastic models used so far to study lipid membranes focus mainly on length scales that are much larger than the thickness of the bilayer . As a result , these models assume that all the lipids are oriented normal to the membrane . 104 There are , however , circumstances under which lipids are not aligned with the surface normal . The lipids are then said to tilt relative to the membrane surface ; this in turn induces a change in membrane thickness , which is simply the projection of the lipid length onto the surface normal . For example , the tilt angle of gel - phase dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine ( DPPC ) was found to be approximately 32 (cid:1) . 242 Even in the liquid phase , lipids can tilt in regions adjacent to protein inclusions . 243 Experimentally observed ripple phases are characterized by oscillatory thickness variations induced by spatially nonuniform tilt . 244 We devel - oped a model for lipid tilt to study how protein inclu - sions could change lipid orientation and showed that for small length scales , lipid orientation and tilt energy dominates the bending energy contribu - tions . 245 , 246 Other models accounting for lipid tilt and the attendant thickness variation have been developed by a number of research groups . 247 – 253 A continuing challenge with the development of these models is the dearth of experimental data at the level of lipid orientation and tilt angles to validate the models and extract the moduli . However , recently some experimental studies have measured the tilt angle using grazing incidence x - ray diffraction 254 , 255 and these will provide valuable inputs for further model development . Multiscale Models The modeling approaches described above are all suited to represent phenomena at a speci ﬁ c length scale . Yet the nature of cellular membranes motivates the need for models able to represent phenomena over multiple length scales . Although the develop - ment of multiscale membrane models is still an emer - ging research ﬁ eld , substantial progress has been made in bridging the atomic and CG scales . For instance , the effective properties of CG elements have been derived from atomistic molecular dynamics for lipids . 256 – 258 Alternatively , the equilibrium structure of the lipid – lipid or lipid – protein systems can be obtained by CG simulations , and then re ﬁ ned to atomistic resolution to allow the simulation of atom interactions and con ﬁ guration . 259 – 261 Such method - ology is particularly useful for computing the dynam - ics of multicomponent lipid mixtures , where the arrangement of lipids happens on a longer time scale than the speci ﬁ c atom interactions . 220 A step further in multiscale resolution has been proposed by cou - pling the CG / Atomistic simulations with reaction modeling using hybrid quantum mechanics / molecular mechanics methods , in order to study the interactions of the cytochrome P450 enzyme with the plasma membrane and its environment . 262 Mesoscale model approaches aim to bridge continuum and coarse grain representations . Among them are the dynamically triangulated membrane model , 263 – 265 and Elastic Membrane 2 ( EM2 ) model . 266 – 268 The main idea behind these models is to discretize the Helfrich energy for continuum mem - branes into pseudomembrane particles that interact through a bending potential . 266 This takes advantage of the CG simulations methodologies to represent the effect of local phenomena on micrometric scales membrane structures . These mesoscale models are particularly well suited to study the in ﬂ uence of curvature - inducing proteins such as BAR proteins on dynamics of membranes . 264 , 265 , 267 – 270 In an attempt to extend the multiscale capabilities of mesoscale models , an inverse ‘ coarse - graining ’ method was pro - posed , to re ﬁ ne the pseudomembrane particles into CG simulations . 271 In this case , the mesoscale EM2 model is run to obtain the equilibrium membrane con ﬁ guration and the local spontaneous curvature . This information at the pseudomembrane nodes is Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 10 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . then converted into CG systems , with one site per lipid and 26 sites per N - BAR protein . Although the modeling approaches presented here are promising steps toward a true multiscale rep - resentation of cellular membranes , we are still quite far from a modeling framework that can encompass the multiscale nature of cellular membranes ( see Figure 5 ) . Indeed , the current coupling of scales is sequential and often unidirectional . One ﬁ rst com - putes an equilibrium con ﬁ guration at one scale , and then re ﬁ nes this equilibrium to obtain local details at a ﬁ ner scale . The limitations of this top - down approach are : ( 1 ) The effective properties at the larger scale are assumed a priori , instead of arising from an upscaling approach . ( 2 ) The current methodologies are heavily computational due to the use of particle - based approaches . Therefore , a theory of lipid bilayers that rigorously upscales the local lipid / protein physics into a continuous mesoscale model with effective proper - ties arising from the local scale would be extremely valuable . Such a model would ease the integration of membrane dynamics into a systemic representation of the cell , enabling its coupling with biological processes occurring away from cellular membranes , such as cytoplasmic transport and extracellular signaling . SOME PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE Cell biology continues to face challenges that emerge from its complexity , especially bridging the whole with the parts . In particular , in systems biology , these challenges are manifested as the need to bridge the gap between model systems and cells . Multidiscipli - nary efforts including physics , mathematics , engineer - ing , and computation coupled with experiments at different system scales will continue to lead the way for us to answer fundamental questions associated with cellular phenomena . Additionally , top - down approaches should be complemented by bottom - up approaches in order to relate the fundamental pro - cesses to their biological counterparts . This is more so the case in the study of cellular membranes , where composition , shape , chemistry , and mechanics are all interconnected . An example of a process that is now well understood through the above mentioned approaches is the formation of micron size lipid het - erogeneities at physiological temperature . 50 , 137 How - ever , many more such approaches are needed to translate the results observed in synthetic systems to cellular systems . Approaches such as network analyses , 24 Boolean methods , 26 compartmental models of signaling , 24 , 25 , 27 , 32 and ‘ - omics ’ approaches 8 – 10 have propelled the era of systems biology in the study of cellular membranes . Alongside , over the last few decades , the biophysics of membranes , through theory , computation , and experi - ment has provided great insight into how mechanics and geometry work in tandem to regulate membrane pro - cesses . These two areas of research have followed paral - lel paths , but recent advances in our understanding of how shape regulates signaling , 40 , 41 how signaling regu - lates shape , 27 , 96 the role of membrane curvature in regu - lating membrane – protein diffusion , 39 , 80 , 81 and how membrane shape and actin ﬂ ow are controlled , 111 – 113 provide a glimpse of the rich future at the intersection of these two ﬁ elds . Therefore , we believe that the future lies in coupling mechanics and geometry of the membrane with biochemistry and temporal dynamics of cellular processes . To that effect , we identify some current inter - disciplinary challenges that serve as opportunities to push the boundaries of systems biology . While by no means exhaustive , this list gives directions for the development of theory , computation , and experimen - tal resources . (cid:129) Although self - assembly features of lipids are well understood in synthetic systems , we still lack knowledge on how the dynamic composi - tion affects signaling and cytoskeletal rearrange - ments in a complex system . (cid:129) The assumption of symmetry in understanding membrane shapes , often used to generate mathe - matically tractable shapes , can sometimes be to our detriment since cells do not require symmetry in their shape for ful ﬁ lling their function . How can we understand complex geometrical aspects of cellular function including asymmetry ? (cid:129) From a biomedical perspective , the interaction of viral proteins and antimicrobial peptides with the lipid membrane needs a further under - standing both in terms of biophysics and on their impact on cellular functions . (cid:129) Signaling needs to be understood in the context of its coupling to the dynamics of protein and lipid uptake by endocytosis , and traf ﬁ cking par - ticularly in endomembranes . (cid:129) The interaction of lipid membranes with the surrounding ﬂ uid and the associated shape changes are complex mathematical problems that invoke ﬁ elds such as differential geometry and the need for new computational methods including advanced image analysis and ﬂ uid - structure interactions . WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 11 of 21 (cid:129) While molecular dynamic simulations and experiments have indicated that lipid orientation is an important order parameter governing mem - brane behavior , there is a need for a truly multi - scale theory that can rigorously upscale lipid scale physics to the curvature - dominant scale . (cid:129) Another important aspect of membrane biology is that the biological processes are inherently out - of - equilibrium . Unlike models for mechani - cal equilibrium that are quite well developed , substantial work needs to be done to study out - of - equilibrium membrane processes . The continued success of systems approaches in cell biology relies on our ability to integrate these different features , and shape the converging futures of systems biology and biophysics of cellular membranes . NOMENCLATURE ADF Actin depolymerizing factor AMP Antimicrobial peptide Arp2 / 3 Actin - Related Proteins 2 / 3 complex BAR Bin amphiphysin rvs domain cAMP Cyclic adenosine monophosphate COPII Phosphatidyl ethanolamine EGF Epidermal growth factor EGFR Epidermal growth factor receptor MAP kinase Mitogen - activated protein kinase MEK Mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase N - WASP Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein PC Phosphatidylclorine PE Phosphatidyl ethanolamine PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate Raf Rapidly Accelerated Fibrosarcoma ( kinase ) siRNA Small interfering ribonucleic acid siRNA Small interfering ribonucleic acid WASP Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein WAVE WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported in part by UCSD Frontiers of Innovation Scholars Program ( FISP ) 3030 award for the year 2015 – 2016 to M . C . , and AFOSR FA9550 - 15 - 1 - 0124 and National Science Foundation ( NSF ) PHY - 1505017 awards to P . R . J . C . S . acknowledges support from the National Institutes of Health through grant GM112065 . The authors are thankful to the anonymous reviewers whose comments were crucial for improving this article . The authors also thank Miriam Bell and Mrunal Seshadri for their critical reading of the manuscript , and to their many colleagues for discussions over the years that have shaped these ideas . Figures 2 , 3 , and 4 used adapted content from Servier Medical Art powerpoint image bank ( http : / / www . servier . com / Powerpoint - image - bank ) . REFERENCES 1 . Kitano H . Systems biology : A brief overview . Science 2002a , 295 : 1662 – 1664 . 2 . Kitano H . Computational systems biology . Nature 2002b , 420 : 206 – 210 . 3 . Ideker T , Galitski T , Hood L . A new approach to decoding life : Systems biology . Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2001 , 2 : 343 – 372 . 4 . Berger SI , Ma ’ ayan A , Iyengar R . Systems pharmacol - ogy of arrhythmias . Sci Signal 2010 , 3 : ra30 . 5 . Berger SI , Iyengar R . Role of systems pharmacology in understanding drug adverse events . WIREs Syst Biol Med 2011 , 3 : 129 – 135 . 6 . Ma ’ ayan A , Jenkins SL , Neves S , Hasseldine A , Grace E , Dubin - Thaler B , Eungdamrong NJ , Weng G , Ram PT , Rice JJ , et al . Formation of regulatory patterns during signal propagation in a mammalian cellular net - work . Science 2005 , 309 : 1078 – 1083 . 7 . Dennis E , Alex Brown H , Deems R , Glass C , Merrill A Jr , Murphy R , Raetz C , Shaw W , Subramaniam S , Russell D , et al . The lipid maps approach to lipidomics . In : Feng L , Prestwich GD , eds . Functional Lipidomics . CRC Press ; 2005 , 1 – 16 , ISBN978 - 1 - 57444 - 467 - 4 . 8 . Dennis EA . Lipidomics joins the omics evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2009 , 106 : 2089 – 2090 . Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 12 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 9 . Van Meer G . Cellular lipidomics . EMBO ’ J 2005 , 24 : 3159 – 3165 . 10 . Wenk MR . The emerging ﬁ eld of lipidomics . Nat Rev Drug Discov 2005 , 4 : 594 – 610 . 11 . Schmelzer K , Fahy E , Subramaniam S , Dennis EA . The lipid maps initiative in lipidomics . In : Alex Brown H , ed . Lipidomics and Bioactive Lipids : Mass - Spectrome - try – Based , Lipid Analysis , vol . 432 . San Diego , CA : Academic Press ; 2007 , 171 – 183 . 12 . Christie WW . Rapid separation and quantication of lipid classes by high performance liquid chromatogra - phy and mass ( light - scattering ) detection . J ’ Lipid Res 1985 , 26 : 507 – 512 . 13 . Yamamoto Y , Brodsky MH , Baker JC , Ames BN . Detection and characterization of lipid hydroperoxides at picomole levels by high - performance liquid chroma - tography . Anal Biochem 1987 , 160 : 7 – 13 . 14 . Bielawski J , Szulc ZM , Hannun YA , Bielawska A . Simultaneous quantitative analysis of bioactive sphin - golipids by high - performance liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry . Methods 2006 , 39 : 82 – 91 . 15 . Brügger B , Erben G , Sandhoff R , Wieland FT , Lehmann WD . Quantitative analysis of biological membrane lipids at the low picomole level by nano - electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry . Proc Natl Acad Sci 1997 , 94 : 2339 – 2344 . 16 . Watson AD , Leitinger N , Navab M , Faull KF , Hörkkö S , Witztum JL , Palinski W , Schwenke D , Salomon RG , Sha W , et al . Structural identi ﬁ cation by mass spec - trometry of oxidized phospholipids in minimally oxi - dized low density lipoprotein that induce monocyte / endothelial interactions and evidence for their presence in vivo . J ’ Biol Chem 1997 , 272 : 13597 – 13607 . 17 . Schiller J , Arnhold J , Benard S , Müller M , Reichl S , Arnold K . Lipid analysis by matrix - assisted laser desorption and ionization mass spectrometry : a meth - odological approach . Anal Biochem 1999 , 267 : 46 – 56 . 18 . Peterson BL , Cummings BS . Cummings . A review of chromatographic methods for the assessment of phos - pholipids in biological samples . Biomed Chromatogr 2006 , 20 : 227 – 243 . 19 . Wymann MP , Schneiter R . Lipid signalling in disease . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008 , 9 : 162 – 176 . 20 . Schlessinger J . Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Cell 2000 , 103 : 211 – 225 . 21 . Revankar CM , Cimino DF , Sklar LA , Arterburn JB , Prossnitz ER . A transmembrane intracellular estrogen receptor mediates rapid cell signaling . Science 2005 , 307 : 1625 – 1630 . 22 . Cho W , Stahelin RV . Membrane - protein interactions in cell signaling and membrane traf ﬁ cking Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2005 , 34 : 119 – 151 . 23 . Bray D . Signaling Complexes : Biophysical constraints on intracellular communication . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 1998 , 27 : 59 – 75 . 24 . Kholodenko BN . Cell - signalling dynamics in time and space . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 , 7 : 165 – 176 . 25 . Eungdamrong NJ , Iyengar R . Compartment - Speci ﬁ c feedback loop and regulated tracking can result in sus - tained activation of ras at the golgi . Biophys J 2007 , 92 : 808 – 815 . 26 . Agnati LF , Guidolin D , Leo G , Fuxe K . A boolean net - work modelling of receptor mosaics relevance of topol - ogy and cooperativity . J ’ Neural Transm 2007 , 114 : 77 – 92 . 27 . Rangamani P , Fardin MA , Xiong Y , Lipshtat A , Rossier O , Sheetz M , Iyengar R . Signaling network triggers and membrane physical properties control the actin cytoskeleton - driven isotropic phase of cell spreading . Biophys J 2011 , 100 : 845 – 857 . 28 . Clapham DE . Calcium signaling . Cell 2007 , 131 : 1047 – 1058 . 29 . Rangamani P , Levy MG , Khan S , Oster G . Paradoxical signaling regulates structural plasticity in dendritic spines . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2016 , 113 : E5298 – E5307 . 30 . Markevich NI , Moehren G , Demin OV , Kiyatkin A , Hoek JB , Kholodenko BN . Signal processing at the Ras circuit : what shapes Ras activation patterns ? Syst Biol 2004 , 1 : 104 – 113 . 31 . Mayinger P . Signaling at the Golgi . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 , 3 : a005314 . 32 . Prior IA , Hancock JF . Ras tra cking , localization and compartmentalized signalling . Semin Cell Dev Biol 2012 , 23 : 145 – 153 . 33 . He Y , Ren Y , Wu B , Decourt B , Lee AC , Taylor A , Suter DM . Src and cortactin promote lamellipodia pro - trusion and lopodia formation and stability in growth cones . Mol Biol Cell 2015 , 26 : 3229 – 3244 . 34 . Perry MM , Gilbert AB . Yolk transport in the ovarian follicle of the hen ( Gallus domesticus ) : lipoprotein - like particles at the periphery of the oocyte in the rapid growth phase . J ’ Cell Sci 1979 , 39 : 257 – 272 . 35 . Chenette EJ , Der CJ , Begley TP . Ras Oncoproteins in Wiley Encyclopedia of Chemical Biology . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . ; 2007 . ISBN 978 - 0 - 470 - 04867 - 2 36 . Deng Y , Mieczkowski M . Three - dimensional periodic cubic membrane structure in the mitochondria of amoebaeChaos carolinensis . Protoplasma 1998 , 203 : 16 – 25 . 37 . Alberts B , Bray D , Hopkin K , Johnson A , Lewis J , Raff M , Roberts K , Walter P . Essential Cell Biology . Garland Science : New York , NY , 2013 . 38 . Terasaki M , Shemesh T , Kasthuri N , Klemm RW , Schalek R , Hayworth KJ , Hand AR , Yankova M , Huber G , Lichtman JW , et al . Stacked endoplasmic reticulum sheets are connected by helicoidal membrane motifs . Cell 2013 , 154 : 285 – 296 . 39 . Rangamani P , Lipshtat A , Azeloglu E , Calizo R , Hu M , Ghassemi S , Hone J , Scarlata S , Neves S , Iyengar WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 13 of 21 R . Decoding information in cell shape . Cell 2013a , 154 : 1356 – 1369 . 40 . Neves SR , Tsokas P , Sarkar A , Grace EA , Rangamani P , Taubenfeld SM , Alberini CM , Schaff JC , Blitzer RD , Moraru II , et al . Cell shape and negative links in regulatory motifs together control spatial information ow in signaling networks . Cell 2008 , 133 : 666 – 680 . 41 . Thalmeier D , Halatek J , Frey E . Geometry - induced protein pattern formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2016 , 113 : 548 – 553 . 42 . Van Meer G , Voelker DR , Feigenson GW . Membrane lipids : where they are and how they behave . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008 , 9 : 112 – 124 . 43 . Nicolson GL . Cell membrane ﬂ uid – mosaic structure and cancer metastasis . Cancer Res 2015 , 75 : 1169 – 1176 . 44 . Escribá PV , Nicolson GL . Membrane structure and function : relevance of lipid and protein structures in cellular physiology , pathology and therapy . Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 , 1838 : 1449 – 1450 . 45 . Dallner G , Siekevitz P , Palade GE . Biogenesis of endo - plasmic reticulum membranes I . Structural and chemi - cal di erentiation in developing rat hepatocyte . J ’ Cell Biol 1966 , 30 : 73 – 96 . 46 . Kolega J , Manabe M , Sun T - T . Basement membrane heterogeneity and variation in corneal epithelial di erentiation . Differentiation 1989 , 42 : 54 – 63 . 47 . Singer SJ , Nicolson GL . The ﬂ uid mosaic model of the structure of cell membranes . Science 1972 , 175 : 720 – 731 . 48 . Simons K , Ikonen E . Functional rafts in cell mem - branes . Nature 1997 , 387 : 569 – 572 . 49 . Baumgart T , Hammond AT , Sengupta P , Hess ST , Holowka DA , Baird BA , Webb WW . Large - scale ﬂ uid / ﬂ uid phase separation of proteins and lipids in giant plasma membrane vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2007a , 104 : 3165 – 3170 . 50 . Veatch SL , Cicuta P , Sengupta P , Honerkamp - Smith A , Holowka D , Baird B . Critical ﬂ uctuations in plasma membrane vesicles . ACS Chem Biol 2008 , 3 : 287 – 293 . 51 . Parthasarathy R , Yu C - h , Groves JT . Curvature - modulated phase separation in lipid bilayer membranes . Langmuir 2006 , 22 : 5095 – 5099 . 52 . Korlach J , Schwille P , Webb WW , Feigenson GW . Characterization of lipid bilayer phases by confocal microscopy and ﬂ uorescence correlation spectroscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999 , 96 : 8461 – 8466 . 53 . Baumgart T , Hess ST , Webb WW . Imaging coexisting ﬂ uid domains in biomem - brane models coupling cur - vature and line tension . Nature 2003 , 425 : 821 – 824 . 54 . Oglecka K , Sanborn J , Parikh AN , Kraut RS . Osmotic gradients induce bio - reminiscent morphological trans - formations in giant unilamellar vesicles . Front Physiol 2012 , 3 : 120 . 55 . Veatch SL , Keller SL . Organization in lipid membranes containing cholesterol . Phys Rev Lett 2002 , 89 : 268101 . 56 . Veatch SL , Keller SL . Separation of liquid phases in giant vesicles of ternary mixtures of phospholipids and cholesterol . Biophys J 2003 , 85 : 3074 – 3083 . 57 . Veatch SL , Keller SL . Miscibility phase diagrams of giant vesicles containing sphingomyelin . Phys Rev Lett 2005 , 94 : 148101 . 58 . Portet T , Gordon SE , Keller SL . Increasing membrane tension decreases miscibility temperatures : an experi - mental demonstration via micropipette aspiration . Bio - phys J 2012 , 103 : L35 – L37 . 59 . Oglecka K , Rangamani P , Liedberg B , Kraut RS , Parikh AN . Oscillatory phase separation in giant lipid vesicles induced by transmembrane osmotic di eren - tials . eLife 2014 , 3 : e03695 . 60 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Yarar D , Jaqaman K , Jaqaman H , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Cargo and dynamin regu - late clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol 2009 , 7 : e1000057 . 61 . Liu Y - W , Neumann S , Ramachandran R , Ferguson SM , Pucadyil TJ , Schmid SL . Differential curvature sensing and generating activities of dynamin isoforms provide opportunities for tissue - speci ﬁ c regulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2011 , 108 : E234 . 62 . Sarabipour S , Ballmer - Hofer K , Hristova K . VEGFR - 2 conformational switch in response to ligand binding . eLife 2016 , 5 : e13876 . 63 . Wood JM . Osmosensing by Bacteria : signals and mem - brane - based sensors . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1999 , 63 : 230 – 262 . 64 . Bass RB , Strop P , Barclay M , Rees DC . Crystal struc - ture of Escherichia coli MscS , a voltage - modulated and mechanosensitive channel . Science 2002 , 298 : 1582 – 1587 . 65 . Jiang Y , Lee A , Chen J , Ruta V , Cadene M , Chait BT , MacKinnon R . X - ray structure of a voltage - dependent K + channel . Nature 2003 , 423 : 33 – 41 . 66 . Schmidt D , del Mármol J , MacKinnon R . Mechanistic basis for low threshold mechanosensitivity in voltage - dependent K + channels . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2012 , 109 : 10352 – 10357 . 67 . Anishkin A , Loukin SH , Teng J , Kung C . Feeling the hidden mechanical forces in lipid bilayer is an original sense . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2014 , 111 : 7898 – 7905 . 68 . Ge J , Li W , Zhao Q , Li N , Chen M , Zhi P , Li R , Gao N , Xiao B , Yang M . Architecture of the mammalian mechanosensitive Piezo1 channel . Nature 2015 , 527 : 64 – 69 . 69 . Daub H , Ulrich Weiss F , Wallasch C , Ullrich A . Role of transactivation of the EGF receptor in signalling by G - protein - coupled receptors . Nature 1996 , 379 : 557 – 560 . Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 14 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 70 . Bhola N , Grandis J . Crosstalk between G - protein - coupled receptors and epidermal growth factor recep - tor in cancer . Front Biosci 2008 , 13 : 1857 – 1865 . 71 . Rosenbaum DM , Rasmussen SGF , Kobilka BK . The structure and function of G - protein - coupled receptors . Nature 2009 , 459 : 356 – 363 . 72 . Groves JT , Kuriyan J . Molecular mechanisms in signal transduction at the membrane . Nat Struct Mol Biol 2010 , 17 : 659 – 665 . 73 . Blenis J . Signal transduction via the map kinases : pro - ceed at your own risk . Proc Natl Acad Sci 1993 , 90 : 5889 – 5892 . 74 . Di Fiore PP , De Camilli P . Endocytosis and signaling : an inseparable partnership . Cell 2001 , 106 : 1 – 4 . 75 . Platta HW , Stenmark H . Endocytosis and signaling . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2011 , 23 : 393 – 403 . 76 . Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG . A pathway for asso - ciation of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endo - cytic internalization . Cell 2003 , 115 : 475 – 487 . 77 . Villaseñor R , Nonaka H , Del Conte - Zerial P , Kalaidzidis Y , Zerial M . Regulation of EGFR signal transduction by analogue - to - digital conversion in endosomes . Elife 2015 , 4 : e06156 . 78 . Zaidel - Bar R , Itzkovitz S , Ma ’ ayan A , Iyengar R , Geiger B . Functional atlas of the integrin adhesome . Nat Cell Biol 2007 , 9 : 858 – 867 . 79 . Neves SR . Obtaining and estimating kinetic parameters from the literature . Sci Signal 2011 , 4 : tr8 . 80 . Meyers J , Craig J , Odde DJ . Potential for control of signaling pathways via cell size and shape . Curr Biol 2006 , 16 : 1685 – 1693 . 81 . Zieske K , Schwille P . Reconstitution of self - organizing protein gradients as spatial cues in cell - free systems . Elife 2014 , 3 : e03949 . 82 . Farhan H , Wendeler MW , Mitrovic S , Fava E , Silberberg Y , Sharan R , Zerial M , Hauri H - P . MAPK signaling to the early secretory pathway revealed by kinase / phosphatase functional screening . J ’ Cell Biol 2010 , 189 : 997 – 1011 . 83 . Farhan H , Rabouille C . Signalling to and from the secretory pathway . J ’ Cell Sci 2011 , 124 : 171 – 180 . 84 . Bareford LM , Swaan PW . Endocytic mechanisms for targeted drug delivery . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2007 , 59 : 748 – 758 . 85 . Bronfman FC , Escudero CA , Weis J , Kruttgen A . Endosomal trans - port of neurotrophins : roles in signal - ing and neurodegenerative diseases . Dev Neurobiol 2007 , 67 : 1183 – 1203 . 86 . Saksena S , Emr SD . ESCRTs and human disease . Bio - chem Soc Trans 2009 , 37 : 167 – 172 . 87 . Chia J , Goh G , Racine V , Ng S , Kumar P , Bard F . RNAi screening reveals a large signaling network con - trolling the Golgi apparatus in human cells . Mol Syst Biol 2012 , 8 : 629 . 88 . Cancino J , Luini A . Signaling circuits on the Golgi complex . Traf ﬁ c 2013 , 14 : 121 – 134 . 89 . Simpson JC , Joggerst B , Laketa V , Verissimo F , Cetin C , Er ﬂ e H , Bexiga MG , Singan VR , Hériché J - K , Neumann B , et al . Genome - wide RNAi screening identi es human proteins with a regulatory function in the early secretory pathway . Nat Cell Biol 2012 , 14 : 764 – 774 . 90 . Pulvirenti T , Giannotta M , Capestrano M , Capitani M , Pisanu A , Polishchuk RS , Pietro ES , Beznoussenko GV , Mironov AA , Turacchio G , et al . A traf ﬁ c - activated Golgi - based signalling circuit coordinates the secretory pathway . Nat Cell Biol 2008 , 10 : 912 – 922 . 91 . Sallese M , Giannotta M , Luini A . Coordination of the secretory compartments via inter - organelle signalling . Semin Cell Dev Biol 2009 , 20 : 801 – 809 . 92 . Luini A , Parashuraman S . Signaling at the Golgi : sen - sing and controlling the membrane uxes . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2016 , 39 : 37 – 42 . 93 . Weller SG , Capitani M , Cao H , Micaroni M , Luini A , Sallese M , McNiven MA . Src kinase regulates the integrity and function of the Golgi apparatus via acti - vation of dynamin 2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2010 , 107 : 5863 – 5868 . 94 . Bashkirov PV , Akimov SA , Evseev AI , Schmid SL , Zimmerberg J , Frolov VA . GTPase cycle of dynamin is coupled to membrane squeeze and release , leading to spontaneous ﬁ ssion . Cell 2008 , 135 : 1276 – 1286 . 95 . Rawicz W , Olbrich KC , McIntosh T , Needham D , Evans E . Effect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers . Biophys J 2000 , 79 : 328 – 339 . 96 . Zimmerberg J , Kozlov MM . How proteins produce cellular membrane curvature . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 , 7 : 9 – 19 . 97 . Kirchhausen T , Owen D , Harrison SC . Molecular structure , function , and dynamics of clathrin - mediated membrane traf ﬁ c . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 , 6 : a016725 . 98 . McMahon HT , Boucrot E . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis . Nature reviews . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2011 , 12 : 517 – 533 . 99 . Dannhauser P , Ungewickell E . Reconstitution of cla - thrin - coated bud and vesicle formation with minimal components . Nat Cell Biol 2012 , 14 : 634 – 639 . 100 . Ford M , Mills I , Peter BJ , Vallis Y , Praefcke GJK , Evans PR , McMahon HT . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 2002 , 419 : 361 – 366 . 101 . Stachowiak J , Schmid E , Ryan C , Ann HS , Sasaki D , Sherman M , Geissler P , Fletcher D , Hayden C . Mem - brane bending by protein - protein crowding . Nat Cell Biol 2012 , 14 : 944 – 949 . WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 15 of 21 102 . Stachowiak J , Brodsky F , Miller E . A cost - bene ﬁ t analysis of the physical mechanisms of membrane curvature . Nat Cell Biol 2013 , 15 : 1019 – 1027 . 103 . Busch DJ , Houser JR , Hayden CC , Sherman MB , Lafer EM , Stachowiak JC . Intrinsically disordered proteins drive membrane curvature . Nat Commun 2015 , 6 : 7875 . 104 . Helfrich W . Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments . Z ’ Naturforsc 1973 , 28 : 693 – 703 . 105 . Lipowsky R . Spontaneous tubulation of membranes and vesicles reveals membrane tension generated by spontaneous curvature . Faraday Discuss 2013 , 161 : 305 – 331 . 106 . Schmidt N , Mishra A , Lai GH , Wong GC . Arginine - rich cell - penetrating peptides . FEBS ’ Lett 2010 , 584 : 1806 – 1813 . 107 . Schmidt NW , Wong GCL . Antimicrobial peptides and induced membrane curva - ture : geometry , coordi - nation chemistry , and molecular engineering . Curr Opin Solid State Mater Sci 2013 , 17 : 151 – 163 . 108 . Iwamoto K , Hayakawa T , Murate M , Makino A , Ito K , Fujisawa T , Kobayashi T . curvature - dependent rec - ognition of ethanolamine phospho - lipids by duramy - cin and cinnamycin . Biophys J 2007 , 93 : 1608 – 1619 . 109 . Bozelli JC Jr , Sasahara ET , Pinto MRS , Nakaie CR , Schreier S . Effect of head group and curvature on binding of the antimicrobial peptide tritrpticin to lipid membranes . Chem Phys Lipids 2012 , 165 : 365 – 373 . 110 . Fang RH , Luk BT , Hu C - MJ , Zhang L . Engineered nanoparticles mimicking cell membranes for toxin neutralization . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2015 , 90 : 69 – xxxx . 111 . Dubin - Thaler B , Giannone G , Dobereiner H , Sheetz M . Nanometer analysis of cell spreading on matrix - coated surfaces reveals two distinct cell states and STEPs . Biophys J 2004 , 86 : 1794 – 1806 . 112 . Dubin - Thaler B , Hofman J , Cai Y , Xenias H , Spielman I , Shneidman A , David L , Dobereiner H , Wiggins C , Sheetz M . Quantication of cell edge velo - cities and traction forces reveals distinct motility modules during cell spreading . PLoS One 2008 , 3 : e3735 . 113 . Xiong Y , Rangamani P , Fardin M , Lipshtat A , Dubin - Thaler B , Rossier O , Sheetz M , Iyengar R . Mechanisms controlling cell size and shape during isotropic cell spreading . Biophys J 2010 , 98 : 2136 – 2146 . 114 . Saarikangas J , Zhao H , Lappalainen P . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton - plasma membrane interplay by phosphoinositides . Physiol Rev 2010 , 90 : 259 – 289 . 115 . Sun Y , Martin AC , Drubin DG . Endocytic internali - zation in budding yeast requires coordinated actin nucleation and myosin motor activity . Dev Cell 2006 , 11 : 33 – 46 . 116 . Kamioka Y , Fukuhara S , Sawa H , Nagashima K , Masuda M , Matsuda M , Mochizuki N . A novel dynamin - associating molecule , formin - binding pro - tein 17 , induces tubular membrane invaginations and participates in endocytosis . J ’ Biol Chem 2004 , 279 : 40091 – 40099 . 117 . Krauss M , Haucke V . Shaping membranes for endo - cytosis . In Reviews of Physiology , Biochemistry and Pharmacology , vol . 161 . Springer ; 2009 , 45 – 66 . 118 . Tsujita K , Suetsugu S , Sasaki N , Furutani M , Oikawa T , Takenawa T . Coordination between the actin cyto - skeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of pch proteins is involved in endocytosis . J ’ Cell Biol 2006 , 172 : 269 – 279 . 119 . Takano K , Toyooka K , Suetsugu S . Efc / f - bar proteins and the n - wasp – wip complex induce membrane cur - vature - dependent actin polymerization . EMBO ’ J 2008 , 27 : 2817 – 2828 . 120 . Henne WM , Boucrot E , Meinecke M , Evergren E , Vallis Y , Mittal R , McMahon HT . Fcho proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 2010 , 328 : 1281 – 1284 . 121 . Roberts - Galbraith RH , Gould KL . Setting the f - bar : functions and regulation of the f - bar protein family Cell Cycle 2010 , 9 : 4091 – 4097 . 122 . Wu M , Huang B , Graham M , Raimondi A , Heuser JE , Zhuang X , De Camilli P . Coupling between cla - thrin - dependent endocytic budding and f - bar - depend - ent tubulation in a cell - free system . . Nat Cell Biol 2010 , 12 : 902 – 908 . 123 . Lewellyn EB , Pedersen RT , Hong J , Lu R , Morrison HM , Drubin DG . An engineered minimal wasp - myosin fusion protein reveals essential functions for endocy - tosis . Dev Cell 2015 , 35 : 281 – 294 . 124 . Liu J , Sun Y , Drubin DG , Oster GF . The mechno - chemistry of endocytosis . PLoS Biol 2009 , 7 : e1000204 . 125 . Pomorski TG , Nylander T , Cárdenas M . Model cell membranes : dis - cerning lipid and protein contribu - tions in shaping the cell . Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2014 , 205 : 207 – 220 . 126 . Brezesinski G , Möhwald H . Langmuir monolayers to study interactions at model membrane surfaces . Adv Colloid Interface Sci , 100 – 102 : 563 – 584 , 2003 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0001 - 8686 ( 02 ) 00071 - 4 . 127 . Oliveira ON Jr , Pavinatto FJ , Balogh DT . In : Bardo - sova M , Wagner T , eds . Nanomaterials and Nanoarchitectures . NATO Science for Peace and Security Series C : Environmental Security . Dordrecht : Springer ; 2015 , 301 – 343 . 128 . Slaughter BD , Unruh JR , Das A , Smith SE , Rubinstein B , Li R . Non - uniform membrane diffusion enables steady - state cell polarization via vesicular traf ﬁ cking . Nat Commun 2013 , 4 : 1380 . Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 16 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 129 . López - Duarte I , Vu TT , Izquierdo MA , Bull JA , Kuimova MK . A molecular rotor for measuring vis - cosity in plasma membranes of live cells . Chem Com - mun 2014 , 50 : 5282 – 5284 . 130 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 2004 , 118 : 591 – 605 . 131 . Aguet F , Antonescu CN , Mettlen M , Schmid SL , Danuser G . Advances in analysis of low signal - to - noise images link dynamin and ap2 to the functions of an endocytic checkpoint . Dev Cell 2013 , 26 : 279 – 291 . 132 . Jarsch IK , Daste F , Gallop JL . Membrane curvature in cell biology : an integration of molecular mechan - isms . J ’ Cell Biol 2016 , 214 : 375 – 387 . 133 . Welsher K , Yang H . Multi - resolution 3D visualiza - tion of the early stages of cellular uptake of peptide - coated nanoparticles . Nat Nanotechnol 2014 , 9 : 198 – 203 . 134 . Adler J , Shevchuk AI , Novak P , Korchev YE , Parmryd I . Plasma membrane topography and inter - pretation of single - particle tracks . Nat Methods 2010 , 7 : 170 – 171 . 135 . Keller H , Rentsch P , Hagmann J . Di erences in corti - cal actin structure and dynamics document that di erent types of blebs are formed by distinct mechan - isms . Exp Cell Res 2002 , 277 : 161 – 172 . 136 . Levental I , By ﬁ eld FJ , Chowdhury P , Gai F , Baumgart T , Janmey PA . Cholesterol - dependent phase separation in cell - derived giant plasma - membrane vesicles . Bio - chem J 2009 , 424 : 163 – 167 . 137 . Sezgin E , Levental I , Grzybek M , Schwarzmann G , Mueller V , Honigmann A , Belov VN , Eggeling C , Coskun Ü , Simons K , et al . Partitioning , diffusion , and ligand binding of raft lipid analogs in model and cellular plasma membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 , 1818 : 1777 – 1784 . 138 . Machta BB , Papanikolaou S , Sethna JP , Veatch SL . Minimal model of plasma membrane heterogeneity requires coupling cortical actin to criticality . Biophys J 2011 , 100 : 1668 – 1677 . 139 . Drees F , Reilein A , Nelson W . In : Guan J - L , ed . Cell migration . Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 294 . Humana Press ; 2005 , 303 – 320 , ISBN 978 - 1 - 58829 - 382 - 4 . 140 . Perez J - B , Martinez KL , Segura J - M , Vogel H . Sup - ported cell - membrane sheets for functional ﬂ uores - cence imaging of membrane proteins . Adv Funct Mater 2006 , 16 : 306 – 312 . 141 . Danelon C , Perez J - B , Santschi C , Brugger J , Vogel H . Cell Membranes suspended across nanoaperture Arrays . Langmuir 2006 , 22 : 22 – 25 . 142 . Pace H , Simonsson Nyström L , Gunnarsson A , Eck E , Monson C , Geschwindner S , Snijder A , Höök F . Preserved transmembrane protein mobil - ity in polymersupported lipid bilayers derived from cell membranes . Anal Chem 2015 , 87 : 9194 – 9203 . 143 . Richards MJ , Hsia C - Y , Singh RR , Haider H , Kumpf J , Kawate T , Daniel S . Membrane protein mobility and orientation preserved in supported bilayers cre - ated directly from cell plasma membrane blebs . Lang - muir 2016 , 32 : 2963 – 2974 . 144 . Sackmann E . Supported Membranes : scienti ﬁ c and practical applications . Science 1996 , 271 : 43 – 48 . 145 . Richter RP , Bérat R , Brisson AR . Formation of solid - supported lipid bilayers : an integrated view . Lang - muir 2006 , 22 : 3497 – 3505 . 146 . Reimhult E , Baumann MK , Kaufmann S , Kumar K , Spycher PR . Advances in nanopatterned and nanos - tructured supported lipid membranes and their appli - cations . Biotechnol Genet Eng Rev 2010 , 27 : 185 – 216 . 147 . Sackmann E , Tanaka M . Supported membranes on soft polymer cushions : fabrication , characterization and applications . Trends Biotechnol 2000 , 18 : 58 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 7799 ( 99 ) 01412 - 2 . 148 . Subramaniam AB , Guidotti G , Manoharan VN , Stone HA . Glycans pattern the phase behaviour of lipid membranes . Nat Mater 2013 , 12 : 128 – 133 . 149 . Rossi C , Doumiati S , Lazzarelli C , Davi M , Meddar F , Ladant D , Chopineau J . A tethered bilayer assembled on top of immobilized calmodulin to mimic cellular compartmentalization . PLoS One 2011 , 6 : e19101 . 150 . Simon A , Girard - Egrot A , Sauter F , Pudda C , Picollet D ’ Hahan N , Blum L , Chatelain F , Fuchs A . Forma - tion and stability of a suspended biomimetic lipid bilayer on silicon submicrometer - sized pores . J ’ Col - loid Interface Sci 2007 , 308 : 337 – 343 . 151 . Crane J , Tamm L . In : Dopico A , ed . ’ Methods in Membrane Lipids . Methods in Molecular Biology TM , vol . 400 . Humana Press ; 2007 , 481 – 488 , ISBN978 - 1 - 58829 - 662 - 7 . 152 . Ries J , Chiantia S , Schwille P . Accurate Determina - tion of membrane dynamics with Line - Scan FCS . Bio - phys J 2009 , 96 : 1999 – 2008 . 153 . El ﬁ ck APD , Downes AR , Mouras R . Development of tip - enhanced optical spectroscopy for biological applications : A review . Anal Bioanal Chem 2009 , 396 : 45 – 52 . 154 . Barfoot RJ , Sheikh KH , Johnson BRG , Colyer J , Miles RE , Jeuken LJC , Bushby RJ , Evans SD . Mini - mal F - actin cytoskeletal system for planar supported phospholipid bilayers . Langmuir 2008 , 24 : 6827 – 6836 . 155 . Lee K , Gallop JL , Rambani K , Kirschner MW . Self - assembly of ﬁ lopodia - like structures on supported lipid bilayers . Science 2010 , 329 : 1341 – 1345 . WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 17 of 21 156 . Courtemanche N , Lee JY , Pollard TD , Greene EC . Tension modulates actin lament polymerization mediated by formin and pro ﬁ lin . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2013 , 110 : 9752 – 9757 . 157 . Vogel SK , Petrasek Z , Heinemann F , Schwille P . Myosin motors fragment and compact membrane - bound actin ﬁ laments Elife 2013 , 2 : e00116 . 158 . Honigmann A , Sadeghi S , Keller J , Hell SW , Eggeling C , Vink R . A lipid bound actin meshwork organizes liquid phase separation in model membranes . Elife 2014 , 3 : e01671 . 159 . Baksh MM , Jaros M , Groves JT . Detection of molec - ular interactions at membrane surfaces through col - loid phase transitions . Nature 2004 , 427 : 139 – 141 . 160 . Pucadyil TJ , Schmid SL . Real - time visualization of dynamin - catalyzed membrane ﬁ ssion and vesicle release . Cell 2008 , 135 : 1263 – 1275 . 161 . Pucadyil TJ , Schmid SL . Supported bilayers with excess membrane reservoir : a template for reconsti - tuting membrane budding and ﬁ ssion . Biophys J 2010 , 99 : 517 – 525 . 162 . Jung HT , Coldren B , Zasadzinski JA , Iampietro DJ , Kaler EW . The origins of stability of spontaneous vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2001 , 98 : 1353 – 1357 . 163 . Kunding AH , Mortensen MW , Christensen SM , Stamou D . A Fluorescence - based technique to con - struct size distributions from single - object measure - ments : application to the extrusion of lipid vesicles . Biophys J 2008 , 95 : 1176 – 1188 . 164 . Angelova MI , Soléau S , Méléard P , Faucon F , Bothorel P . In : Helm C , Lösche M , Möhwald H , eds . Trends in Colloid and Interface Science VI . Progress in Colloid ’ & Polymer Science , vol . ’ 89 . Steinkopff ; 1992 , 127 – 131 , ISBN 978 - 3 - 7985 - 0913 - 9978 - 3 - 7985 - 1680 - 9 . 165 . Walde P , Cosentino K , Engel H , Stano P . Giant vesi - cles : preparations and applications . ChemBioChem 2010 , 11 : 848 – 865 . 166 . Stachowiak JC , Richmond DL , Li TH , Liu AP , Parekh SH , Fletcher DA . Unilamellar vesicle forma - tion and encapsulation by micro ﬂ uidic jetting . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2008 , 105 : 4697 – 4702 . 167 . Ota S , Yoshizawa S , Takeuchi S . Micro ﬂ uidic forma - tion of monodisperse , cell - sized , and unilamellar vesi - cles . Angew Chem Int Ed 2009 , 48 : 6533 – 6537 . 168 . van Swaay D , deMello A . Micro ﬂ uidic methods for forming liposomes . Lab Chip 2013 , 13 : 752 . 169 . Kwok R , Evans E . Thermoelasticity of large lecithin bilayer vesicles . Biophys J 1981 , 35 : 637 – 652 . 170 . Evans E , Kwok R . Mechanical calorimetry of large dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine vesicles in the phase transition region . Biochemistry 1982 , 21 : 4874 – 4879 . 171 . Evans E , Rawicz W . Entropy - driven tension and bending elasticity in condensed - ﬂ uid membranes . Phys Rev Lett 1990 , 64 : 2094 – 2097 . 172 . Evans E , Heinrich V , Ludwig F , Rawicz W . Dynamic tension spectroscopy and strength of biomembranes . Biophys J 2003 , 85 : 2342 – 2350 . 173 . Henriksen JR , Ipsen JH . Measurement of membrane elasticity by micro - pipette aspiration . Eur Phys J E 2004 , 14 : 149 – 167 . 174 . Tian A , Johnson C , Wang W , Baumgart T . Line ten - sion at ﬂ uid membrane domain boundaries measured by micropipette aspiration . Phys Rev Lett 2007 , 98 : 208102 . 175 . Roux A , Cuvelier D , Nassoy P , Prost J , Bassereau P , Goud B . Role of curvature and phase transition in lipid sorting and ﬁ ssion of membrane tubules . EMBO ’ J 2005 , 24 : 1537 – 1545 . 176 . Tian A , Baumgart T . Sorting of lipids and proteins in membrane curvature gradients . Biophys J 2009 , 96 : 2676 – 2688 . 177 . Sorre B , Callan - Jones A , Manneville J - B , Nassoy P , Joanny J - F , Prost J , Goud B , Bassereau P . Curvature - driven lipid sorting needs proximity to a demixing point and is aided by proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2009 , 106 : 5622 – 5626 . 178 . Callan - Jones A , Sorre B , Bassereau P . Curvature - driven lipid sorting in biomembranes . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 , 3 : a004648 , ISSN , 1943 - 0264 . 179 . Simunovic M , Prévost C , Callan - Jones A , Bassereau P . Physical basis of some membrane shaping mechan - isms . Philos Trans R Soc Lond A 2016 , 374 : 20160034 . 180 . Ohno M , Hamada T , Takiguchi K , Homma M . Dynamic behavior of giant liposomes at desired osmotic pressures . Langmuir 2009 , 25 : 11680 – 11685 . 181 . Peterlin P , Arrigler V , Haleva E , Diamant H . Law of corresponding states for osmotic swelling of vesicles . Soft Matter 2012 , 8 : 2185 . 182 . Boroske E , Elwenspoek M , Helfrich W . Osmotic shrinkage of giant egg - lecithin vesicles . Biophys J 1981 , 34 : 95 – 109 . 183 . Sankhagowit S , Wu S - H , Biswas R , Riche CT , Povinelli ML , Malmstadt N . The dynamics of giant unilamellar vesicle oxidation probed by morphologi - cal transitions . Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 , 1838 : 2615 – 2624 . 184 . Seifert U . Con ﬁ gurations of uid membranes and vesi - cles . Adv Physiol Educ 1997 , 46 : 13 – 137 . 185 . Ho JCS , Rangamani P , Liedberg B , Parikh AN . Mixing water , transducing energy , and shaping Membranes : autonomously self - regulating giant vesicles . Langmuir 2016 , 32 : 2151 – 2163 . 186 . Baumgart T , Hunt G , Farkas ER , Webb WW , Feigenson GW . Fluorescence probe partitioning between Lo / Ld phases in lipid membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta 2007b , 1768 : 2182 – 2194 . Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 18 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 187 . Honerkamp - Smith AR , Veatch SL , Keller SL . An introduction to critical points for biophysicists ; obser - vations of compositional heterogeneity in lipid mem - branes . Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 , 1788 : 53 – 63 . 188 . Hamada T , Kishimoto Y , Nagasaki T , Takagi M . Lateral phase sep - aration in tense membranes . Soft Matter 2011 , 7 : 9061 . 189 . Baumgart T , Capraro BR , Zhu C , Das SL . Thermo - dynamics and mechanics of membrane curvature gen - eration and sensing by proteins and lipids . Annu Rev Phys Chem 2011 , 62 : 483 – 506 . 190 . Sens P , Johannes L , Bassereau P . Biophysical approaches to protein - induced membrane deforma - tions in traf ﬁ cking . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2008 , 20 : 476 – 482 . 191 . Sorre B , Callan - Jones A , Manzi J , Goud B , Prost J , Bassereau P , Roux A . Nature of curvature coupling of amphiphysin with membranes depends on its bound density . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2012 , 109 : 173 – 178 . 192 . Scheve CS , Gonzales PA , Momin N , Stachowiak JC . Steric Pressure between membrane - bound proteins opposes lipid phase separation . J ’ Am Chem Soc 2013 , 135 : 1185 – 1188 . 193 . Ramesh P , Baroji YF , Reihani SNS , Stamou D , Oddershede LB , Bendix PM . FBAR Syndapin 1 recog - nizes and stabilizes highly curved tubular membranes in a concentration dependent manner . Sci Rep 2013 , 3 : 1565 . 194 . Prévost C , Zhao H , Manzi J , Lemichez E , Lappalainen P , Callan - Jones A , Bassereau P . IRSp53 senses negative membrane curvature and phase sep - arates along membrane tubules . Nat Commun 2015 , 6 : 8529 . 195 . Vogel SK , Schwille P . Minimal systems to study membrane – cytoskeleton interactions . Curr Opin Biotechnol 2012 , 23 : 758 – 765 . 196 . Cortese JD , Schwab B , Frieden C , Elson EL . Actin polymerization induces a shape change in actin - containing vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci 1989 , 86 : 5773 – 5777 . 197 . Miyata H , Hotani H . Morphological changes in lipo - somes caused by polymerization of encapsulated actin and spontaneous formation of actin bundles . Proc Natl Acad Sci 1992 , 89 : 11547 – 11551 . 198 . Miyata H , Nishiyama S , Akashi K - I , Kinosita K . Pro - trusive growth from giant liposomes driven by actin polymerization . Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999 , 96 : 2048 – 2053 . 199 . Limozin L , Sackmann E . Polymorphism of Cross - linked actin networks in giant vesicles . Phys Rev Lett 2002 , 89 : 168103 . 200 . Li S , Palmer AF . Structure of small actin - containing liposomes probed by atomic force microscopy : Effect of actin concentration & liposome size . Langmuir 2004 , 20 : 7917 – 7925 . 201 . Liu AP , Fletcher DA . Actin polymerization serves as a membrane domain switch in model lipid bilayers . Biophys J 2006 , 91 : 4064 – 4070 . 202 . Liu AP , Fletcher DA . Biology under construction : In vitro reconstitution of cellular function . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 , 10 : 644 – 650 . 203 . Carvalho K , Tsai F - C , Lees E , Voituriez R , Koenderink GH , Sykes C . Cell - sized liposomes reveal how actomyosin cortical tension drives shape change . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2013a , 110 : 16456 – 16461 . 204 . Pontani L - L , van der Gucht J , Salbreux G , Heuvingh J , Joanny J - F , Sykes C . Reconstitution of an actin cor - tex inside a liposome . Biophys J 2009 , 96 : 192 – 198 . 205 . Murrell M , Pontani L - L , Guevorkian K , Cuvelier D , Nassoy P , Sykes C . Spreading Dynamics of Biomi - metic actin cortices . Biophys J 2011 , 100 : 1400 – 1409 . 206 . Carvalho K , Lemière J , Faqir F , Manzi J , Blanchoin L , Plastino J , Betz T , Sykes C . Actin polymerization or myosin contraction : two ways to build up cortical tension for symmetry breaking . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 2013b , 368 : 20130005 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2013 . 0005 . 207 . Ramakrishnan N , Sunil Kumar PB , Radhakrishnan R . Mesoscale computational studies of membrane bilayer remodeling by curvature - inducing proteins . Phys Rep 2014 , 543 : 1 – 60 . 208 . Lindahl E , Sansom MS . Membrane proteins : molecu - lar dynamics simulations . Curr Opin Struct Biol 2008 , 18 : 425 – 431 . 209 . Tobias DJ , Tu K , Klein ML . Atomic - scale molecular dynamics simulations of lipid membranes . Curr Opin Colloid Interface Sci 1997 , 2 : 15 – 26 . 210 . Klauda JB , Venable RM , Freites JA , O ’ Connor JW , Tobias DJ , Mondragon - Ramirez C , Vorobyov I , MacKerell AD , Pastor RW . Update of the CHARMM all - atom additive force ﬁ eld for lipids : validation on six lipid types . J ’ Phys Chem B 2010 , 114 : 7830 – 7843 . 211 . Tieleman DP , Leontiadou H , Mark AE , Marrink S - J . Simulation of pore formation in lipid bilayers by mechanical stress and electric ﬁ elds . J ’ Am Chem Soc 2003 , 125 : 6382 – 6383 . 212 . de Vries AH , Mark AE , Marrink SJ . Molecular dynamics simulation of the spontaneous formation of a small DPPC vesicle in water in atomistic detail . J ’ Am Chem Soc 2004 , 126 : 4488 – 4489 . 213 . MacCallum JL , Bennett WFD , Tieleman DP . Parti - tioning of amino acid side chains into lipid bilayers : results from computer simulations and comparison to experiment . J ’ Gen Physiol 2007 , 129 : 371 – 377 . 214 . MacCallum JL , Bennett WFD , Tieleman DP . Distri - bution of amino acids in a lipid bilayer from Com - puter simulations . Biophys J 2008 , 94 : 3393 – 3404 . WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 19 of 21 215 . Hartkamp R , Moore TC , Iacovella CR , Thompson MA , Bulsara PA , Moore DJ , McCabe C . Investigating the structure of multicomponent gel - Phase lipid bilayers . Biophys J 2016 , 111 : 813 – 823 . 216 . Shelley JC , Shelley MY , Reeder RC , Bandyopadhyay S , Klein ML . A coarse grain model for phospholipid simulations . J ’ Phys Chem B 2001 , 105 : 4464 – 4470 . 217 . Marrink SJ , Risselada HJ , Ye ﬁ mov S , Tieleman DP , de Vries AH . The MARTINI force ﬁ eld : coarse grained model for biomolecular simulations . J ’ Phys Chem B 2007 , 111 : 7812 – 7824 . 218 . de Meyer FJ - M , Benjamini A , Rodgers JM , Misteli Y , Smit B . Molecular Simulation of the DMPC - cholesterol phase diagram . J ’ Phys Chem B 2010 , 114 : 10451 – 10461 . doi : 10 . 1021 / jp103903s . 219 . Bennett WFD , Tieleman DP . Computer simulations of lipid membrane domains . Biochim Biophys Acta 2013 , 1828 : 1765 – 1776 . 220 . Ackerman DG , Feigenson GW . Multiscale modeling of four - component lipid mixtures : domain composi - tion , size , alignment , and properties of the phase interface . J ’ Phys Chem B 2015 , 119 : 4240 – 4250 . doi : 10 . 1021 / jp511083z . 221 . Grafmüller A , Shillcock J , Lipowsky R . Pathway of membrane fusion with two tension - dependent energy barriers . Phys Rev Lett 2007 , 98 : 218101 . 222 . Grafmüller A , Shillcock J , Lipowsky R . The fusion of membranes and vesicles : pathway and energy barriers from dissipative particle dynamics . Biophys J 2009 , 96 : 2658 – 2675 . 223 . Marrink SJ , Mark AE . The mechanism of vesicle fusion as revealed by molecular dynamics simula - tions . J ’ Am Chem Soc 2003 , 125 : 11144 – 11145 . 224 . Simunovic M , Voth GA . Membrane tension controls the assembly of curvature - generating proteins . Nat Commun 2015 , 6 : 7219 . 225 . Simunovic M , Voth GA , Callan - Jones A , Bassereau P . When physics takes over : BAR proteins and membrane curvature . Trends Cell Biol 2015 , 25 : 780 – 792 . 226 . Igli (cid:1) c A . A possible mechanism determining the stabil - ity of spiculated red blood cells . J ’ Biomech 1997 , 30 : 35 – 40 . 227 . Deuling HJ , Helfrich W . Red blood cell shapes as explained on the basis of curvature elasticity . Biophys J 1976 , 16 : 861 – 868 . 228 . Hassinger JE , Oster G , Drubin DG , Rangamani P . Design principles for robust vesiculation in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2017 , 114 : E1118 – E1127 . 229 . Derényi I , Jülicher F , Prost J . Formation and interac - tion of membrane tubes . Phys Rev Lett 2002 , 88 : 238101 . 230 . Seifert U , Berndl K , Lipowsky R . Shape transformations of vesicles : phase diagram for spontaneous - curvature and bilayer - coupling models . Phys Rev A 1991 , 44 : 1182 . 231 . Jaric M , Seifert U , Wintz W , Wortis M . Vesicular instabilities : the prolate - to - oblate transition and other shape instabilities of uid bilayer membranes . Phys Rev E Stat Phys Plasmas Fluids Relat Interdiscip Topics 1995 , 52 : 6623 – 6634 . 232 . Nelson P , Powers T , Seifert U . Dynamical theory of the pearling instability in cylindrical vesicles . Phys Rev Lett 1995 , 74 : 3384 . 233 . Seifert U , Shillcock J , Nelson P . Role of bilayer tilt difference in equilibrium membrane shapes . Phys Rev Lett 1996 , 77 : 5237 . 234 . Rahimi M , Arroyo M . Shape dynamics , lipid hydro - dynamics , and the complex viscoelasticity of bilayer membranes . Phys Rev E 2012 , 86 : 011932 . 235 . Mui B , Döbereiner H , Madden T , Cullis P . In ﬂ uence of transbilayer area asymmetry on the morphology of large unilamellar vesicles . Biophys J 1995 , 69 : 930 . 236 . Miao L , Seifert U , Wortis M , Döbereiner H - G . Bud - ding transitions of uid - bilayer vesicles : the effect of area - difference elasticity . Phys Rev E 1994 , 49 : 5389 . 237 . Saffman P , Delbrück M . Brownian motion in biologi - cal membranes . Proc Natl Acad Sci 1975 , 72 : 3111 – 3113 . 238 . Rangamani P , Agrawal A , Mandadapu K , Oster G , Steigmann D . Interaction between surface shape and intra - surface viscous ow on lipid membranes . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 2013b , 12 : 833 – 845 . 239 . Agrawal A , Steigmann DJ . A model for surface di usion of trans - membrane proteins on lipid bilayers . Z ’ Angew Math Phys 2011 , 62 : 549 – 563 . 240 . Bahmani F , Christenson J , Rangamani P . Analysis of lipid ow on minimal surfaces . Continuum Mech Therm 2015 , 28 : 503 – 513 . 241 . Rangamani P , Mandadapu K , Oster G . Protein - induced membrane curvature alters local membrane tension . Biophys J 2014a , 107 : 751 – 762 . 242 . Tristram - Nagle S , Zhang R , Suter RM , Worthington CR , Sun WJ , Nagle JF . Measurement of chain tilt angle in fully hydrated bilayers of gel phase lecithins . Biophys J 1993 , 64 : 1097 . 243 . Watkins S , Sontheimer H . Hydrodynamic cellular volume changes enable glioma cell invasion . J ’ Neur - osci 2011 , 31 : 17250 – 17259 . 244 . Lenz O , Schmid F . Structure of symmetric and asym - metric " Ripple " phases in lipid bilayers . Phys Rev Lett 2007 , 98 : 058104 . 245 . Rangamani P , Benjamini A , Agrawal A , Smit B , Steigmann D , Oster G . Small scale membrane mechanics . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 2014b , 13 : 697 – 711 . 246 . Rangamani P , Steigmann D . Variable tilt on lipid membranes . Proc R Soc Lond A 2014 , 470 : 20140463 . Advanced Review wires . wiley . com / sysbio 20 of 21 © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 247 . Lubensky TC , MacKintosh FC . Theory of ripple phases of lipid bilayers . Phys Rev Lett 1993 , 71 : 1565 – 1568 . 248 . Kuzmin PI , Akimov SA , Chizmadzhev YA , Zimmerberg J , Cohen FS . Line tension and interac - tion energies of membrane rafts calculated from lipid splay and tilt . Biophys J 2005 , 88 : 1120 – 1133 . 249 . Hamm M , Kozlov MM . Elastic energy of tilt and bending of uid membranes . Eur Phys J E 2000 , 3 : 323 – 335 . 250 . Hamm M , Kozlov MM . Tilt model of inverted amphiphilic mesophases . Eur Phys J B 1998 , 6 : 519 – 528 . 251 . May S . Protein - induced bilayer deformations : the lipid tilt degree of freedom . Eur Biophys J 2000 , 29 : 17 – 28 . 252 . Zhong - Can O - Y , Ji - Xing L , Yu - Zhang X . Geometric Methods in the Elastic Theory of Membranes in Liq - uid Crystal Phases . World Scienti ﬁ c : Singa - pore , 1999 . 253 . Steigmann DJ . A model for lipid membranes with tilt and distension based on three - dimensional liquid crystal theory . Int J Non Linear Mech 2013 , 56 : 61 – 70 . 254 . Watkins EB , Miller CE , Liao W - P , Kuhl TL . Equilib - rium or quenched : fundamental differences between lipid monolayers , supported bilayers , and mem - branes . ACS ’ Nano 2014 , 8 : 3181 – 3191 . 255 . Jablin MS , Akabori K , Nagle J . Experimental support for tilt - dependent theory of biomembrane mechanics . Phys Rev Lett 2014 , 113 : 248102 . 256 . Izvekov S , Voth GA . A Multiscale coarse - graining method for biomolecular systems . J ’ Phys Chem B 2005 , 109 : 2469 – 2473 . 257 . Lyubartsev AP . Multiscale modeling of lipids and lipid bilayers . Eur Biophys J 2005 , 35 : 53 . 258 . Shi Q , Izvekov S , Voth GA . Mixed atomistic and coarse - grained molecular dynamics : simulation of a membrane - bound ion channel . J ’ Phys Chem B 2006 , 110 : 15045 – 15048 . 259 . Gurtovenko AA , Vattulainen I . Pore formation coupled to ion transport through lipid membranes as induced by transmembrane ionic charge imbalance : atomistic molecular dynamics study . J ’ Am Chem Soc 2005 , 127 : 17570 – 17571 . 260 . Rzepiela AJ , Schäfer LV , Goga N , Risselada HJ , De Vries AH , Marrink SJ . Reconstruction of atomistic details from coarse - grained structures . J ’ Comput Chem 2010 , 31 : 1333 – 1343 . 261 . Stansfeld PJ , Sansom MS . From coarse grained to atomistic : a serial multiscale approach to membrane protein simulations . J ’ Chem Theory Comput 2011 , 7 : 1157 – 1166 . 262 . Lonsdale R , Rouse SL , Sansom MSP , Mulholland AJ . A multiscale approach to modelling drug metabolism by membrane - bound cytochrome P450 enzymes . PLoS Comput Biol 2014 , 10 : e1003714 . 263 . Noguchi H , Gompper G . Fluid vesicles with viscous membranes in shear ﬂ ow . Phys Rev Lett 2004 , 93 : 258102 . 264 . Noguchi H . Membrane tubule formation by banana - shaped proteins with or without transient network structure . Sci Rep 2016 , 6 : 20935 . 265 . Ramakrishnan N , Sunil Kumar PB , Ipsen JH . Mem - brane - mediated aggregation of curvature - inducing nematogens and membrane tubulation . Biophys J 2013 , 104 : 1018 – 1028 . 266 . Ayton GS , McWhirter JL , Voth GA . A second gener - ation mesoscopic lipid bilayer model : Connections to ﬁ eld - theory descriptions of membranes and nonlocal hydrodynamics . J ’ Chem Phys 2006 , 124 : 064906 . 267 . Ayton GS , Blood PD , Voth GA . Membrane remodeling from N - BAR domain interactions : insights from multi - Scale simulation . Biophys J 2007 , 92 : 3595 – 3602 . 268 . Ayton GS , Lyman E , Krishna V , Swenson RD , Mim C , Unger VM , Voth GA . New insights into BAR domain - induced membrane remodeling . Biophys J 2009 , 97 : 1616 – 1625 . 269 . Simunovic M , Mim C , Marlovits TC , Resch G , Unger VM , Voth GA . Protein - mediated transforma - tion of lipid vesicles into tubular networks . Biophys J 2013 , 105 : 711 – 719 . 270 . Davtyan A , Simunovic M , Voth GA . Multiscale simu - lations of protein - facilitated membrane remodeling . J ’ Struct Biol 2016 , 196 : 57 – 63 . 271 . Lyman E , Cui H , Voth GA . Reconstructing protein remodeled membranes in molecular detail from meso - scopic models . Physical Chemistry Chemical Phys - ics 2011 , 13 : 10430 – 10436 . WIREs System Biology and Medicine Systems biology of cellular membranes © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 21 of 21