ORIGINAL ARTICLE Pre - implanted Sensory Nerve Could Enhance the Neurotization in Tissue - Engineered Bone Graft Yan Wu , MD , 1 Da Jing , MD , 2 Hongwei Ouyang , BS , 3 Liang Li , MD , 1 Mingming Zhai , MD , 2 Yan Li , MS , 1 Long Bi , MD , 1 and Pei Guoxian , MD 1 In our previous study , it was found that implanting the sensory nerve tract into the tissue - engineered bone to repair large bone defects can signiﬁcantly result in better osteogenesis effect than tissue - engineered bone graft ( TEBG ) alone . To study the behavior of the preimplanted sensory nerve in the TEBG , the TEBG was con - structed by seeding bone mesenchymal stem cells into b - tricalcium phosphate scaffold with ( treatment group ) or without ( blank group ) implantation of the sensory nerve . The expression of calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) , which helps in the healing of bone defect in the treatment group was signiﬁcantly higher than the blank group at 4 , 8 , and 12 weeks . The expression of growth - associated protein 43 ( GAP43 ) , which might be expressed during nerve healing in the treatment group , was signiﬁcantly higher than the blank group at 4 and 8 weeks . The nerve tracts of the preimplanted sensory nerve were found in the scaffold by the nerve tracing technique . The implanted sensory nerve tracts grew into the pores of scaffolds much earlier than the vascular . The implanted sensory nerve tracts traced by Dil could be observed at 4 weeks , but at the same time , no vascular was observed . In conclusion , the TEBG could be beneﬁted from the preimplanted sensory nerve through the healing behavior of the sensory nerve . The sensory nerve ﬁbers could grow into the pores of the TEBG rapidly , and increase the expression of CGRP , which is helpful in regulating the bone formation and the blood ﬂow . Introduction B one defects are one of the most common clinical conditions , and most of the bone defects are healed by the repair mechanisms of bone . However , large bone de - fects caused by tumor resection or severe trauma usually fail to heal spontaneously because of impaired regeneration capacity 1 ; in such cases , bone grafts are necessary . Every year in the US alone , > 500 , 000 patients undergo repairs of bone defect , with a cost greater than $ 2 . 5 billion . 2 , 3 At present , autografts are considered as the gold standard in the treatment for bone defects because they are safe and nonimmunogenic , and they conform to all the requirements of a bone graft material . 4 However , this method is time consuming and expensive . Additionally , it has certain lim - itations , which include morbidity of the harvested site , in - fection , hematoma , and chronic pain that can lead to implant failure . 5 Orthopedists worldwide are waiting for bone grafts with better function . Tissue - engineered bone grafts ( TEBGs ) have provided them an alternative choice , which made it possible to treat large bone defects without the undesirable adverse effects associated with current treatments . However , unsatisfactory osteogenic effect remains a chronic problem , and much bone tissue engineering research was performed to solve it . The present study deals with neurotization in tissue - engineered bone grafts . Bone tissue consists of numerous nerve ﬁbers . A number of studies , not only on bone anatomy , 6 – 8 but also on bone embryology 9 , 10 and traumatology , 11 – 13 conﬁrm the presence of nerve tissue and its key role . Recent studies have conﬁrmed that neuropeptides such as calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) could enhance the formation of bone . 14 – 17 As the main mediator of bone metabolism , CGRP promotes the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of marrow mes - enchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) . 15 – 17 It can also enhance the proliferation of osteoblasts and inhibit the bone resorption of osteoclasts by directly stimulating stromal cell osteoblastic differentiation and by inhibiting RANKL - induced activation of nuclear factor - kappaB , osteoclastogenesis , and bone re - sorption . 17 On the other hand , when tissue - engineered grafts are thicker than the tissue’s thickness limit of 100 – 200 m m , it 1 Institute of Orthopaedics and Traumatology , Xijing Hospital , Fourth Military Medical University , Xi’an , People’s Republic of China . 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Fourth Military Medical University , Xi’an , People’s Republic of China . 3 Department of Orthopedics , The Hospital of Liaoyuan Mining Industry ( Group ) Limited Company , Liaoyuan , People’s Republic of China . TISSUE ENGINEERING : Part A Volume 21 , Numbers 15 and 16 , 2015 ª Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . DOI : 10 . 1089 / ten . tea . 2014 . 0688 2241 will meet the challenge of shortage of oxygen and nutrient supply to cells and removal of waste products . 18 Hence , it is expected that early vascularization could solve the problem . CGRP is a potent vasoactive substance 19 that promotes vascular permeability through the cooperation with the in - ﬂammatory factor . 20 , 21 Hence , CGRP has the ability to regulate the formation of bone and the blood ﬂow , and this ability is helpful in solving the problem in TEBGs . In our animal model , the saphenous nerve tract was im - planted into the side groove of b - tricalcium phosphate ( b - TCP ) scaffold to repair a 1 . 5 cm femur defect in the rabbit . Later , it was found that the values of bone and vesicular regeneration of the saphenous nerve group were signiﬁ - cantly higher than the blank group . 22 – 24 However , there were still questions that need to be ad - dressed . The ﬁrst question dealt with happened to the im - planted saphenous nerve , did the nerve ﬁbers grow ? Is it the growth of the saphenous nerve itself or did the saphenous nerve promote the periosteum nerve growth ? The second question dealt with the relationship among neurotization , vascularization , and bone formation . To solve these questions , this study was designed as follows : ( i ) The expression levels of growth - associated protein 43 ( GAP43 ) in regenerated TEBG was examined . As GAP43 is a biochemical marker for the entire duration of nerve action , 9 , 12 , 25 the value of GAP43 is a reﬂection of nerve regeneration . ( ii ) Dil was used to carefully distinguish the saphenous nerve from the periosteum nerve . Due to its better performance , it was inferred that Dil could complete its role as the saphenous neural tracer successfully . ( iii ) Neural tracer , vascular perfusion , and bone ﬂuorescent marker techniques were used in combination to explore the relationship among neurotization , vascularization , and bone formation . Materials and Methods This study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Fourth Military Medical Uni - versity ( FMMU , Xi’an , People’s Republic of China ) . All animal procedures were performed in strict accordance with the Guidelines on the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals issued by the Chinese Council on Animal Research and the Guidelines of Animal Care . All animals were euthanized after harvesting the TEBG segment . Isolation and identiﬁcation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells Bone marrow ( BM ; 4 mL ) was harvested from the tibia and femur condyle of anesthetized male New Zealand rabbit ( 0 . 75 kg , 1 - month - old ) using the heparinized syringe under aseptic condition . Then , bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells ( BMSCs ) were isolated from the whole BM blood . BM ( 4 mL ) was mixed with 4 mL phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . The BM - PBS mixture ( 8 mL ) was centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 rpm ( Sigma 3 - 16KL ; Sigma ) , and the super - natant was removed . Then the pellets were washed with 4 mL PBS and centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 rpm again . Whole cell sediment was plated onto a Petri dish , cultured with 4 mL Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) / F12 medium ( HyClone ) , consisting of 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; HyClone ) . All cells were cultured at 37 (cid:2) C , 5 % CO 2 , and 95 % humidity . Nonadherent cells were carefully washed and the culture medium was changed after 24 h . After that , the culture medium was replaced every 2 days , and the cells were subcultured when they were at 90 % conﬂuence . A bottle of cells was retained for identiﬁcation . The above experiments were repeated eight times . The osteogenic medium consisted of DMEM / F12 sup - plemented with 10 % FBS , 50 mg / mL ascorbic acid - 2 - phosphate ( Sigma ) , 100 nM dexamethasone ( Sigma ) , and 10 mM b - glycerol phosphate ( Sigma ) . This medium was cultured for 3 weeks . The osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs ( passage 3 ) was conﬁrmed from the results of alkaline phosphatase ( Fig . 2 ) . Generation of TEBG The cylindrical b - TCP ceramic scaffold was prepared by Bio - lu Biomaterials Company . The impregnation of a custom - made organic ediﬁce with b - TCP ( Prolabo ) suspension was sintered at 1100 (cid:2) C . 17 , 26 The cylindrical scaffold ( diameter : FIG . 1 . Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells ( BMSCs ) were long fusiform , spiral arrangement ( 40 · ) , and negative results of alkaline phosphatase . FIG . 2 . Identiﬁcation of BMSCs . The osteogenic differ - entiation of BMSCs ( passage 3 ) was conﬁrmed by positive results of alkaline phosphatase ( 100 · ) . 2242 WU ET AL . 10mm ; length : 15mm ) has a side groove ( width : 2 mm , depth : 3 . 5 mm ) along its long axis . This scaffold is highly porous with fully interconnected pores ( porosity : 75 % – 10 % ; spherical pores : 330 – 100 m m in diameter ; interconnected channel : 90 – 30 m m in diameter ) . The pores are well interconnected with each other , and open into the central tunnel and the outer surface of the scaffold . The mechanical strength of the scaffold was > 2 MPa . The scaffolds were sterilized using 60 Co g - irradiation at 25 kGy 27 and conditioned with DMEM / F12 for at least 1h before loading the cell . BMSCs ( passage 3 ) were harvested from culture ﬂasks with 0 . 05 % trypsin and counted using a hemocytometer . The harvested BMSCs were seeded onto the porous scaf - folds at 1 · 10 6 cells per scaffold using a ﬁbrin - free meth - od , 28 , 29 and cultured overnight for cell adhesion before implantation . First surgery and animal model First of all , critical size bone defect animal model was used to study the different expression of GAP43 and CGRP between the preneuralizational TEBG group and non - preneuralizational TEBG group . Thirty male New Zealand rabbits ( 12 weeks , 2 . 5 kg ) were randomly divided into two experimental groups : Group A , the treatment group ( n = 15 ) and Group B , the blank group ( n = 15 ) , and each group was randomly divided into three time points to retrieve the TEBG ; they were 4 , 8 , and 12 weeks ( n = 5 ) . Following anesthesia with sodium pentobarbital ( 30mg / kg ; Sigma ) , all the surgical procedures were performed under strict aseptic conditions . The right femur was exposed through a lateral longitudinal incision . The quadriceps muscle and the biceps femoris muscle were retracted , and the entire femoral diaphysis was exposed . The periosteum from the bone was stripped off using a periosteal elevator ; then a prebending ﬁve - hole titanium plate was placed on the anterolateral cortex and ﬁxed with four 3 . 5 - mm cortical screws on both the ends . It was ensured that the two screws were inserted on either side of the proposed osteotomy site ( Fig . 3 ) . If the plate was not stable , circumferential wires were used to wrap the plate to reinforce the ﬁxation . 30 – 32 The femur was exposed through a longitudinal incision , and then a 15 - mm - long diaphysis seg - ment defect was made using a miniature oscillating saw . The 15 - mm - long femur defect used in this study has been dem - onstrated as a critical size defect by several studies . 30 – 32 The osteotomy segment of the right femur was ﬁlled with TEBG prepared from the BMSC - loaded scaffold in both Group A and Group B ( Fig . 4 ) , and the scaffold was ﬁxed with three sutures to keep it stable . In Group A , the saphenous nerve was dissociated from the middle part of the femur through the Hunter’s canal to the knee , 33 – 35 using a glass needle under the microscope . Then the saphenous nerve was cut in the distal , the distal part of the epineurium was stripped off , and the nerve tracts were dissociated . Later , the dissociated saphenous nerve was implanted into the side groove of the b - TCP scaffold , and ﬁxed using a 10 / 0 suture ( Alcon Laboratories ) under the microscope ( Figs . 5 and 6 ) . Group B was the control group , in which the side grooves were untreated . Finally , the lateral and medial incisions were closed in two layers . All rabbits were allowed to move freely after surgery without plaster immobilization . FIG . 3 . A ﬁve - hole plate was then applied to the right femur and ﬁxated with four screws through a lateral longi - tudinal incision . FIG . 4 . The tissue - engineered bone graft ( TBEG ) was implanted into the 15 mm bone defect to repair . FIG . 5 . The TBEG was tied and the saphenous nerve tracts were ﬁxed into the side groove of it . BEHAVIOR OF THE PREIMPLANTED SENSORY NERVE IN TEBG 2243 Western blot analysis Femurs implanted with TEBG constructs were retrieved at 4 , 8 , and 12 weeks . After cutting off the segment of TEBG scaffold and stripping off the extra tissue , the samples from each group at 4 , 8 , and 12 weeks were ground into powder under liquid nitrogen . Then , proteins were extracted using radioimmunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer ( with 1 % phe - nylmethanesulfonyl ﬂuoride , Beyotime ) for 1 h at 4 (cid:2) C . Ex - tracted solutions were centrifuged for 5 min at 14 , 000rpm and 4 (cid:2) C in a refrigerated microcentrifuge ( Sigma 3 - 16KL ; Sigma ) . The supernatant ( 20 m L ) was extracted to measure the con - centration of protein . Later , the supernatant was extracted , mixed with the loading buffer , and warmed to 100 (cid:2) C for 5 min . Sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide gel electropho - resis ( 10 % gels ) was used to separate the proteins , and the proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes . Then the membranes were blocked for 2 h using 5 % nonfat dry milk and 0 . 05 % Tween 20 in Tris - buffered saline . There - after , the membranes were incubated with mice anti - rabbit CGRP 1 : 1000 reagent ( Boster ) and mice anti - rabbit GAP43 1 : 1000 reagent ( Boster ) followed by horseradish peroxidase - linked anti - mice immunoglobulin G peroxidase . The emit - ted light was captured on Gel imager ( Bio - Rad ) after adding electrochemiluminescent western blotting substrate ( Ther - mo ) . To verify whether equal amounts of protein were loaded , membranes were stripped and reprobed with mice anti - rabbit b - tubulin 1 : 3000 ( Boster ) . Quantity One software ( Bio - Rad ) was used to measure the optical density of the imager . The expression of CGRP and GAP43 was quantiﬁed by the relative intensity , which was calculated by the in - tensity of CGRP and GAP43 - positive band normalized b - tubulin - positive band in their own groups . Then , the relative intensity of blots was compared between the groups . Second surgery and neural tracing Second , neural tracer technique was used to explore the re - generation of the preimplanted sensory nerve , to observe the growth of the preimplanted sensory nerve . Another 10 male New Zealand rabbits ( 12 weeks , 2 . 5kg ) were randomly divided into two groups : the preneuralizational TEBG group ( n = 5 ) and the non - preneuralizational TEBG group ( n = 5 ) ; animal model was the same as in the First Surgery and Animal Model section . To microinject neural tracer , a second surgery was performed 14 days before the rabbits were killed ( Fig . 7 ) . Following an - esthesia , a short medial longitudinal incision was made near the right femoral triangle . The femoral nerve was found next to the femoral artery and was exposed ( Fig . 8 ) . Neural tracer turbid liquid was concocted with 10mg Dil and 1mL PBS . Dil 1 % ( 20 m L ) turbid liquid was injected into the nerve by microin - jection , 36 , 37 and the excess liquid was skimmed off ( Fig . 9 ) . Then the incision was closed and the surgery was completed . In the blank group , the saphenous nerve was not implanted . The segments of the TEBG scaffold were retrieved at 4 weeks , and ﬁxed with formaldehyde 24 h later . Then the segments were dehydrated with ethanol ( 100 % ) for 24 h , and ethanol was changed every 4 h . Later , the samples were inﬁltrated with a mixture of methyl methacrylate , n - butyl phthalate , and benzoyl peroxide for 7 h , and the mixture was changed every 1 h . Then the mixture was placed into the negative pressure aspirator ( - 2 kPa ) for 24 h . The samples covered with the embedding medium were transversally sectioned to 50 m m ( Leica 2165 microtome ; Leica ) , and observed under ﬂuorescence microscope . Relationship among neurotization , vascularization , and bone formation To explore the relationship among neurotization , vascu - larization , and bone formation , another 20 male New Zealand rabbits ( 12 weeks , 2 . 5 kg ) were randomly divided FIG . 7 . The time axis of the experimental design . Red axis showed the design of neural trac - ing ; Green axis showed the exper - imental design of the relationship among neurotization , vasculariza - tion , and bone formation . FIG . 6 . The schematic diagram of preparing tissue - engineered bone graft . The saphenous nerve tracts were dispersedly ﬁxed into the side groove of the scaffold . 2244 WU ET AL . into four groups ( n = 5 ) based on the retrieval time of the TEBG : 2 , 4 , 8 , and 12 weeks . Animal model was described in First Surgery and Animal Model section ; neural tracer was injected by the procedures provided in Second Surgery and Neural Tracing section . After that , an intramuscular injection of calcein ( 8 mg / kg ) 38 was administered 5 days before ink perfusion and the TEBG retrieve ( Fig . 7 ) . Following anesthesia , the right external iliac artery and vein were exposed through a short medial longitudinal in - cision at the middle of the inguina . Heparin sodium ( 6000 U ; Wanbang ) was administered intravenously ; after 5 min , the right external iliac artery and vein were ligated . A tube was inserted into the right external iliac artery for ink in - fusion , and another tube was inserted into the vein for drainage . The artery was irrigated with heparinized saline ( 25 , 000 U in 250 mL of 0 . 9 % sodium chloride ) , until the liquid in the vein was clear . The perfusion solution ( 100 mL phthalocyanine blue [ or black ] ink and 100 mL water ) was injected until the skin of the crura and nails were uniformly deep blue , and then the drainage tube was closed and the pressure was maintained at 90 mmHg for 4 h . 39 , 40 The rab - bits were then killed . The samples were sectioned and ob - served using the method described in Second Surgery and Neural Tracing section . Statistical analysis All data were analyzed using SPSS software ( Statistical Product and Service Solutions , v17 . 0 ) and statistically sig - niﬁcant values were deﬁned as p < 0 . 05 . The data were ex - pressed as mean – standard deviation . Student’s t - test was used to detect the differences between groups . Results Identiﬁcation of BMSCs The morphology of the BMSCs was long fusiform , spiral arrangement . The alkaline phosphatase results of BMSCs ( passage 3 ) without inducing differentiation were negative . At the same time , the osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs ( passage 3 ) was conﬁrmed by the positive results of alkaline phosphatase ( Figs . 1 and 2 ) . CGRP polypeptide and expression of GAP43 The CGRP polypeptide could promote the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation , regulate the bone formation and the blood ﬂow , and the high expression of CGRP was helpful to the TBEG . The CGRP was tested in both Groups A and B throughout this study . The relative intensity of bands in Group A reached 31 % – 4 % at 4 weeks . It increased with the duration of implantation and reached 41 % – 6 % at 8 weeks . Thereafter , the relative intensity reached a peak value , reaching 75 % – 6 % at 12 weeks . The relative intensity of Group B remained at a low level at 4 and 8 weeks of 10 % – 3 % and 10 % – 2 % , re - spectively , and the peak value ( 49 % – 3 % ) was reached at 12 weeks . The values of CGRP at three time points in Group A were signiﬁcantly higher than those in Group B ( Fig . 10 ) . The expression of GAP43 was used to indicate the growth of nerve ﬁbers . The relative intensity of bands in Group A reached an extreme value of 146 % – 13 % at 4 weeks . Later it decreased with time and the values reached 43 % – 2 % and 38 % – 7 % , respectively , at 8 and 12 weeks . The values of Group B remained at a low level throughout the duration . At 4 and 8 weeks , the values of GAP43 in Group A were signiﬁcantly higher than Group B , but not signiﬁcantly higher at 12 weeks ( Fig . 10 ) . Neural tracing The red ﬂuorescence of the saphenous nerve tracts marked by Dil ( red marker ) could be found in TBEG at 4 weeks in Group A , but the outcome was negative in Group B . The saphenous nerve tracts were markedly thick , and the arrange - ment of the tracts was comparatively centralized ( Fig . 11 ) . Relationship among neurotization , vascularization , and bone formation At 2 weeks , ﬁbers of the saphenous nerve and vascular were not observed in the scaffolds , and calcein - labeled bone was also not observed . The scaffolds were intact . Then , the saphenous nerve tracts traced by Dil were ob - served , but the vascular and newly forming bone were still not observed at 4 weeks , and the scaffolds were still intact . FIG . 8 . The femoral nerve was found and exposed the right femoral triangle . FIG . 9 . Neural tracer liquid was injected into the nerve tract by microinjection . BEHAVIOR OF THE PREIMPLANTED SENSORY NERVE IN TEBG 2245 At 8 weeks , the saphenous nerve ﬁbers were still present , the vascular could also be observed by ink perfusion ( blue marker ) , and bone formation was clearly indicated by the calcein labels ( green marker ) . The scaffolds had started to degrade . Thereafter , a small quantity of nerve ﬁbers could be ob - served ; the vascular grew thicker at 12 weeks and the scaffolds degraded further ( Fig . 12 ) . Discussion The main reason behind choosing the rabbit femur for the critical size defect model was to cooperate with the saphenous nerve . The saphenous nerve had been widely used in micro - surgery and regenerative medicine ; for instance , the most imaginative one , artiﬁcial reﬂex arc , 41 , 42 or the common au - tologous nerve graft 43 , 44 and distally based saphenous nerve nutritional blood vessel island ﬂap . 45 , 46 To be preplanted into the TEBG , the saphenous nerve was cut off . This operation could cause certain adverse effects , mainly the abnormal sensations of the saphenous nerve skin innervation , pain , and numbness were common . But , these kind of abnormal sen - sations were acceptable compared with the loss of motor function caused by large bone defects . On the other hand , the whole saphenous nerve may be unnecessary to reduce the adverse effects , and only part of this nerve would be im - planted into the TEBG . Of course , there is still a lot of re - search to be done before clinical application in the future . The critical size defect model of the rabbit femur was not perfect . Although rabbits are bigger than rats , which made all surgical procedures ( particularly the injection of neural tracer ) easier , larger shape means longer nerve ﬁbers , and long nerve ﬁber is unfavorable to the neural tracer . There are hundreds of neural tracers , but most of the neural tracers are used in the mice model , and they are useless in rabbits . The reasons are : ﬁrst , the axoplasmic transport is very slow and neural tracers also move slowly . Second , neural cells me - tabolize the neural tracer in several hours or a few days . Hence , it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a useful neural tracer to trace the long peripheral nerve , for example , saphenous nerve . 47 Fortunately , it was learnt from Professor Fuxing Zhang ( Neuroanatomy Department , FMMU ) that Dil has good performance in the long - distance neural transportation , and it traced the saphenous nerve in the TEBG successfully . 36 , 37 In the present study , the expression of GAP43 and CGRP polypeptide was only examined , but not at the level of gene expression . As the neurocytes are located in the dorsal root ganglion , it is far from the site of TEBG and all of them cannot be taken without destroying their integrity . The nerve growth activity was detected through the GAP43 , but it cannot be proven whether the saphenous nerve grew alone or it grew along with the periosteum nerve . So far , it was believed that the saphenous nerve grew alone . The reasons were : ﬁrst , the low expression of GAP43 in the blank group , although it is not ﬂawless ; second , the segment of TEBG was retrieved at 4 weeks with stripping off the extra tissue easily , because it might partly be due to the periosteum nerve not beginning to grow . It was determined that the saphenous nerve grew into the scaffolds randomly . Although the reasons for the growth could not be explored , it is still believed that the results can be useful . The implanted saphenous nerve grew into the TEBG scaffolds earlier than the vascular . The rapid re - versible sprouting of sensory nerve ﬁbers can be used to transport the neuropeptide into the scaffolds to promote bone formation and the blood ﬂow before vascularization . The growth of the TEBG is dynamic and complicated ; it involves the growth of the vasculars and nerve ﬁbers , the formation of bone , and the degradation of scaffolds . The relationship between them could not be studied by the simple addition of and subtraction from the blank group , FIG . 10 . The expression of cal - citonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) polypeptide and growth - associated protein 43 ( GAP43 ) protein in Group A and Group B at 4 , 8 , and 12 weeks postoperatively ( data in mean – standard deviation , n = 5 , * p < 0 . 05 ) . 2246 WU ET AL . FIG . 12 . ( 1 – 3 ) Two weeks , ﬁbers of the saphenous nerve , vasculars , and calcein - labeled bone were not found in the scaffolds . The scaffolds were intact ( 40 · ) . ( 4 – 6 ) Four weeks , ﬁbers of the saphenous nerve were observed , vas - culars and calcein - labeled bone were not found in the scaffolds . The scaf - folds were still intact ( 40 · ) . ( 7 – 9 ) Eight weeks , ﬁbers of the saphenous nerve , vasculars , and calcein - labeled bone were observed in the scaffolds . The scaffolds started to degrade ( 40 · ) . ( 10 – 12 ) Twelve weeks , ﬁbers of the saphe - nous nerve , vasculars , and calcein - la - beled bone were still there in the scaffolds . The scaffolds degraded fur - ther ( 100 · ) . FIG . 11 . ( 1 , 2 ) The outcome of nerve tracing . The red ﬂuorescence of the sa - phenous nerve tracts marked by Dil could be observed . ( 3 ) . In the blank group , no ﬂuorescence could be found . 2247 because they inﬂuence each other ; the whole being greater than the sum of its parts . Newer technologies and more ingenious experimental designs need to be adopted . Conclusions 1 . The implanted saphenous nerve tracts could increase the CGRP polypeptide and the expression of GAP43 to pro - mote neurotization , vascularization , and bone formation . 2 . The implanted saphenous nerve tracts traced by Dil grew into the scaffolds randomly by the sprouting of nerve ﬁbers when they were degraded . 3 . The implanted saphenous nerve tracts grew into the pores of scaffolds much earlier than the vascular at 4 weeks , and remained in existence until 12 weeks . Acknowledgments Y . W . , D . J . , and H . W . O . contributed equally to the work . This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 81430049 , 81272011 ) and the Na - tional High Technology Research and Development Pro - gram 863 of China ( 2012AA02A203 ) . Disclosure Statement No competing ﬁnancial interests exist . References 1 . Laurencin , C . T . , Khan , Y . , and El - Amin , S . F . Bone graft substitutes . Expert Rev Med Devices 3 , 49 , 2006 . 2 . Baroli , B . From natural bone grafts to tissue engineering therapeutics : brainstorming on pharmaceutical formulative requirements and challenges . J Pharm Sci 98 , 1317 , 2009 . 3 . Amini , A . R . , Laurencin , C . T . , and Nukavarapu , S . P . Bone tissue engineering : recent advances and challenges . Crit Rev Biomed Eng 40 , 363 , 2012 . 4 . Hutmacher , D . W . Scaffolds in tissue engineering bone and cartilage . Biomaterials 21 , 2529 , 2000 . 5 . Banwart , J . C . , Asher , M . A . , and Hassanein , R . S . Iliac crest bone graft harvest donor site morbidity . A statistical eval - uation . Spine ( Phila Pa 1976 ) 20 , 1055 , 1995 . 6 . Serre , C . M . , Farlay , D . , Delmas , P . D . , and Chenu , C . Evi - dence for a dense and intimate innervation of the bone tissue , including glutamate - containing ﬁbers . Bone 25 , 623 , 1999 . 7 . Hohmann , E . L . , Elde , R . P . , Rysavy , J . A . , Einzig , S . , and Gebhard , R . L . Innervation of periosteum and bone by sympathetic vasoactive intestinal peptide - containing nerve ﬁbers . Science 232 , 868 , 1986 . 8 . Sakai , A . , Nishida , S . , Okimoto , N . , Okazaki , Y . , Hirano , T . , Norimura , T . , Suda , T . , and Nakamura , T . Bone marrow cell development and trabecular bone dynamics after ovariectomy in ddy mice . Bone 23 , 443 , 1998 . 9 . Gajda , M . , Litwin , J . A . , Cichocki , T . , Timmermans , J . P . , and Adriaensen , D . Development of sensory innervation in rat tibia : co - localization of CGRP and substance P with growth - associated protein 43 ( GAP - 43 ) . J Anat 207 , 135 , 2005 . 10 . Sisask , G . , Silfverswa¨rd , C . J . , Bjurholm , A . , and Nilsson , O . Ontogeny of sensory and autonomic nerves in the de - veloping mouse skeleton . Auton Neurosci 177 , 237 , 2013 . 11 . Li , J . , Ahmad , T . , Spetea , M . , Ahmed , M . , and Kreicbergs , A . Bone reinnervation after fracture : a study in the rat . J Bone Miner Res 16 , 1505 , 2001 . 12 . Hukkanen , M . , Konttinen , Y . T . , Santavirta , S . , Paavolai - nen , P . , Gu , X . H . , Terenghi , G . , and Polak , J . M . Rapid proliferation of calcitonin gene - related peptide - immunore - active nerves during healing of rat tibial fracturesuggests neural involvement in bone growth and remodelling . Neuroscience 54 , 969 , 1993 . 13 . Madsen , J . E . , Hukkanen , M . , Aspenberg , P . , Polak , J . , and Nordsletten , L . Time - dependent sensory nerve ingrowth into a bone conduction chamber . Acta Orthop Scand 71 , 74 , 2000 . 14 . Cornish , J . , Callon , K . E . , Lin , C . Q . , Xiao , C . L . , Gamble , G . D . , Cooper , G . J . , and Reid , I . R . Comparison of the ef - fects of calcitonin gene - related peptide and amylin on os - teoblasts . J Bone Miner Res 14 , 1302 , 1999 . 15 . Fang , Z . , Yang , Q . , Xiong , W . , Li , G . H . , Liao , H . , Xiao , J . , and Li , F . Effect of CGRP - adenoviral vector transduction on the osteoblastic differentiation of rat adipose - derived stem cells . PLoS One 8 , e72738 , 2013 . 16 . Wang , Y . S . , Wang , Y . H . , Zhao , G . Q . , and Li , Y . B . Os - teogenic potential of human calcitonin gene - related peptide alpha gene - modiﬁed bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells . Chin Med J ( Engl ) 124 , 3976 , 2011 . 17 . Wang , L . , Shi , X . , Zhao , R . , Halloran , B . P . , Clark , D . J . , Jacobs , C . R . , and Kingery , W . S . Calcitonin - gene - related peptide stimulates stromal cell osteogenic differentiation and inhibits RANKL induced NF - kappaB activation , os - teoclastogenesis and bone resorption . Bone 46 , 1369 , 2010 . 18 . Jain , R . K . , Au , P . , Tam , J . , Duda , D . G . , and Fukumura , D . Engineering vascularized tissue . Nat Biotechnol 23 , 821 , 2005 . 19 . Brain , S . D . , Williams , T . J . , Tippins , J . R . , Morris , H . R . , and MacIntyre I . Calcitonin gene - related peptide is a potent vasodilator . Nature 313 , 54 , 1985 . 20 . Raddant , A . C . , and Russo , A . F . Calcitonin gene - related peptide in migraine : intersection of peripheral inﬂammation and central modulation . Expert Rev Mol Med 13 , e36 , 2011 . 21 . Brain , S . D . , and Williams , T . J . Inﬂammatory oedema in - duced by synergism between calcitonin gene - related pep - tide ( CGRP ) and mediators of increased vascular permeability . Br J Pharmacol 86 , 855 , 1985 . 22 . Jiang , S . , Liu , Y . , Wang , Q . , Zhao , P . , Mu , T . , Wang , L . , Qin , J . , Chen , S . , and Pei , G . [ Experimental study on construction of neurotization tissue engineered bone for repairing large bone defects inrabbit ] . Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi 24 , 599 , 2010 . 23 . Cui , J . D . , Pei , G . X . , and Jiang , S . [ A study of the different effect on the expression of calcitonin gene related peptide and neuropeptide Y in tissueengineered bone with vascular bundle graft in vivo and that with sensory nerve tract graft in vivo ] . Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi 46 , 1249 , 2008 . 24 . Fan , J . J . , Mu , T . W . , Qin , J . J . , Bi , L . , and Pei , G . X . Different effects of implanting sensory nerve or blood vessel on the vascularization , neurotization , and osteogenesis of tissue - engineered bone in vivo . Biomed Res Int 2014 , 412570 , 2014 . 25 . Biffo , S . , Verhaagen , J . , Schrama , L . H . , Schotman , P . , Danho , W . , and Margolis , F . L . B - 50 / GAP43 expression correlates with process outgrowth in the embryonic mouse nervous system . Eur J Neurosci 2 , 487 , 1990 . 26 . Liu , G . , Zhao , L . , Zhang , W . , Cui , L . , Liu , W . , and Cao , Y . Repair of goat tibial defects with bone marrow stromal cells and beta - tricalcium phosphate . J Mater Sci Mater Med 19 , 2367 , 2008 . 2248 WU ET AL . 27 . Carrascosa , C . , Espejo , L . , Torrado , S . , and Torrado , J . J . Effect of gamma - sterilization process on PLGA micro - spheres loaded with insulin - like growth factor - I ( IGF - I ) . J Biomater Appl 18 , 95 , 2003 . 28 . Zhang , Z . Y . , Teoh , S . H . , Chong , W . S . , Foo , T . T . , Chng , Y . C . , Choolani , M . , and Chan , J . A biaxial rotating biore - actor for the culture of fetal mesenchymal stem cells for bone tissue engineering . Biomaterials 30 , 2694 , 2009 . 29 . Liu , Y . , Pei , G . , and Jiang , S . [ New porous beta - tricalcium phosphate as scaffold for bone tissue engineering ] . Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi 21 , 1123 , 2007 . 30 . Di Bella , C . , Farlie , P . , and Penington , A . J . Bone regen - eration in a rabbit critical - sized skull defect using auto - logous adipose - derived cells . Tissue Eng Part A 14 , 483 , 2008 . 31 . Yoneda , M . , Terai , H . , Imai , Y . , Okada , T . , Nozaki , K . , Inoue , H . , Miyamoto , S . , and Takaoka , K . Repair of an intercalated long bone defect with a synthetic biodegrad - able bone - inducing implant . Biomaterials 26 , 5145 , 2005 . 32 . Yoon , S . J . , Park , K . S . , Kim , M . S . , Rhee , J . M . , Khang , G . , and Lee , H . B . Repair of diaphyseal bone defects with calcitriol - loaded PLGA scaffolds and marrow stromal cells . Tissue Eng 13 , 1125 , 2007 . 33 . Hattori , Y . , Chuang , D . C . , and Lan , C . T . Sensory restora - tion of the skin graft on a free muscle ﬂap : experimental rabbit study . Plast Reconstr Surg 108 , 132 , 2001 . 34 . Rab , M . , Koller , R . , Haslik , W . , Kamolz , L . P . , Beck , H . , Meggeneder , J . , and Frey , M . The inﬂuence of timing on the functional and morphological result afternerve grafting : an experimental study in rabbits . Br J Plast Surg 55 , 628 , 2002 . 35 . Zhu , Z . R . , Tang , X . W . , Wang , W . T . , Ren , W . , Xing , J . L . , Zhang , J . R . , Duan , J . H . , Wang , Y . Y . , Jiao , X . , and Hu , S . J . Conduction failures in rabbit saphenous nerve unmyelin - ated ﬁbers . Neurosignals 17 , 181 , 2009 . 36 . Haastert , K . , Joswig , H . , Ja¨schke , K . A . , Samii , M . , and Grothe , C . Nerve repair by end - to - side nerve coaptation : histologic and morphometric evaluation of axonal origin in a ratsciatic nerve model . Neurosurgery 66 , 567 ; discussion 576 – 7 , 2010 . 37 . Brookes , S . J . , Song , Z . M . , Ramsay , G . A . , and Costa , M . Long aboral projections of Dogiel type II , AH neurons within the myenteric plexus of the guinea pig small intes - tine . J Neurosci 15 ( 5 Pt 2 ) , 4013 , 1995 . 38 . Lam , H . , Hu , M . , and Qin , Y . X . Alteration of contraction - to - rest ratio to optimize trabecular bone adaptation induced by dynamic musclestimulation . Bone 48 , 399 , 2011 . 39 . Fan , L . , Li , J . , Yu , Z . , Dang , X . , and Wang , K . Hypoxia - inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor prevents steroid - associated osteonecrosis of the femoralhead in rabbits by promoting angiogenesis and inhibiting apo - ptosis . PLoS One 9 , e107774 , 2014 . 40 . Li , L . Y . , Zhang , L . J . , Jia , J . Y . , Zhao , Q . , Wang , E . B . , and Li , Q . W . Does dynamic immobilization reduce chon - drocyte apoptosis and disturbance to the femoral head perfusion ? Int J Clin Exp Pathol 6 , 212 , 2013 . 41 . Lin , H . , Hou , C . , Chen , A . , and Xu , Z . Innervation of reconstructed bladder above the level of spinal cord injury for inducing micturition by contractions of the abdomen - to - bladder reﬂex arc . Neurosurgery 66 , 948 ; discussion 952 , 2010 . 42 . Wang , J . W . , Zhao , Y . W . , Hou , C . L . , Ni , W . F . , Rui , B . Y . , Guo , S . C . , Zheng , X . Y . , and Dai , K . R . An experimental study of artiﬁcial murine bladder reﬂex arc established by abdominal reﬂex . Chin Med J ( Engl ) 124 , 413 , 2011 . 43 . Rab , M . , Koller , R . , Haslik , W . , Neumayer , C . , Todoroff , B . P . , Frey , M . , and Gruber , H . The impact of a muscle target organ on nerve grafts with different lengths—a his - tomorphological analysis . Muscle Nerve 21 , 618 , 1998 . 44 . Holtzer , C . A . , Marani , E . , van Dijk , G . J . , and Thomeer , R . T . Repair of ventral root avulsion using autologous nerve grafts in cats . J Peripher Nerv Syst 8 , 17 , 2003 . 45 . Gu , H . , Xiong , Z . , Xu , J . , Li , G . , and Wang , C . Clinical and anatomical study of the distally based lesser saphenous veno - lateral sural neurocutaneous ﬂap for lower extremity coverage . J Orthop Sci 18 , 740 , 2013 . 46 . Kansal , S . , Goil , P . , Agarwal , V . , Agarwal , S . , Mishra , S . , Agarwal , D . , and Singh , P . Reverse pedicle - based greater saphenous neuro - veno - fasciocutaneous ﬂap for recon - struction of lower leg and foot . Eur J Orthop Surg Trau - matol 24 , 67 , 2014 . 47 . Li , J . S . Basic Neuroscience [ M ] . Beijing : Higher Education Press , 2002 . Address correspondence to : Pei Guoxian , MD Institute of Orthopaedics and TraumatologyXijingHospital Fourth Military Medical UniversityXi’an People’s Republic of China E - mail : nfperry @ 163 . com Long Bi , MD Institute of Orthopaedics and TraumatologyXijingHospital Fourth Military Medical University Xi’an People’s Republic of China E - mail : bilong @ fmmu . edu . cn Received : December 14 , 2014 Accepted : April 28 , 2015 Online Publication Date : July 20 , 2015 BEHAVIOR OF THE PREIMPLANTED SENSORY NERVE IN TEBG 2249