Conceptual Design Assessment Method for Collaborative CAD System Fariz Muharram Hasby Industrial Engineering , Institut Teknologi Bandung , Indonesia fariz @ mail . ti . itb . ac . id Dradjad Irianto Industrial Engineering , Institut Teknologi Bandung , Indonesia dradjad @ mail . ti . itb . ac . id ABSTRACT Computer Aided Design ( CAD ) technology has been developed for years and is used extensively in the detail design phase . Unfortu - nately , CAD is still unable to fully support the collaborative design activity or the early design phases of the design process , such as the conceptual design phase . Due to the high creativity needed in the conceptual design phase , there will usually be a number of different ideas and there is a need to converge the different designs into one design that can be further elaborated into the detail design phase . On the other hand , finding an optimal design is difficult in this phase as the designs usually do not have sufficient detail to be assessed quantitatively . The problem is even more pronounced in collaborative conceptual design , as the number of designs will increase and arriving at an agreement for the best design without a proper assessment method is hard to do . This paper will introduce a conceptual design assessment method that can be used in a collabo - rative design situation . The method uses a combination of Hurwicz criterion and an estimated range of the product function fulfillment to determine the best design . A case study will also be used to illustrate the use of the method . The method shows a potential to be used in a CAD system designed to support the collaborative conceptual design phase . KEYWORDS Conceptual Design , Design Assessment , Collaborative Design ACM Reference Format : Fariz Muharram Hasby and Dradjad Irianto . 2021 . Conceptual Design As - sessment Method for Collaborative CAD System . In 4th Asia Pacific Con - ference on Research in Industrial and Systems Engineering 2021 ( APCORISE 2021 ) , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 8 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3468013 . 3468340 1 INTRODUCTION Manufacturers around the world are operating in a global market right now , where it is not unusual for a company to procure raw materials from a supplier in one country , manufacture their prod - ucts in a production facility located in another country , and then shipping the finished goods to an entirely different country . The Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . APCORISE 2021 , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia © 2021 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9038 - 5 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3468013 . 3468340 rapid development of internet and communication technology have enabled manufacturers to coordinate their businesses on a global scale and collaborative production has now become a very common method of production . Collaborative Production can be defined as a cooperation be - tween a few entities or individuals within a given network to de - sign , produce , or distribute goods , where the type of goods being produced are decided together by all the entities involved in the pro - duction process . Collaborative production is predicted to contribute 26 billion Euros annually to the global economy [ 1 ] . Collaborative design is an inseparable part of collaborative pro - duction . Likewise , Computer Aided Design ( CAD ) is an inseparable part of the design process . As such , support for collaborative ac - tivities has been identified as one of four important key aspects for future CAD development , along with the ability for CAD to enhance designer’s creativity , to reduce the cognitive burden on the designer , and to support conceptual design [ 2 ] . Conceptual design is an early design phase in the engineering design cycle , where designers try to find basic engineering struc - tures that can fulfill product functions defined in an earlier phase . It is used interchangeably with the embodiment design phase , where designers usually map the basic engineering structures into a fur - ther refined product models , such as sub - modules , components , interfaces , etc . [ 3 ] . CAD support for the conceptual design phase is still inadequate compared to the detail design phase where com - mercial CADs are usually used [ 4 ] . As such , currently there are no widely used conceptual CAD system in the industry and there is still plenty room for researches to be done in this topic [ 5 ] . During the conceptual design stage , designers are expected to generate multiple feasible solutions for a given problem , which are usually described by what the designed product is able to do and how it can fulfill customer’s expectations . However , only a few of them will be considered for further development . Choosing the right concept to be developed is a crucial activity because a majority of the development costs are tied to the design concept [ 6 ] . Unfortunately , detailed information about the performance and costs associated with each design are usually not available at this stage , as such decisions are usually made only with qualitative information and the judgment of the designer [ 7 ] . The problem becomes even more pronounced in a collaborative conceptual design setting . This is because each designer has their own ideas of how the product should be designed and as a conse - quence , the bias for their own design can influence their choice of which design ideas to develop further . To answer this problem , there is a need for a reliable method to rate and choose which de - sign is better , especially in a collaborative setting . This paper will describe an assessment method to assess the quality of a conceptual 254 APCORISE 2021 , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia Fariz Muharram Hasby and Dradjad Irianto design in relation to the desired function of the product , which is developed as a part of a collaborative conceptual CAD system . In the next section we will then present a brief literature research on the relevant topics , followed by a description of such assessment method , an example of how the method is used , and finally a brief discussion regarding the method and the developed collaborative conceptual CAD system . 2 LITERATURE RESEARCH In this section we will present a brief literature research on the relevant topics , such as collaborative CAD and conceptual design assessment . It will provide a short background on the development of the conceptual collaborative CAD that is being done and previous researches on conceptual design assessment that are relevant to the topic of this paper . 2 . 1 Collaborative and Conceptual CAD Collaborative activities can be broadly organized into 2 different ac - tivities , Coordination and Cooperation activities [ 8 ] . Coordination activities emerge when different designers work on different parts of a product , which will then be assembled into a complete product after each designer has completed designing their respective parts . On the other hand , cooperation activities emerge when different designers are working on the same object , as a whole complete product or as a part of a bigger assembly , at the same time . A popular approach taken in this field , such as by Kim and Kim , Louhichi and Rivest , and Eltaief et al . [ 8 – 10 ] focuses on constraints settings by different designers . This approach is used when several designers are each designing a different part of a greater assembled product . Several constraints are usually placed at the beginning of the design process , usually pertaining to some key dimensions or spatial relationships ( angle , distance , etc ) between the parts . When some of the constraints are not met by one of the designers , all designers that are affected by these constraints are notified by the system and they must then negotiate with each other to find a more feasible solution with respect to the previously set constraints . Another approach that can be taken is to automatically modify the designs affected by a change in one part of the product , thereby forcing the designers to alter the design so as to comply with the constraints set by the changing part . Other researches for collaborative CAD tried to look into various software and hardware involved in a collaborative CAD setting . Andreadis et al . [ 11 ] has found that without proper planning , col - laborative CAD activities can create large inefficiencies regarding the use of different CAD software platforms by each entity involved in the activity and to that end they have proposed a cloud com - puting based CAD architecture that tried to address the problem . Virtual reality based technologies such as used by Moldovan and Staturetu [ 12 ] is also a popular approach that tries to replicate the traditional collaborative environment when the participants are geographically dispersed . On the other hand , Martinez - Maldonado et al . [ 13 ] has shown that the traditional collaborative design , in which designers are grouping together in the same physical space , can be enhanced by designing a modern studio equipped with the relevant digital devices to facilitate efficient collaborative design . As mentioned before , conceptual CAD system are not yet fully developed compared to CAD systems used in the detail design phase . Komoto and Tomiyama [ 14 ] have designed a fairly compre - hensive conceptual CAD system for electromechanical products using a function decomposition modeling approach that also con - tains a geometric modeler , such that the system could be used to design a product from the intended functions of the product and also describe the rough shape of the designed product ( skeletal model ) . On the other hand , Khan and Tuncer [ 15 ] felt that conven - tional CAD systems using mouse and keyboard are not suitable for the rapid pace of the conceptual design phase . As such they have designed gestures and verbal commands to manipulate 3D models that will enable designers to concentrate more on the designing aspect rather than operating the CAD system . 2 . 2 Conceptual Design Assessment As mentioned before , researchers have realized the importance of selecting the most suitable design concept for further develop - ment is a very important task in the whole design process . Limited resources become the constraint that prevents multiple solution alternatives to be developed as a prototype . The shortage of infor - mation regarding the designs during the early design phase also raise the difficulty of choosing the right concept at the conceptual design phase . For routine designs , database and knowledge management sys - tems have been found to be a helpful tool during the conceptual design phase . This approach has been shown for various applica - tions , such as to design injection molds [ 7 ] and stamped metal parts [ 16 ] . Specifically , in the research by Chin and Wong [ 7 ] , designers are queried about the product requirement , which will then be subjected through a built - in heuristic reasoning system that will determine the best design for the product through matching the product requirements with the quantitative and qualitative per - formance of a chosen design . In the research by Mukherjee and Liu [ 16 ] , researchers have built a system to translate product re - quirements in natural language into sketching abstractions that can then be used to match the current design with other previously designed parts , such that multiple design alternatives with simi - larities in form or function can be found as possible alternative solutions . From these examples , it can be inferred that without proper knowledge of the design this approach will be hard to im - plement . Hence this approach is not suitable for complex products that are required to fulfill unique functions or in the process of new product development . With sufficient knowledge of the working principles of a design , simulation techniques can also be used to illustrate possible perfor - mance levels for a given design . Clayton et al . [ 17 ] used a virtual product model coupled with interpretation objects that are used to document and illustrate the design intent for a given product feature . These design interpretations can then be used to evaluate the concept design by contrasting it with the user requirements . Delgado - Maciel et al . [ 18 ] used a system dynamic approach to create a dynamic simulation of the performances of the proposed designs . This is then combined with a TRIZ approach to point the areas in the simulation that could be improved and how to improve it . Weyrich et al . [ 19 ] also used a simulation approach , but formulated 255 Conceptual Design Assessment Method for Collaborative CAD System APCORISE 2021 , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia as modules that can be reused and combined with one another to create a configuration of possible designs . It can be seen from these approaches that there is an inherent tradeoff when using simula - tions to evaluate concept design , namely between the effort and cost spent on creating the simulation and the speed that is needed to systematically select a few from many possible solutions . Chami and Bruel [ 20 ] has created an integrated conceptual de - sign evaluation of mechatronic systems using SysML modeling language . This approach aims to automate the majority of the de - sign process by modeling the product requirements and then find - ing product configurations that satisfy those requirements . This approach tries to combine the principles of the knowledge manage - ment approach and the flexibility of the simulation approach by using a configurable modeling language to extend the scope of its knowledge base . A large effort must be spent to ensure the valid - ity of the modeling approach between the product requirements , the possible solution configurations , and the simulated product performance . On the other hand , Moulanitis et al . [ 21 ] used an index to evalu - ate a given concept for mechatronic products from several aspects , namely configurability , adaptability , interaction ability , depend - ability , motion ability , perception ability , and decisional ability . Each aspect of each design alternatives are evaluated based on the given index and after aggregating the evaluation of each as - pect , the design with the biggest evaluation score is chosen as the best design . de Silva and Behbahani [ 22 ] used a similar approach called Mechatronic Design Quotient to evaluate designs according to their performance on certain chosen attributes that best describe the functions of the product . In general , the best design can be chosen by evaluating its performance on several different aspects , qualitatively or quantitatively . Akay et al . [ 23 ] used interval type - 2 fuzzy information axiom to bridge the gap between quantitative evaluation and qualitative eval - uation of the design candidates . Each design is evaluated on how well they fulfill certain functions that made up the product require - ments , while the evaluation itself are conducted qualitatively using natural language , the result will then be transformed by a fuzzy set to generate a quantitative evaluation of the product . Couturier and Imoussaten [ 24 ] proposed another way to qualitatively asses a design from its level of performance on several criteria generated from the design requirements . These approaches can be used when data on the product performance are not yet available or the cost of modeling the performance of the design is deemed too prohibitive . Liu et al . [ 25 ] also proposed a qualitative method to evaluate a conceptual design , but the basis is on the radicality of the design compared to other previous solutions for the same problem . This approach is suited for new product development , especially where novelty is deemed as an important factor for the final product . This approach is based on the research laid out by Shah et al . [ 26 ] , where researchers proposed a method for measuring ideation effective - ness , but in the process they have to also evaluate a given design on its novelty and quality . Another research by Chan et al . [ 27 ] is also focused on new product development , specifically by using statistical analysis to determine whether designs inspired by dis - tant sources are inherently better than designs inspired by closely related previous problems . 3 CONCEPTUAL DESIGN ASSESSMENT METHOD In this section , we will describe the conceptual design assessment model that we have developed to be used in a collaborative concep - tual CAD system . We will also present a case study that will show how the method is used to assess and choose the best conceptual design from a set of possible solutions . 3 . 1 Conceptual Design Assessment Model As stated before , the quality of a conceptual design can be assessed by estimating the performance of the product [ 26 ] , although it is hard to do so in the conceptual design phase due to the lack of data available at that stage of the design [ 7 ] . One way to assess the performance of a product is by evaluating how well can the product fulfill all the functions that are necessary for the product to have . These functions to be fulfilled are usually gathered from the consumers in the form of consumer requirements . By using Qual - ity Function Deployment ( QFD ) and specifically House of Quality ( HOQ ) , consumer requirements can then be transformed into a set of technical criteria that the product has to fulfill [ 28 ] . As such , the set of technical criteria listed on the HOQ can be chosen as the attributes to be evaluated so as to evaluate the performance of a given conceptual design . Figure 1 shows the typical House of Quality matrix , containing a list of customer requirements , techni - cal criteria , weights for each customer requirements and technical criteria , target values for each criteria and correlations between each criteria . As can be seen in the matrix , during this stage of the design it is fairly common to set a target value that must be met by the technical criteria to fulfill the intended functions of the product . It follows that although all the conceptual designs that are generated at this stage are required to meet the target value for each criterion , there is uncertainty involved in whether or not the chosen design can meet the criteria when it is fully developed further in the design process . As such , this problem can be categorized into decision making when facing uncertainties . One of the techniques that can be used in decision making when facing uncertainties is the Hurwicz Criterion [ 29 ] . Using the Hur - wicz Criterion , the decision maker is able to project their confidence ( i . e . optimism or pessimism ) on whether a decision will meet its intended outcome . This criterion can be stated as [ 30 ] H = α max ( x ) + ( 1 − α ) min ( x ) ( 1 ) where H is the Hurwicz criterion payoff , α is the coefficient of optimism that measures the decision maker’s optimism ( 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 ) , max ( x ) is the maximum payoff of action x , and min ( x ) is the minimum payoff of action x . Consequently , if x is the action of choosing a certain conceptual design x , then for each technical criterion i we can indicate the payoff of choosing design x by H xi = α max i ( x ) + ( 1 − α ) min i ( x ) ( 2 ) where H xi is the Hurwicz payoff of choosing design z for technical criterion i , α is the coefficient of optimism that measures the deci - sion maker’s optimism regarding the ability of design z to achieve target value for technical criterion i ( 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 ) , max i ( x ) is the target value for technical criterion i , and min i ( x ) is the minimum 256 APCORISE 2021 , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia Fariz Muharram Hasby and Dradjad Irianto Figure 1 : Typical House of Quality Matrix performance value achievable for technical criterion i . Although the minimum performance value for each criterion are not usually estimated when using the HoQ method , it is reasonable to assume that an estimate of the value can also be made at this stage of the design , since the opposite maximum target value can also be estimated . It is also reasonable to assume that the target value in question is stated as an exact value , not in the form of an interval . In many engineering applications the technical criteria target value is stated as an exact value , although in reality the target value is unbounded , such as for example the number of passengers that a mass rapid transport system can transport at once ( the more passenger the better it is ) , or the minimum weight of a camping bag ( the less weight the better it is ) . Aggregating the payoffs of all technical criteria for each design can be done by involving the weight of each criteria . Traditionally , it is preferable if the weight for each criteria is stated in percent , such as that when all weights are aggregated they add up to 100 . Using this weight , it is then easy to normalize the Hurwicz payoff , such that in full pessimistic condition ( α = 0 ) the normalized payoff for criterion i equals to zero , and in full optimistic condition ( α = 1 ) the normalized payoff for each criterion i is equal to the maxi - mum weight assigned to that criterion . For target values that are approached from the bottom - up ( higher target value is better ) , the normalized payoff can be written as N xi = w i [ H xi − min i ( x ) ] / [ max i ( x ) − min i ( x ) ] ( 3 ) where N xi is the normalized payoff of choosing design x for tech - nical criterion i , H xi is the Hurwicz payoff of choosing design z for technical criterion i , max i ( x ) and min i ( x ) are the maximum and minimum performance value for technical criterion i respectively , and w i is the weight for criterion i . For target values that are ap - proached from the top – down ( lower target value is better ) , the normalized payoff can be written as N xi = w i − ( w i [ H xi − max i ( x ) ] / [ min i ( x ) − max i ( x ) ] ) ( 4 ) where N xi is the normalized payoff of choosing design x for tech - nical criterion i , H zi is the Hurwicz payoff of choosing design z for technical criterion i , max i ( x ) and min i ( x ) are the maximum and minimum performance value for technical criterion i respectively , and w i is the weight for criterion i . It should also be noted that for this type of value max i ( x ) is the lower number and min i ( x ) is the higher number . For each conceptual design , it is possible that the range of the op - eration between each design is different . In this case , after counting the Hurwicz payoff for each design , the value should be put into the same scale before normalization , with the minimum payoff should be set as the minimum achievable target value , which is the lowest number for bottom - up target values and the highest number for top - down target values . Figure 2 illustrates this principle . As such , for a more generalized case , equations 3 and 4 can be expressed as N xi = w i (cid:2) H xi − min i (cid:0) x ′ (cid:1) ] / (cid:2) max i ( x ) − min i (cid:0) x ′ (cid:1) ] ( 5 ) N xi = w i − (cid:0) w i [ H xi − max i ( x ) ] / [ min i (cid:0) x ′ (cid:1) − max i ( x ) ] (cid:1) ( 6 ) where x ′ is the design that has the minimum achievable target value of all the available designs for each i . As this assessment method is used in a collaborative setting , each designer must evaluate all the available conceptual designs . This is done to avoid bias for a particular design created by the same designer . Lastly , the final assessment score for each design will then 257 Conceptual Design Assessment Method for Collaborative CAD System APCORISE 2021 , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia Figure 2 : Combined payoff between two different operational range Table 1 : Technical Criterion Weight and Type No Technical Criteria Weight Type Remarks 1 Temperature 4 Top - Down 2 Toughness of Material 1 Bottom - Up 3 Weight 4 Top - Down Less weight is associated with less material and installation costs 4 Safety Factor 19 Top - Down Less safety factor is associated with less material and installation costs 5 Width 15 Top - Down Compact dimension (cid:27) less material and installation costs 6 Length 15 Top - Down Compact dimension (cid:27) less material and installation costs 7 Height 15 Top - Down Compact dimension (cid:27) less material and installation costs 8 Strength of Material 5 Bottom - Up 9 Failure Rate 4 Top - Down 10 Operational Lifetime 14 Bottom - Up 11 Efficiency 4 Bottom - Up be the average score of all evaluation done by the participating designers . 3 . 2 Case Example To illustrate the use of the assessment method , we use a hypo - thetical case where two designers are involved in the design of a platform deployment arm for boiler header inspection at a thermal power plant . The case and the accompanying HoQ matrix is lifted from Ismail et al . [ 28 ] but the additional data and calculations are purely hypothetical data added by the authors . In this scenario , each designer will only present one conceptual design for simplicity , but it is easy to see that the number of presented designs can be scalable upwards . Figure 3 illustrates the HoQ matrix and Table 1 contains the weight of each technical criterion and the type of the target value ( bottom - up / top - down ) , while Table 2 contains the maximum and minimum payoff for each criterion and each conceptual design . Note that criterion 4 ( “Ability to turn 180 0 ” ) is not counted as it is assumed that each conceptual design offers the same capability with respect to the criterion ( able to turn fully 180 0 ) . Table 3 shows the coefficient of optimism that each designer uses when they evaluate the respective designs . Note that each designer is able to use a different coefficient of optimism for each design and for each technical criterion . Table 4 shows the normalized and total score for each design . It can be seen that the chosen design is Design A due to its greater total score of 70 . 28 . 4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION We have showed an assessment method for evaluating the quality of conceptual designs as a part of our research in collaborative CAD systems . The method is based on the notion that conceptual design selection is inherently a decision making process under uncertainty , pertaining to the uncertainty of whether the chosen design could really fulfill all the customer requirements . To that end we have modeled the evaluation method using the Hurwicz criterion , where designers are able to project their own optimism or pessimism for the chosen concept . In this case , the concept of optimism and pessimism reflects the confidence of the designer towards the capability of the design to 258 APCORISE 2021 , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia Fariz Muharram Hasby and Dradjad Irianto Figure 3 : HoQ matrix for Platform Deployment Arm [ 28 ] Table 2 : Max and Min Values for Technical Criteria Design A Design B No Technical Criteria Max Min Max Min 1 Temperature 90 100 90 105 2 Toughness of Material 1220 1100 1220 1050 3 Weight 260 280 260 300 4 Safety Factor 2 2 . 5 2 3 5 Width 1500 1600 1500 1525 6 Length 10230 21400 10230 16780 7 Height 720 850 720 960 8 Strength of Material 570 420 570 500 9 Failure Rate 0 . 5 1 0 . 5 1 . 5 10 Operational Lifetime 10 9 10 8 11 Efficiency 95 92 95 91 259 Conceptual Design Assessment Method for Collaborative CAD System APCORISE 2021 , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia Table 3 : List of Coefficient of Optimism Technical Criterion / Designs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B DesignerX 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 4 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 DesignerY 0 . 8 0 . 7 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 8 0 . 5 0 . 8 0 . 5 0 . 8 0 . 3 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 7 Table 4 : Normalized and Total Score for Each Design Technical Criterion / Designs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B A B Designer X 3 . 2 2 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 6 3 . 4 2 . 4 16 7 . 6 11 13 . 5 11 11 . 5 12 . 6 9 2 . 5 4 . 1 3 . 4 2 . 4 11 8 . 4 2 . 5 2 . 4 Designer Y 3 . 5 2 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 6 3 2 . 4 14 11 7 . 5 13 . 5 7 . 5 11 . 5 10 . 9 12 2 . 5 4 . 5 3 3 . 2 9 . 1 9 . 8 2 . 8 2 . 8 AverageDesignA 3 . 3 0 . 6 3 . 2 15 9 9 11 . 8 2 . 5 3 . 2 9 . 8 2 . 7 AverageDesignB 2 . 6 0 . 6 2 . 4 9 . 5 13 . 5 11 . 5 11 4 . 3 2 . 8 9 . 1 2 . 6 Total Score A 70 . 28 Total Score B 69 . 38 fulfill its intended function . In turn it also reflects the designer’s confidence on the capability of the manufacturing department’s ability to create and finish the design as it is intended to be . More than that , this attitude also reflects other factors that moderates the manufacturing capabilities , such as whether there will be an advancement in manufacturing technologies in the near future , whether a given company can allocate enough resources ( man - power , capital , etc . ) to produce the intended design , and other such factors . As such , the simple concept of optimism and pessimism takes into account a broader view that comes from a designer’s subjective knowledge and experiences . When compared with other conceptual design assessment tech - niques , the technique that we have introduced removes the need for a thorough knowledge of the operational capability and precise characteristics of the design , which is a requirement for objective methods such as linear programming to find an optimal design , simulation like techniques [ 17 , 18 ] or databases that can predict op - erating capability [ 7 , 16 ] . Subjectivity of the designer are frequently involved in assessing conceptual designs due to the lack of infor - mation available at this design phase , nevertheless as stated above , we have concluded that the Hurwicz criterion retains adequate objectivity compared to other relatively simplistic qualitative meth - ods [ 25 , 26 ] but at the same time it is easy enough to manipulate compared to other techniques such as analytic hierarchy process ( AHP ) or fuzzy values [ 23 ] . The technical criteria weights used in the method can be com - puted directly from the correlation matrix of the HoQ and as such they reflect the correlation between customer requirements and the technical criteria . Traditionally , strong correlation can be given a score of 9 , moderate correlation can be given a 6 , and 3 can be used for weak correlation . The correlations for each technical criterion could then be summed and normalized to find the weight of each criterion . The proposed assessment method has not yet taken into account the correlation between technical criteria , whether it is negative or positive . Future research could focus on the setting of criterion weight that is also indicative of the correlation between criteria . Predicting an operational range for the design is another diffi - culty in implementing the introduced method . It should be clear that improving the accuracy of operational range prediction for a given design could be very beneficial to improve the accuracy of the whole method . To that end , in the future incorporating databases of each alternative design’s operating range could help designers in that part of the method . Further improvements could also be made by incorporating other criteria by using this method , such as manufacturing cost or manufacturability of the design . As mentioned before , the proposed method is developed to be used in a collaborative conceptual CAD system . This CAD system is developed to be used in the conceptual - embodiment design phase where the rough shape of the product is being decided by choosing the basic engineering structures that will form the mechanism of the product . Although the deployment of the House of Quality technique is currently not included in the CAD system , the CAD system itself contains a functional decomposition of the product that is being designed . As such , it is not too hard to estimate the target values and the operating characteristics of each conceptual 260 APCORISE 2021 , May 25 , 2021 , Depok , Indonesia Fariz Muharram Hasby and Dradjad Irianto design , although the introduction of this method means that de - signers should also have a passing familiarity with the operating characteristic of the design . The method will be implemented in the CAD system in such a way to ensure that during collaboration the designers involved will have freedom to explore their own concept but when the time is needed there is a convergence of the different designs such that the design process is still done in an efficient manner . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Probst , L . , Frideres , L , Pedersen , B . , Lide , S . ( 2015 ) : Collaborative Economy : Col - laborative production and the maker economy . European Union [ 2 ] Goel , A . K . , Vattam , S . , Wiltgen , B . , Helms , M . ( 2012 ) : Cognitive , collaborative , con - ceptual and creative – Four characteristics of the next generation of knowledge - based CAD systems : A study in biologically inspired design . Computer Aided Design , 44 , 879 - 900 [ 3 ] Chen , X . , Gao , S . , Yang , Y . , Zhang , S . ( 2012 ) : Multi - level assembly model for top - down design of mechanical products . Computer Aided Design , 44 , 1033 - 1048 [ 4 ] Wang , L . , Shen , W . , Xie , H . , Neelamkavil , J . , Pardasani , A . ( 2002 ) : Collaborative conceptual design - state of the art and future trends . Computer Aided Design , 34 , 981 - 996 [ 5 ] Vuletic , T . , Duffy , A . , Hay , L . , McTeague , C . , Pidgeon , L . , Grealy , M . ( 2018 ) : The challenges in computer supported conceptual engineering design . Computers in Industry , 95 , 22 – 37 [ 6 ] Tiwari , V . , Jain , P . K . , & Tandon , P . ( 2016 ) . Product design concept evaluation using rough sets and VIKOR method . Advanced Engineering Informatics , 30 ( 1 ) , 16 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . aei . 2015 . 11 . 005 . [ 7 ] Chin , K - S . , Wong , T . N . , ( 1996 ) Knowledge - based Evaluation for the Conceptual DesignDevelopmentofInjectionMoldingParts . EngineeringApplicationArtificial Intelligence , 9 ( 4 ) , 359 – 376 [ 8 ] Kim , Y . S . , Kim , K . - Y . ( 2012 ) : DCR - based causal design knowledge evaluation method and system for future CAD applications . Computer Aided Design , 44 , 947 - 960 [ 9 ] Louhichi , B . , Rivest , L . ( 2014 ) : MaintainingconsistencybetweenCADelementsin collaborative design using association management and propagation . Computers in Industry , 65 , 124 - 135 [ 10 ] Eltaief , A . , Louhichi , B . , Remy , S . ( 2018 ) : Associations management and change propagation in the CAD assembly . Computers in Industry , 98 , 134 – 144 [ 11 ] Andreadis , G . , Fourtounis , G . , Bouzakis K . ( 2015 ) : Collaborative design in the era of cloud computing . Advances in Engineering Software , 81 , 66 - 72 [ 12 ] Moldovan , C . C . , Staturetu , I . , ( 2016 ) : A virtual prototyping system research and implementation in a collaborative PLM environment . Procedia Technology , 22 , 1006 - 1013 [ 13 ] Martinez - Maldonado , R . , Goodyear , P . , Carvalho , L . , Thompson , K . , Hernandez - Leo , D . , Dimitriadis , Y . , Prieto , L . P . , Wardak , D . ( 2017 ) : Supporting collaborative design activity in a multi - user digital design ecology . Computers in Human Be - havior , 71 , 327 - 342 [ 14 ] Komoto , H . , Tomiyama , T . ( 2012 ) : A framework for computer - aided conceptual design and its application to system architecting of mechatronic products . Com - puter Aided Design , 44 , 931 - 946 [ 15 ] Khan , S . , Tuncer , B . ( 2019 ) : Gesture and speech elicitation for 3D CAD modeling in conceptual design . Automation in Construction , 106 , 102847 [ 16 ] Mukherjee , A . , Liu , C . R . ( 1997 ) : Conceptual Design , Manufacturability Evalu - ation And Preliminary Process Planning Using Function - Form Relationships In Stamped Metal Parts . Robotics & Computer - Integrated Manufacturing , 13 ( 3 ) , 253 - 270 [ 17 ] Clayton , M . J . , Kunz , J . C . , Fischer , M . A . ( 1996 ) : Rapid Conceptual Design Evalua - tion Using a Virtual Product Model . Engineering Application Artificial Intelligence , 9 ( 4 ) , 439 – 451 [ 18 ] Delgado - Maciel , J . , Cortes - Robles , G . , Sanchez - Ramirez , C . , Garcia - Alcaraz , J . , Mendez - Contreras , J . M . ( 2020 ) : The evaluation of conceptual design through dynamic simulation : A proposal based on TRIZ and system Dynamics . Computers & Industrial Engineering , 149 , 106785 [ 19 ] Weyrich , M . , Klein , P . , Steden , F . ( 2014 ) : Reuse of modules for mechatronic mod - eling and evaluation of manufacturing systems in the conceptual design and basic engineering phase . Proceedings of the 19th World Congress The International Federation of Automatic Control [ 20 ] Chami , M . , Bruel , J . M . ( 2015 ) : Towards an Integrated Conceptual Design Evalua - tion of Mechatronic Systems : The SysDICE Approach . Procedia Computer Science , 51 , 650 – 659 [ 21 ] Moulianitis , V . C . , Zachiotis , G . - A . D . , Aspragathos , N . A . ( 2018 ) : Anewindexbased on mechatronics abilities for the conceptual design evaluation . Mechatronics , 49 , 67 – 76 [ 22 ] de Silva , C . W . , Behbahani , S . ( 2013 ) : A design paradigm for mechatronic systems . Mechatronics , 23 , 960 – 966 [ 23 ] Akay , D . , Kulak , O . , Henson , B . , ( 2011 ) : Conceptual design evaluation using interval type - 2 fuzzy information axiom . Computers in Industry , 62 , 138 – 146 [ 24 ] Couturier , P . , Imoussaten , A . ( 2015 ) : A qualitative method for evaluation in conceptual design . IFAC - PapersOnLine , 48 - 3 , 721 – 726 [ 25 ] Liu , W . , Tan , R . , Cao , G . , Zhang , Z . , Huang , S . , Liu , L . ( 2019 ) : Aproposedradicality evaluation method for design ideas at conceptual design stage . Computers & Industrial Engineering , 132 , 141 – 152 [ 26 ] Shah , J . J . , Vargas - Hernandez , N . , Smith , S . M . ( 2003 ) : Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Design Studies , 24 ( 2 ) , 111 - 134 [ 27 ] Chan , J . , Dow , S . P . , Schunn , C . D . ( 2015 ) : Do the best design ideas ( really ) come from conceptually distant sources of inspiration ? Design Studies , 36 ( C ) , 31 - 58 [ 28 ] Ismail , I . N . , Halim , K . A . , Sahari , K . S . M . , Anuar , A . , Jalal , M . F . A . , Syaifoelida , F . , Eqwan , M . R . , ( 2016 ) : Design and Development of Platform Deployment Arm ( PDA ) For Boiler Header Inspection at Thermal Power Plant by Using the House of Quality ( HOQ ) Approach . Procedia Computer Science , 105 , 296 – 303 [ 29 ] Hurwicz , L . ( 1951 ) : The Generalised Bayes Minimax Principle : A Criterion for Decision Making Under Uncertainty . Cowles Comission Discussion Paper , 355 , 7p . [ 30 ] Wen , M . , Iwamura , K . ( 2008 ) : Fuzzy facility location - allocation problem under the Hurwicz criterion . European Journal of Operational Research , 184 , 627 – 635 261