Marking Time : Predictable Transitions in Task Groups Connie J . G . Gersick The Academy of Management Journal , Vol . 32 , No . 2 . ( Jun . , 1989 ) , pp . 274 - 309 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0001 - 4273 % 28198906 % 2932 % 3A2 % 3C274 % 3AMTPTIT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - M The Academy of Management Journal is currently published by Academy of Management . Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / about / terms . html . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / journals / aom . html . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is an independent not - for - profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals . For more information regarding JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . http : / / www . jstor . org Fri Apr 20 01 : 22 : 43 2007 @ Academy of Management Journal 1989 , Vol . 32 , No . 2 , 274 - 309 . MARKING TIME : PREDICTABLE TRANSITIONS IN TASK GROUPS CONNIE J . G . GERSICK University of California , Los Angeles A new model of group development suggests that groups ' attention to time and pacing is an important catalyst of their progress through cre - ative projects . In this laboratory study , groups were videotaped as they produced creative products and then interviewed about replays of se - lected portions of the tapes . Participants ' efforts to pace themselves were explored in depth , with special focus on a key feature of the model , a major transition in groups ' approach toward their work at the midpoint of their allotted time . The appropriateness of laboratory sim - ulation for studying midpoint transitions was also assessed . The labo - ratory results mirrored and extended the field - based model ; they showed how groups make deliberate attentional shifts at their temporal midpoints , what differences exist between pacing patterns in the first and second halves of groups ' life spans , and what happens when tran - sitions fail . Implications are drawn for theory , practice , and research . Organizations often rely on small groups when they need an innovation by a deadline . Managers appoint time - limited task forces and committees to deal with novel problems . Businesses designate time - limited project groups to invent new products . Consultants set up time - limited retreats for top - executive teams to design new strategies . How do such groups manage - or fail - to produce unpredictable outcomes within preset schedules ? Answer - ing that question requires understanding ( 1 ) how groups progress through creative tasks and ( 2 ) how groups pace themselves , or fit work into time . Although there are important literatures bearing on each of those two points separately , almost no research has considered the integrative question of how groups pace themselves through creative work . However , my recent field study of the complete life cycles of special project groups ( Gersick , 1988 ) did explore how teams finished creative products by their deadlines . The study proposed a new model of group development - the path a group takes over its life span toward the accomplishment of its main tasks - that includes the mechanisms and timing of change . It suggested , furthermore , that there are strong , heretofore unrecognized connections between groups ' I am grateful to Kelin Gersick , Richard Hackman , Barbara Lawrence , Daniel Levinson , Leslie Ray , and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper and to Michael Patton , Leslie Ray , and several M . B . A . student participants for their assistance in carrying out the research . This project was supported by a grant from the Research Committee of the University of California , Los Angeles , Academic Senate . 1989 Gersick 275 pacing efforts and their creative work progress : specifically , that the former can catalyze the latter . This article discusses a study conducted to follow up on my original research by exploring the cognitive and behavioral links between pacing and development . A laboratory simulation was designed to permit both close observation of groups working and close questioning of participants on how they thought about their work . Using this previously untried design with the field - based model dictated a second purpose for the study : to assess the suitability of laboratory simulation as a research tool for the phenomena of interest . PREVIOUS RESEARCH For groups with creative assignments and the responsibility to invent their own work processes , pace is a complex manifestation of group mem - bers ' speed in managing their own interaction and their interaction with outside stakeholders , solving problems , and discovering and developing new ideas . Understanding what such groups do to accomplish those ends by a deadline overlaps importantly with understanding what they do to create a product at all . One source of information about these issues is the nascent body of empirical research on the effects of time limits on problem - solving groups . Studies have shown that groups adjust both their rate of work ( McGrath & Kelly , 1986 ) and their style of interaction ( Frye & Stritch , 1964 ; Hermann , 1972 ; Hoffman & O ' Day , 1979 ; Isenberg , 1981 ; Pruitt & Drews , 1969 ) in response to time constraints . For example , McGrath and Kelly found that " the shorter the time limit on [ an initial ] work period , the higher the rate " at which groups studied in a laboratory solved anagrams ( 1986 : 98 ) . Groups given more time in their first trials not only worked more slowly but showed more attention to interpersonal matters in their interaction patterns ( Mc - Grath , forthcoming ) . Isenberg ( 1981 ) found similarly that groups solving a set of memory - related problems both communicated at a faster rate and used more autocratic decision - making processes under high time pressure than they did when time pressure was low . Those findings were based on labo - ratory groups with sets of similar problems to do in time periods of 3 to 20 minutes . Do the findings extend to groups working through larger , more complex projects ? The literature on group problem solving , or decision development in small groups , should help answer that question . However , although such research has done much to identify the activities groups use to solve prob - lems , it has not attended to pacing . Based on a paradigm of development as an unvarying sequence of stages or activities ( Poole , 1983a ) , ' it has tradi - ' Poole ( 1983a , b ) showed that groups in fact develop in multiple sequences ; however , single - sequence models continue to be presented in management texts as factual representa - tions of group development ( e . g . , Hellriegel , Slocum , & Woodman , 1986 ; Szilagy & Wallace , 1987 ; Tosi , Rizzo , & Carroll , 1986 ) . 276 Academy of Management Journal June tionally concentrated on discovering the content and order of those stages . Bales and Strodtbeck ' s ( 1951 ) model , " orientation , evaluation , control , " is both classic and indicative . It is implicit in the sequential paradigm that a group advances to a given stage only , and whenever , it completes the prior stage . Perhaps naturally , then , researchers working in this tradition have not investigated the timing or mechanics of how a group moves from one stage to the next , as several previous authors have noted ( Hare , 1976 ; McGrath , 1986 ; Poole , 1983b ; Tuckman , 1965 ) , or how groups fit stages into time limits . Background : The Field Study The point of departure for this research was a field study of how task forces - naturally occurring teams brought together specifically to do special projects in limited time periods - actually got work done . I observed eight groups from six different organizations from the start to the finish of their projects . The organizations included a bank , a hospital , a community fund - raising group , a psychiatric treatment center , and two universities . Complete transcripts of groups ' meetings and interviews with the members of four groups were analyzed inductively to derive a model of group development . The findings ( Gersick , 1988 ) showed that teams did not develop in a universal sequence of activities or stages , as traditional models have pre - dicted . Groups ' histories varied considerably . However , even though groups ' projects ranged from several days to several months in duration , there were striking similarities in the times that groups formed , maintained , and changed their approaches toward their work . Every group exhibited a dis - tinctive approach to its task as soon as it commenced and stayed with that approach through a period of inertia , ' which I called phase 1 , that lasted until precisely halfway through the group ' s allotted duration . Every group then underwent what I called a transition . In a concentrated burst of activity , groups dropped old patterns , reengaged with their outside supervisors , adopted new perspectives on their work , and made dramatic progress . The events that occurred during those transitions shaped , for every group , a new approach to its task . Those new approaches carried groups through a second major phase of inertial activity , called phase 2 , as they executed plans cre - ated at their transition . Groups made one last shift in their behavior patterns just before their deadlines , when they launched into a final burst of activity to finish their work . I called this last phase completion . The findings of the field study seemed to call for a different paradigm of development , not simply a different stage model . The difference between the temporally defined phases that emerged and the traditional activity - defined stages is somewhat analogous to the difference between seeing the structure of football as a set of time - based quarters ( phases ) with wide variation in the This article uses the dictionary definition of inertia as the tendency of a body to remain in a condition : if standing still , to remain so ; if moving , to keep moving on the same course . 1989 Gersick 277 sequence of plays across games and seeing it as a sequence of different styles of play ( stages ) that are the same for every game . Moreover , the linear , additive , building block model of traditional group - development theory was not a good description of the data . The data from my field study suggested that groups ' progress was less a succession of stages than a punctuated equilibrium ( Eldrege & Gould , 1972 ) , or an alter - nation of inertial movement and radical change . Groups established percep - tual and behavior patterns suddenly and worked within those patterns for relatively long periods . They moved ahead by virtue of concentrated bursts of revolutionary change in those patterns . Groups ' histories were so varied that progress could not be interpreted as the accomplishment of enough results in one stage to proceed to the next . Instead , the consistent timing of the transition and members ' comments in meetings and interviews sug - gested that major progress occurred when and because members felt partic - ularly strongly that it was time to move ahead . The most striking single feature of the proposed model , and possibly the most critical for understanding the developmental dynamics of creative in - vention in groups , is the midpoint transition . In each group , the transition was the moment when group members made fundamental changes in their conceptualization of their own work . They pulled in new ideas and reframed their accrued experience in ways that enabled them to jump forward . Groups did not make such basic changes in their overall direction either before or after these key moments . To the extent that invention means seeing things in a new way , transitions may be at the heart of the invention process . The Current Study The punctuated equilibrium model describes some specific earmarks of the transition from phase 1 to phase 2 and specifically proposes that group members ' attention to time is the trigger for that transition . The premise of this study was that if group projects could be effectively simulated in a laboratory setting , those earmark events should be as identifiable as they were in the field . By videotaping meetings and replaying those key events ( among others ) for the groups , participants could be asked to observe their own specific behaviors and to discuss their own understanding of what those behaviors meant , independent of researcher conjecture . Data from meetings and interviews could then be combined to refine and enrich the model of group development and to explore some questions about it through grounded theory ( Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ) . The laboratory process , in which interviews immediately followed brief , videotaped group meetings , was expected to allow participants to re - call substantially more about their perceptions and intentions than they could in the field , where projects lasted much longer and interviews were postponed until after meeting observations were complete , to minimize in - trusiveness . However , it was not clear whether patterns observed in natu - rally occurring teams could also arise under artificial conditions and dras - 278 Academy of Management Journal June tically shorter time limits . As McGrath ( 1987 ) pointed out , we currently have no theory of how laboratory time translates to real - world time . An important issue for the study , then , was to see if the field - observed patterns appeared at all or appeared in distorted form . The current study addressed three research questions . The first was if transitions occurred , and if they did , how they worked . Transcript excerpts of meeting behavior itself , alongside members ' interpretations of their own actions , are used both to show the extent to which transitions occurred in these laboratory groups and to illustrate precisely why and how groups made transitional changes . The second question addressed how groups paced themselves through - out their lifespans and what was special about their temporal midpoints . Given the proposed critical role of time in transitions , it is important to understand the temporal context in which groups place their midpoint . Is the special energy associated with it a localized effect , like a reaction to an alarm clock , that can be evoked any time someone inside or outside a group sets off a similar alarm ? Or is a midpoint ' s effect more context - dependent , part of a larger pattern of groups ' feelings about how they will use their entire time span ? The third research question was what happened when the midpoint of a group ' s allotted time passed without the team ' s completing a minimally successful transition by closing its phase 1 agenda and agreeing on a new basis for phase 2 work . The proposed model suggests that a transition pro - vides a chance for teams to take fresh approaches to their projects by inter - rupting the inertial movement of phase 1 . However , if a group ' s reaction to time , not the completion of a certain amount of work , triggers transition , the moment will arrive whether or not members are ready to make good use of it . The transition period is an opportunity for change , not a change in and of itself . A team may experience the transition period without being able to change itself successfully or well . In the field study , none of the teams altered their fundamental ap - proaches after the midpoint transition , and problems left unresolved ( or resolved in a dysfunctional way ) at transitions persisted throughout phase 2 . The midpoint opportunity appears to be fleeting . It is important to explore what happens in teams that do not progress at their midpoints , since the concept of a temporally determined , time - limited chance for major change is so different from the traditional idea that teams progress gradually as they finish the work of each stage . METHODS Data Sources This study was initiated not simply to see whether certain phenomena occurred but also to investigate why and how they occurred . Thorough , in - depth analysis of a small number of teams was therefore chosen over a 1989 Gersick 279 large - sample approach . I studied eight groups of M . B . A . students ( six groups of three and two groups of four ) between December 1985 and May 1986 . Subjects were solicited through classroom visits , where the research was explained as a study of how groups get work done . Session dates were set in advance , and a research assistant composed the groups by telephoning vol - unteers until he found enough who could come for each session . This pro - cess yielded groups of people with varying degrees of acquaintanceship with one another , as might normally occur in a work organization . Volunteers knew they would be paid five dollars per hour for participating . The Simulation The laboratory sessions were set in a small conference room , with a clock in the middle of one end wall . The clock was already there , so it was not a conspicuous addition to the room . A video camera was set up against the wall opposite the clock and linked to a remote television monitor in the adjoining room . Subjects were requested to arrive on the hour . Once all had arrived , they were given a set of materials about their task and told they would have 15 or 20 minutes to peruse the materials , after which I would convene them for a one - hour meeting to do the task . They were asked not to converse until their meeting was convened . The materials the subjects received were designed to simulate a real organizational project group in the following respects : The open - ended , cre - ative task required them to construct a concrete product . The subjects had an external client for their product and some information about the client ' s preferences . They had internal organizational supervisors with whom they could initiate communication . They had a finite but negotiable pool of re - sources to use and some requirements to meet . A written task assignment informed them that they were to assume the role of professional advertising writers at a major urban radio station and that their assignment was to come up with the pilot commercial for a pro - spective client , a well - known airline company . They would have one hour to meet and create a 60 - second commercial ; no written product was required , but at the end of the hour , a technician would tape them acting out their ad . They were told that several groups would be doing commercials and that the group whose product was judged to be the best according to the client ' s criteria would receive a bonus of ten dollars per member . The performance and competition were intended to help motivate the students to finish on time and to attend to the requirements and evaluation criteria , given the artificiality of the situation . Each team ' s materials included a folder of information about the client , a description of requirements and resources , a list of the costs of a recording session , a statement about how much the ad could cost , and the client ' s criteria for evaluating the ad . Each group received an audio tape player , four different music tapes , and two sound effects tapes . The budget allowed a group to use only one of the music tapes . Finally , each group had a telephone 280 Academy of Management Journal June and the numbers of two " vice presidents . " They could call one if they wanted to argue for a budget increase ; they could call the other for advice about the client ' s probable response to their ideas . A research assistant played the role of the vice presidents . After subjects had reviewed the material , I repeated their instructions and gave them a chance to ask questions . They were asked to sit at the end of the table facing the camera ; they had to turn if they wanted to see the wall clock . Groups were timed so that meetings could start on a half hour . Meetings were videotaped while I watched on the remote monitor . As each meeting progressed , I made a handwritten transcript and marked the elapsed time and the videotape counter - number in the margin . As I went along , I starred segments I might want to replay for a group . Segments to be replayed were not chosen mechanically or randomly but were selected for their potential to illuminate times , group members ' thought processes , and events of theoretical importance . The model identifies the very beginning and the midpoint of groups ' lives as times when groups respectively form and change basic patterns , so I starred those moments . The model postulates that groups ' attention to time catalyzes transitions , so moments when members remarked on the time were starred . Since the model proposes that groups make their most significant progress in a concentrated , midpoint burst , I starred moments when the group members strongly urged each other to get moving or appeared to take an especially significant step forward . Finally , the model suggests that groups are particularly receptive to contact with external supervisors at the midpoint and that such contact importantly influences their transitions . Therefore , I starred moments when teams telephoned , or discussed tele - phoning , a vice president . When one hour had elapsed , a research assistant entered the conference room and recorded the group ' s ad on audio tape . He then rewound the videotape . During that time , I selected the starred portions of the written transcripts that appeared most informative or most relevant to the group ' s progress in light of my overview of the whole meeting . To avoid attributing unwarranted importance to the midpoint , I always selected segments from within the first and second halves of each group ' s life span , in addition to segments from the beginning and middle of each hour . The number of seg - ments that could be played for each group varied somewhat because of variation in how much group members had to say . After selecting segments , I entered the room and explained to group members that I was interested in knowing what they were thinking at dif - ferent times during their meeting , noting that there were no right or wrong answers . I began by asking them what they were thinking immediately be - fore the meeting started . No videotape was played at that time . Next , I played five or six one - to - two minute segments of videotape and asked open - ended questions after each segment , following Ericsson and Simon ' s ( 1984 ) sug - gestions for protocol analysis . The first question for every segment was 1989 Gersick 281 " What were you thinking then ? " The last was " Can you recall anything else from that segment ? " Somewhat more specific questions were also asked , to clarify and probe what participants said ( e . g . , " Why did you say [ XI ? " ) . Group members were interviewed together . Doing so undoubtedly pre - vented some participants from speaking freely about some issues , but it elicited a wider range of comments than individual interviews would have , as people reacted to their teammates ' views . It also meant that people did not have to wait to be interviewed , thereby insuring immediacy and providing more time to view and discuss the tapes3 Interviews were audio taped . Written transcripts were made of each group ' s videotape and interview tape . Although I generally did not record nonverbal behavior , transcripts included notations to show when team members looked at the clock and when they took physical actions related to work , such as taking out paper and pen , picking up or using the music tapes and tape player , using the telephone , or taking out their folders of informational materials . Analysis Data reduction . As Miles and Huberman ( 1984 : 21 ) pointed out , the first step in qualitative analysis is reducing the data into a manageable form . Data reduction aimed ( 1 ) to produce a literal condensation of each group ' s meet - ing both compact and informative enough to work with and ( 2 ) to require a very thorough reading of transcripts , so information inconsistent with the original model could not easily be overlooked . In reducing the data , I did not follow the approach , taken in many quantitative studies , of placing every statement group members made into a category and then deriving frequencies . Instead , my strategy was to construct a concise , qualitative map of each meeting . The map consisted of a detailed synopsis of a group ' s discussion on the right half of each page , with code letters on the left half of the page denoting every spot in the meeting where certain types of statements occurred . The codes could be used , for example , to locate every comment a team made about time and pacing , and then the synopsis could be used to see exactly what was said , in what context , and how teammates responded . Condensation of groups ' discussions . For every team , two initial meet - ing maps were created independently , one by me and one by a research assistant . The research assistant knew the general outline and purpose of the study but had not observed any of the group meetings or interviews or read the interview transcripts . Every turn each group member took to speak was numbered , for cross - referencing of maps and transcripts . Members ' ex - changes were then abstracted , a few statements at a time , into detailed sum - maries of each topic of the meeting . For example " 22 - 65 : Z and T report ideas they had while reading information materials " indicates that in state - On an initial trial run , both individual and group interviews were conducted ; the group interviews were more productive . 282 Academy of Management Journal June ments 22 to 65 , members Zoe and ~ e r i ~ sustained a conversation on the topic described before moving to a new topic . Each summary headed a qualitative segment of a meeting map . A category system was developed to identify several types of statements to select from the transcript and record - either verbatim or condensed - under the summary headings . The code letters placed in the left margin of the map showed the location of each such statement . Categories were not exhaustive or mutually exclusive . People often tried to accomplish several purposes in the same speaking turn , so many statements were multiply coded . Since groups ' deliberate efforts to move ahead correspond imperfectly with the actual creation of their products , I used two broad classes of cate - gories . The first showed actions group members took to manage the work process . Action statements indicated members ' attempts to shape their group ' s progress on its work . There were three types of action statements : In process comments , members made suggestions about how their group should proceed with the work . Process comments were coded with a P . In time - pacing comments , members might mention time directly , by noting what time it was , or how much time had elapsed or was left , or members might try to pace their group by saying when something should be done in reference to the group ' s allotted time ( e . g . , " toward the end ; before too long " ) , to how long an action would take , or to finishing on time . Such statements contrast to references to when something should be done accord - ing to a logical sequence of subtasks . Time - pacing comments were coded T . In resources - requirements comments , group members drew attention to their group ' s resources , requirements , or criteria for the task or explicitly tried to shape the product in accordance with the group ' s resources or re - quirements . Resources - requirements comments were coded R . There were two types of query comments . The first , coded Q , repre - sented a participant ' s telephone call to one of the vice presidents . The sec - ond , coded q , coded mentions of telephoning with no call made . The second class of categories traced contributions to the final product . Using a transcript of the recording of each commercial as a guide , we coded the first appearance of ideas found in the finished product . We could then tell when groups were producing usable materials , whether or not they knew they were doing so , when groups ' efforts were directly fruitful , when groups created basic formats to organize ideas , as opposed to scattered details , and when groups were working on different aspects of their products . Coding for statements that contributed to the final product was as follows . In content statements , group members mentioned selling points to be pushed in the ad or gave ideas for content themes or story lines , the content of dialogue , or information to be presented . Content statements were coded # c . Detail statements , coded # d , concerned small modifications or fine All names that appear in this article are pseudonyms . 1989 Gersick 283 points of ad content . Format statements , coded # f , expressed ideas for the basic format of the ad , the vehicle through which the information would be conveyed . Procedure statements , coded # p , gave ideas about the process of acting out the ad and about who would do what for the recording session . Table 1 shows examples of the coded statements and excerpts from meeting maps . After creating the initial maps , the research assistant and I met to com - pare results . We discussed discrepancies until agreement could be reached , referring to the original videotapes if necessary . Cases of unresolved dis - agreement were noted . This process produced a final map of each meeting . As a measure of interrater agreement on the initial , uncorrected meeting maps , reliabilities were calculated for each type of action statement coded . On the basis of Rosenthal ' s ( 1987 ) suggestion for handling dummy variables , phi was calculated for each pair of maps and the results averaged . The mean interrater reliability for time - pacing comments was . 85 for the eight groups ( range = . 70 - 1 . 00 ) . ~ Data display and further analysis . The next steps of qualitative analysis are to select and display parts of the reduced data so research questions can be answered ( Miles & Huberman , 1984 ) . Again working independently , the research assistant and I used the corrected meeting maps to assess pacing and transition processes . To gain an overview of team pacing , the interview transcripts were searched for all members ' comments about their awareness of time and pac - ing . Time comments from the meeting transcripts were isolated and all avail - able interview comments about them were displayed below the meeting excerpts . The last task of the data analysis was to gauge the extent to which each group experienced a transition and to display any interview comments that illuminated the transition process . The first step in this task was to see if meetings broke into major segments , or periods within which activities were ~ i m i l a r . ~ We then determined whether transitions occurred by searching each team ' s data to see if the following configuration of events , identified as indicating transitions in the field study , occurred within a single ten min - Mean interrater reliabilities for other statements coded were . 83 for Q and q comments [ . 95 if one group with only one q comment and zero reliability is excluded ) ; . 73 for P comments ; and . 70 for R comments . ' We used several kinds of data to see if meetings broke into segments . The qualitative summaries of members ' exchanges were isolated and scanned to see if a group ' s miniconver - sations could be grouped into larger chunks , such as " generating raw materials to present in the ad " or " writing and developing a script . " Coded contributions to the final product were simi - larly isolated and , if possible , grouped ; we might note , for instance , that all main elements of ad content ( items coded # c ) were mentioned by X minutes elapsed time , and only minor details and procedures ( items coded # d and # p ) were added after X minutes . Next , the process state - ments [ items coded P ) were used , along with the meeting segments , to pinpoint any moments when groups made major steps forward in their work , such as consolidating agreement on main selling points or beginning work on the concept for the ad ' s script . Academy of Management Journal TABLE 1 Examples of Coded Statements and Meeting Mapsa a ) Coded Statements Type of Letter Type of Statement Code Comment Action P Process statements T Time - pacing H Resources - requirements Contributions # c Content to the final product # d Detail # f Format # p Procedure b ) Excerpts from Two Meeting ~ a p s ~ Examples Why don ' t we just toss out some ideas that we could get into the commercial . Well , do you want to play a tape and see what kind of mood we come up with ? It seems to me that in the limited time we have ( looks at clock ) , what we might want to do is . . . We still have 32 minutes . I was thinking , kind of shoot for 8 : 00 and sort of get - get the concept . That ' s $ 200 per thing , so we basically have the choice of one . Let ' s take one more look over these three ( reads client criteria ; all check folders ) . A rich movie star get [ s ] into a car . . . chauffeur says " What terminal , sir ? " You want to push both [ budget and first class ] . Should the brakes slam or not ? . . . They should . Say " Including Europe , Hawaii - " What if we had a conversation between two people . . . 1 You can have two different points of view , the budget point of view and the - I ' ll do the second person . Can anvone do that noise ? " eerrrrr ? " 1 You ' re hired . 61 - 91 : Discussion of using music and sound effects H 61 D : We have to tailor it toward the L . A . market , so I was thinking it should be # C Beach Boys type music , as opposed to Mozart . 62 - 64 : C & K agree it shouldn ' t be Mozart ; you use music to make a point . # c 67 D : It ' s nice to have classy music to . . . establish an image , but that ' s not really the point . The point is they ' re setting up a hub and they want you to fly it . 530 - 549 : Getting ready and assigning tasks for trial run P 530 M : Why don ' t you set up the music ? # P 532 - 548 : Who and when to do " swoosh " ; J will swoosh and will time it . R 541 J : It ' s 50 bucks there ( for sound effect ) . " Slashes divide sequential statements by different team members . Dashes indicate pauses or breaks in speech . ' ' Numbers indicate the sequence of statements . 1989 Gersick 285 utes of meeting time : ( 1 ) a time - pacing comment , ( 2 ) a clear effort to con - clude or drop phase 1 activity , and ( 3 ) a clear effort to take a major step ahead with the work . We also checked the timing of such configurations of events to see if transitions occurred at the midpoint or at some other time in each meeting . Since contact between teams and external stakeholders , usually supervisors , played important roles in the field teams ' transitions , we checked the maps to see if members moved to telephone a vice president or referred to the group ' s requirements or resources during a transition . Finally , the data were consulted to see whether , in fact , there was a jump ahead in task progress during transitions ; however , achieved progress was considered a measure of the success of a transition , not an indicator of whether or not one occurred . Relevant excerpts from meeting transcripts , interview transcripts , and data displays were used to document the results of every search . After the research assistant and I had analyzed each group independently , we dis - cussed and reconciled discrepancies . RESULTS The results of the study will be presented in three parts corresponding to the research questions identified in the introductory section . The entire data set was used for all the research questions ; however , in order to report every group ' s transition with both depth and economy , I have divided the transcript data among the three parts . 7 The first part of this section examines meeting and interview transcripts from four groups to illustrate the extent to which laboratory transitions can mimic those observed in the field . At the same time , these data are analyzed to suggest how the transitional jump in progress works . The second part examines the overall patterns of time - pacing comments from all eight groups ' meetings , to explore how groups pace themselves . It then presents data from a different subset of four groups in which off - schedule attempts to spark transitions occurred , to probe the special role of the temporal mid - point . In the third part , the one group in the study that experienced serious problems with its work is examined for the lessons it offers about what happens when the midpoint passes without a team ' s completing a successful transition . Transitions in the Laboratory Did midpoint transitions occur in this laboratory setting ? If they did , how did they work ? A key hypothesis generated by the field study was that groups take the major steps in their work suddenly , when and because mem - The one group that did not finish its task provides unique data about a problematic transition and is therefore presented in the third part of the Results section . Four groups that included members who made off - schedule attempts to precipitate transitions are presented in the second part , since they offer some unique data about the timing of transitions . I chose the three remaining groups , along with one from the second part , to present in the first part . 286 Academy of Management Journal June bers feel it is time to do so , not gradually , as they complete a prerequisite amount of work . All eight groups studied exhibited such time - linked tran - sitions , displaying explicit attention to time , accompanied by efforts to con - clude an initial phase of the work and efforts to shift ahead . In six of the groups , transitions occurred at the midpoint of the groups ' allotted time . In group 5 , where one member ' s watch was slow and another overestimated the time limit , the transition was slightly late , and in group 8 , it was early . Groups ' behavior with regard to outside requirements and resources was less similar to the field results than was behavior regarding transitions . The four teams whose meeting and interview transcripts are excerpted in this sub - section provide succinct , representative illustrations of the mechanics of midpoint transitions and show some important variation in how the eight lab teams worked . Attention to time . In all eight groups , members made time - related com - ments at their midpoints , varying from a brief remark to a careful evaluation of the group ' s time use ( see Table 3 ) . Table 2 shows details of those com - ments . The video dialogues in this table are from portions of group meetings that were played back for participants . The interview excerpts below them are members ' comments on the video segments . In group 3 , for example , one member simply noted " we only have a half hour more , " whereas group 2 ' s members interrupted their work on the product to assess how they were " doing for time " and to plan how to pace their work over the remaining half hour . In groups 1 and 4 , members voiced more overt concerns about finish - ing on time : " Once it passes the halfway point , that ' s when the panic sets in " ( lv : 322 ) . ' " You know , if we had three or four hours . . . that ' s one of the things we ' ve got to think about here " ( 4v : 255 ) . This midpoint attention to time is interesting per se , but the important theoretical question is whether or not it affected the development of groups ' work . Table 2 documents members ' explicit midpoint decisions that they should shift gears because of the time . When asked " [ Is there ] anything you can remember about that part of the tape ? " Pat , in group 1 ( li : 135 - 139 ) , described thinking that because it was " the halfway point . . . we did . . . have to get down to business now . " In group 2 , Dan and Nick stated point - blank that " it was time to move on with the task " ( 2i : 99 ; 100 ) and Karl explained how he judged that it was " important to start writing " so the group would have time to make changes later . Other comments offer similar evidence and suggest further that time overrides considerations about the amount of work that ' s been done as a stimulus to move ahead . In group 3 ( 3i : 92 ) , Rob noted that even though , in task terms , he felt they didn ' t " have enough written down " yet to move forward , he still thought " we better get something done on this thing , and go with it . " Finally , Ben ' s statement ( 4i : 106 ) in group 4 shows his assessment In the notation " lv : 322 , " 1 identifies the group , " v " indicates the quote is from the video transcript , and 322 is the statement ' s number in the original transcript ; in other notations , " i " means a quote is from an interview transcript . 1989 Gersick 287 TABLE 2 Time - linked Efforts to Move Ahead at the Midpoint in Four Groups Description Group of Excerpt 1 Meeting videotape , 30 minutes elapsed 1 Group interview 2 Meeting videotape , 30 minutes elapsed 31 minutes elapsed Group interview Statementsa 316 May : Do we care that they carry Columbian coffee instead of instant ? 319 May : Alright , I think we ' re running out of time . 320 Jon : [ looks at clock ) We have 28 minutes . 322 Pat : Uh oh . Once it passes the halfway point , that ' s when the panic sets in . 326 May : OK so we ' ve got this music playing and we ' re going to open with the business scenario of high pressure , fast pace . 327 May : So what ' s our opening line ? 328 Pat : Something like [ suggests line ) . 333 Jon : I don ' t know . . . This is supposed to be creative . . . and probably we ' re not doing it . ( Talks at length ; outlines whole ad , including format , music , sound effects . ) 135 - 139 Pat : I remember thinking . . . it was now , indeed , the halfway point . . . . There was no question in my mind that we were going to get it done . But I was recognizing your concern . . . that you were - watching the clock and that . . . we did . . . have to get down to business now . 140 May : When I [ mentioned the coffee ] I was trying to raise issues so we could say " no , that isn ' t important , let ' s get on with more important issues3 ' - like trying to stimulate some kind of - coming - to a conclusion . . . . 144 May : I was anxious to get something down on paper in the form of a script . And I liked the fact that he had an idea and we were going with it . 147 Pat : Jon was wrapping up and providing a condensed version , basically , of our last 20 minutes and what we wanted to do , with some of his own viewpoints and interpretations . 321 Nick : How are we doing for time ? ( All look at clock ; it is exactly half past . ) 323 Karl : We ' re doing OK . We have till what - 9 : 00 ? 325 Karl : I ' m just watching the time , we ' re doing OK . 326 Nick : I think we should keep a 10 - minute margin . But we should be through by [ 8 : 50 ] . There ' ll be lots of copy and we ' ll have a - 327 Clark : Practice . Yeah . We ' ve got to hit ( summarizes 3 issues to cover ) . 357 Dan : We can start putting this all together . We have ( describes how commercial would be ) . 97 Clark : I thought we should start writing then . We knew the points we were going to put in , so let ' s start . . . At that point , it seemed like we had a lot of time - 99 Dan : . . . It was time to move on with the task . . . . And Clark was - sort of summarizing and re - focusing us to continue to move ahead , and no longer formulate ideas , but transform it into the ad . 100 Nick : I thought it was time to get moving and just get it writ - ten . Whether we get it right or not , we want to get it written . 102 Karl : I was obviously concerned about the time . . . . I knew Description Group of Excerpt 3 Meeting videotape , 28 minutes elapsed 30 minutes elapsed 3 Group interview 4 Meeting videotape , 30 minutes elapsed 31 minutes elapsed 4 Group interview Academy of Management Journal TABLE 2 ( continued ) we could make a . . . change or leave something and then come back . So it seemed important to start writing . Starting thinking more about a script rather than just ideas . . . . 256 Ann : OK , should we listen to some of this [ music ] or just - ? 257 Rob : ( Suggests playing Beethoven tape . ) 258 Ann : Well , maybe that would class up the image . I mean we only have a half hour more ( R looks at clock ) but let ' s class up the image ! 264 Deb : How ' bout this ? ! As it goes " ba ba ba bum , " say " Brussels ! " 280 - 292 Ann : ( Plays rock tape , ad libs to music , as in final product . ] 288 Deb : Oh ! That was perfect ! Right like you said that ! 78 Ann : We were really disjointed . And that gave us something real concrete . . . if we can ' t agree on the concepts , can ' t agree on the text , if we don ' t have a niche marketplace , let ' s at least listen to the music . 81 Deb : . . . it was the first time we started to put on thinking caps as about not what we wanted to say . but how we wanted to say it , and it changed the direction of the conversation . From then on - - from that point on , I started to get a clearer and clearer idea what I wanted this commercial to be . 92 Rob : I started having a lot of fun as soon as P started playing the music , . . I also remember thinking . . . it ' s too soon to do that because we don ' t have enough written down about what the message would be . . . [ but I thought ] we better get soniething done on this thing , and go with it . 206 Ben : We still have 32 minutes . [ Want to ] play one [ tape ] and see what kind of mood we come up with ? 207 Ian : ( Suggests idea using Beethoven tape . ) 224 Ian : We ' re going to have to script this . . . . 225 Ben : . . . alright , let ' s go . You know , if we had three or four hours , we [ could try other things ] - that ' s one of the things we ' ve got to think about here . I Iike the Beethoven idea and being on a time constraint , I feel like , let ' s go with that idea and build from there . 236 Ian : Or you know how we can do it ? We can have a dialogue between two people ? And have one guy say " Joe , I ' d love to fly - " 237 Ben : ( joining in ) " It ' s just so expensive . " 238 Ian : And he goes " Guess what ? Da , da , da , da . People Express ! " 239 Ben : Oh , that could be great ! 61 Ian : ( carlier in interview ) I was . . . wondering who was going to come up with the big concept of the commercial . . . . Like my roommate . . . comes up with the big idea and I throw all the jokes inside . . . . And I could feel the shift at one point , where . . . our ideas were a lot niore creative , whereas before they were just really analytical . 100 Ben : This was . . . the beginning stage of coming up with the TABLE 2 ( continued ) Description Group of Excerpt Statementsa final product more so than the facts . We got the facts . . . and we were in the state now where we were throwing out ideas . . . . It was a real give and take . . . the meat of the creative process . 105 Fred : Well , I was watching my watch , that ' s why - 106 Ben : That ' s what pulled it together is time . . . . You always could make it a little bit better . . . . But time pulls you in a sense of " well , that ' s one limitation we can ' t get around here . " And so whatever you got , quit talking about it , just get it on there . " Initial numbers indicate the sequence of statements . that the group could have continued their current activity indefinitely but that they simply had to move forward , " Time pulls you . . . that ' s one lim - itation we can ' t get around here . And so whatever you got , quit talking about it , just get it on there . " Efforts to conclude an initial phase of the work and shift ahead . The hypothesized model proposes that at the transition , groups are poised for a major turning point in their development . The field study suggested that , at the midpoint , groups stop the activity that has dominated the first half of their time and , if their transitions are successful , quickly move into a new , qualitatively different phase of work activity . Table 2 documents group members ' discussion of their efforts to do that . In groups 1 and 2 , members ' remarks suggest that they brought an initial phase of activity to an abrupt close by summarizing it and then shifted their attention ahead to the next step in a deliberate fashion . In group 1 ' s meeting , May made two consecutive statements , first summarizing the group ' s gen - eral idea of what the product would be like ( lv : 326 ) and then immediately prodding the group to move on from there : " So what ' s our opening line ? " May ' s interview mirrors this pattern when she says she was trying to stim - ulate the group ' s " coming to a conclusion " ( li : 140 ) , then adds that she was " anxious to get . . . a script . " Pat describes Jon ' s long statement in the meet - ing as a " wrapping up . . . of our last 20 minutes and what we wanted to do " ( li : 147 ) . In group 2 , Clark summarized the issues the product should cover ( 2v : 327 ) and , in the interview , Dan said Clark was " summarizing and refocusing us to continue to move ahead - and no longer formulate ideas , but transform it into the ad . " Dan ' s statement that " we can start putting this all together " ( 2v : 357 ) launched group 2 into the work of transforming " ideas into the ad " just 60 seconds after the group ' s midpoint . The transcripts for groups 3 and 4 also indicate that group members saw this part of the meeting as a turning point between two major work segments : " . . . it was the first time we started to [ think ] about not what we wanted to say but how we wanted to say it , and it changed the direction of the 290 Academy of Management Journal June conversation " ( 3i : 81 ) . In group 4 , Ben described the midpoint as " the be - ginning stage of coming up with the final product more so than the facts . . . the meat of the creative process " ( 4 : 100 ) ; Ian said he " could feel the shift at one point , where our ideas were a lot more creative , whereas before they were just really analytical " ( 4i : 61 ) . Groups 3 and 4 were not as far along in their work as groups 1 and 2 when they reached the midpoint , and the way they accomplished the jump ahead was somewhat different . For groups 1 and 2 , the transition was a little like stamping " complete " on one subtask and turning to the in - basket for the next subtask . Groups 3 and 4 made the shift less tidily , but equally deliber - ately , by reaching out for a new source of inspiration - something to catalyze their progress . In these teams , the catalyst was the music tapes they had been given to work with : " . . . if we can ' t agree on the concepts , can ' t agree on the text , if we don ' t have a niche marketplace , let ' s at least listen to the music " ( 3i : 78 ) . " [ Do you want to ] play one and see what kind of mood we come up with ? " ( 4v : 206 ) . Groups 3 and 4 each came up with " the big concept of the commercial " ( 4 : 61 ) within two minutes of their midpoints ( see 3v : 280 - 288 and 4v : 236 - 239 ) . Agreement on a basis for the work . In the field study , the transition was a moment when successful groups agreed on some concrete plan or goal that formed the basis for moving forward with their projects . In doing so , they eliminated competing possibilities and gave themselves a platform from which to construct further work . There was evidence that the laboratory groups also did this . In groups 1 and 2 , members ' summary statements do more than bring an end to an initial phase of activity : they close off options ( " and no longer formulate ideas " [ 2i : 991 ) and provide a point of focus for the next step ( " So . . . we ' re going to open with the business scenario . . . " [ lv : 3261 ) . Comments from groups 3 and 4 , who did not begin their transitions with summaries of the work they had done , show that they also wanted to zero in on a focused plan . Ann ' s comment ( 3i : 78 ) in group 3 indicated that she pulled out the music tapes specifically because she was looking for something " concrete " on which a " disjointed " group could agree . Group 4 essentially pounced on one idea as soon as members came up with something appealing : " I like the Beethoven idea and being on a time constraint , I feel like , let ' s go with that idea and build from there " ( 4v : 225 ) . Attention to outside stakeholders . The field study identified the mid - point as a time when teams were especially influenceable by and interested in contact with outside stakeholders . In some cases , midpoint contact helped teams make choices and move ahead , and often teams ' midpoint matching of their product with outside requirements and resources was critical to project success . Four of the eight field teams had special midpoint meetings with outside ~ takeholders , ~ two initiated by the team , one by the supervisor , and one mutually initiated by the team and outside stakeholders . One of the field team ' s meetings with an outside supervisor was announced at the mid - point and carried out just afterward . 1989 Gersick 291 In the laboratory study , several teams did check requirements and re - sources at the time of their transition , but requirements were more likely to enter teams ' discussions throughout their first half hours . Of the seven teams whose members raised the idea of calling their vice president , four teams made calls , about the same proportion that initiated direct contact in the field study . No calls were made during transitions , however . Almost all telephone activity occurred during the first 27 minutes of teams ' hours , in which seven of the eight calls and 1 2 of the 14 comments about calling occurred . Half of that activity occurred between 22 and 27 minutes elasped time ( 5 calls , 4 comments ) . The sharp drop in calls after the 27 - minute point and the clustering of calls slightly before the midpoint are interesting indexes of differences in teams ' activities between phases 1 and 2 . The calls made between the 22nd and 27th minutes may reflect teams ' running low on patience with phase 1 materials . Furthermore , comments made after 21 minutes had passed dealt mainly with participants ' desire for information to help them make choices , whereas earlier phone calls and comments about phone calls more often dealt with the clarification of facts . ' ' The laboratory teams were therefore somewhat similar to the field teams that regarded supervisors as potential sources of fresh input to catalyze their decision making . But the lab groups showed virtually no concern about their supervisors ' evaluation of them and few expectations that they would get help over the telephone , beyond such simple assistance as a description of the radio audience . In those respects , the lab groups were very different from the field groups . In summary , the evidence from these experimental groups suggests that it is possible to observe the central features of a transition in a laboratory . Groups did make sudden , time - linked shifts in their work at the midpoint of their lifespans . Members ' comments suggest that they chose halfway as a point when they ought to move forward with their work , whatever the amount of material they had generated so far or could potentially generate . Members ' deliberate shifts in attention appeared to be central to the mechan - ics of the laboratory transitions . Members either declared their first phase of activity complete and turned to the next phase , or they sought out a fresh source of ideas . In each team , members moved to narrow down their work by trying to select a concrete base on which to construct their product . The one area that did not match the field results was teams ' contact with outside supervisors . Pacing and the Midpoint How do groups pace themselves through time , and how is the midpoint special ? An overview of all the time - pacing comments from all eight groups shows when and how often group members voiced concern with pacing . It shows the special status of the midpoint and suggests there may be differ - ' ' A summary of Q and q comments is available from the author . 292 Academy of Management Journal June ences between pacing activities in the first and second halves of groups ' time . Excerpts from groups in which members made " early " attempts to move teammates ahead show how groups responded to off - schedule , non - midpoint pacing efforts . Overall patterns of attention to time and pacing . Figure l a shows when every time comment was made , with each group ' s pacing pattern isolated by row . ( Cases in which several statements about time were made in one con - tinuous exchange were counted as one . ) Figure l b is simplified to give a sharper overall picture of when , in the hour , time comments occurred in all eight groups combined . Table 3 shows the abbreviated content of all time comments . The most significant aspect of the distribution of comments is that there FIGURE 1A Patterns of Time Comments in Eight Groups Time 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 Group 0 . . . . / . . . . I . . . . / . . . . 1 . . . . 1 . . . . 1 . . . . / . . . . / . . . . I . . . . 1 . . . . 1 . . . . 60 * * * * * 2 0 . . . . / . . . . 1 . . . . 1 . . . . / . . . . I . . . . I . . . . / . . . . 1 . . . . / . . . . 1 . . . . / . . . . 60 * * * * * * * * 4 0 . . . . I . . . . I . . . . I . . . . . . . . / . . . . / . . . . I . . . . / . . . . 1 . . . . / . . . . 1 . . . . 60 Time 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 FIGURE 1B Patterns of Time Comments in Eight Groups Collapsed Time 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 . . . . 1 . . . . / . . . . I . . . . I . . . . I . . . . * 1 . . I I Total = 12 time comments Total = 35 time comments 1989 Gersick 293 was one segment , from 28 to 31 minutes elapsed time , during which a time comment occurred in every group . Comments were made at precisely 30 minutes in six groups ; in the remaining two groups , one member commented on the " halfway point " at 31 minutes elapsed time , and one remarked that there was " a half hour " left at 28 minutes elapsed time . There was no other 3 - minute segment when more than four groups made time comments until the last 8 minutes . There was no other segment when more than five groups made time comments . Halfway emerges as the most likely moment at which at least one group member will call attention to time or pacing . It is also evident from Figure 1 and Table 3 that members made several comments about time and pacing in every group and that those comments were not evenly distributed across the hour . Clearly , groups do not univer - sally wait for the midpoint to begin pacing themselves ; at least in some cases , they start talking about how fast to work from the start . As Table 3 shows , the first four time comments , made at 4 and 5 minutes elapsed time , all call attention to the total time limit , as if to set the group ' s initial pace at a fast enough rate : " Come on , we only have an hour ! " Two of the other pre - midpoint time comments simply check the time , without calling for any action . A third pattern evident in Figure 1 is the difference in the frequency of comments in the first and last 25 minutes of the groups ' meetings . The midpoint appeared to divide groups ' hours into two parts during which members turned their attention to time at different rates . Two groups did not mention time at all until the midpoint . Across groups , a total of 1 2 time comments were made in the first 25 minutes . During the last 25 minutes , 35 comments - almost three times as many - were made . This skewed distri - bution occurred in six of the groups . Evidently , the less time a group has left , the more frequently pacing activity occurs , with a jump in the rate at the midpoint . Along with differences in frequency , there is a difference in the place - ment of comments made during the first and second halves of the meetings . Comments in the first 25 minutes cluster near 5 minutes , 15 minutes , and 20 minutes , whereas comments in the last half occur at less orderly intervals . The neat clusters of time comments suggest the possibility that for the first half of their time , these students were mechanically pacing themselves against temporal milestones that were relatively independent of the amount of work they had done - the midpoint being by far the most important . In this portion of the groups ' life spans , time limits were much clearer than the amount of work they had to do , given a novel task and great latitude to vary the ambitiousness of their plans . In contrast , the varied spacing of time comments in the second half of groups ' meetings may indicate increased clarity about work plans . Not only were groups hurrying themselves more as the deadline approached , but their struggles to fit work into time may have become more particularistic as they dealt with more concrete demands from the specific plans they had generated . The importance of the midpoint . All but one group ( group 8 , whose Academy of Management Journal June TABLE 3 An Overview of Time and Pacing Comments in the Eight Groups Time Minutes Period Elapsed Group 0 - 28 4 3 minutesa 28 - 32 2 8 minutes - the midpoint 30 Statements Maybe we should just start making some basics because actually I have a feeling an hour is going to go really fast . It seems to me that in the limited time we have ( looks at clock ) what we might want to do is start by thinking what type of ad do we want to do . Maybe what we should do , considering the time constraint , is make a list . . . . ( teammates are joking ) Come on , we only have one hour ! How are we doing on time ? OK ( looks at watch ) . We should get a concept down real fast , because we need to - see if it ' s . . . too boring , whatever . We should really start writing this ( looks at clock and watch ) . We have 45 minutes . How much more time do we have ? I Plenty of time . 140 minutes . We can rattle off 40 commercials . I When did we start ? / 9 : 30 1 OK . OK , I think we ought to start writing some dialogue ( looks at clock ) . You know . . . as far as the other end , I ' m thinking about the production end of it . I think all we have to do just right now ( looks at watch ] is pick one or the other . ( looks at clock ) You know , I think we should stop at - like - I don ' t wanna say stop , but we should get our ideas down . It ' s gonna take a while to write it out . That scares me , ' cause that takes a long time , I Yeah - I was thinking , kind of shoot for 8 : 00 and sort of - Get the concept [ first ] . ( one , then all look at clock ) We have 20 minutes gone . I Should we brainstorm , just ideas for the ad - ? We only have a half hour more - but let ' s class up the image ! How are we doing for time ? I ( all look at clock ) 1 We ' re doing OK , I I think we should keep a ten minute margin . But we should be through by [ 8 : 50 ] . There ' ll be lots of copy and we ' ll have a - I Practice . Do you want to play one again ? ( looks at clock ) We still have 32 minutes . Play one and see what kind of mood we come up with ? Maybe we should start on the script pretty soon . The real time is going to be spent writing up ( looks at clock ) and maybe we should do this separately . [ Would anyone ] feel good about writing the other section or should we all work on it together ? I ' m just thinking about time ( looks at clock ) . Alright . ( looks at clock ) It ' s 8 : OO . We ' ve got half an hour to put this together . . . . Are we ready to move on to concepts for the one - minute spot ? Gersick TABLE 3 ( continued ) Time Minutes Period Elapsed Group Statements 30 8 We have to decide right now . . . either do something . . . realistic or make it funny . . . and we don ' t have an hour to make up a whole jingle . 3 1 1 Alright , we ' re running out of time . I We have 28 minutes . 1 Uh oh . Once it passes the halfway point , that ' s when the panic sets in . 35 - 48 3 5 1 Let ' s run through the whole idea . . . and if we don ' t like minutes it , we [ could ] can it and we still have 20 minutes to - 3 5 3 We have 25 minutes ! 1 OK let ' s start writing some script . Let ' s try this music . If it doesn ' t work , we only have 25 more minutes . 3 5 6 I guess that [ point ' s ] nothing we should worry about too long . We don ' t have the time . 3 7 5 We better start writing the script , since we only have 20 minutes left . 1 We ' ve got a half hour ! / Really ? ( looks at watch ) I have 20 minutes . . . less than 20 minutes ( looks at clock ) . I Really ? When did we start ? 125 after . 37 3 Ready for some script ? We have to time it . We have . . . 20 minutes to write a whole script ! 40 2 We better get some words down . We ' ve got - ten minutes to get some words ! 40 4 OK , we ' ve got to nail it down ( looks at watch ) or we ' re not going to be ready . ! ( looks at watch ) We ' ve got 20 minutes . I We ' ve got to get a script . OK , what do we have the first guy say ? 4 3 3 We have about 10 minutes to finish this . 4 3 4 We ' re down to 15 minutes ! . . . but we don ' t have all week to do this . We just need to get something down now . 4 3 6 We need to write this down - fast , too ( looks at clock ) . 4 3 7 I think we need to ( looks at clock ) get down and write something . 44 7 What would be the jingle ? We really have to decide on things now , otherwise - 46 4 We ' ve got 15 minutes here . We ' ll just go with it , It ' s not to perfection . 4 7 5 I think we have to can quality control because we ' ve only got 10 minutes left and we ' ve only got about 3 lines written ( suggests they divide the labor ) . 47 8 ( looks at clock ) I think we ' re in good shape . 48 4 Eleven minutes . Maybe we ought to go back to the thing on vacation . I Start working on it because we ' re running out of time . Just have a 15 - second dialogue that gets the facts out , OK ? 50 - 60 50 1 We like anything at this point in time . minutes 50 7 ( responding to suggestion ) Well we don ' t have time ( looks at clock ) I think we really have got to get it together . Academy of Management Journal TABLE 3 ( continued ) - - Time Minutes Period Elapsed Group Statements We ' ve got to get it done in 5 minutes . And we ' ve got to minutes have time to practice once , at least . ( continued ) 5 2 3 I ' m at the point I don ' t care what we do . We only have like 3 minutes to finish this and practice once . i We have 7 minutes . / But it ' ll take 5 to [ practice & revise ] . i Well , we better do something . We ' re closing in on the last 10 minutes . / I know , we ' ve got to get going here . I think we should try a dry run in about 2 minutes . It doesn ' t matter . Not right now ( re refining product ) . We need to run through this . . . the time is really a problem . Is that enough help ? / Gotta be , cause . . . we have about three minutes . We ' ve only got a minute here . . . OK we ' ve got three . . . four minutes here ( looks at clock ) . OK we ' ve got ( summarizes script ) . Now we ' ve got to . . . / Alright , we have to think about ( XI , We ' re looking at 2112 minutes ! 55 8 OK , now run through it one more time , and then pick out the music , because we ' ve got 3 minutes ! 5 5 3 How are we doing on time ? / We have 4 minutes left . 56 3 We . . . have time to go through it one time . Let ' s go through it once . Who wants to do what ? 56 1 Why don ' t we play through it once . i It ' s not long enough yet . i Well , put it this way . We have 31 ! z minutes to go . 5 7 4 Let ' s give it one try . We ' ve got a minute and a half . 5 8 8 Final rehearsal ! We have - 2 minutes left ! ( looks at clock ) 58 2 There ' s no time to talk about price ! ( as topic in ad ) 59 4 It ' s great ! We still have not quite figured out the music here . We ' ve got 30 more seconds ! ( laughs ) 5 9 7 Call . . . the marketing manager . . . . Tell him we need a 15 - minute extension . " There were no time comments during the following : 6 - 13 minutes , 16 - 18 minutes , and 23 - 27 minutes . transition is explained below ) waited until the midpoint to make a major transition in their work , even though members of six groups began com - menting about time before then . It appears that early efforts to pace a group don ' t usually push it into a transition . For the most part , teammates ap - peared to regard pre - midpoint times as early , and post - midpoint times as late , for making the transitional shifts into a qualitatively different type of work activity . Table 4 provides evidence of this awareness with excerpts from three teams who talked about pre - midpoint pacing in their interviews . The first TABLE 4 " Off - Schedule " Pacing Comments in Three Groups Group 1 Description of Excerpt Meeting videotape , 19 minutes elapsed 1 Group interview 5 5 Meeting videotape , 30 minutes elapsed Group interview 6 Meeting video , 20 minutes elapsed 6 Group interview Statements 185 May : How much time do we have ? 186 Pat : ( not looking up ] Plenty of time . 187 Jon : ( looks at clock ) 40 minutes . We can rattle off 40 commercials . 188 May : When did we start ? ( looks at clock ) 86 May : I got a little bit impatient . . . . And I really needed to be more aware of time . . . . That ' s when Pat said " Oh , we have forty more minutes ! Plenty of time ! " And I think later on , we referred to time . . . she ' s like " OK , now we ' ve reached the halfway point . Now we ' re really in trouble ! " 251 Meg : ( interrupts talk about number of flight departures ) Well , you ' d have to add them up . Maybe we should start on the script pretty soon . 112 Meg : Feeling time pressure . . . I could envision how much work we had left to do . And even though we had about 25 minutes left , I really felt we had to start then . 113 Cora : I felt . . . it would be a pretty good idea to start . We could also wait for a little . I wasn ' t feeling it was mandatory to start right then . 114 Sam : It turns out I had thought we actually had a few more minutes than we did at that point . So I could see the value of starting early but I didn ' t probably feel as pressured as Meg did , mistakenly so . It turns out , when I finally got on the right time schedule , I started to get a little desperate . 200 Teri : ( looks at clock ) You know , I think we should stop at like - I don ' t wanna say stop , but we should get our ideas down . It ' s gonna take a while to write it out . That scares me , cause that takes a long time . 201 Sid : Yeah - I was thinking , kind of shoot for 8 : 00 and sort of - get the concept [ first ] . 80 Zoe : I had been thinking that we should set up a time table . And then Teri said it . And then - I was also thinking - if I had to write the ad by myself , I could probably do it but I wasn ' t sure we could get it all together by the time limit . 82 Sid : I had an image that we would form the idea completely and then - execute . . . . At that point , I was hoping to stall a move to start working on it too soon and thereby sort of freeze where we were because I felt we were really just . . . spinning off a lot of ideas . . . I felt as we got a really good idea [ we ] could have time to work on it . We would be able to do it really fast . Q : You mentioned 8 : 00 . How did that figure in ? 88 Sid : That was halfway between 7 : 30 and 8 : 30 . ( They laugh ) No , and I thought if we waited until 8 : 00 , that would still give us half an hour , which ought to be enough to execute it . And that way , we sort of set a number . . . we could work toward it and then at that moment , we would shift gears and go into the execution . 298 Academy of Management Journal June excerpt shows one participant ' s observation that one of her teammates went from an assessment that the group had " plenty of time " to the statement " OK , now we ' ve reached the halfway point . Now we ' re really in trouble ! " in just 10 minutes . Group 5 illustrates the importance as a catalyst of group members ' per - ception that they are at the midpoint of their time - as opposed to the ab - solute number of minutes they ' ve spent - and it indicates the need for team agreement that it is time to move . In group 5 , Meg was clearly " feeling time pressure " at the midpoint , but Sam , whose watch was wrong , thought it was " [ too ] early . . . mistakenly so . " Cora , who said in the interview she had thought they had an hour and a half to work , was also feeling no need " to start right then . " Seven minutes later , Meg mentioned the time explicitly , and the group clarified its schedule . The following is an excerpt from group 5 ' s video transcript , at 37 minutes elapsed time . 302 Meg : Well , we better start writing the script , since we only have 20 minutes left . 303 Sam : ( jerks up head , picks up watch from table ) We ' ve got a half hour . 304 Meg : Really ? ( leans forward , looks at watch on table ) I have 20 minutes . . . ( looks at wall clock ) . At this point , Sam apparently thought it was " late " to be moving into script writing , judging from his comment that " When I finally got on the right time schedule , I started to get a little desperate . " Group 6 provides a final illustration of a team ' s reluctance to make a transition before its midpoint . The following interview excerpts show the reaction of members of group 6 to a video segment from 15 minutes into the meeting , when the group was discussing story ideas . 56 Teri : . . . we came back and forth to that same concept a couple of times . . . . there was a long period when my thoughts were pretty much the same . It fit in there . 66 Sid : I actually remember at that point . . . I wondered whether I was sort of stirring the pot about the idea in order not to have to cope with - 67 Teri : The work of it . 68 Sid : ( agreeing ) - who had to do it , because I was really fearful of that - having to actually execute this . So I . . . may have been hoping that we can . . . extend the concept of talking about the idea so as to not have to do it . At the 15 - minute mark , group 6 was circling around the same ideas without doing much to move on . Progress was not simply a matter of striding ahead as soon as a group had enough raw material . Table 4 shows the group 5 minutes later , more restless about time - and it shows Sid ' s conscious plan to " shoot for " a transition at the midpoint . When Teri asked the group to plan its time use , Sid " stall [ ed ] a move to start working on it too soon " ( my emphasis ) , this time because he felt the group 1989 Gersick 299 was working well and he didn ' t want to forgo the possibility of coming up with " a really good idea " ( 6i : 82 ) . He planned waiting until 8 : 00 , because that " was halfway between 7 : 30 and 8 : 30 . " He explained his plan as setting a number to work toward , " and then at that moment , we would shift gears and go into the execution . " Group 8 was the only one that made a major shift before the midpoint . One of the group ' s members started the meeting with a clear structure for pacing the group ' s work . He said at the very beginning of the interview that he " wanted to start right into it " and that he was " trying . . . to formulate things in a time structure . " He added , " You know , for the hour , I was think - ing , OK , we can spend the first half hour deciding what we want , the next 15 minutes writing , the next 15 minutes refining it " ( my emphasis ) . His teammates did use this three - part structure , except they started into their second segment 7 minutes early . They took only 23 minutes to outline all the elements for their ad , then created a complete first - draft script be - tween 23 and 42 minutes elapsed time . They spent the last third of their time rehearsing and revising the ad . The video transcripts clearly indicate that group 8 ' s move ahead was time - linked , like the other groups ' transitions . The following statements are from 15 and 20 minutes elapsed time , respec - tively . 216 Ned : So , we should really start writing this . We have 45 minutes . ( Group does not write , but develops two alternative story lines . ) 266 Ned : I think all we have to do just right now ( looks at watch ) is pick one [ story line ] or the other . ( 3 minutes later , the group settles on one choice and starts writing . ) The major difference between this team and the others was that one member prodded the group to start ahead of schedule , and his teammates went along . There seem to have been several contributors to group 8 ' s early progress : expertise , agreement , and a clear work schedule . One group member with entertainment experience was ready immediately with script scenarios . Members agreed quickly on content for the ad . Perhaps most important , Ned ' s teammates agreed to let him pace their work . In their interview , Joan said : " [ Kathy ] and I pretty much acquiesced to all of - everything [ Ned ] said about budget and time . " Since Ned had explicitly structured both the time and the work into segments as the meeting began , and Joan had had expe - rience with the task , they may have been more likely than other teams to declare or recognize a part of the work as done and move to the next step . In summary , the overall distribution of time comments and transcript evidence about off - schedule pacing attempts suggest the following : ( 1 ) Pac - ing occurs in every team , but individuals vary in their patterns of attention to time . At least some team members begin consciously pacing themselves from the start of work . ( 2 ) Some teammate convergence , or agreement that 300 Academy of Management Journal June " the time is right , " is necessary to precipitate a transition . ( 3 ) Under some circumstances , team members may agree that it is time for a transition before they are halfway through , but in most cases , ( 4 ) the midpoint is the most likely time at which team members will feel both ready and willing to de - clare that it is time to move ahead with the work . Unsuccessful Transitions What happens when a midpoint passes without a successful transition ? The serendipitous difficulties of one of the laboratory teams , group 7 , allow the exploration of this question . Table 5 begins with excerpts from both the midpoint and later in group 7 ' s meeting . Table 5 ( 7v : 268 and 272 ) shows that this group started its transition the same way as the other groups in the study . Pete noted the time , stressing that there was half an hour left . He asked the group to turn to its next subtask : " Are we ready to move on to concepts for the spot ? " Getting no strong response , he backtracked and summarized what he thought the group had agreed on so far ( 7v : 274 ) . The interview indicates that his teammates felt the same time pressure and also felt that it was time to move on . However , members said they did not advance to the next step because they were unable to stop " discussion mode " ( 7i : 157 - 175 and 191 ) . The team could not close debate and agree on a basis for phase 2 work , as statements 303 and 375 in the video transcript indicate . One member expressly described the group ' s trouble as a faulty transition : " Our problem was going from an idea phase to a paper phase . . . that transition was really bad . We should have said ' OK , [ this is it ] ' . . . We had no framework to fit the ideas into . " Video transcript lines 374 - 376 show how group 7 finally did start on a script . With only 10 minutes left , Pete simply stopped further discussion and started dictating . Until then , the team still had not agreed on a common basis for production . Andy , commenting in his interview on video excerpt 374 , said , " Just before this , basically we had nothing . We each had ideas , but . . . our ideas were different . " At that point , however , the team acquiesced : " As soon as [ Pete ] got that paper out there , I knew that was going to be it , because those guys wanted something so badly " ( Josh ' s interview comment on video segments 372 - 374 ) . Although there were certainly multiple reasons for group 7 ' s problems , the transcripts suggest that resistance to Pete ' s leadership was one contrib - utor . However , it seems doubtful that it was working through that problem that finally got the team moving : Pete ultimately dictated the product to the group . Instead , it seems it was the additional temporal jolt of being 10 min - utes from the deadline that made the difference , as video segments 372 - 374 suggest . But if teams feel they must progress at halftime or be unable to finish , why would a team try again at the last minute ? Group 7 seemed to reduce the impossibility by collapsing its standards . As Pete said , " We ' ve got to start generating garbage . " Description of Excerut Meeting videotape , 30 minutes elapsed 37 minutes elapsed 50 minutes elapsed Group interview on midpoint segment Later in the interview TABLE 5 Group 7 : An Unsuccessful Transition Statements 268 Pete : Alright . ( looks at clock ) It ' s 8 : OO . We ' ve got half an hour to put this thing together . Are we ready to move on to concepts for the spot ? 272 Pete : Do we have any disagreement on what we ' re going to sell ? 273 ( all ) : No . 274 Pete : We ' re selling the convenience and the public splash . 303 Fred : . . . but we really have to decide . . . what thing are you going to sell ? 372 Fred : We don ' t have time - I think we really got to get it together . 374 Pete : We ' ve got to get it done in 5 minutes . . . What kind of music fits ? 375 Fred : Before we pick the music - what kind of thing are we going to write ? 376 Pete : OK , let me give you - what I envisioned . . . ( starts " talking " the script , and writes as he talks ) 156 Pete : I thought . . . we took ten minutes to decide that but nobody really knew we had decided it so - make a point of saying " thirty minutes . Halfway through . We decided on what we wanted to try and do . Let ' s work for a concept . . . . " And I felt we were pretty much on schedule . Something was going to come out of it . 157 Andy : That ' s where I felt . . . it ' s at that point that you write something . And I couldn ' t figure out how . . . . It ' s such a different kind of process . But we were still in the discussion mode instead of whatever mode you get into - 173 Fred : I felt we were wandering . . . I just wanted to make that thing stop so we could then define exactly what we were going to be doing . 174 Pete : It was really important to you to get something down on paper ? 175 Fred : No . To stop something . We were discussing things we already talked about . 191 Josh : There was a point . . . it was kind of fleeting . . . where I really felt I needed a break . . . but I wasn ' t able to bring it up because I continued to participate in the discussion . Where I almost wanted to say " OK everybody stop , sit down and write your one minute commercial . . . . " ( Andy agrees ) Right at that same point , we had about half an hour left and I wanted that time to think , and form an idea . And we didn ' t get it again . 235 Andy : Our problem was going from an idea phase to a paper phase . . . . That transition was really bad . . . . We should have said OK [ this is it ] . Then we could have - it ' s in production that the idea ' s going to fit in . But we had no framework to fit the ideas into . 236 Pete : I didn ' t feel it was acceptable at [ that ] time , to bring out paper . 237 Fred : Yeah , we had been trying to extend the time . 264 Pete : I didn ' t feel like I was leading it , . . I never got the feeling that I could structure their time . 265 Andy : Right . We never gave you that . Group 7 was the only team that did not complete a script . After 59 minutes , members tried unsuccessfully to telephone their vice president to ask for a 15 - minute extension . In the end , they had to ad - lib half of their commercial . 302 Academy of Management Journal June The evidence suggests it was not the case that group 7 simply had no transition . Team members felt it was time for a major shift and exhibited much of the same transitional behavior as other teams . However , they did not manage the opportunity successfully enough to launch a productive second half of the group ' s life span . Josh ' s interview comments directly support the hypothesis of the midpoint as a temporary ( and in this case , missed ) opportunity : " There was a point . . . it was kind of fleeting . . . where I really felt I needed a break . . . we had about half an hour left and I wanted that time to . . . form an idea . And we didn ' t get it again " ( i : 191 ) . DISCUSSION The results of this study suggest there is much to learn about group pacing and transitions from laboratory study . Not only did these laboratory group meetings follow patterns originally seen in naturally occurring teams of much longer duration ; in their interviews , laboratory participants de - scribed their own development specifically in terms of time - based transi - tions and halfway - through shifts in work activities . There are several facets of the results to discuss : the substantive findings about transition and pacing processes gained from the transcript analyses , the degree to which the lab - oratory groups mirrored the findings from the field study , and implications for research and practice . Transition Processes The starting point for this study was a punctuated equilibrium model of development , according to which groups persevere with the same cognitive approaches to their projects until their midpoint , when they reinitiate a search for ideas and adopt new perspectives on their work ( Gersick , 1988 ) . The results of the current study support and extend the field - generated com - parison between midpoint pacing efforts and problemistic search , March and Simon ' s ( 1958 ) concept that boundedly rational humans seldom change their basic strategies unless interrupted by a problem . In this case , the prob - lem is the midpoint reminder of the deadline . The findings show a deliber - ate , abrupt attentional shift at the heart of groups ' midpoint efforts to prog - ress . This shift occurs in two related but separate parts : the closing of a group ' s initial phase of work and the pursuit of a next step that is specific to the group . These results also seem related to findings from individual problem - solving research on the Einstellung effect , the tendency of subjects to persist with the same approach to a problem or series of problems whether or not that approach is productive ( Luchins , 1940 ) . Commenting on Jensen ' s ( 1960 ) findings , Ericsson and Simon reported that " the effect is not the result of inadvertent mechanization , but results from subjects ' deliberate choices of strategy . A number of experiments have reduced the Einstellung effect by marking the test problems as separate problems rather than a continuation of the sequence of problems presented before " ( 1984 : 129 ) . Possibly , then , 1989 Gersick 303 groups ' deliberate decisions to close one phase and open a new phase of their work involve a redefinition of their situation or of the task at hand . Such redefinition would be similar to " marking test problems " as starting a separate sequence and therefore calling for a new choice of strategy . Such redefinition may be critical to a team ' s ability to take new approaches . Two ways of making this shift were observed . One way consisted of summarizing previous work , declaring it complete , and picking up a next subtask . A second way was observed in groups whose phase 1 agendas appeared to be floundering . These groups just dropped stalled phase 1 ap - proaches and reached out for a fresh source of inspiration , something around which to crystallize further efforts . The special significance of the second way is that it confers special influence on whatever inspiration source the group happens to choose . In the field study , several groups looked outward - most importantly , to outside stakeholders or requirements - to provide some of this inspiration . The laboratory groups used simpler resources : their music tapes . It is pre - mature to interpret the laboratory findings as a negation of the field results . The lab teams ' connections to their vice presidents did not compare to the powerful team - context relationships operating in real life , and team - supervisor communication was not two - way , as in the field . However , this study does suggest that teams searching for ideas at transition will turn to sources from which they expect some relevant help , not necessarily to ex - ternal supervisors or contexts . Pacing Processes Because the model presented in this research links groups ' transitions to time , it raises questions about pacing . What are the connections between groups ' pacing efforts and their work progress ? Why are temporal midpoints special , and how do groups pace themselves throughout their life spans ? Why would groups ' opportunity to make a quantum leap be best at - and possibly limited to - a particular slice of their time ? The field research that preceded this study suggests that bounded ratio - nality , a cognitive barrier , limits a group ' s ability to take fresh approaches to its task before the midpoint of its life span . The current results suggest that group time - structuring regulates some motivational barriers as well . Group members discussed several sources of reluctance to move from one part of their task to the next in the first half of their time . One source was a fear that the next step might be too difficult . Another described source of inertia was a reluctance to narrow choices prematurely and forgo the chance to think of something better . A third source was a reluctance to compromise with team - mates or bow to someone ' s leadership attempts and agree on one plan . In the face of such forces , group members seem to make a pact with themselves . They use time as a heuristic for deciding how long they will remain on the same track and when they must forge ahead . Such a heuristic is particularly 304 Academy of Management Journal June understandable for time - limited tasks that are novel and open - ended , in which temporal milestones are much more accessible than purely task - based signals for moving ahead . As one participant noted , " You always could make it a little bit better , " but a deadline imposes limits . Individual group members vary somewhat in how early and how con - sciously they start to structure their time and in the temporal milestones they choose . But transitions are unlikely to occur until there is some team agree - ment on the appropriate moment to shift ahead . The special power of the midpoint appears to be that it is the most likely time that members will select , consciously or unconsciously , as a key milestone . Groups are more likely to have a quorum of members simultaneously ready to make changes at that point than either earlier or later , and members are less likely to feel it is the wrong time to make changes than at any other point . If a shared , precise temporal milestone , not a gradually mounting ur - gency , sets off a transition , the collective feeling that " now is the right time to move " must be temporally limited . Beyond a certain time , it will be clear that the midpoint ( or other milestone ) has passed . The current evidence suggests that if a milestone passes without the occurrence of enough per - ceived progress , a team will experience the passing as a failure , and their shared sense of opportunity will probably be lost until the next temporal milestone . The one field group whose transition failed was disbanded on the spot . The one laboratory group whose transition failed did not begin pro - ducing until the deadline was imminent . These results must be interpreted cautiously because of the small numbers of groups studied , but they do argue for further research on the consequences of , and remedies for , flawed tran - sitions . Groups ' pacing patterns were more idiosyncratic after the transition than during phase 1 . It is possible that pacing was more often driven by both temporal and task milestones during phase 2 , as members worked on spe - cific pieces of product designs made more concrete at the transition . Such an interpretation is consistent with Norden ' s finding about project managers ' handling of schedule delays in two - and three - year - long R & D projects : The reduction of maneuvering room [ to recover lost time ] is not an absolute function of the time remaining , but depends on the relative reduction in the " degrees of freedom " inherent in tacti - cal choices made from the start . . . [ As one respondent indicated ] : " When you ' re half - way through a project , you ' re locked - in a lot deeper than when you ' re just getting under way " ( 1965 : 306 ) . A Field - Laboratory Comparison There were some differences between the dynamics observed in this laboratory study and the dynamics observed in the naturally occurring groups . In the field , groups met on several occasions . They prepared home - 1989 Gersick 305 work and communicated with independently acting outside stakeholders between meetings , and they often extended their midpoint meetings beyond their usual time limits in order to complete a key piece of work . Because of the laboratory design , the groups described in this study lacked the flexibil - ity to extend their time spans , so it was not possible to see comparable changes in groups ' routines or external interaction . It was not possible to identify a clearly bounded " transition meeting " with a set of transition ac - complishments . Because of these restrictions , too , laboratory transitions were more temporally compact and less complex than some of the transi - tions observed in the field . More important , the laboratory setting did not simulate team - supervisor relations very well , thus restricting the generaliz - ability of results dealing with that facet of team development . A final difference has to do with the shortness of the time span for the laboratory teams ' work . The fact that the lab groups made many more time comments overall than the field groups and the increased frequency of all the lab groups ' time comments toward the end of their meeting hour suggest that the sharper a group ' s time constraints , the more frequently participants will pay explicit attention to time and pacing . The intensity of teams ' atten - tion to time was probably exaggerated in the one - hour laboratory sessions . To an extent , that exaggeration was a great advantage because it heightened the very phenomenon I wanted to study . Since the midpoint effect was first discovered in the field and then observed in the lab , that particular finding appears to be robust . However , it is important to be cautious about general - izing laboratory pacing patterns back to the field wholesale . Notwithstanding these differences , the central features of the midpoint transition did emerge strongly in the laboratory : groups paid special atten - tion to time at the midpoint of their time spans , made abrupt shifts in the focus of their work activities , and depended on midpoint agreements to provide a basis for work in the second half of their time . If laboratory task groups can display a punctuated equilibrium pattern with a midpoint tran - sition , we can use laboratories to see how various interventions cause groups to depart from that baseline . Such settings appear to be promising sites for further research . Implications for Research and Practice The current findings have several implications for practice that in turn suggest questions for research . Uncertain or shifting deadlines are a fact of life in many organizations . Interdependent organizational units and groups may keep each other waiting , may suddenly move deadlines forward or back , or may create deadlines that are known to be earlier than is necessary in efforts to control erratic workflows . The current research suggests that the consequences of such uncertainty may involve more than stress , wasted time , overtime work , and intergroup conflicts . Synchrony in group mem - bers ' expectations about deadlines may be critical to groups ' abilities to 306 Academy of Management Journal June accomplish successful transitions in their work . The laboratory could be a good place to examine groups ' reactions to uncertain or shifting deadlines and to try out ameliorating interventions . A second area is the appropriate timing for interventions designed to assist or influence groups ' work . The field study suggested that interventions or environmental events that called for dramatic changes would be espe - cially powerful at the very beginning or midpoint of groups ' life spans but might be resisted at other times . The laboratory groups examined here pro - vided consistent evidence that members were quite receptive to teammates ' efforts to redirect the team ' s attention at the midpoint and much less recep - tive before or after that . The laboratory could be a good place to test the effects of environmental changes or interventions at different points in groups ' life spans . A third area concerns effective ways to pace and manage groups through their life spans . The subjects in this research had no exposure to the hypoth - eses of this study , yet they described their own transition processes with great clarity and managed their time relatively deliberately . Those findings suggest that people learn substantial aspects of group pacing and might be able to improve upon that learned behavior . For example , without con - scious , alternative planning , the midpoint appears to be the most likely temporal stimulus for groups ' primary jump ahead , but the case of group 8 , with its 20 - minute transition and three - segment meeting , suggests the pos - sibility of more planful tailoring of groups ' pacing to their tasks and time . Similarly , groups might be taught to anticipate characteristic challenges of the transition and helped to develop various ways of handling those challenges . It should be noted that managing the interaction process is not the only challenge to address . The transition may well be an acid test of whether or not a team ' s design , including its membership composition , task structure , and contextual supports , is workable . If the boost of the transition cannot galvanize a team , it may be suffering from especially serious design flaws . ' ' Overall , the laboratory might be a good place to see whether group members , leaders , and external supervisors can be trained in how to manage different periods of groups ' life spans most effectively . Specific suggestions for such training appear in Hackman and Walton ( 1986 ) and Gersick ( 1988 ) . A final implication applies more broadly to research on temporal issues and the correspondence between laboratory time and field time . The find - ings show that groups , at least in the research domain of this study , regarded time differently as the laboratory hour progressed1 ' and , perhaps , as their Hackman ( 1986 ) contrasted design and process determinants of group effectiveness . McGrath and Kelly ( 1986 ) found that groups solving anagrams , given relatively short ( or long ] time limits on the first of two trials , persisted in working at a faster ( or slower ) pace on the second trial , even when the amount of time they had was lengthened ( or shortened ) . A finding of such persistence in pace clearly differs from the current findings . It is , however , consistent with the findings of research on Einstellung effects that McGrath and Kelly ' s groups , ( continued ) 1989 Gersick 307 work became more concrete . This attitudinal shift suggests the importance of attending to task type and to the whole temporal context in which any segment of activity occurs . Limitations of this Study As pointed out in the above section on field - laboratory differences , there are many respects in which this laboratory simulation departed from natural settings . In addition , this study included only a small number of groups , from one population , doing one kind of task , under one set of conditions . People less experienced in group work or more experienced at a task might use their time differently in a laboratory or might describe their own work differently in interviews . Finally , research to date has been limited to a particular domain : groups with some discretion over their own work pro - cesses , with open - ended tasks and deadlines to meet . Further research is required before the current results can be generalized beyond that domain . CONCLUSIONS The results of this study suggest that the mechanisms groups use to pace their work may have critical effects on members ' collective motivation to move ahead and on attentional and perceptual shifts that allow progress to occur . The reliable appearance of a midpoint transition , participants ' artic - ulate description of their transition dynamics and pacing behavior , and the deliberate quality of groups ' efforts to advance at the midpoint of their al - lotted time have two important implications . First , pacing and transition dynamics may be facets of creative group work that are both consequential for group effectiveness and amenable to improvement through learning . Sec - ond , laboratory study holds much promise for enriching understanding of pacing behavior and punctuated equilibrium patterns in group develop - ment . REFERENCES Bales , R . F . , & Strodtbeck , F . L . 1951 . Phases in group problem solving . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 46 : 485 - 495 . Eldrege , N . , & Gould , S . J . 1972 . Punctuated equilibria : An alternative to phyletic gradualism . In T . J . Schopf ( Ed . ) , Models in paleobiology : 82 - 115 . San Francisco : Freeman , Cooper & Co . Ericsson , K . A , , & Simon , H . A . 1984 . Protocol analysis : Verbal reports as data . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press . Frye , R . , & Stritch , T . 1964 . Effect of timed vs . non - timed discussion upon measures of influence and change in small groups . Journal of Social Psychology , 63 : 139 - 143 . Gersick , C . J . G . 1988 . Time and transition in work teams : Toward a new model of group development . Academy of Management Journal , 31 : 9 - 41 . with 10 or 20 minutes per trial and anagrams to do throughout , perceived themselves as having essentially the same task across trials , but groups in the current study perceived the nature of their task as changing at the midpoint . 308 Academy of Management Journal June Glaser , B . , & Strauss , A . 1967 . The discovery of grounded theory : Strategies for qualitative research . London : Wiedenfeld & Nicholson . Hackman , J . R . 1986 . The design of work in teams . In J . Lorsch ( Ed . ) , Handbook of organiza - tional behavior : 315 - 342 . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall . Hackman , J . R . , & Walton , R . E . 1986 . Leading groups in organizations . In P . S . Goodman & associates ( Eds . ) , Designing effective work groups : 72 - 119 . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Hare , A . P . 1976 . Handbook of small group research ( 2d ed . ) . New York : Free Press . Hellriegel , D . , Slocum , J . , & Woodman , R . 1986 . Organizational behavior ( 4th ed . ) . St . Paul : West Publishing Co . Hermann , C . 1972 . Threat , time , and surprise : A simulation of international crises . In C . Her - mann ( Ed . ) , International crises : Insights from behavioral research : 187 - 211 . New York : Free Press . Hoffman , L . R . , & O ' Day , R . 1979 . The process of solving reasoning and value problems . In L . R . Hoffman ( Ed . ) , The group problem - solving process : Studies of a valence model : 66 - 77 . New York : Praeger . Isenberg , D . J . 1981 . Some effects of time - pressure on vertical structure and decision - making accuracy in small groups . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 27 : 119 - 134 . Jensen , J . 1960 . On the " Einstellung " effect in problem solving . Scandinavian Journal of Psychology , 7 : 135 - 150 . Luchins , A . S . 1940 . Mechanization in problem solving : The effect of Einstellung . Psycholog - ical Monographs , 54 : 248 . March , J . , & Simon , H . 1958 . Organizations . New York : John Wiley & Sons . McGrath , J . E . 1986 . Studying groups at work : Ten critical needs for theory and practice . In P . S . Goodman & associates ( Eds . ) , Designing effective work groups : 363 - 392 . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . McGrath , J . E . 1987 . Time , groups , and organizations : Burma shave signs on the rocky road of research . Invited address to Division 14 , 95th Annual Conference of the American Psychological Association , New York . McGrath , J . E . Forthcoming . Toward a time - based theory of functional groups . In R . P . McGlynn ( Ed . ) , Groups and organizations . Lubbock , Texas : Texas Tech University Press . McGrath , J . E . , & Kelly , J . R . 1986 . Time and human interaction : Toward a socialpsychology of time . New York : Guilford Press . Miles , M . B . , & Huberman , A . M . 1984 . Qualitative data analysis : A sourcebook of newmeth - ods . Beverly Hills : Sage Publications . Norden , P . V . 1965 . Some properties of project schedule recovery limits . In M . C . Yovits , D . M . Gilford , R . H . Wilcox , E . Staveley , & H . D . Lerner ( Eds . ) , Research program effectiveness : Proceedings of the conference sponsored by the Office of Naval Research , Washington , D . C . , July 1965 : 287 - 318 . New York : Gordon & Breach . Poole , M . S . 1983a . Decision development in small groups : 11 - A study of multiple sequences of decision making . Communication Monographs , 50 : 206 - 232 . Poole , M . S . 1983b . Decision development in small groups : 111 - A study of multiple sequences of decision making . Communication Monographs , 50 : 321 - 341 . Pruitt , D . , & Drews , J . 1969 . The effect of time pressure , time elapsed , and the opponent ' s concession rate on behavior in negotiation . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 5 : 43 - 60 . Rosenthal , R . 1987 . Judgment studies : Design , analysis , and meta - analysis . Cambridge , U . K . : Cambridge University Press . 1989 Gersick 309 Szilagy , A . , & Wallace , M . 1987 . Organizational behavior and performance ( 4th ed . ) . Glen - view , Ill . : Scott , Foresman & Co . Tosi , H . , Rizzo , J . , & Carroll , S . 1986 . Managing organizational behavior . Marshfield , Mass . : Pitman Publishing . Tuckman , B . 1965 . Developmental sequence in small groups . Psychological Bulletin , 63 : 384 - 399 . Connie Gersick earned her Ph . D . degree at Yale University ; she is an assistant professor in organization and strategic studies at the Anderson Graduate School of Management , University of California , Los Angeles . Her research interests include group effectiveness and change processes in human systems . You have printed the following article : Marking Time : Predictable Transitions in Task Groups Connie J . G . Gersick The Academy of Management Journal , Vol . 32 , No . 2 . ( Jun . , 1989 ) , pp . 274 - 309 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0001 - 4273 % 28198906 % 2932 % 3A2 % 3C274 % 3AMTPTIT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - M This article references the following linked citations . If you are trying to access articles from an off - campus location , you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR . Please visit your library ' s website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR . References Time and Transition in Work Teams : Toward a New Model of Group Development Connie J . G . Gersick The Academy of Management Journal , Vol . 31 , No . 1 . ( Mar . , 1988 ) , pp . 9 - 41 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0001 - 4273 % 28198803 % 2931 % 3A1 % 3C9 % 3ATATIWT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 8 http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 1 of 1 -