Using Experience - Based Participatory Approach to Design Interactive Voice User Interfaces for Delivering Physical Activity Programs with Older Adults Smit Desai School of Information Sciences , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign smitad2 @ illinois . edu Xinhui Hu School of Information Sciences , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign xhu15 @ illinois . edu Morgan Lundy School of Information Sciences , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign melundy2 @ illinois . edu Jessie Chin School of Information Sciences , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign chin5 @ illinois . edu ABSTRACT Voice User Interfaces ( VUIs ) are popular among older adults , who find them easy to use and perceive them as social companions . However , there is a lack of research on voice - based applications to support physical activities for older adults . To address this gap , we present " Workout Pal , " a voice agent designed to deliver physical activities to older adults . We conducted a mixed - methods study in - volving ten older adults to understand their perceptions and design priorities when interacting with Workout Pal . Questionnaires and semi - structured interviews were used to assess their experience , while experience - based co - design sessions facilitated collaboration in exploring the design space and identifying design requirements . Our findings highlight the feasibility and design preferences for smart speaker - based physical activity programs . The study con - tributes by sharing the design and development of Workout Pal , illustrating a novel co - design approach with older adults , and pro - viding design implications tailored to the specific needs of older adults . The design guidelines emphasize the importance of socia - bility , voice design , and individualization . This research supports the development of elder - friendly VUIs helping older adults live independently and engage in physical activities . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Interaction paradigms ; Natural language interfaces . KEYWORDS Voice User Interfaces , Participatory Design , Physical Activity , Co - design , Older Adults , Conversational agents Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 979 - 8 - 4007 - 0824 - 4 / 23 / 12 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3623809 . 3623827 ACM Reference Format : Smit Desai , Xinhui Hu , Morgan Lundy , and Jessie Chin . 2023 . Using Experience - Based Participatory Approach to Design Interactive Voice User Interfaces for Delivering Physical Activity Programs with Older Adults . In International Conference on Human - Agent Interaction ( HAI ’23 ) , Decem - ber 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3623809 . 3623827 1 INTRODUCTION Voice User Interfaces ( VUIs ) , which are voice - based conversational agents ( CAs ) , are becoming increasingly popular in everyday life . They are integrated into various products , including smartphones , tablets , and , most popularly , smart speakers . It is estimated that nearly half of U . S . adults use voice interfaces [ 39 ] . Moreover , use of VUIs is especially prominent among older adults . About 12 million older adults own a smart speaker in their homes [ 2 ] . This is partly because commercial VUIs are often marketed toward older adults because of their simple hands - free nature and voice - based modality [ 51 ] . Numerous studies with older adults indicate that older adults find VUIs easy to use compared to other modalities ( e . g . , GUIs ) [ 9 , 41 – 43 ] and they perceive VUIs as social companions [ 29 , 43 ] , capable of alleviating loneliness . Previous studies have explored the potential of developing VUIs for older adults in various domains , such as informal learning [ 17 ] , medication instruction [ 4 ] , companionship [ 29 ] , and skill develop - ment [ 1 ] . However , there is a notable lack of prior research specifi - cally focusing on the development of voice - based applications to support physical activities among older adults , despite evidence indicating that older adults perceive this approach as acceptable [ 14 ] . The importance of physical activities among older adults can - not be understated . Research has established the positive impact of physical activity on various aspects of older adults’ well - being , including improvements in physical and cognitive health , as well as the overall quality of life [ 47 ] . In order to support older adults aging in place , the United Nations ( UN ) declared 2021 - 2030 as the “decade of healthy aging” and encouraged researchers to support these efforts with technological solutions [ 59 ] . Our research is one such solution to help older adults live independently . In this study , we present “Workout Pal , ” a Google Assistant Ac - tion ( similar to a smartphone application ) integrated into a screen - less smart speaker to deliver physical activities to older adults ( aged 180 HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden Smit Desai et al . 60 and above ) . We share the design and development of Workout Pal and understand the perceptions of older adults using a mixed methods approach involving ten older adults ( M = 70 years ) . Further - more , we leverage the older adults’ interactions with Workout Pal as a technology probe to facilitate an experience - based co - design session . This collaborative session enables participants to explore and expand the design space , articulate their design requirements more effectively , and conceptualize innovative design features . Our study is guided by two research questions ( RQs ) : • RQ1 : How do older adults perceive their experience and use of Workout Pal ? • RQ2 : What are older adults’ design priorities in their inter - action with Workout Pal ? We answer RQ1 holistically using questionnaires ( including Sys - tem Usability Scale ( SUS ) for assessing the usability and the Positive and Negative Affect Scale ( PANAS ) for gauging affective experi - ences ) and findings from semi - structured interviews with the par - ticipants . To answer RQ2 , we discuss results from our experience - based co - design sessions wherein older adults consulted as co - designers to design an ideal version of Workout Pal based on their design priorities . Findings from RQ1 help in understanding the feasibility and imagined use of using smart speaker - based physical activity programs , while RQ2 broadens the discussion and helps in realizing older adults’ priorities in using and adopting such a system in the future . Taken together , our findings would help con - versational researchers and designers to design elder - friendly VUIs capable of acting as exercise instructors . Our main contributions are : ( 1 ) sharing the design and development of Workout Pal by including the design needs of older adults identified in previous literature with older adults , ( 2 ) illustrating a novel way of co - designing with older adults by familiarizing them with the design space using ex - periential interactions , and ( 3 ) design implications with a focus on the specific design needs of older adults . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Older adults and VUIs Due to the naturalness of voice - based interactions , popular and commercial voice user interfaces ( e . g . , Amazon Alexa , Apple Siri , Google Assistant ) are marketed to older adults [ 51 ] . In the U . S . , one - fifth of older adults own a smart speaker [ 2 ] . In longitudinal studies with older adults , the social aspects of VUIs are highlighted . Pradhan et al . [ 46 ] , in a 3 - week longitudinal study with 7 older adults , found that VUIs helped assuage feelings of loneliness and provided companionship to older adults . Kim & Choudhury [ 29 ] , over a period of 16 weeks with 12 older adults , found that older adults cherished the conversational features of VUIs more , were less worried about making mistakes , and coped with functional errors of VUIs better with time and experience . However , both these studies noted that older adults often suffer from remembering the commands and the wake words , and face a higher volume of conversational errors . More broadly , the adoption of VUIs by older adults faces many challenges , such as auditory issues related to age - related hearing loss [ 29 ] , unfamiliarity with conversational norms of human - VUI interactions [ 46 ] , conversational breakdowns due to Natural Lan - guage Processing ( NLP ) or system failures [ 29 ] , and privacy con - cerns [ 50 ] . Most of the literature discusses the use of VUIs as digital assistants for daily activities and companionship , but there is a rising interest in other VUI applications for older adults , including healthcare and skill development [ 7 , 17 ] . Compared to other populations , research indicates that older adults exhibit a higher tendency to anthropomorphize VUIs than younger adults [ 13 ] . Consequently , their interaction strategies with VUIs are often influenced by human - human conversations , which can significantly differ from interactions in human - VUI contexts [ 19 ] . These distinctions are particularly relevant to older adults and emphasize the importance of tailoring VUI designs to meet their specific needs . 2 . 2 Co - designing with older adults As indicated in the previous section , older adults have different design needs compared to other demographics . Recent studies have acknowledged these needs and have sought to integrate older adults into the design process through participatory approaches such as design workshops [ 24 , 44 ] and co - design activities [ 18 , 25 , 26 ] . How - ever , such approaches also present unique challenges . For instance , previous co - design studies with older adults found that older adults can have difficulties with the open - endedness of design tasks and struggle to conceptualize future technologies [ 24 , 32 ] . Consequently , several researchers have raised the need to revamp the design meth - ods to tailor co - design activities to older adults [ 16 , 23 , 33 ] . In order to involve older adults more actively in the design pro - cess of fitness or health management applications , studies have indicated the need for experience - based co - design [ 24 ] . Such an approach relies on using “technology probes” or “seeding tech - nologies” to help familiarize users with a concept using functional design systems before co - designing [ 27 ] . This kind of exposure helps the ideation process and allows the users to conceptualize design improvements , priorities , and further system uses more creatively . Our study is inspired by these co - design approaches and aims to build on them . The idea of exercising with a smart speaker might seem arcane to older adults . So , we use Workout Pal as a technology probe to help older adults familiarize themselves with the concept of a physical activity - delivering conversational agent before co - designing with them . 2 . 3 Older adults and exercise Sedentary behavior and inadequate physical activities ( PA ) are prevalent in older adults [ 28 ] , despite the fact that there have been known benefits of PA , ranging from enhancing physical and cogni - tive health as well as the quality of life of older adults [ 47 ] . There have been well - established , evidence - based PA programs designed for older adults [ 54 ] . However , the implementation of the PA pro - gram in older communities is limited mostly due to the cost of administering and managing a PA program , the travel cost of older adults to join PA activities , and the lack of enough personnel to pro - vide coaching [ 22 ] . This limited implementation of evidence - based health programs is universal , especially for people in marginalized communities ( including older adults ) [ 5 , 11 ] . With the growth of 181 Using Experience - Based Participatory Approach to Design Interactive Voice User Interfaces for Delivering Physical Activity Programs with Older Adults HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden digital interventions to promote PA or reduce sedentary behavior in older adults , a systematic review demonstrated the effectiveness of the digital interventions of PA programs on older adults , such as the use of internet - based program , automated computer - controlled telephone systems , gaming consoles , and virtual realities ( e . g . , Nin - tendo Wii Sports , Kinect Xbox 360 , Fitbit , etc . [ 52 ] ) . There are some studies using VUIs to support PA programs in other populations [ 30 , 34 , 35 ] , but few studies have used VUIs to promote PA or reduce sedentary behavior among older adults . One study developed an animated embodied conversational agent ( ECA ) on a tablet to moti - vate older adults to do more walking to reduce sedentary behavior [ 8 ] , with the conversations focusing on increasing and sustaining older adults’ motivations to continue walking . The other study implemented a CA on Google Mini devices for older adults and demonstrated the usability and acceptance of the older adults in a user study [ 14 ] . However , both studies were not developed with the participation and input from the older adults , in which the design of conversations for “coaching” or “delivering instructions” to older adults have not been considered , but rather the focus on showing the fidelity of the original PA program . 3 DESIGNING WORKOUT PAL Workout Pal’s development involved utilizing Google’s Natural Lan - guage Understanding ( NLU ) platform , DialogFlow ES . As the default voice for Workout Pal across all participants , we selected Google Assistant Voice " Female 1 . " The design of Workout Pal involved three key components : creating a system persona , developing senior - specific design features to support physical activity programs , and selecting elder - friendly physical activities . Each of these components will be examined in the following sections . 3 . 1 System Persona A system persona can be conceptualized as the front - end of a VUI that interacts with the users . Following Google’s Conversation De - sign Guidelines [ 57 ] , we crafted a system persona that embodies motivating , professional , and helpful qualities . Real - world individ - uals such as exercise instructors and gym trainers served as inspi - ration for this persona . To reflect a friendly and relatable character , we opted for the name " Workout Pal , " leveraging the term " pal " to encourage anthropomorphism and foster a sense of heightened social presence—crucial for older adults for long - term engagement [ 13 ] . The persona description emphasizes Workout Pal as a profes - sional and supportive exercise instructor who possesses extensive knowledge of exercises and prioritizes the needs of older adults to facilitate their workout sessions . 3 . 2 Design features Based on previous literature , we identified four main features to de - sign “instructions” - based VUI to support the specific needs of older adults : Workout Pal : navigation , checks , repeat , and motivation . Older adults often face challenges in progressing conversations with voice interfaces due to unfamiliarity regarding what to say [ 17 ] and lack of support in case of conversational breakdowns [ 29 ] . To mitigate these issues , we embedded “progressivity” [ 20 ] infor - mation regarding the next possible sets of actions at the end of each exercise set . For example , after completing arm curls , Workout Pal would say , “Well done ! We are done with Arm Curls . If you want to continue to the next exercise , you can say , ‘Exercise two . ’ ‘Exercise two’ is for overhead arm raise . If you want more exercise information , you can ask for the menu . You can also take a rest and continue on another day . “Although repetitive , detailed instructions on the next possible step reduce the cognitive load of remembering prompts . Workout Pal also routinely asked older adults if they were “ready to perform the next exercise or repeat movements , ” “felt comfortable , ” and “had the necessary equipment . ” This ensured that older adults could con - trol their workouts and do it at their own pace . Further , older adults could also ask Workout Pal to repeat any exercise instructions if needed . Although repeat is a common feature available in all con - versational agents , older adults are often unaware of its presence . By making it explicit , older adults could avail its advantages [ 18 ] . Lastly , Workout Pal would say “well done” or “congratulations” to provide positive reinforcements at the end of each exercise set . 3 . 3 Physical activities We sourced exercises and exercise instructions using the U . S . National Institute of Aging ( NIA ) ’s Go4Life program [ 58 ] . NIA launched Go4Life to motivate older adults to incorporate exercise into their weekly routines using exercise instructions , motivations , tips , and other resources . In particular , the exercises were developed by aging experts specifically for older adults . For its incorporation into Workout Pal , we redesigned the exercise instructions into a conversational script using our system persona’s filter and elder - friendly VUI design features . The following exercises were available to older adults using Workout Pal : ( 1 ) Arm Curls , ( 2 ) Overhead arm raise , ( 3 ) Front arm raise , ( 4 ) Leg straightening , ( 5 ) Side arm raise , ( 6 ) Ankle stretch , ( 7 ) Knee curls , and ( 8 ) Toe stand . 4 PRESENT STUDY 4 . 1 Participants We recruited 10 participants to participate in a 90 - minute user study using University mailing lists and newsletters in a midwestern city in the United States . Our participants included 7 women , 2 men , and 1 non - binary person , ranging in age from 64 to 81 ( Mean age = 70 , see Table 1 ) . Participants were reimbursed for their time with $ 20 Amazon gift cards . The large majority of participants indicated they were white or Caucasian ( 70 % ) , with 1 participant identifying as both white or Caucasian and Native American or Alaska Native , and 2 participants preferring not to share their ethnic or racial identity . 9 of the 10 participants were native English speakers , and all had a college degree . On average , participants were somewhat familiar with VUIs and did not use them frequently , except 1 participant who used their VUI 1 - 3 times a week ( P5 ) and one participant who used their VUI more than once a day ( P9 ) . Participants reported having little to some expertise with VUIs , with only one participant ( P2 ) rating their expertise with VUIs above average . 4 . 2 Apparatus & Materials Apparatus . We used Google Nest Mini Gen . 2 for this study . In an informal research lab , the smart speaker was placed on a table in front of the participants . A comfortable chair with or without arms was provided according to participant preference . Two 1 - pound 182 HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden Smit Desai et al . Table 1 : Participant Demographic and VUI Use ID Age Gender Ethnicity VUIs Used VUI Usage P1 66 Female White or Caucasian None Less than once a week P2 64 Male White or Caucasian Siri Less than once a week P3 65 Female White or Caucasian Siri & Alexa Less than once a week P4 65 Female Native American / Alaskan Native and White or Caucasian None Less than once a week P5 67 Female White or Caucasian Google Assistant 1 - 3 times a week P6 79 Female Prefer not to say Siri Less than once a week P7 70 Male White or Caucasian None Less than once a week P8 70 Female White or Caucasian None Less than once a week P9 73 Non - Binary White or Caucasian Alexa More than once a day P10 81 Female Prefer not to say None Less than once a week Figure 1 : The image depicts a smart speaker and small dumb - bells on a table in front of a participant who is performing a leg raise . handheld dumbbells were available on the table as well , and dry erase markers if participants preferred to hold a very light weight for the exercises . The participants were provided with pens , papers , markers , and a whiteboard for the codesign session ( see Figure 1 ) . We recorded the audio of the study on Zoom with the participant’s permission . Questionnaires . We included three questionnaires to under - stand the participants and their experiences and perceptions of Workout Pal . The Demographic Questionnaire gathered data on participants’ age , gender , ethnicity , occupation , English proficiency , familiarity with VUIs , and prior experience with VUIs . To assess the usability of Workout Pal , the System Usability Scale ( SUS ) , a 10 - item single - factor scale widely used to evaluate system usability , was employed . Participants expressed their views on the usability of Workout Pal using a 5 - point Likert Scale ranging from " completely disagree " ( 1 ) to " completely agree " ( 5 ) . SUS is commonly utilized to measure the usability of GUIs , but its validity for VUIs has been successfully tested [ 21 ] . Previous VUI studies utilizing SUS to measure usability are summarized in [ 49 ] . For assessing the affective experiences of using Workout Pal , the Positive and Negative Affect Scale ( PANAS ) [ 56 ] was employed . Participants were asked to rate their moods using a 5 - point scale ranging from " not at all " ( 1 ) to " extremely " ( 5 ) , with 10 positive affect items and 10 negative affect items . 4 . 3 Procedure To begin the user study , in accordance with the requirements of the Institutional Review Board , participants were first briefed on the study procedure and their ability to stop the interaction or exercises at any time , then asked to electronically sign an informed consent form . Participants also filled out the demographic questionnaire . Before the agent interaction , participants were welcome to practice basic commands with the Google Nest Mini Gen . 2 ( i . e . , asking for the weather ) . Agent Interaction ( approximately 15 mins ) . Participants began the interaction by asking to talk to Workout Pal and were then prompted by the conversational agent to assess their setting ( i . e . , if they were seated in a comfortable chair ) if they understood an auditory description of the exercise to be completed , and if they were ready to start a specific exercise . Participants then followed along with the VUI , which counted off the repetitions of exercises ( i . e . , arm curls , leg raises ) and provided positive feedback and en - couraging statements to participants . Questionaries ( approximately 10 mins ) . Participants then electron - ically completed the two questionnaires . Semi - Structured Interview ( approximately 20 mins ) . Participants were then asked to speak with the researcher about their overall 183 Using Experience - Based Participatory Approach to Design Interactive Voice User Interfaces for Delivering Physical Activity Programs with Older Adults HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden experience and impressions of Workout Pal . Participants were asked to describe the VUI and its characteristics , like how informative and clear they found instructions , how appropriate the exercises and timing felt , what features they found useful or would remove , and if they liked VUI’s personality or voice . Participants were also asked to compare how this experience compared to other learning mediums for exercise ( i . e . , in - person classes , YouTube videos ) and their previous experiences with VUIs . Participants also imagined if and how they could integrate Workout Pal into their actual exercise routines and home environments . Co - design ( approximately 30 mins ) . To better understand older adults’ design priorities for exercise learning and exercise - guiding VUI design , we then placed participants in the role of designers . Participants were instructed to write or diagram a scene between their idealized versions of Workout Pal and a user interested in exercising . Participants were provided with a set of instructions for an arm raise exercise . Some participants also dictated their imagined dialogues and VUI personas to the researcher . Our co - design activity helped participants to reflect deeply on their interactions with Workout Pal and prompted many design suggestions . Debrief . Last , participants were asked to reflect on the co - design experience and their design priorities for exercise - related VUI . 4 . 4 Analysis Quantitative data was gathered through the employment of SUS and PANAS questionnaires . In the case of SUS , the mean and stan - dard deviation were computed for each individual item , and the obtained outcomes were evaluated in accordance with the guide - lines provided by Bangor et al . [ 6 ] . Likewise , we computed the mean values for the ten items related to positive affect and the ten items associated with negative affect . The internal consistency for both positive affect ( 𝛼 = 0 . 88 ) and negative affect ( 𝛼 = 0 . 74 ) yielded reliable results . To analyze the qualitative data , the study session conducted on Zoom was recorded with the participant’s consent , and the audio recordings were subsequently transcribed and analyzed using The - matic Analysis [ 10 ] . In order to address the challenges associated with intercoder reliability in coding semi - structured interviews , a " negotiated agreement " method [ 12 ] was employed , which in - volved ongoing discussions among the researchers . To ensure the trustworthiness of the analysis , the recommendations provided by Nowell et al . [ 38 ] were followed . Two researchers independently immersed themselves in the primary data by maintaining reflexive journals for a duration of one month . Initially , an inductive ap - proach was adopted , and initial codes were generated individually to answer the two RQs . Through subsequent data sessions over three weeks , the codes were thoroughly examined and discussed until any disagreements regarding their interpretation , significance , and relevance were resolved . A third researcher reviewed the codes and contributed to developing the final set of codes . Subsequently , the codes were grouped , and themes and subthemes were con - structed . All three researchers possessed expertise in qualitative analysis and a background in HCI . 5 FINDINGS We discuss our findings using the two research questions intro - duced in § 1 . To provide a comprehensive understanding of RQ1 , we adopt a holistic approach by employing a combination of question - naires , including the SUS to evaluate usability and the PANAS to gauge emotional experiences . Furthermore , we enrich our findings through in - depth insights obtained from semi - structured interviews with the participants . In addressing RQ2 , we delve into the results derived from our collaborative experience - based co - design sessions , where older adults actively contribute as co - designers . These inter - active sessions empower them to shape an ideal version of Workout Pal , aligning with their unique design priorities and preferences . To ensure transparent reporting of the findings , the prevalence of topics and subtopics among the participants was indicated using the terms : " a few " ( up to 20 % of the participants ) , " some " ( 21 - 50 % ) , " most " ( 51 - 80 % ) , and " nearly all " ( 80 % or more ) . Figure 2 provides a summary of our findings . 5 . 1 How do older adults perceive their experience and use of Workout Pal ? 5 . 1 . 1 Older adults perceived Workout Pal to be usable and reported favorable emotional responses . To holistically understand the expe - riences of older adults , we used usability and affective measures . To operationalize usability , we took advantage of SUS . Overall , older adults found Workout Pal to be usable and gave it a score of 70 . 25 . Using Bangor et al . [ 6 ] interpretations of SUS scores on an adjective scale , a score of 70 . 25 can be considered as “good . ” Typically , a score between 50 - 70 is “okay” for voice interfaces , and anything below 50 is “poor . ” Interestingly , we saw high variability in SUS scores among participants . For example , P4 gave Workout Pal the lowest score of 42 . 5 , while P8 gave a score of 100 . This variability could be explained by the fact that few participants in semi - structured interviews indicated strongly preferring exercising with visual aids . Regarding affective measures , we found that older adults overall experienced strong positive affect ( M = 3 . 73 , SD = 0 . 82 , 𝛼 = 0 . 88 ) and mild negative affect ( M = 1 . 28 , SD = 0 . 38 , 𝛼 = 0 . 74 ) . Table 2 summa - rizes the quantitative experiences of older adults interacting with Workout Pal . 5 . 1 . 2 Older adults perceived Workout Pal to perform the role of an instructor ( and sometimes a pal ) . When being asked about their perception of Workout Pal , nearly all participants indicated that they would prefer Workout Pal to take the role of a professional instructor rather than a friend . The reasons behind this perception varied among participants . Some participants perceived Workout Pal as having the potential to fulfill both the roles of an instructor and a friend , but they expressed a preference for it to primarily assume the role of an instructor . These participants tended to view Workout Pal through an anthropomorphic lens and held a positive attitude to social interactions with Workout Pal , such as engaging in small talks about their daily activities and sharing their experiences from previous exercise sessions . The reasoning behind these partici - pants’ perspectives suggests that they applied their existing mental models of interacting with physical trainers to their interaction with Workout Pal , leading to similar expectations and requirements 184 HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden Smit Desai et al . Figure 2 : Elderly users’ needs and concerns for Workout Pal . Table 2 : Summary of usability and affective experiences of older adults interacting with Workout Pal using SUS and PANAS Questionnaire Measures M SD SUS Usability 70 . 25 17 . 25 PANAS Positive Affect Negative Affect 3 . 73 1 . 28 0 . 82 0 . 38 for this VUI - based assistant . For example , one participant described the envisioned interaction with Workout Pal in this way : “Workout Pal is much the same as an instructor . It guides me through the exercises and counts for me . So , in that sense , it functions as an instructor . ” [ P2 ] Consequently , these participants tended to perceive Workout Pal as primarily fulfilling a utilitarian role , with less emphasis on social companionship . In contrast , some participants viewed Work - out Pal solely as an instructor , without considering its role and entity . These participants associated Workout Pal with the role of an instructor because they had expectations of it fulfilling an instructing role , which was influenced by their mental model of exercise that involves a physical trainer guiding the process . Con - sequently , when interacting with Workout Pal , they expected it to be more efficient and procedural rather than social in nature . One participant deliberately pointed out that : “I wouldn’t care about whether it was a person , I would be more concerned with it performing the exercising instruction function it’s intended to perform . ” [ P1 ] Such a divergence highlights the importance for designers to carefully consider and refine the design of social cues incorporated in products like Workout Pal . 5 . 1 . 3 Older adults envisioned using Workout Pal in varied use sce - narios for light indoor exercises . Regarding the user scenarios of Workout Pal , the majority of participants expressed a strong pref - erence for using it as an in - house application . Several participants recognized the Workout Pal’s usefulness for people who have lim - ited mobility [ P1 , P3 ] or face heavy home duties [ P4 ] , while some others envisioned utilizing Workout Pal when the weather condi - tions are unfavorable for outdoor activities . P7 specifically noted the value of having in - house exercises in the context of covid . More - over , when considering the timing and location of their workout sessions , some participants specifically mentioned their preference for using Workout Pal in the morning before preparing breakfast or in the evening after dinner in their kitchen and living rooms , with the consideration of completing the workout before taking a shower . For example , P1 provided a rather detailed description of the scenario of using Workout Pal : “I am seeing myself in the home , most likely in my room before taking a shower in the morning or sometimes after breakfast . Or probably after dinner , I will put a new song and then do exercise in that space of time . ” [ P1 ] 185 Using Experience - Based Participatory Approach to Design Interactive Voice User Interfaces for Delivering Physical Activity Programs with Older Adults HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden In terms of the motivational context , most participants pointed out they would like to use Workout Pal for building and maintaining exercise routines . 5 . 1 . 4 Older adults appreciated the non - judgmental nature of Work - out Pal . The non - judgmental nature of Workout Pal was widely appreciated by most participants . A few participants compared their experience with Workout Pal to exercising in public spaces such as gyms , appreciating that Workout Pal would not make them self - conscious during their workout sessions and creating a psy - chologically safe and non - embarrassing environment for them . Par - ticipants reported that using Workout Pal alleviated their concerns regarding their physical appearance and the possibility of failing specific exercises or performing with less intensity . As P3 shared : “Workout Pal was non - threatening , non - judgmental while being responsive to the person . ” [ P3 ] 5 . 2 What are older adults’ design priorities in their interaction with Workout Pal ? 5 . 2 . 1 Older adults emphasized sociality features in interacting with Workout Pal . Nearly all participants mentioned that they would like Workout Pal to incorporate more social interaction features , such as small talk before and during exercise . Even participants who explicitly stated that they view Workout Pal as a robot rather than an entity have emphasized the need for social interaction features . Several participants stated that they would like Workout Pal to greet them by asking how they are feeling , how prepared they are for the workout , and if they noticed the positive effects of the previous workout , such as the participants envisioned : “It would be nice for Workout Pal to say something like ‘Would you like to get started for exercise ? This will make you feel better today . The exercise you have done last week is helping you with certain parts of your body , do you feel the improvement ? ”’ [ P2 ] Additionally , participants also wanted Workout Pal to regularly check on their physical and mood state in between sessions and make suggestions for changes to the program if necessary . For this purpose , participants expect that Workout Pal will maintain a record of their progress and consistently update it , including details such as the number of consecutive exercise days , such as : “I would like Workout Pal to keep track of all my move - ments and provide reminders such as , " This is your second workout this week . Well done ! " [ P5 ] A few participants further elaborated that these social compan - ion features would serve as a powerful motivator , encouraging them to persist in their exercise routine . 5 . 2 . 2 Older adults expressed a strong desire to customize their Work - out Pal experience . A common theme consistently highlighted in the participants’ answers is the ability to customize the experience with Workout Pal . Most participants expressed their desire for a customizable instruction speed feature , which would enable them to adjust the pace of movement according to their specific needs , progress , and health conditions . In addition , participants also em - phasized the importance of flexibility in selecting the types and intensities of exercise movements . For example , P10 specifically pointed out that : “If the timeline is not synchronized with my own pace , I find it very distracting . ” [ P10 ] Specifically , most participants expressed their interest in cus - tomizing the types and sequences of exercises they would engage in with Workout Pal , while they also wanted to leverage varying intensities by utilizing different weights and adjusting the number of repetitions for each movement . Moreover , nearly all of the par - ticipants noted that if a product like Workout Pal is to assist them in regulating their breath pace , the rhythms must precisely match their natural breathing patterns . Otherwise , they will feel confused and interrupted . One participant , among those who mentioned the coordination of breath pace , specifically noted : " The breath counting might be helpful . But even if the pace is slightly off , it could become a hindrance and disrupt my natural breathing pace . " [ P3 ] Furthermore , nearly all participants suggested that Workout Pal should be implemented with varying levels of encouragement . In particular , more than half of the participants showed a preference for a more calm and subdued form of encouragement , as opposed to excessively enthusiastic and cheerleading - style encouragement . However , they also acknowledge that other users may prefer the more enthusiastic version and therefore suggest Workout Pal equip multiple levels of encouragement for different users . 5 . 2 . 3 Older adults demonstrated an aversion to uncertainty . Expec - tation management emerged as a common concern among the participants , with nearly all of them stressing the importance of being adequately informed about their current progress and re - ceiving forecasts for upcoming events . The participants primarily attributed this preference to their aversion toward uncertainties and inclination to stay prepared . A few participants further elabo - rated that knowing the next action will assist them in determining the intensity of the next session and deciding whether they would like to perform the action . One of these participants specifically highlighted that receiving a notice about the next action serves as a cue to end the current session , which facilitates better effort allocation and encourages the continuation of the workout : “I would like a one - sentence description of the exercises , a bit more information for caution , and an explanation of its benefits . So that I can determine if it is wise to have this session . Just tell people what is going to be” [ P2 ] Moreover , another participant noted that some sessions neces - sitate equipment changes , in which case the forecast of the next action assists in preparation : “I noticed some sessions require a chair with an arm and some used a chair without an arm . I would like to know it in advance so I can prepare both . ” [ P7 ] Another aspect of expectation management pertains to providing information about the benefits of each action . About half of the participants indicated that they would like to be informed about the health benefits of each action , such as which parts of the body will be benefited or which daily routine duties will be enhanced . 186 HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden Smit Desai et al . 5 . 2 . 4 Older adults preferred natural and encouraging voice design . Participants have expressed a variety of concerns regarding Work - out Pal’s vocal design . Most participants found that the tone of voice , specifically calm versus excited , had a significant impact on their overall experience . Particularly , these participants emphasized their preference for a delightful and encouraging tone of voice in Workout Pal , which would neither be excessively calm nor overly cheerful . Their rationales indicated that they would like Workout Pal to maintain its role as a professional instructor and thus wish to avoid a cheerleading - style voice and tone . On the other hand , participants also highlighted that when the Workout Pal sounds excessively calm , it gives an unnatural and synthetic impression to its voice . Moreover , participants were also concerned with the tempo and flow of the voice . Several participants stated that if the voices used by Workout Pal sound choppy , flat , and lack human - like tonal and rhythmic variations , this issue would be a significant deterrent to their usage . Because such voices would make Workout Pal sound robotic and difficult to negotiate with . From a functional point of view , a few participants suggested that Workout Pal be designed to recognize more diverse accents and less formal language . One participant stressed the significance of accommodating the diverse accents and terms used by users from different regions and cultural backgrounds . Additionally , several other participants drew attention to the possibility that some users may prefer to interact with Workout Pal using less formal language like slang . The gender of the voice was another feature of concern for the participants . Although none of the participants expressed a specific preference for a male or female voice , some recommended that Workout Pal should provide different voice options for users to choose from . Additionally , one participant expressed a need for auditory cues to assist in navigating the interaction with Workout Pal , as she explained : “It will be helpful to have different voices for different sections . For instance , Workout Pal could use one voice for greetings and preparation , another voice to intro - duce the exercise movements and say " Ok , now we are starting , " and a third voice to count the actions for me . This way , just by listening to the voice , I would know which stage I am in . ” [ P1 ] Other participants [ P5 , P10 ] also mentioned that they would prefer to use background music as auditory cues , with the beats of the music synchronizing with their body movements . 5 . 2 . 5 Older adults sought for Progress Tracking features . More than half of the participants identified the need for a progress indicator that indicates their current state of progress , such as “you have done 10 out of the 15 repetitions” [ P2 ] or “you still have three more times to go” [ P4 ] . On the one hand , according to the participants’ rationales , such progress - tracking features would relieve them from mentally counting their actions and enable them to focus more in - tently on the movements themselves , thereby reducing cognitive workloads . On the other hand , participants recognized that being aware of their progress serves as a psychological reward and aids in effectively allocating effort and mental resources during work - outs . However , it should be noted that the implementation of this function exceeds the technological capacity presently available , as current VUIs are designed as continuous language learners with no memories of individual users and lack the ability to build profiles for them without external supporting modules . 6 DISCUSSION 6 . 1 Not human but human - like : An ethical dilemma The field of conversational agents often draws comparisons to pop - ular culture references , such as HAL9000 [ 3 " Computer " from Star Trek [ 3 ] , or Big Brother [ 48 ] . However , these comparisons are not intentionally made by the designers but rather arise due to cer - tain design features or characteristics of the conversational agents . Users’ metaphorical associations with these pop - culture tropes are leveraged by designers to elicit desired behaviors ( e . g . , the respon - siveness of " Computer " from Star Trek ) and mitigate undesired ones ( e . g . , privacy concerns associated with Big Brother ) . It is important to note that the aforementioned examples are fictional non - human entities . The concept of system persona , as advocated by the Google Con - versational UX guidelines , takes this idea further by introducing role production . Instead of mimicking pop - culture entities , con - temporary CAs are designed to exhibit social roles . For instance , commercial voice - based agents are marketed as virtual " assistants . " However , using the metaphor of " servant " or " butler " can be prob - lematic due to the archaic gender or race - based connotations as - sociated with these terms [ 36 ] . The ethical concerns regarding the deployment of metaphor - based stereotype - reinforcing voice user interfaces have been extensively documented [ 19 , 36 , 45 ] . In our study , we aimed to mitigate the problematic aspects of role production by employing a relatively simplistic system persona for Workout Pal . We avoided assigning a human name to this persona and did not make any personality - related design decisions explicit to the participants . However , participants still relied on their men - tal models of physical trainers and visual - based exercise tutorials when expressing their needs , concerns , and design priorities for Workout Pal . They drew direct analogies between their interactions with physical trainers and proposed design ideas to make Workout Pal more akin to a trainer , especially regarding sociability features such as small talk and frequent status checks . This preference for perceiving Workout Pal as an instructor rather than a friend was consistent among participants , irrespective of their perception of Workout Pal’s anthropomorphism . Further , when considering the voice design of Workout Pal , participants’ preferences were influ - enced by their experiences with human physical trainers . This led to a desire for encouraging , moderately passionate voices , offer - ing different gender options , and maintaining a natural flow and rhythm while speaking . This finding suggests that users have an inherent need for social interaction , which should be carefully con - sidered and incorporated into the design of products like Workout Pal . During semi - structured interviews , most participants indicated that they viewed Workout Pal as a machine . However , during the co - design process , all participants designed conversational agents with human features , emphasizing the importance of sociality . This contradiction raises intriguing points for discussion . Although older 187 Using Experience - Based Participatory Approach to Design Interactive Voice User Interfaces for Delivering Physical Activity Programs with Older Adults HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden adults did not perceive the VUI as human , they desired more human - like features . We believe this finding necessitates a closer examina - tion of the ethical considerations when designing conversational interfaces with social roles . We encourage researchers to explore this behavior in their studies , particularly when employing partici - patory design approaches , and introduce ethical heuristics to aid the design process . 6 . 2 Design Implications Our study found that older adults desired conversational agents to be more sociable . This finding is consistent with previous research on older adults and conversational agents . In a study with fifty - one participants , including twenty - six younger adults and twenty - five older adults , researchers found perceived sociability ( the degree of projected niceness ) to be a crucial factor for older adults for perceived long - term adoption . Contrastingly , perceived sociability was not significantly important for younger adults [ 13 ] . Further , in a longitudinal study with seven older adults , Pradhan et al . [ 43 ] found that older adults anthropomorphized older adults ( as per the CASA paradigm [ 37 ] ) using he or she pronouns and described them as friends . Using the results of our study and previous findings , it can be contended that older adults perceive conversational agents as ‘social companions’ and expect CAs to project a sense of niceness towards them . Conversational UX designers must account for this elder - specific design implication to provide personable experiences to older adults . Although Workout Pal was designed to be polite and motivating , it was not perceived as social by older adults . In our co - design sessions , older adults stressed the need to have Workout Pal en - gage in small talk with the users , including asking them , “How are you feeling ? ” Nearly all older adults affirmed that such small talks would make Workout Pal more social . Commercial Voice interfaces adopt a request - response mechanism , and thus are transactional in nature [ 15 , 40 ] . However , since older adults perceive VUIs as social companions , they expect these agents to have social abilities . Designing VUIs , irrespective of context , to engage in small talk and pleasantries heighten the sociality perceptions of older adults and helps older adults connect with the agent . One of the biggest design priorities of older adults is regarding the VUI’s voice . Older adults had different preferences regarding gender , accent , formality , and the naturalness of the synthetic voice . The field of ‘sociophonetics’ discusses the effect of one’s lived ex - periences and cultural background on these preferences . In VUI literature , the possibility of using voice as design material has been discussed [ 53 ] . In our co - design sessions , older adults took a con - siderable amount of time to design the agent’s voice . In fact , one of the older adults ( P1 ) imagined Workout Pal to have different voices based on the context . Consequently , designers should also treat voice as an important design element and test different voices that might be consistent with their system persona and project suitable qualities . Lastly , older adults are not a monolith , with great heterogeneity between them . Some older adults found the repetition of instruc - tions to be helpful , while some found it unnecessary . Similarly , some older adults found the exercises not to be challenging , while others found it appropriate . These differences in older adults necessitate designing for individualization . Allowing older adults to choose a voice , intensity of a workout , use of motivating statements , etc . , would help them exert more control over their interactions . More - over , designers should move away from a ‘frailty narrative’ that is often prevalent in HCI , wherein the assumption is that frailty in older age is inevitable and universal [ 55 ] . Efforts should be made to design for older adults with varied individualized prefer - ences and physical and cognitive abilities focusing on control and customization . 6 . 3 Limitations and Future Work This study has several limitations that need to be addressed . Firstly , the participant recruitment process relied on university emailing lists , which resulted in a sample composed of individuals who were already familiar with email and possessed a notable level of technological proficiency . Furthermore , all participants held a college degree , and most were of White ethnicity , indicating a significant limitation in diversity and generalizability . Additionally , the average age of the participants was 70 , categorizing them as the " youngest - old " [ 31 ] . Lastly , it is important to acknowledge that the study took place in a lab environment , which may introduce artificiality and affect the ecological validity of the findings . Recognizing the inherent diversity within the older adult popu - lation , it is crucial to acknowledge the multifaceted nature of this demographic . Moving forward , our objective will be to enhance the inclusivity of our participant sample by recruiting individuals from a broader range of backgrounds , placing particular emphasis on capturing the heterogeneity of ethnicity and age . By doing so , we can gain a more comprehensive understanding of the experiences and perspectives of older adults in our research . Moreover , in or - der to understand the lived experiences of using Workout Pal , we aim to deploy the VUI in a more naturalistic setting ( e . g . , homes , community dwellings , etc . ) over a longer period of time . 7 CONCLUSION In this study , we introduced Workout Pal , a VUI capable of deliv - ering physical activity programs to older adults . Using a mixed - method approach supplemented with experience - based co - design sessions , we found that older adults enjoyed exercising with Work - out Pal ; however , they identified design priorities to individualize the interaction to their own unique needs . In particular , older adults stressed the importance of the VUI projecting sociability using pleas - antries and small talk and recognized the voice as a crucial design material . Using these findings , we discussed the implications in the form of design guidelines and the ethical implications of older adults desiring more human - like system personas . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Mohammad Rafayet Ali , Kimberly Van Orden , Kimberly Parkhurst , Shuyang Liu , Viet Duy Nguyen , Paul Duberstein , and M . Ehsan Hoque . 2018 . Aging and engaging : A social conversational skills training program for older adults . In IUI 2018 - Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 55 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3172944 . 3172958 [ 2 ] Brooke Auxier . 5 things to know about Americans and their smart speakers . Pew Research Center . Retrieved September 30 , 2022 from https : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2019 / 11 / 21 / 5 - things - to - know - about - americans - and - their - smart - speakers / [ 3 ] BenettAxtellandCosminMunteanu . 2021 . Tea , EarlGrey , Hot : DesigningSpeech Interactions from the Imagined Ideal of Star Trek . In Proceedings of the 2021 188 HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden Smit Desai et al . CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445640 [ 4 ] Renato F . L . Azevedo , Dan Morrow , James Graumlich , Ann Willemsen - Dunlap , Mark Hasegawa - Johnson , Thomas S . Huang , Kuangxiao Gu , Suma Bhat , Tarek Sakakini , Victor Sadauskas , and Donald J . Halpin . 2018 . Using conversational agents to explain medication instructions to older adults . AMIA Annual Sympo - sium Proceedings 2018 : 185 – 194 . [ 5 ] E Andrew Balas . 1998 . From Appropriate Care to Evidence - Based Medicine . Pediatric Annals 27 , 9 : 581 – 584 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3928 / 0090 - 4481 - 19980901 - 11 [ 6 ] Aaron Bangor , Philip Kortum , and James Miller . 2009 . Determining what indi - vidual SUS scores mean : adding an adjective rating scale . Journal of Usability Studies 4 , 3 : 114 – 123 . [ 7 ] Timothy W . Bickmore , Daniel Schulman , and Candace Sidner . 2013 . Automated interventions for multiple health behaviors using conversational agents . Patient Education and Counseling 92 , 2 : 142 – 148 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pec . 2013 . 05 . 011 [ 8 ] Timothy W . Bickmore , Rebecca A . Silliman , Kerrie Nelson , Debbie M . Cheng , Michael Winter , Lori Henault , and Michael K . Paasche - Orlow . 2013 . A Random - ized Controlled Trial of an Automated Exercise Coach for Older Adults . Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 61 , 10 : 1676 – 1683 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jgs . 12449 [ 9 ] T . W . Bickmore , L . Caruso , K . Clough - Gorr , and T . Heeren . 2005 . “It’s just like you talk to a friend” relational agents for older adults . Interacting with Computers 17 , 6 : 711 – 735 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2005 . 09 . 002 [ 10 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychol - ogy . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 : 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 11 ] Ross C . Brownson . 2018 . Dissemination and Implementation Research in Health : Translating Science to Practice . Oxford University Press . [ 12 ] John L . Campbell , Charles Quincy , Jordan Osserman , and Ove K . Pedersen . 2013 . Coding In - depth Semistructured Interviews : Problems of Unitization and Inter - coderReliabilityandAgreement . SociologicalMethods & Research42 , 3 : 294 – 320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0049124113500475 [ 13 ] Jessie Chin and Smit Desai . 2021 . Being a Nice Partner : The Effects of Age and Interaction Types on the Perceived Social Abilities of Conversational Agents . In Technology , Mind , and Behavior . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / tms0000027 [ 14 ] Jessie Chin , Kelly Quinn , Naoko Muramatsu , and David Marquez . 2020 . A User StudyontheFeasibilityandAcceptanceofDeliveringPhysicalActivityProgramstoOlderAdultsthroughConversationalAgents . Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 64 , 1 : 33 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1071181320641010 [ 15 ] Leigh Clark , Nadia Pantidi , Orla Cooney , Philip Doyle , Diego Garaialde , Justin Edwards , BrendanSpillane , EmerGilmartin , ChristineMurad , CosminMunteanu , VincentWade , andBenjaminR . Cowan . 2019 . WhatMakesaGoodConversation ? Challenges in Designing Truly Conversational Agents . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300705 [ 16 ] Jennifer L . Davidson and Carlos Jensen . 2013 . Participatory design with older adults : an analysis of creativity in the design of mobile healthcare applications . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition ( C & C ’13 ) , 114 – 123 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2466627 . 2466652 [ 17 ] Smit Desai and Jessie Chin . OK Google , Let’s Learn : Using Voice User Inter - faces for Informal Self - Regulated Learning of Health Topics among Younger and Older Adults . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’23 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581507 [ 18 ] Smit Desai , Morgan Lundy , and Jessie Chin . 2023 . “A Painless Way to Learn : ” DesigninganInteractiveStorytellingVoiceUserInterfacetoEngageOlderAdultsinInformalHealthInformationLearning . In CUI 2023 - 5th Conference on Conversational User Interfaces . Retrieved from https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3571884 . 3597141 [ 19 ] SmitDesaiandMichaelTwidale . 2022 . IsAlexalikeacomputer ? Asearchengine ? A friend ? A silly child ? Yes . In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Conversa - tional User Interfaces ( CUI ’22 ) , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3543829 . 3544535 [ 20 ] Joel E . Fischer , Stuart Reeves , Martin Porcheron , and Rein Ove Sikveland . 2019 . Progressivity for voice interface design . In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Conversational User Interfaces ( CUI ’19 ) , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3342775 . 3342788 [ 21 ] Debjyoti Ghosh , Pin Sym Foong , Shan Zhang , and Shengdong Zhao . 2018 . As - sessing the Utility of the System Usability Scale for Evaluating Voice - based User Interfaces . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium of Chinese CHI on - ChineseCHI ’18 , 11 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202667 . 3204844 [ 22 ] Samantha M Gray , Heather A McKay , Lindsay Nettlefold , Douglas Race , Heather M Macdonald , Patti - Jean Naylor , and Joanie Sims - Gould . 2021 . Physical activity is good for older adults—but is programme implementation being overlooked ? A systematic review of intervention studies that reported frameworks or measures of implementation . British Journal of Sports Medicine 55 , 2 : 84 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bjsports - 2020 - 102465 [ 23 ] Lilit Hakobyan , Jo Lumsden , and Dympna O’Sullivan . 2014 . Participatory Re - search with Older Adults with AMD : Co - Designing a SMART Diet Diary App . In Proceedings of the 28th International BCS Human Computer Interaction Con - ference on HCI 2014 - Sand , Sea and Sky - Holiday HCI ( BCS - HCI ’14 ) , 32 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14236 / ewic / hci2014 . 4 [ 24 ] Christina N . Harrington , Katya Borgos - Rodriguez , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Engaging Low - Income African American Older Adults in Health Discussions through Community - based Design Workshops . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300823 [ 25 ] Christina N . Harrington , Radhika Garg , Amanda Woodward , and Dimitri Williams . 2022 . “It’s Kind of Like Code - Switching” : Black Older Adults’ Experi - ences with a Voice Assistant for Health Information Seeking . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501995 [ 26 ] Christina N . Harrington , Lauren Wilcox , Kay Connelly , Wendy Rogers , and Jon Sanford . 2018 . Designing Health and Fitness Apps with Older Adults : Examin - ing the Value of Experience - Based Co - Design . In Proceedings of the 12th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare ( PervasiveHealth ’18 ) , 15 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240925 . 3240929 [ 27 ] Hilary Hutchinson , Wendy Mackay , Bo Westerlund , Benjamin B . Bederson , Al - lison Druin , Catherine Plaisant , Michel Beaudouin - Lafon , Stéphane Conversy , Helen Evans , Heiko Hansen , Nicolas Roussel , and Björn Eiderbäck . 2003 . Tech - nology probes : inspiring design for and with families . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’03 ) , 17 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 642611 . 642616 [ 28 ] Sarah Kozey Keadle , Robin McKinnon , Barry I . Graubard , and Richard P . Troiano . 2016 . Prevalence and trends in physical activity among older adults in the United States : A comparison across three national surveys . Preventive Medicine 89 : 37 – 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ypmed . 2016 . 05 . 009 [ 29 ] Sunyoung Kim and Abhishek Choudhury . 2021 . Exploring older adults’ percep - tion and use of smart speaker - based voice assistants : A longitudinal study . Com - puters in Human Behavior 124 : 106914 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2021 . 106914 [ 30 ] Lean L Kramer , Silke Ter Stal , Bob C Mulder , Emely De Vet , and Lex Van Velsen . 2020 . Developing Embodied Conversational Agents for Coaching People in a Healthy Lifestyle : Scoping Review . Journal of Medical Internet Research 22 , 2 : e14058 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 14058 [ 31 ] Sang Bum Lee , Jae Hun Oh , Jeong Ho Park , Seung Pill Choi , and Jung Hee Wee . 2018 . Differences in youngest - old , middle - old , and oldest - old patients who visit the emergency department . Clinical and Experimental Emergency Medicine 5 , 4 : 249 – 255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15441 / ceem . 17 . 261 [ 32 ] Stephen Lindsay , Daniel Jackson , Guy Schofield , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . En - gaging older people using participatory design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) , 1199 – 1208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208570 [ 33 ] Jo Lumsden , Lilit Hakobyan , and Dympna O’Sullivan . 2014 . Older Adults with AMDasCo - DesignersofanAssistiveMobileApplication . InternationalJournalof Mobile Human Computer Interaction 6 , 1 : 54 – 70 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / ijmhci . 2014010104 [ 34 ] TiffanyChristinaLuo , AdrianAguilera , CourtneyReesLyles , andCarolineAstrid Figueroa . 2021 . Promoting Physical Activity Through Conversational Agents : Mixed Methods Systematic Review . Journal of Medical Internet Research 23 , 9 : e25486 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 25486 [ 35 ] Lynnette Nathalie Lyzwinski , Mohamed Elgendi , and Carlo Menon . 2023 . Con - versational Agents and Avatars for Cardiometabolic Risk Factors and Lifestyle - Related Behaviors : Scoping Review . JMIR mHealth and uHealth 11 : e39649 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 39649 [ 36 ] Donald McMillan and Razan Jaber . 2021 . Leaving the Butler Behind : The Future of Role Reproduction in CUI . In CUI 2021 - 3rd Conference on Conversational User Interfaces ( CUI ’21 ) , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3469595 . 3469606 [ 37 ] Clifford Nass , Jonathan Steuer , and Ellen R . Tauber . 1994 . Computers are social actors . InProceedingsoftheSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing Systems ( CHI ’94 ) , 72 – 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 191666 . 191703 [ 38 ] Lorelli S . Nowell , Jill M . Norris , Deborah E . White , and Nancy J . Moules . 2017 . Thematic Analysis : Striving to Meet the Trustworthiness Criteria . International Journal of Qualitative Methods 16 , 1 : 1609406917733847 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1609406917733847 [ 39 ] Kenneth Olmstead . Nearly half of Americans use digital voice assistants , mostly on their smartphones . Pew Research Center . Retrieved October 12 , 2022 from https : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2017 / 12 / 12 / nearly - half - of - americans - use - digital - voice - assistants - mostly - on - their - smartphones / [ 40 ] Martin Porcheron , Joel E . Fischer , Stuart Reeves , and Sarah Sharples . 2018 . Voice InterfacesinEverydayLife . InProceedingsofthe2018CHIConferenceonHuman Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) , 640 : 1 - 640 : 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174214 [ 41 ] F . Portet , M . Vacher , C . Golanski , C . Roux , and B . Meillon . 2013 . Design and evaluation of a smart home voice interface for the elderly : Acceptability and objection aspects . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 17 , 1 : 127 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 011 - 0470 - 5 189 Using Experience - Based Participatory Approach to Design Interactive Voice User Interfaces for Delivering Physical Activity Programs with Older Adults HAI ’23 , December 04 – 07 , 2023 , Gothenburg , Sweden [ 42 ] François Portet , Michel Vacher , Caroline Golanski , Camille Roux , and Brigitte Meillon . 2013 . Design and evaluation of a smart home voice interface for the elderly : acceptability and objection aspects . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 17 , 1 : 127 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 011 - 0470 - 5 [ 43 ] Alisha Pradhan , Leah Findlater , and Amanda Lazar . 2019 . “Phantom Friend” or “Just a Box with Information” : Personification and Ontological Categorization of Smart Speaker - based Voice Assistants by Older Adults . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW : 214 : 1 - 214 : 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359316 [ 44 ] Alisha Pradhan , Ben Jelen , Katie A . Siek , Joel Chan , and Amanda Lazar . 2020 . Understanding Older Adults’ Participation in Design Workshops . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376299 [ 45 ] AlishaPradhanandAmandaLazar . 2021 . HeyGoogle , DoYouHaveaPersonality ? Designing Personality and Personas for Conversational Agents . In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Conversational User Interfaces ( CUI ’21 ) , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3469595 . 3469607 [ 46 ] Alisha Pradhan , Amanda Lazar , and Leah Findlater . 2020 . Use of Intelligent Voice Assistants by Older Adults with Low Technology Use . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 27 , 4 : 31 : 1 - 31 : 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3373759 [ 47 ] W . J . RejeskiandS . L . Mihalko . 2001 . PhysicalActivityandQualityofLifeinOlder Adults . The Journals of Gerontology Series A : Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 56 , Supplement 2 : 23 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / gerona / 56 . suppl _ 2 . 23 [ 48 ] Samiha Samrose , Kavya Anbarasu , Ajjen Joshi , and Taniya Mishra . 2020 . Miti - gating Boredom Using An Empathetic Conversational Agent . In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents ( IVA ’20 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3383652 . 3423905 [ 49 ] Katie Seaborn and Jacqueline Urakami . 2021 . Measuring Voice UX Quantitatively : A Rapid Review . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3451712 [ 50 ] CandaceL . Sidner , TimothyBickmore , BahadorNooraie , CharlesRich , LazloRing , Mahni Shayganfar , and Laura Vardoulakis . 2018 . Creating New Technologies for Companionable Agents to Support Isolated Older Adults . ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems 8 , 3 : 17 : 1 - 17 : 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3213050 [ 51 ] Jaisie Sin , Cosmin Munteanu , Numrita Ramanand , and Yi Rong Tan . 2021 . VUI Influencers : How the Media Portrays Voice User Interfaces for Older Adults . In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Conversational User Interfaces ( CUI ’21 ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3469595 . 3469603 [ 52 ] Stephanie Stockwell , Patricia Schofield , Abi Fisher , Joseph Firth , Sarah E . Jackson , Brendon Stubbs , and Lee Smith . 2019 . Digital behavior change interventions to promote physical activity and / or reduce sedentary behavior in older adults : A systematic review and meta - analysis . Experimental Gerontology 120 : 68 – 87 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . exger . 2019 . 02 . 020 [ 53 ] SelinaJeanneSutton , PaulFoulkes , DavidKirk , andShaunLawson . 2019 . Voiceas aDesignMaterial : SociophoneticInspiredDesignStrategiesinHuman - Computer Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300833 [ 54 ] A Van Der Bij . 2002 . Effectiveness of physical activity interventions for older adults a review . American Journal of Preventive Medicine 22 , 2 : 120 – 133 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0749 - 3797 ( 01 ) 00413 - 5 [ 55 ] JohnVines , GaryPritchard , PeterWright , PatrickOlivier , andKatieBrittain . 2015 . An Age - Old Problem : Examining the Discourses of Ageing in HCI and Strategies for Future Research . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 22 , 1 : 2 : 1 - 2 : 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2696867 [ 56 ] David Watson , Lee Anna Clark , and Auke Tellegen . 1988 . Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect : The PANAS scales . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54 : 1063 – 1070 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 54 . 6 . 1063 [ 57 ] Conversation Design . Google for Developers . Retrieved June 9 , 2023 from https : / / developers . google . com / assistant / conversation - design / welcome [ 58 ] Exerciseandphysicalactivity . NationalInstituteonAging ( NIA ) . RetrievedJune9 , 2023 from https : / / www . nia . nih . gov / health / topics / exercise - and - physical - activity [ 59 ] WHO’s work on the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing ( 2021 - 2030 ) . Retrieved June 13 , 2023 from https : / / www . who . int / initiatives / decade - of - healthy - ageing 190