RESEARCH PAPER A single - cell identification and capture chip for automatically and rapidly determining hydraulic permeability of cells Yeye Xu 1 , 2 & Weiping Ding 1 , 2 & Shibo Li 1 , 2 & Chengpan Li 1 , 2 & Dayong Gao 3 & Bensheng Qiu 1 , 2 Received : 2 April 2020 / Revised : 8 May 2020 / Accepted : 12 May 2020 # Springer - Verlag GmbH Germany , part of Springer Nature 2020 Abstract The hydraulic permeability of the lipid bilayer membrane of a single cell , a very important parameter in biological and medical fields , has been attracting increasing attention . To date , methods developed to determine this permeability are either operation - complicated or time - consuming . Therefore , we developed a chip for automatically and rapidly determining the permeability of cells that integrates microfluidics and cell impedance analysis . The chip is designed to automatically identify a single cell , capture the cell , and record the volume change in that cell . We confirmed the abilities of single - cell identification and capture with the upper and lower voltage thresholds determined , validated the performance of the differential electrode design for accurate cell volume measurements , deduced the extracellular osmotic pressure change in the presence of a hypertonic solution according to fluorescence intensity , and demonstrated the single - cell volume change recorded by the chip . Then , the accuracy of the perme - ability determined with the chip was verified using HeLa cells . Finally , the permeability of human - induced pluripotent stem cells ( hiPSCs ) was determined to be 0 . 47 ± 0 . 03 μ m / atm / min . Using the chip , the permeability can be determined within 5 min . This study provides insights for the new design of an automatic single - cell identification and capture chip for single cell – related studies . Keywords Hydraulic permeability . Single - cell identification . Single - cell capture . Cell impedance . Microfluidics . hiPSC Introduction The hydraulic permeability of cell membranes is an important parameter reflecting the apparent transport of water across the membrane [ 1 , 2 ] , which is widely used for studying the pas - sive exchange between intracellular and extracellular sub - stances [ 3 ] , designing the cryopreservation strategy of the cells [ 4 – 7 ] , indicating the viability of the cells [ 8 ] , and so on . Usually , this parameter is achieved by measuring the change in the volume of cells that emerge in a hypertonic solution and then fitting the measured data to a standard equa - tion [ 9 , 10 ] . The Coulter counter machine is often used to record the change in cell volume [ 11 – 14 ] , and the permeabil - ity attained from this machine reflects the average feature of the cell population . Recently , with advances in microfluidics , the permeability measure of a single cell on a chip has attracted increasing attention because it contributes to catalog - ing single cell behaviors , studying cellular heterogeneity , and reducing cell loss during experiments [ 15 – 18 ] . To obtain the on - chip change in a single - cell volume for determining the permeability , the microscope - based method is routinely used [ 19 – 24 ] . In this method , the images of a single cell adhered on a glass surface [ 23 , 25 ] or trapped by a de - signed microstructure [ 20 , 21 ] in a microfluidic device with a hypertonic solution driven through the single cell are recorded using a microscope with a camera [ 26 , 27 ] . However , the accuracy of this microscope - based method predominantly de - pends on the resolution of the images obtained , the speed of sampling , and the algorithm for isolating the cell profile [ 22 ] ; the cell deformation caused by the cell adhesion on a substrate and the cell capture by a certain curtain ( especially when the Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00216 - 020 - 02704 - 7 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . * Weiping Ding wpdings @ ustc . edu . cn 1 Center for Biomedical Engineering , University of Science and Technology of China , Hefei 230027 , Anhui , China 2 Department of Electronic Science and Technology , University of Science and Technology of China , Hefei 230027 , Anhui , China 3 Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Washington , Seattle , WA 98195 , USA https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00216 - 020 - 02704 - 7 / Published online : 21 May 2020 Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry ( 2020 ) 412 : 4537 – 4548 hypertonic solution is loaded ) further reduce the accuracy of the fitted permeability , as the standard equation for the data fitting is based on the assumption that the cell is always a ball [ 20 , 21 ] . In addition , when applying this method , the single cell needs to be identified artificially [ 19 , 23 ] , and thus , it is time - consuming . The cell impedance – based method is a promising approach for automatically recording and analyzing the volume change of a single cell on a microfluidic chip ( actually , the Coulter counter machine is based on the cell impedance [ 11 – 14 ] ) . To date , this method has been used to assess cell status [ 28 , 29 ] , analyze cell viability [ 30 ] , measure cell death rates [ 31 ] , and study cell membrane capacitance and cytoplasmic conductiv - ity [ 32 – 34 ] , but it is rarely used to determine the volume change of a single cell on a chip , especially for the determi - nation of permeability . Therefore , in this study , we develop a microfluidic chip for automatically and rapidly determining the hydraulic perme - ability of a single cell based on cell impedance . The chip can identify a single cell , capture the cell , and detect the vol - ume change of that cell in the presence of a hypertonic solu - tion ; then , the permeability of the single cell can be obtained . First , the design and fabrication of the chip is introduced . Then , the single - cell identification , single - cell capture , and single - cell volume detection performances are validated . Next , the accuracy of the determined permeability is verified in terms of HeLa cells . Finally , the permeability of human - induced pluripotent stem cells ( hiPSCs ) is obtained using the chip . This work not only presents an on - chip method for au - tomatically measuring single - cell permeability but also pro - vides insights into the design of an automatic single - cell iden - tification and capture chip for single - cell volume – related studies . Materials and methods Design of the chip The chip we designed ( Fig . 1a ) was composed of a polydi - methylsiloxane ( PDMS ) layer with patterned microfluidic mi - crostructures ( Fig . 1a ( 1 ) ) and a glass layer with the indium tin oxide ( ITO ) electrodes covered with a PDMS film ( Fig . 1a ( 2 ) ) . Both layers were bonded together using oxygen plasma ( Fig . 1a ( 3 ) ) , and a picture of the fabricated chip is shown in Fig . 1a ( 4 ) . On the PDMS layer ( Fig . 1a ( 1 ) ) , the design of the single - cell capture microstructure was based on the literature [ 35 – 37 ] . Briefly , there are two fluid flow paths for the capture microstructure : a short , straight path with a narrow capture gap and a long , looped bypass path ( the right region enclosed by the red dashed line in Fig . 1a ( 1 ) ) ; the flow resistance of the short flow path is designed to be less than the flow resistance of the bypass flow path [ 37 ] , resulting in a higher velocity in the short flow path and thus effectively driving a cell to be captured by the capture trap ; once the trap is occupied by a cell , the short flow path is partly blocked , and its flow resis - tance increases , resulting in the fluid mainly flowing through the bypass flow path ( the design schematic is shown in Electronic Supplementary Material ( ESM ) , ESM 1 Fig . S1 , and the detailed design parameters are shown in ESM 1 Fig . S2 ) . On the glass layer ( Fig . 1a ( 2 ) ) , there are three pairs of contactless electrodes : the first pair is the judgment electrode pair , located below the narrow flow pathway of detection position 1 ( Fig . 1a ( 3 ) ; the enlarged view of the narrow flow pathway is shown in Fig . 1a ( 1 ) ) ; the second pair is the sensing electrode pair , located below the cell capture structure of detection position 2 ( Fig . 1a ( 3 ) ) ; and the third pair is the reference electrode pair , located at detection position 3 ( Fig . 1a ( 3 ) ) . The reference electrode pair and the sensing electrode pair constitute a differential electrode pair structure for elim - inating the unexpected voltage / current change and the drifting baseline caused by the surrounding disturbances [ 33 – 35 , 38 ] ( for the sake of symmetry , a mirrored cell capture structure was designed above the reference elec - trode pair ) . Here , detection position 1 was used to judge or identify whether a single cell passes , and detection position 2 , together with detection position 3 , was used to measure the isotonic volume of the single cell and the change in the single - cell volume after single - cell exposure to the hypertonic solution . To reduce the dif - ficulty in fabricating the chip , mm - scale contactless electrodes are adopted in the design [ 39 , 40 ] . In operation ( Fig . 1b ) , the cell suspension was loaded into the chip reservoir through pump 1 , and then it was sucked from the OUTLET through pump 3 at a fixed flow rate of 10 μ L / min ; when a single cell was identified in detection position 1 , pump 3 was stopped to facilitate the single - cell capture ; when a single cell was trapped in the cell capture area ( detection position 2 ) , the hypertonic solution was loaded into the chip reservoir through pump 2 , and then it was sucked again through pump 3 at a fixed flow rate of 10 μ L / min ; the voltage change induced by the single - cell volume change was detected by the differential electrode pair at detection posi - tions 2 and 3 and recorded by a computer , and the permeabil - ity of the single cell was finally obtained by data fitting . Fabrication of the chip For the chip , the PDMS layer was fabricated using a previ - ously developed lithography technique [ 41 ] , and the ITO elec - trodes were fabricated using the laser etching technique ( Shenzhen South China Xiangcheng Technology Co . , Ltd . , Shenzhen , China ) . Here , mm - scale contactless electrodes 4538 Xu Y . et al . were adopted to reduce the fabrication difficulty [ 39 , 40 ] , and the thickness of the PDMS film covered on the glass layer was approximately 5 μ m ( the fabrication schematic and the detailed parameters are shown in ESM 1 Figs . S1 and S2 , respectively ) . System setup The system setup ( Fig . 1b ) consisted of a wave generator ( DG4202 ; RIGOL Technology Co . , Ltd . , China ) , a digitizer ( NI PXle - 5105 ; National Instruments , Austin , TX , USA ) , a self - designed sensing circuit board ( ESM 1 Fig . S3 ) , a self - designed wiring circuit board , a computer with LabVIEW 2013 ( National Instruments , Austin , TX , USA ) , a microfluidic chip , and 3 syringe pumps ( NE - 1000 ; New Era Pump 146 Systems , Inc . , Farmingdale , NY , USA ) . During the experi - ments , a sinusoid voltage with a fixed amplitude ( 7 V ) and frequency ( 500 kHz ) was applied to all pairs of detection electrodes ( Fig . 1b ) , and the sampling frequency was 5 MHz . The acquisition and processing processes are shown in ESM 1 Fig . S3 . Signal processing A self - developed graphic user interface ( GUI ) program writ - ten with LabVIEW 2013 was used to automatically process the signals . Briefly , the output voltage from the judgment electrode pair was digitized with a digitizer at a sampling frequency of 5 MHz ; then , the sampled output was subjected to the bandpass filtering and demodulation processing ( the demodulation used the orthogonal vector method , which re - moved the use of the digital phase - locked loop and increased the speed of operation ; the processing of the output voltages of the sensing electrode pair and the reference electrode pair was the same as the judgment electrode pair ) . To extract the pulse peak , the output voltage of the judgment electrode pair is further processed as follows . The Daubechies 09 wavelet was used to remove the baseline wander signal by discrete wavelet transform , and the detrended signal was further proc - essed by suppressing the wideband noise to improve the signal - to - noise ratio ; after broadband noise was filtered , the signal was reconstructed using the Daubechies 05 wavelet ; the wavelet - based algorithm was used to denoise [ 42 ] and detect Fig . 1 Schematic of the chip and the measuring setup . a Schematic of the chip components ( 1 , the PDMS layer with patterned microfluidic microstructures ; 2 , the glass layer with the ITO electrodes covered with a PDMS film ; 3 , the combination of the PDMS layer and the glass layer ; 4 , the picture of the fabricated chip ) . b The overview of the measuring setup 4539 A single - cell identification and capture chip for automatically and rapidly determining hydraulic . . . the peak ( the pulse peak extraction is based on our previous study [ 31 ] ) , and once the peak was detected , the amplitude ( representing the bead / cell size ) was extracted . Cells and hypertonic solution In the experiments , the cell density of HeLa cells ( lab - owned ) and hiPSCs ( RC01001 - B ; Nuwacell Biotechnology Co . , Ltd . , Hefei , China ) was approximately 10 4 cells per mL ; the hyper - tonic solution ( 1400 mOsm / kg H 2 O ) was prepared with PBS and D - mannitol ( A600335 ; Sangon Biotech Co . , Ltd . , Shanghai , China ) . In practice , the addition of D - mannitol may slightly change the conductivity of the solution ; thus , the sodium chloride titration method was used to keep the conductivity unchanged ( the conductivity was measured using a portable conductivity meter ( DDB - 303A ; INESA Scientific Instrument Co . , Ltd . , Shanghai , China ) ) [ 43 ] . Cell membrane transport theory Based on the water transfer across the cell membrane , the following equation [ 26 , 27 ] was used for fitting the permeabil - ity : dV dt ¼ L p A c RT V 0 − V b V − V b C 0 − C e (cid:1) (cid:3) ð 1 Þ where V is the cell volume ( μ m 3 ) at time t ( s ) , L p is the cell membrane hydraulic permeability ( μ m / atm / min ) , A c is the cell membrane area ( μ m 2 ) and is assumed to be unchanged [ 44 , 45 ] , R is the gas constant ( 8 . 413 J / mol / K ) [ 1 ] , K is the absolute temperature ( K ) , C e is the extracellular osmotic pressure ( mOsm / kg H 2 O ) , C 0 is the osmotic pressure at the isotonic condition , V 0 is the cell volume at the isotonic condition , and V b is the osmotically inactive cell volume [ 26 , 27 ] . Flow field and electric field simulation The software COMSOL Multiphysics ( Burlington , MA , USA ) was used to simulate the flow and electric fields in the cell capture area . For the flow field simulation , the laminar flow was assumed , the Navier - Stokes equation was used , and the boundary conditions were as follows : the inlet flow rate was 10 μ L / min , the outlet flow rate was 10 μ L / min , and the velocity at the walls was 0 ( the properties of the fluid were assumed to be those of water at room temperature [ 46 ] ) . For the electric field simulation , a voltage with a 7 V amplitude and 500 kHz frequency was used , and the permittivity and conductivity of the electrolyte were assumed to be those of PBS , which were 80 and 1 . 6 S / m , respectively [ 47 ] . Differential electrode pair experiments To evaluate the performance of the differential electrode pair in stabilizing the voltage baseline , eliminating the externally applied interference , and analyzing the relationship between the bead size and the voltage change , the following 3 experi - ments were conducted . In the 1st experiment , a small volume of 1× PBS solution was introduced through the chip , and the output voltages from the sensing electrode pair ( U sense ) and the reference electrode pair ( U reference ) were recorded for 400 s . In the 2nd experiment , interference was applied to the chip by touching the operational platform , and the output volt - ages were recorded . In the 3rd experiment , the polystyrene microbeads ( 5 μ m , 10 μ m , and 15 μ m ) were used instead of cells and the output voltages before and after a single bead capture were recorded . Single - cell identification experiments Single - cell identification experiments were conducted to de - termine the upper and lower voltage thresholds of detection position 1 for identifying a single cell and offering a reference standard for pump 3 to exclude the cell debris and the clus - tered cells . In the experiments , 1 mL of the cell suspension ( approximately 10 4 cells per mL ) was loaded into the chip reservoir through pump 1 and then sucked through pump 3 at a flow rate of 10 μ L / min and the pulse peaks were record - ed by the judgment electrode pair ( the sinusoid voltage with an amplitude of 7 V and a frequency of 500 kHz was applied ) ; in addition , 1 mL of the cell suspension was also measured using a flow cytometer ( FCM ) ( CytoFLEX ; Beckman Coulter , Inc . , Brea , CA , USA ) . Fluorescence experiments Fluorescence experiments were conducted to obtain the change in the osmotic pressure around a single cell . In the experiments , a small quantity of fluorescein was added to the hypertonic solution ( the fluorescein concentration was 0 . 04 mM ) , and the fluorescence intensity of the single - cell capture region was imaged at 2 pictures per second using an inverted fluorescence microscope ( IX73 ; Olympus Life Science , Tokyo , Japan ) with a CCD ( DP - 73 ; Olympus Life Science , Tokyo , Japan ) . Permeability determination experiments In the experiments , a 1× PBS buffer solution was introduced using pump 3 at a fixed flow rate of 20 μ L / min ; after the solution arrived at the reservoir , pump 3 was stopped ; the cell suspension ( approximately 10 4 cells per mL ) was loaded into the reservoir through pump 1 ; after the reservoir was filled , pump 1 was stopped and pump 3 was operated at a flow rate of 4540 Xu Y . et al . 10 μ L / min ; when the spherically shaped substance through detection position 1 was identified as a single cell , the flow rate of pump 3 was reduced to 0 μ L / min ; the electrodes in the cell capture area continuously distin - guished whether the single cell was captured ; once the single cell was captured , the cell suspension in the res - ervoir was slowly withdrawn , and then the hypertonic solution was loaded into the reservoir using pump 2 ; after the reservoir was filled , the hypertonic solution was sucked using pump 3 at a flow rate of 10 μ L / min ; when the extracellular fluid was quickly replaced , the single - cell volume was imaged using an inverted microscope , and the voltage change was recorded using a laptop ( all experiments were performed at room tem - perature ) . It should be noted that the narrow flow path - way of the chip may be blocked by some protein floc - cules , which will limit the number of measurements . Statistical analysis In this study , all experiments were repeated at least three times , the data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation , and NS denotes no significance under two - tailed unpaired Student ’ s t tests . Results Single - cell identification by the chip To confirm the ability of the chip to identify a single cell , the voltage amplitude change was recorded by the designed circuit when the cell suspension was driven through detection position 1 of the chip ( Fig . 2 ) . Comparatively , when a cell debris ( Fig . 2a ( 1 ) ) , a single cell ( Fig . 2b ( 1 ) ) , and a cluster of cells ( Fig . 2c ( 1 ) ) ap - peared , respectively , the voltage amplitude change was significantly small for the cell debris ( Fig . 2a ( 2 ) ) , me - dium for a single cell ( Fig . 2b ( 2 ) ) , and large for a cluster of cells ( Fig . 2c ( 2 ) ) . Thus , a single cell could be identified automatically by setting a voltage threshold range . To determine the voltage threshold range , the cell size dis - tribution was obtained as a reference using FCM ( ESM 1 Fig . S4a ; the forward scatter ( FSC ) reflects the cell size [ 48 ] ) . Based on the FCM results , we assumed that the cell debris was 10 . 5 % and the cluster of cells was 2 . 5 % ; thus , for the chip , the lower and upper voltage thresholds were 8 . 1 × 10 − 3 V and 3 . 0 × 10 − 2 V , respectively . In operation , when the detected pulse peak value between the lower and upper volt - age thresholds appeared , the system identified the substance as a single cell . Single - cell capture by the capture zone To confirm the ability of the chip to capture a single cell , the capture effects were imaged at detection position 2 of the chip ( Fig . 2 ) . The results show that a single cell could be captured by setting an amplitude - associated operation of pump 3 ( when the system identified the substance as a single cell , the flow rate decreased for the capture of the cell ) . That is , the cell debris ( Fig . 2a ( 3 ) ) and the cluster of cells ( Fig . 2c ( 3 ) ) were sucked out of the chip while only a single cell ( Fig . 2b ( 3 ) ) was retained . We also theoretically simulated the flow field at de - tection position 2 ( the sensing zone ) : the flow velocity through the short fluid pathway was significantly higher than the ve - locity through the annular fluid pathway ( Fig . 2d ) , further suggesting that the design can effectively cause the cells to be trapped in the capture zone . Detection capability of the cell capture zone Sensitivity To check the detection sensitivity of the cell capture zone , the electric field for the single - cell capture area in the absence of cells was simulated theoretically ( Fig . 2e ) . The results show that the current density in the sensing area / the cell capture area is highest , and thus , the expected change in the cell volume in the capture area can be responded more sensitively because the higher the current density , the higher the detection sensi - tivity [ 35 , 49 ] . Baseline drift elimination In practice , the baseline voltage / current will drift slowly over time [ 50 ] and may be interfered by external distractions ; then , the voltage modulation induced by the cell volume change may be completely submerged by the drifting baseline . Here , we adopted a differential electrode sensing scheme [ 34 ] to solve this problem . To confirm the validation of the differential electrode de - sign , the output voltages of the two pairs of electrodes were monitored . The results show that although the output voltages of both pairs of electrodes decreased slowly ( Fig . 3a ( 1 ) ) , pos - sibly because of the electrolytic reaction of the solution , the ratio of the two voltages remained unchanged ( Fig . 3a ( 2 ) ) . Similarly , if there is interference , such as touching the opera - tion platform and opening a machine , the output voltages of both electrodes fluctuate synchronously ( Fig . 3b ( 1 ) ) , and the fluctuation of the ratio of the two output voltages is small and can be negligible ( Fig . 3b ( 2 ) ) . Therefore , the differential elec - trode design we adopted can eliminate the effects of the drifting voltage ( the output voltages of the sensing and refer - ence electrode pairs should be the same theoretically [ 38 , 49 ] ; here , due to the defective fabrication techniques of the chip , 4541 A single - cell identification and capture chip for automatically and rapidly determining hydraulic . . . the sensing area and the reference area were asymmetric , caus - ing a difference between the output voltages of both electrode pairs . Fortunately , since the output voltage ratio remained unchanged , the differential electrode design could still func - tion well [ 35 ] ) . Here , the output voltages from the sensing electrode pair and the reference electrode pair before the cell Fig . 3 Confirmation of the performance of the differential electrode pair . a The voltage baseline when the chip was perfused with 1× PBS . b The voltage baseline with the interferences externally applied ( a ( 1 ) and b ( 1 ) show the output voltages of the sensing electrode pair and the reference electrode pair ; a ( 2 ) and b ( 2 ) show the ratios of the output voltage of the sensing electrode pair to the reference electrode pair ) . c The capture picture ( 1 ) and the voltage jumping ( 2 ) of a 5 - μ m bead . d The capture picture ( 1 ) and the voltage jumping ( 2 ) of a 10 - μ m bead . e The capture picture ( 1 ) and the voltage jumping ( 2 ) of a 15 - μ m bead . f The relation - ship between the voltage changes and the microbead diameters Fig . 2 Single - cell identification and capture by the chip , when a cell debris ( a ) , a single cell ( b ) , and a cluster of cells ( c ) are pumped through the chip , respectively . a ( 1 ) , b ( 1 ) , c ( 1 ) The images recorded by the microscope at detection position 1 . a ( 2 ) , b ( 2 ) , c ( 2 ) The voltage changes recorded by the electrode pair at detection position 1 . a ( 3 ) , b ( 3 ) , c ( 3 ) The capture effects imaged by the microscope at detection position 2 . d , e The flow and electric fields in the absence of a single cell , respectively 4542 Xu Y . et al . capture were defined as U sense0 and U reference0 , respectively ; k is the ratio of U sense0 to U reference0 ; and the voltage change ( U ) in the presence of a single cell was calculated using the ex - pression U = U sense − k × U reference . Correction between single cell size and voltage amplitude change Based on previous studies [ 32 , 51 ] , the captured single cell can be considered an insulating bead if the frequency of the modulation voltage is less than the eigenfrequency of the cell . Thus , a change / an increase in the output voltage occurs in the presence of a single cell in the cell capture zone . To calibrate the relationship between the magnitude of the voltage change and the cell size , 5 - μ m , 10 - μ m , and 15 - μ m beads captured ( Fig . 3c ( 1 ) , d ( 1 ) , e ( 1 ) ) were used to simulate the three size states of a single cell . The results show that the voltage change increases with the size of the beads ( Fig . 3c ( 2 ) , d ( 2 ) , e ( 2 ) ) ; the value of the voltage change ( U ) is proportional to the diameter of the beads ( D ) , and the ratio of U to D is 0 . 0158 ( Fig . 3f ; the results are consistent with conclusions in the literature [ 31 ] ) . In this study , as the high - precision electrode and microstruc - ture processing techniques were adopted , the difference be - tween chips was so small that the readings of chips or the ratios of U to D were nearly the same ; consequently , the re - peated chip calibration was omitted . Osmotic pressure change around the captured single cell In practice , it is very difficult to instantly replace the extracellular isotonic solution with the hypertonic solu - tion ; thus , it is necessary to know the extracellular osmot - ic pressure change over time when the hypertonic solution is loaded . Here , the fluorescein was added to the hyper - tonic solution to indicate the extracellular osmotic pres - sure change ( Fig . 4 ) . The images show that the fluores - cence solution arrived at the cell capture zone at 15 s and that the fluorescence intensity rapidly reached the maxi - mum in approximately 3 s ( Fig . 4a ) . Further , the normal - ized fluorescence intensity over time was obtained ( Fig . 4b ; the sampling area 5 μ m × 5 μ m is the region enclosed by the red line in Fig . 4a ) , and then the extra - cellular osmotic pressure change over time can be de - duced ( Fig . 4c ) . Permeability accuracy validation based on the captured single HeLa cell To validate the accuracy of the determined permeability , we compared the HeLa cell permeability determined by the chip with the permeability using the microscope - based method . In the presence of a hypertonic solution , the recorded images show that the size of the cell decreased over time due to the Fig . 4 Change in the extracellular osmotic pressure when the hypertonic solution with the added fluorescein is loaded . a Images of the fluorescence intensity of the cell capture area . b The normalized fluorescence intensity change . c The extracellular osmotic pressure change 4543 A single - cell identification and capture chip for automatically and rapidly determining hydraulic . . . loss of intracellular water and reached an equilibrium value after approximately 5 . 5 s ( Fig . 5a ) ; the measured voltage in - creased suddenly and then decreased initially slowly , then rapidly and finally slowly ( Fig . 5b ) . Based on the voltage change , the cell volume change was obtained ( Fig . 5c ) , and then the permeability and the osmotically inactive volume ( Fig . 5e ; 5 cells were included ) were achieved by data fitting . Using the chip , the permeability can be automatically deter - mined within 5 min . The cell volume change was also obtain - ed using a microscope ( Fig . 5d ) . The comparison shows that the permeability and the osmotically inactive volume with the chip are very close to those obtained with the microscope - based method . In addition , the permeability we obtained is also very close to that deduced from the literature [ 52 ] . Thus , the chip is reliable in determining the permeability . Permeability determination of the captured single hiPSC Using the chip , we achieved the automatic determination of the permeability of the captured single hiPSC . Figure 6a – d show the captured cell images , the sudden increased voltage , the relatively gently decreased voltage , and the cell volume change , respectively ( the video for recording the process of the hiPSC volume change is attached in ESM 2 Video 1 ) . By data fitting , the permeability and the osmotically inactive vol - ume of a single cell were obtained ( the results of 5 cells are listed in Fig . 6e ) . Then , the average permeability of hiPSCs we determined was 0 . 47 ± 0 . 03 μ m / atm / min and the correspond - ing normalized osmotically inactive cell volume was 0 . 30 ± 0 . 02 ( Fig . 6e ) . Fig . 5 Permeability determination of HeLa cells . a The images of the single cell in the presence of the hypertonic solution recorded by the microscope . b The output voltage change over time . c The cell volume change deduced accordingto the voltagechange . d The cell volume change estimated according to the images . e The comparison between the permeability with the chip and the permeability with the microscope 4544 Xu Y . et al . Discussion For the chip we designed , there are 3 advantages as follows : ( 1 ) the chip can automatically identify and then capture a singlecell , ( 2 ) thecellcapturezoneisfixedtoavoidtheerrors caused by the cell excursion , and ( 3 ) the determination pro - cess is very quick . Compared with previous single - cell cap - ture chips [ 50 , 53 ] , a pair of electrodes was arranged before the cell capture zone to automatically identify a single cell , thenfalsecapture , i . e . , thecaptureofcell debrisandclustered cells ( which often occurred previously ) can be avoided . Consequently , the capture efficiency of single cells is greatly enhanced . In addition , a microscope assisting the capture as shown in the abovementioned studies is also no longer need - ed . For the chip , the fixed cell capture structure ensured a high measuring precision by avoiding the cell excursion from the detection zone [ 1 , 54 ] ; meanwhile , the effect of the interaction between cells on the detection was eliminated [ 20 ] . Using the chip , the permeability can be automatically measured within 5 min , whereas it often took 15 – 50 min in the previous studies because of the need of the cell adhesion on the glass [ 54 , 55 ] . Compared with the microscope - based cell volume determi - nation , the impedance - based cell volume determination is more accurate . The reason is that the voltage increase is line - arly related to the cell size . Thus , although in the late stage of the cell volume change after the hypertonic solution loading , the cell shape is not anymore a sphere - like morphology be - cause of the solution loading – induced squeeze on the cell ( Figs . 5a and 6a ; the bypass fluid pathway design significantly reduced the squeeze of the fluid on the cell , compared with the one fluid pathway design [ 43 ] ) , and the effect of the cell shape on the determination is negligible . Thus , the permeability with the chip is expected to be more accurate . Fig . 6 Permeability determination of hiPSCs . a The images of the single cell recorded by the microscope . b The voltage jumping in the presence of the single cell . c The output voltage change over time in the presence of the hypertonic solution . d The cell volume change deduced according to the voltage change . e The determined permeability and osmotically inactive cell volume of hiPSCs 4545 A single - cell identification and capture chip for automatically and rapidly determining hydraulic . . . In the calculation of cell permeability , the extracellular os - motic pressure plays a key role . In previous studies [ 21 , 56 ] , it was assumed that the extracellular osmotic pressure is usually the osmolality of the added hypertonic solution , but this is actually inaccurate [ 19 , 57 ] . In this study , although the process of replacing the isotonic solution with the hypertonic solution could be completed within 3 s because of the small fluid pathway size , the change curve of the extracellular osmotic pressure was still deduced for the calculation according to the fluorescence intensity , further enhancing the accuracy of the determined permeability . It should be noted that for the chip we designed , the cell stiffness could affect the accuracy of the determined perme - ability . For the cells with large stiffness , the squeeze of the fluid on the cells is small and thus the accuracy of the deter - mined permeability is high . In addition , if the cells are much larger or smaller than HeLa cells , the single - cell capture mi - crostructure of the chip needs to be scaled up or scaled down accordingly . Today , although hiPSCs have been widely used in drug screening , tissue engineering , and regenerative medicine [ 4 , 58 , 59 ] , the cryopreservation of hiPSCs remains a challenge [ 4 ] ; thus , the determination of the permeability of hiPSCs is of great significance [ 60 ] . To date , the permeability of hiPSCs has rarely been reported . The permeability of hiPSCs we de - termined is in the range of the published permeability but is slightly larger than the value from the literature [ 25 ] . The reason is mainly due to the difference in the cell status that can be affected by many factors , such as the cell cycle , culture medium , cryoprotective agent , and temperature [ 61 – 63 ] . Conclusion In this study , we presented a single - cell identification and capture chip for automatically and rapidly determining the permeability of cells . The chip identifies a single cell based on the voltage pulse induced by the single cell appearance if the voltage change is in the range of the lower ( 8 . 1 × 10 − 3 V ) and upper ( 3 . 0 × 10 − 2 V ) voltage thresholds . If a single cell is identified , it will be captured by a specific microstructure de - signed on the chip according to fluid dynamics . Then , the volume change of the single cell after the extracellular fluid is replaced with a hypertonic solution is recorded through the voltage change . Finally , the permeability of a single cell is determined by data fitting . The performance of the differential electrode design for accurately measuring the single - cell vol - ume was validated in terms of maintaining the stability of the voltage baseline and eliminating externally applied interfer - ences . The accuracy of the permeability determined with the chip was verified using HeLa cells . Then , the permeability of hiPSCs was determined to be 0 . 47 ± 0 . 03 μ m / atm / min . For the chip , the permeability of a single cell can automatically be obtained within 5 min . This study provides an automatic single - cell identification and capture platform and can contrib - ute to single cell – related studies . Acknowledgments We would like to thank the USTC Center for Micro and Nanoscale Research and Fabrication and the Research Center for Life Sciences at USTC for their assistance . Funding information This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 81627806 and 81571768 ) . The funders had no role in the study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . Data availability All data associated to this study is available from the authors upon reasonable request . Compliance with ethical standards Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals . Informed consent Informed consent is not applicable in this study . References 1 . Shu ZQ , HughesSM , Fang CF , Huang JH , FuBW , Zhao G , et al . A study of the osmotic characteristics , water permeability , and cryo - protectant permeability of human vaginal immune cells . Cryobiology . 2016 ; 72 : 93 – 9 . 2 . Peckys D , Mazur P . Regulatory volume decrease in COS - 7 cells at 22 °C and its influence on the Boyle van ’ t Hoff relation and the determination of the osmotically inactive volume . Cryobiology . 2012 ; 65 : 74 – 8 . 3 . Kulbacka J , Choroma ń ska A , Rossowska J , We ż gowiec J , Saczko J , Rols M - P . Cell membrane transport mechanisms : ion channels and electrical properties of cell membranes . In : Kulbacka J , Satkauskas S , editors . Transport across natural and modified bio - logical membranes and its implications in physiology and therapy . Cham : Springer International ; 2017 . p . 39 – 58 . 4 . Baharvand H , Salekdeh GH , Taei A , Mollamohammadi S . An ef - ficient and easy - to - use cryopreservation protocol for human ES and iPS cells . Nat Protoc . 2010 ; 5 : 588 – 94 . 5 . Hunt CJ . Cryopreservation of human stem cells for clinical appli - cation : a review . Transfus Med Hemother . 2011 ; 38 : 107 – 23 . 6 . Lei ZL , Xie DC , Mbogba MK , Chen ZR , Tian CH , Xu L , et al . A microfluidic platform withcell - scaleprecisetemperature controlfor simultaneous investigation of the osmotic responses of multiple oocytes . Lab Chip . 2019 ; 19 : 1929 – 40 . 7 . Peckys DB , Kleinhans FW , Mazur P . Rectification of the water permeability in COS - 7 cells at 22 , 10 and 0°C . PLoS One . 2011 ; 6 : e23643 . 8 . Li M , Yang Y . Quaternized chitosan promotes the antiproliferative effect of vemurafenib in melanoma cells by increasing cell perme - ability . Onco Targets Ther . 2018 ; 11 : 8293 – 9 . 9 . Muldrew K , Schachar J , Cheng P , Rempel C , Liang S , Wan R . The possible influence of osmotic poration on cell membrane water permeability . Cryobiology . 2009 ; 58 : 62 – 8 . 4546 Xu Y . et al . 10 . Liu J , Mullen S , Meng QG , Critser J , Dinnyes A . Determination of oocyte membrane permeability coefficients and their application to cryopreservation in a rabbit model . Cryobiology . 2009 ; 59 : 127 – 34 . 11 . Agca Y , Liu J , Mullen S , Johnson - Ward J , Gould K , Chan A , et al . Chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes ) spermatozoa osmotic tolerance and cryoprotectant permeability characteristics . J Androl . 2005 ; 26 : 470 – 7 . 12 . Agca Y , Mullen S , Liu J , Johnson - Ward J , Gould K , Chan A , et al . Osmotic tolerance and membrane permeability characteristics of rhesus monkey ( Macaca mulatta ) spermatozoa . Cryobiology . 2005 ; 51 : 1 – 14 . 13 . Casula E , Asuni GP , Sogos V , Fadda S , Delogu F , Cincotti A . Osmoticbehaviour ofhumanmesenchymalstemcells : implications for cryopreservation . PLoS One . 2017 ; 12 : e0184180 . 14 . Higgins AZ , Karlsson JOM . Curve fitting approach for measure - ment of cellular osmotic properties by the electrical sensing zone method . I . Osmotically inactive volume . Cryobiology . 2008 ; 57 : 223 – 33 . 15 . Ameri SK , Singh PK , Dokmeci MR , Khademhosseini A , Xu QB , Sonkusale SR . All electronic approach for high - throughput cell trapping and lysis with electrical impedance monitoring . Biosens Bioelectron . 2014 ; 54 : 462 – 7 . 16 . Jang LS , Wang MH . Microfluidic device for cell capture and im - pedance measurement . Biomed Microdevices . 2007 ; 9 : 737 – 43 . 17 . Nguyen TA , Yin TI , Reyes D , Urban GA . Microfluidic chip with integrated electrical cell - impedance sensing for monitoring single cancer cell migration in three - dimensional matrixes . Anal Chem . 2013 ; 85 : 11068 – 76 . 18 . Altschuler SJ , Wu LF . Cellular heterogeneity : do differences make a difference ? Cell . 2010 ; 141 : 559 – 63 . 19 . Liu W , Zhao G , Shu ZQ , Wang T , Zhu KX , Gao DY . High - precision approach based on microfluidic perfusion chamber for quantitative analysis of biophysical properties of cell membrane . Int J Heat Mass Transf . 2015 ; 86 : 869 – 79 . 20 . Li L , Chen ZR , Zhang MK , Panhwar F , Gao C , Zhao G , et al . Cell membrane permeability coefficients determined by single - step os - motic shift are not applicable for optimization of multi - step addition of cryoprotective agents : as revealed by HepG2 cells . Cryobiology . 2017 ; 79 : 82 – 6 . 21 . Chen HH , Shen H , Heimfeld S , Tran KK , Reems J , Folch A , et al . A microfluidic study of mouse dendritic cell membrane transport properties of water and cryoprotectants . Int J Heat Mass Transf . 2008 ; 51 : 5687 – 94 . 22 . Mbogba MK , Haider Z , Hossain SMC , Huang DB , Memon K , Panhwar F , et al . The application of convolution neural network based cell segmentation during cryopreservation . Cryobiology . 2018 ; 85 : 95 – 104 . 23 . Wang JY , Zhao G , Shu ZQ , Zhou P , Cao YX , Gao DY . Effect of iron oxide nanoparticles on the permeability properties of Sf21 cells . Cryobiology . 2016 ; 72 : 21 – 6 . 24 . Zhao G , Zhang ZG , Zhang YT , Chen ZR , Niu D , Cao YX , et al . A microfluidic perfusion approach for on - chip characterization of the transport properties of human oocytes . Lab Chip . 2017 ; 17 : 1297 – 305 . 25 . Xu YQ , Zhang L , Xu JD , Wei YP , Xu X . Membrane permeability of the human pluripotent stem cells to Me2SO , glycerol and 1 , 2 - propanediol . Arch Biochem Biophys . 2014 ; 550 : 67 – 76 . 26 . Lyu SR , Chen WJ , Hsieh WH . Measuring transport properties of cellmembranes bya PDMS microfluidicdevice with controllability over changing rate of extracellular solution . Sensors Actuators B Chem . 2014 ; 197 : 28 – 34 . 27 . Chen HH , Purtteman JJP , Heimfeld S , Folch A , Gao D . Development of a microfluidic device for determination of cell osmotic behavior and membrane transport properties . Cryobiology . 2007 ; 55 : 200 – 9 . 28 . Xu YC , Xie XW , Duan Y , Wang L , Cheng Z , Cheng J . A review of impedance measurements of whole cells . Biosens Bioelectron . 2016 ; 77 : 824 – 36 . 29 . Holmes D , Pettigrew D , Reccius CH , Gwyer JD , van Berkel C , Holloway J , et al . Leukocyte analysis and differentiation using high speed microfluidic single cell impedance cytometry . Lab Chip . 2009 ; 9 : 2881 – 9 . 30 . Park J , Il Jin S , Kim HM , Ahn J , Kim YG , Lee EG , et al . Monitoring change in refractive index of cytosol of animal cells on affinity surface under osmotic stimulus for label - free measure - ment of viability . Biosens Bioelectron . 2015 ; 64 : 241 – 6 . 31 . Zi Q , Ding WP , Sun CL , Li SB , Gao DY , He LQ , et al . On - chip label - free determination of cell survival rate . Biosens Bioelectron . 2020 ; 148 : 111820 . 32 . Sun T , Green NG , Morgan H . Analytical and numerical modeling methods for impedance analysis of single cells on - chip . Nano . 2008 ; 3 : 55 – 63 . 33 . Zhou Y , Basu S , Laue ED , Seshia AA . Dynamic monitoring of single cell lysis in an impedance - based microfluidic device . Biomed Microdevices . 2016 ; 18 : 56 . 34 . Malleo D , Nevill JT , Lee LP , Morgan H . Continuous differential impedance spectroscopy of single cells . Microfluid Nanofluid . 2010 ; 9 : 191 – 8 . 35 . Zhou Y , Basu S , Laue E , Seshia AA . Single cell studies of mouse embryonic stem cell ( mESC ) differentiation by electrical imped - ance measurements in a microfluidic device . Biosens Bioelectron . 2016 ; 81 : 249 – 58 . 36 . Frimat JP , Becker M , Chiang YY , Marggraf U , Janasek D , Hengstler JG , et al . A microfluidic array with cellular valving for single cell co - culture . Lab Chip . 2011 ; 11 : 231 – 7 . 37 . Tan WH , Takeuchi S . A trap - and - release integrated microfluidic system for dynamic microarray applications . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2007 ; 104 : 1146 – 51 . 38 . GawadS , Schild L , RenaudP . Micromachinedimpedance spectros - copy flow cytometer for cell analysis and particle sizing . Lab Chip . 2001 ; 1 : 76 – 82 . 39 . Emaminejad S , Javanmard M , Dutton RW , Davis RW . Microfluidic diagnostic tool for the developing world : contactless impedance flow cytometry . Lab Chip . 2012 ; 12 : 4499 – 507 . 40 . Emaminejad S , Paik KH , Tabard - Cossa V , Javanmard M . Portable cytometry using microscale electronic sensing . Sensors Actuators B Chem . 2016 ; 224 : 275 – 81 . 41 . McDonald JC , Duffy DC , Anderson JR , Chiu DT , Wu HK , Schueller OJA , et al . Fabrication of microfluidic systems in poly ( - dimethylsiloxane ) . Electrophoresis . 2000 ; 21 : 27 – 40 . 42 . Hassan U , Watkins NN , Edwards C , Bashir R . Flow metering char - acterization within an electrical cell counting microfluidic device . Lab Chip . 2014 ; 14 : 1469 – 76 . 43 . Hua SZ , Pennell T . A microfluidic chip for real - time studies of the volume of single cells . Lab Chip . 2009 ; 9 : 251 – 6 . 44 . Mazur P . Equilibrium , quasi - equilibrium , and nonequilibrium freezing of mammalian embryos . Cell Biophys . 1990 ; 17 : 53 – 92 . 45 . Vian AM , Higgins AZ . Membrane permeability of the human gran - ulocyte to water , dimethyl sulfoxide , glycerol , propyleneglycol and ethylene glycol . Cryobiology . 2014 ; 68 : 35 – 42 . 46 . Hou HW , Warkiani ME , Khoo BL , Li ZR , Soo RA , Tan DSW , et al . Isolation and retrieval of circulating tumor cells using centrif - ugal forces . Sci Rep . 2013 ; 3 : 1259 . 47 . Spencer D , Morgan H . Positional dependence of particles in microfludic impedance cytometry . Lab Chip . 2011 ; 11 : 1234 – 9 . 48 . Adan A , Alizada G , Kiraz Y , Baran Y , Nalbant A . Flow cytometry : basic principles and applications . Crit Rev Biotechnol . 2017 ; 37 : 163 – 76 . 49 . Zhou Y , Basu S , Wohlfahrt KJ , Lee SF , Klenerman D , Laue ED , et al . A microfluidic platform for trapping , releasing and super - 4547 A single - cell identification and capture chip for automatically and rapidly determining hydraulic . . . resolution imaging of single cells . Sensors Actuators B Chem . 2016 ; 232 : 680 – 91 . 50 . Sun JS , Stowers CC , Boczko EM , Li DY . Measurement of the volume growth rate of single budding yeast with the MOSFET - based microfluidic Coulter counter . Lab Chip . 2010 ; 10 : 2986 – 93 . 51 . Oren Y , Freger V , Linder C . Highly conductive ordered heteroge - neous ion - exchange membranes . J Membr Sci . 2004 ; 239 : 17 – 26 . 52 . Thirumala S , Forman JM , Monroe WT , Devireddy RV . Freezing and post - thaw apoptotic behaviour of cells in the presence of palmitoyl nanogold particles . Nanotechnology . 2007 ; 18 : 19 . 53 . Sun JS , Yang JK , Gao YD , Xu DY , Li DY . Reference channel - based microfluidic resistance sensing for single yeast cell volume growth measurement . Microfluid Nanofluid . 2017 ; 21 : 33 . 54 . Tseng HY , Sun SJ , Shu ZQ , Ding WP , Reems JA , Gao DY . A microfluidic study of megakaryocytes membrane transport proper - ties to water and dimethyl sulfoxide at suprazero and subzero tem - peratures . Biopreserv Biobank . 2011 ; 9 : 355 – 62 . 55 . Yue C , Zhao G , Yi JR , Gao C , Shen LX , Zhang YT , et al . Effect of hydroxyapatite nanoparticles on osmotic responses of pig iliac en - dothelial cells . Cryobiology . 2014 ; 69 : 273 – 80 . 56 . Zhang YT , Zhao G , Yi JR , Shu ZQ , Zhou P , Cao YX , et al . Comparison of the fitting validity between the 2P model and the nondilute solution model using statistical methods in modeling cell membrane permeabilities . Biopreserv Biobank . 2016 ; 14 : 39 – 44 . 57 . Takamatsu H , Komori Y , Zawlodzka S , Fujii M . Quantitative ex - amination of a perfusion microscope for the study of osmotic re - sponse of cells . J Biomech Eng . 2004 ; 126 : 402 – 9 . 58 . Kikuchi T , Morizane A , Doi D , Magotani H , Onoe H , Hayashi T , et al . Human iPS cell - derived dopaminergic neurons function in a primate Parkinson ’ s disease model . Nature . 2017 ; 548 : 592 – 6 . 59 . Zhao XY , Lv Z , Li W , Zeng FY , Zhou Q . Production of mice using iPS cells and tetraploid complementation . Nat Protoc . 2010 ; 5 : 963 – 71 . 60 . Peng J , Fang CF , Ren S , Pan JJ , Jia YD , Shu ZQ , et al . Development of a microfluidic device with precise on - chip temper - ature control by integrated cooling and heating components for single updates cell - based analysis . Int J Heat Mass Transf . 2019 ; 130 : 660 – 7 . 61 . Fang CF , Ji FJ , Shu ZQ , Gao DY . Determination of the temperature - dependent cell membrane permeabilities using microfluidics with integrated flow and temperature control . Lab Chip . 2017 ; 17 : 951 – 60 . 62 . Karlsson JOM , Younis AI , Chan AWS , Gould KG , Eroglu A . Permeability of the rhesus monkey oocyte membrane to water and common cryoprotectants . Mol Reprod Dev . 2009 ; 76 : 321 – 33 . 63 . Wang JY , Zhu KX , Zhao G , Ren J , Yue C , Gao DY . Dual depen - dence of cryobiogical properties of Sf21 cell membrane on the temperature and the concentration of the cryoprotectant . PLoS One . 2013 ; 8 : e72836 . Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic - tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . 4548 Xu Y . et al .