Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Research Policy journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / respol Thinking about technology : Applying a cognitive lens to technical change Sarah Kaplan a , ∗ , Mary Tripsas b , 1 a University of Pennsylvania , Wharton School , 3620 Locust Walk , Suite 2019 , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , United States b Harvard Business School 219 Rock Center , Soldiers Field Road , Boston , MA 02163 , United States a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 15 August 2007 Received in revised form 14 February 2008 Accepted 19 February 2008 Available online 3 April 2008 Keywords : Technological frames Cognition Technical change Technology life cycle Technology trajectories a b s t r a c t We apply a cognitive lens to understanding technology trajectories across the life cycle by developing a co - evolutionary model of technological frames and technology . Applying that model to each stage of the technology life cycle , we identify conditions under which a cog - nitivelensmightchangetheexpectedtechnologicaloutcomepredictedbypurelyeconomic or organizational models . We also show that interactions of producers , users and institu - tions shape the development of collective frames around the meaning of new technologies . We thus deepen our understanding of sources of variation in the era of ferment , conditions under which a dominant design may be achieved , the underlying architecture of the era of incremental change and the dynamics associated with discontinuities . © 2008 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Evolutionary models of technical change invoke a life cycle metaphor to depict technological progress in an industry over time . Within this literature , the basic model positsthatearlyon , followingatechnologicaldiscontinuity , high levels of technical variation characterize an era of fer - ment . Next , selection among competing technologies leads to the retention of a dominant design – a set of technolo - gies and associated problem - solving heuristics embodied in a particular product design . Convergence on a dominant design is followed by a period of incremental progress that is ultimately disrupted by another technological disconti - nuity as the cycle repeats itself in a highly path - dependent process . Associated with each stage of this cycle are tech - nical outcomes that the literature has addressed : Where does technical variation originate ? Under what conditions ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 215 898 6377 . E - mail addresses : slkaplan @ wharton . upenn . edu ( S . Kaplan ) , mtripsas @ hbs . edu ( M . Tripsas ) . 1 Tel . : + 1 617 495 8407 . does a dominant design emerge ( or not ) ? What determines which design will become “dominant ? ” What drives the rateanddirectionoftechnologicalchangeduringperiodsof incremental progress ? When does a technological discon - tinuity occur ? A long - standing research tradition grounded in both economics ( Dosi , 1984 ; Nelson and Winter , 1982 ; Sahal , 1981 ) and organizations ( Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ; Tushman and Rosenkopf , 1992 ; Utterback , 1974 ) has examined these questions . For the most part , however , the technology life cycle literature , including such recent papersasMurmannandFrenken ( 2006 ) andSuarez ( 2004 ) , has neglected cognitive factors , factors that we argue are essentialtounderstandingthedynamicsoftechnologyevo - lution . Given the inherent unpredictability and equivocality of technologies ( Nightingale , 2004 ; Weick , 1990 ) , one might expect that cognitive processes should shape their evo - lution . Neither the nature of a new technology nor its trajectory is obvious ex ante . When a technology ﬁrst emerges , actors – be they producers , users or institutions – are unsure about what it is or how it will perform . In such ambiguous circumstances , actors need to make sense of the situation before they can act ( Weick , 1995 ) , implying 0048 - 7333 / $ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2008 . 02 . 002 S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 791 that cognitive explanations should be central to under - standing technology evolution . Yet , while cognition has received increasing attention in the broader ﬁeld of organi - zational theory ( DiMaggio , 1997 ; Huff , 1990 ; Lant , 2002 ; Walsh , 1995 ) , research on the technology life cycle has been largely silent about cognition’s role . One view of inno - vation has underscored the cognitive underpinnings for translating scientiﬁc discoveries into technologies within organizations ( Nightingale , 1998 ) , and in this paper we extend these types of insights by developing a model of technology evolution that explicitly considers the role of cognitive dynamics across organizations . The model we develop focuses on how the technolog - ical frames ( Acha , 2004 ; Orlikowski and Gash , 1994 ) of a wide array of actors shape the technological trajectory over the life cycle . We propose that diverse technological frames are a source of variation in the era of ferment , that framing activities help drive the achievement of a dominant design when one emerges , and that the intertwining of techno - logical frames and organizational architecture in the era of incremental change can explain why transitions are so difﬁcult . We use the word “technology” in the tradition of the technology life cycle literature , to mean technology as applied in a particular product context and as embodied in a physical artifact . So technology is not just the knowledge from which products are elaborated , but also includes the physical manifestation of that knowledge within a product . For instance , empirical studies of the technology life cycle have examined products such as automobiles , typewrit - ers , television sets , and calculators ( Suarez and Utterback , 1995 ) . Our theoretical exploration of the relationships among technology , technological frames and actors’ interpretive processes leads to two important contributions to the lit - erature on technological change . We ﬁrst use cognitive factors to reﬁne our understanding of why technologies evolve along a particular path over the course of the life cycle . For each stage of the technology life cycle , we iden - tifyconditionsunderwhichapplyingacognitivelensmight change the expected technological outcome predicted by purely economic or organizational models . Because cog - nitive dynamics may not be fully aligned with the kinds of economic or behavioral forces previously identiﬁed in the technology life cycle literature , we argue that mod - els of technological progress that ignore cognitive factors may result in spurious conclusions . Even when economic , organizational and cognitive factors all work in the same direction , our model provides an alternative explanation for commonly observed phenomena , improving our depth of understanding . Second , applying such a cognitive lens to technological change foregrounds the importance of interactions among the frames of multiple sets of actors in the process . We suggest that the technological frames of producers , users , and institutional actors all need to be considered in under - standing technology evolution . Because their frames are likely to be diverse , interactions among these actors may be conﬂictual . Actors may therefore act purposefully to shapewhichframecomestopredominateintheﬁeld . Thus , we argue that the emergence of a collective technological frame is a contested process . Such diversity and contes - tation amongst frames can help explain why ( and which ) alternatives appear during the era of ferment . It also shows why dominant designs are not always achieved . Only when this process culminates in a predominant collective frame can a dominant design emerge . A collective technological frame is an essential dimension of the dominant design , and it structures further developments in the ﬁeld . This model thus provides a co - evolutionary perspective on the interpretive dynamics that contribute to the direction a technology takes . In the following sections , we ﬁrst develop our cogni - tive model of technology trajectories , building upon prior researchintheareaofmanagerialcognition . Wethenapply the model to each stage of the technology life cycle . We examine how the mechanisms at work and the expected outcomes might differ from previously established eco - nomic or organizational arguments . We conclude with implications for research and practice suggested by this cognitive model of technical change . 2 . A cognitive model of technology trajectories 2 . 1 . The underpinnings of a cognitive model of technology trajectories : technological frames and interpretive processes The examination of cognition in the managerial arena goes back at least to March and Simon ( 1958 ) , who argued that everyone in an organization brings a certain cognitive foundation , a set of givens , to any management decision – assumptions about the future , knowledge about alter - natives and a view of the consequences of pursuing each alternative . Confronted with a highly complex and uncer - tain environment that does not transmit clear and easily recognizable signals , actors use these givens , or frames , to form simpliﬁed representations of the information envi - ronment . By frame , we mean the lens through which actors reduce the complexity of the environment in order to be able to focus on particular features , make context - speciﬁc interpretations , decide , and act ( Goffman , 1974 ) . In the context of understanding technology evolution , we focus on what Orlikowski and Gash ( 1994 , p . 178 ) call a “technological frame , ” which captures how actors make sense of a technology ( see also , Acha , 2004 ) . Specif - ically , technological frames shape how actors categorize a technology relative to other technologies and which per - formance criteria they use to evaluate the technology . Said differently , a technological frame guides the actor’s inter - pretation of what a technology is and whether it does anything useful . Actors’ technological frames do not spring up randomly , but rather are the encoding of their prior history , including both idiosyncratic organizational experiences and industry afﬁliations . Within an organization , the common expe - riences of members create a shared understanding of technology – an understanding that is unique to the ﬁrm givenitsdistinctivehistory ( PrahaladandBettis , 1986 ) . This shared logic is rooted in experience with existing products and technologies . Even startup ﬁrms with no history have founders whose unique perspectives become imprinted in 792 S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 the ﬁrm ( Beckman , 2006 ; Burton et al . , 2002 ) . In addi - tion to internal dynamics , an actor’s external afﬁliations – with industry associations , customer sets , competitive groups , user groups , etc . – affect how a new technology is framed . For example , producers have a mutually agreed upon set of rivals that they attend to ( Baum and Lant , 1995 ; Porac et al . , 1995 ) . That competitive group develops common norms about how ﬁrms operate . These “industry recipes” are often a powerful source of frames , in particu - lar when they inﬂuence the commonsense understanding of a given technology ( Spender , 1989 , p . 56 ) . In this way , actors’ histories create knowledge accumulations that are the source of the technological frames each brings to any situation . In order to understand the evolution of technology , it is crucial to pay attention to the technological frames of the multiple sets of actors who are implicated in this process – not just producers , but also users and institutions . 2 Most research on technical change has focused primarily on the role of producers’ actions in shaping the direction a tech - nology takes ( e . g . , Utterback , 1994 ) . Even Garud and Rappa ( 1994 ) , who explicitly examine the effect of researcher beliefs on technical artifacts , focus mainly on producer organizations . When users are recognized as an impor - tant factor in the literature , they are typically portrayed as making an exogenous , passive choice about whether or not to adopt the new technology ( Rogers , 1995 ) . Only in rare instances are users given a more active and purpose - ful role in shaping technological outcomes ( Tripsas , 2008 ; von Hippel , 1986 ) . Even less has been done to understand their interaction with producers . The one important excep - tion is Clark’s ( 1985 ) analysis of the development of design hierarchies , which suggests that producer and user interac - tions inform the paths that technology development takes , but this aspect of Clark’s work has not been picked up in subsequent scholarship . Where the role of institutional actors ( such as govern - ment agencies , the media , user groups , standards bodies , industry associations and other like groups ) in inﬂuenc - ing technology evolution has been discussed ( Garud and Rappa , 1994 ; Rosenkopf and Tushman , 1998 ; Van de Ven and Garud , 1993 ) , the focus has been on the legitimiz - ing role that institutions play in providing “an industrial system that embodies the social , economic , and political infrastructure that any technical community needs” ( Van de Ven and Garud , 1993 , p . 2 ) . In addition , Suarez ( 2004 ) emphasizes the more active role that institutions can take in , for instance , explicitly endorsing a particular technol - ogy through regulatory action . We extend this work by focusing on the role of institutions in framing processes . We thus argue that a more complete understanding of the evolution of technology requires us to consider the tech - 2 Because we focus the discussion on the interactions of producers , usersandinstitutionalactors , weoftentreattheseorganizationsasunitary actors , but this should not be seen as a reiﬁcation of the organization as a cognizer . Weassumethattheframesofeachorganizationaretheproduct ofinteractionsofindividualsandgroupswithintheorganizationthatpro - duceacollectiveorganizationalframe ( Kaplan , inpress - b ; Spender , 1998 ; Weick and Roberts , 1993 ) , but we bracket these dynamics for the sake of focusing on the technology level of analysis . nological frames of producers , users , and institutions , and their interactions with each other . Technological frames do not inﬂuence technologies directly but rather through the interpretive processes of these actors . Managerial cognition research has concep - tualized organizations as interpretive systems that notice , interpret , decide and act in response to the environment ( DaftandWeick , 1984 ; Gioia , 1986 ; Ocasio , 1997 ) . Weargue that in the case of technology evolution it is the technolog - ical frames that shape what is noticed , how actors attribute meaning to the information and how these interpretations are translated into decisions and action . Thus , the interpre - tive process is the mechanism that connects technological frames to technological outcomes . The most compelling empirical evidence we have on this front is on the producer side , where research has shown that cognition can shape ﬁrm strategic choice and action during periods of environmental change ( e . g . , Barr , 1998 ; ChoandHambrick , 2006 ) . Afewstudieshavefocused speciﬁcally on responses to technical change . For instance , in the transition to digital imaging , Polaroid’s choice of commercialization strategy was driven by beliefs resi - dent in the analog photography business model ( Tripsas and Gavetti , 2000 ) . Similar effects have been found in the shift from print to online newspapers ( Gilbert , 2006 ) , in pharmaceutical ﬁrms’ responses to the emergence of biotechnology ( Kaplan et al . , 2003 ) , and in communica - tions technology ﬁrms’ responses to ﬁber optics ( Kaplan , in press - a ) . Each of these studies of producers shows that frames shape interpretations and organizational out - comes . Whilelessempiricalevidenceexistsregardingthese dynamics for users and institutional actors , we suggest that similar processes are enacted by each . Thus , the underpinnings of a cognitive model of tech - nology trajectories are the technological frames of multiple sets of actors – producers , users and institutions – and the interpretiveprocessesthatconnecttheseframestoactions . In the next section , we examine how the interactions of these actors with each other and with the technology itself shape the direction the technology takes . 2 . 2 . Technological frames and technology evolution Using the building blocks we have established so far , we propose a cognitive model of technology trajectories . We focus on the reciprocal and mutually constituting dynamics among three components : actors’ technological frames and interpretive processes , a collective technolog - ical frame , and the evolution of a technology ( Fig . 1 ) . In our model , actors’ interactions both shape and are shaped by the emerging collective technological frame ( arrows [ a ] and [ b ] ) . Similarly , technology evolution is shaped by actors’ choices and actions ( arrow [ c ] ) , but the technol - ogy also constrains and enables the actions such actors can take ( arrow [ d ] ) . As a result , a collective techno - logical frame co - evolves indirectly with the technology itself through the actions and interactions of actors ( arrow [ e ] ) . This co - evolutionary process provides a cognitive and interactional underpinning to the dynamics of technology evolution . S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 793 Fig . 1 . A cognitive model of technology trajectories . Our conceptualization of frames is multi - level – we distinguish between the actor’s frame and the collective technological frame that is the product of the interaction among producers , users and institutional actors’ interpre - tive processes . The idea of a collective technological frame is akin to ﬁeld frames , which are seen as ﬁeld - level mean - ing systems that guide the development of an industry ( Lounsbury et al . , 2003 ) , or to Kuhn’s ( 1962 ) notion of a scientiﬁc “paradigm , ” which represents general agreement about what a scientiﬁc ﬁeld is . The collective technological frame guides the development of a technology . Collective technological frames do not emerge fully formed – and sometimes do not emerge at all . We argue that they are the product of interactions among the var - ious actors’ competing technological frames ( arrow [ a ] ) . Given the different backgrounds of salient actors and the high levels of uncertainty a new technology poses , actors’ technological frames are likely to be varied and conﬂicting . As a result , actors’ interactions can be highly political as they attempt to get their own technological frame to pre - dominate in the industry . These kinds of political struggles resemble those identiﬁed in social movements research in which framing processes are a means to foment collective action around a particular set of ideas ( Benford and Snow , 2000 ; McAdam et al . , 1996 ) . Contestation is an essential partoftheprocessbywhichcollectivetechnologicalframes emerge and shape the evolution of the technology . The relationship between the actors’ technological frames and the emergence of a collective frame is recipro - cal ( arrow [ b ] ) . Actors’ interactions affect which collective frame will emerge , but the emerging collective frame also inﬂuences which frames individual actors apply . To the extent that a dominant collective technological frame emerges , actors are more likely to evoke it when making decisionsandtakingaction ( Spender , 1989 ) . Byimplication , when a collective technological frame occurs , it is achieved over time during the evolution of a technology , being dif - fuse during the era of ferment , solidifying in conjunction with the achievement of a dominant design , structuring inquiry during the era of incremental change and eventu - ally breaking down in the context of a new discontinuity . Technologicalframesinﬂuenceactors’technicalchoices , which are the direct mechanism by which the technology evolves ( arrow [ c ] ) . Producersinvestinaparticulartechnol - ogy or not . Users adopt the technology or not . Institutional actors support one technology or another . Each of these actions has an effect on the direction of a technology’s evolution by providing more effort , investment , legitimacy or scale economies for one particular variant over others . For instance , in the case of cochlear implants , researchers’ beliefs about the technology , embodied in their evaluation routines , were shown to inﬂuence technical choices ( Garud andRappa , 1994 ) . Thetechnologicalframethatactorsapply to the situation will thus shape these choices , and it is in this way that the frame inﬂuences outcomes . At the same time , the technology itself both constrains and enables possible interpretations ( arrow [ d ] ) . Certain understandingsofatechnologymayleadtogreatersupport for a particular direction , but if the realities of the technol - ogydonotultimatelyplayoutinthewayanticipated ( e . g . , if certain performance criteria are not achievable ) , then that incongruity will force actors to shift away from the orig - inal technological frame to a new understanding of what the technology is and what performance criteria should be applied . For instance , the failure of biotechnology to satisfy pharmaceutical ﬁrms’ initial efforts to create large 794 S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 molecule drugs caused those ﬁrms to reframe biotechnol - ogy as a research method for locating small molecule drugs ( Kaplan and Murray , in press ) . Technological evolution may alsoenableuserstodiscoverotherapplicationsforthetech - nology ( Dowell et al . , 2002 ; von Hippel , 1986 ; Yates , 1993 ) , resulting in new interpretations by other actors . The interactions among the various actors may even - tually construct a collective frame ( Porac et al . , 2001 ) as well as shape technological evolution . The achievement of a dominant design and evolution along a particular tra - jectory will thus involve both the resolution of competing technologicalframesandofcompetingtechnologies ( arrow [ e ] ) . Conversely , if a collective technological frame does not emerge ( e . g . , if political processes cannot resolve com - peting actors’ frames ) , a dominant design is less likely to emerge . Technological frames and technological evolution are tightly intertwined . A technology trajectory is therefore representative of both a technology and a collective frame about the technology . 3 . Applying a cognitive model of technology trajectories to understanding stages in the technology life cycle Having laid the groundwork for an interpretive expla - nation of technology evolution in the previous section , we now show how these processes construct outcomes over the technology life cycle . We deﬁne the technology life cycle in terms of the four standard stages : an era of fer - ment ( variation ) , a dominant design ( selection ) , an era of incremental change ( retention ) and a technological discon - tinuity , which sparks a new era of ferment ( Anderson and Tushman , 1990 ; Tushman and Smith , 2002 ; Tushman and Rosenkopf , 1992 ) ( see Fig . 2 ) . The initial stage of variation , the era of ferment , is characterized by high turbulence and uncertainty , since both the market and the technology are early in their development . Potential users have unclear preferences given their lack of experience with the tech - nology . They do not know what features they want or how to value different characteristics . In addition , it is unclear how well different technical variants will work . The rivalry among competing technologies is eventually resolved , and both technical and market uncertainty decrease with the selection of a dominant design . Once a dominant design emerges , a period of retention – the era of incremental change – ensues , during which incremental technological progress occurs , improving performance across a stable set of user preferences . Finally , a technological discontinuity disrupts the period of stability , resulting in a new era of ferment . The empirical robustness of this basic model has been documented in a broad array of industries includ - ing watches ( Landes , 1969 ) , automobiles ( Abernathy , 1978 ; Utterback and Suarez , 1993 ) , facsimile machines ( Baum et al . , 1995 ) , typesetters ( Tripsas , 1997 ) and many more . ( see Murmann and Frenken , 2006 , for an extensive listing of empirical technology life cycle studies ) . For each stage of the technology life cycle , we next iden - tify speciﬁc technological outcomes of interest and then contrast existing economic and organizational explana - tions of the driving mechanisms and predicted outcomes with those illuminated by our model ( Table 1 ) . We propose that the inﬂuence of technological frames and interpretive processes varies across the life cycle . In some cases , our model provides an alternative explanation for the same observed outcome . In other cases , taking cognitive dynam - ics into account substantively changes expected outcomes . 3 . 1 . The era of ferment The outcomes of interest in the ﬁrst stage of the tech - nology life cycle – the era of ferment – are the degree and type of technical variation . Empirical work has clearly doc - Fig . 2 . The technology life cycle . S . K a p l a n , M . T r i p s a s / R e s e a r c h P o l i c y 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 795 Table 1 A cognitive model of technology evolution over the technology life cycle Era of ferment Dominant design Era of incremental change Discontinuity Technological outcomes to be explained • Greater or lesser variation takes place • A dominant design is achieved or not • Inertia develops around the dominant design • A new technology emerges or not • Speciﬁc variants are introduced • A particular technology becomes the dominant design over others Economic perspective Mechanism : Mechanism : Mechanism : Mechanism : • Technical variety is driven by exogenous stochastic technological advances • Emergence of a dominant design is driven by increasing returns to scale ( network externalities and economies of scale ) • Excess inertia results from network externalities • New technologies emerge because existing technologies reach deﬁnable limits Predicted outcome : Predicted outcomes : Predicted outcomes : Predicted outcome : • No prediction – variation is random • A dominant design will occur when increasing returns to scale ( network externalities and economies of scale ) are strong • When network effects are strong , the existing technology will be difﬁcult to displace • When the existing technology reaches diminishing returns , a new technology will emerge • The ﬁrst technology to reach critical mass will have an advantage Organizational perspective Mechanism : Mechanism : emergence of a dominant design is driven by : Mechanism : • Inertia results from local technological search , driven by existing behavioral routines and procedures Mechanism : • Industry outsiders bring different capability endowments to bear • Technical variety is driven by exogenous stochastic technological advances • Institutional isomorphism : ﬁrms imitate the actions of similar ﬁrms ( bandwagons ) • Social construction : organizations are inﬂuenced by social afﬁliations Predicted outcome : Predicted outcomes : Predicted outcome : Predicted outcome : • No prediction – variation is random • No strong predictions about whether a dominant design will occur or not • Technological progress will be incremental , elaborating on the dominant design • New technologies will emerge if industry outsiders with different capabilities will introduce them • If one occurs , the technology sponsored by a dominant social community is likely to become the dominant design . Cognitive perspective ( our model ) Mechanisms : technical variation is Mechanisms : Mechanism : Mechanisms : driven by : • Idiosyncratic differences in actors’ frames • The resolution of conﬂicting technological frames into a collective frame is a prerequisite for achievement of a dominant design • Collective frames solidify and become intertwined with other systems within ﬁrms and within industries • Entrepreneurial action outside of the collective frame can break the existing frame • Prior afﬁliations , which guide actors’ framing and interpretation of the technology • Higher levels of interaction among diverse actors increases the likelihood they will converge on a collective frame • Change is difﬁcult because these links must be broken apart in order to do things differently • Continuous problem - solving that highlights an increasing number of anomalies can break the frame • Actors may act purposefully to get their own technological frame to predominate 796 S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 P r e d i c t e d o u t c o m e s : P r e d i c t e d o u t c o m e s : P r e d i c t e d o u t c o m e : P r e d i c t e d o u t c o m e : • P r o d u c e r s w i t h s i m i l a r t e c hn i c a l c a p a b i l i t i e s , b u t d i ff e r e n t t e c hn o l o g i c a l f r a m e s , a r e l i k e l y t o d e v e l o p d i ff e r e n t t e c hn o l o g i e s • U s e r s w i t h d i ff e r e n t t e c hn o l o g i c a l f r a m e s w i ll i m p l e m e n t t h e s a m e t e c hn o l o g y d i ff e r e n t l y • T h e t e c hn o l o g y p r o m o t e d b y a c t o r s t h a t s t r a t e g i c a ll y a tt e m p t t o g e t t h e i r o w n t e c hn o l o g i c a l f r a m e ( n o t j u s t t e c hn o l o g y ) t o p r e d o m i n a t e i n t h e c o ll e c t i v e i s m o r e l i k e l y t o b e c o m e t h e d o m i n a n t d e s i g n • T e c hn o l o g i c a l p r o g r e ss w i ll b e i n c r e m e n t a l , e l a b o r a t i n g o n t h e d o m i n a n t d e s i g n • N e w t e c hn o l o g i e s w i ll e m e r g e i f i n d u s t r y o u t s i d e r s w i t h d i ff e r e n t t e c hn o l o g i c a l f r a m e s w i ll i n t r o d u c e t h e m • I n c u m b e n t ﬁ r m s c a n i n t r o d u c e r a d i c a ll y n e w t e c hn o l o g i e s o n l y i f t h e y b r e a k t h e l i n k s b e t w ee n t h e i r o w n t e c hn o l o g i c a l f r a m e s a n d t h e r e s t o f t h e o r g a n i z a t i o n a l a r c h i t e c t u r e • I f a f o c u s e d s e t o f i n s t i t u t i o n a l a r e n a s e m e r g e s , i t p r o v i d e s a f o r u m f o r i n t e r a c t i o n , i n c r e a s i n g t h e l i k e l i h o o d t h a t a c o ll e c t i v e t e c hn o l o g i c a l f r a m e ( a n d t h u s a d o m i n a n t d e s i g n ) e m e r g e s • T h e h i g h e r t h e l e v e l o f v a r i a t i o n i n t h e p r i o r a f ﬁ l i a t i o n o f ﬁ r m s e n t e r i n g a n i n d u s t r y , t h e g r e a t e r t h e t e c hn o l o g i c a l v a r i a t i o n • P r o d u c e r s a n d u s e r s a r e m o r e l i k e l y t o d e v e l o p a n d i m p l e m e n t t e c hn o l o g i e s s i m i l a r t o p r o d u c e r s / u s e r s w i t h w h i c h t h e y h a v e b ee n a f ﬁ l i a t e d i n t h e p a s t umented that variation is highest early in the life cycle . For example , in their longitudinal study of cochlear implants , Van de Ven and Garud ( 1993 ) found that technically novel events were more predominant in the early stages of the industry , and historical research on the automobile industry documents early variation including competition amongsteam , electricandinternalcombustionenginesand tillers vs . steering wheels ( Abernathy , 1978 ; Basalla , 1988 ) . Yet , whilehighvariationisobservedempirically , theunder - lying origins of that variation are not well understood . We know little about what might lead to different degrees of variation or what types might occur . Economic explanations are limited , since variation as an outcome variable is not generally examined . Tech - nical breakthroughs and thus variation are assumed to come from exogenous events ( Dosi , 1982 ) . Similarly , in the organizations literature , the source of technical variation is undertheorized . It is generally attributed to “stochas - tic technological breakthroughs” ( Anderson and Tushman , 1990 , p . 605 ; Tushman and Rosenkopf , 1992 , p . 6 ) . More recent studies have suggested that these breakthroughs comefromcreativerecombinationsofknowledge ( Fleming , 2001 ; Fleming , 2002 ) , but these still do not tell us much about the degree and type of variation . By applying a cognitive lens to the problem , we suggest that differing technological frames of industry actors are a critical source of technical variation . Intheeraofferment , actorsmustmakesenseofthenew technologies , yet technological frames in the new domain arestillbeingcreated . Intheirabsence , actorsdrawontheir prior frames , categorizing the new technology based on its perceived similarity to existing technologies and applying performancecriteriaborrowedfromtheoldframe . Building onthetwobroadsourcesoftechnologicalframesdescribed earlier ( an organization’s idiosyncratic history and its prior industryafﬁliation ) , weexaminethemechanismsbywhich frames affect our outcomes of interest looking ﬁrst at pro - ducers , then at users and institutions . The inﬂuence of a producer’s prior frames on a new context is evident in the example of the nascent personal digital assistant ( PDA ) industry ( Kaplan and Tripsas , 2003 ) . In the early days of the industry , entering ﬁrms tended to develop products that were similar in design and function - ality to their previous products . Hewlett Packard , with its history of experience in producing sophisticated calcula - tors , introduced an early PDA that looked very much like a calculator . Similarly , the word processor company NEC made a PDA that looked like a word processor . The under - lying technological components used by these two ﬁrms were similar ( Bayus et al . , 1997 ) , but the ways that they were combined and the functionality assigned to them dif - fered quite dramatically depending on the history of the ﬁrm that developed the product . In negotiating new environments , producers also look at the activities of ﬁrms in their cognitive competitive set for input ( Peteraf and Shanley , 1997 ; Porac et al . , 1995 ; Reger and Huff , 1993 ) , often mimicking the behaviors of competitors or using competitive behavior to signal the legitimacy of change ( Greve and Taylor , 2000 ) . These inter - organizational comparisons inﬂuence decisions such as what products and services to offer and how to price S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 797 them . When the environment shifts , however , ﬁrms are slow to change their cognitive frames about which ﬁrms constitute their competition . In the ﬁnancial intermediary industry , for instance , managers used outdated frames that reﬂected old industry boundaries even after deregulation transformed the industry ( Reger and Palmer , 1996 ) . In the context of new technology , we argue that managers will continue to pay attention to the technical developments of ﬁrms that have been historically part of their com - petitive set as opposed to developments of more distant ﬁrms . Drawing again on the example of the PDA industry , we see that ﬁrms’ initial products resembled those with whom they shared a prior industry afﬁliation . Firms with a computer hardware background , such as Compaq or Atari , introduced products that were more similar to each other than to products of ﬁrms with a communications back - ground , such as Motorola and Bell South . We next explore the process by which actors’ differ - ent technological frames result in variation . Clark ( 1985 ) proposes that technological choices are conditioned by the solution spaces ( what he terms a design hierarchy ) that actors deﬁne . For instance , having chosen a steam engine over an internal combustion engine , a set of choices within the domain of steam engines is then made . But Clark fails to address how the delineation of the solution spaces is done in the ﬁrst place – a process in which we propose techno - logical frames matter . We argue that ﬁrms with different technological frames will map different solution spaces . In the process of identifying possible technological solutions , ﬁrms scan multiple technical domains , and frames inﬂu - ence what gets noticed , how what gets noticed is evaluated and ultimately what technologies are considered in the set of possibilities . So , at a fundamental level , the origins of technical variation reside within different framing of the potential solution space . Usersalsodevelopdifferentinterpretationsofnewtech - nology as they implement it in practice , driving additional variation . Since potential users do not have the experi - ence needed to evaluate or understand the attributes of a new product ( von Hippel , 1986 ) , they make interpreta - tions based on their existing technological frames and on comparisons with the interpretations being made by other users . For instance , Orlikowski and Gash ( 1994 ) show that in adopting Lotus Notes , users imposed their assumptions about familiar technologies on the new product , making comparisons with word processing and spreadsheet pro - grams . Even within the same ﬁrm , variation in framing resulted in different Lotus Notes implementations . Users that do have experience – what have been called “lead users” – may also ﬁnd different functions for a technology than those initially intended by the producer , thus shaping subsequent technology development in yet another direc - tion ( Urban and von Hippel , 1988 ) . Clark’s ( 1985 ) analysis of the development of design hierarchies suggests that it is not just producers but rather the interaction between producers and users that inform the direction of technology development . At the same time that producers develop technologies based on their technological frame , users’ preferences about the technol - ogy also take shape . Producers track and interpret those developments as input to their own technical choices . But producers may not all “read the context in exactly the sameway” ( Clark , 1985 , p . 238 ) . Technologicalframesinﬂu - ence estimates of the performance trajectory of different technologies , whatattributesuserswillvalueandwhatper - formance criteria are relevant . In making decisions about which technology to pursue , ﬁrms thus incorporate their interpretations of the technology , of user needs , of their own capabilities and of the competition . Thus , one extrap - olation of Clark’s ( 1985 ) work is that variation is produced by the interaction between producers’ and users’ techno - logical frames and interpretive processes . Above and beyond the producers and users , we also add the role of institutional actors who may also shape the degree and direction of variation in the era of ferment directly or indirectly . The direct effect of institutions’ inter - pretations can be felt in the way that industry associations promote a particular technology or regulatory agencies deﬁne standards that favor one version of a technology over others . Their indirect effect is through how institu - tional afﬁliations of producers and users shape their own interpretations . When actors are trying to make sense of an emerging technology , they rely on industry associa - tions to perform market research and develop forecasts of technological performance , market size and the sup - ply / demand balance . Producer ﬁrms depend upon these services to guide assumptions behind technology invest - ments and product development efforts . From the user perspective , user communities provide a forum for shar - ing solutions to problems and for exchanging ideas about innovative ways to use a technology . Just as cognitive maps of competition are slow to be updated , we propose that institutional afﬁliations are also slow to change , leading to inertia around the common beliefs of industry afﬁliates . The more actors can break away from these previous afﬁli - ations , the more likely they are to see anomalies and apply new technological frames to the situation . In aggregate , this evidence suggests that variation in the era of ferment is not purely stochastic , nor is it based on varying capabilities and resources alone , but rather comes from the interpretations and actions of different actors with differing technological frames . In an era of ferment , the idiosyncratic historical experiences and afﬁliations of actors will inﬂuence their framing and interpretation of the new technology , resulting in greater degrees of tech - nological variety than would be expected if only other differences ( e . g . , in capabilities , resources or incentives ) were considered . Speciﬁcally , producers with similar tech - nical capabilities , but different technological frames , are likelytodevelopdifferenttechnologies . And , userswithdif - ferent technological frames adopting the same technology are likely to implement the technology differently . Produc - ers are more likely to develop technologies that are similar to those of their past competitors than to those of other entrants , and users are more likely to implement the tech - nology in a manner similar to users with which they have been afﬁliated in the past . Thus , the higher the level of vari - ation in the prior afﬁliation of actors entering an industry , the greater the degree of technological variation . In an era of ferment , prior histories and afﬁliations will guide actors’ framing and interpretation of the technology , which will in turn affect the type of technological variation . 798 S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 3 . 2 . Convergence on a dominant design In the next stage of the life cycle – convergence on a dominant design – we seek to explain two outcomes : whether convergence occurs and , if so , which technical variant becomes dominant . Both economists and organi - zational scholars have examined these issues extensively . Economists attribute the emergence of a dominant design to the presence of increasing returns to scale resulting from network externalities or economies of scale ( Arthur , 1988 ; David , 1985 ; Klepper , 1996 ) . Avastliteratureoncom - peting technologies and standards has demonstrated the theoretical and empirical importance of these effects in driving a market to consolidate on a single or multiple standards . These same forces determine which particular variant wins , and strategic actions such as ﬁrst mover sta - tus , licensing and penetration pricing are recommended to start early bandwagons around a given ﬁrm’s product ( Farrell and Saloner , 1986 ; Katz and Shapiro , 1985 ; Khazam and Mowery , 1994 ) . Organizational scholars , on the other hand , have pro - posed that “social , political and organizational dynamics select . . . dominantdesigns” ( AndersonandTushman , 1990 , p . 605 ) . While there is no explicit discussion of interpre - tive processes , this stage of the technology life cycle is the domain where organizational scholars are most likely to acknowledge the role of shared understandings . 3 The - oretical models in this stream of research have argued that selection among technologies is adjudicated through a complex process that involves non - technical factors such as competing coalitions and communities that span ﬁrms , universities , professional societies and government ( Rosenkopf and Tushman , 1998 ; Suarez , 2004 ; Tushman and Rosenkopf , 1992 ; Van de Ven and Garud , 1993 ) . Empir - ical work has substantiated the importance of these social processes . For example , Rosenkopf and Tushman ( 1998 ) show how the co - evolution of technology and associated community networks resulted in the eventual dominance of one type of ﬂight simulator – ﬂight training devices – over the alternative . Pinch and Bijker ( 1987 ) trace the early evolution of the bicycle and show how the problems of dif - ferent social groups such as women users or anticyclists affected the evolution of the artifact . Other scholars have examined how actors use social mechanisms to get their preferred variation to win ( Anderson and Tushman , 1990 ; Utterback and Suarez , 1993 ) . This dynamic is demonstrated by the emergence of VHS as the dominant videotape standard . While increasing returns from manufacturing scale and network external - ities from video rentals are certainly part of the story , Matsushita’s strategic maneuvers in deﬁning the product differently helped it to beat out Sony and its Betamax tech - nology ( Cusumano et al . , 1992 ) . While these descriptions acknowledge the role of social processes in shaping the dominant design , they are rarely explicitly cognitive . 3 Though even here some ( c . f . , Rosenkopf and Tushman , 1994 ) sug - gest that social forces only apply for complex products . They argue that dominant designs in simple products will emerge out of a technological , optimizing logic . In contrast to the existing literature , which focuses on the resolution of technical variation in the life cycle , we also considertheresolutionof cognitive variation . Wearguethat negotiating a collective technological frame is a necessary part of the process of convergence on a dominant design . Divergent frames will be embodied in divergent technolog - ical solutions . In explaining the emergence of a dominant design , we focus ﬁrst on explaining the emergence of a collective technological frame . As suggested earlier in our discussion of Fig . 1 , interac - tions are a key element of the process . The resolution of competing technologies and technological frames occurs through the interaction of the technological frames and interpretive processes of the various actors in the market . These interactions can simply be passive , involving data gathering and interpretation with no intent to modify the behavior or understanding of other actors . For instance , in decentralized market exchanges , producers offer a set of products on the market , infer users’ interpretations of the technology from observed purchase behavior , modify the product , release it and repeat the cycle . This series of arms – length interactions results in both learning about user preferences and a common conceptualization of what the technology is and should do . These interactions may also be strategic ( Hargrave and Van de Ven , 2006 ; Oliver , 1988 ) . Purposeful , often political , action occurs when com - peting technological frames exist . Such actions represent participants’ efforts to create a collective technological framefavorabletotheirowninterests , inparticularbecause this collective technological frame will then shape how other actors select among technology alternatives ( Dowell et al . , 2002 ) . Producersfrequentlytakeanactiveroleincommunicat - ing to other actors how to make sense of new technology . Senior management teams in particular can have a sig - niﬁcant inﬂuence in shaping the perceptions of a range of relevant constituents ( O’Reilly and Tushman , in press ) . Formal relationships , such as strategic alliances for the development of a new product , enable purposeful inter - actions , as do some forms of joint experimentation . For instance , in lead user studies or rapid prototyping ( von Hippel , 1986 ) , interpretive processes become joint activi - ties , leading to coherence in the technological frame . Thus , through an interactive process of joint learning and exper - imentation , actors inﬂuence one another’s framing of a new technology and move the industry toward a particular collective technological frame associated with a dominant design . While data on the performance implications of this type of interaction are still limited , in their study of the evolution of wind turbines in the U . S . and Denmark , Garud and Karnoe ( 2003 ) found that Danish ﬁrms , which used a “bricolage” process of joint experimentation , were much more successful than U . S . ﬁrms , which had limited interaction with users and instead focused on discovering breakthrough technologies . Producers and other actors can also have inﬂuence through the media ( Pollock and Rindova , 2003 ) . For exam - ple , IBM in 1980s reinforced its dominant position in mainframes by controlling its “strategic projections” very tightly . These messages to the outside world inﬂuenced the understanding of the industry structure and IBM’s compet - S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 799 itive advantage ( Rindova and Fombrun , 1999 ) . Firms also engage the media in “technological dramas” in order to inﬂuence the perceptions of a range of actors regarding a new technology ( Lampel , 2001 ) . These dramas often take the form of theatrical product announcements or demon - strations , such as Thomas Edison’s announcement of his illuminationsystem ( David , 1992 ) orthespeed - typingcon - tests that drew attention to the QWERTY keyboard design ( David , 1986 ) . The goal is to shape the technological frames of important constituents regarding the new technology . Producers can also inﬂuence the categorization of the technology and the determination of the salient perfor - mancecriteriathroughadvertising . Wheninterpretingdata about a new technology , users develop taxonomies based onanalogieswithexistingproductstohelpcategorizenovel products ( Gregan - Paxton and John , 1997 ) . By using adver - tising messages to inﬂuence what analogies are formed , producerscanshapetheperformancecriteriaappliedinthe new domain ( Moreau et al . , 2001 ) . Producers can also inﬂu - ence new product categories to their advantage . In their study of the evolution of minivan categories , Rosa et al . ( 1999 ) show that once a category label stabilized ( through a consensus among producers and users ) , minivan models that ﬁt within that label had greater market acceptance , even with no material changes to the models . In particular , under conditions of ambiguity and uncertainty , advertising inﬂuenceshowusersmakesenseofwhatproductanalogies to draw , how to use new products , what features to value , how to judge quality and how to interpret evidence ( Hoch and Ha , 1986 ) . Institutional actors play a critical role in shaping which technological frame will come to predominate . Institutional endorsements confer legitimacy upon new technologies , product markets and ﬁrms participating in those markets ( Baum and Oliver , 1991 ; Rao , 1994 ; Zuckerman , 1999 ) . The press , as an example , has been por - trayed as “editors of product categories” ( Lounsbury and Rao , 2004 , p . 991 ) . Institutionscanalsobeanarenathrough whichproducersandusers ( andotherinstitutions ) attempt to shape each others’ understandings in an effort to achieve stabilization around a particular technological frame or category ( RosaandPorac , 2002 ; Rosaetal . , 1999 ) . Standard - setting bodies and technical committees are a common example of institutions performing this function . Different ﬁrms join the standards groups in order to be able to inﬂu - encetheinterpretationsofwhatthetechnologyisandwhat performancecriteriashouldbeapplied . Suchindustryinsti - tutions are particularly useful for facilitating knowledge exchange among actors for whom direct interaction is not feasible ( Rosenkopf et al . , 2001 ) . The emergence of insti - tutions associated with a new technology creates a space in which competing technological frames can be resolved , thus increasing the likelihood of convergence . In sum , we suggest that the interactions of the inter - pretive processes of producers , users and institutions will shape the emergence of a collective technological frame . Increased levels of interaction among diverse actors increases the likelihood that such a frame ( and thus a dom - inant design ) emerges . This process can be enabled by the presence of a focused set of institutional arenas that can increase the level of interaction . In these contexts , the tech - nology promoted by actors who purposefully attempt to shape technological frames will more likely become the dominant design . If a collective technological frame does not emerge , we would not expect a dominant design to emerge . Instead multiple technological frames , each with a correspond - ing design might co - exist , each appealing to a subset of producers , users and institutions that share a common understanding within their community . In fact , even when a dominant design does emerge , small peripheral groups that utilize an alternative technology may persist . 3 . 3 . Era of incremental innovation The era of incremental innovation is portrayed in the literature as a period of inertia in which the dominant design is difﬁcult to displace and technological improve - ments are minor , constrained by limits of the dominant design ( Utterback , 1994 ) . We are interested in what drives this inertia . Economistshavearguedthatthepresenceofstrongnet - work externalities combined with user learning can result in “excess inertia” where movement to a superior , socially optimal technology is thwarted ( Farrell and Saloner , 1985 ) . The quintessential example of this lock - in to what we now regard to be an inferior standard is the QWERTY keyboard ( David , 1985 ) . Organizational scholars , on the other hand , attribute inertia to routines . Once the dom - inant design is achieved , actors in the market no longer reexamine the underlying design choices about what the technology is or how it should be evaluated . To the extent that actors focus on change , it is to reﬁne and elaborate existing components in the context of a relatively sta - ble architecture ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) . This process has also been characterized in behavioral terms as guided by path - dependent learning ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ; LevittandMarch , 1988 / 1996 ) . Actorsengageinlocalsearch , constrained by organizational routines and problem - solving heuristics associated with the dominant design ( Nelson and Winter , 1977 , 1982 ) . For instance , Dosi ( 1982 ) deﬁnes movement along the technological trajectory as “the pattern of ‘normal’ problem - solving activity ( i . e . , of ‘progress’ ) on the ground of a technological paradigm” ( p . 152 ) , and Rosenberg ( 1969 , p . 4 ) describes technical improvements as progressing in one “painfully obvious” direction . We argue that there is also a cognitive element of inertia that causes the era of incremental change to persist ; how - ever , this element is deeply intertwined with the overall system . We propose that both organizational inertia and technological limits are the product of the tight linkages among the collective technological frame , the institutions that embody norms and taken - for - granted beliefs , the interpretive processes of producers and users , and the technology itself . The dominant design embodies the pre - dominant collective frame . That frame gets embedded in day - to - dayroutinesandcommunicationpatterns , andcon - strains actors’ choices . In the era of incremental change , producers focus on improvements and line extensions , mainly for their most signiﬁcant customers ( Christensen and Bower , 1996 ) . User preferences and usage patterns 800 S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 become relatively ﬁxed , in line with the collective tech - nological frame . Institutional actors , such as the press or trade associations , focus on the needs of and inputs from the most dominant actors , thus further reinforcing the sta - tus quo . The role of institutions as arenas provides a stable forum for ongoing interactions that reinforce existing ways of doing business . The stability of this period results in a tightly linked system , with capabilities , routines , incentives and techno - logical frames all working in a common direction ( Kaplan and Henderson , 2005 ) . Thus frames matter , not distinc - tively , but as an essential part of this self - reinforcing system . During an era of incremental change , technological frames become intertwined with the overall organiza - tional and industry architectures such that these frames are one of the essential but not separately distinguish - able elements contributing to organizational and industry inertia . Inertia can only be broken to the extent that technological frames are challenged and changed . It will not be sufﬁcient to change incentives or build new capabilities . 3 . 4 . Technological discontinuity In the ﬁnal stage of the life cycle , this system breaks down when new , discontinuous technologies are intro - duced into the industry . The outcome of interest in this stage is whether a new technology breaks the period of stability . Economists have focused on the size and strength of the new technology’s network , as well as the cost advantages of a new technology in predicting whether it will displace the old one . Coordination of actors can help them to overcome the excess inertia associ - ated with an existing technology’s network , facilitating movement to the new technology ( Farrell and Saloner , 1988 ) . Organizational scholars have not studied the drivers of a discontinuity extensively . As with the era of ferment , new technologies are assumed to be exogenously deter - mined and the dominant empirical ﬁnding is that they are introduced into the industry by outsiders with differ - ent capabilities and resources ( Cooper and Schendel , 1976 ; Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ) . Some have argued that this disruption is triggered when the old technology reaches its natural limits ( Fleming , 2001 ; Sahal , 1981 ) , causing actors to search for solutions in new technological domains . The implicit assumption here is that superior performance of a new technology will result in its adoption . But , others have demonstrated that technology’s performance lim - its are more cognitive than purely technical ( Henderson , 1995 ) . This claim is supported by the substantial evidence that commonly accepted limits have often been exceeded when incumbent ﬁrms have responded to the emergence of a threatening new technology ( Utterback , 1994 ) . One alternative explanation for the timing of technological dis - continuities is radical shifts in user preferences – what Tripsas ( 2008 ) calls preference discontinuities . This work argues that during the era of incremental change , users continue to learn , grow , and potentially develop new pref - erences that are so different they trigger the invasion of radically new technology . We argue that emergence of discontinuous new tech - nologies has an important cognitive aspect . The sources of variation described in our discussion of the era of ferment are precisely the forces that cause old technological frames and technologies to lose their salience . New entrants with different technological frames might be able to visualize opportunities that established ﬁrms miss . Startup ﬁrms in particular have been seen as the source of discontin - uous technologies and threats to incumbent ﬁrms . While this is often attributed to their inherent ﬂexibility as small ﬁrms ( e . g . , Aldrich , 1999 ) , we argue that the advantage that new entrants have – both de novo startups as well as de alio established players coming from other indus - tries – is not just that they are unencumbered by inertia but rather that they see the world through different lenses . Hounshell ( 1975 ) illustrates this vividly in his comparison of the early development of the telephone in which the telegraph “expert” – Elisha Gray – developed early tele - phonetechnologybutcouldnotseeitspracticalapplication and argued that it was a “scientiﬁc toy , ” while the out - sider – Alexander Graham Bell – pursued the technology’s commercial potential . User experience can also result in unique framing , with users not only engaging in ongo - ing innovation ( von Hippel , 1986 ) , but user entrepreneurs commercializingthoseinnovationsthroughﬁrmformation ( Shah and Tripsas , 2007 ) . New technologies are often ignored , at least early on , by existing players in the industry because they do not ﬁt thepredominantcollectiveframe . Evidenceofthisdynamic is found in Christensen and Bower’s ( 1996 ) study of disk drives . They argue that resource dependence is responsible for established ﬁrms’ commitment to the needs of exist - ing customers – and the subsequent lack of interest in new technologies on the part of incumbent disk drive produc - ers . While resource dependence is certainly important , we would argue that cognitive forces were also at play . The new technology was not recognized as competing in the same market as current technologies due to existing tech - nological frames : it was perceived as inferior to current approaches , since it excelled on a new and different set of performance criteria . Thus technological discontinuities are more likely to be introduced by industry outsiders or peripheral actors who possess not only different capabil - ities but also different technological frames from those of existing industry participants . 4 . Discussion In this paper we set out to explore the relationship between cognition and technology evolution , developing a model of how the technological frames and interpretive processes of producers , users and institutional actors inter - act in shaping technology trajectories over the life cycle . This model suggests that technological change is cogni - tively embedded and as such falls under the general project to endogenize the relationship of organizations and their environments ( Dacin et al . , 1999 ) . We argue not only that technological frames engrain themselves in technologies , but also that technologies constrain and enable the use of frames . Our model is therefore a way to conceptualize the loose coupling between the actor and the environment . S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 801 This perspective gives us a new way to think about tech - nology evolution and also suggests an agenda for future research . Whilemanyscholarshavepreviouslyproposedresearch agendas related to managerial cognition in general ( Huff , 1997 ; Meindletal . , 1994 ; Stubbart , 1989 ; Walsh , 1995 ) , cog - nition’s role in explaining the dynamics of technical change has not yet been comprehensively explored . While there is empirical evidence , if limited in some cases , for each of the separateeffectsinthemodelwedevelopinthispaper , there is little work that takes into account the linkages across the interpretive processes of producers , users and institu - tional actors . If we understand technical change to involve interactions between the technology and the interpretive processes of these different actors , we raise a whole host of new research questions . The development of the model in this paper suggests that it would be useful to expand our understanding of framing processes themselves , reexam - ine notions of path dependence , explore the relationships between the interpretive processes of multiple actors and link research methods more closely to the nature of the problem . 4 . 1 . Cognition matters The ﬁrst job of our model was to argue that adopting a cognitive lens can provide us with alternative explana - tionsfortheoutcomesweobserveinexaminingtechnology trajectories . Our explanation , however , allows us to show not just that cognition matters separately from economic or organizational explanations , but that it matters differ - entially across the technology life cycle . And , while the interpretive process may be more or less visible across the life cycle , we suggest that there is a cognitive element at each stage . In the era of ferment , the disparate histories of multiple actors result in divergent frames and , therefore , differ - ent interpretations of new technology . Thus , while much of the management of technology research has focused on the role of competencies in developing new tech - nologies ( e . g . , Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ) , our model proposes that framing processes are equally key in pro - ducing initial variations . One implication is that we should consider not only whether a new technology requires radically new capabilities , but whether it requires new frames ( Tripsas and Gavetti , 2000 ) . With regard to the next stage of the life cycle , there has been disagree - ment in the management of technology literature about whether a dominant design will necessarily emerge in all cases ( Klepper and Simons , 1997 ; Utterback , 1994 ) . Our model suggests that a dominant design will only emergetotheextentthatacollectivetechnologicalframeis achieved . While technological frames are most evident in shap - ing outcomes in the era of ferment and in the achievement of the dominant design , they also play an essential role during the era of incremental change . Once a collective technological frame is achieved and becomes embedded in thetechnology , constraintsonfurtherdevelopmentmaybe associated not only with technical but also with cognitive limits . The collective technological frame becomes more deeply embedded in the industry and in each organization . Itbecomesimplicatedinincentivesystems , capabilitiesand the mutual understanding of how things are done . These features collectively can be thought about as the “architec - ture” of the organization or industry ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) . Radical or architectural innovations will therefore require not only a break in the existing technology but an unraveling of the interconnection between the technolog - ical frames and other features of that architecture ( Kaplan and Henderson , 2005 ) . Byexaminingtheroleofcognitionacrossthetechnology life cycle , we enrich our understanding of the mechanisms by which technological frames affect outcomes . In partic - ular , the notion of a system with interactions forces us to expand our concept of cognition . In this interlinked set of interpretive processes , we suggest that cognition is not just abouttechnologicalframes , butratherisaninteractivepro - cess of framing . The importance of this framing process is especially evident in the contestation over a collective technological frame . In the context of emerging technolo - gies , it is therefore relevant to examine the relationship to outcomes of both the content of frames and the framing process itself . 4 . 2 . History matters Acognitivemodeloftechnologytrajectoriesalsoimplies that path dependence , to the extent it is observed , is an accomplished result rather than a deterministic driver of outcomes . Trajectories have been traditionally described as “compulsive sequences” ( Rosenberg , 1969 ) in which one change then makes the next appear obvious , and path dependence as the effect of chance actions that become determinative ( David , 1992 ; Stinchcombe , 1968 ) . This lit - erature proposes that the mechanism of entrainment is a rational cost beneﬁt analysis based on the current situa - tion at any one point in time . Ex ante , the outcomes are indeterminant . Outcomes may be seen as suboptimal ex post . Consistent with recent research on “path creation” ( Garud and Karnøe , 2001 ) , we suggest , however , that actors are capable of purposeful actions that affect the direction of evolution by shaping the technological frames of other actors . From this perspective , there is no historical accident but rather “mindful deviation” from existing ways of doing things . This process produces new technological frames that guide further action and thus make particular steps appear obvious after the fact . History matters , but in differ - ent ways than those attributed to it in current evolutionary theories . And , as such , the past is more appropriately seen as a source of potential frames rather than a determinis - tic driver of outcomes ( Flaherty and Fine , 2001 ) . It is the manner that history gets drawn upon by the actors as they construct their technological frames that affects the path of development . It may therefore be useful to think of cog - nition in the way that Swidler ( 1986 ) talks about culture , where the past accumulates in a repertoire ( or “tool kit” ) of frames that get activated depending on context and inter - actions . The multiplicity of technological frames within a ﬁeld makes alternative paths possible . In our model , the “path” is shaped by the ways in which interactions among 802 S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 the interpretive processes of multiple actors play out over time . 4 . 3 . Multiple actors matter Our model thus emphasizes that it is the interaction of the cognition of multiple actors in the market that shapes the evolution of technology . Most research on technical change has examined either producers ( e . g . , Utterback , 1994 ) or sometimes users ( e . g . , von Hippel , 1986 ) and only infrequently their interaction ( Clark , 1985 , being an impor - tant exception ) . While the role of institutions in technology evolution has been explored ( e . g . , Garud and Rappa , 1994 ; Rosenkopf and Tushman , 1998 ; Van de Ven and Garud , 1993 ) , their interaction with producers and users in shap - ing technological frames is not emphasized . Separately , the institutional literature has shed light on the role of institu - tionalactorsasshapersofoutcomes ( e . g . , Lounsbury , 2001 ) , but this has not been integrated with producer and user perspectives . Our model emphasizes the need to consider theinterlinkednatureoftheseactors . Allthreesetsofactors matter as they interact with each other . Such an interactional view would suggest , ﬁrst , that it is risky to examine how producing ﬁrms react to technical changes without acknowledging that their reactions also shape the very nature of the change itself or that user inter - pretations of the technology might move it in directions entirely unanticipated by the producer . Thus , harkening back to the debate about the relative merits of demand - pull or technology - push theories ( Mowery and Rosenberg , 1982 ) , we suggest that both market pull and technology push have independent roles in technology evolution and that this occurs through the interaction of the interpre - tive processes of producers ( push ) and users ( pull ) and is mediated by institutional actors . Second , this model sheds new insight on user innova - tion . Whileexistingtheorysuggeststhatusersinnovatedue to a combination of economic incentives and a deep knowl - edge of needs ( von Hippel , 1986 ) , this paper suggests a complementaryperspective . Usersmayalsoinnovatewhen their frame for understanding a new technology differs sig - niﬁcantly from that of its producers . In these situations , usersmaybeinthebestpositiontocreateproductsthatare consistent with their vision of how the technology should develop . Third , we emphasize the role of institutions as both actors and arenas in which the interactions of other actors can take place ( e . g . , through standards bodies ) . Because collective technological frames only emerge from inter - actions , the presence of various industry institutions that drawactorstogethercanaccelerateoramplifytheseefforts . Actors may purposefully create institutions ( e . g . , user groups or industry associations ) precisely to have a forum for their framing activities . Our analysis suggests that each of the different actors brings different technological frames to the table as they interpret the nature of a technology , make choices and act . These frames may often be in conﬂict . Further research could unpack the different ways in which these con - ﬂicts can be resolved , which types of interactions are most productive at different stages of the technology life cycle , to what extent actors can shape others’ frames and under what conditions purposeful action might be possible . Thestudyofcognitivemechanismsforshapingtechnical outcomes could be extended to multiple levels of analysis . Depending on the level of analysis , different designations of the actor and the collective would be salient . For exam - ple , in a study of framing inside one organization , the actor would be an individual , team or functional group , and the collective frame would occur at the organizational level ( Kaplan , in press - b ) . In studying top management teams , the actor would be the individual executive and the collec - tive would be the team . Further research could explore the ways that the mechanisms that we propose in our cogni - tive model of technical change would manifest themselves at these different levels of analysis . 4 . 4 . Methodological implications The model also suggests that researchers in this area may have to rethink methodological approaches . Approachesthataresimultaneouslylongitudinalandcross - sectional ( at least paired comparisons ) are most likely to shed light on cognition and technical change . The most problematic aspect of studying technological frames is the risk of retrospective reconstruction . The uncertainty dur - ing eras of ferment and the achievement of clarity only after the fact mean that ex post efﬁciency explanations are inappropriate . This concern has two methodological implications : the need to present a “symmetric account of different paths irrespective of whether or not they were eventually successful” ( Garud and Rappa , 1994 , p . 348 ) and the importance of using contemporary data sources . These requirements , coupled with the desirabil - ity of a longitudinal approach , put stringent demands on the researcher . Future research along these lines could be aimed at understanding how technological frames are formed ( antecedent conditions such as experience and routines ) and how they evolve over time , at modeling multidirectional forces of macro and micro co - evolution , and at taking into account the endogenous and emer - gent nature of the phenomenon ( Volberda and Lewin , 2003 ) . Answers to the kinds of questions posed by cognition and technical change may also lie in understanding the practices of real - time decision making : the day - to - day per - spectives and events that shape outcomes . It is in these micro - processes that one can observe how framing of the industry context and the technological change can affect choices . To get at the speciﬁc ways that these interpretive processes play out in practice , researchers would need to exploit in greater depth methodological approaches that allow us to study “cognition in the wild” ( Hutchins , 1995 ) . Such a focus on practice is a particularly powerful way to explore a co - evolutionary model of technological frames and technical change because its underpinnings presup - pose actors as knowledgeable agents who enact structures ( technological frames ) that shape their emergent and sit - uated interpretive processes ( Feldman , 2003 ; Orlikowski , 2000 ) . Using a practice lens would allow the researcher to integrate macro and micro approaches to understanding S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 803 technologyevolution , emphasizingthecomplementarityof these perspectives . 4 . 5 . Managerial and policy implications Finally , our cognitive model of technology trajectories may give us power on the normative front . If we can understand how interpretive processes work in relation to technical change , there is potential to inﬂuence fram - ing strategically . Such a perspective could help answer many questions about how ﬁrms can navigate the “gales of creative destruction” associated with technical change ( Schumpeter , 1942 ) . For example , how can ﬁrms manip - ulate users’ technological frames in order to improve adoption or actively manage the manner in which cus - tomers make sense of new technologies in order to optimize their own positions ? Similarly , how can ﬁrms be more effective at managing cognitive change inside their own organizations ? Should they actively manage shifts in technological frames the same way they manage shifts in capabilities ? Does it make sense to hire people with differ - ent frames in order to promote innovation ? What are the implications for organizational and top team demography ? Policy makers should also attend to cognitive factors . When developing regulations for emerging technologies , framing of that technology can have radical consequences . For instance , if the Segway , an innovative motorized scooter , were framed as a motor vehicle , its use would be severely restricted because it could only travel on roads and not pedestrian areas . The framing of technology - based industries can also have serious antitrust implications . Industry deﬁnition is subject to interpretation , so in addi - tion to economic factors , regulators might add cognitive considerationstotheirdeliberationsaboutindustrybound - aries . Such examples suggest that policy makers would be usefully served by taking the time to examine their own cognitive frames about technology and understand the assumptions about the nature of the technology or of competition might shape regulatory frameworks . They mightalsoconsiderexercises , suchascountrycomparisons or open forum discussions with multiple stakeholders , which might help challenge existing ways of thinking . The cognitive model of technical change raises these kinds of questions . We believe that further empirical research into how producers , users and institutional actors think about technology can bring greater theoretical , managerial and policy - level insight to the understanding of technical change . Acknowledgements The authors are listed alphabetically . The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the MIT Industrial Performance Center and the Harvard Business School Division of Research and helpful comments provided by Teresa Amabile , Martin Bell , Giovanni Gavetti , Mauro Guillen , Rebecca Henderson , David Hoopes , David Houn - shell , Michael Lounsbury , Lori Rosenkopf , Alva Taylor , Mike Tushman , James Utterback , anonymous reviewers and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon , University of Illi - nois , the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth , and the Brigham Young University / University of Utah Strategy con - ference . References Abernathy , W . J . , 1978 . TheProductivityDilemma : RoadblocktoInnovation intheAutomobileIndustry . JohnsHopkinsUniversityPress , Baltimore . Acha V . , 2004 . Technology Frames : The Art of Perspective and Interpreta - tion in Strategy , SPRU Working paper series , # 109 . Aldrich , H . , 1999 . Organizations Evolving . Sage Publications , London , Thousand Oaks . Anderson , P . , Tushman , M . L . , 1990 . Technologicaldiscontinuitiesanddom - inantdesigns : acyclicalmodeloftechnologicalchange . Administrative Science Quarterly 35 ( 4 ) , 604 – 633 . Arthur , B . , 1988 . Competing technologies : an overview . In : Dosi , G . , Free - man , C . , Nelson , R . , Silverberg , G . , Soete , L . ( Eds . ) , TechnicalChangeand Economic Theory . Pinter , London , pp . 590 – 607 . Barr , P . S . , 1998 . Adaptingtounfamiliarenvironmentalevents : alookatthe evolution of interpretation and its role in strategic change . Organiza - tion Science 9 ( 6 ) , 644 – 669 . Basalla , G . , 1988 . TheEvolutionofTechnology . CambridgeUniversityPress , Cambridge . Baum , J . A . C . , Korn , H . J . , Kotha , S . , 1995 . Dominant designs and population dynamicsintelecommunicationsservices : foundingandfailureoffac - simile transmission service organizations , 1965 – 1992 . Social Science Research 24 ( 2 ) , 97 – 135 . Baum , J . A . C . , Lant , T . K . , 1995 . Cognitive sources of socially constrained competitive groups : examples from the Manhattan hotel industry . In : Scott , W . R . , Christensen , S . ( Eds . ) , The Institutional Construction of Organizations : International and Longitudinal Studies . Sage Publi - cations , Thousand Oaks , Calif . Baum , J . A . C . , Oliver , C . , 1991 . Institutionallinkagesandorganizationalmor - tality . Administrative Science Quarterly 36 ( 2 ) , 187 – 218 . Bayus , B . L . , Jain , S . , Rao , A . G . , 1997 . Too little , too early : introduction tim - ing and new product performance in the personal digital assistant industry . Journal of Marketing Research 34 ( 1 ) , 50 – 63 . Beckman , C . M . , 2006 . Theinﬂuenceoffoundingteamcompanyafﬁliations on ﬁrm behavior . Academy of Management Journal 49 ( 4 ) , 741 – 758 . Benford , R . D . , Snow , D . A . , 2000 . Framingprocessesandsocialmovements : anoverviewandassessment . AnnualReviewofSociology26 , 611 – 639 . Burton , M . D . , Sorensen , J . , Beckman , C . M . , 2002 . Coming from good stock : career histories and new venture formation . In : Lounsbury , M . , Ven - tresca , M . J . ( Eds . ) , Research in the Sociology of Organizations , Vol . Social Structure and Organizations Revisited . JAI Press , pp . 229 – 262 . Cho , T . S . , Hambrick , D . C . , 2006 . Attention as the mediator between top management team characteristics and strategic change : the case of airline deregulation . Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , 453 – 469 . Christensen , C . M . , Bower , J . L . , 1996 . Customerpower , strategicinvestment , and the failure of leading ﬁrms . Strategic Management Journal 17 ( 3 ) , 197 – 218 . Clark , K . B . , 1985 . Theinteractionofdesignhierarchiesandmarketconcepts in technological evolution . Research Policy 14 , 235 – 251 . Cooper , A . C . , Schendel , D . , 1976 . Strategic responses to technological threats . Business Horizons 19 ( 1 ) , 61 – 69 . Cusumano , M . A . , Mylonadis , Y . , Rosenbloom , R . S . , 1992 . Strategic maneu - vering and mass - market dynamics : the triumph of VHS over Beta . Business History Review 66 ( 51 ) , 44 – 51 . Dacin , M . T . , Ventresca , M . J . , Beal , B . D . , 1999 . The embeddedness of orga - nizations : Dialogue & directions . Journal of Management 25 ( 3 ) , 317 – 356 . Daft , R . L . , Weick , K . E . , 1984 . Toward a model of organizations as interpre - tation systems . Academy of Management Review 9 ( 2 ) , 284 – 295 . David , P . , 1986 . Understanding the necessity of Qwerty : the necessity of history . In : Parker , W . ( Ed . ) , Economic History and the Modern Economist . Blackwell , London , pp . 30 – 49 . David , P . A . , 1985 . ClioandtheeconomicsofQWERTY . AmericanEconomic Review 75 ( 2 ) , 332 – 337 . David , P . A . , 1992 . Heroes , herds and hysteresis in technological history : Thomas Edison and “The Battle of the Systems” reconsidered . Indus - trial and Corporate Change 1 ( 1 ) , 129 – 180 . DiMaggio , P . J . , 1997 . Cultureandcognition . AnnualReviewofSociology23 , 263 – 287 . Dosi , G . , 1982 . Technological paradigms and technological trajectories : a suggested interpretation of the determinants and directions of tech - nical change . Research Policy 11 ( 3 ) , 147 – 162 . Dosi , G . , 1984 . TechnicalChangeandIndustrialTransformation . St . Martin’s Press , New York . 804 S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 Dowell , G . , Swaminathan , A . , Wade , J . B . , 2002 . Pretty pictures and ugly scenes : political and technological maneuvers in high deﬁnition tele - vision . Advances in Strategic Management 19 , 97 – 133 . Farrell , J . , Saloner , G . , 1985 . Standardization , compatibility , andinnovation . The Rand Journal of Economics 16 ( 1 ) , 70 – 83 . Farrell , J . , Saloner , G . , 1986 . Installed base and compatibility – innova - tion , product preannouncements , and predation . American Economic Review 76 ( 5 ) , 940 – 955 . Farrell , J . , Saloner , G . , 1988 . Coordinationthroughcommitteesandmarkets . The Rand Journal of Economics 19 ( 2 ) , 235 – 252 . Feldman , M . S . , 2003 . A performative perspective on stability and change in organizational routines . Industrial and Corporate Change 12 ( 4 ) , 727 – 752 . Flaherty , M . , Fine , G . , 2001 . Present , past , and future – conjugating George HerbertMead’sperspectiveontime . Time & Society10 ( 2 – 3 ) , 147 – 161 . Fleming , L . , 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Man - agement Science 47 ( 1 ) , 117 – 132 . Fleming , L . , 2002 . Finding the organizational sources of technological breakthroughs : thestoryofHewlett - Packard’sthermalink - jet . Indus - trial and Corporate Change 11 ( 5 ) , 1059 – 1084 . Garud , R . , Karnoe , P . , 2003 . Bricolageversusbreakthrough : distributedand embeddedagencyintechnologyentrepreneurship . ResearchPolicy32 ( 2 ) , 277 – 300 . Garud , R . , Karnøe , P . , 2001 . Path creation as a process of mindful devia - tion . In : Garud , R . , Karnøe , P . ( Eds . ) , Path Dependence and Creation . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ , pp . 1 – 38 . Garud , R . , Rappa , M . A . , 1994 . A socio - cognitive model of technology evo - lution : the case of cochlear implants . Organization Science 5 ( 3 ) , 344 – 362 . Gilbert , C . G . , 2006 . Change in the presence of residual ﬁt : can competing frames coexist ? Organization Science 17 ( 1 ) , 150 – 167 . Gioia , D . , 1986 . Symbols , scriptsandsensemaking : creatingmeaninginthe organizationalexperience . In : Sims , H . P . J . , Gioia , D . A . ( Eds . ) , TheThink - ing Organization . Jossey - Bass Publishers , San Francisco , pp . 49 – 74 . Goffman , E . , 1974 . Frame analysis : An Essay on the Organization of Expe - rience , 2nd ed . ( 1986 ) . Northeastern University Press . Gregan - Paxton , J . , John , D . R . , 1997 . Consumerlearningbyanalogy : amodel of internal knowledge transfer . Journal of Consumer Research 24 ( 3 ) , 266 – 284 . Greve , H . R . , Taylor , A . , 2000 . Innovations as catalysts for organizational change : shifts in organizational cognition and search . Administrative Science Quarterly 45 ( 1 ) , 54 – 80 . Hargrave , T . J . , Van de Ven , A . H . , 2006 . A collective action model of institutional innovation . Academy of Management Review 31 ( 4 ) , 864 – 888 . Henderson , R . , 1995 . Of life cycles real and imaginary : the unexpect - edly long old age of optical lithography . Research Policy 24 ( 4 ) , 631 – 643 . Henderson , R . M . , Clark , K . B . , 1990 . Architectural innovation : the reconﬁg - urationofexistingproducttechnologiesandthefailureofestablishedﬁrms . Administrative Science Quarterly 35 ( 1 ) , 9 – 30 . Hoch , S . J . , Ha , Y . W . , 1986 . Consumer learning : advertising and the ambi - guity of product experience . Journal of Consumer Research 13 ( 2 ) , 221 – 233 . Hounshell , D . A . , 1975 . Elishagrayandthetelephone . TechnologyandCul - ture 16 ( 2 ) , 133 – 161 . Huff , A . S . , 1990 . Mapping Strategic Thought . John Wiley and Sons , Chich - ester , New York . Huff , A . S . , 1997 . A current and future research agenda for cognitive research . Journal of Management studies 34 ( 6 ) , 947 – 952 . Hutchins , E . , 1995 . Cognition in the Wild . MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass . Kaplan , S . , inpress - a . Cognition , capabilitiesandincentives : assessingﬁrm responsetotheﬁber - opticrevolution . AcademyofManagementJour - nal . Kaplan , S . , in press - b . Framing contests : strategy making under uncer - tainty . Organization Science . Kaplan , S . , Henderson , R . , 2005 . Inertiaandincentives : bridgingorganiza - tional economics and organizational theory . Organization Science 16 ( 5 ) , 509 – 521 . Kaplan , S . , Murray , F . , in press . Technology , organizations and institutions in the construction of economic value : the case of biotechnology . In : Grifﬁths , D . , Phillips , N . , Sewell , G . ( Eds . ) , ResearchontheSociologyof Organizations , Elsevier . Kaplan , S . , Murray , F . , Henderson , R . M . , 2003 . Discontinuities and senior management : assessingtheroleofrecognitioninpharmaceuticalﬁrm response to biotechnology . Industrial and Corporate Change 12 ( 4 ) , 203 – 233 . Kaplan , S . , Tripsas , M . , 2003 . The Interaction of Cognition and Technology inNewIndustryEmergence : TheCaseofthePersonalDigitalAssistant ( PDA ) , Industrial Performance Center Working Paper Series . Katz , M . L . , Shapiro , C . , 1985 . Networkexternalities , competition , andcom - patibility . The American Economic Review 75 ( 3 ) , 424 – 440 . Khazam , J . , Mowery , D . , 1994 . The commercialization of RISC : strate - gies for the creation of dominant designs . Research Policy 23 ( 1 ) , 89 – 102 . Klepper , S . , 1996 . Entry , exit , growth , and innovation over the product life cycle . American Economic Review 86 ( 3 ) , 562 – 583 . Klepper , S . , Simons , K . L . , 1997 . Technological extinctions of industrial ﬁrms : aninquiryintotheirnatureandcauses . IndustrialandCorporate Change 6 ( 2 ) , 379 – 460 . Kuhn , T . S . , 1962 . TheStructureofScientiﬁcRevolutions , 1996ed . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Lampel , J . , 2001 . Thecorecompetenciesofeffectiveprojectexecution : the challengeofdiversity . InternationalJournalofProjectManagement19 ( 8 ) , 471 – 483 . Landes , D . S . , 1969 . The Unbound Prometheus : Technological change and industrial development in Western Europe from 1750 to the present . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Lant , T . K . , 2002 . Organizational cognition and interpretation . In : Baum , J . A . C . ( Ed . ) , Companion to Organizations . Blackwell Publishers , Malden , MA , pp . 344 – 362 . Levinthal , D . A . , March , J . G . , 1993 . The myopia of learning . Strategic Man - agement Journal 14 , 95 – 112 . Levitt , B . , March , J . G . , 1988 / 1996 . Organizationallearning . In : Cohen , M . D . , Sproull , L . ( Eds . ) , OrganizationalLearning : 516 – 540 ( Originallyappear inAnnualReviewofSociology , vol . 514 , 1988 ) . SagePublications , Thou - sand Oaks . Lounsbury , M . , 2001 . Institutional sources of practice variation : stafﬁng college and university recycling programs . Administrative Science Quarterly 46 ( 1 ) , 29 – 56 . Lounsbury , M . , Rao , H . , 2004 . Sources of durability and change in market classiﬁcations : a study of the reconstitution of product categories in the American mutual fund industry , 1944 – 1985 . Social Forces 82 ( 3 ) , 969 – 999 . Lounsbury , M . , Ventresca , M . J . , Hirsch , P . M . , 2003 . Socialmovements , ﬁeld framesandindustryemergence : acultural - politicalperspectiveonUS recycling . Socio - Economic Review 1 ( 1 ) , 71 – 104 . March , J . G . , Simon , H . A . , 1958 . Organizations . Wiley , New York . McAdam , D . , McCarthy , J . D . , Zald , M . N . , 1996 . ComparativePerspectiveson SocialMovements : PoliticalOpportunities , MobilizingStructures , and Cultural Framings . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge England , New York . Meindl , J . R . , Stubbart , C . , Porac , J . F . , 1994 . Cognition within and betweenorganizations : ﬁvekeyquestions . OrganizationScience5 ( 3 ) , 289 – 293 . Moreau , C . P . , Markman , A . B . , Lehmann , D . R . , 2001 . What is it ? ” Catego - rization ﬂexibility and consumers’ responses to really new products . Journal of Consumer Research 27 ( 4 ) , 489 – 498 . Mowery , D . , Rosenberg , N . , 1982 . The inﬂuence of market upon innova - tion : acriticalreviewofsomerecentempiricalstudies . In : Rosenberg , N . ( Ed . ) , Inside the Black Box : Technology and Economics : 193 – 241 ( originally published in 1979 in Research Policy , 1978 , pp . 1103 – 1953 . Cambridge University Press , New York . Murmann , J . P . , Frenken , K . , 2006 . Toward a systematic framework for research on dominant designs , technological innovations , and indus - trial change . Research Policy 35 , 925 – 952 . Nelson , R . R . , Winter , S . G . , 1977 . In search of a useful theory of innovation . Research Policy 6 , 36 – 76 . Nelson , R . R . , Winter , S . G . , 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Nightingale , P . , 1998 . A cognitive model of innovation . Research Policy 27 ( 7 ) , 689 – 709 . Nightingale , P . , 2004 . Technological capabilities , invisible infrastructure and the un - social construction of predictability : the overlooked ﬁxed costs of useful research . Research Policy 33 ( 9 ) , 1259 – 1284 . O’Reilly , C . A . , Tushman , M . L . , in press . Ambidexterity as a dynamic capa - bility : resolving the innovator’s dilemma . Research in Organizational Behavior . Ocasio , W . , 1997 . Towards an attention - based view of the ﬁrm . Strategic Management Journal 18 , 187 – 206 . Oliver , C . , 1988 . Thecollectivestrategyframework – anapplicationtocom - peting predictions of isomorphism . Administrative Science Quarterly 33 ( 4 ) , 543 – 561 . Orlikowski , W . J . , 2000 . Using technology and constituting structures : a practice lens for studying technology in organizations . Organization Science 11 ( 4 ) , 404 – 428 . Orlikowski , W . J . , Gash , D . C . , 1994 . Technological frames : making sense of information technology in organizations . ACM Transactions on Infor - mation Systems 2 ( 2 ) , 174 – 207 . S . Kaplan , M . Tripsas / Research Policy 37 ( 2008 ) 790 – 805 805 Peteraf , M . , Shanley , M . , 1997 . Getting to know you : a theory of strategic group identity . Strategic Management Journal 18 , 165 – 186 . Pinch , T . J . , Bijker , W . E . , 1987 . The social construction of facts and artifacts : orhowthesociologyofscienceandthesociologyoftechnologymightbeneﬁteachother . In : Bijker , W . E . , Pinch , T . J . ( Eds . ) , The Social Con - struction of Technological Systems . MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass , pp . 17 – 50 . Pollock , T . G . , Rindova , V . P . , 2003 . Media legitimation effects in the market for initial public offerings . Academy of Management Journal 46 ( 5 ) , 631 – 642 . Porac , J . F . , Thomas , H . , Wilson , F . , Paton , D . , Kanfer , A . , 1995 . Rivalry and the industry model of Scottish knitwear producers . Administrative Science Quarterly 40 ( 2 ) , 203 – 227 . Porac , J . F . , Ventresca , M . J . , Mishina , Y . , 2001 . Interorganizational cogni - tion and interpretation . In : Baum , J . A . C . ( Ed . ) , Blackwell Companion to Organizations . Blackwell Publishers , Malden , MA , pp . 579 – 598 . Prahalad , C . K . , Bettis , R . A . , 1986 . The dominant logic : a new linkage between diversity and performance . Strategic Management Journal 7 ( 6 ) , 485 – 501 . Rao , H . , 1994 . The social construction of reputation : certiﬁcation con - tests , legitimation , and the survival of organizations in the American automobile industry . Strategic Management Journal 29 , 1895 – 1912 ( Chichester ) . Reger , R . K . , Huff , A . S . , 1993 . Strategic groups : a cognitive perspective . Strategic Management Journal 14 ( 2 ) , 103 – 123 . Reger , R . K . , Palmer , T . B . , 1996 . Managerial categorization of competitors : using old maps to navigate new environments . Organization Science 7 ( 1 ) , 22 – 39 . Rindova , V . P . , Fombrun , C . J . , 1999 . Constructing competitive advantage : the role of ﬁrm - constituent interactions . Strategic Management Jour - nal 20 ( 8 ) , 691 – 710 . Rogers , E . M . , 1995 . Diffusion of Innovations , 4th ed . Free Press , New York . Rosa , J . A . , Porac , J . F . , 2002 . Categorization bases and their inﬂuence on product category knowledge structures . Psychology & Marketing 19 ( 6 ) , 503 – 531 . Rosa , J . A . , Porac , J . F . , Spanjol , J . R . , Saxon , M . S . , 1999 . Sociocognitivedynam - ics in a product market . Journal of Marketing 63 , 64 – 77 . Rosenberg , N . , 1969 . The Direction of Technological Change : Inducement Mechanisms and Focusing Devices , Economic Development and Cul - tural Change . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , pp . 1 – 24 . Rosenkopf , L . , Metiu , A . , George , V . P . , 2001 . From the bottom up ? Techni - calcommitteeactivityandallianceformation . AdministrativeScience Quarterly 46 ( 4 ) , 748 – 772 . Rosenkopf , L . , Tushman , M . , 1994 . The coevolution and technology and organizations . In : Baum , J . A . C . , Singh , J . V . ( Eds . ) , EvolutionaryDynam - ics of Organizations . Oxford University Press , New York , pp . 403 – 424 . Rosenkopf , L . , Tushman , M . L . , 1998 . The coevolution of community net - works and technology : lessons from the ﬂight simulation industry . Industrial and Corporate Change 7 , 311 – 346 . Sahal , D . , 1981 . PatternsofTechnologicalInnovation . Addison - Wesley , Lon - don . Schumpeter , J . A . , 1942 . Capitalism , Socialism and Democracy , 3d ed . ( 1950 ) . Harper , New York . Shah , S . K . , Tripsas , M . , 2007 . The accidental entrepreneur : the emer - gent and collective process of user entrepreneurship . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 1 , 123 – 140 . Spender , J . C . , 1989 . Industry Recipes : An Enquiry into the Nature and Sources of Managerial Judgement . Blackwell , Oxford , UK , New York , NY , USA . Spender , J . C . , 1998 . The dynamics of individual and organizational knowl - edge . In : Eden , C . , Spender , J . ( Eds . ) , Managerial and Organizational Cognition . Sage Publications , London , pp . 13 – 29 . Stinchcombe , A . L . , 1968 . Constructing Social Theories . Harcourt Brace & World , New York . Stubbart , C . I . , 1989 . Managerialcognition : amissinglinkinstrategicman - agement research . Journal of Management Studies 26 , 325 – 347 . Suarez , F . F . , 2004 . Battles for technological dominance : an integrative framework . Research Policy 33 ( 2 ) , 271 – 286 . Suarez , F . F . , Utterback , J . M . , 1995 . Dominant designs and the survival of ﬁrms . Strategic Management Journal 16 ( 6 ) , 415 – 430 . Swidler , A . , 1986 . Culture in action : symbols and strategies . American Sociological Review 51 ( 2 ) , 273 – 286 . Tripsas , M . , 1997 . Unraveling the process of creative destruction : com - plementary assets and incumbent survival in the typesetter industry . Strategic Management Journal 18 , 119 – 142 ( Special Issue ) . Tripsas , M . , 2008 . Customerpreferencediscontinuities : atriggerforradical technological change . Managerial and Decision Economics 29 , 79 – 97 . Tripsas , M . , Gavetti , G . , 2000 . Capabilities , cognition , and inertia : evi - dencefromdigitalimaging . StrategicManagementJournal21 ( 10 – 11 ) , 1147 – 1161 . Tushman , M . , Smith , W . K . , 2002 . Organizational technology . In : Baum , J . ( Ed . ) , Companion to Organizations . Blackwell , Malden , MA , pp . 386 – 414 . Tushman , M . L . , Anderson , P . , 1986 . Technologicaldiscontinuitiesandorga - nizational environments . Administrative Science Quarterly 31 ( 3 ) , 439 – 465 . Tushman , M . L . , Rosenkopf , L . , 1992 . Organizational determinants of technological - change – towardasociologyoftechnologicalevolution . Research in Organizational Behavior 14 , 311 – 347 . Urban , G . L . , von Hippel , E . , 1988 . Lead user analyses for the development of new industrial products . Management Science 34 ( 5 ) , 569 – 582 . Utterback , J . M . , 1974 . Innovation in industry and the diffusion of technol - ogy . Science 183 ( Feb . 15th ) , 658 – 662 . Utterback , J . M . , 1994 . Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation . HBS Press , Cambridge , Mass . Utterback , J . M . , Suarez , F . F . , 1993 . Innovation , competition , and industry structure . Research Policy 22 ( 1 ) , 1 – 21 . VandeVen , A . H . , Garud , R . , 1993 . Innovationandindustryemergence : the case of cochlear implants . In : Rosenbloom , R . S . , Burgelman , R . ( Eds . ) , Research on Technological Innovation , Management , and Policy , vol . 5 . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , pp . 1 – 46 . Volberda , H . W . , Lewin , A . Y . , 2003 . Guest Editor’s introduction : co - evolutionary dynamics within and between ﬁrms : from evolution to co - evolution . The Journal of Management Studies 40 ( 8 ) , 2111 – 2136 . vonHippel , E . , 1986 . Leadusers : asourceofnovelproductconcepts . Man - agement Science 32 ( 7 ) , 791 – 805 . Walsh , J . P . , 1995 . Managerial and organizational cognition : notes from a trip down memory lane . Organization Science 6 ( 3 ) , 280 – 321 . Weick , K . E . , 1990 . Technology as equivoque . In : Goodman , P . , Sproull , L . ( Eds . ) , Technology and Organizations . Jossey - Bass , San Francisco , pp . 1 – 44 . Weick , K . E . , 1995 . SensemakinginOrganizations . SagePublications , Thou - sand Oaks . Weick , K . E . , Roberts , K . H . , 1993 . Collective mind in organizations : heedful interrelating on ﬂight decks . Administrative Science Quarterly 38 ( 3 ) , 357 – 381 . Yates , J . , 1993 . Coevolution of information - processing technology and use – interaction between the life - insurance and tabulating industries . Business History Review 67 ( 1 ) , 1 – 51 . Zuckerman , E . W . , 1999 . The categorical imperative : securities analysts and the illegitimacy discount . American Journal of Sociology 104 ( 5 ) , 1398 – 1438 .