J7ournal ofNeurology , Neurosurgery , and Psychiatry 1992 ; 55 : 181 - 184 Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson ' s disease : a clinico - pathological study of 100 cases Andrew J Hughes , Susan E Daniel , Linda Kilford , Andrew J Lees Abstract Few detailed clinico - pathological correla - tions of Parkinson ' s disease have been published . The pathological findings in 100 patients diagnosed prospectively by a group of consultant neurologists as having idiopathic Parkinson ' s disease are repor - ted . Seventy six had nigral Lewy bodies , and in all of these Lewy bodies were also found in the cerebral cortex . In 24 cases without Lewy bodies , diagnoses included progressive supranuclear palsy , multiple system atrophy , Alzheimer ' s disease , Alz - heimer - type pathology , and basal ganglia vascular disease . The retrospective appli - cation of recommended diagnostic criter - ia improved the diagnostic accuracy to 82 % . These observations call into question current concepts ofParkinson ' s disease as a single distinct morbid entity . Parkinson ' s Disease Society Brain Bank , Institute of Neurology , 1 Wakefield Street , London WClN IPJ A J Hughes S E Daniel L Kilford A J Lees Correspondence to : Dr S E Daniel Received 14 September 1990 and in revised form 13 May 1991 . Accepted 25 June 1991 Necropsy studies of patients with Parkinson ' s syndrome show that idiopathic Parkinson ' s disease ( IPD ) comprises between 60 and 75 % of cases . ' 2 In life most of these are correctly diagnosed , but despite the application of strin - gent diagnostic criteria3 misdiagnoses do occur , with some patients thought clinically to have IPD turning out to have other ill - nesses . 1 24 Conversely , in other patients with atypical clinical pictures the diagnosis ofIPD is established only after death . 5 6 There are few clinico - pathological studies from which to assess the accuracy of clinical diagnosis but it is estimated at around 80 % . 2 7 Multiple system atrophy , progressive supranu - clear palsy , Alzheimer ' s disease , and cerebro - vascular pathology are thought to make up most misdiagnoses . ' 24 The Parkinson ' s Disease Society Brain Bank ( PDSBB ) in London receives donor tissue from parkinsonian patients , most of whom have been prospectively examined annually by a neurologist . To assess the accuracy of clinical diagnosis we examined the neuropathology in 100 patients who were thought to have IPD . For patients in whom the diagnosis was histologically substantiated the clinical vari - ables were correlated with the pathological findings . Materials and methods We studies 100 consecutive cases with clini - cally diagnosed IPD . The brains were collected over a three year period between June 1987 and August 1990 from all over the United Kingdom . Seventy cases were registered donors and had been prospectively assessed annually by neurologists associated with the PDSBB . All other cases had been diagnosed by consultant neurologists or geriatricians as hav - ing IPD . Hospital and consultant case notes were reviewed to supplement clinical informa - tion . Age at onset of illness , disease duration , initial response to levodopa , and severity of disease at death , as measured by the Hoehn and Yahr score , 8 were correlated with the pathological findings . Half brains fixed in 10 % neutral formalin were available for examination by standard neuropathological methods . Tissue for paraffin embedding was taken from the cerebral cortex , striatumi , midbrain , pons , and medulla . In most cases all areas of cortex ( frontal , tempo - ral , parietal , occipital ) and the cerebellum ( hemisphere and vermis ) were examined . Sec - tions were stained with haematoxylin - eosin ( HE ) , luxol fast blue cresyl - violet , and mod - ified Bielschowsky silver impregnation . On selected regions , immunocytochemistry was performed with biotin - streptavidin method and antibody to ubiquitin ( Dako , polyclonal 1 : 400 ) . The diagnosis of IPD was based on finding a clear depletion of brain stem pigmented neur - ones with Lewy bodies in some of the remain - ing nerve cells . 9 In all cases where Lewy bodies were difficult to find , at least three HE stained 7 , u sections of midbrain were examined . In each section there were usually more than 150 pigmented nigral neurones . The cerebral cor - tex was carefully screened for intraneuronal Lewy bodies with HE stained sections . In most cases the frontal anterior cingulate gyrus was used , however , in a few cases only the para - hippocampal gyrus was available . Lewy bodies were considered to be found easily if identified within 5 minutes ' inspection . Sections were stained with anti - ubiquitin if Lewy bodies had not been identified after 10 minutes ' observation time . Nerve cell loss in the substantia nigra and the locus coeruleus was assessed by two independent observers with a 4 point ( 1 = mild , 4 = severe ) grading system , which was based on comparison with age - matched controls . The presence of Lewy bodies in the locus coeruleus and dorsal vagal nucleus was recorded for each case . In cases lacking the pathological changes of IPD , diagnoses were established by accepted neuropathological criteria . The criteria pro - posed by Khachaturianl ' were used to identify cases in which neocortical senile plaques were numerous . This group was sub - divided into 181 group . bmj . com on May 10 , 2017 - Published by http : / / jnnp . bmj . com / Downloaded from Hughes , Daniel , Kilford , Lees Alzheimer ' s disease and Alzheimer - type pathology . For the diagnosis of Alzheimer ' s disease the presence of numerous neocortical neurofibrillary tangles and a history of demen - tia were required . Cases with Alzheimer - type pathology had few or no neocortical tangles and no definite dementia . Progressive supra - nuclear palsy was classified as histologically typical " and atypical ; the latter being dis - tinguished by predominant pallido - luysio - nigral degeneration with neurofibrillary tangles , few brain stem tangles , and a normal dentate nucleus . Cases of multiple system atrophy4 showed striatonigral involvement combined in all the cases with some degree of olivopontocerebellar damage . Arterioloscler - osis with widening of perivascular spaces in the deep grey nuclei was considered a normal accompaniment of ageing . Vascular damage was considered important when there were ischaemic infarcts . A single case of post - encephalitic parkinsonism ' was distinguished by severe nigral damage with widespread brain stem tangles in a patient with disease onset in 1955 , when aged 34 , having possibly been exposed to an encephalitic - like illness at the age of eight years . Clinical variables were correlated with the neuropathological features with Spearman ' s rank correlation test . The clinical and patho - logical data from patient subgroups were com - pared with Student ' s t test . The case histories of all patients were reviewed by two of us ( AJL , AJH ) and the clinical diagnoses re - evaluated with the PDSBB clinical criteria3 ( box ) . Results The mean age of disease onset was 64 - 5 ( range 31 - 85 ) years , and the mean duration ofdisease was 11 9 ( range 2 - 35 ) years ; 59 patients were men and 41 were women . Seventy six cases fulfilled the pathological criteria for IPD , while 24 patients were clinically misdiagnosed . There was no significant difference between the two groups for age at onset , age at death , or terminal disease severity ( table 1 ) . The dura - tion of disease was significantly longer in cases with IPD , mean 12 - 8 ( range 2 - 30 ) years , compared to those with other diagnoses , mean 8 - 8 ( range 2 - 35 ) years ( p = 0006 ) . Where information was available , 96 % ( 66 / 69 ) of those with pathologically confirmed IPD and 82 % ( 18 / 22 ) of those without Lewy body pathology had a definite initial response to levodopa . After retrospective assessment of the clinical features 11 patients were judged not to fulfil the PDSBB clinical criteria for IPD . 3 Nine had exclusion criteria for Parkinson ' s disease ( table 1 ) , including no response to an adequate trial of levodopa ( 4 ) , early severe dementia ( 2 ) , early autonomic failure ( 2 ) , history of stepwise progression related to strokes ( 1 ) , and supranuclear gaze palsy ( 1 ) . The two others had inadequate supportive positive criteria ( table 1 ) . Eight of the 11 patients had pathological findings other than IPD while three had typical Lewy body pathology . Neuropathological findings - Lewy bodies were found easily in the substantia nigra of most cases with histological IPD . In a few , where there was severe cell loss , it was necessary to examine more than one section before they were identified . Lewy bodies were also present in the locus coeruleus in 76 % ( 54 / 7 1 ) and in the dorsal vagal nucleus in 79 % ( 49 / 62 ) of cases where suitable tissue was available for examination . Cortical Lewy bodies were found in all cases with histological IPD , including seven patients in whom the disease duration was 5 years or less . In 58 ( 76 % ) they were easily found ; nine ( 12 % ) required a prolonged search ; a further nine ( 12 % ) needed ubiquitin staining for identification . A formal study of Lewy body distribution in the different cortical areas was not undertaken . In most cases , however , we found that examination of the anterior cingulate gyrus yielded positive results most quickly . Only one case showed more than five Lewy bodies per field at x 100 magnifica - tion , thereby satisfying the recently proposed criteria for diagnosis of diffuse Lewy body disease . 12 Cell loss in the substantia nigra , relative to age - matched controls , was esti - mated as mild in eight ( 1 % ) , mild to moder - ate in 23 ( 30 % ) , moderate to severe in 30 ( 39 % ) , and severe in 15 ( 20 % ) of cases . Co - existing striatal pathology was found in 27 ( 36 % ) IPD brains ; in most there was vascular damage with multiple lacunar infarcts ( table 2 ) . Pathology outside of the nigro - striatal system occurred in 19 ( 22 % ) cases ; in nine ( 12 % ) there was co - existent Alzheimer ' s disease , seven ( 9 % ) had vascular damage , and one case had Alzheimer - type pathology . The principal findings in the 24 cases without Lewy bodies were progressive supra - nuclear palsy ( six ; two classical and four atypical ) , multiple system atrophy ( five ) , Alz - heimer ' s disease ( three ) , Alzheimer - type UK Parkinson ' s Disease Society Brain Bank clinical diagnostic criteria Step 1 Diagnosis of Parkinsonian syndrome * Bradykinesia ( slowness of initiation of voluntary movement with progressive reduction in speed and amplitude of repetitive actions ) * And at least one of the following : muscular rigidity 4 - 6 Hz rest tremor postural instability not caused by primary visual , vestibular , cerebellar , or proprioceptive dysfunction . Step 2 Exclusion criteria for Parkinson ' s disease * History of repeated strokes with stepwise progression of parkinsonian features * History of repeated head injury * History of definite encephalitis * Oculogyric crises * Neuroleptic treatment at onset of symptoms * More than one affected relative * Sustained remission * Strictly unilateral features after 3 years * Supranuclear gaze palsy * Cerebellar signs * Early severe autonomic involvement * Early severe dementia with disturbances of memory , language , and praxis * Babinski sign * Presence of cerebral tumour or communicating hydrocephalus on CT scan * Negative response to large doses of levodopa ( if malabsorption excluded ) * MPTP exposure Step 3 Supportive prospective positive criteria for Parkinson ' s disease ( Three or more required for diagnosis of definite Parkinson ' s disease ) * Unilateral onset * Rest tremor present * Progressive disorder * Persistent asymmetry affecting side of onset most * Excellent response ( 70 - 100 % ) to levodopa * Severe levodopa - induced chorea * Levodopa response for 5 years or more * Clinical course of 10 years or more 182 group . bmj . com on May 10 , 2017 - Published by http : / / jnnp . bmj . com / Downloaded from Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson ' s disease : a clinico - pathological study of 100 cases Table 1 Clinical variables in patients with histologically confirmed Parkinson ' s disease and in those with other pathological diagnoses3 IPD Non - IPD Variable ( n = 76 ) ( n = 24 ) Mean ( range ) age at onset ( years ) 63 - 6 ( 31 - 84 ) 67 - 6 ( 34 - 85 ) Mean ( range ) duration of disease ( years ) 12 - 8 ( 2 - 30 ) 8 - 8 ( 2 - 35 ) Mean ( range ) Hoehn andYahr score at death 4 - 3 ( 3 - 5 ) 4 - 4 ( 3 - 5 ) Mean ( range ) age at death ( years ) 76 - 4 ( 50 - 91 ) 76 - 6 ( 62 - 90 ) Initial levodopa response unknown 7 2 nil to poor 3 4 moderate 9 2 good 37 12 excellent 20 4 pathology ( three ) , vascular disease ( three ) , isolated nigral atrophy with no Lewy bodies ( two ) , and postencephalitic parkinsonism ( one ) ( table 3 ) . In one case there were no abnormal pathological findings and review of the clinical details raised the possibility of benign essential tremor . Clinico - pathological correlations in the cases of IPD - For the 76 patients with histological IPD there was a positive correlation between the severity of nigral cell loss and both disease duration ( r = 0 - 31 ; p = 0 - 008 ) and severity at death ( r = 0 39 ; p = 0001 ) . There was also a positive correlation between the duration of disease and severity at death ( r = 0 - 34 ; p = 0 003 ) and between cell loss in the substantia nigra and the locus coeruleus ( r = 0 - 38 ; p = Table 2 Pathologicalfindings in 76 cases with histologically confirmed Parkinson ' s disease Pathologicalfindings No of cases IPD with co - existent striatal pathology 27 Vascular 19 lacunar infarction 16 putaminal haemorrhage 2 putaminal AVM 1 Striatal plaques 7 with neocortical involvement 5 isolated to striatum with normal 2 neocortex Caudate atrophy 1 IPD with pathology outside 19 nigro - striatal system Alzheimer ' s disease 9 Alzheimer - type pathology 1 Vascular events 7 cerebral infarction 5 cerebellar infarction 1 cerebellar haemorrhage 1 Abscess 1 " Diffuse Lewy body disease " 1 See text for definitions of Alzheimer ' s disease . Alzheimer - type pathology and diffuse Lewy body disease . Table 3 Pathologicalfindings in 24 cases clinically mis - diagnosed as Parkinson ' s disease Pathological findings No of cases Progressive supranuclear palsy 6 atypical 4 classical 2 Multiple system atrophy 5 Alzheimer ' s disease 3 with striatal involvement I without striatal involvement 2 Alzheimer - type pathology 3 with striatal involvement 3 Vascular , lacunar state 3 Nigral atrophy without Lewy bodies 2 Postencephalitic parkinsonism 1 Normal ? essential tremor 1 See text for definitions of Alzheimer ' s disease . Alzheimer - type pathology , progressive supranuclear palsy , multiple system atrophy , postencephalitic parkinsonism . 0002 ) . In 54 ( 71 % ) patients the cause ofdeath was known . All correlations were greatest for the 46 % ( 26 / 54 ) of patients who died from causes clearly unrelated to their IPD ( for example , myocardial infarction , stroke , can - cer ) . The r value for the correlation between nigral cell loss and disease duration in this group increased to 0 - 52 ( p = 001 ) . Discussion The concept of Parkinson ' s disease is histor - ically a clinical one stemming from James Parkinson ' s ' 3 seminal description which was later embellished by the nineteenth century neurologists Charcot and Gowers . Many authorities have drawn attention to the difficul - ties in distinguishing Parkinson ' s disease clini - cally from other parkinsonian syndromes . Progress in this area has been hampered by the failure to apply rigid clinical criteria and sparse clinical documentation in published patho - logical series . ' 4 Furthermore , how much disease classification relied on pathological criteria such as severity of nigral cell loss or the presence of Lewy bodies , is unclear . In our study 76 % of cases satisfied the established neuropathological criteria for IPD . Despite the guideline PDSBB criteria for the clinical diagnosis of IPD3 those used by indi - vidual neurologists clearly differed . Never - theless , each patient included in this study had been specifically considered during life to have IPD rather than a less well - defined parkinson - ian syndrome . The retrospective application of the recommended diagnostic criteria ' improved the diagnostic accuracy to 82 % ( 73 / 89 ) ; 16 of the 24 cases misdiagnosed , however , still fulfilled these criteria and three others with atypical clinical features had typical Lewy body pathology . The occurrence of cortical Lewy bodies in all cases of IPD has not been previously reported . Our finding suggests the causative agent of IPD produces damage beyond the confines of those nuclei regularly reported as being involved - for example , substantia nigra , substantia innominata , locus coeruleus , dorsal vagal nucleus . We suggest that the widespread distribution of Lewy bodies may reflect a " field change " in certain neuronal types , one of which may be cells synthesising tyrosine hydroxylase , which have recently been identi - fied in the cerebral cortex . ' 6 Whether Lewy bodies are formed primarily at a specific site - for example , the substantia nigra - with later development elsewhere is not known , but our findings of widespread Lewy bodies in patients with short disease duration suggest concurrent formation may occur . An unexpected finding was the high inci - dence of Alzheimer ' s disease and Alzheimer - type pathology which had been diagnosed clinically as IPD . Extrapyramidal signs in Alzheimer ' s disease are well reported and have in part been attributed to the severity of cell loss in the substantia nigra . ' 7 18 In previous reports , however , it has been suggested that these patients are easily distinguishable from those with IPD . ' 9 Our findings suggest that 183 group . bmj . com on May 10 , 2017 - Published by http : / / jnnp . bmj . com / Downloaded from Hughes , Daniel , Kilford , Lees such a distinction cannot always be made . Furthermore , we wish to draw attention to those patients with a parkinsonian syndrome and Alzheimer - type pathology , who may repre - sent cases of " preclinical " Alzheimer ' s dis - ease . 20 In both groups the preponderance of striatal plaques and cell loss in the substantia nigra may together have contributed to the extrapyramidal features . We have confirmed previous reports corre - lating nigral cell loss with disease duration and severity " 5 21 especially in patients dying of causes unrelated to Parkinson ' s disease . This group contained more patients at different stages of disease ( mean Hoehn andYahr score at death 3 - 6 ( range 2 - 5 ) , mean nigral cell loss score 2 - 4 ( range 1 - 4 ) ) and thus reflected more broadly the natural history of decline of IPD . In comparison , those dying of parkinsonian - related causes had more - end stage disease with clear disability and more severe cell loss ( mean Hoehn andYahr score 4 - 8 ( range 4 - 5 ) , mean nigral cell loss score 3 - 0 ( range 1 - 4 ) ; p = 0 005 and 001 respectively ) . If the presence of Lewy bodies in brain stem nuclei is considered an essential prerequisite for the diagnosis of Par - kinson ' s disease , then currently used criteria will lead to an 18 % incidence of false positives . Furthermore , although the incidence is unknown , cases with atypical clinical pictures may turn out to have typical Lewy body pathology . This finding throws into question many clinical studies that assume that IPD is a specific morbid entity and may be diagnosed on clinical grounds alone . Although the patho - genesis of Parkinson ' s disease may prove to be multifactorial further clinico - pathological cor - relations may help to refine the clinical diag - nostic accuracy of Lewy body Parkinson ' s disease . Until biological markers or more specific neuro - imaging techniques are devel - oped it may have to be accepted that diverse neuropathological disorders including multiple system atrophy and neurofibrillary tangle pathology may produce clinical syndromes indistinguishable from Lewy body Parkinson ' s disease . We thank Miss Siobhan Blankson for the histological prepara - tions and Miss Beatrice Vanderstichele for assistance with the manuscript . Dr A J Hughes and Dr S E Daniel are funded by the Parkinson ' s Disease Society of the United Kingdom . 1 Jellinger K . The pathology of parkinsonism . In : Marsden CD , Fahn S , eds . Movement disorders Vol 2 . London : Butterworths , 1987 : 124 - 65 . 2 Jellinger K . New developments in the pathology of Parkin - son ' s disease . In : Streifler MB , Korczyn AD , Melamed E , Youdim MBH , eds . Advances in neurology Vol 53 . Parkin - son ' s disease . Anatomy , pathology , and therapy . NewYork : Raven Press , 1990 : 1 - 16 . 3 Gibb WRG , Lees AJ . The relevance of the Lewy body to the pathogenesis of idiopathic Parkinson ' s disease . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1988 ; 51 : 745 - 52 . 4 Feamley JM , Lees AJ . Striatonigral degeneration : a clin - icopathological study . Brain 1990 ; 113 : 1823 - 42 . 5 Sage JI , Miller DC , Golbe LI , Walters A , Duvoisin RC . Clinically atypical expression of pathologically typical Lewy body parkinsonism . Clin Neuropharmacol 1990 : 13 : 36 - 47 . 6 Joachim CL , Morris JH , Selkoe DJ . Clinically diagnosed Alzheimer ' s disease : autopsy results in 150 cases . Ann Neurol 1988 ; 24 : 50 - 6 . 7 Lees AJ . The treatment of multiple system atrophy : striato - nigral degeneration and olivopontocerebellar degenera - tion . In : Bannister R , ed . Autonomicfailure : a textbook of clinical disorders of the autonomic nervous system , 2nd ed . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1988 : 596 - 604 . 8 Hoehn MM , Yahr MD . Parkinsonism : onset , progression , and mortality . Neurology 1967 ; 17 : 427 - 42 . 9 Oppenheimer DR . Diseases of the basal ganglia , cerebellum and motor neurons . In : Adams JH , Corsellis JAN , Duchen IW , eds . Greenfield ' s neuropathology , 4th ed . New York : Wiley , 1984 : 699 - 747 . 10 Khachaturian ZS . Diagnosis of Alzheimer ' s disease . Arch Neurol 1985 ; 42 : 1097 - 105 . 11 Steele JC , Richardson JC , Olszewski J . Progressive supranu - clear palsy . Arch Neurol 1964 ; 10 : 333 - 59 . 12 Kosaka K . Diffuse Lewy body disease in Japan . J Neurol 1990 ; 237 : 197 - 204 . 13 Parkinson J . An essay on the shaking palsy . London : Sher - wood , Nelly and Jones , 1817 . 14 Forno LS , Alvord EC . The pathology of parkinsonism . In : McDowell FH , Markham CH , eds . Recent advances in Parkinson ' s disease . Oxford : Blackwell Scientific Publica - tions , 1971 : 120 - 61 . 15 Bernheimer H , Birkmayer W , Hornykiewicz 0 , Jellinger K , Seitelberger F . Brain dopamine and the syndrome of parkinsonism and Huntington : clinical , morphological and neurochemical correlations . J Neurol Sci 1973 ; 20 : 415 - 55 . 16 Kuljis RO , Martin - Vasallo P , Peress NS . Lewy bodies in tyrosine hydroxylase - synthesizing neurons of the human cerebral cortex . Neuroscience Letters 1989 ; 106 : 49 - 54 . 17 Rinne JO , Rummukainen J , Paljarvi L , Sako E , Molsa P , Rinne UK . Neuronal loss in the substantia nigra in patients with Alzheimer ' s disease and Parkinson ' s disease in relation to extrapyramidal symptoms and dementia . In : Iqbal K , Wisniewski HM , Winblad B , eds . Alzheimer ' s disease and related disorders . New York : Alan R Liss Inc , 1989 . 18 Morris JC , Drazner M , Fulling K , Grant EA , Goldring J . Clinical and pathological aspects of parkinsonism in Alzheimer ' s disease . Arch Neurol 1989 ; 46 : 651 - 7 . 19 Tyrrell PJ , Rossor MN . Extrapyramidal signs in dementia of the Alzheimer type . Lancet 1989 ; ii : 920 . 20 Daniel SD , Lees AJ . Neuropathological features of Alzhei - mer ' s disease in non - demented parkinsonian patients . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1991 ; 54 : 972 - 5 . 21 Alvord EC Jr , Forno LS , Kusska JA , Kauffman RJ , Rhodes JS , Goetowski CR . The pathology of parkinsonism : a comparison of degenerations in cerebral cortex and brainstem . In : McDowell FH , Barbeau A , eds . Advances in neurology . Vol 5 . New York : Raven Press , 1974 : 175 - 93 . 184 group . bmj . com on May 10 , 2017 - Published by http : / / jnnp . bmj . com / Downloaded from study of 100 cases . Parkinson ' s disease : a clinico - pathological Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of idiopathic A J Hughes , S E Daniel , L Kilford and A J Lees doi : 10 . 1136 / jnnp . 55 . 3 . 181 1992 55 : 181 - 184 J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry http : / / jnnp . bmj . com / content / 55 / 3 / 181 Updated information and services can be found at : These include : service Email alerting box at the top right corner of the online article . Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article . Sign up in the Notes http : / / group . bmj . com / group / rights - licensing / permissions To request permissions go to : http : / / journals . bmj . com / cgi / reprintform To order reprints go to : http : / / group . bmj . com / subscribe / To subscribe to BMJ go to : group . bmj . com on May 10 , 2017 - Published by http : / / jnnp . bmj . com / Downloaded from