Enacted virtual partnerships Imbrications of representations of boundary artifacts and cloud services Demosthenes Akoumianakis , George Ktistakis , Giannis Milolidakis , Konstantinos Michailidis Department of Applied Informatics & Multimedia Technological Education Institution of Crete ( TEI - C ) Heraklion , Crete , Greece da @ epp . teicrete . gr ; ktistak @ gmail . com ; milolidakis @ gmail . com ; mikonprog @ yahoo . gr Abstract — This paper examines the mechanics and the implications of remediated practices in the context of virtual cross - organizational collaboration . Our treatment of the issue is informed by a case study aiming to assess how imbrications of representations hosted by different social media enable or constrain peer co - engagement of members in a virtual partnership . To this effect , we draw upon theories of agency and artifacts to anchor the concept of imbrication of representations and then we describe a prototypical platform intended to facilitate distributed organizing in an organic farming virtual partnership . Key property of this platform is the improved capability for coordinated virtual work attained through the blending of computer - mediated boundary artifacts and generic cloud services . Keywords - Imbrication of representations , Virtual partnership , Boundary artifacts , Cloud services I . I NTRODUCTION Virtuality is increasingly catalyzing activities at different levels , including individual , group and organizational teams . Although , there are several scholarships acknowledging the new status quo , they recognize different set of phenomena and adopt different lenses to seek for detailed insights . In most cases however , one of the recurrent themes of concern is that of boundary spanning ( [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] ) . Boundaries are mostly conceived as static demarcations that separate individuals working together , such as geography , time zones or organizational and national boundaries [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 7 ] [ 12 ] . Furthermore , in most cases empirical evidence suggests ( implicitly ) that boundaries are always problematic for individuals and teams [ 14 ] . Contrasting these perspectives , recent works are skeptical of both the static nature of boundaries and their qualification as problematic . For instance , Leonardi [ 6 ] but also Watson - Manheim et al . [ 14 ] , posit that people often adapt to working across boundaries and learn to do so effectively and efficiently . In terms of system design , boundaries and boundary spanning tactics remain challenging issues . This is witnessed in recent works towards e - infrastructures and inter - organizational information systems where it is convincingly argued that established management information systems ( MIS ) lack the capacity to cross over organizational borders [ 8 ] [ 10 ] . In response to the critiques , the MIS scholarship approaches boundary crossing through different lenses . One lens stems from concepts such as adaptation [ 11 ] , standardization [ 9 ] , or integration of MIS functions at various levels [ 22 ] . Another lens concentrates on advancing the conception of and engineering grounds for ‘inter - organizational information systems - IOISs’ [ 15 ] [ 16 ] as means for standardizing , adapting and / or integrating MIS functions across different organizations . Yet another theoretical lens is grounded on tactics for crossing knowledge boundaries [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] , social worlds [ 13 ] and virtual settings [ 1 ] . In most cases , the types of MIS considered include large scale deployments of ERPs , CRMs and other technologies typically referred to as ‘best - practice’ packages [ 17 ] . Then , crossing or working around boundaries is typically assessed in relation to tailoring and re - organizing components of the ‘best - practice’ package to suit the work practices of organizations or vice versa . The results of these efforts on understanding boundaries and their effects on practice are admittedly far from consistent or convincing . One explanation may be due to an implicit assumption characterizing these works and which is rooted in a conception of practice as ‘contained’ within the system and the user community , thus ‘imposed’ upon organizations . More recent works criticize this view at several fronts . For instance , it is claimed that ‘best - practice’ solutions suffer from ‘lock - in’ effects that may constrain either the emergence of new fields of expertise [ 7 ] , or the evolution of novel practices within a single or across organizational borders [ 18 ] , or the transition to ecologies of e - Infrastructures [ 19 ] . The present research approaches cross - organization virtual collaboration through a different line of thinking . Our normative perspective is grounded on a ‘socio - material’ view of technology , and in particular the notion of imbrications of representations . According to [ 6 ] , imbrication refers to the arrangement of distinct elements in overlapping patterns so that they function interdependently . In this paper , our objectives are to layout the principles underlying the imbrication of digital representations of different type , scope and purpose , and assess the extent to which they enable or constrain novel cyber - formations such as virtual partnerships . The paper is structured as follows . The next section discusses the theoretical ground and motivates the problem at hand . Then , we untangle key dimensions in the study of boundary crossing collaboration and the means through which it is achieved . This helps us to advance a theoretical scaffold for imbricating representations that afford the enactment of business oriented virtual partnerships . Using this framework , we then discuss recent experience in an on - going research and development effort aiming to remediate practices in a regional organic farming alliance along the lines suggested by our theoretical scaffold . II . T HEORETICAL B ACKROUND AND R ESEARCH F OCUS The present research builds on two interrelated literatures . The first relates to collaborative virtual work and the ( digital ) representations that enable or constrain crossing of boundaries . The second stream of research is concerned with the material agency as embedded in technologies to determine their affordances for boundary spanning in virtual settings . Following the review of related works , this section consolidates key constructs and outlines the research focus of the present work . A . Collaboration , representations and boundary spanning There have been various attempts at qualifying the constituent properties of team work . Cohen and Bailey [ 20 ] highlight unity of purpose , the team’s identity as a social structure and the members’ shared responsibility for outcomes , when stating “A team is a collection of individuals who are interdependent in their tasks , who share responsibility for outcomes , who see themselves and who are seen by others as an intact social entity embedded in one or more larger social systems , and who manage their relationship across organizational boundaries . ” ( p . 241 ) . It can be argued that this definition is general enough to capture traditional and virtual teams as well as to exclude ad hoc formations of groups that meet occasionally , for a very limited period of time and with no clear allocation of responsibilities [ 21 ] . Other scholars emphasize the technological means through which geographically , organizationally and / or time dispersed team members are brought together to negotiate the accomplishment of meaningful work [ 23 ] . These conceptions of virtual team work make no attempt to characterize knowledge management processes and intrinsic properties of collaborating therein such as shared practices , emergent social structures , or otherwise enacted capabilities . Recently and in an effort to improve theorizing on the IT artifact in the course of virtual work , Bailey and colleagues [ 24 ] distinguish between digitization and virtuality and concentrate on what the technology actually makes virtual . According to the authors , digitization implicates computer - based representations of physical phenomena , while virtuality occurs when digital representations stand for , and in some cases completely substitute for , the physical objects , processes , or people they represent . This line of argumentation makes explicit the need to understand virtual collaborative work ( i . e . , human agency ) in relation to specific technologies , the representations they employee and their affordances ( i . e . , material agency ) . Attempting to untangle the role of representations in virtual work , early studies on communities of practice ( CoP ) [ 25 ] , [ 26 ] offer useful insights . Specifically , representations make explicit the relationship between knowledge and practice , as representations invite certain practices and codify knowledge . Furthermore , representations provoke thinking on innovative uses of IT that leads to a virtualization of the operations of CoP [ 27 ] , internet - based inter - organizational partnerships for product development [ 28 ] as well as interesting variations of the concept of CoP such as ‘best practice’ networks and ‘collectivities of practice’ . In inter - organizational settings where practice is determined by social / organizational norms , representations are frequently used to anchor the boundary spanning behavior of partners . Early works by Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) scholars conceived of boundary spanning in relation to boundary objects [ 13 ] . Subsequent research points to the need for extending CSCW inquiries beyond the information processing properties of boundary objects [ 29 ] to account for the wider context in which these artifacts operate . At core , these efforts are rooted in the quest to understand the factors that anchor the intelligibility of boundary artifacts , thus making it easier to discern what boundaries are dissolved or re - located . MIS and organizational science scholarships have also been concerned with boundaries and boundary spanning . Their focus is on knowledge boundaries and the organizational tactics instituted or invented to facilitate knowledge sharing through boundary spanning [ 7 ] , [ 12 ] . Carlile’s [ 2 ] analysis of knowledge transfer specifies three types of boundaries , namely syntactic ( which require only the transfer of knowledge , the meaning of that knowledge is clear to both parties ) , semantic ( which require that knowledge be translated as well as transferred because its meaning is not universally understood ) , and pragmatic boundaries ( which further require that knowledge be transformed among actors ) . B . Embeddedness , linguistic vocabularies and material agency The works presented earlier , although useful in pointing out the arti - factual properties of technology in virtual work , lack detailed treatments of the technological inscriptions that enable or constrain certain capacities . Phrased differently , there is a compelling need for a shift away from a view of technology as ‘black box’ and towards an analysis of the features that establish the technologies’ material agency [ 24 ] . A key issue in this endeavor relates to what representations and artifacts become embedded in technology and how such embeddedness implicates new social practices . Let us briefly consider social presence and the way in which it is manifested in Web 2 . 0 applications and services through the notion of user profile . User profiles are pre - requisites for connectivity , as no connection is possible without building an account . On the other hand , connectivity is enacted with respect to certain artifacts such as videos , photos , narratives , etc . , in specific ways determined by and large the way these artifacts are embedded in technologies such as YouTube , Twitter , Facebook , LinkedIn , etc . It can therefore be argued that Web 2 . 0 - enabled social participation practices have grown to rely upon a shared macro - context that entails provisions for user profiles , communication , opinion expression , sharing user - generated content , searching and finding peers , etc . At micro - level social participation is differentiated by intrinsic properties of artifacts and representation - specific means . Thus , it is possible to differentiate contact - based ad hoc connections in Facebook , Twitter and Flickr from more professional and business connections in LinkedIn . This leads to the conclusion that human connectivity and social participation are enacted relative to the material agency inscribed into these systems through embedded micro - level linguistic conventions . C . Consolidation and research focus In light of the above and given the focus of the present research on enacted virtual partnerships in the organic farming sector , our claim is two - fold . Firstly , such cyber - formations emerge in practice through the recurrent co - engagement of partners in a designated linguistic vocabulary ; thus designing the virtual partnership becomes synonymous to designing the linguistic vocabulary to allow partners to recurrently co - engage in practice . Secondly , the linguistic vocabulary for connectivity in organic farming can be developed by imbricating representations appropriate for different purposes . To understand the notion of imbrication , it is useful to recall Bailey et al . ’s [ 24 ] classification of virtual work . The authors argue that virtual work can be broadly classified as operations with or on , through , or within representations . It is also possible for more than one type of activities to be involved in any given scenario . Thus , work on a representation A ( i . e . , a calendar ) may be followed or augmented by a representation B ( i . e . , a photo standing for an activity in the field ) , which in turn may trigger a representation C ( e . g . , dialogue exchanges between partners ) . If these activities are delegated to different material agents such as for instance Google Calendar , Flickr and Disqus , then enacted connectivity is the result of a digital assemblage that enables work on , with , through or within representations . This drives the notion of imbrications of representations ( see Figure 1 ) . The figure reveals not only the incremental improvement as a result of certain affordances , but also the kind of embedded agency that stems from the design of transformative technologies . It also helps to anchor the range of possible transformations meaningful to the practice of a virtual partnership . We will return to this issue in the following section , where we study the specific case of regional organic farming . Figure 1 : Theoretical scaffold for imbrications III . I MBRICATIONS & V IRTUAL P ARTNERSHIPS Bio - DRASIS aims to investigate current impediments to and pilot mechanisms for computer - mediated collaboration and networking in the sector of organic agricultural production . As currently organized regional organic farming is a strongly regulated sector that is characterized by the actors’ commitment to quality , high concentration of effort , increased production cost and limited capacity to reach the wider consumer base effectively and efficiently . Due to these , but also other exogenous factors and unforeseen circumstances ( e . g . , weather conditions ) , organic farming is typically conceived of as an endeavor associated with high risk . To reduce such risk , producers seek to combine efforts and liaise with intermediaries such as specialists , certification experts and commerce - based outlets ( retail or wholesale grocery stores ) in search of support in all stages involved in organic farming , from planning to marketing . This makes organic farming a boundary spanning activity ( i . e . , an endeavor that crosses several social worlds ) , that is heavily reliant upon established ties and the actors’ willingness to collaborate and network . Typically , such collaboration and networking materializes as recurrent co - engagement in small - scale partnership , leading members to incrementally develop social bonds and sustain togetherness in the medium to long run . Emerging web - based technologies , new media and social networking services can catalyze the way in which organic farming is conducted provided that they are aligned to serve specific purposes . Nevertheless , this is not always straight forward as these technologies rely on different foundational premises and employ different representations . In order to test our theoretical scaffold for imbrications , we are envisioning a reference scenario which is grounded on the synergistic use of different technology genres . The specific scenario as outlined in Figure 2 aims to highlight both the shortcomings in existing practices that create the need for change in technology as well as the new technological affordances that set the scene for changes in routines . The central theme in this scenario is an envisaged infrastructure for ( a ) managing digital traces of a broad range of daily / periodic organic farming activities and products ; ( b ) assembling such digital traces so as to make them transparent , accountable and tailorable to the requirements of different actors e . g . , producers , domain experts , certification specialists , intermediaries and consumers . The scenario foresees a staged workflow according to which a farmer’s situated and individual practice is progressively turned into collective agency through engaging representations that span boundaries of time , place and knowledge / competences . The notation used to highlight the transitions from one stage to another aims to pinpoint imbrications that drive changes in routines as well as changes in human and material agencies . As a result , the scenario depicts an evolutionary process whereby enactment of human agency in relation to established routines is followed by change in technology and new affordances . This iterative refinement leads to the conception of enacted virtual partnerships through imbrications of representations and different social media . A . Analysis of current practices Deciding on the type and mix of appropriate representation to be employed requires detailed analysis of the objects of practice that proliferate in established routines and methods of work . Through an elaborate ethnographic field study , interviews and in situ analysis of the material objects of practice , we identified three broad types of artifacts predominating in organic farming : ( a ) paper - based forms and documents such as diaries and farming books ; ( b ) a variety of scheduling artifacts ; and ( c ) samples of quality indicators typically generated either by dedicated devices installed in - house or compiled by external parties . In addition , established technologies such as spreadsheets , databases , file management and word processing software were extensively used to codify data , workflows , farming incidents and periodic progress . Finally , it was also observed that a large volume of potentially useful information is codified only in human minds and exchanged as needed , either through face - to - face communication , telephone - based dialogue , advice and informal argumentation . Such information , if codified and made persistent , would be of value to multiple parties , while also providing reach insights on historical and situational data . In light of the above and the detailed analysis of data , incidents and processes , we concluded that the imbrication to be targeted is the one leading to improved human agency for ‘porting and liaising with peers’ ( see Figure 2 ) . Consequently , the design challenge entails remediation of practices to facilitate collaborative virtual engagements through imbrications of appropriate representations ( relevant to our scenario ) . Figure 2 : Reference scenario and imbrications involved B . Devising and designing digital representations In order to devise appropriate representations that would suit the design goal , an arti - factual analysis was undertaken highlighting the range of possibilities and the available technological offerings . Through iterative assessments , it was decided to experiment with three categories of generic digital objects , namely : ( a ) the calendar for coordinating activities ; ( b ) dialogue acts for capturing discussions and informal argumentation ; and ( c ) photos and videos for anchoring local and situated practices and making them available either for argumentation , or as supporting evidence of an activity or field incident . In terms of implementation strategy , and following targeted prototyping efforts to assess maturity of different platforms and services , the following commitments were made . Google’s Calendar application could provide the baseline for coordination , planning and guiding . The online argumentation / dialogue platform Disqus could provide the means to foster online commenting and discussions on selected features / objects of the calendar . As for photo - sharing , the Flickr service was favored as other candidates such as Instagram lacked ( at the time ) in maturity of the supporting API . In each case suitable extensions should be introduced to facilitate the imbrications of the representations embedded in each tool category . In light of the above , the basic architectural pattern implemented is depicted in Figure 3 . Figure 3 : Architectural pattern for imbrications C . The enacted virtual partnersgip Figure 4 presents instances of the imbrications of the three representations as embedded in a single application . Users ( in different roles ) can create new events and anchor their linguistic intention by designating their type e . g . , ‘argumentation’ , ‘announcement’ , ‘notification’ , etc . Each type appropriates the bridge with the target social networking service , thus affording specific interactions . Accordingly , remote participants can engage in dialogue , post comments and share photos of their recent activities in the field . The figure can be interpreted in the context of a reference scenario according to which a ‘production coordinator’ creates an event for argumentation , thereby inviting peers to express opinion and negotiate on the specific issue . This is done by follow up replies that create announcement or notification events that reveal peer activities during a certain period ( by sharing photos , narratives or videos ) . Finally , it is important to notice that the scenario assumes a single Google Calendar acting as boundary artifact across social worlds and social networking services . From the preceding informal description , it becomes evident that the remediated practice entails transformation of a collection of human and material agencies ( i . e . , in the conventional setting ) to a ( new ) digital assemblage of agencies meaningful through the imbrication of different representations ( e . g . , the calendar as coordination artifact , the Disqus online commenting service , the Flickr photo sharing service , etc . ) . Such a digital assemblage is a form of an enacted partnership that creates new opportunities for all parties involved . Figure 4 : An instance of the imbrication of representations IV . D ISCUSION AND C ONCLUDING R EMARKS The present research re - orients organic farming towards a digital practice through imbrications of digital representations . Although the work is in its early stages , it points to some prominent issues . First of all , it is evident that switching medium produces discontinuities in the smooth flow of familiar routines . As a result , practitioners’ perceptions and understandings of what they do and how they do it seem to be displaced . However , the new medium creates opportunities for novel things to happen in a new space of possibilities . Thus , certain features of the domain of practice not visible or conceivable in the traditional medium , are now made visible and easily accessible . Due to this interplay between discontinuity and novelty , practitioners re - orient their activities so as to engage in and capitalize upon virtual work and collaborative engagements . Secondly , preliminary findings indicate that no single representation suffices for all users or purposes . As different media ( e . g . , text , image or video ) exhibit different affordances , the design challenge amounts to ( a ) embedding an appropriate mix of flexible representations ( b ) inscribing imbrications of representations to smooth out discontinuities in practice . In this manner , each representation zooms - in on some selected elements of practice which become the focus of attention , while others are ignored or pushed into the background . Then , imbrication of representations dissolves ambiguities and re - orients the users’ practice . A final issue relates to computational context and the way it determines enacted human agency . Our case reveals how widely used representations ( e . g . , calendar , photos , dialog ) , when migrated to the cloud , enable peer collectivity through micro - negotiations on a variety of thematic topics . Such new collectivities can then be used to frame collaboration and virtual work . To this end , further work is needed to solicit empirical evidence for refining the scenario and to extend the cloud infrastructure to accommodate services for digital trace data management . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This research has been co - financed by the European Union ( European Social Fund – ESF ) and Greek national funds through the Operational Program " Education and Lifelong Learning " of the National Strategic Reference Framework ( NSRF ) - Research Funding Program : ARCHIMEDES III " Investing in knowledge society through the European Social Fund " . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] S . B . Butler , and X . Wand , “The Cross - Purposes of Cross - Posting : Boundary Reshaping Behavior in Online Discussion Communities” , Information Systems Research , 23 ( 3 ) , pp . 993 - 1010 , 2012 . [ 2 ] P . R . Carlile , “A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and Boundaries : Boundary Objects in New Product Development , ” Organization Science , 13 ( 4 ) , pp . 442 - 455 , 2002 . [ 3 ] P . R . Carlile , “Transferring , Translating , and Transforming : An Integrative Framework for Managing Knowledge Across Boundaries , ” Organization Science , 15 ( 5 ) , pp . 555 - 568 , 2004 . [ 4 ] J . Cummings , J . A . Espinosa , and C . Pickering , C . “Crossing Spatial and Temporal Boundaries in Globally Distributed Projects : A Relational Model of Coordination Delay” , Information Systems Research , 20 ( 3 ) , pp . 420 - 439 , 2009 . [ 5 ] J . A . Espinosa , J . M . Cummings , J . N . Wilson , and B . M . Pearce , “Team Boundary Issues Across Multiple Global Firms” , Journal of Management Information Systems , 19 ( 4 ) , pp . 157 - 190 , 2003 . [ 6 ] P . M . Leonardy , “When flexible routines meet flexible technologies : Affodance , constraint and the imbrication of human and material agencies , ” MIS Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) , pp . 147 - 167 , 2011 . [ 7 ] N . Levina , and E . Vaast , “The Emergence of Boundary Spanning Competence in Practice : Implications for Implementation and Use of Information Systems , ” MIS Quarterly , 29 ( 2 ) , 335 - 363 , 2005 . [ 8 ] M . L . Markus , “Paradigm Shifts - Business and Business / Systems Integration , ” Communications of AIS , 4 ( 10 ) , 2000 . [ 9 ] M . L . Markus , C . W . Steinfield , T . R . Wigand , and G . Minton , “Industry - wide IS standardization as collective action : The U . S . residential mortgage industry , ” MIS Quarterly , 30 , pp . 439 - 465 , 2006 . [ 10 ] E . Monteiro , N . Pollock , O . Hanseth , and R . Williams , R . “From Artefacts to Infrastructures , ” CSCW Journal , in print 2012 . [ 11 ] A . Majchrzak , E . R . Rice , A . Malhotra , N . King , and B . Sulin , “Technology adaptation : Case of a computer - supported inter - organizational virtual team , ” MIS Quarterly , 24 , pp . 569 - 600 , 2000 . [ 12 ] S . D . Pawlowski , and D . Robey , “Bridging User Organizations : Knowledge Brokering and the Work of Information Technology Professionals , ” MIS Quarterly , 28 ( 4 ) , pp . 645 - 672 , 2004 . [ 13 ] S . L . Star , and J . Griesemer , “Institutional ecology , ' translations ' and boundary objects : Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley ' s museum of vertebrate zoology , ” Social Studies of Science , 19 , 387 - 420 , 1989 . [ 14 ] M - B . Watson - Manheim , M . K . Chudoba , and K . Crowston , “Perceived discontinuities and constructed continuities in virtual work , ” Information Systems Journal , 22 , pp . 29 – 52 , 2012 [ 15 ] V . Choudhury , “Strategic Choices in the Development of Inter - organizational Information Systems , ” Information Systems Research 8 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 - 24 , 1997 . [ 16 ] S . Kurnia , S . , and R . B . Johnston , “The Need for a processual view of Inter - organizational systems adoption , ” Journal of Strategic Information Systems 9 , pp . 295 - 319 , 2000 . [ 17 ] E . Wagner , E . , and S . Newell , “‘Best’ for whom ? The tension between ‘best practice’ ERP packages and diverse epistemic cultures in a university context , ” J . of Str . Inf . Sys . , 13 ( 4 ) , pp . 305 – 328 , 2004 . [ 18 ] M . Marabelli , and S . Newell , “Knowledge risks in organizational networks : The practice perspective , ” J . Str . Inf . Sys . , 21 , pp . 18 – 30 , 2012 . [ 19 ] V . Hepsø , E . Monteiro , and H . K . Rolland , “Ecologies of e - Infrastructures , ” Journal of the Ass . for IS , 10 , pp . 430 - 446 , 2009 . [ 20 ] S . Cohen , and E . Bailey , E . ‘‘What makes groups work : Group effectiveness research from the shop floor to the executive suite , ’’ Journal of Management , 23 , pp . 239 - 290 , 1997 . [ 21 ] A . Powell , G . Piccoli , and B . Ives , B . , “Virtual Teams : A Review of Current Literature and Directions for Future Research , ” The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems , 35 ( 1 ) , pp . 6 - 36 , 2004 . [ 22 ] O . Volkoff , M . D . Strong , and B . M . Elmes , “Understanding enterprise systems - enabled integration , ” European Journal of Information Systems , 14 ( 2 ) , pp . 110 - 120 , 2005 . [ 23 ] S . Jarvenpaa , and D . Leidner , D . “Communication & Trust in Global Virtual Teams , ” Organization Science , 10 ( 6 ) , pp . 791 - 815 , 1999 . [ 24 ] E . D . Bailey , M . P . Leonardi , and R . S . Barley , R . S . “The Lure of the Virtual , ” Organization Science , 23 ( 5 ) , pp . 1485 - 1504 , 2012 . [ 25 ] E . Wenger , and W . M . Snyder , “Communities of Practice : The organizational frontier , ” Harvard Business Review , pp . 139 - 145 , 2000 . [ 26 ] J . S . Brown , and P . Duguid , “Organizational Learning & Communities of Practice : Toward a Unified View of Working , Learning , and Innovation , ” Knowledge & Communities , 2 ( 1 ) , pp . 40 - 57 , 1991 . [ 27 ] D . Akoumianakis , D . , “Electronic community factories : The model and its application in the tourism sector , ” Electronic Commerce Research 10 ( 1 ) , pp . 43 - 81 , 2010 . [ 28 ] E - M Kern , and W . Kersten , “Framework for internet - supported inter - organizational product development collaboration , ” Journal of Enterprise Information Management , 20 ( 5 ) , pp . 562 - 577 , 2007 . [ 29 ] W . G . Lutters , and M . S . Ackerman , “Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support , ” CSCW Journal , 16 ( 3 ) , pp . 341 – 372 , 2007 .