Using Prototypes to Leverage Knowledge in Product Development : Examples from the Automotive Industry Jorgen A . B . Erichsen Department of Engineering Design and Materials Norwegian University of Science and Technology ( NTNU ) Trondheim , Norway jorgen . erichsen @ ntnu . no Andreas Lyder Pedersen Department of Engineering Design and Materials Norwegian University of Science and Technology ( NTNU ) Trondheim , Norway andrealp @ stud . ntnu . no Martin Steinert Department of Engineering Design and Materials Norwegian University of Science and Technology ( NTNU ) Trondheim , Norway martin . steinert @ ntnu . no Torgeir Welo Department of Engineering Design and Materials Norwegian University of Science and Technology ( NTNU ) Trondheim , Norway torgeir . welo @ ntnu . no Abstract — This article is rooted in the automotive industry as starting point , and discusses the topic of leveraging tacit knowledge through prototypes . The aim of this study is to make the case of using reflective and affirmative prototypes for knowledge creating and transferal in the product development process . After providing an overview on learning and knowledge , the Socialization , Externalization , Combination and Internalization ( SECI ) model is discussed in detail , with a clear distinction between tacit and explicit knowledge . Based on this model , we propose a framework of using said reflective and affirmative prototypes in an external vs . internal learning / knowledge capturing and transferal setting . Rounded by two case examples from the automotive industry we end by identifying the emergent research questions and areas . Using prototypes and prototyping may hold a monumental potential to better capture and transfer knowledge in product development , thus leveraging existing integration events in engineering as a basis for knowledge transformation . Keywords — knowledge transfer ; internal reflective prototypes ; prototyping ; tacit knowledge ; integration events ; product development ; automotive engineering I . I NTRODUCTION AND B ACKGROUND In this paper , we argue for increased usage of reflective and affirmative prototypes for knowledge creating and transferal in the product development ( PD ) process . This paper attempts to make two literature contributions . The first is to provide a mapping of relevant literature on knowledge in PD . This section includes an overview of select topics , including organizational and individual knowledge , in addition to some current practices on knowledge transfer . A brief introduction to learning mechanisms is given , with integration events and knowledge owners as key aspects for lean product development in systems engineering . Furthermore , a synthesis on the Socialization , Externalization , Combination and Internalization ( SECI ) model [ 1 ] is presented , with its relation to tacit and explicit knowledge . The second contribution is to provide a short overview of prototypes and prototyping , and their relation to knowledge transformation processes in PD . This paper proposes a model of four prototyping categories , with each aspect of the model briefly explained with examples . Examples on contextual internal , reflective prototypes from real - world settings are provided , and their relation to knowledge acquisition and transfer is emphasized . Lastly , the possibilities within said research space are presented , with a coarse mapping of interesting topics that need further investigation . The automotive industry is subject to an immense pressure to develop new products ever faster due to steadily increasing competitive pressure . Being an industry in constant evolution , with increasing focus on both reducing lead times and emphasis on quality , a lot of research is targeting aspects of knowledge and the mechanisms of increased learning in new PD . For example , knowledge - based development has been established as a viable method [ 2 ] for extracting the base points of Toyota’s PD process [ 3 ] . In this paper , we will focus onto knowledge , its creation and its transfer in a PD organization . In the automotive industry , making mistakes may cost you dearly . With ( relatively ) low cycle times , the costs of making mistakes in the later stages of PD are immense , having major implications further down the value stream . Also , automakers cannot develop knowledge from scratch every time they start new projects . Thus they aim to keep a large base of standardization of parts and processes within a product - technology platform to ease the burden on the PD team ( s ) . Hence , managing and controlling the knowledge within the company becomes an important issue . For our research , we have access to several industrial liaisons , including a multinational automotive tier 1 / 2 supplier company . Many of our insights and proposed discussion points are gathered from case - examples , semi - structured interviews and conversations with said liaisons [ 4 ] . II . T HEORY : K NOWLEDGE IN P RODUCT D EVELOPMENT There are numerous definitions of knowledge provided in the literature [ 5 ] . Wisdom and knowledge are differentiated by [ 6 ] , defining wisdom as evaluated understanding ( “know - why” ) and knowledge as application of data and information ( “know - how” ) . Reference [ 7 ] argues that knowledge can be divided into individual and organizational knowledge . Organizational knowledge is defined as the sum of what is learned , perceived , experienced or discovered ( by individuals ) during a project ( in the organization ) . Individual knowledge has three main categories ; experience - based , information - based and personal knowledge [ 8 ] . Interactions of individuals are the main ingredient of organizational knowledge , and that this knowledge exists between ( and not within ) individuals [ 9 ] . A . Defining Integration Events and Knowledge Owners Most companies use a stage gate process in PD . However , stage gate is an investment - based governance process . Hence there is a call for more event - driven approaches for improved organizational learning as this aspect becomes increasingly important in competitive consumer businesses . One of the more recent practices is the use of so - called ‘ integration events ’ [ 10 ] . These events are reported to ensure better insights and information while preserving other know - hows , providing a basis for transforming project knowledge into organizational learning . Integration events are ‘learning cycle gates’ where informal knowledge is formalized ( made explicit ) , and formal knowledge is interpreted . When these events are systematically applied , they become learning loops [ 11 ] . Hence , the key to organizational learning is in the mutual exchange of knowledge between the individuals and the organization . Fig . 1 - Learning Mechanisms in Product Development , adopted from [ 11 ] . As a catalyst for this exchange of knowledge , many companies deploy key experts or learning facilitators . These are engineers and so - called ‘ knowledge owners ’ within each project , providing organizational grounding , previous insights and know - how for the PD team . For example , Toyota is well - known for using functional managers to employ existing knowledge within projects , and chief engineers to challenge the existing standard by being the customer representative [ 3 ] . As a result of being part of the development team , these knowledge owners gain insights and experience – thus contributing to organizational learning as long as they are part of the ongoing projects . In ( Fig . 1 ) , adapted from [ 11 ] and [ 12 ] , three different types of learning loops within the PD knowledge acquisition processes are illustrated . B . Tacit and Explicit Knowledge in PD Closely linked to organizational knowledge , is the differentiation between tacit and explicit knowledge . Explicit ( i . e . formal ) knowledge , learning loop one , includes information - based , fact - based [ 13 ] learnings that are summarized in knowledge artifacts [ 14 ] . An example of knowledge artifacts within the automotive industry is the use of A3s , described by [ 3 ] and [ 15 ] . Tacit ( i . e . informal ) knowledge , learning loops two and three , is the know - how , the craft , the skill and learnings of the product engineering individuals [ 16 ] . Tacit knowledge is hard to formalize and to make explicit , as this kind of knowledge is stored within interactions , experiences , instances and discoveries . We argue that one key dimension of tacit knowledge is the interactions with ( and use of ) objects and experiences in the product engineering processes , often referred to as prototypes in one form or another . C . The SECI - model and Transfer of Knowledge in PD In [ 1 ] , the prevalent model for dynamic knowledge creation has been proposed . Here , the SECI process ( Fig . 2 ) is presented , explaining the enhancement of knowledge creation through conversion of tacit and explicit knowledge . The SECI process spirals through four stages , including socialization , externalization , combination and internalization . The model further proposes certain knowledge assets as facilitators of knowledge creation . Knowledge assets are categorized as experiential , conceptual , systemic and routine . This model has gained major traction , and a study by [ 17 ] concludes conceptual knowledge assets ( i . e . early stage PD insights ) to have the most effect on knowledge creation . The socialization ( tacit - to - tacit ) , internalization ( explicit - to - tacit ) and externalization ( tacit - to - explicit ) stages of the SECI process describe the setting of tacit knowledge creation and transfer in development teams and organizations . Socialization in the context of transferring tacit knowledge includes creating a work environment which encourages understanding of skills and expertise through practice and demonstrations , while internalization includes conducting experiments , sharing results , and facilitating prototyping as a means of knowledge acquisition [ 1 ] . The study conducted in [ 17 ] concludes conceptual knowledge assets to be the most efficient tool in facilitating internalization and externalization . Conceptual knowledge assets are defined as “knowledge articulated through images , symbols and language” [ 1 ] – and although not explicitly identified in the definition – it can be argued that prototyping is encompassed by the term conceptual knowledge assets . D . A Proposed Model of Prototyping Categories In general , prototypes are defined as “A n approximation of the product along one or more dimensions of interest” [ 18 ] , thus including both physical and non - physical models , e . g . sketches , mathematical models simulations , test components , and fully functional preproduction versions of the concept [ 19 ] . Further , prototyping is defined as the process of developing such an approximation of the product [ 18 ] . Fig . 2 The SECI model , with highlighted areas of interest [ 1 ] . Fig . 3 A proposed model of four prototyping categories . Taking a broad perspective , we propose that prototypes and prototyping may be divided in a two - by - two metric ( Fig . 3 ) . On the first axis , the intent ( of the prototype ) can be split into two sub - categories ; “reflective” and “ affirmative ” . On the second axis , inspired by [ 20 ] , the target audience is split into “internal” and “external” . By using this two - by - two metric , we map four different prototyping categories . These four are : 1 ) External , affirmative prototypes : These prototypes display an approximation of a nearly finished pre - production model , and are typically the prototypes presented for validation or showcasing purposes , or namely alpha / beta prototypes [ 21 ] . Both appearance and relative functionality is high , and these prototypes are often used for marketing or external validation ( e . g . New Car Assessment Programme ( NCAP ) tests ) etc . 2 ) Internal , affirmative prototypes : These prototypes are focused in terms of function , and can be subject to function , reliability and manufacturability testing . Examples of these prototypes are the combination of subsystems , fatigue testing of a conceptual prototype or a project milestone to validate the progression of the team . These prototypes are rarely shown to external audiences . 3 ) External , reflective prototypes : These prototypes are often concepts displayed to external sources for feedback in early stage development . The response and reaction gathered from observing a user interacting with a prototype expressing the basic functionality of a concept can provide useful insights and be a time - saver . 4 ) Internal , reflective prototypes : These are the prototypes the PD team uses to learn internally and conceptualize their ideas . Internal reflective prototypes are learning tools . Their purpose is conceptualizing ideas , and might focus on certain functionalities or suggest appearance of a product concept [ 22 ] . Internal , reflective prototypes are used for learning , enabling experiences and insights through interactions . Generally , these prototypes are low fidelity [ 20 ] , and often thrown out after the projects are finished . The insights , experiences , interactions and learnings , created by means of the internal , reflective prototypes lay the foundation for the tacit knowledge accumulated within the PD team . How this knowledge is captured , stored and utilized , however , is not well described in the literature . In [ 23 ] , Simon identifies a gap between professional knowledge and real world practice . The foundation of a “science of design” is drawn up , applying methods of optimization from statistical decision theory . He thus lays the basis for a scientific approach of treating knowledge . This is criticized in [ 24 ] by Schön for its presumption of technical rationality . He argues instead that the real challenge lies not in the treatment of well - formed / modeled requirements , but in the extraction of these , often unknown , requirements from real - world situations . The practical unknown unknowns are the core challenge . In [ 25 ] , he thus proposes reflective iteration rounds as the learning tool with the biggest potential . Schön also points out that creation / translation of explicit knowledge , is a major difficulty . Together , Simon and Schön thus represent the knowledge creation spiral in the SECI model . III . E XAMPLES : K NOWLEDGE T RANSFERED FROM P ROTOTYPES In the following sections , we attempt to exemplify the internal , reflective prototypes by providing findings from two case studies . Both cases come from an automotive concept setting at Stanford University , with the prior being the development of a multi - modular vehicular research platform , and the latter being a dynamic hunter - gatherer approach [ 26 ] to the future autonomous driving experience . A . Case I : Real Industry Case with Reference Collaborative efforts between the Dynamic Design Laboratory [ 27 ] and Product Realization Laboratory [ 28 ] at Stanford University to create a steer - by - wire prototype . This project , later dubbed as the ‘ P1 ’ , was an electric vehicle with independent rear - wheel drive , and also independent left and right steering mechanisms . This car was first done as a one - off to test steering mechanism redundancy , independent torque control , maximize handling performance and minimize tire wear , but the project was later extended in another project , dubbed the ‘X1’ . As the P1 was first built as a research vehicle , the team had several insights as to how to improve this setup for further Fig . 4 An early wooden prototype of the ‘X1 Experimental Vehicle’ . Fig . 5 Finished ‘ X1 Experimental Vehicle ’ at Stanford University . testing when building the X1 . Hence , the X1 was built to be modular , rather than fixed , with different testing modules and systems fitting together on a single test platform . During the early stages of the X1 project ( Fig . 5 ) , the team discovered that simple design decisions on single aspects of the car altered a vast amount of other aspects , making the planning of everything ( i . e . in SECI - terms : both externalization and internalization ) before building a prototype a very difficult task . Indeed , a CAD process failed utterly . As a result , the team planned the car structure ( with modules , their relations and critical functions ) in physical mock - up prototypes , using wood ( Fig . 5 ) for convenience and learning speed . This way , they could iterate rapid designs , reflect , and gain new insights on the systems and their relations to each other in a short amount of time . B . Case II : ME310 Product Innovation Renault Prototype During the mechanical engineering course of ME310 [ 11 ] at Stanford University , a team working with Renault had the challenge of redefining the future autonomous driving experience , especially regarding passenger trust towards the vehicle . In ( Fig . 6 ) , we see an explorative prototype made by the team . The prototype is a plate , mounted in the passenger foot well to represent pre - queuing braking motion by small actuation in fully autonomous vehicles . The prototype was used as an initial road test within the development team , and lead to a new insight ; that is , the interaction with the prototype facilitated increased passenger comfort . The insight is not captured within the prototype ( the object ) , but rather within the interaction with the object . It is worth noting that the development team had a hard time understanding the cause of increased level of passenger comfort . IV . R ESEARCH P OTENTIAL OF USING P ROTOTYPES IN K NOWLEDGE CAPTURING AND TRANSFERRING There is certainly a need for further exploring the transfer of insight , learning and knowledge , especially through the use of physical tests and prototypes . The product developers and engineers of tomorrow will need a broad understanding of systems , enabling improved problem - defining ( rather than problem - solving ) skills , as the challenge in PD as a whole is to both define and solve problems . An experiment conducted in [ 29 ] focuses on the role of prototyping in the detection of design anomalies in a course of engineering students . When presented with initial examples containing certain bad features , some groups were made aware of the bad features , while others were not . The study concludes that certain bad features were excluded in the students own initial prototypes ( i . e . before testing ) , while other bad features predominantly were not excluded until after the initial prototypes were tested . As stated in [ 29 ] , there is a call for more research on understanding the students’ preliminary selection of concepts , their understanding of systems , and the effect on both as a result of physical testing . It is with respect to these insights that we define future research areas – and possibly fields . The research space of tacit knowledge transfer within PD is one promising focus . We would like to especially encourage exploring how prototypes ( and prototyping ) can be used as a catalyst for the tacit knowledge transfer . If the insights , experiences , learnings and interactions with prototypes accumulate tacit knowledge in the PD processes , how can one facilitate the PD process in such a way that most of the tacit knowledge is transferred – both internally ( socialization ) , but also within the organization ( externalization and internalization ) ? The ambiguous nature of tacit knowledge poses some challenges , especially regarding the capture of this knowledge , as this externalization is very difficult to automate . After raising the question on how to accumulate ( more ) tacit knowledge , one can also argue that we need more understanding on how to capture the knowledge . How can the organization internalize the tacit knowledge , making it usable for others , and how can it be externalized back in the PD process when needed ? We see a need to explore the importance of the human aspect of this tacit knowledge . How do human interactions influence the accumulation and transfer of tacit knowledge , and can we alter this for the benefit of the PD process ? Can tacit knowledge be transferred by interactions with ( other’s ) prototypes , or can you transfer the same insights through pictures ? Are there instances , events or arenas that leverage the transfer of tacit knowledge , and how can we better design the PD processes for this purpose ? Can we use objects ( prototypes ) as tacit knowledge artifacts , and can we use these to alter the learning or the PD team ? If we find ways of accumulating , capturing and transferring tacit knowledge , how do we employ these methods and practices with minimum effort ? Ultimately , we are questioning whether there are there methods that can work for a ) better internalization , and b ) better externalization of tacit knowledge ? How do we capture experiences , interactions and insights , and how do we store these ? Can we use artifacts like pictures , video and text for capturing this knowledge ? Are there prototypes that are better for capturing said knowledge , and if so , what are their properties ? Are there any systematic tools that can be used for capturing and leveraging tacit knowledge ? These are all questions that need attention in coming research . Fig . 6 Early prototype on increasing autonomous car passenger comfort . V . C ONCLUSION The purpose of this article has been to propose a new research space , including prototypes and their use and impact on knowledge acquisition and transfer within PD organizations . This paper aims at taking a comprehensive view on the different kinds of knowledge provided in the literature , and bringing this into the context of engineering design . Individual knowledge and organizational knowledge have been differentiated , and some current knowledge capturing practices in the automotive industry have been briefly discussed . A model on prototyping categories is proposed , mapped in a two - by - two metric in ( Fig . 3 ) . These categories are briefly presented , with the four categories being external , affirmative prototypes , internal , affirmative prototypes , external , reflective prototypes and internal , reflective prototypes . Two small case studies have been presented , with emphasis on prototypes and their effects on developing knowledge . Lastly , this paper has attempted to map future opportunities within said research space . The need for a better understanding of how to deal with tacit knowledge – both within the PD team and the knowledge value stream of system engineering organizations – is evident . The use of prototypes in relation to tacit knowledge transfer is of particular interest . We expect their deployment to lead to more event - driven and thus leaner PD processes . This is a call for more research towards the use of prototypes and prototyping , especially covering the socialization aspects of knowledge transfer in engineering design . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This research is supported by the Research Council of Norway through its user - driven research ( BIA ) funding scheme , project number 236739 / O30 . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] I . Nonaka , R . Toyama , and N . Konno , “SECI , Ba and Leadership : a Un ified Model of Dynamic Knowledge Creation , ” Long Range Plann . , vol . 33 , no . 1 , pp . 5 – 34 , Feb . 2000 . [ 2 ] G . Ringen and T . Welo , “Knowledge based development practices in systems engineering companies : A comparative study , ” in Systems Conference ( SysCon ) , 2015 9th Annual IEEE International , 2015 , pp . 353 – 358 . [ 3 ] J . M . Morgan and J . K . Liker , “The Toyota product development system , ” N . Y . , 2006 . [ 4 ] K . M . Eisenhardt , “Building Theories from Case Study Research , ” Acad . Manage . Rev . , vol . 14 , no . 4 , pp . 532 – 550 , Jan . 1989 . [ 5 ] S . Ulonska , A Knowledge - Based Approach for Integration of System Design Methodology and Documentation in Advanced Multi - Disciplinary NPD Projects . NTNU , 2014 . [ 6 ] J . E . Rowley , “The wisdom hierarchy : representations of the DIKW hierarchy , ” J . Inf . Sci . , Feb . 2007 . [ 7 ] P . Schubert , D . - M . Lincke , and B . Schmid , “A global knowledge medium as a virtual community : the NetAcademy concept , ” AMCIS 1998 Proc . , p . 207 , 1998 . [ 8 ] B . R . Løwendahl , Ø . Revang , and S . M . Fosstenløkken , “Knowledge and Value Creation in Professional Service Firms : A Framework for Analysis , ” Hum . Relat . , vol . 54 , no . 7 , pp . 911 – 931 , Jan . 2001 . [ 9 ] I . Nonaka and H . Takeuchi , The Knowledge - Creating Company : How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation . Oxford University Press , 1995 . [ 10 ] G . ( 1 ) Ringen and T . ( 2 ) Welo , “Towards a more event - driven NPD process : First experiences with attempts of implementation in the front - end phase , ” 75 - 1 Proc . 19th Int . Conf . Eng . Des . ICED13 Des . Harmon . Vol1 Des . Process . Seoul Korea 19 - 22082013 , 2013 . [ 11 ] L . J . Leifer and M . Steinert , “Dancing with Ambiguity : Causality Behavior , Design Thinking , and Triple - Loop - Learning , ” in Management of the Fuzzy Front End of Innovation , O . Gassmann and F . Schweitzer , Eds . Springer International Publishing , 2014 , pp . 141 – 158 . [ 12 ] O . Eris and L . Leifer , “Faciliating product development knowledge acquisition : interaction between the expert and the team , ” Int . J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 19 , no . 1 , pp . 142 – 152 , 2003 . [ 13 ] G . Ryle , The Concept of Mind : 60th Anniversary Edition . Routledge , 2009 . [ 14 ] C . W . Holsapple and K . D . Joshi , “Organizational knowledge resources , ” Decis . Support Syst . , vol . 31 , no . 1 , pp . 39 – 54 , May 2001 . [ 15 ] D . K . S . II and A . Smalley , Understanding A3 Thinking : A Critical Component o f Toyota’s PDCA Management System . CRC Press , 2011 . [ 16 ] M . Polanyi and A . Sen , The Tacit Dimension . University of Chicago Press , 2009 . [ 17 ] S . - W . Chou and M . - Y . He , “Knowledge Management : The Distinctive Roles of Knowledge Assets in Facilitating Knowledge Creation , ” J . Inf . Sci . , vol . 30 , no . 2 , pp . 146 – 164 , Jan . 2004 . [ 18 ] S . D . Eppinger and K . T . Ulrich , “Product design and development , ” 1995 , 1995 . [ 19 ] C . W . Elverum and T . Welo , “On the use of directional and incremental prototyping in the development of high novelty products : Two case studies in the automotive industry , ” J . Eng . Technol . Manag . [ 20 ] N . Bryan - Kinns and F . Hamilton , “One for All and All for One ? : Case Studies of Using Prototypes in Commercial Projects , ” in Proceedings of the Second Nordic Conference on Human - computer Interaction , New York , NY , USA , 2002 , pp . 91 – 100 . [ 21 ] K . N . Otto and K . L . Wood , “Product Evolution : A Reverse Engineering and Redesign Methodology , ” Res . Eng . Des . , vol . 10 , no . 4 , pp . 226 – 243 , Dec . 1998 . [ 22 ] Y . - K . Lim , E . Stolterman , and J . Tenenberg , “The Anatomy of Prototypes : Prototypes As Filters , Prototypes As Manifestations of Design Ideas , ” ACM Trans Comput - Hum Interact , vol . 15 , no . 2 , pp . 7 : 1 – 7 : 27 , Jul . 2008 . [ 23 ] H . A . Simon , Administrative behavior , vol . 4 . Cambridge Univ Press , 1965 . [ 24 ] D . A . Schön , “Educating the reflective practitioner , ” 1987 . [ 25 ] D . A . Schön and G . Wiggins , “Kinds of seeing and their functions in designing , ” Des . Stud . , vol . 13 , no . 2 , pp . 135 – 156 , Apr . 1992 . [ 26 ] M . Steinert and L . J . Lei fer , “‘Finding One’s Way’ : Re - Discovering a Hunter - Gatherer Model based on Wayfaring , ” Int . J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 28 , no . 2 , p . 251 , 2012 . [ 27 ] “Dynamic Design Lab | Dynamic Design Lab . ” [ Online ] . Available : https : / / ddl . stanford . edu / . [ Accessed : 04 - Nov - 2015 ] . [ 28 ] “Stanford Product Realization Lab - Home . ” [ Online ] . Available : https : / / productrealization . stanford . edu / . [ Accessed : 04 - Nov - 2015 ] . [ 29 ] V . Viswanathan , O . Atilola , N . Esposito , and J . Linsey , “A study on the role of physical models in the mitigation of design fixation , ” J . Eng . Des . , vol . 25 , no . 1 – 3 , pp . 25 – 43 , Mar . 2014 .