Caveolin - 1 Null Mice Are Viable but Show Evidence of Hyperproliferative and Vascular Abnormalities * Received for publication , June 12 , 2001 , and in revised form , July 13 , 2001 Published , JBC Papers in Press , July 16 , 2001 , DOI 10 . 1074 / jbc . M105408200 Babak Razani‡ § , Jeffery A . Engelman‡ , Xiao Bo Wang‡ , William Schubert‡ , Xiao Lan Zhang‡ , Carolyn B . Marks ¶ , Frank Macaluso ¶ , Robert G . Russell (cid:1) , Maomi Li * * , Richard G . Pestell‡‡ * * * , Dolores Di Vizio‡‡ , Harry Hou , Jr . § § , Burkhard Kneitz § § , Guy Lagaud ¶¶ , George J . Christ ¶¶ , Winfried Edelmann § § , and Michael P . Lisanti‡ (cid:1)(cid:1) From the ‡ Department of Molecular Pharmacology and The Albert Einstein Cancer Center , the ¶ Analytical Imaging Facility , the (cid:1) Department of Pathology and Institute for Animal Studies , the * * Department of Pathology , ‡‡ Departments of Developmental and Molecular Biology and Medicine , and The Albert Einstein Cancer Center , the § § Department of Cell Biology and The Albert Einstein Cancer Center , the ¶¶ Departments of Urology , Physiology , and Biophysics , Institute for Smooth Muscle Biology , The Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , New York 10461 Caveolin - 1 is the principal structural protein of caveo - lae membranes in fibroblasts and endothelia . Recently , we have shown that the human CAV - 1 gene is localized to a suspected tumor suppressor locus , and mutations in Cav - 1 have been implicated in human cancer . Here , we created a caveolin - 1 null ( CAV - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) ) mouse model , us - ing standard homologous recombination techniques , to assess the role of caveolin - 1 in caveolae biogenesis , en - docytosis , cell proliferation , and endothelial nitric - ox - ide synthase ( eNOS ) signaling . Surprisingly , Cav - 1 null mice are viable . We show that these mice lack caveolin - 1 protein expression and plasmalemmal caveolae . In ad - dition , analysis of cultured fibroblasts from Cav - 1 null embryos reveals the following : ( i ) a loss of caveolin - 2 protein expression ; ( ii ) defects in the endocytosis of a known caveolar ligand , i . e . fluorescein isothiocyanate - albumin ; and ( iii ) a hyperproliferative phenotype . Im - portantly , these phenotypic changes are reversed by recombinant expression of the caveolin - 1 cDNA . Fur - thermore , examination of the lung parenchyma ( an en - dothelial - rich tissue ) shows hypercellularity with thick - ened alveolar septa and an increase in the number of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor ( Flk - 1 ) - pos - itive endothelial cells . As predicted , endothelial cells from Cav - 1 null mice lack caveolae membranes . Finally , we examined eNOS signaling by measuring the physio - logical response of aortic rings to various stimuli . Our results indicate that eNOS activity is up - regulated in Cav - 1 null animals , and this activity can be blunted by using a specific NOS inhibitor , nitro - L - arginine methyl ester . These findings are in accordance with previous in vitro studies showing that caveolin - 1 is an endogenous inhibitor of eNOS . Thus , caveolin - 1 expression is re - quired to stabilize the caveolin - 2 protein product , to mediate the caveolar endocytosis of specific ligands , to negatively regulate the proliferation of certain cell types , and to provide tonic inhibition of eNOS activity in endothelial cells . Caveolin was first identified in 1989 by Glenney and col - leagues ( 1 , 2 ) as a major v - Src substrate in Rous sarcoma virus - transformed chicken embryo fibroblasts . Interestingly , this same protein was found to be the primary structural com - ponent of caveolae microdomains , 50 – 100 nm vesicular invagi - nations of the plasma membrane ( 3 ) . Caveolae were morphologically described as early as the 1950s by Yamada ( 4 ) and Palade ( 5 ) . They are curious struc - tures that can be found individually or in clusters at the sur - faces of numerous cell types , the best examples of which are adipocytes , endothelial cells , muscle cells , and fibroblasts . Re - search in the past decade has shown that caveolae are special - ized membrane microdomains formed as a result of localized accumulation of cholesterol , glycosphingolipids , and caveolin ( 6 – 8 ) . Caveolin , an integral membrane protein that can directly bind cholesterol , most likely plays a major role in the invagination of caveolae from the plasma membrane proper , although our un - derstanding of the mechanisms behind this process remains rudimentary . Two other members of the caveolin gene family have recently been identified and cloned , caveolin - 2 and caveolin - 3 ( 9 , 10 ) ; as a consequence , caveolin has been re - termed caveolin - 1 ( Cav - 1 ) . 1 Caveolin - 2 has the same tissue distribution as and co - localizes with caveolin - 1 , whereas caveolin - 3 is expressed only in cardiac , skeletal , and smooth muscle cells ( 11 , 12 ) . * The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . This work was supported in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health , the Muscular Dystrophy Association , the American Heart Association , and the Komen Breast Cancer Foundation ( to M . P . L . ) . § Supported by a National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) Medical Scien - tist Training Grant T32 - GM07288 . (cid:1)(cid:1) Recipient of a Hirschl / Weil - Caulier Career Scientist Award . To whom correspondence should be addressed : Dept . of Molecular Phar - macology and The Albert Einstein Cancer Center , Albert Einstein Col - lege of Medicine , 1300 Morris Park Ave . , Bronx , NY 10461 . Tel . : 718 - 430 - 8828 ; Fax : 718 - 430 - 8830 ; E - mail : lisanti @ aecom . yu . edu . * * * Supported by NIH Grants R01 - CA70897 , R01 - CA86072 , and R01 - CA75503 , the Komen Breast Cancer Foundation , and the Department of Defense . Recipient of a Hirschl / Weil - Caulier Career Scientist Award . 1 The abbreviations used are : Cav - 1 , caveolin - 1 ; Cav - 2 , caveolin - 2 ; Cav - 3 , caveolin - 3 ; eNOS , endothelial nitric - oxide synthase ; FITC , fluo - rescein isothiocyanate ; L - NAME , nitro - L - arginine methyl ester ; MAP , mitogen - activated protein ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; EGF - R , EGF receptor ; VEGF - R , vascular endothelial growth factor receptor ; mAb , monoclonal antibody ; kb , kilobase pair ; bp , base pair ; PCR , polymerase chain reaction ; MEF , mouse embryonic fibroblast ; PAGE , polyacryl - amide gel electrophoresis ; GFP , green fluorescent protein ; PBS , phos - phate - buffered saline ; BSA , bovine serum albumin ; DMEM , Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; PFUs , plaque - forming units ; KO , knockout ; NO , nitric oxide ; NOS , nitric - oxide syn - thase ; PE , phenylephrine ; Ach , acetylcholine ; pAb , polyclonal antibody ; Mes , 4 - morpholine - ethanesulfonic acid ; ES , embryonic stem ; CSD , caveolin - 1 scaffolding domain . T HE J OURNAL OF B IOLOGICAL C HEMISTRY Vol . 276 , No . 41 , Issue of October 12 , pp . 38121 – 38138 , 2001 © 2001 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . Printed in U . S . A . This paper is available on line at http : / / www . jbc . org 38121 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Although caveolae function in vesicular and cholesterol traf - ficking ( 13 , 14 ) , they have also been implicated in signal trans - duction at the plasma membrane ( 15 , 16 ) . Biochemical and morphological experiments have shown that a variety of lipid - modified signaling molecules are concentrated within these plasma membrane microdomains , such as Src family tyrosine kinases , Ha - Ras , eNOS , and heterotrimeric G - proteins ( 17 – 22 ) . In many ways , caveolin - 1 is intricately involved in caveolar functioning . In the years after the discovery that caveolae might serve to compartmentalize signaling molecules and fa - cilitate cross - talk among signaling cascades ( the so - called “caveolae signaling hypothesis” ( 16 ) ) , Cav - 1 has been found to be a key regulator of some of these proteins . Both in vitro and cell culture experiments indicate that Cav - 1 can directly inter - act with and maintain some of these signaling molecules in an inactive conformation ( reviewed in Ref . 23 ) . In effect , Cav - 1 seems to act as a scaffolding protein , able to negatively regulate the activity of other molecules by binding to and releasing them in a timely fashion . Research in the past few years has established a recurring theme in this regulation . Many of the proteins that either interact with , transcriptionally repress , or are inhibited by Cav - 1 fall under the pro - proliferative , oncogenic , and anti - apoptotic category of molecules . Cav - 1 interacts with and neg - atively regulates the EGF - R , platelet - derived growth factor receptor , and Neu tyrosine kinases ( 24 – 26 ) , Ha - Ras ( 17 , 18 ) , c - Src ( 17 ) , and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( 27 ) . Conversely , caveolin - 1 levels are transcriptionally reduced upon activation of the oncogenes Ha - ras , v - abl , myc , neu , the HPV oncogene E6 , among others ( 26 , 28 – 30 ) . Therefore , it is not surprising that we and others ( 26 , 29 , 31 – 37 ) observed undetectable or very low expression levels of Cav - 1 in numerous tumor - derived cell lines . For some time , it has been known that a certain locus ( D7S522 ; 7q31 . 1 ) is an aphidicolin - induced fragile site in the human genome ( 38 , 39 ) and a hot spot for deletions in a variety of human tumors including breast , prostate , colorectal , ovarian , pancreatic , and renal cell carcinomas ( 38 , 40 – 46 ) . Interestingly , determination of the genomic organization of the human CAV - 1 locus revealed that it maps to 7q31 . 1 , adjacent to the LOH marker D7S522 , and as of yet it still remains the closest known gene to this putative tumor suppressor locus ( 35 , 47 ) . Taken together , the results described above have led many investigators to propose the possibility that Cav - 1 is indeed a “tumor suppressor” whose reduction / deletion in cells would provide growth advantages and expedite tumorigenesis . In support of this idea , the only two methods thus far used to abolish Cav - 1 expression have arrived at similar conclusions . Antisense - mediated down - regulation of Cav - 1 in NIH - 3T3 fi - broblasts leads to a hyperactivation of the p42 / 44 MAP kinase pathway and anchorage - independent growth ( 48 ) . An RNA in - terference - based ablation of Cav - 1 in Caenorhabditis elegans leads to progression of the meiotic cell cycle , a phenotype that mirrors that of Ras activation ( 49 ) . Furthermore , a recent report indicates that the caveolin - 1 gene is mutated in up to 16 % of human breast cancer samples examined ( 50 ) . Recombinant expression of the caveolin - 1 cDNA harboring this mutation ( P132L ) was sufficient to transform NIH 3T3 cells ( 50 ) . As similar results have been obtained previously using an antisense approach to ablate caveolin - 1 expression ( 48 ) , these results indicate that the caveolin - 1 ( P132L ) mutation may behave in a dominant - negative fashion . Interestingly , an analogous mutation occurs within the caveo - lin - 3 gene ( P104L ) in patients with a novel form of autosomal dominant limb - girdle muscular dystrophy ( LGMD - 1C ) ( 51 ) . In order to gain a better understanding of caveolae and caveolin - 1 functioning in a mammalian organism , we used a gene targeting strategy to disrupt the Cav - 1 locus in the mouse . In this way , we could observe the role Cav - 1 plays in animal physiology ( i . e . during development and into adult life ) as well as molecularly ( i . e . caveolar biogenesis , its interaction with caveolin - 2 , and its functional roles in endocytosis , cellular pro - liferation , and signal transduction ) . In this study , we describe the generation of mice lacking the cav - 1 gene and determine some of the molecular side effects that result from a deficiency of Cav - 1 expression . Undoubtedly , the generation of viable / fertile Cav - 1 - deficient mice ( and cells derived from these animals ) will allow us and others to critically evaluate the many proposed functions of caveolae organelles and the caveolin - 1 protein in vivo . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Materials— Antibodies and their sources were as follows : anti - caveo - lin - 1 mAb 2297 , anti - caveolin - 2 mAb 65 , and anti - caveolin - 3 mAb 26 ( 10 , 11 , 52 ) ( gifts of Dr . Roberto Campos - Gonzalez , BD Transduction Labora - tories , Inc . ) ; anti - caveolin - 1 pAb N - 20 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) ; anti - p42 / 44 pAb and phospho - specific anti - p42 / 44 pAb ( New England Biolabs ) ; anti - (cid:1) - tubulin mAb TUB - 2 . 1 and anti - (cid:1) - actin mAb AC - 15 ( Sigma ) . A variety of other reagents were purchased commercially as follows : cell culture reagents and the LipofectAMINE liposomal transfection reagent were from Life Technologies , Inc . Construction of the Targeting Vector— Genomic clones containing the murine Cav - 1 locus were isolated from a 129 / Sv ( J1 ) (cid:2) - phage genomic library ( 53 , 54 ) by using probes corresponding to the murine Cav - 1 cDNA . The genomic organization of the locus was determined by sub - cloning portions of these genomic inserts into the vector pBS - SK (cid:1) ( Stratagene ) and using Southern blotting to determine a detailed re - striction map of the region ( 55 ) . One of the genomic clones ( containing the first and second exons of Cav - 1 ) was used to construct the targeting vector . Briefly , a 2 . 7 - kb Not I - Eco RI fragment that is immediately 5 (cid:2) to the first exon and a 2 . 1 - kb Bam HI - Bam HI fragment that is immedi - ately 3 (cid:2) to the second exon of the cav - 1 gene were used to flank the NEO cassette in the targeting vector pGT - N29 ( New England Biolabs ) ( as shown in Fig . 1 ) . Screening of Homologously Recombined ES Cells and Generation of Germ Line Chimeras— WW6 ES cells ( gift of Dr . Pamela Stanley ( 56 ) ) were electroporated with the linearized targeting construct ( 40 (cid:3) g ) and selected with G418 ( 150 (cid:3) g / ml of active component , Life Technologies , Inc . ) as described previously ( 57 ) . Homologous recombination in 360 selected ES clones was assessed via Southern blot analysis . Briefly , genomic DNA was digested with Pst I or Xba I and hybridized with a 1 . 1 - kb Xba I - Sac I probe ; Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:3) clones produced an 8 . 0 - kb wild - type and a 5 . 5 - kb knockout band ( Pst I digest ) or a 10 . 0 - kb wild - type and a 4 . 0 - kb knockout band ( Xba I digest ) ( as shown in Fig . 1 ) . Four Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:3) ES clones were microinjected into C57BL / 6 blastocysts , and three gave rise to male chimeras with a significant ES cell contribution ( as deter - mined by an Agouti coat color ) . By mating with C57BL / 6 females and genotyping of offspring tail DNA via Southern and PCR analysis , germ line transmission was confirmed for two separate clones ( Fig . 1 ) . F1 male and female heterozygous animals were interbred to obtain Cav - 1 - deficient animals . To facilitate the genotyping of all future mice , we also devised a 3 - primer PCR - based screening strategy . The wild - type specific forward primer was derived from Cav - 1 exon 2 ( 5 (cid:2) - GTGTAT - GACGCGCACACCAAG - 3 (cid:2) ) ; the knockout - specific forward primer was derived from the neomycin cassette ( 5 (cid:2) - CTAGTGAGACGTGCTACT - TCC - 3 (cid:2) ) , and the common reverse primer was derived from Cav - 1 intron 2 ( 5 (cid:2) - CTTGAGTTCTGTTAGCCCAG - 3 (cid:2) ) . PCR conditions were 95 °C / 5 min , 35 cycles of ( 95 °C / 1 min , 56 °C / 1 min , 72 °C / 1 min 20 s ) and then 72 °C / 7 min , which resulted in a (cid:4) 650 - bp wild - type band and a (cid:4) 330 - bp knockout band . Animals were analyzed at 2 – 4 . 5 months of age . Experiments were conducted under the direct supervision of the trained veterinarians of the Einstein Animal Institute , and animal protocols were approved by the Animal Use Committee . Mouse Embryonic Fibroblast ( MEF ) Culture and Immortalization Protocol— Primary MEFs were obtained from Day 13 . 5 embryos essen - tially as described ( 58 ) . Briefly , embryos were decapitated , thoroughly minced , and trypsinized in 1 ml of 0 . 05 % trypsin , 0 . 53 m M EDTA ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) for 20 min at 37 °C . Ten ml of complete medium ( Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 2 m M glutamine , 100 units / ml penicillin , and Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38122 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 100 (cid:3) g / ml streptomycin ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) ) was used to inactivate the trypsin and resuspend the dissociated cells . Cells were plated on a 10 - cm plate and cultured in a 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 incubator . These “passage 1” cells were further propagated using a defined 3T3 passaging protocol ( i . e . 3 (cid:5) 10 5 cells were plated per 60 - mm dish every 3 days ) . For all experiments early passage primary MEFs ( (cid:6) 5 ) were used . To immor - talize MEFs , cells were passaged according to the 3T3 protocol contin - uously until growth rates in culture resumed the rapid rates seen in early passage MEFs ( i . e . Passage 25 cells and beyond ) . Transmission Electron Microscopy— MEFs were fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer post - fixed with OsO 4 , and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate . A cryotome was used to yield sections , and the samples were examined under a JEOL 1200EX trans - mission electron microscope and photographed at a magnification of (cid:5) 16 , 000 ( 59 – 61 ) . Caveolae were identified by their characteristic flask shape , size ( 50 – 100 nm ) , and location at or near the plasma membrane ( 28 ) . Expression Vectors— The cDNA encoding full - length caveolin - 1 was subcloned into pCB7 , a mammalian expression vector driven by the cytomegalovirus promoter ( 62 ) . The cDNAs encoding GFP and GFP - Cav - 1 ( containing the full - length Cav - 1 cDNA C - terminal to GFP ) were as described previously ( 63 ) . Immunoblot Analysis— Cells were cultured in their respective media and allowed to reach 80 – 90 % confluency . Subsequently , they were washed with PBS and incubated with lysis buffer ( 10 m M Tris , pH 7 . 5 ; 50 m M NaCl ; 1 % Triton X - 100 ; 60 m M octyl glucoside ) containing protease inhibitors ( Roche Molecular Biochemicals ) . Protein concentrations were quantified using the BCA reagent ( Pierce ) , and the volume required for 10 (cid:3) g of protein was determined . Samples were separated by SDS - PAGE ( 12 . 5 % acrylamide ) and transferred to nitrocellulose . The nitrocellulose membranes were stained with Ponceau S ( to visualize protein bands ) followed by immunoblot analysis . All subsequent wash buffers contained 10 m M Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 150 m M NaCl , 0 . 05 % Tween 20 , which was supple - mented with 1 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) and 2 % nonfat dry milk ( Carnation ) for the blocking solution and 1 % BSA for the antibody diluent . Primary antibodies were used at a 1 : 500 dilution . Horseradish peroxi - dase - conjugated secondary antibodies ( 1 : 5000 dilution , Pierce ) were used to visualize bound primary antibodies with the Supersignal chemilumi - nescence substrate ( Pierce ) . Purification of Caveolae - enriched Membrane Fractions— Caveolae - enriched membrane fractions were purified essentially as we described previously ( 59 ) . 200 mg of lung tissue was placed in 2 ml of MBS ( 25 m M Mes , pH 6 . 5 , 150 m M NaCl ) containing 1 % Triton X - 100 and solubilized by using quick 10 - s bursts of a rotor homogenizer and passing 10 times through a loose fitting Dounce homogenizer . The sample was mixed with an equal volume of 80 % sucrose ( prepared in MBS lacking Triton X - 100 ) , transferred to a 12 - ml ultracentrifuge tube , and overlaid with a discontinuous sucrose gradient ( 4 ml of 30 % sucrose , 4 ml of 5 % sucrose , both prepared in MBS , lacking detergent ) . The samples were subjected to centrifugation at 200 , 000 (cid:5) g ( 39 , 000 rpm in a Sorval rotor TH - 641 ) for 16 h . A light scattering band was observed at the 5 – 30 % sucrose interface . Twelve 1 - ml fractions were collected , and 50 - (cid:3) l aliquots of each fraction were subjected to SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting . Immunofluorescence Microscopy— The procedure was performed as we described previously ( 17 ) . MEFs ( either un - transfected or trans - fected with the caveolin - 1 cDNA ) were fixed for 30 min in PBS contain - ing 2 % paraformaldehyde , rinsed with PBS , and quenched with 50 m M NH 4 Cl for 10 min . The cells were then incubated in permeabilization buffer ( PBS ; 0 . 2 % BSA ; 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) for 10 min , washed with PBS , and double - labeled with a 1 : 400 dilution of anti - caveolin - 1 pAb N - 20 and 1 : 200 dilution of anti - caveolin - 2 mAb for 60 min . After rinsing with PBS ( 3 times ) , secondary antibodies ( 7 . 5 (cid:3) g / ml ) ( ( lissamine - rho - damine - conjugated goat anti - rabbit and fluorescein ( FITC ) - conjugated goat anti - mouse ) antibodies ( Jackson ImmunoResearch ) were added for a period of 60 min . Cells were washed with PBS ( 3 times ) and slides mounted with Slow - Fade anti - fade reagent ( Molecular Probes ) . A Bio - Rad MR600 confocal fluorescence microscope was used for visualization of bound secondary antibodies . Rescue of Caveolin - 2 Levels in Caveolin - 1 - deficient MEFs— The con - struction and characterization of the Cav - 1 and GFP Adenoviruses were as we described previously ( 34 ) . MEF infections were conducted as follows : 10 5 cells were seeded in a series of 35 - mm dishes . The desired viral titer ( quantified as plaque - forming units ( PFUs ) ) was aliquoted and preincubated with 10 4 molecules of poly - L - lysine per viral particle in PBS for 30 min . Serum - free medium up to 1 ml was added to this solution and placed on the cells for 2 h . Cells were then cultured in regular growth medium ( DMEM , 10 % FBS ) for 48 h and subjected to immunoblot analysis . The lysosomal / proteasomal inhibitor experi - ments were performed essentially as described ( 64 ) . Briefly , 1 . 5 (cid:5) 10 5 cells were seeded in a series of 35 - mm dishes and treated for the indicated times with vehicle alone ( Me 2 SO ) or with either the protea - somal inhibitors MG - 132 ( 1 (cid:3) M , Sigma ) or MG - 115 ( 1 (cid:3) M , Sigma ) or the lysosomal inhibitors chloroquine ( 50 (cid:3) M , Sigma ) or NH 4 Cl ( 10 m M ) . Cells were then lysed and subjected to immunoblot analysis . Endocytosis Assays— Wild - type and Cav - 1 null mouse embryo fibro - blasts ( MEFs ) were plated on 18 - mm glass coverslips ( Fisher ) in 12 - well plates . Cells were grown in complete medium ( DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , 2 m M glutamine , 100 units / ml penicillin , and 100 (cid:3) g / ml streptomycin ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) ) . When cells reached (cid:4) 75 – 85 % confluency , the media was replaced with 1 ml of complete media con - taining FITC - conjugated albumin ( Sigma ) at a final concentration of 10 (cid:3) g / ml . Cells were incubated at 37 °C for 5 , 15 , and 30 min , washed in PBS , and fixed in 2 % paraformaldehyde for 20 min . The cells were washed for 20 min in PBS and mounted on slides with the Prolong anti - fade reagent ( Molecular Probes ) and imaged with an Olympus IX 70 inverted microscope . Virtually identical experiments were carried out with FITC - conjugated transferrin ( 10 (cid:3) g / ml ; Sigma ) . Caveolin - 1 knockout MEFs were grown on 60 - mm tissue culture dishes and transiently transfected with the caveolin - 1 cDNA in the pCB7 vector using LiopfectAMINE Plus ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) , ac - cording to the manufacturer’s instructions . The transfected cells were plated on 18 - mm coverslips in 12 - well plates after 24 h . FITC - albumin uptake was then examined in the transfected cells 36 h after the initial transfection . Cells transfected with caveolin - 1 were detected by immu - nostaining with anti - Cav - 1 IgG ( N - 20 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) and a rhodamine - conjugated secondary antibody . MEF Proliferation Curves and Cell Cycle Analysis— Proliferation curves were conducted essentially as described previously ( 65 ) . Briefly , 15 (cid:5) 10 3 cells were seeded in a series of twenty 35 - mm dishes and cultured under regular growth conditions ( DMEM , 10 % FBS ) . Each day , two plates were counted using a hemocytometer , and the medium was changed for the remaining plates . Growth curves were continued for a 10 - day time course . Cell cycle analysis was conducted by Flow Cytometry essentially as described ( 66 ) . Briefly , 2 (cid:5) 10 5 cells were seeded in 60 - mm dishes and cultured under regular growth conditions ( DMEM , 10 % FBS ) for 24 h . Cells were trypsinized , washed in PBS , and fixed in 70 % ethanol at 4 °C for at least 30 min . Fixed cells were resuspended in PBS containing 0 . 25 mg / ml RNase A ( Sigma ) and 10 (cid:3) g / ml propidium iodide ( Sigma ) and subjected to univariate cell cycle analysis using a Becton - Dickinson FACScan flow cytometer . The G 0 / G 1 , S , and G 2 / M phases of the cell cycle were quantified with CELLQUEST software . DNA synthesis in MEFs was directly analyzed by [ 3 H ] thymidine incorporation , essentially as described ( 66 ) . Briefly , 2 (cid:5) 10 5 cells were seeded in five 60 - mm dishes , allowed to adhere , and cultured overnight under regular growth conditions ( DMEM , 10 % FBS ) supplemented with 1 (cid:3) Ci of [ 3 H ] thymidine . Cells were washed with PBS , lysed in 0 . 3 M NaOH , and fixed with 10 % trichloroacetic acid at 4 °C for 30 min . The precipitated material was centrifuged , washed , and resuspended in 200 (cid:3) l of 0 . 3 M NaOH , 100 (cid:3) l of which was quantified using a scintillation counter . Light and Electron Microscopic Analysis of the Lung— Lung tissue samples were fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium cacody - late buffer , postfixed with 1 % osmium tetroxide followed by 1 % uranyl acetate , dehydrated through a graded series of ethanol , and embedded in LX112 resin ( LADD Research Industries , Burlington VT ) . Ultrathin sections were cut on a Reichert Ultracut E , stained with uranyl acetate followed by lead citrate , and viewed using a JEOL 1200EX transmission electron microscope at 80 kV . One - (cid:3) m thick sections were stained with toluidine blue and imaged on a Zeiss Axiophot microscope . Preparation of Lung Paraffin Sections— Wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice were sacrificed and the lungs removed and placed in 10 % formalin . The lungs were then inflated by injecting fixative with a syringe di - rectly into the lungs to preserve the alveolar structure . The tissue was fixed for 2 h , washed in PBS for 20 min , and dehydrated through a graded series of ethanol washes . The tissue was then treated with xylene for 40 min all at room temperature and then paraffin fo r 1 h at 55 °C . The tissue was then embedded , and 5 - (cid:3) m thick sections were prepared using a Microm ( Baxter Scientific ) microtome and placed on super - frost plus slides ( Fisher ) . Slides were then hematoxylin and eosin - stained according to standard laboratory protocols . Quantitation of Nuclei— Wild - type and Cav - 1 null mouse lung tissue sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin were examined using a Zeis Axiophot . By using a 20 (cid:5) objective , six random 0 . 5 - mm 2 fields were photographed for each genotype , and all the nuclei within those regions were manually tabulated using a hand - held counter . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38123 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Immunostaining of Lung Paraffin Sections— Sections of wild - type and Cav - 1 null mouse lung were de - paraffinized in xylene for 4 min and rehydrated through a graded series of ethanol and placed in PBS . Sections were pre - blocked with 2 % horse serum for 20 min and then washed with PBS for 10 min . The sections were incubated with a given primary antibody at room temperature for 1 h . An FITC - conjugated or lissamine - rhodamine - conjugated secondary antibody was added to the sections after a 10 - min wash in PBS . After a 30 - min incubation with the secondary antibody , the sections were washed in PBS for 20 min . Prolong anti - fade reagent was then added to prevent bleaching of the fluorochrome . Samples were imaged with an Olympus IX 70 inverted microscope . Anti - VEGF - R IgG ( Flk - 1 ; rabbit pAb C - 20 ) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . Anti - Ki67 IgG ( rabbit pAb ; NCL - Ki67p ) was purchased from Novocastra , Ltd , UK , and used at a dilution of 1 : 500 . For Ki67 immunostaining , sections were subjected to antigen retrieval by microwave irradiation in 0 . 01 M , pH 6 , trisodium citrate buffer . Assessment of Exercise Tolerance— A 4 - liter beaker filled with water ( 25 °C ) was used as a “swimming pool” to assess the exercise tolerance of male mice . Briefly , a very light weight ( a paper clip ; 0 . 4 g ; (cid:4) 1 . 25 % of their body weight ) was attached to the tail of a mouse with a body weight of (cid:4) 32 g . The mouse was gently placed in the water and care - fully observed . The time at which the mouse was initially unable to maintain complete buoyancy was recorded and the mouse was imme - diately removed from the pool . No mice were injured in these experi - ments ; 5 animals were tested for each genotype . Aortic Ring Studies of Vasoconstriction and Vasorelaxation— Wild - type and Cav - 1 null male mice ( 4 . 5 months old ) were sacrificed by CO 2 asphyxiation . The thoracic aorta was dissected and cut into cylindrical segments of (cid:4) 3 mm in length . Five to six rings from 3 mice were obtained from each genotype of mouse strain . Rings were immediately placed in ice - cold Krebs - Henseleit buffer containing the following com - position ( in m M ) : NaCl , 110 , KCl , 4 . 8 , CaCl 2 , 2 . 5 , MgSO 4 , 1 . 2 , KH 2 PO 4 , 1 . 2 , NaHCO 3 , 25 , glucose and dextrose , 11 , in glass - distilled water . Briefly , the rings were suspended by two hooks ( 25 - (cid:3) m thickness ) inserted into the lumen and mounted in a vessel myograph system ( 7 - ml organ bath , Danish Myo Technology , Aarhus , Denmark ) contain - ing Krebs - Henseleit buffer . The organ chambers were maintained at 32 (cid:7) 0 . 05 °C and continuously bubbled with 95 % O 2 and 5 % CO 2 to maintain pH 7 . 4 (cid:7) 0 . 1 . The mouse aortas were submitted to a resting tension of 1 . 2 g , and isometric tension was recorded using a transducer coupled to a MacLab data acquisition system . Following a 60 - min equil - ibration period , with frequents washings ( every (cid:8) 15 min ) , the rings were preconstricted with a submaximal concentration of PE ( 10 (cid:3) M ) , and concentrations of Ach ( 10 (cid:3) 8 to 10 (cid:3) 4 M ) or L - NAME ( 100 (cid:3) M ) were injected when the PE - contractile response achieved steady state ( (cid:8) 5 min ) . Data are expressed as means (cid:7) S . E . Statistical differences were measured by one - way analysis of variance followed by Newman - Keul post - hoc test . RESULTS Generation of Caveolin - 1 - deficient Mice via Targeted Disrup - tion of the Cav - 1 Locus— We previously determined the genomic organization of the caveolin - 1 ( Cav - 1 ) locus and found that exons 1 and 2 are spaced within 2 kb of each other , whereas exon 3 is (cid:4) 10 kb downstream ( 47 ) . Therefore , we generated a targeting vector designed to replace the first two exons and a small portion of the 5 (cid:2) promoter sequence with the neomycin resistance cassette ( neo ) ( Fig . 1 A ) . WW6 embryonic stem ( ES ) cells ( 56 ) were electroporated with the targeting vector , and 360 clones were selected with G418 . Homologous recombination at this locus is predicted to create two new restriction sites , Pst I and Xba I , both of which can be used to identify positive ES cell clones by Southern blot analysis ( Fig . 1 A ) ; four clones were determined to be positive in this manner . Germ line chimeras were derived from only two of these clones , as shown in the positive Southern blots in Fig . 1 B . We subsequently mated these chimeras with C57Bl / 6 mice to yield F1 heterozygous offspring , a cohort of which was inter - bred to produce the Cav - 1 null progeny . Southern blot and PCR - based methods of assessing the targeted locus were per - formed on the first series of live offspring , confirming the predicted loss of a wild - type 8 . 0 - kb band on Southern blot and the 500 - bp band on PCR analysis ( Fig . 1 C ) . Genotyping of offspring from such heterozygous inter - crosses revealed that there is no reduced viability of the Cav - 1 - null mice and that mice of all three genotypes are present at the expected Mende - lian frequency ( Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) 25 . 2 % , Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:3) 49 . 2 % , Cav - 1 (cid:3) / (cid:3) 25 . 6 % ; n (cid:9) 305 animals ) . Although Cav - 1 is expressed in numerous tissues at varying levels , it is found in abundance in certain terminally differen - tiated cells ( i . e . adipocytes , endothelial cells , type I pneumo - cytes , and fibroblasts ) ( 9 , 11 ) . Furthermore , Cav - 1 expression is completely absent in skeletal and cardiac muscle cells , and in contrast , caveolin - 3 ( Cav - 3 ) , another member of the caveolin gene family , is selectively expressed ( 10 , 12 ) . In order to verify whether the targeted disruption of the Cav - 1 locus led to a truly null mutation , we determined the expression of the Cav - 1 pro - tein in adipose , lung , and heart tissues from mice of all three genotypes ( wild - type , heterozygote , and knockout ; Fig . 1 C ) . In all tissues examined , ablation of the Cav - 1 locus leads to a concomitant loss of Cav - 1 protein expression ; (cid:1) - tubulin is shown as an equal protein loading control . In addition , several points are worth noting . 1 ) These mice are deficient in both Cav - 1 isoforms ( the full - length 178 - amino acid (cid:4) - isoform and the shorter 146 - amino acid (cid:1) - isoform ( 52 ) ) . 2 ) The ablation of the Cav - 1 locus in only one chromosome , as in the heterozygous animals , is sufficient to reduce protein levels by approximately half . 3 ) Although Cav - 1 is expressed in the cardiac tissue of wild - type and heterozygous mice ( Fig . 1 D ) , Cav - 1 expression is derived from endothelial and fibroblastic cells within the heart and not the cardiac myocytes themselves ( 10 , 12 ) . We also assessed Cav - 1 expression in cultured mouse embry - onic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) , another cell type with abundant Cav - 1 expression ( 67 ) . Two different clones of MEFs for each possible genotype were extracted and cultured from day 13 . 5 embryos . Immunoblot analysis of Cav - 1 levels indicated similar findings to those above , namely a complete ablation of Cav - 1 expression in the knockout and a significant reduction in Cav - 1 expression in heterozygous MEFs ( Fig . 1 E ) . Phenotype and Histopathological Examination of Cav - 1 (cid:3) / (cid:3) Mice— Caveolin - 1 null mice are both viable and fertile . We initially established a large cohort consisting of mice from all genotypes , the eldest of which are now 9 months of age . Al - though no overt phenotypic abnormalities ( including tumors ) have been detected , only two mice have thus far died of un - known causes , both of which were Cav - 1 - deficient ( autolysis prevented a pathological work - up ) . Follow - up of this cohort in the coming months will establish whether Cav - 1 deficiency can precipitate tumorigenesis and / or a reduction in life span . A routine histopathological examination of Cav - 1 null mice at 4 – 5 months of age ( n (cid:9) 4 male , n (cid:9) 4 female ) failed to show any evidence of abnormalities , with the exception of lung tissue ( see below ) . We have noticed , however , that although in the first few months of life there is no overt difference between wild - type and knockouts , older Cav - 1 - deficient mice are more likely to be smaller in size than their wild - type littermates . The Absence of Caveolin - 1 Is Sufficient to Abrogate Caveolae Formation— The molecular components required for caveolar biogenesis have been studied by numerous investigators . From the following observations , the general consensus remains that caveolin - 1 plays an essential role in caveolae formation . 1 ) Cholesterol is required for caveolar invagination , because treatment with cholesterol - depleting agents ( e . g . filipin and methyl - (cid:1) - cyclodextrin ) ablates caveolar structures ( 68 ) . 2 ) Caveolin - 1 is a cholesterol - binding protein , possibly facilitating the concentration of the critical mass of cholesterol required for invagination ( 8 , 69 ) . 3 ) Down - regulation of caveolin - 1 in Ha - Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38124 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Ras and v - Abl - transformed NIH 3T3 fibroblasts or by antisense strategies results in a concomitant reduction of caveolae at the membrane ( 28 , 48 ) . 4 ) Overexpression of caveolin - 1 in a lym - phocytic cell line , cells that do not endogenously express the protein , is sufficient to allow the formation of caveolae ( 6 ) . Thus , the generation of caveolin - 1 null mice provided an opportunity to test this assertion under physiological condi - tions . In this manner , nonspecific effects due to chemical treat - ments , cellular transformation , and overexpression would not confound such a study . MEFs derived from Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) and (cid:3) / (cid:3) embryos were cultured to near 100 % confluency , conditions that have been shown to result in optimal caveolin - 1 expression and caveolae formation . Standard transmission electron mi - croscopy was used to visualize the plasma membrane ( Fig . 2 ) . While wild - type MEFs have numerous uniformly sized caveo - lae , the Cav - 1 - deficient cells are conspicuously devoid of caveo - lae . An exhaustive search of the plasma membrane from Cav - 1 knockout MEFs failed to show any invaginations resembling F IG . 1 . Targeted disruption of the cav - 1 gene produces a null mutation . A , the Cav - 1 locus ( containing the first two exons ) and the targeting construct ( containing the neomycin ( NEO ) cassette with flanking segments homologous to the locus ) are shown in schematic format . The transcriptional orientation of neomycin cassette and the Cav - 1 locus are delineated by arrows . Note that homologous recombination would eliminate a 2 . 2 - kb genomic segment containing Cav - 1 exons 1 and 2 and introduce two new restriction sites ( Pst I and Xba I ) , both of which can be used to screen for positive ES clones . The 1 . 1 - kb Sac I - Xba I probe used for Southern blot analysis is located 3 (cid:2) of the targeting vector , as shown . B , Southern blot analysis of two positive and wild - type ES cell clones . The probe used is a 1 . 1 - kb Sac I - Xba I fragment located 3 (cid:2) of the targeting vector shown in A . The 4 - kb ( Xba I digest ) or 5 . 5 - kb ( Pst I digest ) bands signify appropriate targeted disruption of the Cav - 1 locus . C , Southern blot analysis of Pst I - digested tail DNA from the offspring of Cav - 1 heterozygote inter - crosses . The absence of a wild - type 8 . 0 kb signifies the generation of the Cav - 1 knockout animal . An alternative PCR - based strategy used to determine the genotype of animals is also shown . The absence of a 500 - bp wild - type band signifies the generation of a Cav - 1 knockout animal . D , lysates from three tissues with varying levels of Cav - 1 expression ( fat , lung , and heart ) were prepared from mice of all three genotypes . 30 (cid:3) g of protein was loaded in each lane , subjected to SDS - PAGE , and immunoblotted with anti - Cav - 1 mAb ( clone 2297 ) . A longer exposure of the same blot fails to detect any Cav - 1 expression in knockout tissues . Equal protein loading was assessed using the anti - (cid:1) - tubulin mAb ( clone 2 . 1 ) . E , MEFs were derived from 13 . 5 - day - old embryos . Two independent embryos of each genotype were selected for subsequent analysis . 20 (cid:3) g of cell lysate was loaded in each lane , subjected to SDS - PAGE , and immunoblotted with anti - Cav - 1 mAb ( clone 2297 ) . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38125 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m caveolae . However , we did observe the occasional clathrin - coated pit ( invaginations typically 5 times larger than caveolae ) in MEFs of both genotypes ( data not shown ) , indicating that their number or presence is not affected by a Cav - 1 deficiency . The Absence of Caveolin - 1 Leads to Degradation and Redis - tribution of Caveolin - 2— Currently , the caveolin gene family is composed of caveolin - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 . All known terminally differ - entiated tissues that express caveolin - 1 also express the closely related family member caveolin - 2 ( Cav - 2 ) ( 9 , 11 ) . In contrast , caveolin - 3 ( Cav - 3 ) , the protein with the highest homology to Cav - 1 , is expressed specifically in muscle cells ( including cardiac , skeletal , and smooth muscle ) . Therefore , we were interested to determine any possible counter - regulatory or compensatory behavior by Cav - 2 and Cav - 3 in Cav - 1 null tissues . We immu - noblotted the same tissues samples used to compare Cav - 1 expression in mice of different genotypes ( Fig . 1 D ) for Cav - 2 and Cav - 3 . To our surprise , Cav - 2 expression was greatly reduced in all the Cav - 1 ( (cid:3) / (cid:3) ) tissues examined ( Fig . 3 A ) . A longer exposure of the same blots shows that caveolin - 2 is in fact expressed , albeit at (cid:4) 5 % of wild - type levels . Cav - 3 levels remained unper - turbed , however , and showed the expected expression pattern ( i . e . muscle - specific expression ) ( Fig . 3 A ) . A (cid:1) - tubulin immuno - blot indicates equal protein loading in all lanes ( Fig . 3 A ) . More importantly , in heterozygous animals , Cav - 2 levels remain un - perturbed despite the reduction in caveolin - 1 ( Fig . 1 , D and E ) . Similar results were observed in Cav - 1 - null MEFs ( Fig . 3 B ) . Therefore , it seems that the absence , but not the reduction of Cav - 1 , is sufficient to cause a near - total deficiency in Cav - 2 . The in vivo relationship between these two proteins ( Cav - 1 and Cav - 2 ) goes beyond simple co - expression however . Although Cav - 1 is able to form homo - oligomers consisting of 14 – 16 indi - vidual molecules ( 70 , 71 ) , it also is capable of forming similar size hetero - oligomers with Cav - 2 ( 11 , 72 ) and co - localizes with Cav - 2 in caveolae microdomains ( 11 ) . Additionally , it appears that Cav - 2 requires the presence of Cav - 1 for oligomerization and plasma membrane localization ; when Cav - 2 is overex - pressed alone , it behaves as a mixture of monomers and dimers and is found in the Golgi complex ( 73 – 75 ) . However , down - regulation of caveolin - 1 either by antisense strategies or by oncogenic transformation ( conditions where Cav - 1 is reduced to undetectable levels ) has no effect on Cav - 2 levels or their local - ization ( 48 ) . 2 The generation of Cav - 1 - deficient mice provided us the opportunity to definitively resolve the relationship be - tween Cav - 1 and Cav - 2 in vivo . Due to the abundance of Type I pneumocytes and endothelial cells , lung tissue is a great source for the purification and molecular analysis of caveolae ( 60 ) . In order to determine the localization of Cav - 2 in Cav - 1 null mice , we subjected mouse 2 B . Razani , J . A . Engelman , X . B . Wang , W . Schubert , X . L . Zhang , C . B . Marks , F . Macaluso , R . G . Russell , M . Li , R . G . Pestell , D . Di Vizio , H . Hou , Jr . , B . Knietz , G . Lagaud , G . J . Christ , W . Edelmann , and M . P . Lisanti , unpublished observations . F IG . 2 . A deficiency in Cav - 1 is sufficient to disrupt caveolae formation . Cav - 1 wild - type and knockout MEFs were grown to near - confluence on 60 - mm dishes and prepared for transmission electron microscopy as described under “Experimental Procedures . ” All analyses were performed at (cid:5) 16 , 000 magnification ( for ease of view , images shown are further magnified to (cid:5) 43 , 500 ) . The plasma membranes of numerous cells were exhaustively scanned for caveolae , defined as uniform 50 – 100 - nm flask - shaped membrane invaginations . The scale bar is shown at the lower left corner ( bar , 150 nm ) . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38126 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m lung tissue to extraction and sucrose gradient ultracentrifuga - tion , a procedure with which we have previously separated caveolar microdomains from other cellular constituents . Via this method , it is possible to dramatically concentrate Cav - 1 , the caveolae marker protein , with respect to total cellular pro - tein ( 60 , 62 ) . The outputs of this centrifugation consist of 12 equal fractions ( of which fractions 4 – 5 and 8 – 12 are considered of caveolar and non - caveolar origin , respectively ) . As shown in Fig . 3 C , Cav - 1 and - 2 are enriched heavily in the caveolar fractions of wild - type lungs . Interestingly , however , in Cav - 1 - deficient lungs , Cav - 2 is almost entirely excluded from such fractions . We also obtained similar results in cultured MEFs ( data not shown ) , indicating that a lack of Cav - 1 alters the fractionation of Cav - 2 . We next attempted to uncover more definitively the subcel - lular localization of Cav - 2 . Fig . 3 D shows a series of micro - graphs of wild - type and knockout MEFs co - immunostained with anti - Cav - 1 polyclonal and anti - Cav - 2 monoclonal antibod - ies . There is a distinct and overlapping membrane localization for Cav - 1 and - 2 in wild - type cells ; in contrast , we found Cav - 2 only in the perinuclear Golgi compartments of Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs ( Fig . 3 D ) . We reasoned that transient transfection of these Cav - 1 knockout cells with the Cav - 1 cDNA should rescue and redistribute Cav - 2 away from the Golgi , restoring its plasma F IG . 3 . Phenotypic behavior of the caveolin - 2 protein in Cav - 1 null cells . A and B , the absence of Cav - 1 leads to severely reduced caveolin - 2 levels . A , 30 (cid:3) g of lysates from tissues used in Fig . 1 D were loaded in each lane , subjected to SDS - PAGE , and immunoblotted with anti - Cav - 2 mAb ( clone 26 ) and anti - Cav - 3 mAb ( clone 65 ) . A longer exposure of the same blot shows that Cav - 2 is expressed in Cav - 1 knockout mice , albeit at extremely reduced levels ( (cid:4) 5 % of wild - type ) . Equal protein loading was assessed using the anti - (cid:1) - tubulin mAb ( clone 2 . 1 ) . Note that the expression of caveolin - 3 remains muscle - specific . B , 20 (cid:3) g of lysates from MEFs used in Fig . 1 E were subjected to SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with anti - Cav - 2 mAb ( clone 26 ) . C and D , caveolin - 2 is displaced from caveolae microdomains and localizes to a perinuclear compartment in Cav - 1 null cells . C , lung tissue from wild - type and knockout mice was homogenized thoroughly in lysis buffer containing 1 % Triton X - 100 and subjected to sucrose gradient centrifugation , a procedure that separates caveolar microdomains from other cellular constituents ( 60 ) . Twelve fractions , of which fractions 4 – 5 and 8 – 12 are considered of caveolar and non - caveolar origin , respectively , were collected and subjected to SDS - PAGE . Immunoblotting with anti - Cav - 1 mAb ( clone 2297 ) and anti - Cav - 2 mAb ( clone 26 ) was used to determine the localization of Cav - 1 and Cav - 2 in these gradient fractions . Note that the Western blot showing the distribution Cav - 2 in Cav - 1 null lung tissue is overexposed to illustrate the distribution of residual Cav - 2 , as Cav - 2 protein levels are down - regulated to (cid:4) 5 % of normal levels in Cav - 1 null animals . D , formaldehyde - fixed wild - type and knockout MEFs were doubly immunostained with anti - Cav - 1 pAb ( N20 ) and anti - Cav - 2 mAb ( clone 26 ) . Bound 1° antibodies were visualized with distinctly tagged 2° antibodies ( see “Experimental Procedures” ) . Note the perinuclear / Golgi localization of caveolin - 2 in Cav - 1 knockout MEFs . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38127 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m membrane localization . Fig . 4 A confirms this assumption , show - ing co - localization of both proteins at the cell surface in the Cav - 1 transfected cell . It should be noted that the Golgi staining for Cav - 2 in neighboring untransfected cells is not viewable at this exposure simply due to the immensely reduced Cav - 2 expression . We have described previously a high efficiency method of Cav - 1 overexpression using adenovirus - mediated gene transfer ( 34 ) . With this strategy , we would be able to demonstrate biochemically a Cav - 1 - mediated rescue of Cav - 2 expression . Since the Cav - 1 adenovirus contains a tet - responsive promoter ( “tet - off” system ) , Cav - 1 expression is possible only by co - infec - tion of cells with a tet - transactivator ( tTA ) - producing virus . Fig . 4 B shows that a steadily increasing dose of adenoviral titers achieves a concomitant increase in Cav - 1 expression . In turn , we observe a robust elevation of Cav - 2 expression ; (cid:1) - actin is used as an equal protein loading control . Note that expres - sion of equal titers of the irrelevant protein GFP have no effect on Cav - 2 expression ( Fig . 4 B ) . To gain insight into possible mechanisms for the reduction in Cav - 2 levels , we focused on the cellular degradative machinery . The obvious requirement of Cav - 1 for both the expression and membrane trafficking of Cav - 2 indicates that protein misfold - ing , a hang - up in the Golgi , and subsequent degradation ( pro - teasomal pathway ) or an increase in retrograde trafficking from the membrane ( lysosomal pathway ) are possible areas of investigation . Therefore , we treated Cav - 1 knockout MEFs with MG - 132 and MG - 115 ( two classically used proteasomal inhibitors ( 76 , 77 ) ) and chloroquine and NH 4 Cl ( two lysosomal inhibitors ) for a period of up to 24 h ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . We discovered that only the proteasomal inhibitors have a positive effect on Cav - 2 expression . Over a time course of 8 , 16 , and 24 h , Cav - 2 levels increase substantially from base line . It is interest - ing to note , however , that the increase in Cav - 2 expression is not complete . This could be due to the following : 1 ) sub - optimal dosages of proteasomal inhibitors , a condition not rectifiable in such experiments as higher dosages have toxic effects on the MEF cells 2 or 2 ) the presence of other degradative processes not fully abrogated by our repertoire of chemical inhibitors . Caveolin - 1 Null MEFs Show Defects in the Endocytosis of Albumin but Not Transferrin— Albumin has been used exten - sively to monitor caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( 78 ) . Thus , we next examined the ability of Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs to endocytose the fluorescent tracer , FITC - albumin . Fig . 5 , A and B , shows the Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs fail to accumulate FITC - albumin even af - ter 30 – 60 min of continuous incubation . In contrast , wild - type MEFs show cell surface labeling with FITC - albumin after only 5 min , with significant intracellular accumulation by 15 min of incubation . These results support the idea that caveolae clearly participate in endocytosis of specific ligands , such as albumin . Importantly , transient expression of the caveolin - 1 cDNA in Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs was sufficient to restore the uptake of FITC - albumin ( Fig . 5 B ) . To ensure that a lack of caveolin - 1 expression did not glo - F IG . 4 . Rescue of caveolin - 2 expression in Cav - 1 null cells . A and B , caveolin - 2 localization and expression can be rescued by recom - binantly expressing Cav - 1 in Cav - 1 knockout cells . A , Cav - 1 (cid:3) / (cid:3) MEFs were transiently transfected with the full - length cDNA encoding Cav - 1 . Thirty six hours post - transfection , cells were formaldehyde - fixed and doubly immunostained with anti - Cav - 1 pAb ( N20 ) and anti - Cav - 2 mAb ( clone 26 ) as in Fig . 3 D . The image shown is that of a Cav - 1 - transfected cell . B , in order to obtain a higher efficiency of Cav - 1 expression in Cav - 1 (cid:3) / (cid:3) MEFs , an adenoviral strategy was used ( 34 ) . The Cav - 1 and GFP adenoviruses ( Ad - Cav - 1 and Ad - GFP ) contain a tet - responsive promoter that can only be induced by co - infection of cells with the tet - transactivator ( Ad - tTA ) (cid:3) “tet off ” system . MEFs were co - infected with Ad - Cav - 1 and Ad - tTA at varying titers ( 100 , 400 , and 1000 PFUs / cell ) . Controls included infection with Ad - Cav - 1 alone ( 1000 PFUs / cell ) or co - infection with Ad - GFP and Ad - tTA ( 1000 PFUs / cell ) . C and D , in the absence of Cav - 1 , caveolin - 2 is partially degraded through the proteasomal pathway . C , Cav - 1 (cid:3) / (cid:3) MEFs grown to near - confluence were treated with the proteasomal inhibitors MG - 132 ( 1 (cid:3) M ) and MG - 115 ( 1 (cid:3) M ) for a series of time points ( 8 , 16 , and 24 h ) or with vehicle ( Me 2 SO ) . Whole cell lysis and subsequent SDS - PAGE allowed the com - parison of Cav - 2 levels with that of wild - type MEFs . D , Cav - 1 ( (cid:3) / (cid:3) ) MEFs , grown to near - confluence , were treated with the lysosomal in - hibitors chloroquine ( 50 (cid:3) M ) and NH 4 Cl ( 10 m M ) or vehicle ( Me 2 SO ) for 24 h . Whole cell lysis and subsequent SDS - PAGE allowed comparison of Cav - 2 levels with that of wild - type MEFs . Equal protein loading was assessed in A and B with anti - (cid:1) - actin mAb ( clone AC - 15 ) . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38128 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m bally affect endocytosis , we also examined the fate of a second fluorescent tracer , FITC - transferrin , which is endocytosed via clathrin - coated pits . Fig . 5 C demonstrates that FITC - trans - ferrin was rapidly endocytosed in both wild - type and Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs , with no apparent differences . After 30 min , FITC - transferrin accumulated in a perinuclear compartment in both wild - type and Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs . Thus , Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs show a selective defect in the F IG . 5 . Caveolin - 1 - deficient MEFs show defects in the endocytosis of albumin but not transferrin . A , wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs were incubated in normal medium supplemented with FITC - albumin ( 10 (cid:3) g / ml ) . After 5 , 15 , and 30 min at 37 °C , cells were formaldehyde - fixed and visualized by fluorescence microscopy . Note that Cav - 1 null MEFs fail to internalize FITC - albumin . Left panels , wild - type MEFs ( WT ) ; right panels , Cav - 1 null MEFs ( KO ) . B , Cav - 1 null MEFs were transiently transfected with the full - length cDNA encoding caveolin - 1 . Thirty six hours post - transfection , cells were allowed to continuously endocytose FITC - albumin for 30 min , as in A . Cells were then formaldehyde - fixed and immunostained with anti - Cav - 1 IgG ( rabbit pAb N - 20 ) . Note that in cells recombinantly expressing the caveolin - 1 cDNA that uptake of FITC - albumin is clearly restored ( left panels ) . However , untransfected cells in the same cell population failed to internalize FITC - albumin ( right panels ) . Upper panels , FITC - albumin uptake ; middle panels , Cav - 1 immunostaining ; lower panels , phase images . C , wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs were incubated in normal medium supplemented with FITC - transferrin ( 10 (cid:3) g / ml ) . After 5 , 15 , and 30 min at 37 °C , cell were formaldehyde - fixed and visualized by fluorescence microscopy . Note that both wild - type and Cav - 1 null MEFs internalize FITC - transferrin , without any apparent differences . Left panels , wild - type MEFs ( WT ) ; right panels , Cav - 1 null MEFs ( KO ) . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38129 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m F IG . 6 . Growth properties and cell cycle analysis of Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) MEFs . A – C , Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs proliferate faster and have increased S phase fractions . A , six independent MEF cultures , consisting of two Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) , two Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:3) , and two Cav - 1 (cid:3) / (cid:3) genotypes , were plated at a density of 15 (cid:5) 10 3 cells / dish on a series of 35 - mm dishes . Duplicate plates from each MEF culture were then counted each day for a period of 10 days . Cell numbers at the indicated time points ( Days 1 – 10 ) are the average of duplicate plates . B , wild - type and knockout MEFs were plated at a density of 2 (cid:5) 10 5 in 60 - mm dishes . At the exponential phase of growth they were ethanol - fixed , stained with propidium iodide , and analyzed by flow cytometry for the G 0 / G 1 , S , and G 2 / M phases of the cell cycle . Parameters indicated are the percentage of cells in each phase of the cell cycle out of a total of 10 , 000 cells analyzed . C , wild - type and knockout MEFs were plated at a density of 2 (cid:5) 10 5 in 60 - mm dishes . Upon adherence to the plates they were supplemented with 1 (cid:3) Ci / ml [ 3 H ] thymidine and cultured overnight . Incorporated tritium was determined by scintillation counts of alkaline lysed cells / trichloroacetic acid - precipitated DNA ( see “Experimental Procedures” ) . Data shown are the average and standard deviation of counts from five plates . D and E , the increased S phase in Cav - 1 null cells can be rescued by re - introduction of Cav - 1 . D , Cav - 1 knockout MEFs were transfected with either GFP alone or GFP - Cav - 1 . Untransfected plates of wild - type and knockout cells were similarly cultured . Thirty six hours post - transfection , all cells were trypsinized , live - stained with Hoechst 33342 , and subjected to flow cytometry . Transfected ( i . e . GFP - positive ) cells were distinguished from non - transfected cells ( GFP - negative ) by using appropriate fluorescence channels . Cell cycle Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38130 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m uptake of a known caveolar ligand , i . e . albumin . This is con - sistent with our observation that Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs lack morphological caveolae , as seen by transmission electron mi - croscopy ( Fig . 2 ) . The Growth Properties and Cell Cycle Analysis of Cav - 1 (cid:3) / (cid:3) MEFs— In the past decade , several important observations have implicated Cav - 1 as a negative regulator of signaling pathways involved in pro - proliferative responses ; as a result , Cav - 1 has been suggested to function as a putative tumor suppressor . Caveolin - 1 levels are drastically reduced upon on - cogenic transformation of several cell lines ( 28 – 30 , 33 – 37 , 61 ) . More importantly , overexpression of Cav - 1 is sufficient to ab - rogate anchorage - independent growth in these transformed cells ( 29 – 32 , 34 , 61 ) . Cav - 1 also interacts with and negatively regulates several pro - proliferative signaling molecules , such as certain receptor - tyrosine kinases ( including EGF - R , platelet - derived growth factor receptor , and Neu ) , Ha - Ras , c - Src , and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase , among others ( 17 , 18 , 24 – 27 ) . Finally , down - regulation of Cav - 1 by an antisense strategy in NIH - 3T3 fibroblasts leads to a tumorigenic phenotype , ena - bling the these cells to grow in soft agar and nude mice ( 48 ) . However , all of this work has been conducted in immortal - ized cell lines ( i . e . cells that have perturbations in one or more genes important for controlling cell cycle progression ) , a situa - tion that may confound the physiological behavior of Cav - 1 . Therefore , we attempted to study Cav - 1 function in cellular proliferation in cultured primary MEFs . We first determined the growth potential of six independent MEF cultures ( two F IG . 7 . Hyperproliferation of Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs is not re - lated to hyperactivation of the p42 / 44 MAP kinase cascade . A , MEFs derived from embryos of all three genotypes were cultured in triplicate at 70 – 80 % confluence . One set of cultures was grown contin - uously under normal serum conditions ( DMEM , 10 % FBS ) , and the other two were serum - starved for 12 h . Serum ( 10 % FBS ) was reintro - duced into only one set of the serum - starved cells for 40 min . Cells were lysed , subjected to SDS - PAGE , and immunoblotted with phospho - spe - cific anti - p42 / 44 pAb , anti - p42 / 44 antibody , and anti - Cav - 1 mAb ( 2297 ) . B , wild - type and knockout MEFs were plated in a series of 60 - mm dishes , serum - starved for 12 h , and stimulated with EGF ( 50 ng / ml ) for either 0 , 5 , 10 , 20 , or 40 min . Cells were lysed , subjected to SDS - PAGE , and immunoblotted for the same antibodies used in A . F IG . 8 . Although Cav - 1 levels increase at higher passages of culture , the absence of Cav - 1 does not impart an advantage in senescence and subsequent immortalization . A , four independent MEF cultures ( two wild - type and two knockout ) were propagated ac - cording to the 3T3 protocol ( i . e . 3 (cid:5) 10 5 cells were plated in 60 - mm dishes every 3 days ) . At each passage ( 2 – 16 ) , the combined cell counts from three 60 - mm dishes were determined for each MEF culture by hemocytometer . B , wild - type and Cav - 1 knockout MEFs were propa - gated according to the 3T3 protocol ( i . e . 3 (cid:5) 10 5 cells were plated in 60 - mm dishes every 3 days ) . Cell lysates were prepared from Passage 4 and Passage 14 MEFs , subjected to SDS - PAGE , and immunoblotted with anti - Cav - 1 mAb ( clone 2297 ) , anti - Cav - 2 mAb ( clone 65 ) , or anti - (cid:1) - actin mAb ( clone AC - 15 ) . parameters for all populations were analyzed as shown . The indicated numbers represent the percentages of cells in each phase out of a total of 10 , 000 cells . E , the percentage of increase in S phase fraction as compared with wild - type MEFs for all transfected and untransfected cell populations analyzed in D . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38131 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m from each possible genotype ) ( also shown in Figs . 1 E and 3 B ) over a 10 - day period . Cells were plated sparsely in a series of 35 - mm dishes , two of which were counted each day . In each case , the Cav - 1 - deficient cells proliferated approximately 2 - fold faster and to higher saturation densities than their wild - type counter - parts ( Fig . 6 A ) . Remarkably , cells heterozygous for Cav - 1 show intermediate proliferation rates that seem to inversely correlate with their levels of Cav - 1 expression ( see Fig . 1 E for a comparison of Cav - 1 protein levels ) . These experiments were also performed with MEFs derived from 2 other knockout and wild - type embryos with similar results ( data not shown ) . We next conducted a more quantitative growth comparison of the Cav - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) and (cid:3) / (cid:3) cells . Fig . 6 B shows a representative flow cytometric analysis of the cell cycle of wild - type and knock - out MEFs in their exponential phase of growth . Note that there is a reproducible increase of (cid:4) 25 – 30 % in the S phase popula - tion of the Cav - 1 - deficient cells , with concomitant decreases in G 0 / G 1 and to a lesser extent G 2 / M . We quantitatively assessed this S phase increase in another way , i . e . by calculating the incorporation of [ 3 H ] thymidine in randomly cycling wild - type and knockout MEFs . Fig . 6 C shows the rates of S phase in - crease in line with the cell cycle analysis above ( with increases in thymidine incorporation of (cid:4) 25 % ) . Interestingly , an increase in S phase of similar magnitude is observed in MEFs harboring a deletion of several classically known cell cycle inhibitors , such as p16 INK4A / p19 ARF and Rb ( 79 , 80 ) . If increases in cellular proliferation and S phase are due to a Cav - 1 deficiency , we reasoned that recombinant overexpression of Cav - 1 in knockout cells should act to revert their cell cycle profiles to wild - type levels . In light of the fact that MEFs are relatively resistant to high transfection efficiencies , the follow - ing strategy was devised . We have described previously ( 63 ) the characterization of a GFP - Cav - 1 chimera that behaves indis - tinguishably from wild - type Cav - 1 . Transient transfection of this GFP - Cav - 1 chimera or GFP alone , followed by flow cyto - metric analysis of GFP - positive cells , allowed us to compare the cell cycle responses of transfected and untransfected cells . Fig . 6 D summarizes the results from such an experiment , whereas Fig . 6 E shows the relative changes in S phase between each group of cells . Note that expression of GFP alone was insuffi - cient to complement the cell cycle defect in Cav - 1 (cid:3) / (cid:3) MEFs , whereas expression of GFP - Cav - 1 successfully complemented this defect . Thus , we conclude that the observed increase in cell proliferation in Cav - 1 null MEFs reflects a decrease in the number of cells in the G 0 / G 1 phase of the cell cycle , with a corresponding proportional increase in the number of cells in the S phase . The relative inability of Cav - 1 - deficient cells to control cel - F IG . 9 . Caveolin - 1 - deficient mice show lung abnormalities , with thick - ened alveolar septa and hypercellular - ity . A , light microscopy . One - (cid:3) m sections of lung parenchyma were cut and stained with toluidine blue . Note that in caveolin - 1 - deficient mice the alveolar spaces ap - peared significantly smaller or appeared constricted , with thickened alveolar septa and hypercellularity . These images were acquired with a 60 (cid:5) objective . Upper panel , wild - type mice ( WT ) ; lower panel , Cav - 1 null mice ( KO ) . B , reticulin stain - ing . Wild - type and Cav - 1 null mouse lung tissue sections were subjected to reticulin staining and examined using a Zeis Axio - phot with a 20 (cid:5) objective . Note that in caveolin - 1 - deficient mice , reticulin stain - ing showed increased basement mem - branes in the thickened alveolar walls . There was increased density and thick - ness of the basement membranes and loose arrays of reticulin fibers . Upper panel , wild - type mice ( WT ) ; lower panel , Cav - 1 null mice ( KO ) . C , transmission electron microscopy . Lung tissue samples were processed for electron microscopy , as detailed under “Experimental Proce - dures . ” Images were acquired at low mag - nification ( (cid:5) 2 , 000 ) , and montages were as - sembled to illustrate the detailed morphology of the alveolar architecture . Note the presence of thickened alveolar septaandhypercellularityinCav - 1 - deficient mice . Upper panel , wild - type mice ( WT ) ; lower panel , Cav - 1 null mice ( KO ) . D , quantitation of nuclei . Wild - type and Cav - 1 null mouse lung tissue sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin were examined using a Zeis Axiophot . Using a 20 (cid:5) objective , six random 0 . 5 - mm 2 fields were photographed for each genotype , and all the nuclei within those regions were manually tabulated using a hand - held counter . Note that lung sections from Cav - 1 null mice show an (cid:4) 2 - fold increase in overall cellularity . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38132 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m lular proliferation could be a result of lost functional interac - tions with any of the signaling molecules previously implicated to interact with caveolin - 1 . Based on several important obser - vations , one of the most attractive candidates in this process is the Ras / p42 / 44 MAP kinase signaling cascade . Cholesterol de - pletion of cellular membranes , a process that abolishes caveo - lae formation and Cav - 1 membrane localization ( 3 ) , leads to a hyperactivation of the p42 / 44 MAP kinase cascade ( 81 ) . Anti - sense - mediated reductions of Cav - 1 in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts leads to a similar hyperactivation of p42 / 44 MAP kinase cas - cade ( 48 ) . Finally , the ablation of Cav - 1 levels in C . elegans by RNA interference produces a meiotic phenotype that mirrors that of Ras activation ( 49 ) . We attempted to recapitulate the above results in MEFs derived from wild - type and knockout embryos . Fig . 7 A shows that under conditions of normal serum , serum starvation , and serum re - introduction ( situations that activate , depress , and reactivate the p42 / 44 kinase cascade , respectively ) , Cav - 1 deficiency does not affect the activation state of this cascade . We independently corroborated these results by observing a lack of altered kinetics in Cav - 1 - deficient cells under conditions of EGF - stimulated p42 / 44 phosphoryla - tion ( Fig . 7 B ) . Therefore , we conclude that the hyperprolifera - tive effect of Cav - 1 deficiency on primary cultured cells is independent of the Ras / p42 / 44 MAP kinase cascade . Caveolin - 1 levels have previously been shown to increase at the onset of senescence in primary human fibroblasts ( 82 ) . Therefore , we were interested in assessing the levels of Cav - 1 in wild - type MEFs and the relative proliferation capacity of Cav - 1 null MEFs at higher passages of culture . In this way , we could observe both the senescence and subsequent immortal - ization responses of Cav - 1 knockout MEFs . By using a stand - ard 3T3 passaging protocol , two wild - type and two Cav - 1 knockout MEF cultures were serially propagated until immor - talization . Fig . 8 A shows the growth of these cells at each passage . There was no observable differences in senescence and subsequent immortalization in the Cav - 1 null cells . We additionally performed immunoblot analysis on lysates taken from wild - type cells at passages 4 and 14 of culture . Fig . 8 B shows a dramatic increase in Cav - 1 and - 2 expression at the higher passage , even though this phenomenon apparently does not appear to be important for age - dependent cellular senes - cence and growth arrest . Caveolin - 1 - deficient Mice Show Lung Abnormalities , with Thickened Alveolar Septa and Hypercellularity , and Exercise Intolerance— As a consequence of the hyperproliferative pheno - type we observed with Cav - 1 null MEFs , we extensively exam - ined our pathology specimens for evidence of hypercellularity . Interestingly , the lung appeared abnormal , and thin sections ( 1 (cid:3) m ) were cut to better evaluate this possible phenotype . Fig . 9 A shows toluidine blue - stained thin sections of lung parenchyma from wild - type and caveolin - 1 - deficient animals . Note that in caveolin - 1 - deficient mice , the alveolar spaces ap - peared significantly smaller or appeared constricted , with thickened alveolar septa and hypercellularity . In caveolin - 1 - deficient mice , reticulin staining showed increased basement membranes in the thickened alveolar walls ( Fig . 9 B ) . There was increased density and thickness of the basement mem - branes and loose arrays of reticulin fibers . However , lung fi - brosis was not detected with trichrome staining ( not shown ) . The presence of thickened alveolar septa and hypercellularity was indeed confirmed by transmission electron microscopy at low magnification . Montages of images taken of wild - type and Cav - 1 null alveoli are shown in Fig . 9 C . As these lung tissue sections appeared hypercellular , we next quantitated the number of nuclei per high power field using hematoxylin and eosin - stained paraffin sections . Our results in - dicate that Cav - 1 null mice lung sections show an (cid:4) 2 - fold in - crease in cellularity . This is consistent with our observation that Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs proliferate (cid:4) 2 - fold faster and to higher saturation densities than their wild - type counterparts ( Fig . 9 D ) . As endothelial cells are one of the major cell types in lung tissue , and they are known to normally express high levels of F IG . 10 . Lung endothelial cells in Cav - 1 - deficient mice lack caveolae and are more numerous . A , transmission electron microscopy . Lung tissue samples were processed for electron microscopy as detailed under “Experimental Procedures . ” Images were acquired at high magnification ( (cid:5) 33 , 000 ) . Note that endothelial cells from Cav - 1 null mice lack caveolae , whereas their normal counterparts in wild - type mice showed abundant caveolae ( see arrows ) . Endothelial cells were identified by their proximity to red blood cells ( RBC ) that are electron dense ( due to their high iron content ) and appear black . Similarly , type I pneumocytes also lacked caveolae in the Cav - 1 null mice ( not shown ) . Upper panel , wild - type mice ( WT ) ; lower panel , Cav - 1 null mice ( KO ) . B and C , immunostaining . Lung paraffin sections from wild - type and caveolin - 1 - deficient mice were immunostained with an endothelial marker , anti - VEGF - R ( Flk - 1 ) IgG . Bound primary antibodies were detected with a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody . Arrows point at VEGF - R - positive endothelial cells , which appear more numerous in lung sections from Cav - 1 - deficient animals . Two representative fields are shown for each genotype . B , wild - type mice ( WT ) ; C , Cav - 1 null mice ( KO ) . Long overexposures are shown to illustrate better the overall architecture of the adjacent VEGF - R - negative lung parenchyma . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38133 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m caveolin - 1 , we examined the status of lung endothelial cells in both wild - type and caveolin - 1 - deficient animals . Transmission electron microscopy revealed that endothelial cells from Cav - 1 null mice lack caveolae , whereas their normal counterparts in wild - type mice showed abundant caveolae ( Fig . 10 A ) . We also used antibodies to VEGF - R ( Flk - 1 ) as a marker for endothelial cells . Immunostaining of paraffin sections with anti - VEGF - R revealed that the number of lung endothelial cells were increased in Cav - 1 null animals . For example , in wild - type animals , we routinely observed (cid:4) 1 – 2 VEGF - R - positive endothelial cells per 60 (cid:5) field , whereas in Cav - 1 - deficient animals there were (cid:4) 6 – 10 VEGF - R - positive endothelial cells per 60 (cid:5) field . Also , in Cav - 1 - deficient animals , the VEGF - R - positive endothelial cells were sometimes present in discrete clusters , i . e . reminiscent of a focus of cellular growth . Two representative images for each genotype are shown in Fig . 10 , panels B and C . The Ki67 “proliferation” antigen is a nuclear protein that is highly expressed in proliferating cells ( late G 1 , S , G 2 , and M phases of the cell cycle ) and is undetectable in cells in the G 0 phase of the cell cycle ( 83 , 84 ) . Fig . 11 shows that Ki67 immu - noreactivity is dramatically increased in lung tissue sections from Cav - 1 null mice , as compared with wild - type controls . This is consistent with the idea that a lack of caveolin - 1 can lead to hyperproliferation , as we have shown with Cav - 1 null MEFs in culture ( Fig . 6 A ) . To grossly assess the possible physical consequences of these lung abnormalities , we examined the exercise tolerance of wild - type and Cav - 1 - deficient mice . For this purpose , we subjected these animals to a “swimming test” ( see “Experimental Proce - dures” ) . Fig . 12 shows that wild - type animals were able to swim for up to 40 min , whereas Cav - 1 - deficient animals only swam for (cid:4) 10 min . Thus , Cav - 1 - deficient mice clearly show exercise intolerance when compared with their wild - type littermates . Caveolin - 1 - deficient Mice Show Abnormal Vasoconstriction and Vasorelaxation Responses— Caveolin - 1 is highly expressed in endothelial cells where caveolae are abundant . In addition , in vitro studies have shown that caveolin - 1 functions as a tonic inhibitor of eNOS ( 85 – 87 ) . Thus , we next assessed the vascular tone of isolated mouse aortic rings by using an established physiological method that measures tension in response to vasoconstriction or vasorelaxation . For this purpose , we employed phenylephrine ( PE ; an (cid:4) 1 - adrenergic receptor agonist ) as a vasoconstrictor and acetylcho - line ( Ach ) to induce NO - dependent relaxation . To demonstrate a role for eNOS in these physiological responses , we took ad - vantage of the availability of a well characterized arginine - based NOS inhibitor , known as L - NAME ( nitro - L - arginine methyl ester ) . As shown in Fig . 13 , aortic rings isolated from the Cav - 1 null mice were significantly different from their wild - type counter - parts in all parameters examined . The results of a represent - ative experiment on an aortic ring from each genotype ( WT versus KO ) are shown in Fig . 13 A . As illustrated , PE was first used to elicit a contractile response . Upon achieving steady - state , relaxation was induced by adding acetylcholine ( Ach ) in gradually increasing doses ( from 10 (cid:3) 8 to 10 (cid:3) 4 M ) , thereby cre - ating a dose - response curve . Finally , in order to dissociate the PE - induced contractility from NO - mediated relaxation , the NOS inhibitor L - NAME was added to all rings . There are several important observations to note . 1 ) The steady - state maximal tension response to PE in the wild - type aortic rings was nearly 2 - fold greater than that observed for the Cav - 1 null aortic rings ( Fig . 13 B , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . It should be noted that over the same experimental time course , there was a less than 10 % variation in tension development in wild - type and Cav - 1nullaorticrings . 2 ) AlthoughAchinducedaconcentration - dependent relaxation response in aortic rings from both wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice , significantly greater relaxation was observed in Cav - 1 null aortic rings at all Ach concentrations examined ( Fig . 13 C ) . 3 ) After addition of L - NAME , the steady - state contractile response in the continuing presence of PE was significantly greater in aortic rings from both the wild - type and Cav - 1 null mice ; however , the percent increase was significantly greater for the Cav - 1 null mice ( see Fig . 13 , A and B ) . Moreover , F IG . 11 . Immunostaining of the lung parenchyma with the Ki67 “proliferation” antigen . Lung paraffin sections from wild - type and caveolin - 1 - deficient mice were immunostained with a widely used proliferation marker , Ki67 . Bound primary antibodies were detected with a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody . Note that Ki67 immu - noreactivity is dramatically increased in lung tissue sections from Cav - 1 null mice , as compared with wild - type controls . Upper panel , wild - type mice ( WT ) ; lower panel , Cav - 1 null mice ( KO ) . F IG . 12 . Exercise tolerance in wild - type and Cav - 1 - deficient mice . Weight - matched , age - matched ( 4 . 5 months ) , same - sex litter - mates for each genotype were subjected to a “swimming test” ( see “Experimental Procedures” ) . Note that wild - type animals were able to swim for up to 40 min , whereas Cav - 1 - deficient animals only swam for (cid:4) 10 min ( an (cid:4) 4 - fold change ) . Thus , Cav - 1 - deficient mice clearly show exercise intolerance , as would be predicted based on the morphology of the lung . Similar exercise intolerance was also observed in 1 - month - old mice ( not shown ) . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38134 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m the steady - state PE - induced contractile response after addition of L - NAME in the Cav - 1 null mice was indistinguishable from that observed in the wild - type mice ( Fig . 13 , A and B ) . In summary , we observed that Cav - 1 null mice showed an impaired vasoconstrictor response to PE . This impaired response was due to increased eNOS activity as the proper vasoconstrictor response could be restored by treatment with L - NAME , a well characterized NOS inhibitor . Conversely , Ach - induced relaxation ( a NO - dependent phenomenon ) of the aortic rings was clearly potentiated by loss of caveolin - 1 expression . DISCUSSION The discovery of caveolae by pioneering cell biologists in the 1950s added yet another major organelle to the cellular reper - toire . Although the field remained relatively dormant for sev - eral decades , the advent of caveolar biology occurred in 1992 with the discovery of Cav - 1 as the marker protein for such microdomains . It has become clear over the ensuing years that caveolar function is intimately liked to this marker protein . In this study , we describe the generation of a new mouse model with an ablation of the gene encoding the Cav - 1 protein . We show that the cells derived from these mice are deficient in caveolae , as determined ultrastructurally , thereby conclusively demonstrat - ing that Cav - 1 is required for caveolae formation in primary cells . Surprisingly , despite a lack of such prevalent and conspicuous organelles , these mice are both viable and fertile . Cav - 1 null MEFs are perturbed in several other ways , how - ever . First , we show that Cav - 2 , a protein that is co - expressed , co - localizes , and hetero - oligomerizes with Cav - 1 is severely affected in Cav - 1 null cells . In the absence of caveolin - 1 , Cav - 2 levels are reduced by (cid:4) 95 % . In addition , the remaining Cav - 2 no longer targets to the plasma membrane but instead is se - questered within the Golgi complex . We further show that re - introduction of Cav - 1 in these deficient cells can rescue this effect by elevating Cav - 2 levels and recruiting it to the plasma membrane . Thus , the reduction of Cav - 2 protein seems to be independent of transcriptional repression and is rather medi - ated by proteasomal degradation , as two inhibitors of the 26 S proteasome are able to partially reverse this effect . Second , we demonstrate the Cav - 1 null MEFs fail to endocytose a known caveolar ligand , i . e . FITC - albumin , but show no defects in the uptake of FITC - transferrin , a marker for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Importantly , transient expression of the caveo - lin - 1 cDNA in Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs was sufficient to restore the uptake of FITC - albumin . Third , we show that Cav - 1 null MEFs reveal a hyperproliferative phenotype . Cav - 1 null MEFs are able to grow approximately 2 - fold faster during the expo - nential phase and reach higher densities at confluence . These effects are due to an increase of (cid:4) 25 – 30 % in the S phase fraction . Furthermore , we demonstrate a reversion of this ex - cess proliferation to wild - type levels by re - expressing Cav - 1 in knockout cells . However , we do not find any evidence that the observed growth augmentation is due to a hyperactivation of the p42 / 44 MAP kinase cascade , a signaling pathway reported by many investigators to be intimately linked to caveolae / caveolin functioning . Furthermore , although we show that Cav - 1 levels increase in higher passage cells ( i . e . cells at or near senescence ) , a deficiency in Cav - 1 is not sufficient to expedite immortalization in primary fibroblasts . Caveolae are thought to form as a result of a local accumu - lation of cholesterol , glycosphingolipids , and caveolin - 1 ( 8 , 88 , 89 ) . Caveolin - 1 can bind cholesterol in vitro ( 8 ) ; also , Cav - 1 is a major protein bound to photoactivable forms of both cholesterol and glycolipids in vivo ( 88 , 90 ) . Although in this study we have demonstrated that physiological levels of Cav - 1 protein are required for caveolae formation ( in corroboration of previous overexpression studies ) , the mechanisms underlying this proc - ess remain entirely unknown . Primarily , this is due to the fact that the Cav - 1 protein is not readily amenable to mutational analysis . Due to its ability to form a large oligomeric complex with itself and with Cav - 2 ( 11 , 70 , 72 , 91 ) , its ability to coalesce F IG . 13 . Caveolin - 1 - deficient mice show abnormal endothelium / NO - dependent modulation of mouse aortic contraction . A , repre - sentative trace of concentration - dependent acetylcholine ( 10 (cid:3) 8 – 10 (cid:3) 4 M ) - induced relaxation , followed by addition of L - NAME ( 100 (cid:3) M ) , which induced further contraction of the mouse aorta . Note the appearance of spontaneous oscillatory contractions present in the Ach concentration response curve in aortic rings from the wild - type mouse but largely absent from tracings obtained on aortic rings from the Cav - 1 null mouse . As such , for comparative purposes , the % relaxation ( see C ) was calculated from the “steady - state” trough of relaxation observed for each Ach concentration . The asterisks indicate the times of addition of increasing amounts of Ach ( 10 (cid:3) 8 , 3 (cid:5) 10 (cid:3) 8 , 10 (cid:3) 7 , 3 (cid:5) 10 (cid:3) 7 , 10 (cid:3) 6 , 3 (cid:5) 10 (cid:3) 6 , 10 (cid:3) 5 , 3 (cid:5) 10 (cid:3) 5 , and 10 (cid:3) 4 M ( molar ) ) . B , L - NAME ( 100 (cid:3) M ) modulation of PE - induced contraction in mouse aorta from wild - type ( WT ) and Cav - 1 null ( KO ) mice . Points represent the mean (cid:7) S . E . of 5 ( KO ) and 6 ( WT ) rings from 3 mice each . * , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 versus control WT ; * * * , p (cid:6) 0 . 0001 ; # # # , p (cid:6) 0 . 0001 versus KO ; two - way analysis of variance for repeated measures . Note that Cav - 1 null mice showed ( i ) an impaired vasoconstrictor response to PE , and ( ii ) this impaired response could be rescued by treatment with L - NAME , a well characterized NOS inhibitor . C , concentration - dependent relaxation induced by acetylcholine ( expressed as the log of molar concentration ) in aortas pre - constricted with 10 (cid:3) M phenylephrine from wild - type ( WT ; open squares ) and Cav - 1 null ( KO ; black squares ) mice . Points represent mean (cid:7) S . E . of 5 ( KO ) or 6 ( WT ) rings from 3 mice each . * * * , p (cid:6) 0 . 0001 versus WT . Note that Ach - induced relaxation ( a NO - dependent phenomenon ) of the aortic rings was clearly potentiated by the loss of caveolin - 1 expression . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38135 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m into even larger macrostructures ( 62 ) , its binding to cholesterol and glycosphingolipids ( 8 , 88 – 90 ) , and its membrane - spanning properties , any deletion / mutation of the protein can confound an analysis of caveolae formation in numerous ways . For ex - ample , baculovirus - mediated expression of Cav - 1 proteins lack - ing their oligomerization domain or C - terminal domains ( i . e . Cav - 1 (cid:10) 61 – 100 and (cid:10) 140 – 178 ) in Sf21 insect cells can induce vesicle formation albeit with sizes 10 (cid:5) normal caveolae . Our establishment of Cav - 1 - deficient cells can aid future studies in several ways . First , determinations of the composition of the plasma membrane in Cav - 1 - deficient cells could possibly estab - lish whether the absence of caveolae is due to relative reduc - tions in cholesterol / glycosphingolipid content or to simply the Cav - 1 protein itself . Second , overexpression of Cav - 1 mutants in these cells will establish an elegant screening strategy for de novo caveolae formation . Based on the current study , the intricate dependence of Cav - 2 on the presence of Cav - 1 is obvious . Cav - 2 is present at astonishingly lower levels ( (cid:4) 5 % of wild - type ) in knockout tis - sues , is localized in the Golgi compartment , and is degraded by the proteasomal pathway . However , the degradation of Cav - 2 is perhaps not entirely surprising . Rather elaborate mecha - nisms of quality surveillance have developed at various levels of the secretory pathway . Incompletely folded or assembled proteins are often sequestered at the endoplasmic reticulum where they are eventually degraded by the 26 S proteasome ( reviewed in Refs . 92 and 93 ) ) . The few molecules that “escape” detection , traffic to the Golgi where they can again be detected and re - routed to the endoplasmic reticulum for degradation . Since Cav - 2 cannot homo - oligomerize but rather hetero - oli - gomerizes with Cav - 1 , it is possible that in the absence of Cav - 1 , several critical hydrophobic regions remain exposed , thereby affecting not only folding of Cav - 2 but increasing the probability of recognition by the proteasomal apparatus . To date , however , much less is known about Cav - 2 function than is for Cav - 1 function . Cav - 2 does not contain a scaffolding domain ( the primary proposed region of interaction between Cav - 1 and signaling molecules ) and has rarely been implicated in signal transduction processes . Although there is no overt reason to believe that its severely reduced levels in Cav - 1 - deficient cells can compound any phenotypic analyses , the fact remains that Cav - 1 knockout mice are in effect deficient in two caveolins . The generation of Cav - 2 knockout mice will ultimately resolve this issue . Based on the growth curves of MEFs and the corresponding cell cycle analyses , we have shown in this study that a deficiency in Cav - 1 leads to higher proliferation rates . This is the first direct demonstration of a relationship between Cav - 1 and the cell cycle under physiological circumstances . Our results corroborate pre - vious data showing that Cav - 1 overexpression can reduce cell proliferation and / or abrogate anchorage - independent growth in several cancer cell lines ( 29 , 31 , 61 ) . Surprisingly , we found that this proliferation is not due to a hyperactivation of the p42 / 44 MAP kinase cascade , a signaling pathway that had been shown in numerous ways to be reciprocally regulated by Cav - 1 ( 28 , 48 , 49 , 61 , 81 , 94 ) . The main difference in our study lies in the use of embryonic fibroblasts , instead of immortalized and transformed cell lines . This type of discrepancy is not unusual and necessitates the analysis of proteins in primary culture systems , such as this one . For example , the ras oncogene , a potent transforming agent when used in immortalized cells ( 95 , 96 ) , actually in - duces cell cycle arrest and premature senescence in MEFs ( 97 , 98 ) . In the same way , the mechanistic explanation of the ex - cessive proliferation of Cav - 1 - deficient primary cells may de - pend on other signal transduction processes . Although several other pro - proliferative signaling molecules have been shown to be regulated by Cav - 1 , further work is required to determine more closely their physiological relevance . Analysis of these pathways in knockout versus wild - type MEFs will eventually shed light on the detailed mechanism for the observed hyper - proliferation . In addition , although we have not noticed any spontaneous tumors in Cav - 1 null mice at 9 months of age , they may have a higher susceptibility than wild - type mice to tumors induced either chemically or by breeding with other tumor - prone mice ( e . g . the p53 - or INK4a - deficient mice ( 79 , 99 ) ) . It should be noted that the lack of spontaneous tumor for - mation and the modest proliferation defect observed in the Cav - 1 null setting is reminiscent of several previously de - scribed mice lacking inhibitory cell cycle proteins . For example , mice deficient in the cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitor , p21 ( which functions in G 1 phase progression ( 100 , 101 ) and is a major target of p53 ( 102 ) ) , do not develop tumors , and their MEFs display only a modest proliferative advantage over the wild - type counterparts ( 65 ) . The ablation of the p19 INK4d , a member of the INK4 ( inhibitor of cyclin - dependent kinase 4 / 6 ) family of proteins , also does not predispose mice to tumors or cell cycle defects ( 103 ) . A deficiency of p15 INK4b predisposes only a small percentage of mice to tumors ( 104 ) . Although mice lacking p27 , another important cyclin - dependent kinase inhib - itor , can develop pituitary tumors , cells derived from these mice only show subtle cell cycle defects ( 105 , 106 ) . In many instances , the lack of an overt phenotype can be due to com - pensatory proteins ( i . e . compensation derived from parallel - acting cell cycle and checkpoint control pathways ) . We assessed a possible up - regulation of caveolin - 3 , the highly homologous muscle - specific caveolin family member , in several Cav - 1 null tissues , and we found it to remain unperturbed . Therefore , if there are any counter - regulatory mechanisms involved , they are independent of the caveolin gene family . In accordance with the hyperproliferative phenotype we ob - served with Cav - 1 null MEFs , the lung parenchyma of Cav - 1 null animals appeared hypercellular with thickened alveolar septa . Quantitation of the number of nuclei per high power field using hematoxylin - eosin - stained paraffin sections re - vealed an (cid:4) 2 - fold increase in cellularity . The Ki67 “prolifera - tion” antigen is a nuclear protein that is highly expressed in proliferating cells and is undetectable in cells in the G 0 phase of the cell cycle ( 83 ) . Interestingly , Ki67 immunoreactivity was also dramatically increased in lung tissue sections from Cav - 1 null mice . This is consistent with our observation that Cav - 1 - deficient MEFs proliferate faster and to higher saturation den - sities . We also found that the number of VEGF - R - positive lung endothelial cells were increased in Cav - 1 null animals . These VEGF - R - positive endothelial cells were sometimes present in discrete clusters , i . e . reminiscent of a focus of cellular growth . Transmission electron microscopy revealed that lung endothe - lial cells from Cav - 1 null mice lack caveolae , whereas their normal counterparts in wild - type mice showed abundant caveo - lae . Taken together , these findings are consistent with the idea that a lack of caveolin - 1 expression and caveolae organelles can lead to hyperproliferation in certain cell types . These lung abnormalities appeared to have physical consequences , as the Cav - 1 - deficient mice clearly showed exercise intolerance . Several in vitro studies employing recombinant expression and peptide - based analyses have strongly suggested that caveolin - 1 can function as an endogenous negative regulator of eNOS , by providing tonic inhibition of eNOS enzymatic activity ( 85 – 87 ) . Here , by using isolated mouse aortic rings , we evalu - ated the effect of loss of caveolin - 1 expression on the vasocon - strictor actions of PE , an (cid:4) 1 - adrenergic receptor agonist . We observed that Cav - 1 null mice showed an impaired vasocon - Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38136 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m strictor response to PE . This impaired response was due to increased eNOS activity as the proper vasoconstrictor response could be restored by treatment with L - NAME , a well charac - terized NOS inhibitor . Conversely , acetylcholine ( Ach ) - induced relaxation ( a NO - dependent phenomenon ) of the aortic rings was clearly potentiated by loss of caveolin - 1 expression . These physiological observations provide strong in vivo evidence that caveolin - 1 indeed functions as a tonic inhibitor of eNOS - medi - ated signal transduction . Our current studies directly support the findings of Sessa and colleagues ( 107 ) who used a chimeric peptide containing a cellular internalization signal and the caveolin - 1 scaffolding domain ( CSD , residues 82 – 101 ) . By using mouse aortic rings from wild - type mice , they showed that the CSD could potenti - ate the vasoconstrictor response to PE and that the CSD could inhibit Ach - induced relaxation of the blood vessel . The actions of the CSD could be mimicked by using the NOS inhibitor , L - NAME . In further support of the specificity of the CSD , a scrambled peptide version of the CSD had no activity in this assay system . In summary , by using targeted disruption of the caveolin - 1 gene in mice , we have shown that Cav - 1 expression is required to stabilize the Cav - 2 protein product , to mediate the caveolar endocytosis of specific ligands , to negatively regulate the pro - liferation of certain cell types , and to provide tonic inhibition of eNOS activity in endothelial cells . The availability of a viable Cav - 1 - deficient mouse model will allow investigators to criti - cally evaluate the many proposed functions of the Cav - 1 pro - tein and caveolae organelles in vivo . Acknowledgments— We thank Drs . David Baltimore and Anthony J . Koleske for participating in the early stages of this study . We also thank Dr . Roberto Campos - Gonzalez for donating mAbs directed against caveolin - 1 , caveolin - 2 , and caveolin - 3 ; Dr . Tony Karnezis for help with cell cycle analysis ; and Dr . Michael Cammer for help with photography . Note Added in Proof— After this paper was published online ( July 16 , 2001 ) , another report appeared online describing the generation of caveolin - 1 knockout mice ( August 9 , 2001 ; Ref . 108 ) . In accordance with our results , these authors demonstrate that loss of caveolin - 1 expres - sion prevents caveolae formation , induces a loss of caveolin - 2 expres - sion , and causes lung hypercellularity and vascular defects , as well as exercise intolerance . However , these authors did not examine the phe - notypic behavior of MEFs in culture or further study the hyperprolif - erative phenotype . In addition , they did not examine the endocytic behavior of caveolin - 1 deficient cells . Both reports ( our paper and Ref . 108 ) conclude that the observed caveolin - 1 null phenotype is consistent with the idea that caveolin - 1 is a negative regulator of signal transduc - tion and that caveolin - 1 may indeed function as a tumor suppressor gene . REFERENCES 1 . Glenney , J . R . , Jr . ( 1989 ) J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 20163 – 20166 2 . Glenney , J . R . , Jr . , and Zokas , L . ( 1989 ) J . Cell Biol . 108 , 2401 – 2408 3 . Rothberg , K . G . , Heuser , J . E . , Donzell , W . C . , Ying , Y . S . , Glenney , J . R . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1992 ) Cell 68 , 673 – 682 4 . Yamada , E . ( 1955 ) J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 1 , 445 – 458 5 . Farquhar , M . , and Palade , G . ( 1963 ) J . Cell Biol . 17 , 375 – 412 6 . Fra , A . M . , Williamson , E . , Simons , K . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1995 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . , U . S . A . 92 , 8655 – 8659 7 . Li , S . , Song , K . S . , Koh , S . S . , Kikuchi , A . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 28647 – 28654 8 . Murata , M . , Peranen , J . , Schreiner , R . , Weiland , F . , Kurzchalia , T . , and Simons , K . ( 1995 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 10339 – 10343 9 . Scherer , P . E . , Okamoto , T . , Chun , M . , Nishimoto , I . , Lodish , H . F . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1996 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 131 – 135 10 . Song , K . S . , Scherer , P . E . , Tang , Z . - L . , Okamoto , T . , Li , S . , Chafel , M . , Chu , C . , Kohtz , D . S . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 15160 – 15165 11 . Scherer , P . E . , Lewis , R . Y . , Volonte , D . , Engelman , J . A . , Galbiati , F . , Couet , J . , Kohtz , D . S . , van Donselaar , E . , Peters , P . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 29337 – 29346 12 . Tang , Z . - L . , Scherer , P . E . , Okamoto , T . , Song , K . , Chu , C . , Kohtz , D . S . , Nishimoto , I . , Lodish , H . F . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 2255 – 2261 13 . Galbiati , F . , Razani , B . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2001 ) Cell 106 , 403 – 411 14 . Razani , B . , Schlegel , A . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2000 ) J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2103 – 2109 15 . Couet , J . , Li , S . , Okamoto , T . , Scherer , P . S . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1997 ) Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 7 , 103 – 110 16 . Lisanti , M . P . , Scherer , P . , Tang , Z . - L . , and Sargiacomo , M . ( 1994 ) Trends Cell Biol . 4 , 231 – 235 17 . Li , S . , Couet , J . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 29182 – 29190 18 . Song , K . S . , Li , S . , Okamoto , T . , Quilliam , L . , Sargiacomo , M . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 9690 – 9697 19 . Song , K . S . , Sargiacomo , M . , Galbiati , F . , Parenti , M . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1997 ) Cell . Mol . Biol . 43 , 293 – 303 20 . Garcia - Cardena , G . , Oh , P . , Liu , J . , Schnitzer , J . E . , and Sessa , W . C . ( 1996 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 6448 – 6453 21 . Shaul , P . W . , Smart , E . J . , Robinson , L . J . , German , Z . , Yuhanna , I . S . , Ying , Y . , Anderson , R . G . W . , and Michel , T . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 6518 – 6522 22 . Li , S . , Okamoto , T . , Chun , M . , Sargiacomo , M . , Casanova , J . E . , Hansen , S . H . , Nishimoto , I . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1995 ) J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 15693 – 15701 23 . Okamoto , T . , Schlegel , A . , Scherer , P . E . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1998 ) J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 5419 – 5422 24 . Couet , J . , Sargiacomo , M . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 30429 – 30438 25 . Yamamoto , M . , Toya , Y . , Jensen , R . A . , and Ishikawa , Y . ( 1999 ) Exp . Cell Res . 247 , 380 – 388 26 . Engelman , J . A . , Lee , R . J . , Karnezis , A . , Bearss , D . J . , Webster , M . , Siegel , P . , Muller , W . J . , Windle , J . J . , Pestell , R . G . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1998 ) J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20448 – 20455 27 . Zundel , W . , Swiersz , L . M . , and Giaccia , A . ( 2000 ) Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 1507 – 1514 28 . Koleske , A . J . , Baltimore , D . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1995 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 1381 – 1385 29 . Razani , B . , Altschuler , Y . , Zhu , L . , Pestell , R . G . , Mostov , K . E . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2000 ) Biochemistry 39 , 13916 – 13924 30 . Park , D . S . , Razani , B . , Lasorella , A . , Schreiber - Agus , N . , Pestell , R . G . , Iavarone , A . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2001 ) Biochemistry 40 , 3354 – 3362 31 . Lee , S . W . , Reimer , C . L . , Oh , P . , Campbel , L . D . B . , and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) Oncogene 16 , 1391 – 1397 32 . Bender , F . C . , Reymond , M . A . , Bron , C . , and Quest , A . ( 2000 ) Cancer Res . 60 , 5870 – 5878 33 . Bagnoli , M . , Tomassetti , A . , Figini , M . , Flati , S . , Dolo , V . , Canevari , S . , and Miotti , S . ( 2000 ) Oncogene 19 , 4754 – 4763 34 . Zhang , W . , Razani , B . , Altschuler , Y . , Bouzahzah , B . , Mostov , K . E . , Pestell , R . G . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2000 ) J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 20717 – 20725 35 . Engelman , J . A . , Zhang , X . L . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1999 ) FEBS Lett . 448 , 221 – 230 36 . Racine , C . , Belanger , M . , Hirabayashi , H . , Boucher , M . , Chakir , J . , and Couet , J . ( 1999 ) Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 255 , 580 – 586 37 . Suzuki , T . , Suzuki , Y . , Hanada , K . , Hashimoto , A . , Redpath , J . L . , Stanbridge , E . J . , Nishijima , M . , and Kitagawa , T . ( 1998 ) J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) 124 , 383 – 388 38 . Shridhar , V . , Sun , Q . C . , Miller , O . J . , Kalemkerian , G . P . , Petros , J . , and Smith , D . I . ( 1997 ) Oncogene 15 , 2727 – 2733 39 . Jenkins , R . B . , Qian , J . , Lee , H . K . , Huang , H . , Hirasawa , K . , Bostwick , D . G . , Proffitt , J . , Wilber , K . , Lieber , M . M . , Liu , W . , and Smith , D . I . ( 1998 ) Cancer Res . 58 , 759 – 766 40 . Zenklusen , J . C . , Thompson , J . C . , Troncoso , P . , Kagan , J . , and Conti , C . J . ( 1994 ) Cancer Res . 54 , 6370 – 6373 41 . Zenklusen , J . C . , Bieche , I . , Lidereau , R . , and Conti , C . J . ( 1994 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 12155 – 12158 42 . Huang , H . , Qian , C . , Jenkins , R . B . , and Smith , D . I . ( 1998 ) Genes Chromo - somes Cancer 21 , 152 – 159 43 . Zenklusen , J . C . , Thompson , J . C . , Klein - Szanto , A . J . , and Conti , C . J . ( 1995 ) Cancer Res . 55 , 1347 – 1350 44 . Zenklusen , J . C . , Weitzel , J . N . , Ball , H . G . , and Conti , C . J . ( 1995 ) Oncogene 11 , 359 – 363 45 . Koike , M . , Takeuchi , S . , Yokota , J . , Park , S . , Hatta , Y . , Miller , C . W . , Tsuruoka , N . , andKoeffler , H . P . ( 1997 ) GenesChromosomesCancer 19 , 1 – 5 46 . Achille , A . , Biasi , M . O . , Zamboni , G . , Bogina , G . , Magalini , A . R . , Pederzoli , P . , Perucho , M . , and Scarpa , A . ( 1996 ) Cancer Res . 56 , 3808 – 3813 47 . Engelman , J . A . , Zhang , X . L . , Galbiati , F . , Volonte , D . , Sotgia , F . , Pestell , R . G . , Minetti , C . , Scherer , P . E . , Okamoto , T . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1998 ) Am . J . Hum . Genet . 63 , 1578 – 1587 48 . Galbiati , F . , Volonte´ , D . , Engelman , J . A . , Watanabe , G . , Burk , R . , Pestell , R . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1998 ) EMBO J . 17 , 6633 – 6648 49 . Scheel , J . , Srinivasan , J . , Honnert , U . , Henske , A . , and Kurzchalia , T . V . ( 1999 ) Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 127 – 129 50 . Hayashi , K . , Matsuda , S . , Machida , K . , Yamamoto , T . , Fukuda , Y . , Nimura , Y . , Hayakawa , T . , and Hamaguchi , M . ( 2001 ) Cancer Res . 61 , 2361 – 2364 51 . Minetti , C . , Sotgia , F . , Bruno , C . , Scartezzini , P . , Broda , P . , Bado , M . , Masetti , E . , Mazzocco , P . , Egeo , A . , Donati , M . A . , Volonte’ , D . , Galbiati , F . , Cordone , G . , Bricarelli , F . D . , Lisanti , M . P . , and Zara , F . ( 1998 ) Nat . Genet . 18 , 365 – 368 52 . Scherer , P . E . , Tang , Z . - L . , Chun , M . C . , Sargiacomo , M . , Lodish , H . F . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1995 ) J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 16395 – 16401 53 . Wu , H . , Liu , X . , and Jaenisch , R . ( 1994 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 2819 – 2823 54 . Wu , H . , Liu , X . , Jaenisch , R . , and Lodish , H . F . ( 1995 ) Cell 83 , 59 – 67 55 . Engelman , J . A . , Zhang , X . L . , Galbiati , F . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1998 ) FEBS Lett . 429 , 330 – 336 56 . Ioffe , E . , Liu , Y . , Bhaumik , M . , Poirier , F . , Factor , S . M . , and Stanley , P . ( 1995 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 7357 – 7361 57 . Edelmann , W . , Yang , K . , Umar , A . , Heyer , J . , Lau , K . , Fan , K . , Liedtke , W . , Cohen , P . E . , Kane , M . F . , Lipford , J . R . , Yu , N . , Crouse , G . F . , Pollard , J . W . , Kunkel , T . , Lipkin , M . , Kolodner , R . , and Kucherlapati , R . ( 1997 ) Cell 91 , 467 – 477 58 . Kamijo , T . , Zindy , F . , Roussel , M . F . , Quelle , D . E . , Downing , J . R . , Ashmun , R . A . , Grosveld , G . , and Sherr , C . J . ( 1997 ) Cell 91 , 649 – 659 59 . Sargiacomo , M . , Sudol , M . , Tang , Z . - L . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1993 ) J . Cell Biol . Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38137 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 122 , 789 – 807 60 . Lisanti , M . P . , Scherer , P . E . , Vidugiriene , J . , Tang , Z . - L . , Hermanoski - Vosatka , A . , Tu , Y . - H . , Cook , R . F . , and Sargiacomo , M . ( 1994 ) J . Cell Biol . 126 , 111 – 126 61 . Engelman , J . A . , Wycoff , C . C . , Yasuhara , S . , Song , K . S . , Okamoto , T . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 16374 – 16381 62 . Song , K . S . , Tang , Z . - L . , Li , S . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 4398 – 4403 63 . Volonte , D . , Galbiati , F . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1999 ) FEBS Lett . 445 , 431 – 439 64 . Galbiati , F . , Volonte , D . , Minetti , C . , Chu , J . B . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1999 ) J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 25632 – 25641 65 . Deng , C . , Zhang , P . , Harper , J . W . , Elledge , S . J . , and Leder , P . ( 1995 ) Cell 82 , 675 – 684 66 . LeCouter , J . E . , Kablar , B . , Hardy , W . R . , Ying , C . , Megeney , L . A . , May , L . L . , and Rudnicki , M . A . ( 1998 ) Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 7455 – 7465 67 . Glenney , J . R . , and Soppet , D . ( 1992 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 89 , 10517 – 10521 68 . Hailstones , D . , Sleer , L . S . , Parton , R . G . , and Stanley , K . K . ( 1998 ) J . Lipid Res . 39 , 369 – 379 69 . Smart , E . J . , Ying , Y . - S . , Donzell , W . C . , and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 29427 – 29435 70 . Monier , S . , Parton , R . G . , Vogel , F . , Behlke , J . , Henske , A . , and Kurzchalia , T . ( 1995 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 911 – 927 71 . Monier , S . , Dietzen , D . J . , Hastings , W . R . , Lublin , D . M . , andKurzchalia , T . V . ( 1996 ) FEBS Lett . 388 , 143 – 149 72 . Das , K . , Lewis , R . Y . , Scherer , P . E . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1999 ) J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 18721 – 18726 73 . Li , S . , Galbiati , F . , Volonte , D . , Sargiacomo , M . , Engelman , J . A . , Das , K . , Scherer , P . E . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1998 ) FEBS Lett . 434 , 127 – 134 74 . Mora , R . , Bonilha , V . L . , Marmorstein , A . , Scherer , P . E . , Brown , D . , Lisanti , M . P . , and Rodriguez - Boulan , E . ( 1999 ) J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 25708 – 25717 75 . Parolini , I . , Sargiacomo , M . , Galbiati , F . , Rizzo , G . , Grignani , F . , Engelman , J . A . , Okamoto , T . , Ikezu , T . , Scherer , P . E . , Mora , R . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , Peschle , C . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1999 ) J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 25718 – 25725 76 . Rock , K . L . , Gramm , C . , Rothstein , L . , Clark , K . , Stein , R . , Dick , L . , Hwang , D . , and Goldberg , A . L . ( 1994 ) Cell 78 , 761 – 771 77 . Lowe , J . , Stock , D . , Jap , B . , Zwickl , P . , Baumeister , W . , and Huber , R . ( 1995 ) Science 268 , 533 – 539 78 . Ghitescu , L . , Fixman , A . , Simionescu , M . , and Simionescu , N . ( 1986 ) J . Cell Biol . 102 , 1304 – 1311 79 . Serrano , M . , Lee , H . , Chin , L . , Cordon - Cardo , C . , Beach , D . , andDePinho , R . A . ( 1996 ) Cell 85 , 27 – 37 80 . Herrera , R . E . , Sah , V . P . , Williams , B . O . , Makela , T . P . , Weinberg , R . A . , and Jacks , T . ( 1996 ) Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 , 2402 – 2407 81 . Furuchi , T . , and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1998 ) J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 21099 – 21104 82 . Park , W . Y . , Park , J . S . , Cho , K . A . , Kim , D . I . , Ko , Y . G . , Seo , J . S . , and Park , S . C . ( 2000 ) J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 20847 – 20852 83 . Schluter , C . , Duchrow , M . , Wohlenberg , C . , Becker , M . H . , Key , G . , Flad , H . D . , and Gerdes , J . ( 1993 ) J . Cell Biol . 123 , 513 – 522 84 . Gerdes , J . , Li , L . , Schlueter , C . , Duchrow , M . , Wohlenberg , C . , Gerlach , C . , Stahmer , I . , Kloth , S . , Brandt , E . , andFlad , H . D . ( 1991 ) Am . J . Pathol . 138 , 867 – 873 85 . Garcia - Cardena , G . , Martasek , P . , Siler - Masters , B . S . , Skidd , P . M . , Couet , J . C . , Li , S . , Lisanti , M . P . , and Sessa , W . C . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 25437 – 25440 86 . Ju , H . , Zou , R . , Venema , V . J . , and Venema , R . C . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 18522 – 18525 87 . Michel , J . B . , Feron , O . , Sacks , D . , and Michel , T . ( 1997 ) J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 15583 – 15586 88 . Fra , A . M . , Masserini , M . , Palestini , P . , Sonnino , S . , and Simons , K . ( 1995 ) FEBS Lett . 375 , 11 – 14 89 . Li , S . , Song , K . S . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 568 – 573 90 . Thiele , C . , Hannah , M . J . , Fahrenholz , F . , and Huttner , W . B . ( 2000 ) Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 42 – 49 91 . Sargiacomo , M . , Scherer , P . E . , Tang , Z . - L . , Kubler , E . , Song , K . S . , Sanders , M . C . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1995 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 9407 – 9411 92 . Wickner , S . , Maurizi , M . R . , and Gottesman , S . ( 1999 ) Science 286 , 1888 – 1893 93 . Ellgaard , L . , Molinari , M . , and Helenius , A . ( 1999 ) Science 286 , 1882 – 1888 94 . Engelman , J . A . , Chu , C . , Lin , A . , Jo , H . , Ikezu , T . , Okamoto , T . , Kohtz , D . S . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1998 ) FEBS Lett . 428 , 205 – 211 95 . Shimizu , K . , Goldfarb , M . , Suard , Y . , Perucho , M . , Li , Y . , Kamata , T . , Feramisco , J . , Stavnezer , E . , Fogh , J . , and Wigler , M . H . ( 1983 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 80 , 2112 – 2116 96 . Newbold , R . F . , and Overell , R . W . ( 1983 ) Nature 304 , 648 – 651 97 . Serrano , M . , Lin , A . W . , McCurrach , M . E . , Beach , D . , and Lowe , S . W . ( 1997 ) Cell 88 , 593 – 602 98 . Lin , A . W . , Barradas , M . , Stone , J . C . , van Aelst , L . , Serrano , M . , and Lowe , S . W . ( 1998 ) Genes Dev . 12 , 3008 – 3019 99 . Sah , V . P . , Attardi , L . D . , Mulligan , G . J . , Williams , B . O . , Bronson , R . T . , and Jacks , T . ( 1995 ) Nat . Genet . 10 , 175 – 180 100 . Harper , J . , Adam , G . , Wei , N . , Keyomarsi , K . , and Elledge , S . ( 1993 ) Cell 75 , 805 – 816 101 . Harper , J . W . , Elledge , S . J . , Keyomarsi , K . , Dynlacht , B . , Tsai , L . H . , Zhang , P . , Dobrowolski , S . , Bai , C . , Connell - Crowley , L . , and Swindell , E . ( 1995 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 387 – 400 102 . el - Deiry , W . S . , Tokino , T . , Velculescu , V . E . , Levy , D . B . , Parsons , R . , Trent , J . M . , Lin , D . , Mercer , W . E . , Kinzler , K . W . , and Vogelstein , B . ( 1993 ) Cell 75 , 817 – 825 103 . Zindy , F . , van Deursen , J . , Grosveld , G . , Sherr , C . J . , and Roussel , M . F . ( 2000 ) Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 372 – 378 104 . Latres , E . , Malumbres , M . , Sotillo , R . , Martin , J . , Ortega , S . , Martin - Caballero , J . , Flores , J . M . , Cordon - Cardo , C . , and Barbacid , M . ( 2000 ) EMBO J . 19 , 3496 – 3506 105 . Fero , M . L . , Rivkin , M . , Tasch , M . , Porter , P . , Carow , C . E . , Firpo , E . , Polyak , K . , Tsai , L . H . , Broudy , V . , Perlmutter , R . M . , Kaushansky , K . , and Roberts , J . M . ( 1996 ) Cell 85 , 733 – 744 106 . Coats , S . , Whyte , P . , Fero , M . L . , Lacy , S . , Chung , G . , Randel , E . , Firpo , E . , and Roberts , J . M . ( 1999 ) Curr . Biol . 9 , 163 – 173 107 . Bucci , M . , Gratton , J . P . , Rudic , R . D . , Acevedo , L . , Roviezzo , F . , Cirino , G . , and Sessa , W . C . ( 2000 ) Nat . Med . 6 , 1362 – 1367 108 . Drab , M . , Verkade , P . , Elger , M . , Kasper , M . , Lohn , M . , Lauterbach , B . , Menne , J . , Lindschau , C . , Mende , F . , Luft , F . C . , Schedl , A . , Haller , H . , and Kurzchalia , T . V . ( 2001 ) Science , in press , Published Online August 9 , 2001 , 10 . 1126 / science . 1062688 Cav - 1 - deficient Mice Show Proliferative and Vascular Defects 38138 by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Winfried Edelmann and Michael P . Lisanti Dolores Di Vizio , Harry Hou , Jr . , Burkhard Kneitz , Guy Lagaud , George J . Christ , Carolyn B . Marks , Frank Macaluso , Robert G . Russell , Maomi Li , Richard G . Pestell , Babak Razani , Jeffery A . Engelman , Xiao Bo Wang , William Schubert , Xiao Lan Zhang , Vascular Abnormalities Caveolin - 1 Null Mice Are Viable but Show Evidence of Hyperproliferative and originally published online October 5 , 2001 2001 , 276 : 38121 - 38138 . J . Biol . Chem . Access the most updated version of this article at doi : Alerts : When a correction for this article is posted • When this article is cited • to choose from all of JBC ' s e - mail alerts Click here http : / / www . jbc . org / content / 276 / 41 / 38121 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 107 references , 66 of which can be accessed free at by gu e s t on J u l y 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m