Research Report Clarification of the peripherally located F - actin network around the primary afferent neurons Yan - Chao Li a , ⁎ , Lian - Kun Sun b , Li Zhou a , Hai - Ning Zhang c a Department of Histology and Embryology , Norman Bethune College of Medicine , Jilin University , Changchun , Jilin Province 130021 , China b Department of Pathophysiology , Norman Bethune College of Medicine , Jilin University , Changchun , Jilin Province 130021 , China c Department of Neurology , the First Hospital , Jilin University , Changchun , Jilin Province 130021 , China A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Article history : Accepted 25 March 2011 Available online 1 April 2011 The primary afferent neurons are enriched for F - actin in the peripheries , giving rise to ring - like appearances when stained with fluorescence probes for actin . A variety of data , mainly obtained from in vitro experiments , suggested that the satellite cell ( SC ) envelopes around sensory neurons may be a candidate for the F - actin positive structures . However , immunohistochemicalstudiesondorsalrootganglia ( DRGs ) suggestedthatF - actinwaslocated exclusively within the cortical regions of the sensory neurons . Given this discrepancy , the present study has reexamined the distribution of F - actin in the DRGs at both the fluorescence light and electron microscopic levels . Double staining of F - actin with S - 100beta and neural cell adhesion molecule showed that the fluorescence signals for F - actin around the DRG neurons were restricted to the inner margins of the SC envelope . Subsequent ultrastructural observations , by use of a modified anti - FITC system , demonstrated that the F - actin - positive sites corresponded mostly to the adneuronal SC lamellae , while the cortical cytoskeletons in the neurons seemed to contribute little to the typical F - actin staining . The high concentration of F - actin in the SC envelope has not yet described before , and is thought to assist in understanding the functions of the SCs in the ganglia . © 2011 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Filamentous actin Satellite cell Sensory ganglia Fluorescence microscopy Ultrastructure 1 . Introduction As a structural and contractile protein , actin exists in a dynamic equilibrium between monomeric and filamentous forms , and plays an important role in virtually every cell biological process ( Fifková , 1985 ; Dillon and Goda , 2005 ) . Mature nerve cells are known to contain substantial amounts of cytoplasmic actin , but the concentration of filamentous actin ( F - actin ) is rather low in the somata . Interestingly , the peripheral regions around the nerve cells are otherwise enriched for F - actin , giving rise to ring - like appearances when stained by fluorescence - labeled phalloidin , a specific probe for F - actin . This is true in both the central and peripheral nerve cells , but the structural bases for such fluorescence patterns remain largely undefined ( Kuczmarski and Rosenbaum 1979 ; Hirokawa , 1982 ; Drenckhahn and Kaiser , 1983 ; Goldman , 1983 ; Drenckhahn et al . , 1984 ; Papasozomenos and Payne , 1986 ) . Like their central counterparts , the primary afferent neurons are enriched for F - actin in the peripheries . A variety of data , from studies on either sensory or autonomic ganglia , showed that there were numerous filaments within the SC B R A I N R E S E A R C H 1 3 9 2 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 4 – 6 1 ⁎ Corresponding author at : Department of Histology and Embryology , Norman Bethune College of Medicine , Jilin University , No . 126 Xinmin Street , Changchun , Jilin Province 130021 , China . Fax : + 86 431 85669236 . E - mail address : ldlyc @ yahoo . com ( Y . - C . Li ) . 0006 - 8993 / $ – see front matter © 2011 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . brainres . 2011 . 03 . 063 available at www . sciencedirect . com www . elsevier . com / locate / brainres envelope , lying more or less parallel to the plasma membrane ( Peach , 1975 ; Pannese , 1981 ; Tay et al . , 1984 ; Matsumoto and Rosenbluth , 1986 ; Leong and Wong , 1989 ; Scaravilli et al . , 1991 ) . The filaments around the axon hillock and initial segment seemed especially abundant , and have been demon - strated by morphological criteria as microfilaments in the trigeminal ganglia ( Peach , 1975 ) . The clear - cut evidence for the presence of F - actin within the SCs was provided by Kuczmarski and Rosenbaum ( 1979 ) , who labeled F - actin by fluorescein - labeled myosin fragment S1 and found that F - actin was not present in the cell bodies of cultured chick DRG neurons , but was abundant in the assumed SCs . Ultrastructural analysis of cultured SCs further revealed that the SC cytoplasm contained two types of microfilaments , which were located primarily beneath the plasma membrane ( Spooner et al . , 1971 , Kuczmarski and Rosenbaum , 1979 ) . These data suggested that the SC envelope may be one of the major components positive for F - actin in the sensory ganglia . On the other hand , several in vivo studies on F - actin have produced conflicting data in the dorsal root ganglia ( DRGs ) ( Loesser et al . , 1986 ; Everett and Nichol , 1990 ; Pannese et al . , 1996 ) . Pannese et al . ( 1996 ) have investigated the typical F - actin staining in adult rat DRGs by using antiactin and immunogold labeling . Their ultrastructural observations sug - gested that actin - like immunoreactivity was located exclu - sively within the cortical regions of sensory neurons , but not in the surrounding SC envelope ( Pannese et al . , 1996 ) . Furthermore , structural analysis of the neuronal – SC bound - aries did reveal some microfilament - like structures beneath the plasma membrane in the DRG neurons , especially within the neuronal projections ( Pannese , 2002 ) . The apparent discrepancy among the previous studies may be mainly due to the lack of a reliable detection method for ultrastructural analysis . Recently , we reported a phalloidin - based anti - fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) system , which has been successfully adapted to the ultrastructural investi - gations of F - actin in the ependymal microvilli ( Li et al . , 2009 ) , and to the clarification of the precise localization of synaptic F - actin ( Li et al . , 2010 ) . In the present study , this technique was used to reinvestigate the distribution of F - actin within the DRGs . 2 . Results 2 . 1 . Fluorescence microscopic study on F - actin in the DRG In rat DRGs , FITC – phalloidin staining was confined mostly to the peripheries of nerve cells , while the neuronal somata remained unstained , except for weak fluorescence scattered in the perikaryal cytoplasm ( Fig . 1A and D ) . On the other hand , their dark contours , standing out against the brightly stained peripheries , could be easily distinguished ( Fig . 1A and D ) . The majority of axonal profiles near the nerve cells were devoid of fluorescence , but also enclosed within ring - like bright struc - tures ( Fig . 1A ) . In the rat DRGs , the majority of the SCs are positive for S - 100 β ( Levy Bde et al . , 2007 ) . Fluorescence signals for S - 100 β were localized in the cytoplasm of the SCs around the neu - ronal cell bodies and the axonal initial segments ( Fig . 1B ) . Double labeling of S - 100 β and F - actin showed that not all the S - 100 β - positive structures were positive for F - actin , and that the fluorescence for F - actin was restricted to the inner margins of S - 100 β positive structures ( Fig . 1C ) . NCAM is expressed extensively on the membranes of both sensory neurons and their associated SCs ( Mirsky et al . , 1986 ; Reichelt et al . , 2008 ) . Fluorescence signals for NCAM were located in the peripheries of the DRG neurons ( Fig . 1E ) . Because the layers of SC lamellae varied in number along the neuronal cell surface , NCAM labeling was also distributed unevenly in the SC envelope ( Fig . 1E ) . Double labeling of NCAM and F - actin showed that NCAM positive structures were also stained for F - actin ( Fig . 1F ) . These results suggested that the F - actin ring around the DRG neuron was , at least in part , located within the SC envelope . But the neurons and SCs were in close apposition , the fluorescence microscopic microscopy could not provide unambiguous evidence on whether F - actin was present in the cortical regions of the DRG neurons . 2 . 2 . Electron microscopic localization of F - actin in the DRG By use of a phalloidin - based anti - FITC method , fluorescence signals for F - actin were converted to peroxidase / DAB reaction products visible by the light microscope . The overall distribu - tion of reaction products for F - actin agreed well with that obtained by FITC - conjugated phalloidin labeling and confocal microscopy ( Fig . 2A and E ) . The staining pattern was not altered by pretreatment with hydrogen peroxide ( Fig . 2B and F ) . The specificity of this conversion was confirmed by omitting FITC - conjugated phalloidin ( Fig . 2D and H ) or by omitting the anti - FITC antibody ( Fig . 2C and G ) in the immunostaining procedure . As observed by confocal microscopy , the neuronal somata in the DRG were devoid of positive labeling , while their outer boundaries were deposited densely with peroxidase / DAB reaction products , appearing as ring - like structures . Almost no discernable differences in the distribution of F - actin were noted in the samples pretreated with or without H 2 O 2 ; however , the use of hydrogen peroxide often resulted in folding of sections . Therefore , the results obtained from the samples without H 2 O 2 treatment were presented here . Alter - natively , unstained samples were used as negative control . Under the electron microscope , the positive reaction products for F - actin were prominently concentrated in the SC lamellae , surrounding the cell bodies of DRG neurons ( Fig . 3 ) as well as the initial segments of axons ( Fig . 4 ) . Not the whole cytoplasm of SCs was labeled evenly for F - actin . Positive reaction products were confined predominant - ly to the adneuronal ( inner ) aspect of the SC envelope , while the outeraspectaswellasthenucleatedregionremainedunlabeled ( Fig . 3B ) . The SC envelopes around the initial segments of axons were stained similarly in the adaxonal regions ( Fig . 4 ) . These results were consistent well with the fluorescence microscopic data obtained by double staining of S - 100 β and F - actin . The thickness of positive zones in the SC envelopes varied around the axons or the cell bodies , and seemed to correlate with the number of the layers of the SC lamellae ( Fig . 3B ) . The bulk cytoplasm of the neurons and axon initial seg - ments remained unstained or very faintly stained ( Figs . 3 – 5 ) . 55 B R A I N R E S E A R C H 1 3 9 2 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 4 – 6 1 The matrix of mitochondria remained unstained , but there was an accentuation of positive staining about their periphery ( Figs . 3B and 5B ) . Weakened staining was found sparsely beneath the neuronal plasmalemma ( arrowheads in Fig . 4 ) , especially at the invaginations or projections ( Fig . 5C ) , but most of the cortical regions were devoid of positive labeling ( Fig . 4 ) . The neuronal – SC boundary was complicated by the pres - ence of numerous projections , which arose from either the neuron or the adjacent SCs . The SC projections were consistently labeled for F - actin ( Fig . 5A and B ) . They were seen invaginated into the infolding of the neuronal cell surface ( Fig . 5A ) or extruded toward the interstitial space ( Fig . 5B ) . The neuronal projections occurred more frequently . In single sections , they were sometimes seen continuous with the neuronal cell surface ( Fig . 5C ) , but in most cases they appeared as isolated electron - lucent structures embedded within the SC envelope ( Fig . 5D ) . The bulk cytoplasm within the neuronal projections was almost not stained ( Fig . 5C and D ) , but weakened staining for F - actin was sometimes found beneath the plasmalemma ( Fig . 5C ) . As control , no positive reaction was detected in the unstained samples ( Fig . 6A ) . Examination of the connective tissue capsule , which has been found intensely stained with FITC – phalloidin under the confocal microscope ( not shown ) , revealed that peroxidase / DAB reaction products were densely deposited in the perikaryal region of fibrocytes ( Fig . 6B ) . Collagen fibrils were not stained , which were densely packed between fibrocytes in the connective tissue capsule ( Fig . 6B ) or in the interstitial spaces between the DRG neurons ( Figs . 3 – 5 ) . 3 . Discussion The present study has examined the precise localization of F - actin in the DRGs at both the fluorescence light and electron microscopic levels . Double staining of F - actin and S - 100 β showed that the fluorescence signals for F - actin around the DRG neurons were restricted to the inner margins of the S - 100 β - positive SC envelope . Subsequent ultrastructural ob - servations , by use of a modified anti - FITC system , demon - strated that the F - actin positive sites corresponded mostly to the extra - neuronal , SC - derived lamellae . Within the neurons , however , except for less intense staining distributed sparsely beneath the neuronal plasmalemma , most of the cortical regions were devoid of positive labeling for F - actin . These results are consistent with most previous experimental data Fig . 1 – Fluorescence microscopic localization of F - actin in the DRG . Scale bars : 10 μ m ; insets , 2 μ m . A and D : Fluorescence images obtained by FITC - conjugated phalloidin staining and confocal microscopy . In the DRG , except for positively labeled granular structures ( arrow ) scattered in the perikaryal cytoplasm , the neuronal somata ( N ) are virtually unstained . The axonal profiles near the nerve cells are devoid of fluorescence , but also enclosed within ring - like fluorescent structures ( asterisks ) . B : A fluorescence image showing the distribution of S - 100 β in the SC envelope . Fluorescence signals for S - 100 β are localized mainly in the cytoplasm of the SCs around axonal profiles ( asterisks ) and the cell body of the DRG neurons ( N ) . C : An image merged from panels A and B , showing the spatial relationship between F - actin and S - 100 β . F - actin is colocalized with S100 β ( yellow color ) in the peripheral region around the DRG neuron . Not the whole cytoplasm of the SCs is stained for F - actin , and the fluorescence for F - actin is restricted mainly to the inner margins of the SC envelop ( for detail , see the inset ) . In addition , an F - actin positive granular structure within the neuron is also positive for S - 100 β . E : A fluorescence image showing the distribution of NCAM in the DRG . NCAM is expressed on the membranes of both the nerve cells and their associated SCs . F : An image merged from panels D and E , showing the spatial relationship between F - actin and NCAM . F - actin is localized together with NCAM ( yellow color ) in the peripheral region of a DRG neuron ( N ) ( for detail , see the inset ) . 56 B R A I N R E S E A R C H 1 3 9 2 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 4 – 6 1 as well as with the well - known fact that the concentration of F - actin is rather low in the majority of neurons ( Drenckhahn and Kaiser , 1983 ; Drenckhahn et al . , 1984 ; Fifková , 1985 ; Capani et al . , 2001 ; Li et al . , 2010 ) . As related before , immunocytochemical studies on F - actin have resulted in conflicting data in the sensory ganglia , which suggested that F - actin was located exclusively within the cortical regions of sensory neurons ( Pannese et al . , 1996 ) . Differences between phalloidin and antibody labeling should be expected since antibodies generally recognize only a single isoform , but cannot distinguish monomeric or filamentous actin ( Fifková , 1985 ; Capani et al . , 2001 ) . Moreover , F - actin is extraordinarily difficult to study by morphological techniques because of its small size and its sensitivity to fixation and dehydration ( Small , 1981 ; Hirokawa et al . , 1982 ) . As the authors themselves said , the omission of osmification and the use of hydrophilic resin in the immunostained prepara - tions had resulted in poor preservation of membranes , which made the details of the ultrastructures difficult to discern ( Loesser et al . , 1986 ; Pannese et al . , 1996 ) . Therefore , the interpretation of the experimental data in these works does not seem straightforward in the case of F - actin . 3 . 1 . The cortical F - actin seems to have been exaggerated Previous ultrastructural studies showed that actin microfila - ments in the axons were abundant in the cortical region , but few in the inner regions that constituted most of the axonal volume ( Hirokawa , 1982 ; Tsukita et al . , 1986 ; Fath and Lasek , 1988 ) . Furthermore , fluorescent probes for actin stained the axonal cortex much more intensely than the central axonal region ( Kuczmarski and Rosenbaum , 1979 ; Hirokawa , 1982 ; Goldman , 1983 ; Drenckhahn et al . , 1984 ; Papasozomenos and Payne , 1986 ) . These observations have led to a widely accepted view that actin microfilaments were primarily cortical . However , the so - called cortical staining for F - actin was found only in the myelinated axons , but became lost in the initial segments ( Zimmermann , 1996 ) . Comparison between phase contrast and fluorescence microscopic images showed that the phalloidin labeling in the peripheral nerve fibers corresponded mostly to extra - axonal , Schwann cell - derived cellular elements ( Trapp et al . , 1989 ; Zimmermann , 1996 ) . The peripheries of the neuronal cell bodies are also intensely stained for F - actin , but increasing evidence indicates that the typical F - actin staining is located mostly outside of Fig . 2 – Comparison of F - actin staining in the DRG between fluorescence and light microscopic images . Scale bars : 50 μ m . The panels in the upper and lower row show fluorescence and light microscopic images , respectively . A and E : FITC - conjugated phalloidin staining reveals ring - like structures surrounding the DRG neurons ( A ) . The same section is then reacted with biotinylated anti - FITC antibody followed by detection with ABC method . Peroxidase / DAB reaction products are localized similarly in the peripheral regions of the nerve cells ( E ) . B and F : Fluorescence signals for F - actin are detectable in the neuronal peripheries when the section is pretreated with 3 % H 2 O 2 in 0 . 1 M PB ( B ) . The same section is then reacted with biotinylated anti - FITC antibody followed by detection with ABC method . The distribution of peroxidase / DAB reaction products is well consistent with that of phalloidin staining ( G ) . C and G : Fluorescence signals for F - actin in the DRG are located predominantly in the neuronal peripheries in the section stained with FITC - conjugated phalloidin ( C ) . No peroxidase / DAB reaction products are observed when the same section is directly detected with ABC method ( G ) . D and H : No fluorescence signals are detected when FITC - conjugated phalloidin is replaced with 0 . 1 M PB ( D ) . Subsequent detection of F - actin with the anti - FITC system does not reveal any positive staining in the same section ( H ) . 57 B R A I N R E S E A R C H 1 3 9 2 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 4 – 6 1 the neurons . In cerebellum , Purkinje cells were reported to be surrounded with a densely F - actin network ( Drenckhahn and Kaiser , 1983 ) . Astrocytic processes around the Purkinje cells have been demonstrated as the major component of the F - actin positive structures ( Capani et al . , 2001 ) . In spinal cord , a similar ring - like staining for F - actin is present around the neurons of various types ( Drenckhahn and Kaiser , 1983 ) . Such ring - like F - actin network has been found to be located mainly in the synaptic junctions along the neuronal somata ( Li et al . , 2010 ) . In the present study , we have provided further evidence showing that the F - actin ring around the neurons as well as the axon initial segments is located mainly in the extra - neuronal , SC - derived lamellae in the DRGs . Taken together , these observations suggest that the cortical actin microfilaments seem to have been exaggerated due to the misinterpretation of the fluorescence microscopic data . 3 . 2 . The possible roles played by the F - actin network in the SC envelopes Available information suggests that SCs are similar in many respects to astrocytes ; however a complete glial sheath like the one formed by SCs around sensory neurons is unique and is not found in the central nervous system ( Hanani , 2005 ) . The predominant localization of F - actin in the adneuronal or adaxonal regions of the SC envelope exactly coincides with the presence of numerous junctions between the SC lamellae within the same envelope ( Pannese , 1981 ) . These junctions included adhering , gap and tight junctions , all of which have been thought as instrumental devices for the cohesion Fig . 3 – Ultrastructural localization of F - actin in the DRG . Scale bars : 1 . 0 μ m . A : Peroxidase / DAB reaction products are deposited prominently in the SC envelope ( Sc ) . Almost no positive staining is found in the bulk cytoplasm of the subjacent neuron ( N ) . The connective tissue ( ct ) in the interstitial space shows a translucent appearance , and is not stained . B : The nucleated portion of an SC is shown here . The perikaryal cytoplasm ( asterisk ) and the nucleus ( Sc ) are devoid of positive staining . The peroxidase / DAB reaction products are restricted to the adneuronal aspect of the SC envelope , where several lamellae can be discerned closely applied to the neuronal cell surface . The neuronal cytoplasm ( N ) shows diffuse staining , which is often associated with the plasma membrane or the periphery of mitochondria ( arrows ) . Fig . 4 – Ultrastructural localization of F - actin in the DRG . Scale bars : 1 . 0 μ m . A : Peroxidase / DAB reaction products are located in the adaxonal region of the SC envelope around the initial segment ( IS ) of an axon . The rest cytoplasm of the SC envelope surrounding the axon remains unstained ( asterisks ) . Between the IS and the neuronal soma ( N ) is the nucleated portion of an SC ( Sc ) , whose adneuronal region is intensely deposited with positive reaction products . In the axon or the neuron , most of the cortical regions remain unlabeled , but less intensely stained materials are seen sparsely beneath the plasma membrane ( arrowheads ) . B : The inset b in panel A is enlarged in panel B , showing that the cortical region of the axon as well as the bulk cytoplasm remains unstained . C : The inset c in panel A is enlarged in panel C , showing less intensely stained materials ( arrowheads ) beneath the plasma membrane within the neurons . 58 B R A I N R E S E A R C H 1 3 9 2 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 4 – 6 1 between the SC lamellae ( Pannese , 1981 ) . Since F - actin plays a crucial role in the formation of stable cellular structures ( Fifková , 1985 ; Dillon and Goda , 2005 ) , the F - actin concentrated in the SCs may act as part of a cytoskeletal framework for these glial cells to shape their peri - neuronal sheath , and play an important role in maintaining the unique structure of the SC envelope in the DRG . However , the F - actin network around the DRG neurons should not be considered only as a supportive structure , since actin has a dual role as a structural and contractile protein in eukaryotic cells ( Fifková , 1985 ; Dillon and Goda , 2005 ) . Previous ultrastructural observations showed that both smooth - surfaced and coated pinocytotic vesicles are present along the SC plasma membrane facing the neurons ( Pannese , 2002 ) . Therefore , the high concentration of F - actin in the SC envelope is well consistent with the roles of F - actin critical for various forms of cellular uptake ( Robertson et al . , 2009 ) . In addition , SCs seem to be highly mobile because they can extend processes to connect previously separate perineuronal envelopes after axon injury ( Pannese et al . , 2003 ) . Studies on cultured SCs showed that the processes of SCs moved rapidly while their cell bodies showed grouping and regrouping over time ( Chamley et al . , 1972 ) . Kuczmarski and Rosenbaum ( 1979 ) further demonstrated that myosin , the force - generating counterpart of actin , was also present in the SC cytoplasm , along the length of the stress fibers . These observations suggest that actin , in cooperation with other proteins , may act to produce some morphological or positional changes in the SC envelope . 3 . 3 . In summary The present study has clarified the subcellular distribution of F - actin in the sensory ganglia , which suggests that the cortical F - actin might contribute little to the peripheral staining of F - actin . The high concentration of F - actin in the SC envelope has not yet been described before , and is thought to assist in understanding the functions of the SC in the ganglia . Fig . 5 – Ultrastructural distribution of F - actin at the neuronal – SC boundary . Scale bars : 1 . 0 μ m . A : The positive reaction products for F - actin are deposited prominently in the multilayered lamellae of the SC envelope . An intensely labeled projection ( arrow ) is seen protruding from the SC envelope into the infolding of the subjacent neuron ( N ) . B : An SC projection ( arrow ) is seen protruding toward the interstitial space . Positive reaction products are unevenly distributed in the SC envelope including its projection . In the SC cytoplasm , mitochondria ( m ) can be discerned , and their matrices are virtually unstained . C : A neuronal projection ( arrow ) embedded in the SC envelope is continuous with a DRG neuron ( N ) . The bulk cytoplasm of the neuron remains unstained , but much weakened labeling is also found beneath the plasmalemma within the projection . D : A neuronal projection ( asterisk ) seems almost completely embedded within the adjacent SC envelope . Peroxidase / DAB reactions are intensely deposited in the SC envelope , while positive labeling is almost not visible in the neuronal projection or in the neuronal cell body . 59 B R A I N R E S E A R C H 1 3 9 2 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 4 – 6 1 4 . Experimental procedures 4 . 1 . Animals and antibodies In total , eight female adult Sprague – Dawley rats ( 400 – 450 g ) were used , which has been approved by Jilin University Animal Care and Use Committee . This experiment was performed in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals ( National Academy Press , 1996 ) . FITC - conjugated phalloidin ( p5282 ) , biotinylated mouse anti - FITC antibody ( Clone FL - d6 ) and monoclonal anti - S - 100 ( β - subunit , Cline SH - B1 ) were purchased from Sigma ( St . Louis , MO . Inc ) . Rabbit polyclonal antibody ( AB5032 ) against NCAM was purchased from Chemicon , USA . Alexa 594 - conjugated goat anti - rabbit and Alexa 594 - conjugated goat anti - mouse IgG antibody were obtained from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , Oregon ) . 4 . 2 . Fluorescence microscopic studies Three rats were perfused through the heart with 50 ml physiological saline under Nembutal anesthesia , followed by 200 – 300 ml 4 % paraformaldehyde in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer ( PB , pH 7 . 2 ) . The L4 and L5 DRGs were dissected out , postfixed in fresh fixatives for 4 – 6 h , and then washed in a series of cold sucrose solutions of increasing concentration . The samples were embedded in OCT compound , frozen on dry ice , then cut into 40 - μ m - thick sections using a cryostat ( Leica , CM1900 ) . Immunohistochemistry was performed on free - floating sections . The cryosections were preincubated with 3 % normal goat serum in 0 . 1 M PB containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 30 min at room temperature and then incubated with the primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C . After several washes with 0 . 1 M PB , the sections were reacted with Alexa fluor - conjugated secondary antibodies and 2 μ g / ml FITC - conjugated phalloidin in 0 . 1 m PB for 1 h at room temperature . The sections were mounted onto glass slides , and examined with a laser scanning confocal microscope ( Olympus FV1000 ; Olympus , Tokyo , Japan ) . 4 . 3 . Electron microscopic detection F - actin Five rats were fixed as described above . The L4 and L5 DRGs were dissected out , postfixed in fresh fixatives for 4 – 6 h , then left in 0 . 1 M PB containing 5 % sucrose overnight at 4 °C . The samples were cut into 50 - μ m - thick vibratome sections , and stained with FITC - conjugated phalloidin ( 2 mg / ml ) for 1 h at room temperature . The sections were incubated further with biotinylated anti - FITC antibody , followed by enhancement using the avidin - biotin - peroxidase ( ABC ) method , and pro - cessed for transmission electron microscopy . To make the detection of peroxidase stain unequivocal , the stained sam - ples were examined without heavy metal contrasting . Unstained samples were also examined and used as negative control . The detailed procedure has been described previously ( Li et al . , 2009 ) . Acknowledgments This investigation was supported by the Scientific Research Foundation of Norman Bethune College of Medicine ( No . 421010053426 and 450091099002 ) from Jilin Univ . to Dr . Yan - Chao Li . R E F E R E N C E S Capani , F . , Ellisman , M . H . , Martone , M . E . , 2001 . Filamentous actin is concentrated in specific subpopulations of neuronal and glial structures in rat central nervous system . Brain Res . 923 , 1 – 11 . Chamley , J . H . , Mark , G . E . , Burnstock , G . , 1972 . Sympathetic ganglia in culture . II . Accessory cells . Z . Zellforsch . Mikrosk . Anat . 135 , 315 – 327 . Fig . 6 – Electron microphotographs from the controls . Scale bars : 1 . 0 μ m . A : No positive reaction is detected in the unstained sample . Two neuronal projections ( arrows ) are continuous with the neuronal cell surface . An isolated neuronal projection ( asterisk ) is embedded within the SC envelope ( SC ) . N : sensory neuron ; IS : axon initial segment . B : The fibrocytes in the connective tissue capsule around the DRG are known as an F - actin - rich component , and therefore used as positive control . In the electron micrograph , two fibrocytes ( Fc ) are seen embedded in the connective tissue ( ct ) , and their perikaryal cytoplasm is found densely deposited with positive reaction products for F - actin . 60 B R A I N R E S E A R C H 1 3 9 2 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 4 – 6 1 Dillon , C . , Goda , Y . , 2005 . The actin cytoskeleton : integrating form and function at the synapse . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 28 , 25 – 55 . Drenckhahn , D . , Kaiser , H . W . , 1983 . Evidence for the concentration of F - actin and myosin in synapses and in the plasmalemmal zone of axons . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 31 , 235 – 240 . Drenckhahn , D . , Frotscher , M . , Kaiser , H . W . , 1984 . Concentration of F - actin in synaptic formations of the hippocampus as visualized by staining with fluorescent phalloidin . Brain Res . 300 , 381 – 384 . Everett , A . W . , Nichol , K . A . , 1990 . Ezrin immunoreactivity in neuron subpopulations : cellular distribution in relation to cytoskeletal proteins in sensory neurons . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 38 , 1137 – 1144 . Fath , K . R . , Lasek , R . J . , 1988 . Two classes of actin microfilaments are associated with the inner cytoskeleton of axons . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 613 – 621 . Fifková , E . , 1985 . Actin in the nervous system . Brain Res . 356 , 187 – 215 . Goldman , J . E . , 1983 . Immunocytochemical studies of actin localizationinthecentralnervoussystem . J . Neurosci . 3 , 1952 – 1962 . Hanani , M . , 2005 . Satellite glial cells in sensory ganglia : from form to function . Brain Res . Brain Res . Rev . 48 , 457 – 476 . Hirokawa , N . , 1982 . Cross - linker system between neurofilaments , microtubules and membranous organelles in frog axons revealed by the quick - freeze , deep - etching method . J . Cell Biol . 94 , 129 – 142 . Hirokawa , N . , Tilney , L . G . , Fujiwara , K . , Heuser , J . E . , 1982 . Organization of actin , myosin , and intermediate filaments in the brush border of intestinal epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 94 , 425 – 443 . Kuczmarski , E . R . , Rosenbaum , J . L . , 1979 . Studies on the organization and localization of actin and myosin in neurons . J . Cell Biol . 80 , 356 – 371 . Leong , S . K . , Wong , W . C . , 1989 . An ultrastructural study of the stellate ganglion of the pig - tailed monkey ( Macaca nemestrina ) . J . Anat . 164 , 1 – 18 . Levy Bde , F . , Cunha Jdo , C . , Chadi , G . , 2007 . Cellular analysis of S100Beta and fibroblast growth factor - 2 in the dorsal root ganglia and sciatic nerve of rodents . focus on paracrine actions of activated satellite cells after axotomy . Int . J . Neurosci . 117 , 1481 – 1503 . Li , Y . C . , Bai , W . Z . , Sakai , K . , Hashikawa , T . , 2009 . Fluorescence and electron microscopic localization of F - actin in the ependymocytes . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 57 , 741 – 751 . Li , Y . C . , Bai , W . Z . , Zhou , L . , Sun , L . K . , Hashikawa , T . , 2010 . Nonhomogeneous distribution of filamentous actin in the presynaptic terminals on the spinal motoneurons . J . Comp . Neurol . 518 , 3184 – 3192 . Loesser , K . E . , Doane , K . J . , Wilson , F . J . , Roisen , F . J . , Malamed , S . , 1986 . Improved immunoelectron microscopic method for localizing cytoskeletal proteins in Lowicryl K4M embedded tissues . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 34 , 1477 – 1485 . Matsumoto , E . , Rosenbluth , J . , 1986 . Structure of the satellite cell sheath around the cell body , axon hillock , and initial segment of frog dorsal root ganglion cells . Anat . Rec . 215 , 182 – 191 . Mirsky , R . , Jessen , K . R . , Schachner , M . , Goridis , C . , 1986 . Distribution of the adhesion molecules N - CAM and L1 on peripheral neurons and glia in adult rats . J . Neurocytol . 15 , 799 – 815 . National Academy Press Staff , Commission on Life Sciences Staff , Institute Of Laboratory Animal Research Staff , National Research Council ( U . S . ) Staff , 1996 . Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals . National Academies Press , Washington . Pannese , E . , 1981 . The satellite cells of the sensory ganglia . Adv . Anat . Embryol . Cell Biol . 65 , 1 – 111 . Pannese , E . , Ledda , M . , Cherkas , P . S . , Huang , T . Y . , Hanani , M . , 2003 . Satellite cell reactions to axon injury of sensory ganglion neurons : increase in number of gap junctions and formation of bridges connecting previously separate perineuronal sheaths . Anat Embryol 206 , 337 – 347 . Pannese , E . , Procacci , P . , Ledda , M . , 1996 . Ultrastructural localization of actin in the cell body of rat spinal ganglion neurons . Anat Embryol Berl 194 , 527 – 531 . Pannese , E . , 2002 . Perikaryal surface specializations of neurons in sensory ganglia . Int . Rev . Cytol . 220 , 1 – 34 . Papasozomenos , S . C . , Payne , M . R . , 1986 . Actin immunoreactivity localizes with segregated microtubules and membraneous organelles and in the subaxolemmal region in the beta , beta ′ - iminodipropionitrile axon . J . Neurosci . 6 , 3483 – 3491 . Peach , R . , 1975 . Tubules and filaments in satellite cells and axons of sensory neurons . Am . J . Anat . 42 , 385 – 390 . Reichelt , M . , Zerboni , L . , Arvin , A . M . , 2008 . Mechanisms of varicella - zoster virus neuropathogenesis in human dorsal root ganglia . J . Virol . 82 , 3971 – 3983 . Robertson , A . S . , Smythe , E . , Ayscough , K . R . , 2009 . Functions of actin in endocytosis . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 66 , 2049 – 2065 . Scaravilli , F . , Giometto , B . , Chimelli , L . , Sinclair , E . , 1991 . Macrophages in human sensory ganglia : an immunohistochemical and ultrastructural study . J . Neurocytol . 20 , 609 – 624 . Small , J . V . , 1981 . Organization of actin in the leading edge of cultured cells : influence of osmium tetroxide and dehydration on the ultrastructure of actin meshworks . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 695 – 705 . Spooner , B . S . , Yamada , K . M . , Wessells , N . K . , 1971 . Microfilaments and cell locomotion . J . Cell Biol . 49 , 595 – 613 . Tay , S . S . , Wong , W . C . , Ling , E . A . , 1984 . An ultrastructural study of the non - neuronal cells in the cardiac ganglia of the monkey ( Macaca fascicularis ) following unilateral vagotomy . J . Anat . 138 , 411 – 422 . Trapp , B . D . , Andrews , S . B . , Wong , A . , O ' Connell , M . , Griffin , J . W . , 1989 . Co - localization of the myelin - associated glycoprotein and the microfilament components , F - actin and spectrin , in Schwann cells of myelinated nerve fibres . J . Neurocytol . 18 , 47 – 60 . Tsukita , S . , Tsukita , S . , Kobayashi , T . , Matsumoto , G . , 1986 . Subaxolemmal cytoskeleton in squid giant axon II . Morphological identification microtubule microfilament associated domains axolemma . J Cell Biol . 102 , 1710 – 1725 . Zimmermann , H . , 1996 . Accumulation of synaptic vesicle proteins and cytoskeletal specializations at the peripheral node of Ranvier . Microsc . Res . Tech . 34 , 462 – 473 . 61 B R A I N R E S E A R C H 1 3 9 2 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 4 – 6 1