1 “Open” Disclosure of Innovations , Incentives and Follow - on Reuse : Theory on Processes of Cumulative Innovation and a Field Experiment in Computational Biology Kevin J . Boudreau a and Karim R . Lakhani b Abstract : Most of society ' s innovation systems - - academic science , the patent system , open source , etc . - - are “open” in the sense that they are designed to facilitate knowledge disclosure among innovators . An essential difference across innovation systems is whether disclosure is of intermediate progress and solutions or of completed innovations . We present experimental evidence that links intermediate versus final disclosure not just with quantitative tradeoffs that shape the rate of innovation , but with transformation of the very nature of the innovation search process . We find intermediate disclosure has the advantage of efficiently steering development towards improving existing solution approaches , but also the effect of limiting experimentation and narrowing technological search . We discuss the comparative advantages of intermediate versus final disclosure policies in fostering innovation . ( a ) Boudreau : London Business School , Strategy Department , Regent ' s Park , London , U . K . NW1 4SA , fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 20 7000 8701 , telephone : + 44 ( 0 ) 20 7000 8455 , e - mail : kboudreau @ london . edu ; ( b ) Lakhani : Harvard Business School , Technology and Operations Management . We thank the Harvard Medical School and TopCoder for contribution of considerable support to this project , and especially note efforts of Ramy Arnaout , Eva Guinan , Lee Nadler , Jack Hughes , Rob Hughes , Mike Lydon , and Ira Heffan . We thank Po - Ru Loh , Hernán Amiune and Xiaoshi Lu for technical evaluations of the data algorithms developed in the experiment . We also thank J . P . Benoit , Lee Branstetter , Wesley Cohen , Carliss Baldwin , Erik Brynjolfsson , Chaim Ferschtman , Francisco Gomes , Rebecca Henderson , Nicola Lacetera , Alan McCormack , Anita McGahan , Petra Moser , Ramana Nanda , Richard Nelson , Richard Stallman , Catherine Tucker , Keyvan Valkili , Feng Zhu and seminar participants at the BYU - Utah Strategy Conference , London Business School , the National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) , the Roundtable for Engineering Entrepreneurship Research ( REER ) , and Tel Aviv University for helpful comments . Onal Vural provided excellent research assistance . Boudreau would like to acknowledge financial support from a London Business School Research and Materials Development Grant and the University of Toronto , Rotman School of Management . Lakhani would like to acknowledge the financial support of the HBS Division of Research and Faculty Development . A Google Faculty Research Grant supported both authors . All errors are our own . “Open” Disclosure of Innovations , Incentives and Follow - on Reuse : Theory on Processes of Cumulative Innovation and a Field Experiment in Computational Biology Abstract Most of society’s innovation systems – academic science , the patent system , open source , etc . – are “open” in the sense that they are designed to facilitate knowledge disclosure among innov - ators . An essential di ﬀ erence across innovation systems is whether disclosure is of intermediate progress and solutions or of completed innovations . We present experimental evidence that links intermediate versus ﬁnal disclosure not just with quantitative tradeo ﬀ s that shape the rate of innovation , but with transformation of the very nature of the innovation search process . We ﬁnd intermediate disclosure has the advantage of e ﬃ ciently steering development towards improving existing solution approaches , but also the e ﬀ ect of limiting experimentation and narrowing tech - nological search . We discuss the comparative advantages of intermediate versus ﬁnal disclosure policies in fostering innovation . 1 Introduction How do disclosure policies that govern the reuse of knowledge , technology and innovations , once developed , a ﬀ ect the rate and direction of inventive activity ? Consider , for example , the imple - mentation of the “Bermuda Principles” by the Human Genome Project ( HGP ) . In return for stable , guaranteed funding , more than one thousand research scientists representing more than 30 research laboratories in at least 19 countries released all of their sequence data into the public domain within 24 hours of discovery ( Contreras , 2011 ) . Conducted over a thirteen - year period , the HGP was one of the most ambitious , large - scale , scientiﬁc e ﬀ orts in modern times . This process of near instanta - neous disclosure of ﬁndings and methods , intended to enable investigators to build on each others’ results and coordinate in order to more rapidly advance the frontiers of scientiﬁc knowledge , yielded the structure of the human genome . This immediate disclosure and public sharing of scientiﬁc re - sults ( sequences ) was a signiﬁcant departure from the usual academic practice of releasing results and analyses in the form of a published scientiﬁc journal article . ( These data outputs would later be used in more typical scientiﬁc publications down the road ) . It was also in stark contrast to the patenting and contracting strategy pursued by Celera , the for - proﬁt ﬁrm that was racing against the HGP consortium . 1 As the example illustrates , there is a range of institutions or frameworks in which innovation can be governed , including the patent system , academic science , open source frameworks , the vari - ety of idiosyncratic contracted frameworks in the human genome example and so on ( Table 1 ) . Each framework or innovation system treats knowledge and technology disclosures ( e . g . , sharing , spillovers , transfers and reuse more generally ) according to its own particular rules and proced - ures ( Table 1 ) . Rather than focus on the many details of disclosure policies within within a given innovation system , this paper considers an essential di ﬀ erence across innovation systems : ﬁnal ver - sus intermediate disclosure policies . Here , we investigate how ﬁnal and intermediate disclosure policies – this key di ﬀ erence distinguishing innovation systems – shapes innovation . Thus , we attempt to better understand the comparative advantages of these approaches and the innovation systems that embody them . Traditional institutions tend to favor ﬁnal disclosure of an innovation or problem - solving output that is completed or “working , ” i . e . after the innovation - related problem solving process is com - pleted , such as patented inventions , working instantiations of designs in product components or machinery used in larger downstream systems , vetted academic contributions in the form of pub - lished journal articles , artistic or compositional products in some integral form and so on ( Table 1 ) . Intermediate and ﬁnal disclosure are distinguished in the ﬁrst instance by timing . Whereas ﬁnal disclosures necessarily occur upon ( and often considerably after ) the completion of work , interme - diate disclosure occurs continuously . Disclosure is further distinguished by form . Final disclosures , by their deﬁnition , typically involve some standardized , integral , working and wholly resolved form of solution . By contrast , intermediate disclosure can accommodate a greater breadth or smaller quanta of knowledge , as in partial and negative results , methods , data , progress and so forth . We argue and test two main points . First , we argue that more readily promoting knowledge reuse through intermediate disclosure comes with the cost of diminished incentives , depressing ef - fort and participation – an “incentives - versus - reuse” tradeo ﬀ . We clarify that this tradeo ﬀ is rooted in the timing , form and contractibility of technology and knowledge reuse . Second , intermediate and ﬁnal disclosure policies produce a qualitative transformation in patterns and scope of “search” across di ﬀ erent approaches to addressing an innovation problem – both in terms of choices by indi - vidual innovators and overall patterns in the population of innovators . Final disclosure promotes greater independent , “parallel” or uncorrelated experimentation across di ﬀ erent innovators ( Nelson , 2 1961 ; Abernathy and Rosenbloom , 1969 ; Boudreau et al . , 2011 ) ; intermediate disclosure produces more coordinated – and possibly convergent and overlapping – choices of solution approaches . These di ﬀ erences are shaped by the prospect of reducing cost and uncertainty in experimentation and by greater signaling ( regarding the knowledge frontier and the actions of others ) under intermediate disclosure . Whereas , within the economy , intermediate and ﬁnal disclosure are associated with entirely di ﬀ erent innovation systems , our empirical investigation makes inferences by varying the disclosure policy while holding other features of institutional design constant . To do so , we implemented a ﬁeld experiment in a controlled , “synthetic” institutional environment . We implemented the experiment on an online platform that was built and customized to incorporate key research design features by TopCoder ( a leading developer of contest - based custom software and algorithm solutions ) . The design involved comparing randomly - assigned independent groups of individuals working to develop and optimize a bioinformatics algorithm under either disclosure regime . In all , 733 mathematicians , software developers , scientists and data scientists participated over the two - week problem - solving period . Under intermediate disclosure , intermediate solutions developed in the regular trial - and - error development process were instantaneously catalogued and made available for inspection and reuse by other participants within the group . Under ﬁnal disclosure , intermediate solutions were not disclosed until the end of the two - week development period . Payo ﬀ s and rewards were on the basis of rank order of solution performance within each independent group . We observe ﬁne - grained measures of incentives and e ﬀ ort , solution approaches and the technical performance of solutions . It should be emphasized that the experimental design is intended to reﬂect a population of prospective innovators and how they respond to the prospect of working under a given institutional framework . This creates the need for unusually large comparison groups to be constructed from the 733 participants . A direct consequence and cost of this requirement is minimal replication in the design . We discuss this point at greater length herein . A second point deserving special emphasis is the research is intended to generalize insights in relation to a wide range of innovation systems on the basis of the one ( synthetic ) institutional context presented here . Therefore , we caution that while the intermediate disclosure regime produces higher quality problem - solving at lower cost in this particular context , this is not a generalizable ﬁnding . The key generalizable insights reside in 3 the tradeo ﬀ s we document . The paper is organized as follows . In Section 2 , we establish key terms of reference with respect to disclosure policies in innovation systems . In Section 3 , we review related literature and develop predictions . The experimental set - up , methods and data collection are described in Section 4 . Section 5 describes the data . Section 6 presents results and analysis . Section 7 concludes . < Table 1 > 2 The Role of Disclosure Policies in Innovation In this section , we establish our key terms of reference , ﬁrst discussing the cumulative innovation process and then deﬁning questions of disclosure more precisely . 2 . 1 “Upstream” Knowledge and “Downstream” Reuse Scholarship in a range of disciplines has conceived of innovation as a cumulative process whereby the frontiers of knowledge and production possibilities are advanced by successfully solving a series of problems ( Kuhn , 1962 ; Sahal , 1985 ) . In large part , new knowledge , innovation and technical advances are products of a recombinatorial process ( e . g . Weitzman , 1998 ; Fleming , 2001 ) , where existing “upstream” knowledge is built upon and recombined within an on - going stream of cumulative innovations , including those that improve upon the original application and perhaps others that open up new uses ( Basalla , 1988 ) . In academic science , for example , this takes the form of new advances building upon and citing existing publications , presentations and exchanges in meetings and seminars , etc . ( Dasgupta and David , 1994 ) . In industrial innovation , for example , competitors may learn from and draw on the knowledge and technology of other ﬁrms through some combination of licensing , involuntary knowledge spillovers , movement of employees and so forth ( e . g . , Marx et al . , 2009 ; Rosenkopf and Almeida , 2003 ) . Similarly , various instantiations of open innovation systems rely on participants being able , in their attempts to solve current problems and create new inventions , to reuse prior contributors’ knowledge and technology ( e . g . , Chesbrough , 2003 ; von Hippel , 2005 ) . 4 2 . 2 Disclosure , Granting Access and Devolving Control Where innovating individuals or organizations possess distinct comparative advantages , it will some - times be productive to involve multiple parties to innovate within the chain of cumulative innovation ( Green and Scotchmer , 1995 ) . Therefore , central to cumulative innovation is a need for upstream knowledge and technology to be disclosed in order for downstream innovators to reuse and build upon this work . Our use of “disclosure” here should be understood as shorthand for the idea of implementing a broader framework 1 in which upstream knowledge and technology are not just disclosed but follow - on innovators are also granted access rights ( Murray and O’Mahony , 2007 ; Boudreau , 2010 ) . For example , patents disclose the designs of inventions in the public domain . But patents also confer rights of exclusion to the patent owner ; it is through licensing that access is granted for reuse by downstream innovators . Imperfect defensibility of patents can also lead to de facto access through “leakage” and involuntary spillovers of knowledge . Analogously , “user innovation” requires that originating technologies and ideas not only be disclosed , but also that users have rights of access and reuse , typically via the “ﬁrst - sale doctrine” ( Katz , 2014 ) , which grants inventors rights to adapt , change and modify existing products without legal encumbrances . Furthermore , beyond providing access via a contractual framework , in the case of physical materials there can be a need for investments in facilities and infrastructure to enable transfer and downstream reuse ( Stern , 2004 ; Furman and Stern , 2011 ) . Disclosures and access typically impose certain conditions and stipulations , include those related to use , sharing , further development , modiﬁcation and commercialization ( e . g . : Gans and Murray , 2012 ) . Stipulations may concern issues such as payments , attribution , responsibilities and restric - tions of various kinds . Wholly devolving control rights over upstream knowledge or technology may eliminate such restrictions and conditionality ( Boudreau , 2010 ) . Wholesale devolution of control rights , however , is rare . Even in the case of open source software , rights of access and reuse are only established by acceding to the General Public License or like agreements , which place a great num - ber of conditions on sharing , further development , modiﬁcation and commercialization ( Raymond , 1999 ) . 1 We focus here on disclosure policies rather than strategic , voluntary disclosures by individual actors ( e . g . , Haeussler et al . ( 2009 ) , Henkel and Baldwin ( 2010 ) 5 2 . 3 Intermediate versus Final Disclosure Policies Following earlier premises , we contend that all innovation systems are “open” , if by “open” we mean they enable disclosure of upstream knowledge and technology for reuse . Although endless details distinguish di ﬀ erent innovation systems ( see Table 1 ) , a categorical distinction can be make between systems implementing ﬁnal and intermediate disclosure policies . Intermediate and ﬁnal disclosure are distinguished in the ﬁrst instance by timing . Whereas ﬁnal disclosures necessarily occur upon ( and often considerably after ) the completion of work , intermediate disclosures occur more continuously , as progress is made throughout the problem - solving process . Disclosure is further distinguished by form . Final disclosures , by their deﬁnition , typically involve some standardized , integral , working and wholly resolved form of solution . By contrast , intermediate disclosure can accommodate a greater range and varying quanta of knowledge , as in partial and negative results , methods , data , progress and so forth . 2 Perhaps the most common and inﬂuential example of intermediate disclosure is open source soft - ware , in which code , bug reports and test suites are instantly made available for developers to build upon and reuse in successive submissions to the code base ( O’Mahony , 2003 ; von Krogh et al . , 2003 ; von Hippel and von Krogh , 2003 ) . Intermediate disclosure practices have also been implemented in computer hardware ( Osterloh and Rota , 2007 ) , Wikipedia ( Zhang and Zhu , 2011 ) , synthetic biol - ogy ( Torrance , 2010 ) , the Polymath Project for creating mathematical proofs ( Gowers and Nielsen , 2009 ) and Netﬂix’s $ 1MM prize contest to improve its movie rating prediction algorithm , in which intermediate solutions were disclosed in the course of the contest . Intermediate disclosure is not just a modern , Internet - driven phenomenon . Ample case examples from the industrial revolution and early 20th century of particular technological advances describe instances of “collective inven - tion” in which inventors making intermediate disclosures to one another of ideas and techniques propelled advances in blast furnace technology ( Allen , 1983 ) , Cornish pumping engines , Bessemer steel , large - scale silk production ( Nuvolari , 2004 ) and aviation technology ( Meyer , 2013 ) . 2 Our consideration of timing here di ﬀ ers from past research on questions of timing and breadth of disclosure ( Mazzoleni and Nelson , 1998 ; Mukherjee and Stern , 2009 ; Lerner , 2006 ; Moon , 2011 ; Gans and Murray , 2012 ) by examining , in particular , e ﬀ ects of disclosures before the creation of a ﬁnal innovation . 6 3 Disclosure Policies and Innovation Outcomes In this section , we consider how implementing ﬁnal or intermediate disclosure policies may a ﬀ ect innovation . Our discussion is in two parts . We ﬁrst describe what we refer to as the incentives - versus - reuse tradeo ﬀ . We then describe how intermediate versus ﬁnal disclosure policies qualitatively transform the search process . We develop predictions for the empirical analysis to follow . 3 . 1 Disclosure Policies , Incentives and Follow - on Reuse Creating ex ante incentives to make costly and risky investments and an e ﬀ ort to realize an innov - ation while simultaneously encouraging ex post or follow - on knowledge reuse ( through disclosure ) are two goals 3 of any innovation system . ( See Scotchmer ( 2004 ) and Table 1 . ) The goals of in - centives and reuse can sometimes conﬂict and other times be complementary in any one system . For example , knowledge spillovers and leakage among competing ﬁrms facilitates reuse , but may harm incentives ( Scotchmer , 2004 ) . In academic science , greater reuse through citations might , by contrast , stimulate e ﬀ orts and incentives ( Stephan , 1996 , 2012 ) . In this subsection , rather than focus on incentives and reuse within a given system , we will instead consider how di ﬀ erences in disclosure policies across systems bear on innovation outcomes . Intermediate Disclosure and Contractibility . As is well known , contractibility conditions are tenuous around the transfer and reuse of knowledge and ideas ( e . g . , Arrow , 1971 ) . It is challenging , under the best of circumstances , to assure contractibility in the sense of assuring that disclosure and access conditions are honored and proper rewards conferred to the originating innovator . Managing the challenge of contractibility is arguably so central that key features of the innovation system design ( with nuanced rules , laws , procedures and even cultures and customs ) can be understood as means of either increasing e ﬀ ectiveness of contractibility or reducing their costs . For example , multi - party exchange frameworks – as in patent pools , academic publishing , standards organizations and biological research centers – avoid the need for ad hoc bilateral negotiations and governance . Informal governance can also supplement formal governance in order to enforce rules of reuse and sharing ( Fauchart and von Hippel , 2008 ) . Proprietary platform technologies are even designed from 3 Other considerations may include allocative interests or fairness and minimizing deadweight losses . Here , however , we emphasize dynamic considerations of technical change and innovation , given our focus here on innovation processes and that such considerations are most central to advancing welfare in society ( Solow , 1957 ) . 7 the ground up in a way that enables access and reuse by large numbers of downstream innovators without the need to relinquish control or transfer knowledge of the inner workings of the platform ( Boudreau , 2010 ; Parker and Van Alstyne , 2010 ) . Most crucial to our arguments here , the cornerstones of contrability are observability and veriﬁ - ability ( Hart , 1995 ) – and intermediate disclosures degrade observability and contractibility of know - ledge disclosure and reuse . The delicate balance in the design of any innovation system can best function to the extent that upstream knowledge being disclosed , transferred and reused takes some completed , working , wholly integral form – simply because this makes the quantum of knowledge transfer more measurable and standardized . The completed , working and wholly integral nature of ﬁnal disclosure alleviates challenges of attribution . Consider the academic science context , where the research article is the commonly accepted and readily observed “unit of innovative output . ” Production of research articles is governed by commonly understood requirements for format , content and completeness . These outputs are even certiﬁed by the institutions through peer review . Peer review is itself somewhat standardized through a set of regular routines , given standard expectations around the content of research articles . Simple counts of research articles also even act as meaningful measures of journal quality ( impact factor as average numbers of citations ) and researcher quality ( on the basis of publication counts , by journal type ) . Intermediate disclosure will reduce these levels of observability and veriﬁability if they imply less standardized , less measurable , less certiﬁed , more commingled , more varied forms and proper attribution is made more di ﬃ cult . The “Incentives - versus - Reuse” Tradeo ﬀ . In considering how incentives and reuse are a ﬀ ected by disclosure policies , prior research has tended to consider these issues separately , rather than at once ; and this research also tends to consider these issues within a given innovation system , rather than in relation to di ﬀ erent approaches to disclosure across altogether di ﬀ erent systems . ( See Appendix for further description and mapping of the existing research that we build upon . ) Here , we deﬁne an “incentives - versus - reuse” tradeo ﬀ associated with intermediate and ﬁnal disclosure . With respect to incentives , intermediate disclosure reduces contractibility , as earlier described , reducing upstream innovators’ ability to impose conditions and stipulations on reuse . This includes stipulations asssuring recognition and rewards to the upstream innovator . Intermediate disclosure 8 therefore reduces incentives , all else being equal . 4 This claim is consistent with the popular view that the absence of patents ( a ﬁnal disclosure mechanism ) might decrease incentives ( Schanker - mann , 1998 ) , which enjoys at least some empirical support ( Belleﬂamme , 2006 ) . Note , this lower contractibility adds to what might already be depressed incentives under any form of reuse – based on either intermediate or ﬁnal disclosure – with “proﬁt - division” - related losses of incentives that occur under any form of disclosure , where dividing payo ﬀ s between upstream and downstream innovators can itself harm incentives ( Scotchmer , 1991 ; Green and Scotchmer , 1995 ; Scotchmer , 2004 ) . Implications for follow - on reuse between ﬁnal and intermediate disclosure are more straightfor - ward . Intermediate disclosure – by deﬁnition – creates the opportunity for earlier , more frequent and wider ranging disclosures , with fewer restrictions on reuse than does ﬁnal disclosure . 5 It immedi - ately follows that intermediate disclosure enables greater reuse of a given upstream innovation , all else being equal . 6 As straightforward as the logic of the “reuse” half of the “incentives - versus - reuse” tradeo ﬀ might be – i . e . , all else being equal , removing obstacles to disclosure indeed enables greater reuse – it remains di ﬃ cult to directly observe relevant all - else - being - equal empirical comparisons to illustrate this point and to assess magnitudes of e ﬀ ects . That said , we can begin to appreciate the central role of follow - on innovation and reuse under intermediate disclosure simply by referring to the numerous studies documenting their abundancy in contexts such as open source software projects ( e . g . : von Krogh et al . , 2003 ) , communities of inventors ( e . g . Meyer 2013 ) , user innovator groups ( e . g . , von Hippel , 4 This presumes , for example , that lower appropriability is not somehow outweighed by beneﬁts of wider adoption and reuse by competing innovators , as with say network e ﬀ ects ( e . g . , Cusumano et al . , 1992 ) , powerful complementar - ities and increasing returns in knowledge recombination ( Weitzman , 1998 ; Bessen and Maskin , 2004 ; Belenzon , 2012 ) or the establishment of a cooperative reciprocating or “sharing” equilibrium among those disclosing and recombining knowledge ( e . g . , Allen , 1983 ) . 5 Note that these arguments imply that contractibility is “good” for upstream innovators but “bad” for downstream reuse . This might seem a departure from Coasian reasoning , where the assignment of property rights and ability to write contracts can assure e ﬃ cient trades . However , even if a perfect contract for the transfer and reuse could be written , the downstream innovator might not be able to commit to the contract without ﬁrst engaging in trial - and - error experimentation to assess the value of an upstream input . Thus , the downstream innovator would need a means of accessing this knowledge prior to assessing its value . Alternatively , under less than ideal Coasian conditions , this contention ( of good for upstream incentives and bad for downstream reuse ) simply requires that imperfect contracts go some measure towards guaranteeing upstream innovators’ payo ﬀ s , while adding transaction costs in downstream reuse relative to what would be the case in a less heavily contracted environment . 6 The all - else - being - equal qualiﬁcation is rather important here , as intermediate disclosure could a ﬀ ect incentives in a way that determines whether a given upstream innovation appears in the ﬁrst place . It should also a ﬀ ect down - stream innovator’s incentives to invest in “absorbing” and learning upstream knowledge and technology . Intermediate disclosure could also shape coordination and search costs . For example , a published academic article ( a ﬁnal dis - closure ) comes with the validation , certiﬁcation and screening of the peer review process . The selection process of journals and the full development and articulation of contributions in an article also help sort and categorize its content for other scholars to comprehend and situate within the torrent of academic research output . 9 2005 ) and other intermediate disclosure regimes . Although follow - on reuse is taken as a matter of fact in research focused on intermediate dis - closure regimes , innovators’ incentives to enter , participate and exert e ﬀ ort in development is taken as a “puzzle” given lower appropriability conditions ( e . g . , Lerner and Tirole , 2002 ; Bonaccorsi and Rossi , 2004 ) – consistent again with the incentives - versus - reuse tradeo ﬀ . In many cases , the puzzle is clariﬁed by pointing to some form of compensating mechanism that countervails any productivity losses from depressed incentives . For example , enlisting “many eyeballs” ( Raymond , 1999 ) through globally distributed reach and highly modular work streams can o ﬀ set lost incentives in open source software projects . Lower contractibility and payo ﬀ s speciﬁcally related to disclosures and reuse might also be o ﬀ set by enlisting sources of motivation not tied to transfers and reuse , such as in - trinsic , pro - social , own - use and learning - by - doing motivations ( Lakhani and Wolf , 2005 ; Roberts et al . , 2006 ) . Further , research on open source and user innovation routinely refer to populations of those innovators as “communities” ( Franke and Shah , 2003 ; von Hippel and von Krogh , 2003 ; West and Lakhani , 2008 ) , implying norms and socialization might compensate by producing cooperative , reciprocating interactions rather than competitive ones . In some cases , intermediate disclosure re - gimes still involve attempts to tie payo ﬀ s to encourage e ﬀ ort and disclosure , at least for small levels of e ﬀ ort . For example , Wikipedia encourages “edits” ( contributions and simultaneous disclosure ) via the motivations of participants to signal their expertise to a wider audience of users ( Zhang and Zhu , 2011 ) . The small size of individual intermediate , partial contributions might also relieve the need for herculean e ﬀ orts by any one individual . Beyond papers focusing on patterns associated with particular disclosure policies , a small stream of recent papers attempts to compare follow - on reuse when disclosure policies vary within a given innovation system . None precisely relates to intermediate versus ﬁnal disclosure , but nonetheless o ﬀ ers a degree of corroborating insight . For example , several papers have begun to investigate e ﬀ ects of patents , a ﬁnal disclosure mechanism , on follow - on reuse ( relative to no patents , at all ) . Our theory would predict that patents , as a ﬁnal disclosure regime , should retard disclosure and reuse of a given upstream innovation all else being equal , relative to rates of reuse in intermediate disclosure . However , rather than simply ﬁnding patents generate little reuse , these studies fail to ﬁnd any evidence whatsoever that patents produce an increase of reuse at all – and most data analyzed thus far suggests a decrease ( Huang and Murray , 2009 ; Murray and Stern , 2007 ; Williams , 10 2013 ; Sampat and Williams , 2014 ) . 7 Thus , rather than promoting reuse via property rights and a “market for ideas” ( Kitch , 1977 ; Arora , et al . 2004 ) at least these existing comparisons suggest imperfections and transaction costs of patents ( Heller and Eisenberg , 1998 ; Anand and Khanna , 2000 ; Bessen , 2004 ) that lead them to support fewer disclosures than even our theory would allow for . More broadly , these results corroborate our contention that hindrances and conditions placed on disclosure can have large negative implications for on - going reuse . Perhaps works that are closest to our reuse “half” of the incentives - versus - reuse tradeo ﬀ , are those by Stern and Furman ( 2011 ) and Boudreau ( 2010 ) . Stern and Furman ( 2011 ) show that the establishment of biological resource centers as an infrastructure and contracting framework to grant access to research materials increases reuse by wide margins . Boudreau ( 2010 ) analogously shows that both granting access to and devolving control over upstream operating system platforms in PDAs and smartphones accelerates reuse in downstream development sizably increases building of downstream products on top of those platforms . We summarize the preceding arguments in the following prediction . Prediction 1 ( “Incentives - versus - Reuse” Tradeo ﬀ ) : Implementing an intermedi - ate rather than ﬁnal disclosure policy leads to lower incentives but greater follow - on reuse . 3 . 2 Disclosure Policies and Search for Solutions The earlier incentives - versus - reuse tradeo ﬀ draws on literatures that implicitly conceptualize the innovation process as a “production function” where upstream knowledge or technology serves as an “input” along with e ﬀ ort and investment in determining the level of downstream innovation that results . In this section , we consider that innovation performance is also shaped by the the search for problem - solving approach . We develop predictions in relation to disclosure policies . 7 Williams ( 2013 ) is exceptional in ﬁnding zero e ﬀ ect of patents on disclosure . Her interpretation is that given there is zero e ﬀ ect on disclosure , the e ﬀ ect of patents on reuse can be disregarded in e ﬃ ciency assessments of patents . Our theory and arguments instead would suggest that the absence of an e ﬀ ect on reuse should instead be regarded as cause to question to e ﬃ cacy of the disclosure mechanism in patents . It should be noted too that Galasso and Schankermann ( 2013 ) ﬁnd considerable variation from industry to industry , even in their relatively selected subsample of inventions that are invalidated , suggesting considerable need for caution in interpreting the existing evidence . 11 Alternative Approaches to Solving Problems . Innovation problems that involve making large numbers of interacting decisions are , by their nature , complex and uncertain – and therefore require search to ﬁnd a solution ( Simon , 1962 ) . For example , in aeronautical engineering , landing gear design involves sets of decisions related to a great many interrelated parameters ( e . g . , the num - ber and conﬁguration of wheels , gear design , retraction and extension method , etc . ) that trade o ﬀ various performance criteria ( e . g . , drag , weight , cost , maintenance , reliability , etc . ) . Analog of such complex innovation and problem - solving exist in science , technology , software , artistic composition , etc . In principle , there may be multiple solutions that meet some criteria – although perhaps trading o ﬀ aspects of performance in di ﬀ erent ways . Where the individual decisions ( around particular parameters of a solution ) are complementary and “go together” ( Rosenberg , 1982 ) altogether dif - ferent solution approaches can exist ( e . g . , a ﬁxed landing gear goes together with the choice of aerodynamic covers for wheels , whereas a retractable landing gear goes together with modiﬁcations to the fuselage ) . Innovation thus tends to proceed as a search for approaches and then as a search for optimal solutions within a given approach . ( This is akin to search on di ﬀ erent “hills” within a “rugged landscape” ( Kaufmann , 1993 ; Levinthal , 1997 ) , or “exploration versus exploitation” ( March , 1991 ) ) . In the history of aeronautical design , landing gear design proceeded in at least four distinct and parallel approaches until ﬁnally the retractable landing became the preferred approach ( Vin - centi , 1994 ) . Landing gear design proceeds today within that same basic approach , with continuing incremental improvements . 8 This notion of search is explored in a range of research traditions bey - ond just innovation , including artiﬁcial intelligence , psychology , biology , evolution , organizational learning and others ( e . g . , Baron , 1988 ; Cyert and March , 1963 ; Newell and Simon , 1972 ; Simon , 1962 ; March , 1991 ; Levinthal , 1997 ) . To the extent that innovation and problem solving is shrouded in uncertainty , individual problem solvers may initiate search according to their own initial stock of knowledge and beliefs ( Rosenkopf and Nerkar , 2001 ; Rosekopf and Almeida , 2003 ) . Trial - and - error experimentation then provides feedback and insight – learning – accumulating upon an innovator’s initial stock of knowledge . Given constraints of uncertainty and bounded rationality , the choice of search direction can be inﬂuenced by 8 Bijker et al . ( 1987 ) document multiple simultaneous approaches in a range of technologies including bicycles , synthetic dye chemistry and ship - building . 12 some combination of heuristics ( e . g . Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) , theoretical understandings ( Fleming and Sorenson , 2004 ) , analogies from comparable situations ( Gavetti et al . , 2005 ) and the problem solver’s own initial endowment of knowledge and experience . In addition , problem solvers may not be entirely isolated , autonomous and independent of one another . They may and often are , searching whilst others do the same . This provides an opportunity to observe the activities and outcomes of the experimentation of other problem solvers . Depending on the payo ﬀ structure , observing others’ action can also inﬂuence expected returns of making investments in given directions . Disclosure and Innovative Search . The earlier incentives - versus - reuse tradeo ﬀ , on its own , suggests that the higher incentives of ﬁnal disclosure might be associated with higher experimentation – inasmuch as higher incentives and e ﬀ ort translate to greater search e ﬀ orts . Here we argue that disclosure policies should more fundamentally transform patterns of search . There will be a greater degree of independence in the choice of search approach across innovators under ﬁnal disclosure , where a steady stream of intermediate updating and observation of others’ actions and choices is not possible . At the population level , this may imply some degree of “parallel” or uncorrelated search , inasmuch as individuals maintain some level of ignorance regarding outcomes of each other’s trial - and - error search process ( Nelson , 1961 ; Abernathy and Rosenbloom , 1969 ; Boudreau et al . , 2011 ) . In the case of intermediate disclosures , a steadier stream of updates has the potential to res - ult in far more “coordinated” or correlated responses , if individual problem solvers can observe and respond systematically to their own experimentation outcomes and to those of others . Inter - mediate disclosure , not only increases the immediacy and extent of transfers and reuse , but also telegraphs information about the existence and potential of alternative approaches . More informed and coordinated searching could potentially produce deliberately di ﬀ erentiated search paths , as when competing innovators expect higher returns from staking out new ground than from engaging in overlapping experiments ( cf . Murray , et al . 2009 ; Acemoglu , 2012 ) . Following this argument , it is possible that a coordinated search could lead to greater diversity in solution approaches than that generated by independent experimentation . However , a countervailing argument , is that conver - ging on established solution approaches economizes search costs and reduces uncertainty – creating incentives to replicate what has been done . Following the weight of historical evidence – indicating 13 a general tendency to convergent trajectories , dominant designs and the emergence of scientiﬁc paradigms ( e . g . , Kuhn , 1962 ; Utterback and Abernathy , 1975 ; Dosi , 1982 ) , we make the following prediction : Prediction 2 ( “Independent - versus - Convergent Search” ) : Implementing an in - termediate rather than ﬁnal disclosure policy leads innovators to tend to converge to - wards successful solution approaches and to engage in a lesser degree of independent experimentation . 4 Experimental Design In this experiment , we implement a synthetic innovation system in a “Petri dish , ” applying di ﬀ erent disclosure policies in di ﬀ erent treatments . At the same time , we hold constant the problem addressed and the composition and number of participants working under di ﬀ erent treatments so as to infer ceteris paribus e ﬀ ects of disclosure policies . The research question and our objectives place relatively high restrictions on the research con - text . We needed an exceptionally highly - controlled environment that would enable us to precisely implement distinct disclosure policies while controlling all other aspects of the institutional context and observing relevant micro - measures ( i . e . , e ﬀ ort , problem - solving performance and the particu - lar solution approaches pursued ) . The experiment was carried out over two weeks on the online software development platform of TopCoder , the leading platform for developing software and al - gorithmic solutions as a series of contests . The platform has existing communications and payment systems and a membership of elite software and algorithm problem - solvers . We worked closely with TopCoder executives and technologists to modify the platform to implement the features of the experimental design , the particulars of which we describe here . 4 . 1 Sign - up Phase and Random Assignment to Independent Groups Subjects were recruited from the TopCoder platform’s existing membership of software and al - gorithm programmers , the experiment being included as part of the regular stream of listed “chal - lenges” members can sign up for and participate in . The posting indicated that the challenge would 14 feature an algorithmic optimization solution related to genomics , the solution to which was sought by Harvard Medical School ( from which the problem had been sourced , see Section 4 . 2 ) , that the total prize pool would be $ 6 , 000 . 00 and that the exercise was also being used for research purposes . The call for participation did not describe what particular problem would be solved . In response to our call for participation , 733 TopCoder members signed up for the experiment . Roughly half ( 44 % ) were professionals , the remainder were students . Participants from India ( 20 % ) , the United States ( 16 % ) , China ( 9 % ) and Russia ( 9 % ) accounted for more than half of a pool that represented 69 countries . Intermediate Disclosure was assigned 245 treatments ; Final Disclosure and Mixed treatments were each assigned 244 subjects . Our primary goal in the experiment was to observe di ﬀ erences not only across individuals working under di ﬀ erent disclosure policies , but also di ﬀ erences across the groups , as a whole . For example , patterns of learning and innovation in each group is a collective outcome , at least as much as it is can be regarded at the individual level . In this sense , it was important to design an environment – synthetic as it might be – that would represent a population of creative problem - solvers could , in the presence of a given institutional framework , might elect to participate in the innovation process or otherwise devote their attention to outside options ( much like the case in our real - world innovation systems ) . This , however , implies the need to create large comparison groups of prospective entrants , to enable us to observe entry , non - entry and the consequences of interactions among individual subjects who do enter and actively participate . With these points in mind , we constructed a minimum – only two – main experimental comparison groups to maximize their size : the “Intermediate Disclosure” and “Final Disclosure” regimes . A cost of large groups is a loss of replication , with just one trial per treatment . As a means of providing greater validation to the results , we constructed a third , supplementary regime to better assure that our main comparison groups were not somehow eccentric . In this “Mixed” regime , intermediate disclosure was permitted in the second but not the ﬁrst week of the experiment . In reporting results , we focus on the main comparison groups and return to the Mixed regime to ﬁnd they corroborate main results . In creating three equally - sized , independent groups of similar composition , we randomized , but simultaneously matched on skills by rank - ordering participants according to skill - ratings and then randomly assigned descending triplets of roughly equal skill ratings . We are able to observe skills , 15 as the TopCoder platform provides participants’ skill ratings , formulated via an Elo - based system ( Maas and Wagenmakers , 2005 ) . This rating estimates skill on the basis of historical performance in similar algorithmic problem - solving exercises . 9 4 . 2 Problem - Solving and Development Phase All development and interaction occurred on the online platform . Once assignment of individuals was completed and problem - solving was set to begin , a series of information was immediately revealed . Subjects were given the problem statement , together with a description of how solution accuracy and speed would translate into quantitive solution scores ( Appendix A ) . At the same time , the identities ( “handles” ) of all other subjects in the same treatment group were revealed . The Problem . The innovation problem was to develop de novo solutions in computer code to a problem sourced from researchers at Harvard Medical School , speciﬁcally , to design a bioinformatics algorithm to compare and annotate a large series of genomic sequences . The problem involved pro - cessing large amounts of data , accurately annotating the sequencing while minimizing transcription errors , solving within constrained computational resources ( utilizing only an o ﬀ - the - shelf computer ) and minimizing the amount of time . A detailed description of scientiﬁc features of the problem and scoring of solutions is described by Lakhani et al . ( 2013 a ) . The problem we selected sits at the intersection of software development , mathematics , computer science and biology , is nontrivial and challenging and is a sort of computational optimization problem that involves iterative solution development and ongoing incremental gains rather than a ﬁnal analytical solution that is either correct or incorrect . The focus on algorithm development enables us to treat intermediate solutions as primary inputs to subsequent development within a trial - and - error learning process . Working in digital format also enables solutions to be codiﬁed and recorded in computer instructions and evaluated by an automated system . The algorithmic setting also enabled us to devise a common , automated and precise measure of quality . Such advantages would not be possible were we to use a non - digital context . Further , the speciﬁc problem is highly salient in the scientiﬁc literature , having ﬁrst been addressed when gene sequencing got underway ( Altschul et 9 The average participant had engaged in dozens of problems prior to the experiment . The Elo system is standard in a range of contexts from chess grandmaster tournaments to US College Bowl systems to the National Scrabble Association and European Go Federation . 16 al . , 1990 ) . More generally , the problem is also representative of complex , data - intensive numerical optimization problems . Work Environment , Scoring and Information . Subjects worked through the platform’s “heads - up” interface screen on which development could be performed in a range of computer lan - guages . Subjects received direct feedback by submitting their algorithm designs to the platform for assessment by the automated test suite and observing solution scores . ( It was not possible to receive direct feedback on the quality of submissions “o ﬀ line . ” ) The main task required subjects to write code to maximize accuracy and minimize time in identifying the originating gene segments that formed a particular genomic sequence ( see Lakhani et al . , 2013 a for a detailed description of the problem and scoring ) . Each code submission had to evaluate 100 , 000 genomic sequences with the quality score determined as a linear combination of speed and accuracy . Although the explicit scoring model was shared with participants , practically speaking , it was only through submitting intermediate working solutions to the platform in trial - and - error fashion that participants could determine their scores and whether improvements could be made . 4 . 2 . 1 Disclosure Regimes The di ﬀ erences of central interest are those related to the disclosure policies that were implemented across the independent groups . Subjects were informed of procedures within their respective regimes , but not of procedures of other groups or that there would be di ﬀ erences across groups . Final Disclosure . Final Disclosure is the simplest case . No communications or sharing facilities were enabled on the platform for this treatment . Individuals were also instructed that interacting with other competitors o ﬀ the platform would result in immediate disqualiﬁcation of all involved . Participants simply worked on their own and submitted their solutions for scoring . Although solu - tions were not disclosed , we followed TopCoder’s insistence that the system display scores and rank ordering of participants throughout the experiment . 10 10 This creates the possibility of updating and consequent decision - making throughout the contest . However , the experiment was not designed to derive inferences in relation to any dynamic adjustments . We focus on cross - sectional comparisons . 17 Intermediate Disclosure . In Intermediate Disclosure all solutions submitted by subjects in the trial - and - error development process were immediately disclosed to other participants in the same treatment group . This was done via the same main “heads - up” display interface used to conduct software development . All submitted intermediate solutions , identiﬁed by score , submitter and time of submission , were listed and available to participants in their entirety ( i . e . , source code ) by simply clicking on the relevant entry in the list . The implemented system of disclosure should thus be understood as relatively simple and frictionless . Mixed Regime . In the Mixed regime , intended to supplement our main comparisons , the ﬁrst week followed the rules and procedures of Final Disclosure ( i . e . , no disclosures ) , the second week followed the rules and procedures of Intermediate Disclosure ( i . e . , all solutions from the ﬁrst week was revealed along with any subsequent solutions during the second week ) . 4 . 3 Payo ﬀ s and Rewards Phase Our primary interest in this experiment is to examine e ﬀ ects of variation in disclosure policies , nonetheless we deﬁne a ﬁxed underlying institutional design held constant across treatments . Par - ticularly relevant is , of course , the payo ﬀ structure . Payo ﬀ s in Final Disclosure . Payo ﬀ s were tied to quality of the solutions developed , based on the precise quantitative scoring enabled by platform submissions . In general , payo ﬀ s to an innovation problem can , for example , go to the top performing solutions , as in winner - take - all outcomes . Such is the case where only the very best solution is desired and there is no need for variety of solutions or solution approaches in addressing a particular problem . However , more generally , we often see some returns to more than just one solution for a given problem ( e . g . , competition in academia , industrial competition , prize contests , etc . ) . For this reason , we chose an arbitrarily small number ( 5 ) of prizes , monotonically varying is size with rank . ( We were also encouraged to follow this design by TopCoder executives , on the basis of their experience . ) In Final Disclosure , the top ﬁve positions were allocated a total of $ 1 , 000 in payo ﬀ s ( $ 500 , $ 250 , $ 125 , $ 75 and $ 50 ) at the end of each of the two weeks , i . e . , a total of $ 2 , 000 . ( The particular amounts were chosen under the advice of TopCoder executives , given the nature of the problem and given our interest in eliciting wide 18 participation . TopCoder executives also recommended we break up payments over two weeks , rather than confer rewards only at the end , as a means of maintaining engagement and participation across the entire process , enabling us to observe a longer period of experimentation and improvement . 11 ) Speciﬁcally , payo ﬀ s were based upon the ﬁnal , last submissions made by each subject , each week . Top ranking subjects were also publicly announced on the TopCoder website . Therefore , implicit , reputational payo ﬀ s accompanied monetary payo ﬀ s . Payo ﬀ s in Intermediate Disclosure . In Intermediate Disclosure we created an environment and framework in which both upstream problem - solvers and downstream providers of superior ﬁnal solutions were conferred payo ﬀ s – maintaining the same overall budget as in Final Disclosure ( $ 1 , 000 per week ) . We chose an arbitrary division of payo ﬀ s between ﬁnal solution providers and upstream innovators of one - half . ( See Green and Scotchmer ( 1995 ) and related for a more complete discussion of the theoretical considerations in allocating shares . ) Therefore , in Intermediate Disclosure , the top ﬁve ranked solution providers were allocated a total at the end of each week of $ 500 ( $ 250 , $ 125 , $ 62 . 50 , $ 37 . 50 and $ 25 ) , akin to the Final Disclosure case but half the magnitudes . The remaining payo ﬀ budget was allocated to upstream innovators . In submitting any given solution , downstream innovators were instructed to list solutions they examined ( i . e . , clicked on through the web interface ) and somehow drew upon in improving their own solutions . This involved listing the name of creator of solution that was drawn upon and answering the question of what fraction ( percentage ) of the solution drew on the identiﬁed prior submission . The response of this question had no bearing on payo ﬀ s to the downstream innovator ( in the instance they would go on to secure one of the top ﬁve positions ) . The sum totals of percentage responses for the identiﬁed upstream contributors to the top ﬁve ranked solutions where then used to generate a rank order of all upstream innovators . Cash payo ﬀ s were then conferred to these upstream innovators in the same magnitudes as the top ﬁnal solution providers ( i . e . , $ 500 , $ 250 , $ 125 , $ 75 and $ 50 ) . This payo ﬀ structure therefore implements a framework in which rewards are allocated to high - performing upstream solutions . However , stipulations of downstream use including payo ﬀ s and rewards associated with reuse are minimal in a low contractibility environment . 12 11 An alternative design would entail a lump disclosure of all ﬁrst - week solutions at the end of the ﬁrst week . However , we elected to implement the simpler design as it did not bear on predictions in Section 3 . There is clearly scope for examining more nuanced dynamics in future research . 12 Note , here we do not generate low contractibility by varying the form of disclosures ( see Section 2 . 3 ) , but rather 19 Figure 1 summarizes timing and payo ﬀ s across the distinct comparison groups . < Figure 1 > 5 Data and Variables The data set we analyze here was constructed from several data sources . First , the experimental setup provides us with observational data subjects’ decision to participate and make at least one submission or not , number of submissions , quality of submissions . As a supplementary measure of e ﬀ ort exerted , apart from number of submissions , we also administered a survey after all coding activity was completed and before ﬁnal results were made public , asking participants to report the number of hours worked over the two - week period . The experimental setup also allowed us to record subjects’ clicking through to examine disclosed code submissions of other participants under Intermediate Disclosure . Key variables in the analysis are described in Table 2 . Descriptive statistics of variables are provided in the analysis to follow . < Table 2 > We also collected the software code for each submission . From this , we recorded the programming language utilized . Further , we hired three Ph . D . experts to uncover and systematically document the technical solution approaches used in each of the 654 submissions . The experts ﬁrst reviewed the submissions to infer that across the body of solutions , subsets of distinct combinations of ten elemental computational techniques were used ( Table 3 ) . Each solution was then coded accord - ing to whether each of these techniques were employed , leading each solution to be encoded as a 10 digit binary code . Across each of the submissions , the experts identiﬁed 56 distinct 10 - digit combinations or solution approaches . Consistent with the innovation literature’s identiﬁcation of novel approaches as combinations of distinct knowledge sets ( Fleming , 2001 ; Fleming and Sorenson , 2001 ) , unique combinations of methods can be understood to represent distinct approaches to vary - ing degrees , while there is still considerable variation in the particular implementation and quality across individual solutions within a given approach . < Table 3 > we directly implement low contractibility in how we deﬁne the experimental framework . 20 6 Results and Analysis Before proceeding to assessing evidence in relation to Predictions 1 and 2 , Figure 2 ﬁrst provides a broad orienting overview of problem - solving patterns in the main comparison groups , showing submissions by quality , over time . The graphs also trace the maximal frontier ( black ) and mov - ing averages ( red ) lines . Table 4 provides a broader overview of readily - observable cross - sectional di ﬀ erences between Intermediate Disclosure and Final Disclosure outcomes that we will discuss in greater detail in the discussion to follow . < Figure 2 > < Table 4 > 6 . 1 Findings on the Incentives - versus - Reuse Tradeo ﬀ Results presented in this subsection relate to Prediction 1 . We examine evidence in relation to either side of the tradeo ﬀ in turn . E ﬀ ort and Incentives . Evidence of lower levels of participation and e ﬀ ort exerted under In - termediate Disclosure are consistent with our prediction of lower incentives under Intermediate Disclosure , as in Prediction 1 . ( See “’Entry’ Participation and E ﬀ ort” in Table 4 . ) The fraction of subjects choosing to “enter” and actively participate in problem - solving ( i . e . , subjects submitting at least one solution ) was signiﬁcantly – 26 % – lower in Intermediate Disclosure than in Final Disclos - ure , with 14 % entering and actively participating in Intermediate Disclosure versus 19 % in Final Disclosure . Precision and signiﬁcance of this di ﬀ erence increase when controlling for skill levels and other subject covariates , without altering the point estimate of the di ﬀ erence ( not reported ) . 13 Those who did participate under Intermediate Disclosure also exerted lower e ﬀ ort , despite facing fewer other active participants as competitors . The number of submissions per participant was 56 % lower in Intermediate Disclosure than in Final Disclosure ( 3 . 9 versus 6 . 9 solution submissions , a di ﬀ erence signiﬁcant at p = 1 % ) . Our other measure of e ﬀ ort – the number of self - reported hours worked over the two weeks ( Section 5 ) – is also lower in Intermediate Disclosure – 10 . 0 versus 14 . 1 13 The data suggests results are driven by “treatment e ﬀ ects” and behaviors rather than “selection e ﬀ ects” and composition . For example , we found no statistical evidence of di ﬀ erences in distributions of skills , industry , areas of technical interest , age and self - reported source of motivation for participating on the platform . 21 hours , a di ﬀ erence signiﬁcant at p = 1 % , based on a 60 % response rate . ( Precision and signiﬁcance of these di ﬀ erences again become greater still when controlling for skill level while not changing estimated magnitude of di ﬀ erences . ) Therefore apart from considerably more participants entering to engage in problem - solving under Final Disclosure , each active participant also exerts considerably greater e ﬀ ort . In total , Intermediate disclosure produces 99 solution submissions in relation to 319 produced under Final Disclosures . 14 Taken together , 15 we interpret patterns of lower entry and active participation , lower hours worked and lower numbers of submissions as consistent with lower incentives associated with Intermediate Disclosure . Reuse of Intermediate Solutions . Intermediate Disclosure , by deﬁnition , enabled intermediate disclosures and reuse whereas Final Disclosure did not . It necessarily follows that the reuse half of the “incentives - versus - reuse” tradeo ﬀ holds ( Section 3 . 1 ) . Beyond simply being greater than zero , we ﬁnd that disclosures and reuse in this environment were widespread and frequent . In total , 30 of the 33 active participants submitting at least one solution in Intermediate Disclosure examined a total of 1 , 024 intermediate solutions , or 34 . 1 on average ( std . dev . = 28 . 0 ) . This is consistent with the use of a relatively frictionless ( “click - through” ) system , an ease of reviewing these intermediate solutions , the focus of all parties on the same problem and thus , an expectation of returns to reviewing intermediate solutions . Early and highest - scoring , solutions elicited the greatest number of examinations . Incidences steadily declined over the two - week duration , with four - ﬁfths of examinations of prior solutions occurring in the ﬁrst week of the experiment . It was also the case that many subjects who did not eventually enter and participate also examined solutions , 44 , examined intermediate solutions of others . However they examined many fewer 7 . 3 on average ( std . dev . = 8 . 5 ) . This might be explained in relation to curiousity or an 14 We should qualify this statement by noting that notwithstanding the large di ﬀ erential , even 99 solutions should be regarded as a ( very ) high number in relation to the level of usual level of attention and publishing around comparable algorithmic problems in genomics in recent decades . 15 The measure of number of submissions has the appeal of being observational data , whereas hours worked is closest to a direct measure of e ﬀ ort level but is self - reported . The 29 % drop in number of hours worked , however , is less susceptible to other factors’ inﬂuence than is the 56 % drop in numbers of submissions in Intermediate Disclosure . For example , subjects might delay submissions , foregoing a measure of trial - and - error feedback , to limit undesired disclosures . Public disclosure of others’ solutions information regarding the e ﬃ cacy of di ﬀ erent approaches might also reduce the information value of making one’s own submissions , while increasing the information value to simply studying prior solutions . The sharing of information regarding past solutions even to non - entrants might also have shaped decisions to enter either upward or downward , if this further informed their beliefs regarding their possible success . Alternatively , the reuse of prior solutions could facilitate and hasten submissions . 22 interest in learning . It is also plausible that some of these non - submitters might have decided not to submit upon having reviewed others’ solutions . 6 . 2 Findings on Di ﬀ erences in the Innovation Search Process Results presented in this subsection relate to Prediction 2 . Performance Patterns and Trajectories . As a ﬁrst approach to inferring the nature of search in either regime , we contrast the performance trajectories of individual submitters , as in Figure 3 , by connecting the dots representing submissions by the same submitter . Perhaps more than any other ﬁgure or table in the paper , this ﬁgure reveals the workings of our two main predictions at once in inﬂuencing innovation outcomes . ( Participants who did not submit solutions do not appear . ) Patterns under Final Disclosure , in the left panel of Figure 3 , are inherently the most di ﬃ cult to read . There are more numerous lines and dots and seemingly more erratic , less regular patterns . The greater number of lines and dots follows the earlier discussion of higher incentives , participation and e ﬀ ort ( Section 6 . 1 ) . Beyond a slight , if not entirely general tendency for individual performance trajectories to increase over time , some start high , others low , at times declining , at times increasing . There is not clear indication of correlated or coincident perturbations across submitters . This results in a high frequency of solutions distributed relatively evenly across the performance spectrum overall and in every time period ( Figure 3 ) . These patterns are consistent with independent trial - and - error learning and experimentation occurring under Final Disclosure , as theorized in Section 3 . 2 . Patterns under Intermediate Disclosure , in the right panel of Figure 3 , starkly contrast with those of Final Disclosure . Di ﬀ erences begin with there simply being fewer trajectories and fewer individual submissions . Rather than the up - and - down trajectories of Final Disclosure , we observe laminar , smooth patterns , ascending together . Individuals’ trajectories ( save for those of a handful of low scoring outliers ) also cluster on the maximal performance envelope and increasingly do so over time . These patterns are consistent with greater coordinated patterns of learning , experimentation and advance across subjects in a collective process of cumulative innovation . In this , the shape of trajectories suggest also a tendency towards convergence rather than di ﬀ erentiation . Thus , these patterns documented in Figure 3 are consistent with Prediction 2 . < Figure 3 > 23 Diversity of Solution Approaches . An added perspective unto Prediction 2 is provided by data on solution approaches ( i . e . , combinations of the 10 elemental techniques , see Section 5 ) . These data a ﬃ rm the earlier suggestion of a greater tendency to coordination in the form of convergence rather than divergence in the case of Intermediate Disclosure . Fewer solution approaches were tried by the overall group of submitters in Intermediate Dis - closure . A total of 19 unique solution approaches were developed under Intermediate Disclosure whereas 27 unique solution approaches were developed under Final Disclosure ( i . e . , 42 % fewer in Intermediate Disclosure ) . Figure 4 presents the accumulation of distinct solution approaches over time . The lines never cross , indicating there were always a greater number of approaches attempted in Final Disclosure throughout the entire exercise . In Intermediate Disclosure , apart from fewer overall solutions ( 99 versus 319 ) and fewer solution approaches ( 19 versus 27 ) , there were fewer programming languages used . In Intermediate Disclosure , three languages ( C # , C + + and Java ) were used ; in Final Disclosure these languages and two more were used ( Python and Visual Basic ) . < Figure 4 > It remains possible , nonetheless , that lower levels of experimentation and diversity are simply the result of lower incentives and e ﬀ ort exerted under Intermediate disclosure . It is di ﬃ cult to entirely rule this possibility out and we should expect this played some sort of role . However , there is evid - ence consistent with convergence in directions of experimentation . Submitters under Intermediate Disclosure themselves , as individuals experimented across 15 % fewer solution approaches than did those in Final Disclosure ( 1 . 67 versus 1 . 96 , on average ) , as in Table 4 under “Solution Approaches” . Given fewer submissions and solution approaches overall in Intermediate Disclosure , we might ex - pect even randomly selected approaches to be less likely to overlap – and to be unique in relation to those used by the wider group . ( Consistent with this , each of the 319 solution submissions Final Disclosure each submission has about 8 % chance of being unique to the rest of all prior submissions ; in the case of the considerably smaller number of submissions under Intermediate Disclosure , 99 , sub ) any deliberate attempts to di ﬀ erentiate or even to engage in independent experimentation might then lead to a greater number of unique approaches pursued per submitter under Interme - diate Disclosure . However , we ﬁnd no such evidence . Unique solution approaches ( relative to the group ) per submitter are virtually identical ( 0 . 58 and 0 . 59 , in Intermediate and Final Disclosure . ) 24 Further suggestion of convergent coordinated approaches comes from direct measures of concen - tration of solution submissions across approaches . The Herﬁndahl measure of concentration of shares is 52 % higher in Intermediate Disclosure ( 0 . 149 ) than in Final Disclosure ( 0 . 0986 ) . 16 Beyond be - ing concentrated , submissions in Intermediate Disclosure were concentrated on just “high - potential” approaches . We rank ordered each of the 54 solution approaches in the entire experiment by their “potential , ” based on the top score achieved within each approach and found that every solution in Intermediate Disclosure employed an approach that was above median . 6 . 3 Replication Our experimental design minimized replication in order to maximize group size . Thus , we observe results in single trials of Intermediate Disclosure and Final Disclosure . This leaves the possibility that random eccentric outcomes or “butterﬂy e ﬀ ects” could have still somehow emerged and distor - ted population - level patterns in some way . 17 Some level of assurance already comes from results conforming closely to a priori reasoned theory and predictions . Further , despite single trials at the population level , we have considerable replication at the subject level , where there are no obvious signs of unduly inﬂuential or rogue outlier data points . In addition , we sought a minimal level of added empirical validation by running a Mixed treat - ment ( Section 4 . 2 . 1 ) . This is not replication in the sense of running multiple trails of Intermediate and Final Disclosure . It is nonetheless a basis for assessing consistency of outcomes with a single separate empirical benchmark trial . Table 5 reports key summary statistics for the Mixed regime , relative to the main comparison groups . The results suggest considerable regularity of reported pat - terns ( Table 5 ) . In the case of each of the main statistics reported earlier – number of participants , number of submissions per participant , number of examinations of intermediate solutions , numbers of solutions generated and maximum score achieved – the Mixed regime falls between Intermediate and Final Disclosure regimes . The precise distribution of scores ( beyond maximum scores ) , given by quantiles of ﬁnal scores , is less regular . Broadly speaking , these comparisons demonstrate consider - 16 The Herﬁndahl measure of concentration is the sum of squared shares . Therefore , a higher Herﬁndahl measure indicates higher concentration . We calculate the share of submissions for each approach within each treatment by dividing the number of submissions using a particular solution approach , by the total number of submissions in the treatment . 17 Single - trial comparisons ( i . e . , where a stream of outcomes resulting from one policy is compared to a stream of outcomes from another ) remain the norm in the literatures making before - and - after or di ﬀ erences - in - di ﬀ erences comparisons on e ﬀ ects of innovation policies . 25 able regularity of results , providing no indication of eccentric outcomes driving the earlier reported patterns . < Table 5 > 7 Conclusion This paper introduced an experimental framework for studying e ﬀ ects of disclosure policies on cumulative innovation , while contributing to a growing research interest in disclosures , transfers and “sharing” of knowledge and technology among innovators : “open innovation” of various sorts ( e . g . , West , 2003 ; von Hippel , 2005 ; Chesbrough et al . , 2006 ; Laursen and Salter , 2006 ; von Krogh et al . 2003 ; Murray , et al . 2009 ; Boudreau 2010 ; Dahlander and Gann , 2010 ; Furman and Stern , 2011 ; Williams 2013 ) . Our goal here being to distinguish e ﬀ ects of intermediate versus ﬁnal disclosure policies . This paper contributes to this growing body of work – by ﬁrst by taking two steps back . The ﬁrst step back we take is to observe that “open” innovation is hardly an isolated or exceptional phenomenon , if by “open” we mean that innovation takes place within a framework or system that deliberately enables transfers and reuse . We discussed and presented numerous examples ( Table 1 ) , to illustrate that the intended enablement of knowledge and technology transfers are a routine feature of most every innovation system – including those implemented by both public and private actors . This only stands to reason . Where innovators di ﬀ er in their capabilities to recombine past innovations into new ones ( and it is not always the originating upstream innovator who is superior in carrying this out ) there will be innovative gains from transfers and reuse taking place . Designing ( open ) innovation systems therefore entails establishing frameworks in which productive transfers and exchanges – be they bilateral or multilateral – are feasibly implemented . The second step back is to return to the longtime conception of the process of ongoing innovation as depending not just on transfers and reuse of knowledge and technologies but also on maintaining incentives ( e . g . , Romer , 1990 ; Green and Scotchmer , 1995 ) . In this regard , this study departs from recent studies that focus on reuse and ongoing innovation patterns , without simultaneously considering how ex post reuse might a ﬀ ect ex ante incentives to develop the upstream innovation in the ﬁrst place . We also depart from usual focus on a given institutional setting and innovation 26 system in favor of considering approaches that distinguish altogether di ﬀ erent systems , following intermediate disclosure versus ﬁnal disclosure policies . Thus , we consider e ﬀ ects of disclosure prior to the work on an innovation even being completed rather than optimal length of patents and other timing issues that have been studied in the past . Our work is somewhat analogous to pioneering econometric studies of naturally occurring con - texts examining ex post reuse , particularly focused on e ﬀ ects of patents on on - going innovation ( e . g . , Murray et al . , 2009 ; Galasso and Schankermann , 2013 ; Williams , 2013 ; Sampat and Willi - ams , 2014 ) . As patents are , in principle and by design , 18 intended to ease reuse through assigning property rights ( Kitch , 1977 ; Arora , et al . 2004 ) , these patent citation studies can be interpretted as tests of the patent system’s ability to deliver on this goal . None has yet found evidence of ac - celerated reuse of an innovation subsequent to it being patented . The results are thus consistent with transaction cost impediments to disclosures and reuse with patents ( e . g . , Heller and Eisenberg , 1998 ) ( presuming there are indeed gains from trade / transfers in the contexts studied ) – rather than addressing fundamental di ﬀ erences across systems as we do here . Our theory is consistent with but does not particularly strongly rely on these results . In terms of methods , our direct comparison of independent experimental groups under di ﬀ erent disclosure treatments is also analogous to the comparison of small numbers of cases with and without patents in these studies . However , rather than compare cases with and without patents or investigating any one innovation system , our study sought to better understand essential di ﬀ erences across intermediate and ﬁnal disclosure systems , an essential di ﬀ erence across a wide range of innovation systems . ( The patent system , for example , is but one example of a ﬁnal disclosure system . ) Our work is also somewhat related to studies by Stern and Furman ( 2011 ) and Boudreau ( 2010 ) , which document cases in which attempts to deliberately accelerate ex post reuse indeed did so . Incentives - versus - Reuse and Patterns of “Search” . We develop theory on intermediate versus ﬁnal disclosure by drawing on insights from the economics of innovation ( e . g . , Green and Scotchmer , 1995 ; Bessen and Maskin , 2009 ; Murray , et al . 2009 ) and a distinct tradition considering innov - ation as a complex “search” process ( e . g . , Nelson , 1961 ; Simon , 1962 ; Levinthal , 1997 ; Fleming , 2001 ) – showing that both perspectives are required to understand the most important , ﬁrst - order 18 Indeed , the word “patent” derives from Anglo - Norman “lettre patente , ” meaning “open letter . ” 27 determinants of innovation outcomes . A key starting point is our observation that intermediate dis - closures reduce contractibility over transfers and reuse – where contractibility over innovations is already notoriously challenging under best of instances . Lost contractibility here refers speciﬁcally to the originating innovator’s ability to uphold stipulations of reuse , including assuring his payo ﬀ s and rewards . By the same token , intermediate disclosure leads to earlier , more frequent and po - tentially wider ranging disclosures , with fewer stipulations and restrictions on reuse . Under usual contracting conditions surrounding innovation , these conditions imply an incentives - versus - reuse tradeo ﬀ , which was readily revealed in our experimental results . Intermediate disclosure led to 70 % fewer solution submissions . Apart from the incentives - versus - reuse tradeo ﬀ , our experimental analysis starkly revealed the importance of “search directions” and how systematic di ﬀ erences in choices of solution approaches across disclosure policies were essential to shaping innovation outcomes . Intermediate disclosures – if only by virtue of their timing – increase information and signaling in the innovation environment . As a result , choices of solution approaches across innovators are less independent , they are more “coordinated . ” In our experiment , coordination of decisions led to convergence , with 30 % fewer solution approaches tried by those working under intermediate disclosure . Comparative Advantages of Intermediate and Final Disclosure Policies . The theoretical and experimental analysis should be understood as identifying simplest ﬁrst - order tradeo ﬀ s and tensions created by di ﬀ erent disclosure policies , necessarily abstracting from the many details of any one innovation system . The research design was particularly geared to documenting starkest di ﬀ erences in innovation outcomes on the basis of uncomplicated cross - sectional comparisons and with a minimum of econometric manipulation . Although a great many questions remain , the results begin to suggest the outlines of a “division of labor” between intermediate and ﬁnal disclosure approaches , while highlighting limitations and challenges of each . In our setting , intermediate disclosure promoted e ﬃ cient reuse , coordination and convergence on a globally optimal solution with less entry and e ﬀ ort ( i . e . , lower costs ) and higher performance . How - ever , more generally and in a “rugged” landscape of possible solutions , we might be concerned that intermediate disclosure encourages path dependence and lock into a suboptimal solution approach , or leads incentives to evaporate . Such systems might therefore beneﬁt from o ﬀ setting features of 28 their design to countervail these weaknesses , as being directed – for example – to problems where the optimal solution approach is well known and wide experimentation is less useful and where returns to reuse are especially high . Alternatively , drawing on a wide and diverse pool of innovators less likely to fall into “groupthink” and to select on innovator types whose motivations are less dependent on contractibility of transfers and reuse . Inasmuch as intermediate disclosures imply smaller units of innovation output ( e . g . , edits , contributions , ideas , bug reports ) many more individuals may be able to participate by making much smaller e ﬀ ort investments . In theory and in our experiment , ﬁnal disclosure promotes higher levels of entry and e ﬀ ort and independent experimentation . On the one hand , this generated wide diversity of approaches ; on the other hand , this led to considerable e ﬀ ort devoted to suboptimal approaches and overall lesser learning and performance achieved . The overall empirical result of lower performance under ﬁnal disclosure should hardly be regarded as general ; tradeo ﬀ s should vary in importance according to the particularly prevailing structural conditions . Nonetheless , we might surmise that such systems might therefore also beneﬁt from o ﬀ setting features of their design to countervail these weaknesses . This includes being devoted to conditions where wide diversity of experimentation is highly valued . Alternatively , if capabilities tend to concentrate and accumulate in individual innovators and there is little beneﬁt from drawing on widely distributed contributions , then there may be higher returns to simply maximizing incentives of greatest experts , foregoing some degree of reuse . 29 References Abernathy , W . J . , Utterback , J . M . , 1978 . Patterns of industrial innovation . Technology Review 80 , 40 - 47 . Acemoglu , D . , 2012 . Diversity and Technical Progress . in : The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited , Lerner , J . and Stern , S . ( Eds ) . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL , Chapter 6 . Aghion , P . , Dewatripont , Stein , J . 2008 . Academic freedom , private - sector focus , and the process of innovation . RAND Journal of Economics , 39 ( 3 ) , 617 - 635 . Allen , R . , 1983 . Collective invention . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 4 , 1 - 24 . Altschul , S . , Gish , W . , Miller , W . , Myers , E . , Lipman . D . , 1990 . Basic local alignment search tool . Journal of Molecular Biology 215 , 403 - 410 . Anand , B . N . , & Khanna , T . ( 2000 ) . The structure of licensing contracts . The Journal of Industrial Economics , 48 ( 1 ) , 103 - 135 . Arora , A . , Fosfori , A . , Gambardella , A . , 2004 . Markets for Technology : The Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Arrow , Kenneth . ( 1962 ) , Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Innovation , in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity , Nelson R . , ed . , ( Princeton : Princeton University Press , 1962 ) . Baldwin , C . , Clark , K . , 2000 . Design Rules : The Power of Modularity . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA Basalla , G . , 1988 . The evolution of technology . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Belenzon , S . , 2012 . Cumulative innovation and market value : Evidence from patent citations . The Economic Journal 122 ( 559 ) , 265 - 285 . Bessen , J . ( 2004 ) . Holdup and licensing of cumulative innovations with private information . Economics Letters , 82 ( 3 ) , 321 - 326 . Bessen , J . , Maskin , E . , 2009 . Sequential innovation , patents , and imitation . RAND Journal of Economics 40 , 611 - 635 . Belleflamme , P . 2006 . Patents and incentives to innovate : Some theoretical and empirical economic evidence . Ethical Perspectives : Journal of the European Ethics Network , 13 ( 2 ) , 267 - 288 . Bijker , W . E . , Hughes , T . P . , Pinch , T . J . , 1987 . The Social Construction of Technological Systems : New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Bikard , Michaël , Hurdles to Invention Based on Academic Science : Evidence from ' Knowledge Twins ' ( May 20 , 2014 ) . Available at SSRN : http : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 2333413 or http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 2333413 Bonaccorsi , A . , & Rossi , C . ( 2003 ) . Why open source software can succeed . Research policy , 32 ( 7 ) , 1243 - 1258 . Boudreau , K . , 2010 . Open platform strategies and innovation : Granting access vs . devolving control . Management Science 56 , 1849 - 1872 . Boudreau , K . , 2012 . Let a thousand flowers bloom ? An early look at large numbers of software apps developers and patterns of innovation . Organization Science 23 , 1409 - 1427 . Boudreau , K . , Lacetera , N . , Lakhani , K . R . , 2011 . Incentives and problem uncertainty in innovation contests : An empirical analysis . Management Science 57 , 843 - 863 . Boudreau , K . , Lakhani K . R . , 2012 . The Confederacy of Heterogeneous Software Organizations and Heterogeneous Developers : Field Experimental Evidence on Sorting and Worker Effort , in : Lerner , J . , Stern , S . ( Eds ) , The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited : University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL , 483 – 502 . Capek , P . G . , Frank , S . P . , Gerdt , S . , Shields , D . , 2005 . A history of IBM’s open - source involvement and strategy . IBM Systems Journal 44 ( 2 ) , 249 - 258 . Chesbrough , H . , 2003 . Open Innovation . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Cohen , W . M . , Nelson , R . R . , Walsh , J . P . , 2000 . Protecting their intellectual assets : Appropriability conditions and why US firms patent ( or not ) . NBER Working Paper No . 7552 . Contreras , J . , 2011 . Bermuda ' s legacy : Policy , patents , and the design of the Genome Commons . Minnesota Journal of Law , Science & Technology 12 , 61 - 125 . Cusumano , M . A . , Mylonadis , Y . , & Rosenbloom , R . S . ( 1992 ) . Strategic maneuvering and mass - market dynamics : The triumph of VHS over Beta . Business History Review , 66 ( 01 ) , 51 - 94 . Cyert , R . M . , March , J . G . , 1963 . Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ Dasgupta , P . , David , P . , 1994 . Toward a new economics of science . Research Policy 23 , 487 - 521 . Dosi , G . , 1982 . Technological paradigms and technological trajectories . Research Policy 11 , 147 - 162 . Fauchart , E . , von Hippel , E . , 2008 . Norms - based intellectual property systems : The case of French chefs . Organization Science 19 , 187 - 201 . Fleming , L . 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Management science , 47 ( 1 ) , 117 - 132 . Fleming , L . , Sorenson , O . , 2004 . Science as a map in technological search . Strategic Management Journal 25 , 909 – 928 . Furman , J . , Stern , S . , 2011 . Climbing atop the shoulders of giants : The impact of institutions on cumulative research . American Economic Review 101 , 1933 - 1963 . Franke , N . , & Shah , S . , 2003 . How communities support innovative activities : an exploration of assistance and sharing among end - users . Research policy , 32 ( 1 ) , 157 - 178 . Galasso , A . , Schankerman , M . , 2013 . Patents and cumulative innovation : Causal evidence from the courts . CEP Discussion Paper No . CEPDP1205 . Gans , J . , Murray , F . , 2012 . Funding scientific knowledge : Selection , disclosure and the public - private portfolio , , in : Lerner , J . and Stern , S . ( Eds ) . , The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . , Chapter 1 . Green , J . , Scotchmer , S . , 1995 . On the division of profit in sequential innovation . The RAND Journal of Economics 26 , 20 - 33 . Gowers , T . , Nielsen , M . , 2009 . Massively collaborative mathematics . Nature 461 , 879 - 881 . Hart , O . 1995 . Firms , Contracts , and Financial Structure . Oxford University Press . Heller , M . A . , & Eisenberg , R . S . ( 1998 ) . Can patents deter innovation ? The anticommons in biomedical research . Science , 280 ( 5364 ) , 698 - 701 . Henkel , J . , Baldwin , C . , 2010 . Modularity for value appropriation : How to draw the boundaries of intellectual property . Harvard Business School Working Paper . Huang , K . G . , & Murray , F . E . ( 2009 ) . Does patent strategy shape the long - run supply of public knowledge ? Evidence from human genetics . Academy of Management Journal , 52 ( 6 ) , 1193 - 1221 . Kauffmann , S . A . , 1993 . The origins of order : Self - organization and selection in evolution . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK . Katz , A . , 2014 . The First Sale Doctrine and the Economics of Post - Sale Restraints . Brigham Young University Law Review , 55 ( 1 ) . Kitch , Edmund W . ( 1977 ) . " The nature and function of the patent system , " The Journal of Law and Economics ( October ) , No . 20 , pp . 265 - 90 . Kuhn , T . , 1962 . The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . Lakhani , K . , Boudreau , K . , Loh P - R . , Backstrom , L . , Baldwin , C . , Lonstein , E . , Lydon , M . , MacCormack , A . , Arnaout , R . , Guinan , E . , 2013 a . Prize - based experiments can provide solutions to computational biology problems . Nature Biotechnology 31 , 108 - 111 . Lakhani , K . , Wolf , R . , 2005 . Why hackers do what they do : Understanding motivation and effort in free / open source software projects , in : Feller , H . , Fitzgerald , B . , Hissam , S . A . , Lakhani , K . R . ( eds . ) , Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Lakhani , K . , von Hippel , E . 2003 . How open source software works : “free” user - to - user assistance . Research policy 32 ( 6 ) , 923 - 943 . Lerner , J . , J . Tirole . 2002 . Some simple economics of open source . The Journal of Industrial Economics . 50 ( 2 ) , 197 . Lerner , J . , 2006 . 150 years of patent office practice : Law and institutions . American Law and Economics Review 7 , 112 - 143 . Lessig , L . , 1999 . Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace . Basic Books , New York , NY . Levinthal , D . A . , 1997 . Adaptation on rugged landscapes . Management Science 43 , 934 - 950 . Maas , H . , Wagenmakers , E - J . , 2005 . A psychometric analysis of chess expertise . The American Journal of Psychology 118 , 29 - 60 . March , J . G . , 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organization Science , 2 ( 1 ) , 71 - 87 . Marx , M . , Strumsky , D . , Fleming , . L . , 2009 . Mobility , skills and the Michigan non - compete experiment . Management Science 55 ( 5 ) , 875 - 899 . Mazzoleni , R . , Nelson , R . , 1998 . The benefits and costs of strong patent protection : A contribution to the current debate . Research Policy 27 ( 3 ) , 273 - 284 . Meyer , P . B . , 2013 . The airplane as an open source invention . Revue Economique 64 ( 1 ) , 115 - 132 . Moon , S . , 2011 . How does the management of research impact the disclosure of knowledge ? Evidence from scientific publications and patenting behavior . Economics of Innovation and New Technology 20 , 1 - 32 . Mukherjee , A . , Stern , S . , 2009 . Disclosure or secrecy ? The dynamics of open science . International Journal of Industrial Innovation 27 , 459 - 462 . Murray , F . , O’Mahony , S . , 2007 . Exploring the foundations of cumulative innovation : Implications for organization science . Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , 1006 - 1021 . Murray , F . , Stern , S . , 2007 . Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of scientific knowledge ? An empirical test of the anti - commons hypothesis . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 63 , 648 - 687 . Murray , F . , Aghion , P . , Dewatripont , M . M . , Kolev , J . , Stern , S . , 2009 . Of mice and academics : Examining the effect of openness on innovation . NBER Working Paper Series 14819 . Nordhaus , W . D . , 1972 . The optimal life of a patent . The American Economic Review 62 ( 3 ) , 428 - 431 . Nelson , R . , 1961 . Uncertainty , learning , and the economics of parallel research and development . Review of Economics and Statistics 43 , 351 - 368 . Nelson , R . R . , & Winter , S . G . ( 1982 ) . An evolutionary theory of economic change . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Newell , A . , and Simon , H . A . , 1972 . Human Problem Solving . Prentice - Hall , Engelwood Cliffs , NJ . Nuvolari , A . 2004 . Collective invention during the British Industrial Revolution : The case of the Cornish pumping engine . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 28 ( 3 ) , 347 - 363 . O ' Mahony , S . , 2003 . Guarding the commons : How community managed software projects protect their work . Research Policy 32 , 1179 - 1198 . Osterloh , M . , Rota , S . , 2007 . Open source software development : Just another case of collective invention ? Research Policy 26 ( 2 ) , 157 - 171 . Parker , G . and M . Van Alstyne . 2010 . Innovation , Openness and Platform Control . EC ' 10 Proceedings of the 11th ACM conference on Electronic commerce Raymond , E . , 1999 . The Cathedral and the Bazaar . O’Reily and Associates , Sebastapol . Roberts , J . , Hann , I . , Slaughter , S . , 2006 . Motivations , participation and performance in open source software development . Management Science 52 , 984 - 999 . Romer , P . , 1990 . Endogenous technological change . Journal of Political Economy 98 ( 5 ) . Rosenberg , N . , 1982 . Inside the black box : technology and economics . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Rosenkopf , L . , Almeida , P . , 2003 . Overcoming local search through alliances and mobility . Management Science 49 ( 6 ) , 751 - 766 Rosenkopf , L . , Nerkar , A . , 2001 . Beyond local search : Boundary - spanning , exploration and impact in the optical disk industry . Strategic Management Journal 22 , 287 - 306 . Sahal , D . 1985 . Technological guideposts and innovation avenues . Research Policy , 14 ( 2 ) , 61 - 82 . Schankerman , Mark . 1998 . How Valuable is Patent Protection ? Estimates by Technology Field . The RAND Journal of Economics , 29 ( 1 ) , 77 - 107 Sampat , B . , Williams , H . , 2014 . How do patents affect follow - on innovation ? Evidence from the human genome . NBER Working Paper . Scotchmer , S . , 1991 . Standing on the shoulders of giants : Cumulative research and the patent law . Journal of Economic Perspectives 5 ( 1 ) , 29 - 41 . Scotchmer , S . , 2004 . Innovation and Incentives . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Simon , H . A . , 1962 . The architecture of complexity . Proc . Amer . Philos . Soc . 106 ( 6 ) , 467 - 482 . Solow , R . M . , 1957 . Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function . Review of Economics and Statistics , 39 ( 3 ) , 312 – 320 Stephan , P . , 1996 . The economics of science . Journal of Economic Literature 34 , 1199 - 1235 . Stephan , P . , 2012 . How economics shapes science . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Haeussler , C . , Jiang , L . , Thursby , J . , Thursby , M . , 2009 . Specific and general information sharing among academic scientists . NBER Working Paper Series 15315 . Torrance , A . W . ( 2010 ) . Synthesizing law for synthetic biology . Minnesota Journal of Law , Science & Technology , 11 , 629 . Utterback , J . , Abernathy , W . , 1975 . A dynamic model of product and process innovation . Omega 3 , 639 - 656 . Vincenti , W . G . , 1994 . The retractable airplane landing gear and the Northrop ' anomaly ' : Variation - selection and the shaping of technology . Technology and Culture 35 , 1 - 33 . von Hippel , E . , 1987 . Cooperation between Rivals : Informal Know - How Trading . Research Policy 16 , 291 - 302 . von Hippel , E . , 1988 . The Sources of Innovation . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . von Hippel , E . , von Krogh , G . , 2003 . Open source software and the “private - collective” innovation model : Issues for organization science . Organization Science 14 ( 2 ) , 209 - 223 . von Hippel , E . , 2005 . Democratizing Innovation . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . von Krogh , G . , Spaeth , S . , & Lakhani , K . R . 2003 . Community , joining , and specialization in open source software innovation : A case study . Research Policy , 32 ( 7 ) , 1217 - 1241 . Weitzman , M . 1998 . Recombinant Growth . Quarterly Journal of Economics West , J . , 2003 . How open is open enough ? Melding proprietary and open source platform strategies . Research Policy 32 ( 7 ) , 1259 - 1285 . West , J . , & Lakhani , K . R . ( 2008 ) . Getting clear about communities in open innovation . Industry and Innovation , 15 ( 2 ) , 223 - 231 . Williams , H . , 2013 . Intellectual property rights and innovation : Evidence from the human genome . Journal of Political Economy 121 , 127 . Zhang , X . , & Zhu , F . ( 2011 ) . Group size and incentives to contribute : A natural experiment at Chinese Wikipedia . The American economic review , 101 ( 4 ) , 1601 - 1615 . TABLES Table 1 : Illustrative Examples of Cumulative Innovation Systems , by Disclosure Policy Governance Framework Unit of Innovation Output / Disclosure Implementation of Incentives Implementation of Disclosure & Reuse FINAL DISCLOSURE Patent System A working invention Patents confer finite rights of exclusion , which in principle may enable property rights and trade or , alternatively , monopoly supply . ( e . g . , Arrow , 1962 ; Nordhaus , 1972 ; Green and Scotchmer , 1995 ; Bessen and Maskin , 2009 ) Patent award leads to disclosure in the public domain with general public access once patent expires . Prior to this , licensing or imperfect protections enable disclosures and reuse . ( e . g , , Kitch , 1977 ; Jaffe , et al . 1992 ; Green and Scotchmer , 1995 ; Cohen et al . , 2000 ; Arora et al . , 2001 ; Chesbrough 2003 ; Williams , 2013 ) Academic Science A complete research publication . Quality and number of publications are the basis of rewards in Science ( promotion , status , funding , peer esteem honors and awards . Intrinsic motivation also plays a large role . ( e . g . , Dasgupta and David , 1994 ; Stern , 1994 ; Stephen , 1996 ; Aghion et al . , 2008 ) Publications are disclosed in the public domain ( i . e . , academic journals , working paper databases ) whereupon others , conditional on citation , can reuse their content and ideas . ( e . g . , Dasgupta and David , 1994 ; Stephen , 1996 ; Salter and Martin , 2001 ; Murray et al . , 2009 ; Bikard , 2014 ) Ansari X - Prize for Suborbital Space Flight ( and other public contests ) A complete , working solution to the challenge Cash payoffs and public acclaim are on the basis of rank - ordered outcomes based on preannounced criteria . ( e . g . , Taylor , 1995 ; Moldovanu and Sela , 2001 ; Boudreau , et al . 2011 ; Murray et al . 2012 ) Disclosure in prizes may , in principle be dealt with any number of ways . In this case , ownership over the winning technology was retained by the winning solution provider . ( e . g . , Moser and Nicholas , 2013 ) Apple AppStore ( and other multi - sided platforms ) An “App” . The platform creates two - sided market - based incentives to make sales to the large number of users of Apple devices . ( e . g . , Bresnahan and Greenstein , 1999 ; Rochet and Tirole , 2003 ; Parker and Van Alstyne , 2010 ; Boudreau , 2012 ) The upstream platform is , by design , a technology intended to be reused and built upon . ( e . g . , Baldwin and Clark , 2000 ; Boudreau , 2010 ; Parker and Van Alstyne . 2010 ) INTERMEDIATE DISCLOSURE Open Source Projects ( and other copyleft frameworks ) A code contribution , edit or bug report . Projects enlist contributors with an intrinsic or own - use motivation , in addition to those wishing to learn , affiliate or signal their mastery through high quality contributions . ( e . g . , Lerner and Tirole , 2002 ; Lakhani and Wolf , 2005 ; Roberts et al . , 2006 ) GPL licenses ( etc . ) impose stringent requirements on those using and modifying code under GPL to mandatorily disclose and grant rights of access to others . ( e . g . , Lerner and Tirole , 2002 ; Lessig , 1999 ) Human Genome Project ( Bermuda Principles ) The gene sequence . Public scientific institutions partaking in the HGP were required to accede to Bermuda principles as a condition of research funding . ( e . g . , Contreras , 2011 ) The Bermuda Principles required public disclosure within 24 hours of discovery of sequence information . ( e . g . , Williams , 2013 ) Homebrew Computer Club ( and other collective invention , “user” and innovator communities ) The idea or technique . Those drawn to participate in informal associations and communities of innovators may be motivated by wide range of reasons , including those related to learning , intrinsic motivation , socialization and many more . “Community” can also initiate an incentive to reciprocate . ( e . g . , von Hippel , 1988 ; von Krogh and von Hippel , 2003 ; Osterloh and Rota , 2007 ) The typically informal nature of communities leads to few formal restrictions to disclosure and reuse . However , informal rules and norms and threat of sanction may be the basis for imposing conditions , such as acknowledgments . ( e . g . , Allen , 1983 ; Nuvolari , 2004 Fauchart and von Hippel , 2008 ) Foldit Protein Folding Platform ( and other aggregative , collaborative platforms ) The “fold” or “contribution” The Foldit interface is devised “gamify” and entice an intrinsic puzzle - solving response of contributors . More generally , collaborative and aggregative platforms may mobilize effort through any number of incentive in collaborations . ( Khatib , 2011 ; Zhang and Zhu , 2011 ; Franzoni and Sauermann , 2014 ) The assembled database is available to scientist who study highest scoring solutions and who can then proceed to use these intermediate outputs as a basis for developing academic publications ( See Table 1 ) . Table 2 : Description of Variables Note . The data set relates to 733 subjects , of which 122 are submitters , submitting 654 solutions . Table 3 : Elemental Techniques Used in Solutions Variable Unit of Observation Description Participation Subject An indicator variable switched on for all subjects submitting at least one solution . Submissions Subject Count of the number of solutions submitted by a subject over the course of the two - week experiment . No . Disclosures Subject Count of the number of past solutions for which the subject " clicked through " to see the complete code . Submission Quality Solution Submission An automated precise measure of the quality of a each solution submission . Programming Language Solution Submission A wide variety of programming languages were admissible . This field records the name of the language . Solution Approach Solution Submission A 10 - digit binary code describing which among 10 elemental techniques are used in a given solution submission . Table 4 : Overview of Differences in Outcomes across Final Disclosure and Intermediate Disclosure mean No . Subjects Assigned : 245 " Entry " , Participation and Effort No . Active Participants / Submitters 46 Prob { Submitting } . 19 No . Submissions 319 Submissions / Active Participant 6 . 93 FINAL DISCLOSURE s . e . ( . 01 ) ( . 42 ) FINAL DISCLOSURE mean 244 33 . 1499 3 . 00 INTERMEDIATE DISCLOSURE s . e . ( . 01 ) ( . 14 ) INTERMEDIATE DISCLOSURE Examinations of Intermediate Solutions No . Examinations of Intermediate Solutions n / a No . Examinations by Submitters No . Submitters Examining Prob { Submitter Examining } No . Solutions Examined per Examining Submitter No . Examinations by Non - Submitters No . Non - Submitters Examining Prob { Non - Submitter Examining } No . Solutions Examined per Examining Non - Submitter Solution Approaches No . Solution Approaches 27 Unique ( to Submitter ) Approaches per Submitter 1 . 96 Unique ( to Group ) Approaches per Submitter . 59 Unique Approaches per Submission . 08 Problem - Solving Performance [ Final Scores ] Max 71 q90 47 q75 24 Median 13 q25 5 q10 5 Min 0 ( . 07 ) ( . 07 ) ( . 00 ) 13591024 30 . 91 34 . 1333546 . 22 7 . 28 19 1 . 67 . 58 . 19 100943811520 ( . 01 ) ( 1 . 79 ) ( . 01 ) ( . 5 ) ( . 06 ) ( . 06 ) ( . 01 ) Table 5 : Regularity of Results in Relation to Mixed Comparison Group mean No . Subjects Assigned 245 FINAL DISCLOSURE MIXED COMPARISON GROUPmean mean 244 244 INTERMEDIATE DISCLOSURE No . Active Participants 46 43 33 No . Submissions 319 236 99 No . Examinations 0 654 1359 No . Solution Approaches 27 25 19 Problem - Solving Performance Max 71 q90 47 q75 24 Median 13 q25 5 q10 5 Min 0 83 100 61 94 39 38 24 11 4 5 5 2 0 0 FIGURES Figure 1 : Overview of Experimental Sequence Figure 2 : Overview of Solution Submissions over Time , by Disclosure Policy ( submissions , fitted mean and maximal envelope shown ) Note . Submissions shown along with upper maximal envelope and a fitted mean ( nonparametric , locally - weighted second - order polynomial ) . Final Disclosure $ 1000 $ 1000 $ 1000 $ 1000 $ 1000 $ 1000 Assignment Phase Sign - up Phase Problem Solving & Development Phase Questionnaire 733 sign - ups 244 245 244 Intermediate Disclosure Mixed ( Comparison Group ) Week 1 Week 2 0 25 50 75 100 0 48 96 144 192 240 288 336 Hour Count I . Final Disclosure 0 25 50 75 100 0 48 96 144 192 240 288 336 Hour Count II . Intermediate Disclosure Solution Quality [ Score , Normalized on 100 Points ] Figure 3 : Subjects’ Performance Trajectories ( highlighting first through fifth ranked ) 0 25 50 75 100 0 48 96 144 192 240 288 336 Hour Count I . Final Disclosure 0 25 50 75 100 0 48 96 144 192 240 288 336 Hour Count II . Intermediate Disclosure Solution Quality Trajectories of Individual Subjects [ Score , Normalized on 100 Points ] Figure 4 : Solutions by Approach ( i . e . , Unique Combination of Techniques ) 0 10 20 30 0 48 96 144 192 240 288 336 Hour Count III . Final Disclosure 0 10 20 30 0 48 96 144 192 240 288 336 Hour Count IV . Intermediate Disclosure Cumulative Number of Distinct Solution Approaches