a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 0011224v1 [ c ond - m a t . d i s - nn ] 13 N ov 2000 Bose - Einstein condensation in complex networks Ginestra Bianconi ∗ and Albert - L´aszl´o Barab´asi ∗ , † ∗ Department of Physics , University of Notre Dame , Notre Dame , IN 46556 , USA † Institute for Advanced Studies , Collegium Budapest , Szenth´aroms´ag utca 2 , H - 1014 Budapest , Hungary Abstract The evolution of many complex systems , including the world wide web , busi - ness and citation networks is encoded in the dynamic web describing the interactions between the system’s constituents . Despite their irreversible and non - equilibrium nature these networks follow Bose statistics and can undergo Bose - Einstein condensation . Addressing the dynamical properties of these non - equilibrium systems within the framework of equilibrium quantum gases predicts that the ’ﬁrst - mover - advantage’ , ’ﬁt - get - rich’ and ’winner - takes - all’ phenomena observed in competitive systems are thermodynamically distinct phases of the underlying evolving networks . PACS numbers : 89 . 75 . Hc , 89 . 75 . - k , 5 . 65 + b Typeset using REVTEX 1 Competition for links is a common feature of complex systems : on the world wide web sites compete for URLs to enhance their visibility [ 1 ] , in business world companies compete for links to consumers [ 2 ] and in the scientiﬁc community scientists and publications compete for citations , a measure of their impact on the ﬁeld [ 3 ] . A common feature of these systems is that the nodes self - organize into a complex network , whose topology and evolution closely reﬂects the dynamics and outcome of this competition [ 1 , 3 – 6 ] . The reversibility of the microscopic processes that govern the evolution of these systems , such as growth through the addition of new nodes , or the impossibility ( citation network ) and the high cost ( business networks ) to modify an established links give a distinctly far - from equilibrium character to the evolution of theses complex systems . Here we show that despite their non - equilibrium and irreversible nature , evolving networks can be mapped into an equilibrium Bose gas [ 7 ] , nodes corresponding to energy levels and links representing particles . This mapping predicts that the common epithets used to characterize competitive systems , such as ’winner - takes - all’ , ’ﬁt - get - rich’ , or ’ﬁrst - mover - advantage’ emerge naturally as thermodynamically and topologically distinct phases of the underlying complex evolving network . In particular , we predict that such networks can undergo Bose - Einstein condensation , in which a single node captures a macroscopic fraction of links . Fitness model – Consider a network that grows through the addition of new nodes such as the creation of new webpages , the emergence of new companies or the publication of new papers . At each time step we add a new node , connecting it with m links to the nodes already present in the system . The rate at which nodes acquire links can vary widely as supported by measurements on the www [ 5 ] , and by empirical evidence in citation [ 3 ] and economic networks . To incorporate the diﬀerent ability of the nodes to compete for links we assign a ﬁtness parameter to each node , η , chosen from a distribution ρ ( η ) , accounting for the diﬀerences in content of webpages , the quality of products and marketing of companies , or the importance of the ﬁndings reported in a publication . The probability Π i that a new node connects one of its m links to a node i already present in the network depends on the number of links , k i , and on the ﬁtness η i of node i , such that 2 Π i = η i k i P ℓ η ℓ k ℓ . ( 1 ) Equation ( 1 ) incorporates in the simplest possible way the fact that new nodes link prefer - entially to nodes with higher k [ 8 ] ( i . e . connecting to more visible websites ; favoring more established companies ; or citing more cited papers ) , and with larger ﬁtness ( i . e . websites with better content ; companies with better products and sales practice ; or papers with novel results ) . Thus ﬁtness ( η i ) and the number of links ( k i ) jointly determine the attractiveness and evolution of a node . Mapping to a Bose gas – Using a simple parameterization , we assign an energy ǫ i to each node , determined by its ﬁtness η i through the relation ǫ i = − 1 β log η i , ( 2 ) where β is a parameter playing the role of inverse temperature , β = 1 / T , whose relevance to real networks will be discussed later . A link between two nodes i and j with energy ǫ i and ǫ j ( e . g . ﬁtnesses η i and η j ) corresponds to two non - interacting particles on the energy levels ǫ i and ǫ j ( Fig . 1 ) . Adding a new node to the network corresponds to adding a new energy level ǫ i and 2 m particles to the system . Of these 2 m particles m are deposited on the level ǫ i ( corresponding to the m outgoing link node i has ) , while the other m particles are distributed between the other energy levels ( representing the links pointing to m nodes present in the system ) , the probability that a particle lands on level i being given by ( 1 ) . Deposited particles are inert , i . e . they are not allowed to jump to other energy levels . Each node ( energy level ) added to the system at time t i with energy ǫ i is characterized by the occupation number k i ( t , ǫ i , t i ) , denoting the number of links ( particles ) the node ( energy level ) has at time t . The rate at which level ǫ i acquires new particles is ∂k i ( ǫ i , t , t i ) ∂t = me − βǫ k i ( ǫ i , t , t i ) Z t , ( 3 ) where Z t is the partition function , deﬁned as Z t = t X j = 1 e − βǫ j k j ( ǫ j , t , t j ) . ( 4 ) 3 We assume that each node increases its connectivity following a power - law ( we demonstrate the self - consistency of this assumption later ) k i ( ǫ i , t , t i ) = m (cid:18) t t i (cid:19) f ( ǫ i ) , ( 5 ) where f ( ǫ ) is the energy dependent dynamic exponent . Since η is chosen randomly from the distribution ρ ( η ) , the energy levels are chosen from the distribution g ( ǫ ) = βρ ( e − βǫ ) e − βǫ . We can now determine Z t by averaging over g ( ǫ ) , i . e . < Z t > = Z dǫg ( ǫ ) Z t 1 dt 0 e − βǫ k ( ǫ , t , t 0 ) = m z − 1 t ( 1 + O ( t − α ) ) , ( 6 ) where 1 z = Z dǫg ( ǫ ) e − βǫ 1 − f ( ǫ ) ( 7 ) is the inverse fugacity . Since z is positive for any β 6 = 0 we introduce the chemical potential , µ , as z = e βµ , which allow us to write ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) as e − βµ = lim t →∞ < Z t > t . ( 8 ) Using ( 8 ) we can solve the continuum equation ( 3 ) ﬁnding in a self - consistent way solutions of form ( 5 ) , where the dynamic exponent is f ( ǫ ) = e − β ( ǫ − µ ) . ( 9 ) Combining ( 7 ) and ( 9 ) , we ﬁnd that the chemical potential is the solution of the equation I ( β , µ ) = Z dǫg ( ǫ ) 1 e β ( ǫ − µ ) − 1 = 1 . ( 10 ) The system deﬁned above has a number of properties that make it an unlikely candidate for an equilibrium Bose gas [ 7 ] . First , the inertness of the particles is a non - equilibrium feature , in contrast with the ability of particles in a quantum gas to jump between energy levels , leading to a temperature driven equilibration . Second , both the number of eligible energy 4 levels ( nodes ) and particles populating them ( links ) increase linearly in time , in contrast with the ﬁxed system size employed in quantum systems . Despite these apparent conﬂicts , Eq . ( 10 ) indicates that in the thermodynamic limit ( t → ∞ ) the ﬁtness model maps into a Bose gas . Indeed , since in an ideal gas of volume v = 1 we have [ 7 ] Z dǫg ( ǫ ) n ( ǫ ) = 1 , ( 11 ) where n ( ǫ ) is the occupation number of a level with energy ǫ Equation ( 10 ) indicates that for the inert gas inspired by the ﬁtness model the occupation number follows the familiar Bose statistics [ 7 ] n ( ǫ ) = 1 e β ( ǫ − µ ) − 1 , ( 12 ) i . e . the evolving network maps into a Bose gas . Thus the irreversebility and the inertness of the network are resolved by the stationarity of the asymptotic distribution , allowing the occupation number to follow Bose statistics in the thermodynamic limit t → ∞ . Bose - Einstein condensation – The solutions ( 5 ) , ( 6 ) and ( 9 ) exist only when there is a µ that satisﬁes Eq . ( 10 ) . However , I ( β , µ ) deﬁned in ( 10 ) takes its maximum at µ = 0 , thus when I ( β , 0 ) < 1 for a given β and g ( ǫ ) , Eq . ( 10 ) has no solution . The absence of a solution is a well - known signature of Bose - Einstein condensation [ 7 ] , indicating that a ﬁnite n 0 ( β ) fraction of particles condensate on the lowest energy level . Indeed , due to mass conservation at time t we have t energy levels populated by 2 mt particles , i . e . 2 mt = t X t 0 = 1 k ( ǫ t 0 , t , t 0 ) = mt + mtI ( β , µ ) . ( 13 ) When I ( β , 0 ) < 1 , Eq . ( 13 ) has to be replaced with 2 mt = mt + mtI ( β , µ ) + n 0 ( β ) , ( 14 ) where n 0 ( β ) is given by [ 7 ] n 0 ( β ) mt = 1 − I ( β , 0 ) . ( 15 ) 5 The occupancy of the lowest energy level corresponds to the number of links the node with the largest ﬁtness has . Thus the emergence of a nonzero n 0 ( β ) , a signature of Bose - Einstein condensation in quantum gases , represents a ’winner - takes - all’ phenomena for networks , the ﬁttest node acquiring a ﬁnite fraction of the links , independent of the size of the network . The mapping to a Bose gas and the possibility of Bose - Einstein condensation in ran - dom networks predicts the existence of three distinct phases characterizing the dynamical properties of evolving networks : ( a ) a scale - free phase , ( b ) a ﬁt - get - rich phase and ( c ) a Bose - Einstein condensate . Next we discuss each of these possible phase separately . ( a ) Scale - free phase – When all nodes have the same ﬁtness , i . e . ρ ( η ) = δ ( η − 1 ) , ( g ( ǫ ) = δ ( ǫ ) ) , the model reduces to the scale - free model [ 8 ] , introduced to account for the power - law connectivity distribution observed in diverse systems , such as the www [ 4 , 6 ] , actor network [ 9 , 8 ] , Internet [ 10 ] or citation networks [ 3 ] . The model describes a ’ﬁrst - mover - wins’ behavior , in which the oldest nodes acquire most links . Indeed , ( 9 ) predicts that f ( ǫ ) = 1 / 2 , i . e . according to ( 5 ) all nodes increase their connectivity as t 1 / 2 , the older nodes with smaller t i having larger k i . However , the oldest and ’richest’ node is not an absolute winner , since its share of links , k max ( t ) / ( mt ) , decays to zero as t − 1 / 2 in the thermodynamic limit . Thus a continuous hierarchy of large nodes coexist , such that the connectivity distribution P ( k ) , giving the probability to have a node with k links , follows a power law P ( k ) ∼ k − 3 [ 8 , 11 ] . Rewiring , aging , and other local processes can modify the scaling exponents or introduce exponential cutoﬀs in P ( k ) [ 11 – 13 ] while leaving the thermodynamic character of the phase unchanged . ( b ) Fit - get - rich ( FGR ) phase – This phase emerges in systems for which nodes have diﬀerent ﬁtnesses and Eq . ( 10 ) has a solution ( i . e . I ( β , µ ) = 1 ) . Equation ( 5 ) indicates that each node increases its connectivity in time , but the dynamic exponent depends on the ﬁtness , being larger for nodes with higher ﬁtness . This allows ﬁtter nodes to join the system at a later time and surpass the less ﬁt but older nodes by acquiring links at higher rate [ 5 ] . Consequently , this phase predicts a ’ﬁt - get - rich’ phenomena , in which , with time , the ﬁtter prevails . But , while there is a clear winner , similar to the scale - free phase the ﬁttest node’s 6 share of all links decreases to zero in the thermodynamic limit . Indeed , since f ( ǫ ) < 1 , the relative connectivity of the ﬁttest node decrease as k ( ǫ min , t ) / ( mt ) ∼ t f ( ǫ min ) − 1 . This competition again leads to the emergence of a hierarchy of a few large ’hubs’ accompanied by many less connected nodes , P ( k ) following a power - law P ( k ) ∼ k − γ , where γ can be calculated analytically if ρ ( η ) is known . ( c ) Bose - Einstein ( BE ) condensate – Bose - Einstein condensation appears when ( 10 ) has no solution , at which point ( 5 ) , ( 9 ) , ( 10 ) break down . In the competition for links the node with the largest ﬁtness emerges as a clear winner , a ﬁnite fraction of particles ( n 0 ( β ) ) landing on this energy level . Thus BE condensation predicts a real ’winner - takes - all’ phenomena , in which the ﬁttest node is not only the largest , but despite the continuous emergence of new nodes that compete for links , it always acquires a ﬁnite fraction of links ( Eq . ( 15 ) ) . To demonstrate the existence of a phase transition from the FGR phase to a BE con - densate in a network , we consider a formally simple case , assuming that the energy ( ﬁtness ) distribution follows g ( ǫ ) = Cǫ θ , ( 16 ) where θ is a free parameter and the energies are chosen from ǫ ∈ ( 0 , ǫ max ) , normalization giving C = ( θ + 1 ) / ǫ θ + 1 max . For this class of distributions the condition for a Bose condensation is θ + 1 ( βǫ max ) θ + 1 Z βǫ max βǫ min ( t ) dx x θ e x − 1 < 1 , ( 17 ) where ǫ min ( t ) corresponds to the lowest energy ( ﬁttest ) node present in the system at time t . Extending the limits of integration to zero and to inﬁnity , we ﬁnd the lower bound for the critical temperature T BE = 1 / β BE T BE > ǫ max ( ζ ( θ + 1 ) Γ ( θ + 2 ) ) − 1 / ( θ + 1 ) . ( 18 ) To demonstrate the emergence of Bose - Einstein condensation near the predicted T BE , we simulated numerically the discrete network model described above , using the energy distri - bution ( 16 ) . The chemical potential , µ , measured numerically indicates a sharp transition 7 from a positive to a negative value ( Fig . 2a ) , corresponding to the predicted phase transi - tion between the BE and the FGR phases . The diﬀerence between the network dynamics in the two phases is illustrated in Fig . 2b , where we plot the relative occupation number of the most connected node for diﬀerent temperatures . We ﬁnd that the ratio k max ( t ) / mt is independent on time in the BE phase , indicating that the largest node maintains a ﬁnite fraction of the total number of links even as the network continues to expand , a signature of BE condensation . In contrast , for T > T BE , the most connected node gradually looses its share of links , k max ( t ) / mt decreasing continuously with time . The numerically determined phase diagram ( Fig . 2b ) conﬁrms that the analytical prediction ( 18 ) oﬀers a lower bound for T BE . To predict the precise value of T BE one needs to incorporate the interplay between the convergence of ǫ min ( t ) to zero and the thermodynamics of BE condensation . Since real networks have a ﬁxed ( T independent ) ρ ( η ) ﬁtness distribution , whether they are in the BE or FGR phase is independent of T . Indeed , for ρ ( η ) ( 1 − η ) λ the network undergoes a BE condensation for λ > λ BE = 1 , thus T , introduced during the calculations , plays the role of a dummy variable that at the end vanishes from all topologically relevant quantities . The existence of T BE in the numerically studied model ( Fig . 2 ) is rooted in our technically simpler choice of deﬁning g ( ǫ ) to be independent of T , providing a richer phase space to demonstrate the existence of a phase transition in a discrete network model . However , as the inset in Fig . 2b shows , by changing θ the phase transition emerges for ﬁxed T as well . Do the www , business or citation networks represent a Bose - Einstein condensate , or are described by the FGR phase without a dominating winner ? It is well known that in certain markets some companies did gain and maintain an unusually high market share . A much publicized case is the continued dominance of Microsoft in the rapidly expanding operating systems market , indicating that business networks do develop ’winner - takes - all’ phenomena , similar to a Bose - Einstein condensate . The situation of the www is more complex : while indeed some webpages did capture an unusually high number of links , it is less clear weather they maintain a ﬁnite fraction of all links as the www grows ( as expected if the www is 8 a BE condensate ) , or will loose market share , leading to the coexistence of a continuous hierarchy of large websites , a signature of the FGR phase . While the power - law connectivity distribution holding over six order of magnitude support the FGR scale - free phase [ 6 , 14 ] , the most recent study involving more that 200 million nodes did identify a run - away node of approximately 10 7 links [ 14 ] , an apparently clear and dominating winner . Since ρ ( η ) could be explicitly determined from network data , the phase to which various networks belong to could be decided in the future . Uncovering the prevailing behavior in these and other complex evolving networks ( e . g . social networks [ 15 ] , ecological and transportation webs [ 16 , 17 ] , etc . ) is a formidable task that will require careful quantitative studies on real networks . The identiﬁcation of the possible phases oﬀered in this paper might provide the appropriate analytical framework for such studies . 9 REFERENCES [ 1 ] S . Lawrence , S . and C . L . Giles , Nature 400 , 107 ( 1999 ) . [ 2 ] A . Kirman , J . Evol . Econ . , 4 339 ( 1997 ) . [ 3 ] S . Redner , Euro . Phys . J . B 4 , 131 ( 1998 ) . [ 4 ] J . Kleinberg , S . R . Kumar , P . Raghavan , S . Rajagopalan , and A . Tomkins , International Conference on Combinatorics and Computing , 1999 . [ 5 ] L . A . Adamic and B . A . Huberman , Science 287 , 2115 ( 2000 ) . [ 6 ] R . Albert , H . Jeong , and A . - L . Barab´asi , Nature 401 , 130 ( 1999 ) . [ 7 ] K . Huang , Statistical Mechanics ( John Wiley & Sons , Singapore , 1987 ) . [ 8 ] A . - L . Barab´asi and R . Albert , Science 286 , 509 ( 1999 ) . [ 9 ] D . J . Watts and S . H . Strogatz , Nature 393 , 440 ( 1998 ) . [ 10 ] M . Faloutsos , P . Faloutsos , and C . Faloutsos , ACM SIGCOMM ’99 . Comput . Commun . Rev . 29 , 251 ( 1999 ) . [ 11 ] S . N . Dorogovtsev , J . F . F . Mendes and A . N . Samukhin , http : / / xxx . lanl . gov / abs / cond - mat / 0004434 . [ 12 ] P . L . Krapivsky , S . Redner and F . Leyvraz , Phys . Rev . Lett . ( in press ) , http : / / xxx . lanl . gov / abs / cond - mat / 0005139 . [ 13 ] L . A . N . Amaral , A . Scala , M . Barth ` el ` emy , and H . E . Stanley , Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . 97 , 11149 ( 2000 ) . [ 14 ] A . Broder , R . Kumar , F . Maghoul , P . Raghavan , S . Rajagopalan , R . Stata , A . Tomkins and J . Wiener , COMPUT NETW 33 ( 1 - 6 ) 309 ( 2000 ) . [ 15 ] M . E . J . Newman , J . Stat . Phys . ( in press ) , http : / / xxx . lanl . gov / abs / cond - mat / 0001118 . 10 [ 16 ] J . R . Williams and N . D . Martinez , Nature 404 , 180 ( 2000 ) . [ 17 ] J . R . Banavar , A . Maritan and A . Rinaldo , Nature 399 , 130 ( 1999 ) . 11 ( b ) ( c ) Bose−Einstein condensate FGR ( a ) 6 η η 2 1 η η η η 4 3 5 ε Bose gas Network 2 ε 1 ε 4 ε 6 ε 3 ε 5 ε ε ε FIG . 1 . Schematic illustration of the mapping between the network model and the Bose gas . ( a ) On the left we have a network of ﬁve nodes ( continuous circles and lines ) , each characterized by a ﬁtness , η i , chosen randomly from a distribution ρ ( η ) . Equation ( 2 ) assigns an energy ǫ i to each η i , generating a system of random energy levels ( right ) . A link from node i to node j corresponds to a particle at level ǫ i and one at ǫ j . The network evolves by adding a new node ( dashed circle , η 6 ) at each timestep which connects to m = 2 other nodes ( dashed lines ) , chosen randomly following ( 1 ) . In the gas this results in the addition of a new energy level ( ǫ 6 , dashed ) populated by m = 2 particles , and the deposition of m = 2 other particles at energy levels to which η 6 is connected to ( ǫ 2 and ǫ 5 ) . The number of energy levels and particles increase linearly with time , as t and 2 mt , respectively . ( b ) In the FGR phase we have a continuous connectivity distribution , the several highly connected nodes linking the numerous small nodes together . In the energy diagram this corresponds to a decreasing occupation level with increasing energy . ( c ) In the Bose - Einstein condensate the ﬁttest node attracts a ﬁnite fraction of all links , corresponding to a highly populated energy level , and only sparsely populated higher energies . In ( b ) and ( c ) the energy diagram shows only incoming links , ignoring the default m = 2 particles on each energy level corresponding to the outgoing links to simplify the picture . 12 10 −1 10 0 10 1 10 −3 10 −1 10 1 10 −2 10 −1 10 0 10 1 10 −3 10 −2 10 −1 10 0 10 1 | µ | 10 −2 10 −1 10 0 10 1 10 −3 10 −2 10 −1 10 0 k m ax / m t 0 1 2 0 1 T | µ | ( a ) ( b ) T BE FGR BE BE θ FGR BE FGR T T BE FIG . 2 . Numerical evidence for Bose - Einstein condensation in a network model . ( a ) Choosing the energies from the distribution ( 16 ) with ǫ max = 1 , we calculated the chemical potential µ numerically as the network evolved in time , using ( 8 ) . Due to the wide range over which µ varies , we plot | µ | on a logarithmic scale . The temperature at which µ changes sign corresponds to the sharp drop in | µ | on the ﬁgure , and identiﬁes the critical temperature T BE for Bose - Einstein condensation . The data are shown for θ = 1 and for diﬀerent times ( i . e . system sizes ) t = 10 3 ( continuous ) , 10 4 ( dashed ) , 10 5 ( long - dashed ) , being averaged over 500 , 100 and 30 runs respectively . The inset shows the chemical potential for diﬀerent values of the exponent θ in ( 16 ) , i . e . θ = 0 . 5 , 1 . 0 , 2 . 0 , indicating the θ dependence of T BE . ( b ) Fraction of the total number of links connected to the most connected ( ’winner’ ) node , k max / ( mt ) , plotted as a function of T , shown for m = 2 and θ = 1 . The three curves , corresponding to diﬀerent system sizes recorded at t = 10 3 , 10 4 , 10 5 indicate the diﬀerence between the two phases : in the BE phase ( left ) the ﬁttest node maintains a ﬁnite fraction of links even as the system expands , while in the FGR phase ( right ) the fraction of links connected to the most connected node decreases with time . The inset shows the ( θ , T BE ) phase diagram , the continuous line corresponding to the lower bound predicted by Eq . ( 18 ) , while the symbols represent the numerically measured T BE as indicated by the position of the peaks in Inset ( a ) . 13