OBITUARY Peter Mansfield , physicist who developed MRI , remembered p . 180 BIOLOGY Behind the scenes in the world of synthetic biology p . 178 MILITARY A history of the US agency behind the Internet and drones p . 176 MEDICINE Don’t deregulate : the market is useless at weeding out futile drugs p . 174 Commercialize early quantum technologies Masoud Mohseni , Peter Read , Hartmut Neven and colleagues at Google’s Quantum AI Laboratory set out investment opportunities on the road to the ultimate quantum machines . F rom aspects of quantum entangle - ment to chemical reactions with large molecules , many features of the world cannot be described efficiently with con - ventional computers based on binary logic . The solution , as physicist Richard Feynman realized three decades ago 1 , is to use quan - tum processors that adopt a blend of classical states simultaneously , as matter does . Many technical hurdles must be overcome for such quantum machines to be practical , however . These include noise control and improving the fidelity of operations acting on the quan - tum states that encode the information . The quantum - computing community is channelling most of its efforts towards building the ultimate machine : a digital quantum computer that tolerates noise and errors , and that in principle can be applied to any problem . In theory , such a machine — which will need large processors comprising many quantum bits , or qubits — should be able to calculate faster than a conventional computer . Such capability is at least a decade away 2 . Correcting for errors requires redun - dancy , and the number of qubits needed quickly mounts . For example , factorizing a 2 , 000 - bit number in one day , a task believed to be intractable using classical computers 3 , would take 100 million qubits , even if indi - vidual quantum operations failed just once in every 10 , 000 operations . We have yet to assemble digital quantum processors with tens of qubits . This conservative view of quantum computing gives the impression that inves - tors will benefit only in the long term . We contend that short - term returns are possi - ble with the small devices that will emerge within the next five years , even though these will lack full error correction . A lack of theoretical guarantees need not preclude success . Heuristic ‘hybrid’ methods that blend quantum and classical approaches could be the foundation for powerful future applications . The recent success of neural net - works in machine learning is a good exam - ple . In the 1990s , when the computing power required to train deep neural networks was unavailable , it was fashionable in the field to focus on ‘convex’ methods ( based on func - tions with a clear minimum solution ) that had a strong theoretical basis . Today , these methods are no match for deep learning . The underlying algorithms of neural networks Google’s cryostats reach temperatures of 10 millikelvin to run its quantum processors . E R I K L U C E R O 9 M A R C H 2 0 1 7 | V O L 5 4 3 | N AT U R E | 1 7 1 COMMENT © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . have hardly changed , yet impressive new performance milestones are being reached , thanks to ‘Moore’s law’ . Similarly , although there is no proof today that imperfect quantum machines can com - pute fast enough to solve practical problems , that may change . The scale , fidelity and con - trollability of analog and digital quantum hardware are improving steadily . We antici - pate that , within a few years , well - controlled quantum systems may be able to perform certain tasks much faster than conventional computers based on CMOS ( com - plementary metal oxide – semiconductor ) technology . Here we highlight three commercially viable uses for early quantum - computing devices : quantum simulation , quantum - assisted optimization and quantum sampling . Faster computing speeds in these areas would be commercially advantageous in sectors from artificial intelligence to finance and health care . Capitalizing on imminent advances in quantum technologies requires that the discipline broadens its focus and that scientists work more closely with entrepre - neurs . Hardware improvements are needed to make devices reliable and controllable enough to be commercialized . Heuristic quantum algorithms need to be developed that address practical problems within the current hardware limitations . As researchers working on quantum computing at Google , we plan to provide access to our quantum processors through cloud services to facili - tate the development and benchmarking of quantum algorithms and applications across industries , delivering real benefit to society . THREE PRIORITIES If certain feasible technological improve - ments are achieved , we believe that emerging quantum processors have a good chance of carrying out the following classes of compu - tational tasks and could become commer - cially valuable within a few years . Quantum simulation . Modelling chemical reactions and materials is one of the most anticipated applications of quantum comput - ing . Instead of spending years , and hundreds of millions of dollars , making and charac - terizing a handful of materials , researchers could study millions of candidates in silico . Whether the aim is stronger polymers for aeroplanes , more - effective catalytic con - verters for cars , more - efficient materials for solar cells , better pharmaceuticals or more - breathable fabrics , faster discovery pipelines will bring enormous value . Computational materials discovery is already a large industry . Quantum com - puters promise a radical transition : from the qualitative and descriptive to the quan - titative and predictive . Chemical - reaction rates are extremely sensitive to molecu - lar energies and span a range wider than classical methods can handle . If robust algo - rithms are developed , it might be possible to simulate important materials without the overhead of full quantum error correc - tion 4 . For example , algorithms are already known ( such as the ‘quantum variational eigensolver’ approach ) that seem to be immune to qubit control errors . A variety of business models could supply quantum simulators . Laboratories might pay a subscription for access . Computing companies could act as consultants . Some businesses might exchange equity in return for quantum - assisted breakthroughs that lead to innovative material developments . Quantum - assisted optimization . A central and difficult computational task in all quantitative disciplines of physical and social sciences , and across industries , is optimization . Such problems are diffi - cult to solve with conventional computers because algorithms can navigate only slowly through the mathematical landscape of possible solutions ; good solutions may be hidden behind high barriers that are hard to overcome . The most general classical algorithms use statistical methods ( such as thermal energy distributions ) to ‘jump’ over these barriers . We believe that this type of classical sampling could be enhanced by occasionally invoking quantum phenomena such as tunnelling ( whereby quantum infor - mation is transmitted through barriers ) to find rare but high - quality solutions . For example , online recommendations and bidding strategies for advertisements use optimization algorithms to respond in the most effective way to consumers’ needs and changing markets . More - powerful protocols , based on a combination of quan - tum and classical solvers , could improve the quality of products and services in many industries . Logistics companies need to optimize their scheduling , planning and product distribution daily . Quantum - enhanced algorithms could improve patient diagnostics for health care . The quality of search or product recommendations for large information - technology companies such as ours , Microsoft , Amazon and Facebook could be enhanced . Quantum sampling . Sampling from probability distributions is widely used in statistics and machine learning . In theory , ideal quantum circuits can sample from a larger set of probability distributions than classical circuits can in the same time . Our calculations show that , for relatively small circuits involving high - fidelity quantum gates , it will be possible to sample from probability distributions that are inaccessible classically , using a circuit of just 7 × 7 qubits in layers that are around 25 deep ( ref . 5 ) . In fact , sampling from distributions with such a shallow quantum circuit is “Quantum - enhanced algorithms could improve patient diagnostics for health care” The smaller of these chips , a 6 - mm square , holds 6 qubits . E R I K L U C E R O 1 7 2 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 4 3 | 9 M A R C H 2 0 1 7 COMMENT © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . likely to constitute the first example of ‘quantum supremacy’ . This term was coined by theoretical physicist John Preskill 6 to describe the ability of a quantum processor to perform , in a short time , a well - defined mathematical task that even the largest classical supercomputers ( such as China’s Sunway TaihuLight ) would be unable to complete within any reasonable time frame . We predict that , in a few years , an experiment achieving quantum supremacy will be performed . Among promising applications of quantum sampling are inference and pattern recognition in machine learn - ing . To facilitate experimentation across academia and industry , we plan to offer access to the quantum hardware through a cloud - computing interface . TECHNICAL HURDLES Several technological challenges must be overcome for quantum computing to be commercialized . Quantum hardware needs to be scaled up to compete with clas - sical hardware , which has been improving exponentially for decades . Qubits require quantum coherence , which leads to quan - tum entanglement , by analogy with how classical circuits require transistors with gain . Combining scaling and coherence is the big challenge of quantum systems engi - neering . It is fundamentally difficult because quantum information cannot be copied and subsystems are entangled , leading to design trade - offs that are global in nature . We think that superconducting qubits are one of the most promising hardware platforms for quantum computers . Based on standard integrated - circuit and super - conducting technologies , they are relatively easy to construct and control . And there are many possible designs that might suit different requirements for digital and analog quantum processors . High - fidelity systems of around ten qubits have been demonstrated , showing the feasibility of the engineering concepts . New technologies are emerging that could aid scalability , such as superconduct - ing bump bonds — a two - layer architecture for information - processing units and con - trol circuits . Prototype ‘quantum annealers’ of about 1 , 000 qubits are already available commercially 7 , 8 . ( These are analog quantum processors that could find good - quality solu - tions for certain optimization tasks . ) Several improvements are required for today’s imperfect quantum devices to be practical . Shallow quantum circuits need higher gate fidelities and more stability to limit decoherence . Quantum - annealing hardware needs to be improved with respect to connectivity , control precision and coher - ence times , as well as having access to alterna - tive annealing schedules 9 . BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES A new technology can improve business in three ways : by increasing revenue , reducing costs or lowering investments in infrastructure . In the digital era , introduc - ing a new technology has an exponential impact : even a 1 % gain in product quality can help a company to achieve overwhelming growth in terms of user numbers or revenue 10 . This is the ‘superstar effect’ , which assumes close competition , transparency and an efficient market . If early quantum - computing devices can offer even a modest increase in computing speed or power , early adopters will reap the rewards . Rival companies would face high entry barriers to match the same quality of services and products , because few experts can write quantum algorithms , and busi - nesses need time to tailor new algorithms . The markets that are most open to such dis - ruptions are information - rich and digital , and involve business challenges that rely on many variables . Such markets include financial ser - vices , health care , logistics and data analytics . Making a business case requires companies to examine demand and supply . Demand can be assessed as follows . First , identify the ‘min - imal viable products’ — early quantum inno - vations with just enough core features to enter the market . Estimate whether the innovation solves an existing need ( product – market fit ) , the time it would take to commercialize the product ( speed to market ) and the market’s response ( business traction ) . For example , encryption breaking — often portrayed in the media as a ‘killer application’ for digital quantum computers — does not score highly in terms of market fit . It will one day be superseded by cryptosystems that are immune to quantum attack . And most pri - vate enterprises are uninterested in breaking encryption systems . By contrast , portfolio optimization and risk management need immediate data feedback and could benefit from quantum - enhanced models 11 . More efficient quantum - chemistry calculations would revolutionize the development of pharmaceuticals , catalytic converters , solar cells and fertilizers . Quantum - assisted optimization and inference techniques could empower new machine - learning and artificial - intelligence systems . These could improve the manage - ment of renewable power generators , and of remote - sensing and early - warning systems . The techniques would also aid dynamic pric - ing for online goods and services , as well as warehouse automation and self - driving cars . On the supply side , companies will distinguish themselves through the quality of their technology and teams . Pioneering quantum academics and entrepreneurs will have to work together . This will be challeng - ing because academic incentives are often inconsistent with those of start - up cultures and industry . Strategic partnerships can help businesses to stand out . To attract venture capitalists , the winning quantum products should have business models that require few assets , are low on manufacturing costs and clearly help customers to increase their revenues . Through the cloud , a company could benefit from using G R E G K E N D A LL - B A LL / N A T U R E Radio - frequency and microwave electronics are used at Google to make scalable control hardware . 9 M A R C H 2 0 1 7 | V O L 5 4 3 | N AT U R E | 1 7 3 COMMENT © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . existing data centres when applying classi - cal solvers to simple problems , and invoke quantum processors when it matters . WHAT NOW ? The field of quantum computing will soon achieve a historic milestone — quantum supremacy . It is still unknown whether application - related algorithms will be able to deliver big increases in speed using the sorts of processors that will soon be available . But when quantum hardware becomes sufficiently power - ful , it will become possible to test this and develop new types of algorithms . Over the next decade , academia , industry and national labs should work together to develop quantum simulation and quantum machine - learning algo - rithms . We plan to support such research by offering access to Google’s quantum processors through cloud services to others that lack the necessary capital , expertise or infrastructure . ■ Masoud Mohseni is senior research scientist at Google Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory in Venice , California ; Peter Read is managing director at Vitruvian Partners in London ; Hartmut Neven is director of engineering at Google Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory in Venice , California ; co - authors Sergio Boixo , Vasil Denchev , Ryan Babbush , Austin Fowler , Vadim Smelyanskiy and John Martinis are all part of Google’s Quantum AI team . e - mails : mohseni @ google . com ; petermread @ gmail . com ; neven @ google . com 1 . Feynman , R . Int . J . Theor . Phys . 21 , 467 – 488 ( 1982 ) . 2 . Touzalin , A . et al . Quantum Manifesto : A New Area of Technology ( Quantum Information Processing and Communication in Europe , 2016 ) ; available at http : / / go . nature . com / 2im6rjr 3 . Fowler , A . G . , Mariantoni , M . , Martinis , J . M . & Cleland , A . N . Phys . Rev . A 86 , 032324 ( 2012 ) . 4 . Wecker , D . , Hastings , M . B . & Troyer , M . Phys . Rev . A 92 , 042303 ( 2015 ) . 5 . Boixo , S . et al . Preprint at https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1608 . 00263 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Preskill , J . in The Theory of the Quantum World ( eds Gross , D . , Henneaux , M . & Sevrin , A . ) 63 – 80 ( World Scientific , 2011 ) . 7 . Denchev , V . S . et al . Phys . Rev . X 6 , 031015 ( 2016 ) . 8 . Boixo , S . et al . Nature Commun . 7 , 10327 ( 2016 ) . 9 . Rams , M . M . , Mohseni , M . & Del Campo , A . New J . Phys . 18 , 123034 ( 2016 ) . 10 . Brynjolfsson , E . & McAfee , A . The Second Machine Age : Work , Progress , and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies ( Norton , 2014 ) . 11 . Rosenberg , G . et al . IEEE J . Sel . Top . Signal Process . 10 , 1053 – 1060 ( 2016 ) . The authors declare competing financial interests : see go . nature . com / 2rygdtf for details . 1 7 4 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 4 3 | 9 M A R C H 2 0 1 7 COMMENT Show drugs work before selling them Regulation makes economic sense , argue Douglas Sipp , Christopher McCabe and John E . J . Rasko . U nder US President Donald Trump , defunct economic arguments about prescription drugs are coming to the fore . His advisers contend that today’s system is a bad deal . They want to undo regulations that require companies to show that a medical product actually works before it is sold . The advisers argue that removing the burden of large , lengthy clinical trials will cut costs and reduce delays , and that the marketplace can be trusted to sort good drugs from bad ones . Although many have raised concerns about a Trump Food and Drug Administra - tion ( FDA ; see , for example , Nature http : / / doi . org / bz92 ; 2017 ) , few have debunked the economic arguments . Here we outline what the case for deregulation gets wrong . All nations should take note — weaker stand - ards for entry of drugs onto the US market will harm health everywhere . I LL U S T R A T I O N B Y D A V I D P A R K I N S © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Knowledge of the history is important . The 1938 US Food , Drug , and Cosmetic Act required only that drug safety be demon - strated . In 1962 , new legislation demanded that marketed drugs also go through well - controlled studies to test for therapeutic ben - efit . More than 1 , 000 medical products were subsequently withdrawn after reviews found little or no evidence of efficacy 1 . The free mar - ket that existed before 1962 revealed no con - nection between a drug’s ability to turn a profit and its clinical usefulness . The same is likely to be true of any future deregulated market . MARKET FARCES Economic arguments against the FDA’s requirements for efficacy date back to at least the early 1970s . Originally these were advanced by libertarians and neoliberal economists at think tanks such as the Ameri - can Enterprise Institute in Washington DC . Since the early 2000s , the Manhattan Insti - tute for Policy Research in New York City has added its voice . Some economists posit that regulatory agencies are systematically biased towards excessive caution , and that the burden of testing a drug’s efficacy before it comes to market outweighs the benefits . They argue that ‘bad’ drugs can be iden - tified quickly after they go on sale , whereas harms caused by the unrealized utility of ‘good’ drugs are often invisible ( see go . nature . com / 2hymtel ) . Such reasoning has led prom - inent economists , including Nobel prize - winners Milton Friedman , Gary Becker and Vernon Smith , to recommend that efficacy requirements be weakened or abandoned . An overly stringent system will err by with - holding or delaying safe and effective ‘good’ drugs from patients . Critics of existing regu - lations often point to the case of a treatment for Hunter syndrome — a rare , inherited degenerative disease in which the absence of a crucial enzyme can be fatal . Trials of the enzyme - replacement drug Elaprase ( idursul - fase ) meant that , for a year , a group of chil - dren received a placebo instead of the drug that was eventually shown to be effective 2 . Conversely , a lax regulatory system will subject patients to ‘bad’ drugs that may be toxic . The iconic example is the more than 10 , 000 birth defects caused worldwide by the drug thalidomide , a late 1950s remedy for nausea during pregnancy . Even in the past dozen years , initially promising drugs , such as torcetrapib ( for reducing cholesterol and heart - disease risk ) and semagacestat ( for improving cognition in people with Alzheimer’s disease ) , were found to cause harm only after they had been tested in large , mandatory trials — effects that were not seen in the smaller trials 3 . The most extreme proponents of deregu - lation argue that the market can serve as the sole arbiter of utility : if a medicine is selling well , it must be delivering value 4 . A more moderate view is that reliable information on efficacy can be collected after a drug goes on sale , through uncontrolled observational studies and other post hoc analyses . There is a third type of error that these arguments neglect ( see ‘The good , the bad and the useless’ ) . Untested drugs can be rea - sonably safe but provide no benefit . Unregulated markets are hopeless at sift - ing out these ‘futile’ drugs ( witness the multi - billion - dollar industries in homeo pathy and other pseudo - medicines ) , unlike the current system . In January 2017 , the FDA released a report identifying 22 products that were initially promising but disappointed in later - stage clinical trials : 14 for lack of efficacy , 1 for lack of safety , and 7 for both reasons 3 . Futile drugs , even the non - toxic ones , cause real harms . They waste money for both patients and taxpayers . Marketing useless drugs wastes industry resources that could be used in developing effective thera - pies , squanders opportunities for patients to receive beneficial medical care , engen - ders false hope in miracle cures , and leads to cynicism about the value of research . Some countries , including South Korea and Japan , have allowed cell biologics such as stem and immune cells onto the market without requiring them to show compelling evidence of efficacy . This might boost the domestic drug industry , but lowers the value of local health care . These products have not been authorized for sale in any other countries . Europe should beware too . Lower drug - quality requirements in the large US market could make firms that adhere to the higher standards in the European Union less competitive . NO FREE LUNCH Arguments for deregulation fail to recog - nize that valuable information has a cost . Drug companies cannot afford to generate reliable evidence for efficacy unless their competitors are all held to the same high standards . Efficacy requirements level the playing field and ensure that the health sec - tor receives the data needed to inform good therapeutic and economic decisions . The government , insurers , patients and others need to know whether medicines are likely to provide benefits . Patients and physicians must have access to reliable information to make educated and ethical choices . Rigorous clinical studies are still the best way to learn whether a drug works , and regulation is essential to ensure that these studies are conducted . Pre - specified end - points , controls , randomization and blind - ing cannot be discarded without sacrificing actionable clinical information 5 . Once a drug is on the market , it is hard to gather solid efficacy data . Blinding and ran - domization in clinical studies can be com - promised when money changes hands and , historically , compliance with monitoring requirements has been poor . One analysis found that only 13 % of post - market studies required by the FDA had been completed between 1990 and 1999 ( see go . nature . com / 2mayocv ) . And a survey of 20 drugs approved by the FDA in 2008 found that fewer than one - third of post - market study commitments had been fulfilled by 2013 ( ref . 6 ) . Marketed drugs are also unlikely to be withdrawn because of a lack of efficacy 7 . The FDA’s gatekeeper role makes the med - ical marketplace function . The economic benefits of good research and a healthier population will be lost without incentives to find truly effective drugs . ■ Douglas Sipp is a researcher at the RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology in Kobe , Japan , and visiting professor at Keio University School of Medicine and Global Research Institute , Tokyo . Christopher McCabe is a health economist at the University of Alberta , Edmonton , Canada . John E . J . Rasko is head of the Department of Cell and Molecular Therapies at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney , Australia . e - mail : sipp @ cdb . riken . jp 1 . Junod , S . W . In A Quick Guide to Clinical Trials ( eds Davies , M . & Kerimani , F . ) 25 – 55 ( Bioplan , 2008 ) ; available at http : / / go . nature . com / 2kjhny4 2 . Da Silva , E . M . K . , Strufaldi , M . W . L . , Andriolo , R . B . & Silva , L . A . Cochrane Database Syst . Rev . 2 , CD008185 ( 2016 ) . 3 . US Food and Drug Administration . 22 Case Studies Where Phase 2 and Phase 3 Trials had Divergent Results ( FDA , 2017 ) ; available at http : / / go . nature . com / 2mayug4 4 . Henderson , D . R . ‘Markets Can Determine Drug Efficacy’ Forbes ( 8 July 2009 ) ; available at http : / / go . nature . com / 2kbkzps 5 . Bothwell , L . E . , Greene , J . A . , Podolsky , S . H . & Jones , D . S . N . Engl . J . Med . 374 , 2175 – 2181 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Moore , T . J . & Furberg , C . D . JAMA Intern . Med . 174 , 90 – 95 ( 2014 ) . 7 . Siramshetty , V . B . et al . Nucleic Acids Res . 44 , D1080 – D1086 ( 2016 ) . J . E . J . R . declares competing financial interests : see go . nature . com / 2jct6ei for details . 9 M A R C H 2 0 1 7 | V O L 5 4 3 | N AT U R E | 1 7 5 COMMENT THE GOOD , THE BAD AND THE USELESS Allowed on market ? Drug is harmful ( ‘bad’ drug ) Drug is safe and beneficial ( ‘good’ drug ) Drug may be safe , but is useless ( ‘futile’ drug ) Yes Patients at risk ( toxicity ) Appropriate decision False hope , wasted money No Appropriate decision Patients lose out Appropriate decision “Unregulated markets are hopeless at sifting out futile drugs . ” © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .