Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 ZDM – Mathematics Education ( 2022 ) 54 : 211 – 229 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11858 - 022 - 01334 - w ORIGINAL PAPER Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? Florence Mihaela Singer 1 · Cristian Voica 2 Accepted : 3 February 2022 / Published online : 26 February 2022 © FIZ Karlsruhe 2022 Abstract While patterning was commonly seen as evidence of mathematical thinking , interdisciplinary interest has recently increased due to pattern - recognition applications in artificial intelligence . Within two empirical studies , we analyze the analogical - transfer capability of primary school students when completing three types of bi - dimensional patterns , namely , numerical , discrete geometric , and continuous geometric . We found that the mechanisms involved in analogical transfer for continuing sequential patterns are based on two complementary cognitive processes : decoding and adapting . In addition , at a basic level of processing , students activate one of the operational tools of shape recognition or counting , and based on it , they find a surface analogy that leads them to use isometric transformations or one - dimensional development for continuing the given pattern . At a more complex level of processing , students activate both shape recognition and counting and are thus able to apply a filter of processing that uncovers a deep - structure analogy , which allows cognitive framing of the problem and leads to coherent 2D developments within the understood conceptual frame . At a more advanced level of processing , students can use a refined filter not only to uncover a deep - structure analogy but also to use an external language to verbalize that anal - ogy , and consequently , to find 2D developments that trigger changes in cognitive framing , showing that pattern generation is a creative activity . Teaching and learning implications are discussed . Keywords Analogical transfer · Mathematical patterns · Decoding and adapting · Change in cognitive framing · Semantics and syntax 1 Introduction It is generally accepted that pattern recognition and pattern - ing are human ' s necessary abilities for successful survival . The process of pattern recognition involves matching newly received information with the information already stored in the brain . This involves semantic memory through the recall of generic knowledge ( facts , ideas , meaning , and concepts ) that we have accumulated throughout our lives . Remembering facts and findings , processing of visual and auditory sequences , spatial positioning in the environment , and detecting hazards and resources to increase chances of survival are all examples of applied pattern recognition for humans ( e . g . , Mattson , 2014 ) . As learning is a condition of survival , the processing of sequences and the ability to detect and apply patterns are necessary abilities for learning and development in the real world . In addition , there is an increasing interest in pattern - recognition applications in the field of artificial intelligence . All these are underpinnings that motivate the present study , which has the goal of analyzing how students explore , understand , and continue mathematical patterns . 2 Theoretical framework 2 . 1 Pattern generalization and analogical transfer Mathematics - learning literature provides a categorization of types of patterns , including numerical patterns , geometrical patterns , repeating patterns , etc . According to Rivera ( 2018 ) , pattern generalization is influenced by three cognitive fac - tors , as follows : competence with number relationships ; competence with shape similarity ; and competence with figural property construction , discernment , and justification . * Florence Mihaela Singer mikisinger @ gmail . com Cristian Voica voica @ fmi . unibuc . ro 1 UPG University of Ploiesti , Ploie ș ti , Romania 2 University of Bucharest , Bucharest , Romania 212 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 Tasks involving visual pattern generalization facilitate stu - dents’ understanding of functions ( Rivera , 2018 ) and pro - mote multiple generalization strategies , thus enhancing the development of more flexible reasoning ( Barbosa & Vale , 2015 ; Rivera & Becker , 2008 ) . Haverty et al . ( 2000 ) argued that pattern finding is a “fundamental type” of inductive rea - soning . In patterning activity , there is a difference between near generalization ( e . g . , a pattern allowing one to determine the next term in a sequence ) , and far generalization ( e . g . , the construction of a general rule for the terms of a sequence ) ( Rivera , 2013 ) . At a basic level , both types of generalizations involve identifying similarities and differences among suc - cessive given terms , with the purpose of building analogies . Children encounter sequences upon their first steps in formal learning when they explore the sequence of natural numbers and the ordered alphabet of their mother tongue . Nevertheless , all the IQ tests have a component consisting of pattern generalization based on analogical transfer . In the specific literature , analogical transfer is described as follows : one starts from a source ( input ) context / domain ( S ) and develops a new target context / domain ( T ) by map - ping the components of the source on to it . More precisely , an analogical argument has the following shape : If S is similar to T in certain ( known ) respects and S has some further feature , Q , then T also has the feature Q , or some feature Q * similar to Q ( Copi & Cohen , 2005 ) . A domain is a set of objects , properties , or relations , bundled with a set of accepted statements about those . The argument form is inductive , while the conclusion is not guaranteed to stem from the premises . From this perspective , we are dealing with the logic of formal language , where syntax and seman - tics are essential terms . Syntax refers to the rules of gram - mar in the structure of a sentence ( i . e . , the way that words are ordered ) , while semantics refers to the meaning of a sen - tence . Syntax and semantics have been used to characterize the coherence and consistence of a problem in problem - pos - ing contexts ( e . g . , Singer & Voica , 2013 ; Voica et al . , 2021 ) . Formally , an analogy between S and T is a one - to - one mapping between the objects , properties , and relations of S and those of T ( Bartha , 2013 ) . In the case of continu - ing a given pattern , the source domain consists of the given terms of the sequence that are related in a certain way , and the target domain consists of the terms of the sequence that are to be discovered by mapping the relationship identi - fied in the source ( the given terms of the sequence ) onto an unknown target domain ( the next terms of the sequence ) . Analogical transfer from the source problem ( the terms and the potential relationship among them ) to the target problem ( the continuation of the sequence ) supposes the following processes : retrieval and recognition ( recall of past patterns and identification of a potential candidate for the analogy ) , abstraction and mapping ( abstracting of a general princi - ple from the source problem ) , and transfer ( applying the identified principle to the target ) ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ; Gust et al . , 2008 ) . In a larger sense , analogical transfer of learning implies that what is learned in one situation influences what the learner can do in another situation ( Terwel et al . , 2009 ) . Some studies on analogical transfer in problem - solving make a distinction between similarity in the problem struc - ture and surface similarity ( e . g . , Bassok , 2003 ; Gentner , 1983 ) . If the variables of the two problems ( i . e . , the ‘base’— known source problem , and the ‘target’—novel problem ) are organized in isomorphic ( i . e . , identical ) , or homeomorphic ( i . e . , similar ) structures , then structural similarities are high - lighted , which facilitates analogical transfer . 2 . 2 Creativity , analogical transfer , and patterning Creativity is defined by Csikszentmihalyi ( 1999 ) in a simple and synthetical mode as “the production of an idea , action , or object that is new and valued” ( p . 205 ) . Analogies can provide a means for the expression of creativity , as they can introduce new concepts into a domain via analogical transfer . The principles guiding the transfer ensure that the concepts are relevant for understanding the target domain . Various studies address the creativity – transfer relation - ship . Lassig ( 2013 ) concluded that transfer is one of the components of creative behavior in problem solving . A similar conclusion was highlighted by Singer and Voica ( 2017 ) , in a problem - posing context . Kaniel ( 2013 ) com - bined transfer and creativity into similar processes . How - ever , other studies show that even if someone is creative in one ( or even in many ) domains , s / he cannot always transfer creativity from one domain to another ( Baer , 2015 ) . Things get even more complicated when we try to discriminate between creativity and expertise . The manifestation of crea - tivity seems to be conditioned by a certain level of exper - tise , but , in the process of solving a nonstandard problem by university students , expertise and creativity support and develop each other ( Singer & Voica , 2017 ) . The recognition of mathematical patterns and structures in students’ solu - tions is considered essential in order to encourage and fur - ther nurture students ' creativity ( Hoth et al . , 2017 ) . The main problem ( also highlighted by Vale et al . , 2012 ) seems to gravitate around the identification and measure - ment of creativity in tasks involving pattern generalization . Their paper used as parameters fluency , flexibility , and origi - nality , parameters defined by Torrance ( 1965 ) and used by Conway ( 1999 ) to evaluate open - ended problems . However , while two of the creativity components ( i . e . , fluency and flexibility ) could be identified in students’ answers , the third ( originality ) was not detected . A similar conclusion appeared in another study ( Barbosa & Vale , 2015 ) , which showed that most of the students displayed fluency ( i . e . , they found more than one correct solution ) and flexibility ( different 213 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 approaches used to reach the nth term of the pattern ) , but not as much originality . Given this difficulty in identifying and measuring students ' creativity in pattern - generalization tasks , one can wonder whether the framework used in the above - mentioned studies ( based on fluency—flexibility— originality parameters ) provides sufficiently meaningful information . We claim that what makes the difference in students’ con - tinuations of sequences is a certain component of creativ - ity , namely the ability to change mental frames to reach the optimal solution to the problem . That is why in this paper , we use another framework for studying creativity , based on cognitive flexibility , where an important dimension is an observed change in cognitive framing . ‘Frames’ are concep - tual structures ( which may include images and metaphors ) into which our concepts are organized , and all words are defined relative to those frames . Conventional frames are mostly fixed in the neural structures of our brains . For a fact to be comprehended , it must fit the relevant frames ( Lakoff , 2010 ) . Previous experiences of an individual may lead to the phenomenon called cognitive framing , manifested by the persistence of trying to solve a new problem by using a previously practiced strategy ( Goncalo et al . , 2010 ) . When this chain is broken and allows changes in the cognitive frame , new perspectives are activated , as things are seen in a new way , which leads to the discovery of new solutions . Consequently , change in cognitive framing is an indicator of creative behavior ( e . g . , Singer & Voica , 2015 ; Voica & Singer , 2012 , 2013 ) . 2 . 3 Research problem Pattern detection and inductive reasoning are capabilities unique to the human mind , helping us not just to find pat - terns , but also to detect rationally what these patterns mean related to what will happen next . Piaget used seriation prob - lems to identify young children’s patterning abilities ( e . g . , Baylor & Lemoyne , 1975 ; Piaget , 1957 ) . Linguists and psy - chologists found that these are based on a human endowment for recursion . Evidence of recursion as a general focus of the mind stems from the ability to generate more and more complex grammar sentences ( Chomsky , 1980 ; Hauser et al . , 2002 ) , as well as from the ability to utter bigger and big - ger numbers , even in early ages ( Singer , 2009 ) . Research showed that first and second graders easily identified recur - rence rules for various numerical sequences , and they were able to continue those sequences indefinitely ( e . g . , Singer & Voica , 2008b ) . However , intelligence tests use pattern com - pletion exercises as an important tool for detecting high IQ levels . If this ability is considered so sophisticated that it is used by some to measure intelligence , how is it possible that many young students spontaneously find continuations to various sequences ? This intriguing remark led us to develop the present study . In this paper , we analyze the process of pattern continu - ation by 1st to 5th graders , who have been exposed to a variety of numerical and geometrical sequences . Using this analysis as background , we highlight mechanisms of analog - ical transfer activated in children at these ages and explain the extent to which these are related to cognitive flexibility . Consequently , we address the following questions : What types of completions do young students discover for con - tinuing given patterns ? Why are some types of completions more frequent than others ? In what ways are these related to changes in cognitive framing from the perspective of cogni - tive flexibility ? 3 Methods 3 . 1 Design of the study In our previous studies ( e . g . , Singer & Voica , 2008b ) , we identified a persistent tendency of young students to develop numerical sequences indefinitely . We explained that ten - dency based on the recursive property of mind . Subse - quently , we wanted to investigate the extent to which the natural propensity for recursion is displayed when young students are exposed to a variety of patterns . To test this , we involved students 6 – 7 to 11 – 12 years old , randomly selected from two schools from Bucharest , Romania , in a short study . The results of this study were surprising both in terms of the degree to which the tasks were solved by young students and the diversity of those solutions . We wanted to see if similar types of completions would be found in a representa - tive sample . Thus , we took advantage of a national sample prepared for the TIMSS assessment of fourth graders and provided those students with similar tasks to those adminis - tered to our previous group of students . The results we discuss in the present paper are based on the analysis of the data obtained from tests and interviews applied to the above - mentioned samples of 6 - to 12 - year - old children . According to Piaget and neo - Piagetians , children between these ages are in the concrete operations stage of their mental development . By analyzing developmental changes in children ( and adults ) in real contexts , Fischer and Bidell ( 1998 ) concluded that there is a large individual variation in acquiring skills until the acquisitions are consist - ent across most skills that allow the passage to the next level , that of the abstract operations stage . Therefore , we chose students between these ages for our study , as we wanted to see them deal with patterns while they were in the con - crete operations stage . The variance in ages within the stage allowed us to capture various moments in organization and growth of abilities related to pattern detection and use . 214 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 3 . 2 Participants As previously mentioned , two samples were involved in this research : the first consisting of 32 randomly selected students from grades 1 to 5 ( 6 – 7 to 11 – 12 years old ) , and the second consisting of 3 , 837 students in the 4th grade ( 10 – 11 years old ) , which is a representative sample for the Romanian school population of that age , the sample gener - ated using the TIMSS methodology ( 51 . 1 % boys and 48 . 9 % girls , 41 . 7 % from rural schools , and 58 . 3 % from urban schools ) . 3 . 3 Tools The students of the two samples were exposed to patterns of different types : numerical sequences , discrete geometrical sequences , and continuous geometrical sequences , all organ - ized in performance tests . The test items were classified into the following categories : 1 . Items composed of sequences of numbers . In this cat - egory , the numbers were clustered in groups of four , delineated by rectangles . Some sequences were repre - sented ‘one - dimensionally’ , i . e . , the four numbers were in a line , one after the other ( Appendix 1 , item 1a ) , while others , ‘bi - dimensionally’ , i . e . , the four numbers were positioned in the corners of a rectangle ( Appendix 1 , item 1b ) . 2 . Items composed of discrete sequences of geometrical figures . These were based on two independent devel - opmental rules applied successively . Some of the sequences were represented ‘one - dimensionally’ , i . e . , the development rules were suggested through the alter - nation of some graphic symbols displayed one after the other ( line and circle , white and black balls , etc . , as in Appendix 1 , item 2b ) , while others , ‘bi - dimensionally’ , i . e . , through the variation of lengths on two dimensions ( Appendix 1 , item 2a ) , or through the display of graphic symbols in two distinct directions ( Appendix 1 , item 2c ) . 3 . Items composed of continuous geometrical sequences ( ‘routes’ ) . These too included two independent devel - opmental rules applied successively . These routes were represented either ‘mono - dimensionally’ ( Appendix 1 , item 3a ) , or ‘bi - dimensionally’ ( Appendix 1 , items 3b and 3c ) . The drawings given on grid paper were , in each case , limited by the margins of the given grid , and sometimes even by a closed line around the relevant part of the grid . Each of the performance tests applied to students from the first sample was composed of two groups of items , each group consisting of 2 to 4 items from the above - described categories . In addition to these tasks , the students of the first sample were asked to express their preference for a certain item / solution in each given category . Two types of perfor - mance tests filled in by two students of the first sample are included in Appendix 3 . Two months later , we interviewed all the 32 students of this sample . During the interviews , students saw their answers to the tests , and the discussions were focused on their reasoning leading to their answers ; occasionally , they were asked to continue other new sequences , ad - hoc created by the interviewers . The information regarding students’ preferences allowed us to introspect more about their ways of thinking . To test the hypotheses induced by the results of the first sample , the second sample was presented with seven pat - terns , listed in Appendix 2 . Most of these patterns belonged to the same categories as those from the first sample , as follows : numerical patterns ( Appendix 2 , items 1 and 2 ) ; geometrical discrete patterns ( Appendix 2 , item 3 ) ; geo - metrical continuous patterns ( Appendix 2 , items 4 and 5 ) . What essentially differed was the presence of two continuous geometrical patterns , for which the requirement to complete to the left was suggested ( the ‘L’ pattern—Appendix 2 , item 6 ) , or , respectively in both directions ( left and right—the ‘L & R’ pattern—Appendix 2 , item 7 ) . We opted to add these patterns to test the hypothesis of the effect of recursion on pattern continuation . As the tests were anonymous for the second sample , we could not continue to collect data through other forms of post - test interactions with students . We had to rely on the distribution of respondents by various categories ( gender , geographical region , or social situation ) instead . However , we considered these data irrelevant for our research problem at this stage , and we do not include their use in our reporting of the present study . 3 . 4 Data analysis The students’ answers to tests were analyzed and clustered into the following categories : ( 1 ) Translation ; ( 2 ) Disturbed ( imperfect ) translation ; ( 3 ) Symmetry ; ( 4 ) 1 - dimensional development ; ( 5 ) 2 - dimensional development ; ( 6 ) Disturbed 2 - dimensional development ; ( 7 ) Constant or periodic string ; ( 8 ) Impossible to deduce student’s intention or aberrant trial ; ( 9 ) No answer . We coded all students’ answers based on these categories ; in clustering the data , we started from the idea that there are no ‘good’ or ‘bad’ continuations of a sequence . Even if some continuations might be judged as more appropriate , any continuation posed by a child was analyzed and assigned a category . We processed the results of this classification using SPSS software . The statistical processing of the data yielded certain correlations on the continuations made by the students . Thus , we could infer , for example , the percentage 215 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 of students who continued a certain item by translation , while using the continuation by symmetry for another item . The interviews with students in the first sample were video and audio recorded . Subsequently , we transcribed these interviews and used the thematic analysis method ( as described by Maguire & Delahunt , 2017 ) in interpreting the students’ answers and comments . 4 Sample data and results 4 . 1 Types of students’ continuations In students’ answers to tests , we identified two large cat - egories of continuations for the geometrical patterns : one was based on congruence , involving identical reproduction in the target domain of the given sequence , and another involving development , where the pattern structure was repeated within a modified shape . We extended these char - acterizations to the case of numerical patterns . Thus , in this case , continuations based on congruence are basically expressed through the repetition of the same sequence of numbers , and continuations through development are based on an extension of the observed principle that governs the first numbers of a sequence ( the input domain ) to the new numbers ( of the target domain ) . In what follows , more specific details of students’ answers are presented . Some children made use of translation to con - tinue various sequences . Intuitively , translation is a reloca - tion of a figure ; we considered that there is an intention for continuation through translation when the child ' s comple - tion repeats the given configuration with a certain degree of accuracy . Figure 1 presents a continuation through trans - lation made by Andreea ( grade 2 ) : the child’s intention is clearly focused on the reproduction of the given drawing , although the translation is not perfectly achieved . Children also used translation for the numerical sequences . In this case , the continuation through translation involved a repetition of the terms given initially , as in the example that follows : 10 , 1 , 9 , 3 , 8 , 5 , 10 , 1 , 9 , 3 , 8 , 5 , … ( the added terms are italicized ) . Among the students’ answers , we found other congruence - based continuations , such as , for example , continuation through symmetry ( e . g . , Andi , grade 2 ) . In Fig . 1 , we also included the answer of Lucia ( grade 2 ) , which we classified in the ‘aberrant’ category . Many children in our samples made use of continua - tion through development for the given geometric patterns . Intuitively , developing a pattern in the given context means re - representing the initial model on a different scale . Math - ematically , such development generates components that are in a homothetic relationship with the given drawing . Figure 1 shows a completion through the development of a continuous geometrical pattern made by Ana ( grade 2 ) . Some children made use of developmental rules also for the given numerical sequences . Thus , for example , for the sequence 10 , 1 , 9 , 3 , 8 , 5 , … , some students used a continua - tion through development that involved identifying the rules of variation of the even terms and of the odds , respectively , and the application of these rules for producing new terms , as in the example 10 , 1 , 9 , 3 , 8 , 5 , 7 , 7 , 6 , 9 , 5 , 11 ( the terms added by a student are italicized ) . 4 . 2 Continuation through development : some cases from the first sample Here we further discuss the types of continuations which allowed us to uncover mechanisms of transfer . Since transfer is easier to observe when a student continues the given pat - tern through development , we start with sequences filled in based on a developmental way . We first present some solutions given for the numerical sequences of Appendix 1 . Ioana ( grade 3 ) chose to draw schemes as support for her way of continuation of the numer - ical sequences ; the scheme is represented by dots under the numbers of the first pattern and is explicitly given for the second pattern ( Fig . 2 ) . She did this spontaneously , without being asked to give explanations concerning the solving . Ioana identified schemes that allowed her to obtain a 1 - to - 1 correspondence between the given patterns and the sequence of natural numbers . She grasped a ‘filter’ that helped her to decrypt the given information ; by using that filter ( the iden - tified ‘rule’ ) , she succeeded in applying analogical transfer for the next terms of the sequence and , by recursion , she was able to continue it indefinitely ( a fact highlighted during the interview ) . We can see different levels of transfer in her solution : from numerical representation to symbolic schema and then back to numerical representation . Fig . 1 Continuations posed by four students in the first sample 216 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 In the above example , clustering numbers through their inclusion in rectangles could give a hint to fulfill the task . How necessary is such support for the continuation of pat - terns ? We searched for an answer within the interviews , as well as in the students ' solutions to the tests . Figure 3 shows the continuation made by Iulian ( 10 years old ) and Emilian ( 9 years old ) for a sequence where the first five terms were given during one of the interviews . There were many possibilities to continue this sequence . A choice could be even to put numbers at random . When asked about his choice , Iulian explained that he observed two groups of terms ( 1 , 2 and 1 , 1 , 2 ) ; he used the first group as a ‘delimiter’ , and he increased the length of the second group of terms . Even though he was not consistent in applying this rule ( there are some errors when moving to the second row—see Fig . 3a ) , Iulian was consistent in the explanations given later and showed us his rule for continu - ing the sequence . Emilian identified the same two groups of terms ( i . e . , 1 , 2 and 1 , 1 , 2 ) , but he did not differentiate them as Iulian did ; he assigned them an equal role . As a result , Emilian developed the proposed sequence by increasing the length of the stream of terms equal to 1 each time , and he applied this rule without errors ( see Fig . 3b ) . Their explanations uncover a metacognitive view of the task . From the apparently arbitrary sequence of numbers , the two students inferred a structured relationship , which allowed them to organize information ( by segmentation ) and assign meaning to it . After identifying such a meaningful relational structure among the numbers , they subsequently applied properties of the said structure to generate new cases . This is inductive behavior—which serves for us as additional evidence regarding the connection between pat - tern generalization and inductive thinking . We now analyze continuations through development for the discrete geometrical patterns , posed by students of the first sample . A transfer of the type of concrete—abstract— concrete can be identified also in this case . For Stefan ( grade 4 ) , the limitation imposed by the border of the given grid does not seem to be an impediment ( Fig . 4 ) . He identified the variation in length and width , ( mentally ) devised a rule , and applied it subsequently . The discussion with Stefan about how he got to the devel - opmental continuations highlights a certain chain of thought . Fig . 2 Ioana’s ( grade 3 ) development of two numerical sequences , and the explanation ( “ you have to place [ the num - bers ] in x , like ⋉” ) she included in her answer Fig . 3 Numerical sequences developed by Iulian , grade 4 ( a ) , and Emilian , grade 3 ( b ) . The first 5 terms were given Fig . 4 Continuation proposed by Stefan ( grade 4 ) for a discrete geometric pattern ( The first 3 groups were given and the next were filled in by the student . ) 217 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 Thus , he had started from the given drawing , decoded the meaning of the figures , and transferred the graphical infor - mation to numerical information ( for example , for Fig . 4 , the decoding was : “we have 1 column of 2 small squares , then 3 columns of 3 small squares , then 5 columns of 4 small squares”—the description was numerical and positional , accompanied by gestures ) . Then , he extrapolated the rule to a principle and applied it to designing new elements of the sequence . In this case , the transfer also occurred between geometry and algebra . 4 . 3 Translation‑based continuations : some data from the first sample We have seen above a few examples in which students ' con - tinuations through development of some ( numerical or geo - metrical ) patterns manifest analogical transfer from a given source - domain to a target domain that is subsequently identi - fied , using deep structural analogies . Many times , children continued various patterns based on surface similarity . Among all types of continuations , transla - tion ( and disturbed translation ) is the most frequent , and this is why we gave it special attention . A few more examples of students’ trials are presented in Fig . 5 . Oana ( grade 2 ) initially started with a kind of symmetry , then she continued through a kind of translation without respecting the lengths ( Fig . 5a ) . Denise ( grade 3 ) identi - fied a general shape of the pattern , which she tried to repro - duce ( Fig . 5b ) . Alex ( grade 4 ) tried to imitate the model by emphasizing some numerical details , but he failed to follow the shape of the pattern ( Fig . 5c ) . Tudor ( grade 2 ) accurately imitated the model while also applying a kind of rotation ( Fig . 5d ) . In the four examples presented above , there is a tendency to follow completion through translation , albeit with some mistakes in processing . These ‘imperfect’ translations , some of which neglect either the shape or the numerical values , show that there is a certain level of complexity involved in pattern comprehension , which is not fully grasped by some students of this age . Other children , able to move between geometry and algebra , achieved a ‘correct’ model extrapo - lation . We also found a translation - based interpretation for some discrete geometrical sequences presented by the chil - dren in our first sample . For example , Laura ( grade 3 ) repro - duces only the relevant part ( Fig . 6 ) . In concluding this section , we report that some children used only an approximate completion based on translation , in order to continue patterns . Others succeeded in identi - fying all the necessary elements of a translation , i . e . , both shape and numerical information needed to keep the same distances between the points of the initial configuration . Therefore , we assume that they better grasped the meaning of the pattern , framed the model , and were able to apply it . Further , they repeated it . 4 . 4 More comparative data The data obtained from our second sample of students were analyzed through correlation matrices , which offered some information regarding the development of different patterns by the same student . Statistically significant correlations ( p < 0 . 01 ) were obtained between students’ responses to items of the same type , meaning that there is a high prob - ability that a student who continued , for example , item 4 by symmetry , did the same for item 5 ( numbering is according to Appendix 2 ) . For this reason , the next diagram represents a cumulative mean of the students’ answers for each type of item . The comparative analysis of the data contained in Fig . 7 shows that there is a significant number of continuations by translation ( about 30 % ) for geometrical patterns . When it comes to numerical patterns , this type of completion is Fig . 5 Imperfect completions based on translation Fig . 6 A translation proposed by Laura ( Grade 3 ) 218 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 almost entirely missing . For numerical sequences and for continuous geometrical sequences , most students—more than 55 % —chose a developmental solution for their patterns . This result contrasts with the geometrical discrete problems , where there was a clear preference for translation . What is striking from this diagram is the distribution of non - answers ( NA ) : less than 3 % of students did not provide an answer for discrete geometrical patterns , around 5 % did not answer for continuous geometrical patterns , while this percentage rises to almost 30 % for numerical sequences . Therefore , in the case of geometrical patterns , the percentage of non - answers is ( on average ) 7 times lower than the same indicator in the case of numerical patterns ( i . e . , approx . 4 % vs . 28 % ) . The distribution of aberrant answers ( i . e . , answers not connected with the given pattern , for example drawing flowers , or just meaningless answers ) is also interesting . The questions involving numerical patterns had the highest number of aberrant answers ( almost 30 % ) , while the ques - tions involving discrete geometrical patterns had the smallest number of aberrant answers ( less than 5 % ) . These differ - ences in percentages could be explained if we accept that visual support can favor the familiarity of the task , greatly helping to diminish the pattern complexity . The data are also very interesting regarding the ‘L’ and ‘L & R’ - patterns . Apparently , the ‘L’ - pattern does not pre - sent a structured connection among its components . For this item , many children ( 60 % ) proposed , however , a transla - tion or a symmetry - based continuation . For the ‘L & R’ pat - tern presented in Appendix 2 , the number of students that continued through translation to the right is approximately 2 . 5 times larger compared to the number of students that continued through translation to the left ( see also Fig . 8 ) . We can also notice that the number of non - answers and aberrant answers are almost equally distributed for ‘L & R’ tasks . Some limitations of the data we use in this study are to be considered . One of these comes from the impossibility of checking some of the data obtained from the second sample ( a representative sample for the grade 4 student population ) through analysis of the subsequent performances of the par - ticipants , or of repeating the study applying other new vari - ants of patterns . Another limitation comes from the fact that , for this sample ( containing 3837 students ) , we were unable to select some students for interviews , as the answers were anonymous . However , we compensated for some of these limitations by interviewing all the students from the first sample , who had been exposed to similar performance tests . 5 Discussion In this study , students from grades 1 to 5 were exposed to solving problems involving the continuation of patterns pre - sented as geometrical and algebraic sequences . As we have seen in the previous section , students used isometries ( trans - lation—most frequently , symmetry , or rotation ) , or continu - ations through development , for their patterns . The interviews uncovered certain preferences of students for a certain type of continuation . The statistical analysis of 0 % 10 % 20 % 30 % 40 % 50 % 60 % Con(cid:20)nuousgeometricalpa(cid:7)erns Discrete geometricalpa(cid:7)erns Numerical ( discrete ) pa(cid:7)erns " L " - pa(cid:7)ern " L & R " - pa(cid:7)ern - con(cid:20)nua(cid:20)on to the le " L & R " - pa(cid:7)ern - con(cid:20)nua(cid:20)on to the right Development Transla(cid:20)on Symmetry NA Aberrant Fig . 7 Types of continuations provided by the students of the second sample for different patterns Fig . 8 Numerical data from sample 2 regarding the comple - tion through translation to the left and to the right for the ‘L & R’ pattern 161 students 338 students 889 students Translation to the left Translation to the right 219 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 a sample of 3837 students confirmed that for certain types of patterns , certain types of continuations were preferred within the sample . Thus , for example , for discrete geo - metrical patterns , there was a significant number of con - tinuations by translation , while symmetry was much less frequent . For numerical sequences and for continuous geo - metrical sequences , a vast majority of students came up with a developmental continuation . 5 . 1 Decoding and context adaptation In this section , we explore the underlying mechanisms of analogical transfer , to explain why some types of comple - tions were more frequent than others . When it comes to continuing geometrical sequences , the main operational tool the students utilized seems to be shape recognition . Shape recognition can attract a simple continuation by replicat - ing the model , even if this is done inaccurately . For exam - ple , we interpret the answer illustrated in Fig . 9 as Alex’s ( grade 3 ) attempt to reproduce the given drawing through a kind of translation . When the explicit iconic representation is missing , that is for numerical sequences , children might be unable to answer because their cognitive system cannot identify an immediate plausible solution . A more elaborated answer needs more processable resources ‘at hand’ . A student ' s continuation of the source pattern seems to depend upon the degree of understanding of the pattern structure . As we have seen , at a most elementary level , the student identifies a shape for the given model , and this is his / her way of decoding the pattern . Some children remain at this stage of understanding and propose developments that preserve an approximate shape of the pattern , as in Fig . 5 . In some cases , the children arrived at the development of the pattern using shape recognition only . This could also explain the students’ endeavor to develop continuous geometrical patterns ( more than 55 % of the second sample of students posed developmental solutions ) . The importance of shape recognition can be emphasized when the same patterns are drawn on a white sheet ( and not on a square grid ) . In this case , the missing numerical tool is compensated for by the supplementary relevance of the pattern shape . The elimination of this constraint ( the grid on the background ) activates a topological perception of the shapes ( Singer & Voica , 2008a ; Singer . , 2007a ) , which is not perturbed by the numerical information of the grid . During the interviews , some children spontaneously found a devel - opmental solution for a pattern given on white paper com - pared to the cases when this was first presented on a square grid . In the white - paper case , they perceived the gestalt of the pattern that allowed them to reach a reasonable answer to the task . When the patterns are drawn on a square grid , more con - straints are in play , which must be processed . We can see such constraints interfering also in situations where patterns are framed within a container ( i . e . , when there is a graphical border drawn around the problem ) : some students , such as Stefan ( see Fig . 4 ) managed to indicate how to continue the pattern , even if it involved exceeding the border , but other students show a real blockage and give a role of ‘barrier’ to the border , meant to act as a hard boundary for the entire drawing . Approximately 40 % of the students opted for translation - based continuation of the discrete geometrical patterns , making it the most frequent option . Recursion is somehow embodied in translation , as translation is generated by perio - dicity , which is the simplest kind of recursion . A supplementary discussion is needed here concern - ing recursion . We suggest that recursion is amplified by the practice of writing , and this explains the dominance of completion through translation for discrete geometrical pat - terns . When a child learns to write , he / she starts from given models and ends with something that reproduces them as accurately as possible . This is a kind of completion through translation . We claim that the teaching process for writing contributes to the preference for translation as a pattern continuation . Thus , for the languages with horizontal writ - ing from left to right , the most frequent use of translation would have this orientation . If writing is based on an iso - metric process ( translation ) that is implicitly trained within the writing - skill progress , then the students ' performance in using translation should be higher for the completion of patterns from left to right than vice versa . Deliberately , the structure used in the ‘L & R’ pattern does not suggest any possible continuation ; therefore , we expected students to encounter difficulty in deciding on the continuation . ( This also explains the highest number of NA and aberrant answers , compared to all other types of sequences . ) Fig . 9 The way Alex ( 3rd grade ) continued a geometric pattern 220 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 About 33 % of students opted for continuing this pattern with translation to the right , and only 12 % of students , to the left . Even more , the data presented in Fig . 8 show that 5 . 5 times more students made the translation to the right and not to the left , compared to those who made the translation to the left but not to the right . The situation is reversed when it comes to symmetry . The use of symmetry is dominant for the ‘L & R’ - pattern con - tinuation to the left ( more than 25 % ) , but this percentage decreases to 5 % for the same pattern with continuation to the right . In addition , the ‘L’ pattern ( which supposed only continuation to the left ) obtained equal distribution with translation and symmetry , while symmetry quite rarely appeared for the rest of the pattern types . It is also interest - ing to observe that the highest number of solutions based on symmetry appears for tasks requesting continuation to the left , but not for the ones requesting continuation to the right . As symmetry , in this case , invites us to ‘read’ from left to right , we consider that our claim is convincingly sustained by our data . In many cases , recursion acts powerfully , and thus , a solution through translation can involuntarily appear first , blocking the student ' s access to a deeper analysis of the pat - tern structure . For the discrete geometrical patterns , two operational tools interfered concurrently , namely , shape recognition and counting . The small percentage of non - answers in sample 2 ( of around 3 % ) for this type of task can be explained by the fact that because there are two available tools , a student applies one of them ( the more familiar one ) , gets an answer , and stops there . What seems more difficult is the coordination of these tools ( and therefore their simul - taneous use ) to interpret the pattern . Shape recognition and counting are delivered by the students’ prior knowledge and are used to decode the pat - tern . Further , to fully understand the problem , these tools must be adapted to the problem context . Thus , for exam - ple , for the bi - dimensional numerical sequences given to sample 2 , counting cannot be directly applied : it is neces - sary to decode , in addition , the alternation of the increas - ing and decreasing sequences . A cognitive filter should be activated to eliminate inconsistent data and make sense of the terms that are grouped by twos : this filter divides the given sequences into two distinct sequences . When read in this new language ( in which two independent sequences are analyzed ) , information becomes clear and processable . This is the phase of context adaptation . From this phase onwards , the context allows a coherent , correlated use of the tools , which is equivalent to a developmental solution for the sequence , even beyond the margins of the given pattern . 5 . 2 Mechanisms of analogical transfer in pattern continuation As previously discussed , pattern continuation in the case of sequences involves starting from a source domain ( S ) , which consists of the given terms of the sequence , to develop a new target domain ( T ) , represented by the newly discov - ered terms of the sequence . The passage from S to T goes through a series of cognitive processes . Based on memory and prior experiences , retrieval and recognition processes are activated , which allow the decoding of the ‘message’ transmitted by the given task , i . e . , transferring the given information into a language accessible to the individual . This decoding process leads students to ‘notice’ a certain relation between the given elements . The possible relation can be perceived differently by different students and can thus be differently represented by different individuals . ( See , for example , the continuations of the growing pat - tern presented in Fig . 1 , where the four students proposed different solutions . ) . Relational reasoning ( i . e . , the ability to discern meaningful relationships within informational streams ) activates abstraction—meaning a general expres - sion of the identified relationship between the given terms of the sequence ; and this leads to a mapping action in S ( the check that the identified relation is compliant with the given terms ) . Further , the identified relation should be suitable for the T domain via analogical transfer . This also engenders the need for adaptation to the newly created context ( the next terms of the sequence , where the identified relation should match ) . Therefore , the entire system is coordinated by the two complementary cognitive mechanisms of decod - ing and adapting , which are triggered by the need to solve the problem . The cognitive processes involved in building continua - tions to given sequences are schematically represented in Fig . 10 . While the main parts of this schema are known and utilized in the analogical transfer literature in various forms ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ; Gust et al . , 2008 ) , to our knowledge the roles of decoding and adapting have not been discussed up to now . These roles are very important on the cognitive route from S to T , and their identification might be a relevant contribution of this paper to the specific literature . In what follows , we go more deeply into explaining these processes and the way they manifest . The number of students able to follow these two processes coherently is small compared to the number of students that resort to only primary decoding . This explains the statisti - cal dominance of certain options for continuations ( i . e . , for translations in the case of discrete geometrical sequences and development in the case of geometrical continuous and numerical sequences ) . Some students activate operational tools such as shape recognition or counting and remain at this level of decoding , 221 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 which offers an acceptable semantics for the pattern struc - ture , and pose continuations based on isometric transfor - mations inside the given frame . Others go further in pro - cessing the context ( i . e . , identifying relationships among its components ) , and succeed in using a processing filter that tests available languages ( expressions / representations ) of the cognitive system until they find one that matches most or even all the constraints . When the filter is coarse , unrefined , the conflicted languages lead to a superficial understanding of the problem . That means a partial analogical transfer that might lead to one - dimensional continuation for bi - dimen - sional sequences , or to constructions based on translation or symmetry . A more elaborated answer supposes the achievement of a more advanced level of understanding , in which the child , after accessing the semantics of the pattern , also decodes its syntax . The applied filter selects information from succes - sive languages available in the cognitive system until arriv - ing at a language that is abstract , essential , and structured . Practically , this filter sifts through all the possible ( mental ) languages , until what is left is clear , neat , and transferable— the pattern deep structure . This processing filter generates a cipher that unlocks the informational code of the pattern . This mechanism is complex because the filter is gradually refined until it pairs the context with the appropriate lan - guage of description . If the pattern structure has been found , the context is perfectly determined , the tools are functional , and they can be put to work based on the identified structural relationships . In such a case , students opt for coherent devel - opmental solutions , within the recognized frame . In what ways are the above - presented mechanisms related to changes in cognitive framing from the perspective of cog - nitive flexibility ? At a third level , once the deep structure is decoded , the operational tools work in a correlated way , and they transform the new context ( of the unknown - yet target domain ) through passages on different levels of abstracting ( Singer , 2001 , 2007b ) until that context fits the structure . In this context adaptation process , the pattern syntax is applied , but it is also explained and described in an explicit way , which leads to generalizations . When such mechanisms are activated , the continuation of a sequence is made through development even beyond the borders of the given drawing . At this stage , students prove capable of changes in cognitive framing . These levels are synthesized in Fig . 11 . Summarizing the above diagram , at a basic level of pro - cessing , students activate one of the mechanisms of shape recognition or counting , and based on it , they find a surface analogy that leads them to use isometric transformations or one - dimensional development for continuing the given pat - tern . At a more complex level of processing , students acti - vate both shape recognition and counting and are thus able to apply a filter of processing that uncovers a deep - structure analogy , which allows cognitive framing of the problem and leads to coherent 2D developments within the understood conceptual frame . At a more advanced level of processing , students can use a refined filter of processing not only to uncover a deep - structure analogy but also to use an external language to explain / verbalize / represent mathematically that analogy , and consequently , to find 2D developments that trigger changes in cognitive framing , manifesting cognitive flexibility . These last cases were relatively rare in the sam - ples , showing that although the format of the tasks stimu - lated students’ desire to answer , creative behavior rarely occurred . 6 Conclusions : the perspective of teaching practice In our study , 6 - to 12 - year - old children witnessed a certain capacity to transform various representations for continuing sequences . Using patterns as support , we found that chil - dren belonging to the concrete operations stage of cognitive Fig . 10 Cognitive processes and mechanisms involved in analogical transfer for continuing sequential patterns 222 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 development show different levels of performance in pattern detection and use . Thus , some 2nd graders spontaneously continue given sequences , they find and generalize applica - ble rules or principles , and , even more , they can coherently explain the identified principles , while some 4th graders have difficulties in making sense of any of the given pat - terns . This confirms the variability across skill development recorded by neo - Piagetians within this stage . The students of our samples were enthusiastic to fill in continuations for patterns . Thus , all students answered the tasks , and only some of them omitted a few items . The small number of non - answers shows the young students’ interest and confidence in their capacity to overcome the challenge . As argued before , we assume that this is due to the recur - sive capacity of the human mind , which includes an inborn operational capacity for iterating ( Singer , 2009 ) . At the most basic level , recursion can generate low - quality analogical transfer ; yet , with some training and hints , the quality of inferences and results can be enhanced . From the teaching practice perspective , the following twofold question is rel - evant : How may one increase the level of analogical transfer and how may one use this capacity for deeper , more effec - tive , learning ? Using patterns as support , we focused on revealing stu - dents ' intuition about the subtle interface between deep and surface structures of mathematical concepts . A first con - clusion that emerged from our study is that the successful learner constructs meaning that uncovers the semantics , and ( simultaneously or successively ) decodes the syntax of a pattern . This induces an important consequence for teaching and learning : students should be presented with opportunities for analyzing both the semantics and syntax of patterns in mathematics concepts and beyond . Despite this , frequently , mathematics teachers are focused more on the syntax and less on the semantics of the mathematical concepts . Our findings related to this study highlight that discovering the semantics involved in a problem / concept is essential for the vast majority of students to improve their problem - solving abilities . A second conclusion emphasizes that analogical trans - fer in learning is stimulated if some hints highlight relevant associations among the compounds of the source domain / pattern . For example , in the structured numerical sequences in which some clusters were already suggested , the pattern continuation was more successfully inferred than in the cases where less support was offered ( see Ioana’s explana - tion from Sect . 4 . 2 ) . We noticed that the strategies of men - tally modifying S and T are rarely discussed in the literature , especially in the mathematics education literature . However , if the cognitive processes mentioned in Sect . 5 . 2 are identi - fied and practiced , they can improve learning through ana - logical transfer , which is a very effective way of learning . For example , Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) noticed that when students were presented with a new problem , only 10 % of the students solved it spontaneously . However , when an analog story was presented , roughly 30 % more of them came up with the solution spontaneously . Finally , after a hint on the relational analogy was given , about 82 % of the students solved the problem . In a recent article , Gray and Holyoak suggest five prin - ciples that would help maximize the potential of learning by resorting to analogical transfer . Among them , three are very much related to our study : first , for an analogy to be effective , teachers should use well - understood , explicit Fig . 11 Levels of analogical transfer in processing sequential patterns 223 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 source analogs to capitalize on students’ prior knowledge ; the shared structure among examples should be highlighted using visuospatial , gestural , and verbal supports ; second , teachers should also explain correspondences between semantic information and mathematical operations , and dis - cuss the conceptual meaning of mathematical operations ; and third , once students have some proficiency with the material , they should be encouraged to generate inferences ( Gray & Holyoak , 2021 ) . A third conclusion derived from our study is that many children at the ages within the concrete - operations stage of cognitive development spontaneously switch between algebraic and geometric contexts , between continuous and discrete properties , moving among different levels of abstracting , for the purpose of solving a problem . We found that the students’ continuations through develop - ment provided evidence for successive changes and pas - sages as follows : from numerical—to verbal—then back to numerical ; from an amorphous set—to structure—then to a sequence of structures . In the processes of decoding and context adaptation , changes in cognitive framing go from concrete— to abstract—and then back to concrete , to final - ize the completion of the sequence in a developmental way . At this phase , students can change / overcome their cognitive frame , and they become able to use adequate algebraic and geometric tools interchangeably , showing cognitive flex - ibility . This potentiality is , however , too little valued in the practice of teaching . A transdisciplinary approach , in which the underlying structure of mathematical concepts is high - lighted through crossings in - between algebra and geometry , could contribute to a better understanding of both algebra and geometry . Similarly , crossings between concrete and abstract , from concrete examples to more general situations and back to concrete levels should be practiced ( e . g . , Singer , 2003 ) , even in early ages , with a high benefit for learning with understanding . The analysis of students’ completion of patterns shows that children enact various layers of under - standing , bridging techniques and multiple representations to increase their problem - solving abilities , and they can be stimulated to do so by adequate educational tools and practices . Fourthly , we found that faced with a pattern , students spontaneously orient towards searching for relationships among the given data . This is in line with a study developed by Simms and Richland ( 2019 ) , which showed that the train - ing for generating relations can elicit a relational mindset , even in 4 - year - old children . Therefore , students should be stimulated to make relational inferences , with a consequence in their ability to combine data flexibly for the purpose of ultimately solving the problems they encounter . Finally , the context of learning deeply influences the stu - dents’ perception of mathematics concepts . Consequently , effective teaching should favor concept explorations in vari - ous contexts , with multiple passages , in order to stimulate representational change . Teaching practices strongly influ - ence students’ capacity for transfer and thus , learning rou - tines might hinder analogical transfer . For this reason , a balanced and structured distribution of routine and creative tasks becomes essential for effective learning . This study led us finally to formulate an open question : Can the ability to complete sequences through development be a prediction for performance in mathematics or other cre - ative fields ? A partial response to this question comes from a recent study by Bates et al . ( 2021 ) . This study suggests , from evidence of neural activation , that the ability to trans - form mental representations spatially might be a predictor of mathematical calculation ability . Taking this into account , the practice of developing various sequences in schools at an early age could train mental transformations , with the potential of stimulating mathematics learning . A working hypothesis can also be launched for further studies : once the presence of the mechanisms described above for processing patterns is identified in children , they can be involved in building analogies between increasingly distant fields , thus helping students to develop their creative abilities . This hypothesis justifies the rationale of the present study and paves the way for future research . 224 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 Appendix 1 . Examples of items in performance tests addressed to the first sample 225 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 Appendix 2 . The patterns proposed to students from the second sample 226 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 Appendix 3 . Two performance tests filled in by students in grade 2 , from the first sample 227 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 228 F . M . Singer , C . Voica 1 3 Acknowledgements We thank the Editor - in - Chief and three anony - mous reviewers for their suggestions . References Baer , J . ( 2015 ) . The importance of domain - specific expertise in creativ - ity . Roeper Review , 37 ( 3 ) , 165 – 178 . Barbosa , A . , & Vale , I . ( 2015 ) . Visualization in pattern generalization : potential and challenges . Journal of the European Teacher Educa - tion Network , 10 , 57 – 70 . Bartha , P . ( 2013 ) . Analogy and analogical reasoning . In E . N . Zalta ( Ed . ) , The Stanford encyclopedia . of philosophy ( Fall 2013 ed . ) Bassok , M . ( 2003 ) . Analogical transfer in problem solving . The Psy - chology of Problem Solving , 343 – 369 Bates , K . E . , Gilligan - Lee , K . , & Farran , E . K . ( 2021 ) . Reimagining mathematics : the role of mental imagery in explaining mathemati - cal calculation skills in childhood . Mind , Brain , and Education , 15 ( 2 ) , 189 – 198 . Baylor , G . W . , & Lemoyne , G . ( 1975 ) . Experiments in seriation with children : towards an information processing explanation of the horizontal decalage . Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science , 7 ( 1 ) , 4 – 29 . Chomsky , N . ( 1980 ) . Rules and representations . Columbia U . P . Conway , K . D . ( 1999 ) . Assessing open - ended problems . Math Teaching in the Middle School , 4 ( 8 ) , 510 – 514 . Copi , I . M . , & Cohen , C . ( 2005 ) . Introduction to logic . Prentice - Hall . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1999 ) . Creativity . In R . A . Wilson & F . C . Keil ( Eds . ) , The MIT encyclopedia of the cognitive sciences . MIT Press . Fischer , K . W . , & Bidell , T . R . ( 1998 ) . Dynamic development of psy - chological structures in action and thought . In R . M . Lerner ( Ed . ) , Handbook of child psychology ( pp . 467 – 561 ) . Wiley . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : a theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 ( 1 ) , 1 – 38 . Goncalo , J . A . , Vincent , L . , & Audia , P . G . ( 2010 ) . Early creativity as a constraint on future achievement . In D . Cropley , J . Kaufman , A . Cropley , & M . Runco ( Eds . ) , The dark side of creativity ( pp . 14 – 133 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gray , M . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2021 ) . Teaching by analogy : from theory to practice . Mind , Brain , and Education , 15 ( 3 ) , 250 – 263 . Gust , H . , Krumnack , U . , Kühnberger , K . U . , & Schwering , A . ( 2008 ) . Analogical reasoning : a core of cognition . Künstliche Intelligenz , 22 ( 1 ) , 8 – 12 . Hauser , M . D . , Chomsky , N . , & Fitch , W . T . ( 2002 ) . The faculty of language : what is it , who has it , and how did it evolve ? Science , 298 , 1569 – 1579 . Haverty , L . A . , Koedinger , K . R . , Klahr , D . , & Alibali , M . W . ( 2000 ) . Solving inductive reasoning problems in mathematics : not - so - trivial pursuit . Cognitive Science , 24 ( 2 ) , 249 – 298 . Hoth , J . , Kaiser , G . , Busse , A . , Doehrmann , M . , Koenig , J . , & Blömeke , S . ( 2017 ) . Professional competences of teachers for fostering crea - tivity and supporting high - achieving students . ZDM Mathematics Education , 49 ( 1 ) , 107 – 120 . Kaniel , S . ( 2013 ) . When creativity met transfer : increasing creativity and transfer by controlling the styles of processing . Gifted Educa - tion International , 29 ( 1 ) , 13 – 27 . Lakoff , G . ( 2010 ) . Why it matters how we frame the environment . Environmental Communication , 4 ( 1 ) , 70 – 81 . Lassig , C . J . ( 2013 ) . Approaches to creativity : how adolescents engage in the creative process . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 10 , 3 – 12 . Maguire , M . , & Delahunt , B . ( 2017 ) . Doing a thematic analysis : a prac - tical , step - by - step guide for learning and teaching scholars . All Ireland Journal of Higher Education , 9 ( 3 ) . Mattson , M . P . ( 2014 ) . Superior pattern processing is the essence of the evolved human brain . Frontiers in Neuroscience , 8 , 265 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fnins . 2014 . 00265 Piaget , J . ( 1957 ) . Logic and psychology . Basic Books . Rivera , F . D . ( 2013 ) . Teaching and learning patterns in school math - ematics : psychological and pedagogical considerations . Springer . Rivera , F . D . ( 2018 ) . Pattern generalization processing of elementary students : cognitive factors affecting the development of exact mathematical structures . Eurasia Journal of Mathematics , Sci - ence and Technology Education , 14 ( 9 ) , em158 . Rivera , F . D . , & Becker , J . R . ( 2008 ) . Middle school children’s cogni - tive perceptions of constructive and deconstructive generalizations involving linear figural patterns . ZDM Mathematics Education , 40 , 65 – 82 . Simms , N . K . , & Richland , L . E . ( 2019 ) . Generating relations elicits a relational mindset in children . Cognitive Science , 43 ( 10 ) . Singer , F . M . ( 2001 ) . Structuring the information—a new way of per - ceiving the content of learning . ZDM Mathematics Education , 6 , 204 – 217 . Singer , F . M . ( 2003 ) . From cognitive science to school practice : build - ing the ridge . PME , 4 , 207 – 214 . Singer , F . M . ( 2007a ) . Beyond conceptual change : Using representa - tions to integrate domain - specific structural models in learning mathematics . Mind , Brain , and Education , 1 ( 2 ) , 84 – 97 . Singer , F . M . ( 2007b ) . Modelling both complexity and abstraction : a paradox ? In W . Blum , P . Galbraith , H . W . Henn , & N . Mogens ( Eds . ) , Applications and modelling in mathematics education ( pp . 233 – 240 ) . Springer . Singer , F . M . ( 2009 ) . The dynamic infrastructure of mind—a hypoth - esis and some of its applications . New Ideas in Psychology , 27 ( 1 ) , 48 – 74 . Singer , F . M . , & Voica , C . ( 2017 ) . When mathematics meets real objects : How does creativity interact with expertise in problem solving and posing ? In Creativity and Giftedness ( pp . 75 – 103 ) . Springer Singer , F . M . , & Voica , C . ( 2008a ) . Extrapolating rules : How do chil - dren develop sequences ? In O . Figueras , J . L . Cortina , S . Ala - torr & A . Mepúlveda ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of PME 32 ( Vol . 4 , pp . 256 – 263 ) . Singer , F . M . , & Voica , C . ( 2008b ) . Between perception and intuition : learning about infinity . The Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 27 ( 3 ) , 188 – 205 . Singer , F . M . , & Voica , C . ( 2013 ) . A problem - solving conceptual framework and its implications in designing problem - posing tasks . Educational Studies in Mathematics , 83 ( 1 ) , 9 – 26 . Singer , F . M . , & Voica , C . ( 2015 ) . Is problem posing a tool for iden - tifying and developing mathematical creativity ? In F . M . Singer , N . Ellerton , & J . Kai ( Eds . ) , Mathematics problem posing ( pp . 141 – 174 ) . Springer . Terwel , J . , van Oers , B . , van Dijk , I . , & van den Eeden , P . ( 2009 ) . Are representations to be provided or generated in primary math - ematics education ? Effects on transfer . Educational Research and Evaluation , 15 ( 1 ) , 25 – 44 . Torrance , E . P . ( 1965 ) . Rewarding creative behavior . Prentice - Hall . Vale , I . , Pimentel , T . , Cabrita , I . , Barbosa , A . , & Fonseca , L . ( 2012 ) . Pattern problem solving tasks as a mean to foster creativity in mathematics . Proceedings of PME 36 , 4 , 171 – 178 . Voica , C . , & Singer , F . M . ( 2012 ) . Creative contexts as ways to strengthen mathematics learning . Procedia SBS , 33 , 538 – 542 . Voica , C . , & Singer , F . M . ( 2013 ) . Problem modification as a tool for detecting cognitive flexibility in school children . ZDM Mathemat - ics Education , 45 ( 2 ) , 267 – 279 . 229 Playing on patterns : is it a case of analogical transfer ? 1 3 Voica , C . , Singer , F . M . , & Stan , E . ( 2020 ) . How are motivation and self - efficacy interacting in problem - solving and problem - posing ? Educational Studies in Mathematics , 105 ( 3 ) , 487 – 517 . Publisher ' s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .