452 A Bibliometric Test of the Hierarchy of the Sciences : Preliminary Results Daniele Fanelli * and Wolfgang Glänzel * * * dfanelli @ staffmail . ed . ac . uk ISSTI - The University of Edinburgh , Old Surgeons’ Hall , Edinburgh , EH1 1LZ , UK * * Wolfgang . Glanzel @ econ . kuleuven . be Centre for R & D Monitoring ( ECOOM ) and Dept . MSI , KU Leuven , Leuven , Belgium Dept . Science Policy & Scientometrics , LHAS , Budapest , Hungary Introduction The existence of a hierarchy of the sciences and the possibility to measure the hardness of disciplines are matters of research and debate ( e . g . Fanelli , 2010 ; Nicolaisen & Frandsen , 2012 ) . Intuitively , a field’s accuracy , precision and level of scholarly consensus should decline in proportion to the complexity of subject matter—e . g . when moving form physical to social phenomena . However , the many studies that tried to test this idea yielded contradictory results ( e . g . Cole , 1983 ; Simonton , 2006 ) . Most of these studies however , are limited by small size , unrepresentative sampling and by ignoring confounding factors . To help solve this controversy , we intend to measure several parameters that previous studies suggested would reflect a study’s hardness , in a large random sample of papers . In this poster we report preliminary results of this project , obtained on a smaller sample of papers , measuring the following parameters : Length of title : harder disciplines should aim to convey specific findings , in the most economic way possible . Therefore , titles in harder disciplines should have more substantive words , especially when correcting for the length of the article itself . Measures : total number of words in the title , divided by number of pages ( see below ) . Length of abstract : based on the same logic as above , we hypothesised that the length of abstracts might also correlate with hardness . Measure : total number of words in the abstract . Length of article : in softer disciplines , where the consensus is hypothesised to be lower , papers need to provide a full background to the study reported , and need to interpret and discuss the results at greater length . Therefore , the length of articles should inversely correlate with hardness . Measure : total number of pages . Number of references : for the same reasons as above , the number of references cited should increase in “softer” studies . Measure : total number of references cited in the article Citations to books : as explained above , “softer” sciences are hypothesised to deal with greater complex - ity and lower consensus , and to refer more often to older literature . Books and book chapters , therefore , should be cited more often than periodicals , and other forms of scientific communication ( Glänzel & Schoepflin , 1995 ) . Books were identified reliably by searching each title and author in Google - Books . Diversity of cited sources : the higher focus and consensus of “harder” disciplines is hypothesised to lead to a concentration of the literature in fewer outlets , manifested in a reduced diversity of journals cited . The greater citation of books amongst softer disciplines can be considered a consequence of the opposite tendency ( see above ) . Measures : Shannon , Simpson and Gini diversity indices . Age distribution of references : as de Solla Price ( 1970 ) showed , a key aspect of “harder” sciences may be the speed with which they “metabolize” new findings , leading to a negatively skewed distribution in the age of references . We verified whether fitting a Poisson distribution would be more powerful than Price’s index . Oldest reference cited : this parameter complements the measure above , to encompass the range as well as the shape of the distribution . Measures : minimum year in references list . Since books are cited in recent editions , we also recorded the minimum year yielded by searches in Google - Books . Direction of references : disciplines studying more fundamental problems should have little need to base their research from theories and findings outside their domain , and in particular from “softer” domains dealing with systems of higher levels of complexity . To classify the cited references , an algorithm matched the cited source to abbreviations listed in various literature databases , the classification of which gave us one or more possible disciplines , from which the general domain could be reliably identified . Measures : number of citations to journals outside the domain , and proportion of these directed to lower domains ( e . g . from biological to physical sciences ) . Frequency of citations : the higher focus and “rapid metabolism” of harder disciplines should lead to higher citation frequencies . Measure : number of citations counted at time of sample collection . 453 Number of authors : the higher precision , consensus and focus of harder disciplines should increase the level of collaboration and division of labour . Measure : total number of authors . Materials and Methods Sample We randomly sampled 100 papers from journals listed in Thompson - Reuter’s Essential Science Indicators database , for each of the following disciplines ( in order of hypothesised hardness ) : Mathematics , Space Science , Physics , Chemistry , Biology & Biochemistry , Plant and Animal Sciences , Environment / Ecology , Psychiatry / Psychology , Economics & Business , Social Sciences General . In addition , we searched journals from the Arts and Humanities citation database . The final sample consisted of 1 , 200 papers , and a total of 35 , 844 cited references . Analysis The ability of each parameter to predict the hypothesised rank of a paper’s discipline or domain was tested with an ordinal regression . Factors were examined singly and all together , and alternatively including and excluding the two extremes ( Mathematics and Arts and Humanities ) . Results The various analyses yield rather coherent results . Most parameters significantly predicted the putative “hardness” of a paper’s discipline or domain , but the magnitude of effect sizes was small in many cases ( see Table 1 ) . Table 1 . Multiple ordinal regression , with domain rank as dependent variable . Predictors are listed by decreasing effect magnitude . [ Data sourced from Thomson Reuters Web of Knowledge ] FACTOR B SE Z - value prop . refs . to books - 2 . 31 0 . 01 - 342 . 08 Price index , on journals 1 . 39 0 . 01 122 . 44 prop . refs . to harder domain - 0 . 99 0 . 18 - 5 . 39 Shannon diversity ( sources ) - 0 . 53 0 . 09 - 6 . 05 length of title / n . of pages 0 . 27 0 . 10 2 . 74 n . of pages - 0 . 08 0 . 01 - 7 . 90 n . citations - 0 . 01 0 . 00 - 2 . 81 oldest year in refs . 0 . 00 0 . 00 4 . 17 length of abstract 0 . 00 0 . 00 3 . 85 n . refs outside domain 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 67 total n . of refs 0 . 02 0 . 00 4 . 81 n . of authors 0 . 03 0 . 01 2 . 71 Strongest predictors identified were : the proportion of books in references ( Fig . 1A ) , Price’s index measured on journal - type references ( which turned out to have very similar effects to the measures of skewness we tested , with the advantage of being simpler to calculate and more robust ) , the proportion of references to harder domains ( Fig . 1B ) , the diversity of sources ( Shannon gave the clearest results ) , and the length of title corrected for article length . Conclusions These preliminary results support the existence of a Hierarchy of the Sciences and the possibility to estimate a field’s hardness using bibliometric parameters . However , many hypothesised differences are very small , and with within - discipline variability might challenge conventional classifications . Figure 1 . see text for explanations . Legend : ( M mathematics , P physical sciences , B biological sc . , S social sc . , H humanities ) [ Data sourced from Thomson Reuters Web of Knowledge ] Acknowledgments Bart Thijs gave helpful suggestions , Google - Books kindly increased its search limits to allow automatic searches . DF was funded by a Leverhulme Early - Career fellowship . References Cole , S . ( 1983 ) . The Hierarchy of the Sciences ? American Journal of Sociology , 89 ( 1 ) , 111 - 139 . Fanelli , D . ( 2010 ) . “Positive” Results Increase Down the Hierarchy of the Sciences . Plos One , 5 ( 3 ) . Glänzel , W . & Schoepflin , U . ( 1995 ) . A Bibliometric Study on Ageing and Reception Processes of Scientific Literature . Journal of Information Science , 21 ( 1 ) , 37 - 53 . Nicolaisen , J . & Frandsen , T . F . ( 2012 ) . Consensus Formation in Science Modeled by Aggregated Bibliographic Coupling . Journal of Informetrics , 6 ( 2 ) , 276 - 284 . Price , D . D . ( 1970 ) . Citation Measures of Hard Science , Soft Science , Technology , and Non - Science . In C . E . Nelson , D . K . Pollak , ( Eds ) , Communication among Scientists and Engineers , Heat , Lexington , Mass . , 1 - 12 . Simonton , D . K . ( 2006 ) . Scientific Status of Disciplines , Indi - viduals , and Ideas : Empirical Analyses of the Potential Im - pact of Theory . Rev . of General Psychology , 10 ( 2 ) , 98 - 112 .