Article FSCS Reveals the Complexity of Lipid Domain Dynamics in the Plasma Membrane of Live Cells Philip R . Nicovich , 1 , 2 , 3 , * Joanna M . Kwiatek , 1 , 2 Yuanqing Ma , 1 , 2 Ale (cid:1) s Benda , 4 and Katharina Gaus 1 , 2 1 EMBL Australia Node in Single Molecule Science , School of Medical Sciences , and 2 ARC Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging , University of New South Wales , Sydney , New South Wales , Australia ; 3 Allen Institute for Brain Science , Seattle , Washington ; and 4 Imaging Methods Core Facility at BIOCEV , Faculty of Sciences , Charles University , Vestec , Czech Republic ABSTRACT The coexistence of lipid domains with different degrees of lipid packing in the plasma membrane of mammalian cells has been postulated , but direct evidence has so far been challenging to obtain because of the small size and short lifetime of these domains in live cells . Here , we use ﬂuorescence spectral correlation spectroscopy in conjunction with a probe sensitive to the membrane environment to quantify spectral ﬂuctuations associated with dynamics of membrane domains in live cells . With this method , we show that membrane domains are present in live COS - 7 cells and have a lifetime lower bound of 5 . 90 and 14 . 69 ms for the ordered and disordered phases , respectively . Comparisons to simulations indicate that the underlying mech - anism of these ﬂuctuations is complex but qualitatively described by a combination of dye diffusion between membrane domains as well as the motion of domains within the membrane . INTRODUCTION The biophysical properties of the cell plasma membrane are thought to arise from the diversity of lipids and their inter - actions . For example , the lipid raft hypothesis suggests that membrane heterogeneity is caused by the associations of saturated phospholipids such as sphingomyelin with cholesterol to form a highly ordered lipid domain that dif - fuses in a sea of less ordered and more ﬂuid phospholipids ( 1 , 2 ) . Further , the hypothesis postulates that a distinct subset of membrane proteins partition preferentially in the raft - like lipid environments , affecting protein clustering , interac - tions , and diffusion dynamics . An alternative theory is the picket - fence model , which proposes that the plasma mem - brane is segregated into compartments by underlying cortical actin ﬁlaments that are associated with the mem - brane ( 3 ) . In this model , membrane lipids and proteins exhibit random diffusion within the compartments but require hop diffusion to cross the membrane - actin barriers . Other studies have proposed that glycosylphosphatidylino - sitol - anchored proteins are directly coupled to cortical actin in an ATP - dependent manner , resulting in the formation of cholesterol - enriched nanoclusters ( 4 , 5 ) . It should be noted that these models do not exclude each other so that different organizing principles could yield coexisting membrane domains within the plasma membrane ( 6 ) . We and others have previously used environment - sensitive ﬂuorescent probes such as Laurdan , di - 4 - ANEPPDHQ , and NR12S ( 7 – 9 ) , to visualize differences in membrane order in intact and living cells ( 10 , 11 ) . For example , we showed that the plasma membrane at T cell activation sites ( 12 ) and focal adhesions ( 13 , 14 ) is more ordered than the unstimulated re - gions in the same cell and that membrane condensation con - tributes to the formation of clathrin - independent endocytic invagination ( 15 – 17 ) . Environment - sensitive ﬂuorescent probes have the advantage that they are often only ﬂuorescent in the hydrophobic environment of the membrane ( i . e . , mini - mal background ﬂuorescence from the aqueous media ) , are not required to partition preferentially into a particular lipid phase , and report the biophysical state of the membrane via spectral shifts or intensity changes . For example , the mem - brane - order - sensitive dye NR12S displays a large blue shift in the emission maxima in liquid - ordered ( L o ) lipid vesicles composed of sphingomyelin and cholesterol compared to liquid - disordered ( L d ) vesicles composed of 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ) ( 8 ) . This probe inserts itself exclusively into the outer leaﬂet of both model and cell membranes , avoiding issues with internalization and labeling of internal membranes ( 8 ) . In phase - separated liposomes , NR12S exhibits no preference for L o or L d phases ( 8 ) . Submitted July 7 , 2017 , and accepted for publication April 10 , 2018 . * Correspondence : rustyn @ alleninstitute . org Philip R . Nicovich and Joanna M . Kwiatek contributed equally to this work . Editor : Joseph Falke . Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 2855 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2018 . 04 . 050 (cid:1) 2018 Biophysical Society . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . Because individual membrane domains in cell mem - branes cannot be resolved with diffraction - limited micro - scopy ( 18 , 19 ) , most of our biophysical understanding of lipid phase separation and phase coexistence comes from model membranes ( 20 – 22 ) . Researchers have used various techniques to map the phase diagrams of ternary lipid mix - tures ( 23 ) and four - component bilayers ( 24 ) and observed cholesterol - rich L o - like nanodomains of (cid:1) 10 nm in one - component lipid membranes and DOPC - sphingomyelin mixtures with high cholesterol content ( 21 , 22 ) . In an attempt to provide evidence of L o - like nanodomains in cell membranes that are below the resolution limit of con - ventional microscopes , we previously unmixed the ﬂuores - cence lifetime signal from Laurdan membranes ( 19 ) . We found that the plasma membrane is better described as a mixture of two lipid environments of low and high membrane order than as a single membrane environment of intermediate order ( 19 ) . Interestingly , the oxysterol 7 - ke - tocholesterol ( 7KC ) , which increases the overall ﬂuidity of the membrane ( 25 ) , reduced the relative abundance of the ordered membrane but retained the coexistence of two distinct membrane environments ( 19 ) . Other aspects of lipid phase separation , such as the ﬂuctuations near the critical point , have so far only been observed in model membranes ( 26 , 27 ) . A technique that has the required temporal resolution to detect even short - lived membrane domains is ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) . By performing FCS mea - surements at different spatial scales ( variable - spot FCS ) , Wawrezinieck et al . established the so - called FCS diffusion law , in which spot size is plotted against diffusion time through the spot size ( 28 ) . The FCS diffusion law can distin - guish between free diffusion and diffusion impacted by conﬁnement in domains and membrane compartments . Superresolution techniques , such as stimulated emission depletion , dramatically improve the resolution of FCS ( 29 ) and reveal the conﬁnement times of different lipids . For example , ﬂuorescently labeled phosphoethanolamine , a pu - tative nonraft lipid , diffused across the detection spot in (cid:1) 1 ms , whereas sphingomyelin or raft - associated glyco - sylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins took (cid:1) 10 ms ( 30 , 31 ) and appeared to be trapped in domains of (cid:1) 20 nm in diameter ( 31 ) . In this article , we combined the high temporal resolution of FCS with the environmentally sensitive probe NR12S in a spectral unmixing approach called ﬂuorescence spectral correlation spectroscopy ( FSCS ) ( 32 ) . When FSCS is applied to environment - sensitive ﬂuorescent probes such as NR12S , the ﬂuorescence emitted from more ordered and more ﬂuid membranes can be distinguished by spectral channels . The subsequent analysis essentially treats signals from the separate environments as separate emissive spe - cies . This yields timescales of NR12S signal ﬂuctuations originating from the two lipid environments independently . FSCS is analogous to ﬂuorescence lifetime correlation spec - troscopy ( 33 , 34 ) , in which the ﬂuorescence lifetime is used to segregate ﬂuorescent signals with overlapping spectra so that correlation curves can be calculated for different sig - nals . FSCS too can separate simultaneous signals arising from multiple ﬂuorophores with overlapping spectra ( 32 ) . FSCS has the advantage that recording spectra with multiple spectrally resolved detectors is technically simpler than using lifetime measurements and can utilize dyes that show a spectral , but not lifetime , shift in response to the environment , which is the case with NR12S . We applied FSCS to NR12S - stained live cells and found evidence for two coexisting lipid environments , even in cells that have been treated with an oxysterol , 7KC , that increases the over - all ﬂuidity of cell membranes . To understand the origin of the ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation arising from these domains and their dynamic coexistence , we performed a series of simulations and qualitatively compared them to the experi - mental FSCS data . METHODS Lipid vesicles were formed by extrusion of the desired lipid mixture ( Lo , 70 : 30 n - palmitoyl - sphingomyelin : cholesterol ; Ld 80 : 20 DOPC : cholesterol ; Avanti Polar Lipids , Alabaster , AL ) through 100 nm pores at 55 (cid:3) C . Supported lipid bilayers ( SLBs ) were prepared by diluting extruded and stained vesicles in Ca 2 þ buffer ( 10 mM HEPES , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM CaCl 2 ( pH 7 . 4 ) ) and incubated on glass coverslips for 30 min . The formed bilayer was gently ﬂushed three times with HEPES buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) to remove remaining vesicles . Samples were stained with NR12S ( N - [ 3 - [ [ 9 - ( diethylamino ) - 5 - oxo - 5H - benzo [ a ] phenoxazin - 2 - yl ] oxy ] - propyl - N - methyl - N - ( 3 - sulfopropyl ) - 1 - dodecanaminium ; obtained from Dr . Andrey Klymchenko ) at a concentration of 0 . 7 m M for 15 min at room temperature . COS - 7 live cells were stained with NR12S by adding dye solution to the growth medium at a ﬁnal concentration of 105 nM for 30 min at 37 (cid:3) C . Where indicated , cells were additionally treated with 30 m M oxysterol 7KC ( C6970 - 000 ; Steraloids , Newport , RI ) complexed to 38 mM methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( C4555 ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) at a concentration of 30 m M simultaneously with the NR12S staining . Cells were treated with la - trunculin B ( LatB ) ( L5288 ; Sigma ) by adding LatB to the growth medium at a concentration of 5 m M in the ﬁnal 5 min of NR12S staining . Cells were then washed three times with phosphate - buffered saline and imaged in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle medium . Data were acquired on a Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscope using a C - Apochromat 40 (cid:4) 1 . 20 NAwater - immersion objective with 514 nm exci - tation ( 7 m W at objective back aperture ) . Emission was separated by a dichroic mirror and emission ﬁlter before passing through a 36 . 3 m m pinhole . The emission signal was split by a prism before reaching a 32 - channel gallium arsenide phosphide photodetector operating in single - photon counting mode . The detector signal was binned into six spectral channels with centers / bandwidths of 552 . 9 / 35 . 6 , 579 . 6 / 17 . 8 , 597 . 4 / 17 . 8 , 615 . 2 / 17 . 8 , 637 . 5 / 26 . 7 , and 673 . 1 / 44 . 5 nm , respectively . These ranges yield more even count rates across the spectral channels than are obtained from channels with equal spectral widths . The proper z - position of the focus dur - ing the acquisition of single point data was conﬁrmed by subsequent line scan FCS acquisition , which provides the actual illuminated area radius . Spectral analysis and correlations were calculated using home - written LabVIEW and MATLAB ( The MathWorks , Natick , MA ) code , including an implementation of the multi - t algorithm for correlation of time - tagged single photon counting data , which accepted double - precision weights for each photon based on the spectra of the two emissive species ( see Support - ing Materials and Methods ) . Nicovich et al . 2856 Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 Fluorophores ( n ¼ 200 ) were simulated as noninteracting particles expe - riencing two - dimensional Brownian motion within the simulated area ( 5 (cid:4) 5 m m ) with periodic boundary conditions . The magnitude of motion of the particle between time step t (cid:5) 1 to t was deﬁned by the identity of the particle , assigned as existing in either the L o or L d state . This identity was either assigned at the beginning of the simulation and not varied ( the ‘‘independent’’simulation condition ) or evaluated at each time step . In these cases , the particle identity was assigned based on the particle’s location within a two - dimensional ( 2D ) binary domain - containing lattice ( ‘‘static domains’’ or ‘‘motile domains’’ ) or by a two - state hidden Markov simula - tion ( ‘‘switching domains’’ ) . The particle identity of L o was assigned a value equal to 1 and the identity of L d was assigned a value of 0 . Cross talk was introduced by biasing these binary values toward the mean of 0 . 5 , either by a multiplicative factor ( in the ‘‘independent’’ case ) or by blur - ring the binary lattice with a Gaussian spatial ﬁlter . The domain - containing lattice was generated as a partially relaxed binary 2D Ising spin lattice in which the input temperature and number of relaxation cycles were used to generate domains of various sizes ( here , interaction strength ¼ k B ; temperature ¼ 50 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 01 , or 0 . 001 K for small ( 1 . 1 5 0 . 05 pixels ) , medium ( 25 . 9 5 0 . 51 pixels ) , and large domains ( 49 . 6 5 1 . 8 pixels ) ; either 50 ( small and medium domains ) or 100 ( large domains ) relaxation iterations ) . These domain sizes were eval - uated through pair correlation and approximation of the resulting curve with a Gaussian domain model ( fullwidth at half - maximum values are reported ) . This Ising lattice was simulated at a 1 nm pixel size with total dimensions of 2 (cid:4) 2 m m placed at the center of the particle simulation area . The remainder of the area was ﬁlled with randomly assigned binary values . In the ‘‘static domains’’ case , this lattice was held ﬁxed and only the particles diffused ; in the ‘‘motile domains’’ case , the lattice was also allowed to diffuse randomly within the 2D ﬁeld . This was accomplished by simulating a single diffusing particle of a deﬁned diffusion constant and shifting the position of all diffusing particles by this position when determining the particle identity at that time step . Diffusion constants were set at 0 . 1 m m 2 / s for the L o phase and 0 . 3 m m 2 / s for the L d phase ( 35 ) for the data presented here in the ‘‘independent , ’’ ‘‘static domain , ’’ ‘‘eroded , ’’ or ‘‘blended’’ cases ( Fig . 2 ; Figs . S6 – S8 ) . These values give a reasonable qualitative match to the experimental data under the simulation conditions and fall within an order of magnitude of diffusion constants found in other works ( 36 ) . In the ‘‘motile domain’’ case ( Fig . 3 A ) , the domains were given a diffusion constant of 5 . 0 m m 2 / s and probes diffu - sion constants of 0 m m 2 / s . For the ‘‘switching domains’’ case ( Fig . 3 C ) , the switching rate was set to 5 s (cid:5) 1 for the L o / L d transition and 15 s (cid:5) 1 for the L d / L o rate , and both L o and L d diffusion constants were set to 0 . 01 m m 2 / s ( setting these diffusion constants to 0 m m 2 / s produced anomalous results ) . When combining both domain and particle diffusion ( Fig . 4 ) , these diffu - sion constants were set to 0 . 05 , 0 . 3 , and 0 . 1 m m 2 / s for the domain , L o par - ticle , and L d particle diffusion , respectively . Simulations were prerun for 10 , 000 time steps of 1 ms to allow the sys - tem to approach the steady state . The simulation was then recorded for an additional 10 , 000 time steps ( 10 s ) . The generated position of each particle was then converted into intensity within the simulated focal spot by evalu - ating a Gaussian of deﬁned width ( 1 / e 2 radius of 230 nm ) and centered in the simulation box at each particle’s position . This intensity was multiplied either by the particle’s identity or by 1 minus the particle’s identity to generate L o - and L d - speciﬁc intensity traces . Matrix multiplication of each of these traces by the respective L o and L d reference spectra generated identity - speciﬁc spectral intensity traces , the sum of which represented the simulated six - channel intensity trace for the simulation . This , along with the generating reference spectra , was passed to an unmixing and correlation function ( via fast Fourier transform ) to generate the resulting simulated auto - and cross correlation curves . Twenty runs of each simulation were accumulated , and averages for each of the correlation curves were gener - ated before plotting . Statistical analysis was performed where indicated using the two - sample t - test using the provided MATLAB function ttest2 . Analysis and simulation codes are available through the author’s GitHub repository ( https : / / github . com / PRNicovich / FSCS . git ) . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION FSCS in live cells with the polarity - sensitive membrane dye NR12S In FSCS , the ﬂuorescence intensity of NR12S emitted from live cells is spectrally split or ‘‘unmixed’’ into ‘‘ordered’’ and ‘‘ﬂuid’’ membranes with 16 m s temporal resolution ( Fig . S1 ) . It is assumed that the observed spectra originate from at least two ﬂuorescent species that coexist within the observation volume ( (cid:1) 200 nm in diameter ) at any given time . The linear spectral unmixing calculation ( 28 ) recon - stitutes the contributions from a given number of species to the overall spectra . This is done with so - called ﬁlter coef - ﬁcients that are applied to the total mixed spectrum on a per photon basis . This generates the contributions of a signal photon in a given spectral channel at a given time to one of the decomposed signals . It is this decomposition that allows retention of the dynamics to generate the corre - lation curves . In our study , we assume the coexistence of only two NR12S species : one residing in ‘‘L o ’’ membranes and the other in ‘‘L d ’’ membranes . Please note that this assumption only allows us to address whether membrane domains of different orders dynamically coexist in cells ; it does not allow us to draw conclusions about the similarity or differ - ence between these two membrane environments . Thus , we could use model membranes as reference data that represent membranes in L o and L d environments that are vastly different from each other . The use of such simple model sys - tems does not presume that the ‘‘L o ’’ and ‘‘L d ’’ membranes unmixed from our experimental data are indeed L o and L d environments ; the two cellular membrane environments could be much more similar in their degree of membrane order than the two reference model systems . To ensure that the brightness and diffusion constant of the environ - mentally sensitive dye has no impact on the FSCS auto - and cross correlation curves , we conducted simulations ( Fig . S6 ) that illustrate the suitability of NR12S as a probe in our work . Additional semiempirical modeling indicates that the chosen reference spectra drawn from model mem - brane systems are at or near the optimum basis spectra to describe the experimentally observed NR12S emission spectra ( Supporting Materials and Methods and Fig . S8 ) . We recorded spectra and intensity ﬂuctuations of NR12S - labeled COS - 7 cells and in model membranes in six spectral channels with 16 m s temporal resolution . Autocorrelations from the ﬂuctuation of NR12S signal as it transited through the detection volume centered on SLBs , which are charac - teristic of the L o phase , showed an average diffusion time of 3 . 55 5 0 . 79 ms ( 5 SD , n ¼ 8 , Fig . S1 ) using a 2D free diffusion model . Within this model environment , we can FSCS Reveals Live Cell Lipid Dynamics Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 2857 assume that dye motion is the only cause of ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuations on the 10 (cid:5) 4 – 10 0 s timescale . The spectrum acquired from NR12S in these SLB experiments was used as the reference for the pure L o envi - ronment . A similar measurement was performed in single - phase vesicles characteristic of the L d phase ( Figs . 1 , A – C and S1 ) . Spectra obtained in cells could be then decomposed into a linear combination of these reference spectra , produc - ing a scaled sum spectrum that reasonably matched the original observed spectrum . Furthermore , the decomposi - tion of the observed spectrum into scaled reference spectra provided FSCS ﬁlter coefﬁcients for each of the six spectral channels . That the sum of ﬁlter coefﬁcients at each spectral channel did not signiﬁcantly deviate from unity further indicates that the observed spectrum could be adequately described by two components ( Fig . 1 , A – C , bottom ) . This does not contra - dict the presence of ‘‘in between’’ membrane environments or those in which the dye exhibits behavior indicative of an environment somewhere between the extremes of the L o and L d reference environments ; rather , it shows that a linear combination of these two environments is sufﬁcient to explain the observed behavior . Untreated cells showed a preference for the ordered phase and enrichment with 7KC , which acts as a spacer in the membrane , greatly increasing the contribution of the disor - dered phase ( 19 ) ( Fig . 1 B ) . LatB treatment , which depoly - merizes actin , shows a similar enhancement of the disordered phase in the bulk spectrum but to a lesser extent than 7KC treatment ( Fig . 1 C ) . These ﬁlter coefﬁcients were applied to the measured photon arrival stream to produce the FSCS curves for the FIGURE 1 FSCS in live COS - 7 cells . ( A – C ) Representative measured and ﬁtted spectra of NR12S in control ( A ) , 7KC - treated ( B ) , and LatB - treated ( C ) cells are shown as well as reference data from model membranes in L o ( green ) and L d ( purple ) phases . NR12S was excited at 514 nm , and emission was collected in channels with centers / bandwidths of 552 . 9 / 35 . 6 , 579 . 6 / 17 . 8 , 597 . 4 / 17 . 8 , 615 . 2 / 17 . 8 , 637 . 5 / 26 . 7 , and 673 . 1 / 44 . 5 nm , respectively . Using the reference data from the model membranes , ﬁlter coefﬁcients ( A – C , bottom ) were calculated so that the cellular spectra could be described as a two - compo - nent system ( calculated , top ) . Filter coefﬁcients ( bottom ) represent the relative weighting for each channel for the L o ( circles ) and L d ( squares ) spectra , with sums that should equal unity ( triangles ) . Data are representative of at least 12 independent measurements . ( D – F ) Representative correlations for control ( D ) , 7KC - treated ( E ) , and LatB - treated ( F ) cells were calculated by applying extracted ﬁlter coefﬁcients as in ( A ) – ( C ) to yield autocorrelations for the L o ( circle ) and L d ( square ) components of the cellular data and the corresponding cross correlation ( diamonds ) . Dashed lines indicate autocorrelation decay timescales ( t 1 / 2 values ) . ( G ) Ratio of autocorrelation amplitudes is shown . ( G ) A summary of autocorrelation decay timescales is shown . ( I ) Ratio of autocorrelation decay times is shown . In ( G ) – ( I ) , each colored symbol is one measurement ( n ¼ 13 , 12 , and 19 for control , 7KC , and LatB conditions , respectively ) with mean ( black cross ) and error bars ( black lines ) corresponding to 5 – 95 % conﬁdence interval . * * * p % 0 . 001 by two - sample t - test . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Nicovich et al . 2858 Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 two observed spectral components , corresponding to the L o and L d contributions . Representative correlation results appear in Fig . 1 , D – F , with all measured correlation curves appearing in Figs . S2 – S4 . Autocorrelation FSCS curves have a total amplitude approximately equal to the inverse of the average number of molecules in the focal volume . Within this amplitude , the respective curves are divided proportionally to the inten - sity of the signal from a given NR12S spectral signal and the square of the diffusing entity brightness . The resulting FSCS autocorrelations in live cells show that NR12S in the L d phase resulted in a stronger correlation signal than in the L o phase across all conditions ( Fig . 1 G ) . The ratio of ampli - tudes between L d and L o autocorrelations was reduced under 7KC treatment ( p ¼ 0 . 0010 ) but did not signiﬁcantly vary under LatB treatment ( p ¼ 0 . 59 , Fig . 1 G ) . This could represent a difference in prevalence of a given membrane environment , of the probe’s preference for one environment over the other , or of a change in diffusing entity brightness in each environment . All autocorrelation curves show a decrease from a maximum near zero lag ( t ¼ 0 ) to a value close to 1 signi - fying no correlation at times approaching t ¼ N , as is typical for aperiodic motion of probes through a single focal volume . The intervening curve shape is complex and not readily ﬁtted to a multicomponent 2D or three - dimensional diffusion model . To compare timescales , the model - free half - amplitude autocorrelation decay time ( t 1 / 2 ) was used . For cases of single - component 2D diffusion , this value is equal to the diffusion time ( t D ) , but for more complex ( or unknown ) sources of ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuations , it provides a means to compare timescales without ﬁtting to an explicit model . Mean decay lifetimes were 5 . 90 , 6 . 48 , and 5 . 15 ms for the L o component and 14 . 69 , 24 . 38 , and 13 . 13 ms for the L d component in control , 7KC - treated , and LatB - treated cells , respectively ( Fig . 1 H ; Table S1 ) . Previous work indicated that lipid molecules are trapped or conﬁned on timescales of 10 – 11 ms ( 31 , 37 ) ; our results show similar timescales are associated with changes in lipid environment for the probe and that each environment is associated with a distinct timescale . Autocorrelation decay times showed a similar trend to the amplitude results wherein the L d autocorrelation decayed to the half amplitude point in a longer time than the L o phase . This trend carried across treatments , whereas the difference in autocorrelation decay times between the two phases did not vary signiﬁcantly with treatment ( p ¼ 0 . 075 for 7KC , p ¼ 0 . 50 for LatB ) ( Fig . 1 I ) . As the autocorrelation times are longer than diffusion times observed within SLBs ( 3 . 55 5 0 . 79 ms in L d model membranes vs . 13 . 13 – 24 . 37 ms for the L d component in live cells , 5 SD ) , this means that the diffusion in cell membranes was greatly hin - dered to constrain the dye molecules within a region smaller than the focal volume . Such constrained motion is a known feature of molecules in plasma membranes ; the cause is attributed to multiscale conﬁnement of the lipids to regions 20 – 750 nm in size ( 31 , 37 ) . Weighting detected photons with ﬁlters for the two spec - tral components respectively further allows the calculation FIGURE 2 Simulations of freely diffusing probes in static modeled membranes . ( A ) Correla - tions are shown from simulations in which the diffusion rate of the probe differs by environment , but the probes do not change spectral identity after the initial assignment . ( B ) Correlations from the same simulations are shown , but now with cross talk between spectral channels . ( C ) A heteroge - neous 2D membrane environment is simulated as a 2 (cid:4) 2 m m semirelaxed binary Ising lattice within a 5 (cid:4) 5 m m box . The 1 / e 2 diameter of the simulated Gaussian focal spot is shown in blue . ( D ) Correla - tions from simulations in which probes are allowed to diffuse and probe identity at a given time is determined by the lattice identity at the probe’s location . Data are processed as for experimental FSCS data sets , resulting in autocorrelation curves shown in ( A ) , ( B ) , and ( D ) for the L o ( green ) and L d ( purple ) components and their cross correlation curves ( blue ) under the respective simulation con - ditions . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . FSCS Reveals Live Cell Lipid Dynamics Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 2859 of an FSCS cross correlation curve . This curve represents the timescale and magnitude of similarities ( or dissimilar - ities ) in the ﬂuctuations between the two spectral channels . Representative cross correlations appear in the correlation curves in Fig . 1 , D – F , with the full set of measured correla - tions in Figs . S2 – S4 . As with the autocorrelation curves , the observed cross correlation signals are complex and not readily ﬁtted to an a priori model of membrane behavior . Still , it is possible to describe commonalities observed in the results . In all cases , observed cross correlations were of lower amplitude than were the autocorrelations . A common motif in the cross correlation curve is a peak occurring at or near the timescale of the autocorrelation decays ( see Fig . 1 D ) . Such a peak was observed in 11 / 13 control cells , 4 / 12 7KC - treated cells , and 9 / 19 LatB - treated cells over the time - scale of the autocorrelation decays ( 10 (cid:5) 4 – 10 (cid:5) 1 s ) . These peaks were at timescales comparable to the L o and L d auto - correlation decays in the control cell case ( Fig . S2 ) , and where present , this moves to faster timescales when cells were treated with 7KC or LatB ( Figs . S3 and S4 ) . The reduction in cross correlation peak timescale upon treatment is consistent with a reduction in domain size or reduction in conﬁnement strength of the dye within a single domain . Other cross correlation curves show anticorrelation ( values below 1 ) at short timescales ( t < 10 (cid:5) 4 s ) . This feature is observed in 2 / 13 control cells , 0 / 12 7KC - treated cells , and 5 / 19 of the LatB - treated cells . An additional 5 / 19 cells showed persistent anti - cross - correlation at all measured ( 10 (cid:5) 5 – 10 0 s ) timescales . Simulations of NR12S ﬂuctuations in a heterogeneous membrane environment Three mechanisms are proposed to potentially give rise to the observed ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuations : 1 ) the transit of probe through a static , if heterogeneous , membrane ; 2 ) the transit of membrane domains relative to the focal volume ; and 3 ) ﬂuctuation of domain order identity in each location in the membrane . The true process could be a combination of all three hypothesized mechanisms , but the FSCS signal will be dominated by the fastest process , which yields a FIGURE 3 Simulation results from dynamic domain environments . ( A ) Correlations from simulations in which dyes are ﬁxed relative to the lattice are shown , but the lattice and probes diffuse through the static observational volume . ( B ) A representative result from LatB - treated cells shows anticor - relation behavior at short timescales ( for experimental details , see Fig . 1 ) . Dashed lines indicate the t 1 / 2 timescales . ( C ) Correlations from simulations in which probes are additionally allowed to slowly diffuse in addition to switching identities are shown via a hidden Markov model . In ( B ) and ( C ) , autocorrelation curves for the L o ( green ) and L d ( purple ) components and cross correlation curves ( blue ) are shown . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . FIGURE 4 Correlation results from simulations with simultaneous probe diffusion through the modeled domain lattice and diffusion of the underly - ing domain lattice relative to the observational volume . Autocorrelation curves for the L o ( green ) and L d ( purple ) components and cross correlation curves ( blue ) are shown . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Nicovich et al . 2860 Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 change in intensity of a single probe species with other pro - cesses occurring at longer timescales and lower magnitudes masked . Simulations provide a means to investigate the implica - tions of these proposed mechanisms on the observable auto - and cross correlation curves . These simulations as - sume a heterogeneous 2D membrane of a binary mixture of L o and L d domains , generated as a semirelaxed Ising lat - tice . This model is a reasonable approximation of observed membrane behavior on the nanometer scale ( 26 , 38 ) . The de - gree of relaxation ( and resulting size of membrane domains ) is held as a variable , as is the membrane viscosity within each environment , degree of motion of the domains , and other potential transition rates . The focal volume is matched to the experimental point - spread function ( approximated as a Gaussian with width s ¼ 230 nm ) and centered in a much larger simulated area ( 5 (cid:4) 5 m m ) . Dye intensity is assumed to be equal in both environments . Dye abundance is held constant at 8 dyes / m m 2 in the simulated membrane , and L o and L d spectra are those measured experimentally . Sim - ulations were run 20 times in each condition for 10 5 ms in 1 ms steps , and the correlation curves were averaged . As a control , dyes were assigned an environmental and corresponding spectral identity at the start of the simulation and allowed to diffuse . These simulations are not sufﬁcient to yield the observed correlation behavior ( Fig . 2 ) . Without switching of dye spectral identity , there is no signiﬁcant average cross correlation signal , and individual simulation runs show small deviations around 1 that do not change with timescale ( Fig . 2 A ) . Introducing cross talk between channels does add a cross correlation decay as essentially a scaled replica of the average autocorrelation curves ( Fig . 2 B ; Fig . S5 ) . Importantly , this curve does not show a peak but rather a monotonic decay . These results show that dye switching spectral identity is required for the observed auto - and cross correlation signals . It is not sufﬁ - cient to have two populations of dye that do not alter their spectral properties through the course of the experiment to recapitulate the experimental observations . If instead the dyes diffuse within a heterogeneous envi - ronment , many of the features are observed in the experi - mental results ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . Here , a binary membrane lattice domain environment with equal proportion of the two environments was generated , and dyes were allowed to diffuse within this environment . The spectral identity of a given dye was assigned by the value of the binary lattice at the dye’s position at that time point . An additional param - eter was added to allow the dye diffusion rate to vary along with the lattice environment . The simulation progressed for 10 4 time steps to relax to a steady state before the recording of the simulated ﬂuorescence output began . These simulations produce two key features in the exper - imental correlations . First , the autocorrelation curves show a deviation in amplitude along with timescale . In all cases with equal probe intensity and domain abundance , the faster diffusional component shows a lower amplitude and faster decay timescale than the slower diffusional component . This occurs even with the two membrane environments being present in equal amounts and without any thermody - namic effects on the preference of the probe for a given environment . The difference in amplitude points to kinetic trapping within an environment of higher effective viscosity as a possible mechanism for the observed difference in auto - correlation amplitude . The observed autocorrelation curves nearly always have the ordered phase autocorrelation curve at higher amplitude , which , given that this phase is of higher viscosity , is consistent with this explanation . The cross correlation curves under these conditions are also qualitatively consistent with the broad peak near the autocorrelation decay timescale observed in the experi - mental data . This peak is present in all simulated data sets and represents the motion of dye from one membrane envi - ronment to another . The peak position varies linearly with simulated domain size , being at a longer timescale for larger domains . Here , an increase in simulated domain size from 25 . 93 5 0 . 51 nm ( 5 SD , n ¼ 120 ) to 49 . 61 5 1 . 78 nm ( 5 SD , n ¼ 40 ) results in an increase in the peak position from 12 . 15 5 3 . 4 ms ( 5 SD ) to 25 . 5 5 5 . 0 ms ( 5 SD ) . If domain size is exceedingly small , approaching the 1 nm pixel size of the simulated area , then three identical correla - tion curves are observed . Together , these results indicate that the domains must be on the same size scale but smaller than the focal spot for the observed experimental behavior . If they are too small , then the differential correlation behavior is not observed , whereas if they are too large , the domains would be visible in diffraction - limited imaging . Ultimately , previous work indicating a domain size of tens of nanometers ( 19 , 31 ) is consistent with the observations here . Kinetic trapping as the primary mechanism for autocorre - lation amplitude differences assumes that the two phases are present in near - equal amounts . Manipulating the prevalence of environments in the lattice additionally alters this differ - ence in autocorrelation amplitude , with the ratio of autocor - relation amplitudes being switched when the prevalence of the faster diffusional environment is sufﬁcient to overcome the kinetic trapping effects ( Fig . S6 ) . For simulated probes with diffusion constants of 0 . 1 and 0 . 3 m m 2 / s for the L o and L d phases , respectively , this crossover occurs when the abundance of the L d domain increases from 50 % to be - tween 44 % ( Fig . S6 , A and B ) and 31 % ( Fig . S6 , C and D ) . In these trials , the cross correlation always shows a peak at a timescale approximately equal to the autocorrelation decays and with an amplitude between the two autocorrelation curves at the peak position . The experimental data are qual - itatively consistent with a near - equal distribution of domain abundance . Intensity differences between probes in the L o or L d envi - ronment have an additional compounding effect . It has been previously shown that NR12S can vary by a factor of (cid:1) 2 in FSCS Reveals Live Cell Lipid Dynamics Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 2861 ﬂuorescence quantum yield based on the polarizability of the surrounding environment ( 8 ) . We ran simulations in equivalent environments while varying the diffusion con - stant and relative intensity of the probe in different environ - ments ( Fig . S7 ) . The autocorrelation amplitude did vary with probe brightness ; an increase in brightness yielded an increase in autocorrelation amplitude for that phase . The effect of different diffusion coefﬁcients in the two phases worked in concert with the brightness effect on auto - correlation amplitude . In the experimental data , we observe that the autocorrelation in the ordered channel is always at a longer timescale than in the ﬂuid channel . All experimental systems show an autocorrelation amplitude ratio of the ﬂuid to the ordered phase greater than 1 ( Fig . 1 G ) . We expect the ﬂuid channel autocorrelation to have a greater amplitude than the ordered channel autocorrelation , given equal probe brightness . Varying the simulated probe brightness by a factor of two away from equal is sufﬁcient to reach the crossover point such that the brighter ordered channel shows greater auto - correlation amplitude than the dimmer ﬂuid phase ( simu - lated diffusion constants of 0 . 3 and 0 . 1 m m2 / s and relative brightness of 2 : 1 for the ordered and ﬂuid environment , respectively ) . The converse brightness ratio with the same diffusion constants yields simulated amplitudes in the proper sign but with ordered / ﬂuid autocorrelation ampli - tudes greater than most of the observed experimental data . Although it is difﬁcult to extract an experimental diffusion constant given the complex membrane environment , these data together suggest that the relative brightness of the NR12S probe in the experimental membrane environments is within a factor of 2 or equivalent . Introducing an intermediate membrane environment state ( one between the binary L o or L d extreme ) by blurring the binary lattice does not alter the qualitative features of the correlation curves ( Fig . S8 ) . Modeling domain boundaries as gradients rather than as discrete binary transitions re - sulted in correlation curves that retained the qualitative features of the curves from the binary condition . The only effect is a reduction in contrast between the three correlation curves with reduced discrete binary character . As with the spectral data , it is not possible to discern if there are truly two distinct membrane environments in the experimental data or if a continuum of environments exists between the two extremes . However , the data observed requires mem - brane heterogeneity and is not inconsistent with a binary lattice of two distinct membrane states . Additionally , this loss of correlation contrast may provide a route to experi - mentally quantify the level of discrete character in the mem - brane , especially if this can be varied by temperature or drug treatment . Together , these coupled effects of domain abundance , size , and viscosity in the membrane environment on the cor - relation curves are challenging to disentangle . However , the qualitative features of the correlation curves remain consis - tent . As such , it is reasonable to continue to compare simu - lated results against the experimental data to determine parameters that describe the qualitative correlation features observed . From these , we can determine that the experi - mental behavior is consistent with membrane domains in near - equal abundance with approximately discrete transi - tions while differing in viscosity . Further , the NR12S probe brightness in the two environments is nearly equivalent . Simulating mobile domains and domain formation and disassembly On their own , the cross correlation curves from these simu - lations are in good agreement with many of the cross corre - lation curves in the experimental data . However , the experimental data do not always show the same peak as that in the simulations , but in some cases , no peak or a nega - tive anticorrelation signal is shown . Additionally , the cross correlation curve is always at a lower amplitude than both autocorrelation curves rather than crossing the lower - ampli - tude autocorrelation curve , as seen in these simulations . Whereas this simulated mechanism does explain much of the data , it is not sufﬁcient to explain all qualitative features . Rather than holding the domain lattice position constant and allowing probes to move , the probes can be held static relative to the lattice while the lattice is allowed to move as a single unit ( Fig . 3 A ) . This would represent a case in which domains moving through a cell membrane carry rela - tively ﬁxed membrane constituents along with them . Under these conditions , no difference in autocorrelation amplitude or timescale is seen between the two spectral components . The cross correlation curve , however , can recapitulate the observed anticorrelation behavior seen in many of the exper - imental data sets . This anticorrelation would represent a case in which the presence of one environment excludes the signal from the other being present . In previous work , this was observed with a mixed population of vesicles , each of either L o or L d environment , in which the size of the vesicle was sufﬁcient to exclude others from the focal volume ( 32 ) . Here , the mosaic of the domain lattice accom - plishes the same effect . Anti - cross - correlation behavior was primarily observed in the LatB condition ( Fig . 3 B ) , suggesting the role of the actin meshwork in domain formation and diffusion conﬁne - ment within the membrane ( 37 , 39 ) . Removal of this conﬁnement through actin depolymerization could yield more motile domains and subsequently the observed corre - lation behavior . Notably , the conditions that can yield this anti - cross - cor - relation are also likely to yield positive cross correlation of the same amplitude and timescale across the measurement window ( Fig . 3 A ) . Such variability in cross correlation in the simulated results helps explain the variability observed in the experimental results , especially under LatB treatment conditions . Nicovich et al . 2862 Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 A change in domain identity around the dye molecules is the third possibility . Such behavior could be attributed to that of a membrane at or near its critical temperature . Emer - gent from these conditions are domains similar to the Ising - like regions invoked above but with domain identity at a given point evolving over time as domains percolate within the membrane environment ( 38 , 40 ) . Simulations for this mechanism modeled each dye using a hidden Markov model switching between L o and L d identity at a speciﬁed rate . There was no spatial connection between simulated probe molecules , but this should not affect the results , as switching entire domains would be equivalent to switching individual probes at the probe densities characteristic of these experiments . Allowing for both probe identity switching and diffusion ( slower than that in the diffusion - only case ) , it was possible to observe some general parallels between the simulated and observed curves ( Fig . 3 C ) . Interestingly , without addition - ally allowing for diffusion of the probe , the autocorrelation results for both phases were identical , with the cross corre - lation being equal in opposite magnitude regardless of spec - iﬁed switching timescale . Like with the diffusion - only case , the autocorrelation curve amplitudes diverge with the longer - lived state , resulting in a greater amplitude . A peak in the cross correlation is observed at a similar timescale to that of the autocorrelation decay . However , the shape of this peak differs from that observed in the diffusion - only case . Rather than a broad peak with positive signal at t ¼ 0 and increasing to a maximum , the peak here is very close to 1 ( uncorrelated ) at t ¼ 0 and rises to a relatively sharp peak at the maximal value . The former diffusion - only peak shape is a much closer ﬁt to the experimental cross correlation curves than that generated by Markov switching of dye identity . It remains that no one mechanism simulated is sufﬁcient to describe the observed correlation curves . Dye diffusion through a heterogeneous membrane can capture the differ - ence in autocorrelation amplitudes and the shape and presence of the common cross correlation peak motif . Mem - brane domain translation alternatively can explain the anti - cross - correlation seen in the experimental data . Although a single mechanism may be a simpler explanation , it is fully possible that a more complex set of mechanisms underlies the behavior of probe molecules in the cell membrane . Combining mechanisms of dye molecules diffusing in and out of mobile domains To test one such set of combination of mechanisms , we allowed both dye diffusion in and out of domains and lattice motion during the simulation . The result yielded a set of curves well - approximating much of the experimental data ( Fig . 4 ) . The amplitude of the correlation curves is correct , with the autocorrelation of the slower - diffusing environ - ment yielding the greatest amplitude , followed by the auto - correlation of the slower environment and ﬁnally the cross correlation curve . The cross correlation curve maintains the broad peak with a positive signal at t ¼ 0 . The match between these simulations and the observed data implies that the dynamics in the cell membrane envi - ronment is complex and not well described by a single mechanism . Two separate and plausible mechanisms oper - ating on similar timescales describe the experimental data better ( Fig . 4 ) than any single simulated mechanism alone ( Fig . 3 ) . It is therefore likely that multiple mechanisms are involved , and any experiment biased to show only one is present in driving membrane dynamics may well be conﬁrmed . These results show that care should be taken in the interpretation of these results to not unduly exclude other mechanisms . The ability of FSCS does allow for extra information in the form of the cross correlation that is not present in conventional FCS . These crossing events prove exceptionally useful in distinguishing between possible mechanisms , enforcing the utility of this approach to inves - tigate lipid dynamics in live cells . CONCLUSIONS We demonstrate that FSCS is an appropriate tool for moni - toring the dynamics of an environmentally sensitive lipid probe within a dynamic membrane environment . Mecha - nisms underlying the ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuations are proposed , and we ﬁnd no single mechanism is sufﬁcient to describe the observed ﬂuctuations ; at minimum , a combination of two mechanisms—probe motion through distinct membrane domain environments and motion of domains through the membrane—is necessary to qualitatively recapitulate the correlation behavior observed . Regardless of mechanism , these experiments show that domains must exist as distinct environments to yield the observed spectrally separable dye signals . Further , these environments are likely to exist on the length scale of tens of nanometers and persist for at least the timescale of the autocorrelation decay i . e . , 5 . 90 and 14 . 69 ms for the ordered and disordered phases , respectively ( Fig . 1 G ) . These results conﬁrm the presence of distinct lipid phases in live cells and that these domains can ﬂuctuate on biologically relevant timescales . SUPPORTING MATERIAL SupportingMaterialsandMethods , nineﬁgures , andonetableareavailableat http : / / www . biophysj . org / biophysj / supplemental / S0006 - 3495 ( 18 ) 30588 - 5 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS J . M . K . and A . B . designed and performed the experiments and initial anal - ysis . P . R . N . performed the analysis and simulation , wrote the manuscript , and generated the ﬁgures . K . G . conceived the study and wrote the manu - script . Y . M . contributed to the manuscript preparation . FSCS Reveals Live Cell Lipid Dynamics Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018 2863 ACKNOWLEGEMENTS The authors gratefully acknowledge Andrey Klymchenko and Yves M (cid:3) ely for their provision of the NR12S dye essential for this work . K . G . and P . R . N . acknowledge funding from the Australian Research Coun - cil Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging ( CE140100011 to K . G . ) , Australian Research Council ( LP140100967 to K . G . and P . R . N . and DP130100269 to K . G . ) , and National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia ( 1059278 to K . G . ) . A . B . acknowledges the support from CZ . 02 . 1 . 01 / 0 . 0 / 0 . 0 / 16 _ 013 / 0001775 funded by the Ministry of Education , Youth and Sports , Czech Republic . J . M . K . and Y . M . each acknowledge University International Postgraduate Awards from the University of New South Wales , Australia . REFERENCES 1 . Simons , K . , and D . Toomre . 2000 . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 : 31 – 39 . 2 . Simons , K . , and E . Ikonen . 1997 . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature . 387 : 569 – 572 . 3 . Kusumi , A . , H . Ike , . , T . Fujiwara . 2005 . Single - molecule tracking of membrane molecules : plasma membrane compartmentalization and dynamic assembly of raft - philic signaling molecules . Semin . Immunol . 17 : 3 – 21 . 4 . Goswami , D . , K . Gowrishankar , . , S . Mayor . 2008 . Nanoclusters of GPI - anchored proteins are formed by cortical actin - driven activity . Cell . 135 : 1085 – 1097 . 5 . Gowrishankar , K . , S . Ghosh , . , M . Rao . 2012 . Active remodeling of cortical actin regulates spatiotemporal organization of cell surface mol - ecules . Cell . 149 : 1353 – 1367 . 6 . Carquin , M . , L . D’Auria , . , D . Tyteca . 2016 . Recent progress on lipid lateral heterogeneity in plasma membranes : from rafts to submicromet - ric domains . Prog . Lipid Res . 62 : 1 – 24 . 7 . Dietrich , C . , L . A . Bagatolli , . , E . Gratton . 2001 . Lipid rafts reconsti - tuted in model membranes . Biophys . J . 80 : 1417 – 1428 . 8 . Kucherak , O . A . , S . Oncul , . , A . S . Klymchenko . 2010 . Switchable nile red - based probe for cholesterol and lipid order at the outer leaﬂet of biomembranes . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 132 : 4907 – 4916 . 9 . Jin , L . , A . C . Millard , . , L . M . Loew . 2006 . Characterization and application of a new optical probe for membrane lipid domains . Bio - phys . J . 90 : 2563 – 2575 . 10 . Owen , D . M . , C . Rentero , . , K . Gaus . 2011 . Quantitative imaging of membrane lipid order in cells and organisms . Nat . Protoc . 7 : 24 – 35 . 11 . Gaus , K . , T . Zech , and T . Harder . 2006 . Visualizing membrane microdomains by Laurdan 2 - photon microscopy . Mol . Membr . Biol . 23 : 41 – 48 . 12 . Gaus , K . , E . Chklovskaia , . , T . Harder . 2005 . Condensation of the plasma membrane at the site of T lymphocyte activation . J . Cell Biol . 171 : 121 – 131 . 13 . Gaus , K . , S . Le Lay , . , M . A . Schwartz . 2006 . Integrin - mediated adhesion regulates membrane order . J . Cell Biol . 174 : 725 – 734 . 14 . Le Saux , G . , A . Magenau , . , K . Gaus . 2011 . Spacing of integrin ligands inﬂuences signal transduction in endothelial cells . Biophys . J . 101 : 764 – 773 . 15 . Ro¨mer , W . , L . Berland , . , L . Johannes . 2007 . Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invaginations for its uptake into cells . Nature . 450 : 670 – 675 . 16 . Ro¨mer , W . , L . L . Pontani , . , L . Johannes . 2010 . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocy - tosis . Cell . 140 : 540 – 553 . 17 . Lakshminarayan , R . , C . Wunder , . , L . Johannes . 2014 . Galectin - 3 drives glycosphingolipid - dependent biogenesis of clathrin - independent carriers . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 : 595 – 606 . 18 . Owen , D . M . , and K . Gaus . 2013 . Imaging lipid domains in cell mem - branes : the advent of super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy . Front . Plant Sci . 4 : 503 . 19 . Owen , D . M . , D . J . Williamson , . , K . Gaus . 2012 . Sub - resolution lipid domains exist in the plasma membrane and regulate protein diffusion and distribution . Nat . Commun . 3 : 1256 . 20 . McIntosh , T . J . 2015 . Stepping between membrane microdomains . Bio - phys . J . 108 : 783 – 784 . 21 . Koukalova´ , A . , M . Amaro , . , R . (cid:1) Sachl . 2017 . Lipid driven nanodo - mains in giant lipid vesicles are ﬂuid and disordered . Sci . Rep . 7 : 5460 . 22 . Armstrong , C . L . , D . Marquardt , . , M . C . Rheinst € adter . 2013 . The observation of highly ordered domains in membranes with cholesterol . PLoS One . 8 : e66162 . 23 . Bezlyepkina , N . , R . S . Gracia ` , . , R . Dimova . 2013 . Phase diagram and tie - line determination for the ternary mixture DOPC / eSM / cholesterol . Biophys . J . 104 : 1456 – 1464 . 24 . Goh , S . L . , J . J . Amazon , and G . W . Feigenson . 2013 . Toward a better raft model : modulated phases in the four - component bilayer , DSPC / DOPC / POPC / CHOL . Biophys . J . 104 : 853 – 862 . 25 . Rentero , C . , T . Zech , . , K . Gaus . 2008 . Functional implications of plasma membrane condensation for T cell activation . PLoS One . 3 : e2262 . 26 . Nielsen , L . K . , T . Bjørnholm , and O . G . Mouritsen . 2000 . Fluctuations caught in the act . Nature . 404 : 352 . 27 . Veatch , S . L . , P . Cicuta , . , B . Baird . 2008 . Critical ﬂuctuations in plasma membrane vesicles . ACS Chem . Biol . 3 : 287 – 293 . 28 . Wawrezinieck , L . , H . Rigneault , . , P . F . Lenne . 2005 . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy diffusion laws to probe the submicron cell membrane organization . Biophys . J . 89 : 4029 – 4042 . 29 . Ruprecht , V . , S . Wieser , . , G . J . Sch € utz . 2011 . Spot variation ﬂuores - cence correlation spectroscopy allows for superresolution chronoscopy of conﬁnement times in membranes . Biophys . J . 100 : 2839 – 2845 . 30 . Honigmann , A . , V . Mueller , . , C . Eggeling . 2014 . Scanning STED - FCS reveals spatiotemporal heterogeneity of lipid interaction in the plasma membrane of living cells . Nat . Commun . 5 : 5412 . 31 . Eggeling , C . , C . Ringemann , . , S . W . Hell . 2009 . Direct observation of the nanoscale dynamics of membrane lipids in a living cell . Nature . 457 : 1159 – 1162 . 32 . Benda , A . , P . Kapusta , . , K . Gaus . 2014 . Fluorescence spectral corre - lation spectroscopy ( FSCS ) for probes with highly overlapping emis - sion spectra . Opt . Express . 22 : 2973 – 2988 . 33 . Bo¨hmer , M . , M . Wahl , . , J . Enderlein . 2002 . Time - resolved ﬂuores - cence correlation spectroscopy . Chem . Phys . Lett . 353 : 439 – 445 . 34 . Kapusta , P . , R . Macha´ (cid:1) n , . , M . Hof . 2012 . Fluorescence lifetime correlation spectroscopy ( FLCS ) : concepts , applications and outlook . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 13 : 12890 – 12910 . 35 . Knight , J . D . , M . G . Lerner , . , J . J . Falke . 2010 . Single molecule diffu - sion of membrane - bound proteins : window into lipid contacts and bilayer dynamics . Biophys . J . 99 : 2879 – 2887 . 36 . Lagerholm , B . C . , D . M . Andrade , . , C . Eggeling . 2017 . Convergence of lateral dynamic measurements in the plasma membrane of live cells from single particle tracking and STED - FCS . J . Phys . D Appl . Phys . 50 : 063001 . 37 . Fujiwara , T . , K . Ritchie , . , A . Kusumi . 2002 . Phospholipids undergo hop diffusion in compartmentalized cell membrane . J . Cell Biol . 157 : 1071 – 1081 . 38 . Machta , B . B . , S . Papanikolaou , . , S . L . Veatch . 2011 . Minimal model of plasma membrane heterogeneity requires coupling cortical actin to criticality . Biophys . J . 100 : 1668 – 1677 . 39 . Trimble , W . S . , and S . Grinstein . 2015 . Barriers to the free diffusion of proteins and lipids in the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 208 : 259 – 271 . 40 . Burns , M . C . , M . Nouri , and S . L . Veatch . 2016 . Spot sizevariation FCS in simulations of the 2D Ising model . J . Phys . DAppl . Phys . 49 : 214001 . Nicovich et al . 2864 Biophysical Journal 114 , 2855 – 2864 , June 19 , 2018