IST - Africa 2016 Conference Proceedings Paul Cunningham and Miriam Cunningham ( Eds ) IIMC International Information Management Corporation , 2016 ISBN : 978 - 1 - 905824 - 55 - 7 Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 1 of 13 RootIO : ICT + Telephony for Grassroots Radio Chris CSÍKSZENTMIHÁLYI , Jude MUKUNDANE Madeira Interactive Technologies Institute , Madeira E - mail : csik @ m - iti . org , jude . mukundane @ m - iti . org Abstract : Communities across Africa depend on radio for access to information , often as their primary source of news and information . Given its importance , surprisingly little ICT work has focused on improving radio . Contemporary ICTs have the potential to catalyze radical changes in ownership models , facilitate greater linguistic and cultural diversity , increase inclusion , and allow for the types of major innovations we have seen in music , television , gaming , or other media in the last decade . The RootIO project set out to test some of these possibilities by building hyperlocal low - cost , low - power radio stations . This paper presents an argument for community media as a focus of ICT , a summary of our research and design process , a technical description of the free / open software and hardware platform we have built , and a description of some early findings from field testing the system . Keywords : Radio , Community Media , Telephony and Internet for Radio . 1 . Introduction Media constitutes a critical form of community infrastructure , allowing for the flow of information into , within , and out of a community . Like plumbing or electric cable , a community information platform moves information to where it is needed , but it is often overlooked , or treated as a means rather than an end . The topology of an information structure — be it a newspaper , Facebook , or word of mouth — can be analyzed to understand the interests of those who instantiated and maintain it . Conversely , a new information structure can be built to accommodate a particular set of interests , as well as engender different balances of power and resources . In the developing world , information is often seen as a resource to be provided by NGOs or government experts to people , rather than as a resource to conduct information between people . The exchange of information between members of a community can be extremely important . Local advertisements create business and efficiencies . Birth and death announcements strengthen social fabric . Community discourse and deliberation can lead to the solution of community problems . In emergencies , local responses can be enhanced and coordinated through local media [ 1 ] . It is a significant oversight of many development communications platforms that they ignore or minimize local connectivity , focusing instead on transfer from experts to communities . In contrast , the most dramatically successful information platforms in the developing world - - including GSM , Facebook , and now WhatsApp - - are exceptions to this rule , allowing ( despite other legitimate concerns ) peer communication . The speed with which such systems have successfully scaled is worth noting ; WhatsApp has grown to 420M global users in only four years , now including 78 % of mobile Internet users in South Africa [ 2 ] . The success of these systems is in part because they allow users to supply content to , and communicate with , one another . They only serve a small number of users in any part of Africa , however , because mobile Internet penetration is relatively low . We believe that ICTs can help to engender sustainable local media in rural Africa , especially when attention is paid to community - sourced information . The digital divide , Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 2 of 13 however , remains a significant challenge . While handset ownership is growing , handset usage does not resemble the “always on , ” constant 4G scenario most app designers assume . Keeping a battery charged is difficult off - the - grid , and keeping credits on a phone is not necessarily a good investment [ 3 ] . Phones are often off or out of credit for much of the day in rural areas ; radios , however , are on . An extensive existing network of radio receivers exists ; radio is very popular ; it can be heard while working ; it does not require literacy ; it costs nothing to receive ; it can be multi - lingual . But radio only fills a fraction of a community’s information needs because most stations are typically regional or national . One channel for a million or more people only allows a handful of voices on air . The bigger the station , the smaller ( relatively ) the community or listener . To bring radio into communities in an inclusive way thus means systematically addressing the structure of radio ownership , and increasing the interplay of radio and ICTs to allow greater community connectivity . We have been developing the RootIO project with these goals in mind . In its simplest form , RootIO combines : 1 . a low power FM radio station transmitter and antenna 2 . a solar panel and batteries to run the station with little cost or reliance on external power 3 . a smart phone capable of mixing live and recorded content , including voice streams playing over GSM 4 . a cloud data and telephony server capable of sending programming content to one or many smartphones ; placing , receiving , and connecting live calls ; and aggregating audio content from a variety of sources . We will next extend our discussion of the limitations of radio ownership ; continue by discussing software platforms and commons - based production ; and finally describe RootIO , an ICT platform approach to highly connected low power community radio – in detail . 1 . 1 Radio and “Old Media” Radio is the preeminent form of broadcast media in the developing world . It inherits its structure from the era of broadcast . Liberalization in the 1990s brought dramatic change to most countries in Africa , significantly increasing the number and variety of stations . For example , Uganda diversified from one broadcaster with three stations to over 200 licensed stations [ 4 ] . 89 % of Ugandans cite radio as their primary source of news , and over 97 % of families have access to a working receiver [ 5 ] . The structure of most stations has remained static : they follow the broadcast imperative to grow as large as possible , capture as many listeners as possible , and sell the most expensive advertising possible . While nearly every station in Uganda will describe itself a community station , listenership for a single station in rural areas might exceed 1 million people . Advertisers are not drawn from the same community as the listener ; they are primarily multinational telcos and beverage companies . As a recent report explained , “Many stations that describe themselves as ‘community’ radios do not meet the classic definition of the concept . Most consider themselves community stations merely by virtue of their location in rural areas but can hardly be described as ‘owned and controlled by communities . ’” [ 6 ] Many obstacles prevent radio from being an optimal source of comm unity information , most stemming from station ownership structure and the legacy of broadcast media . To run a typical station in Africa can require more than 20 employees , offices and studios , a large expensive transmitter , diesel generator for power outages , and mobility for reporters . Radio Apac , a small to medium - sized station in Uganda , reported its initial cost as roughly $ 102 , 250USD in setup fees , with a $ 17 , 740USD annual operating budget [ 7 ] . Apac , a self - described community station with a 300 - kilowatt station broadcasts over a massive swath of the country : its functions and ambitions are clearly regional . ( For reference , low - power community FM radio in the USA is limited to 0 . 1 - kilowatt . ) To be sure , regional radio fulfills Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 3 of 13 a vital role , but a typical mayor or a dressmaker in any of the hundreds of villages within Apac’s catchment is never going to be heard on its airwaves . Founded by government ministers , members of parliament , church ministers , or commercially interested parties , most stations promote regional or national business , political , and religious interests . As the Uganda Communication Commission acknowledges in its rural development charter , “Market forces alone are not adequate to ensure equitable distribution of communication services . ” [ RCDF Policy 2011 - 15 ] 1 . 2 Participation Participating in radio is prohibitively expensive for most members of a rural community . It costs money to go to a studio . Even if you are welcomed , to participate in a “call in” program requires more credits than most farmers burn through in a month or more . And since the cost of running most large stations is high , the cost of participation goes up accordingly . In the developing world programs are frequently underwritten and run by NGOs , who train expert presenters and essentially rent program slots . This has led to what at least one commentator has called “NGOization” : “Content is often closely tied to the programmatic agenda of NGOs and the imperative of putting together a ' fixed - point - chart " of more and more hours of daily broadcast forces many stations to a stultifying adoption of standardized genre and format . ” [ 8 ] Early research into “call out” programs indicates that they increase interaction , diversity , and the effectiveness of the communication channel . In a call out model , listeners call in to a station but the call is not answered , yet the number is recorded . The station then returns the call . This is a wide - spread telecommunications pattern globally , called “flashing” or “beeping” in Uganda . In the case of a “call out” program it puts the financial burden on the station ; however the station is likely to be able to buy bulk credit at a greatly reduced cost . “AFRRI found that call - outs to farmers can significantly affect farming adoption rate of agricultural improvements , ( up to 14 % ) , increase their level of knowledge about the agricultural practice , ( up to 50 % ) , and improve their overall listenership ( up to 22 % ) , when compared with stations that do not make call - outs to farmers . ” [ 9 ] Our own fieldwork indicates that very few farmers call in to regional stations during agricultural shows ; the ones who do are highly capitalized and tend to steer the direction of radio programs toward their problems ( cotton , tractors ) rather than those of the other 99 % of farmers ( cassava mosaic disease , goats ) . Inclusion across income , gender , and age is important for community media ; small changes in format or economics can significantly increase interaction . While attempts have been made to lower the cost of radio stations [ 7 ] using a simple microphone and transmitter or ICTs , “a station in a suitcase , ” these prototypes have typically thrown away much participatory potential in the process . The minimal stations have not proven able to engender much community interest or provide much information value . We believe that a more successful approach might come from promoting more connectivity between listeners and stations , and between stations and stations , rather than less . We now describe how peer production and decreased communications costs have led to significant changes in other information topographies , and why we chose to build a radio system that could leverage similar network effects . 1 . 3 Commons Production and Software Platforms As mentioned earlier , many successful new media have taken a platform approach to the creation of content . Such systems do not follow the broadcast model of radio , television , or newspapers but rather rely on user - created content . We see similar trends in the creation of software or similar informational goods and services , which are created not by a single Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 4 of 13 company or corporation but rather by a distributed group of co - creators . The economics of these approaches are still being investigated , but many examples have shown that distributed production can be used for “ public good” projects in areas that are not well served by commercial business models [ 10 ] . The Free Software movement ( sometimes called Open Source ) is one early and important example [ 11 ] . Baldwin and von Hippel have called the new forms of production enabled by decreased communications costs “open collaborative innovation , ” in contrast to the forms of innovation characterized the industrial and broadcast era [ 12 ] . David Hess has noted that cheap communications have allowed various groups that are not served by markets to collaborate to produce material solutions : these groups might include patients who suffer a disease to rare to be considered a profitable market by pharmaceutical manufacturers ; people globally impacted by a problem that is difficult to solve ; or even the politically underrepresented . He calls these “technology or product oriented movements” ( TPOMs ) [ 13 ] . Whereas social movements typically advocate for legislation , litigation , or other traditional civil remedies to their issues , the members of of TPOMs consolidate creativity and resources to create a product or service that might benefit them . Internet users now routinely turn to blogs , Twitter , Reddit , or Facebook to find out information from their communities and peers . Facebook claims over 800 million users each day ; it is international , many of its users are from “developing” nations . This is largely because Facebook creates a framework , and users generate the information for each other . A user in Kampala will see a completely different set of jokes , memes , news stories , and images than a user in Los Angeles . Information for a Facebook user is usually contextually relevant ; with over a few dozen friends it will probably also be more timely than broadcast media . Software platforms , then , are a type of information product that can scale tremendously at relatively low cost . They can be developed agnostically of traditional markets and organizations ; while they do require money and resources to run , many do so based on financial contributions ( Wikipedia ) or simply volunteer labor , sometimes by users who find ways in which the platform may contribute indirectly to their income . Importantly , these extra - market systems can forward social or political agendas that no corporation could , and run irrespective of a profit motive . RootIO engages with these new means of production in two ways . First , it is developed in a free / open license with contributions from many people outside the RootIO project , and relies on projects in the Free Software ecosystem . Licensing costs are thus zero , and anyone can clone or improve the project . Second , we note that agricultural communities have many forms of commons - based ownership and collaborative management . When Nobel Prize winning economist Elinor Ostrom sought to understand commons - based organizations , she looked to fishermen and shepherds , who seek individual profits but share commons resources like pastures and seas . Her work has been of fundamental importance to free software and commons - based ICT initiatives . We embrace the possibility that ICT infrastructure owned communally is a viable an alternative to private or government stewardship . In Uganda , for instance , the community savings trusts ( SACCOs ) are an excellent example of the kind of ownership model that would allow a radio station to be an unmitigated community resource . 2 . Objectives RootIO was designed on a technology stack to reduce the hardware and labor components that are required to operate a typical radio station , while increasing its connectivity and flexibility . If successful , it will allow for sustainable radio stations that are small enough to be used for intra - community communication without overly relying on NGO programming or telco ads . A successful station will not grow , but rather “divide” to create new stations in neighboring communities . This large objective is constituted by the following smaller and more targeted objectives : Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 5 of 13  Detail a technology stack that can be used by grass - root technicians to build a low power FM radio station with low barrier to entry  Base the stack on free / open software and locally sourced off - the - shelf components wherever possible , to allow for community innovation and adaptation  Develop an online platform and telephony / voice interfaces that can be used to manage content and scheduling for a low power FM radio station ; to distribute programs between stations in similar linguistic areas ; to aggregate content from the Internet  Allow for “scaffolded” community participation and engagement to grow  Develop a communication model that allows for affordable , intuitive , auditable , and balanced access to the FM radio station by members of the community  Within the system , allow for multiple forms of revenue generation that can help to sustain the community - based low power FM radio station  Transfer costs from farmers to local businesspeople and if necessary NGOs  To make such systems robust and with low downtime , and low maintenance costs These objectives seek to both make radio stations small enough that they can be used within small communities for communication , while also eliminating the factors that make it necessary for radio stations to grow in order to thrive . 3 . Project History RootIO began as a partnership between a telecommunications engineer with successful engagements in large - scale NGO - led development projects , and a technologist and professor with a background in Civic Media . After initial fieldwork that included many interviews , visits with radio stations , and discussions with journalists , we began to proof the concept using rapid and recursive prototyping techniques . In late 2013 we hired several coders , and began the co - development of the software with a range of Ugandan actors . We also began to approach the Uganda Communications Commission to secure licenses . The RootIO team , upon licensing from the UCC , embarked on a process of co - creation and community information needs assessment , jointly formulating programming templates with the input of the communities that would eventually become recipients of RootIO stations . We sought to greatly reduces the operational costs for RootIO stations , liberating them from the need to serve relatively large populations in order to thrive . Nevertheless , radio listeners demand “produced” information - the kind that necessitates production and editorial teams . RootIO sought and exploited partnerships with organizations that are in the business of sourcing and producing media from the grassroots , such as Uganda Radio Network ( URN ) , a news house with stringers covering the entire country . RootIO also sought partnership with Northern Uganda Media Club ( NUMEC ) , a regional organization in northern Uganda that specializes , among other things , in the dissemination of media generation skills at the grassroots level . Working with UNICEF’s ICT for Development team , a few communities were identified as potential hosts for RootIO stations . A local expert in journalism , media , and development joined to help build a ground operation to gather local news , conduct local trainings in journalism and public speech , and launch the stations . We were granted gratis experimental licenses in December 2014 and launched four stations in May / June 2015 . Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 6 of 13 Figure 1 : A Map Showing the Location of the Four RootIO Stations in Northern Uganda 4 . Technology Description RootIO stations run on two discrete technology stacks . 1 ) Stations are located in the community : they are housed on a primarily sub - $ 100USD Android smart phone running a complex app connected by headphone jack to cheap Chinese radio transmitter , a solar system and an antenna . 2 ) A linux server handles station coordination , hosts audio content and telephony , and through a web interfaces allow for the upload of content , definition of shows , and creation of schedules according to which these shows should be aired . These two distinct stacks work in tandem , inter - linked by mobile voice and data , which allows for the delivery of pre - recorded material for later broadcast , streaming of audio messages over GSM ( voice ) calls , upload of system diagnostics from the community station to the web API as well as update of broadcast schedules for the mobile phone serving as a studio . Both station and cloud development have been conducted according to free software techniques using public source repositories that may be found here : [ https : / / github . com / rootio ] . As we are in testing , the system is not turnkey - deployable , though other groups have successfully deployed it . We are simplifying the installation process over the next six months . The station software is Android - native Java available for download in the Google Play store and runs on any Samsung Pocket Galaxy with later firmware . The cloud server runs on a GNU / Linux stack , tested on Ubuntu 14 . 04 and relying on Freeswitch , Flask , and a variety of other free / open software . Information on deployment is available on the Github site , and a VirtualBox image is also available upon request . Deploying the server is not trivial and not intended for community members , but rather organizations that have a competent GNU / Linux system administrator . Most critically , to interface with telephony the server must have access to SIP endpoints , or use a device like a GOIP ( SIP to SIM interface ) . In the former case , SIP endpoints are not easy to acquire in Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 7 of 13 much of the world , though services like Plivo and Twilio are making it simple in the US and Europe . We anticipate that most server hosts will serve regional or national networks . To better understand how these components interact , we present a few use scenarios and how these technologies interact to enable the functionality of a RootIO station . Figure 2 : A RootIO station setup in Patongo , Northern Uganda 4 . 1 News Broadcasts In order to broadcast news to the community , a pre - recorded audio file of a news bulletin is uploaded to the off - site web server by a community - level journalist . A news show is created through the web portal specifying the news file as the file to be played during this show . When the time for the news show arrives , the off - site web server will call the on - site mobile phone , which , after recognition of the phone number used by the web server , will automatically answer the phone call and broadcast the news file that is being broadcast by the web server . 4 . 2 Community Talk Show In the event of a community talk show , the program is created on the web portal specifying among other things the duration of the talk show and the phone number of the person hosting the talk show . The show is then scheduled to air on a station of interest . When the time scheduled for the talk show arrives , the host receives a phone call over the GSM network , and upon confirming through DTMF that they are ready to host the show , their call is bridged to the mobile phone on - site acting as the studio . The call of the host is then broadcast to the community . The host has options , by pressing a number on their phone during the show , to call back community members who registered interest by “beeping” the station so that they can participate , to take a short break , and also to call in an expert on the subject of discussion . 4 . 3 Recording an Advertisement or Announcement Should a member of the community wish to record an ad or announcement to be aired over the radio , they would call a number that is publicized on the radio station . Upon calling , they are prompted to choose whether to record an ad or an announcement . Upon choosing any of the two options , the caller is then prompted to enter the number of days for which the message should be broadcast . Upon entering the number of days , the user can listen to the message he or she has recorded . Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 8 of 13 Figure 3 : Selection of an area on a map to simulcast an emergency broadcast 4 . 4 Simulcasting and Emergency Broadcasting In the event that it is necessary to send an emergency broadcast simultaneously to multiple stations , the RootIO web interface caters for the option to select an area of interest on a map , record a message , and send the message to all stations in the area selected . In the absence of Internet , it is possible for a member of the community to call the station directly and if their number is on the list of allowed numbers , interrupt the schedule of the station to pass on an urgent message to communities . 4 . 5 Rebroadcasting a Show from Another Station RootIO stations are designed to co - exist with existing FM radio stations and supplement their functionality . In the event that an FM radio station in the area is broadcasting a show of interest , RootIO stations can relay the show by tuning the FM radio station on the Android mobile phone to the frequency of the radio station whose transmission is to be relayed . The RootIO station would then relay the broadcast on its own frequency but sourced from another radio station . 4 . 6 Relaying Podcasts and Externally Sourced Media Given the availability of diverse podcasts and serialized media on the Internet , the web server features downloaders for several standard formats and websites that allow for the download of audio information from websites of publishers . Similar to news files , these audio files are also streamed to the RootIO station over a GSM connection as scheduled . 5 . Developments and Results Soon after launching the project , we requested licenses from the Uganda Communications Commission . Every country has different licensing regimes ; the FM licensing process is usually neither trivial nor quick . In our case , we asked for reduced fees because the stations were small , and the community investment would be too large to make low power FM sustainable . The UCC asked us to justify our request with a gap analysis ; we were able to draw heavily from the UCC’s own Rural Communications Development Policy for support . Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 9 of 13 Key to the application is the specification of transmitter location , height of antenna , gain of antenna , and power of transmitter . The UCC chose to give us one frequency , and asked us to provide from a list of potential sites from which they would pick . After a little over a year we were granted four stations in Northern Uganda , far enough from each other that there was no chance of radio interference . Stations were built by a local electronics enterprise [ http : / / www . logelproject . org / ] based on our designs , using locally available COTS materials , with access to a model prototype . Antennas were fabricated from local telco wire and agricultural piping . All fabrication can be done with minimal hand tools . The one component not available locally was an FM transmitter , an inexpensive unit purchased on the web and shipped from China . Anyone interested in deploying RootIO stations should probably work with a local electronics importer to stock these units . Antennas towers of 15m were designed and installed by a Kampala company . Unfortunately , the design was overly complex and material intensive , and we commenced too soon before installation to iterate . Each antenna tower cost as much as the transmitter and solar power systems combined . We are working with a team of mechanical engineering students at Makerere to reduce this price by an order of magnitude . Solar installation took roughly two days for one professional installer , while station installation with wiring to antenna took roughly the same time . Solar and station installation could be conducted in parallel . Tower installation took two workers roughly three days , but involved a concrete pour that had to cure for roughly two weeks . All work was conducted by Ugandan professionals . During installation , a regionally - based journalist and media lecturer led community training sessions with 10 - 20 volunteers from each site . These included technical training on conducting a program , but also discussions of telecommunications law and responsible public speech . These communities in Northern Uganda are still recovering from the nearly 20 years of guerrilla ware between the Ugandan Army and the infamous LRA , so peaceable speech was emphasized . The trainers also worked with the site hosts to understand the station hardware and build the initial station schedule . As each antenna tower dried , our hosts organized a launch event and broadcasts commenced . All four RootIO stations have developed traction at different rates . Our sample is too small to draw much of a conclusion , but certain factors allowed us to roughly predict which one would be most successful . Our pilot sites were chosen by the national regulator , a process that was out of our control . In rank order , most successful to least ( based on participation rates , original programs , and indicators of sustainability ) : one host organization is a CBO ( Community Based Organization ) , two others are local sub - county office compounds , and the last is the local office of an NGO . After our initial visits , the CBO , in Patongo village , clearly stood out as the organization most enthusiastic to use a station . They were good storytellers , and their mission was linked to community awareness of HIV / AIDS . Patongo is a remote community , far from the regional commercial stations . Our recent review indicates :  Up to 5 original programs per day with different hosts  Up to 35 callers per community talk show or call - in show  Hundreds of community announcements per month  Significant revenue generation for the community and local businesses  Strong community popularity , with significant market share  Aired more than 350 news reports sourced from the BBC and local media houses  Broadcast more than 1200 local news bulletins  Hardware for all stations has successfully broadcast for 9 months , 24 hours a day , with no failure There are also problems and hurdles : Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 10 of 13  The station relies extensively on GSM which drops after rain  There is a relatively high turnover of volunteers  Call - outs and scheduled calls to hosts are said to be sometimes unreliable  Advertisers have approached the stations with scripts : there is no one in the community able to produce these scripts yet  RootIO does not yet have an automated payment system  There is no automatic system to prove that advertisements have played , leading to disagreements with advertisers as to whether they have or not There is significant room for improvement in participation . If RootIO is to succeed we will need to cover more eventualities , such as payment systems . A method of selecting appropriate sites is critical , as is further community training . Still , these results are promising . Patongo has its first electronic community media platform , it is on a path to sustainability , and our hypothesis that a peer production platform would work even at the level of an extremely small rural community seems likely to be proven . 6 . Industrial Significance and Eventual Benefits RootIO stations have the potential to benefit the stakeholders who host them , content provider volunteers from the community ; advertisers ; station hosts ; cloud operators ; associated NGOs and CBOs ; and listeners . In 6 . 1 we will elaborate on a few of these roles , using examples from a focus group recently conducted at the station in Patongo . In 6 . 2 we will discuss longer term benefits and implications . 6 . 1 . 1 Benefits for Station Hosts ‘‘ The radio has increased visibility for Gwoke Keni . This has now become a meeting point . People say ‘‘let’s meet at the radio , ’’ - Okech Latworo , Chairman Gwoke Keni . 1 ) Entities that own community stations have generated significant revenue from local ads and announcements . One host , an HIV / AIDS CBO named Gwoke Keni , has opened a bank account that by has contained as much as 500 , 000UGX ( about 150USD ) at one time from ads and announcements . 2 ) Gwoke Keni has been able to spread their own message extensively through the community . It had previously paid 875 , 000UGX ( controlled for inflation ) twice per year for a regional radio slot ; this message was dispersed throughout the greater region , even while the CBO only served one small rural community . The ads alone could have paid for an entire RootIO station . They now broadcast several hours per week while making revenue . 3 ) Community host organizations also incur costs , mostly indirect ones : they must provide space ; host an antenna pole ; must consider security of the installation ; and are accountable for messages to local and regulatory authorities ( the only complaint about content was proven to have originated from an unrelated commercial radio station ) . They may also accrue some telephony and transport charges for organization . On the other hand , in addition to various new revenue streams there are indirect benefits , like community good will . When asked what RootIO could do differently in the future , hosts have suggested that training , which had been limited to guidelines on broadcast law and responsible speech and journalism , should also include clear marketing strategies for local revenue generation . 6 . 1 . 2 Benefits for Station Presenters To better scale , a central tenet of our project has been that community volunteers — either hosts organizations or on - air presenters — are not paid . Like any peer production system , Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 11 of 13 successful contributors may reap indirect monetary , in - kind , promotional , and social benefits . This appears to be holding true for RootIO station presenters . 1 ) Professionals whose jobs include interface with the community may use the radio to better promote their work . For example , in several communities Agricultural Extension Officers are using the program to conduct training or spread news they previously would do in person , traveling from village to village . From our early analysis , these are some of the best organized and most information dense of the local programs , because these presenters are professional educators with prepared materials . 2 ) Other professionals can extend their job to have a public aspect , in order to contribute to the community but at the same time promote their business . Veterinarians might host a program on goat health , where they help “triage” community problems and recommend farmers take at - risk kids for professional advice . Such roles run the risk of abuse , but so far the stations have avoided complaints of such behavior . 6 . 1 . 3 Benefits for Community Enterprises “ Oluge senior secondary school came and placed an advert on the radio . It is a school that used to get only about three students from Patongo but this time they got 22 students . They assembled under this very mango tree where we are sitting and it’s where the school hired a truck from Lira to come and pick them . ” - John Bosco Kenneth Okot , Radio Host 1 ) Local businesses can advertise for the first time ; this is linking people to products and services , and generating new revenue . 2 ) Patongo Community Radio broadcasts commodity prices from transient vendors every Tuesday , a market day . Without the station , focus group members said , they would not have been able to broadcast local market information specific to the town . 3 ) In addition to businesses , the local government routinely uses the RootIO station for its announcements . So do local religious leaders , several of whom have programs . 6 . 1 . 4 Benefits for Local Community Listeners ‘‘A man lost his cow . He brought the announcement at the radio and we read it only three times then we got a call from a listener who said he had found the cow . ’’ 1 ) Stations act as an audio “Craig’s List” for the community . There are free announcements for deaths . Births , weddings , and other announcements cost 2 , 000UGX ( $ 0 . 60 ) : other stations charge 5 , 000 to 10 , 000UGX . The majority of announcements have shifted from the regional capital , Pader , to the local radio . 2 ) Stations are playing a variety of helpful information , including in topics like business training , farming , agriculture , sexual and reproductive health , and water sanitation . As importantly , we would argue , they are providing sports , music , prayer , and comedy . 3 ) Participants in the focus group said older people in the community prefer listening to local programming / events , radio announcements etc while younger people like it when the station broadcasts information about European football . Market women ( traders ) based at the local market in Patongo call the station the most . 4 ) A variety of local events are telecast , from Easter celebrations to town meetings . “There is a lot more local sport on the radio . For example even now I am from a sports event which I have already talked about on the radio , ’’ said Alex Obol , a volunteer presenter . He came in late for the focus group because he was at the football pitch watching and relaying on the radio a soccer match between two schools from Patongo . 6 . 2 Long Term Significance , Scaling It should be clear that we hope to scale the system and to continue to develop it even as we deploy further . We believe that new digital systems take some of the pressure off of FM as a Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 12 of 13 dominant form of regional mass media , perhaps allowing a space for community media to grow . Recently , British and French FM regulators relaxed their rules to allow a proliferation of community stations ; hundreds of new low power stations have been created in each country . We believe that RootIO could service this next phase of FM , and add the many benefits of ICTs . As a social enterprise , our project is committed to a strong ( AGPL ) free / libre model of development , and to community - initiated , community - owned stations . We have had numerous requests by NGOs , businesses , churches , community saving trusts ( SACCOS ) , and expats to start community stations : these are exactly the entities who should be investing in community media . At the same time , we believe that a range of NGOs , foundations , and individuals can contribute to the free / libre development of the software stacks . We recognize , however , that the complexity of serving telephony services , especially in the Global South , makes running the cloud side of the project difficult . We expect the RootIO organization to offer this service , including negotiating with local telcos or server farms for necessary access , and to coordinate further development of the project . 7 . Conclusions and Recommendations FM radio is the most pervasive medium in most of the developing world , but its general business model has changed little in the last hundred years . RootIO represents an orthogonal approach , embracing FM’s constraints , reducing its range and expense , and hybridizing it with ICTs . We have drawn inspiration from Internet models of collaborative peer production and cloud scaffolding , and also from community radio . As a recommendation , national regulators need to look into the issuance of very low power FM radio licenses . Some regulators have made great strides in accommodating low power FM radio stations , while other licensing regimes have no provision for these kinds of stations . We believe that community owned low power FM offers great value , regardless of our own project . ICT4D projects are often initiated by NGOs or governments with particular programs , and the commissioning entities are their actual clients . Communications are modeled as a topography where experts at the top feeding information to rural communities , or rural communities are resources from which experts can extract information . Such systems are brittle , and the developing world is awash with information from above that has largely proved of little interest or relevance . Peer - oriented intra - community communications are an end in themselves , not a means for pushing expert information . They provide economic opportunity , increase resilience , and increase local autonomy and problem solving . Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the Knight Foundation and Resilient Africa Network for their essential support , as well as LARSYS and M - ITI . There have been too many allies and colleagues to list here , but in particular we thank the communities of Aber , Kitgum , Pabbo , and Patongo for their patience , hard work , and enthusiasm . References [ 1 ] Klinenberg , Eric . Fighting for Air : The Battle to Control America’s Media . Henry Holt & Co . , 2007 . Pavarala , Vinod . “Ten Years of Community Radio in India : Towards New Solidarities . ” EduComm Asia 17 , no . 2 ( 2013 ) : 2 – 4 . [ 2 ] “Top Markets for WhatsApp , Snapchat and WeChat . ” Accessed January 19 , 2016 . http : / / www . globalwebindex . net / blog / top - markets - for - whatsapp - snapchat - and - wechat . [ 3 ] Wyche , Susan P . , and Laura L . Murphy . “‘Dead China - Make’ Phones off the Grid : Investigating and Designing for Mobile Phone Use in Rural Africa . ” In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 186 – 95 . DIS ’12 . New York , NY , USA : ACM , 2012 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317985 . Copyright © 2016 The authors http : / / www . ist - africa . org / Conference2016 Page 13 of 13 [ 4 ] “The Uganda Communications Commission’s 2nd National Electronic Media Performance Study for Eastern and Northern Uganda Regions , ” January 2013 . http : / / www . ucc . co . ug / files / downloads / NEMPS % 28N & E % 29 % 20final % 20report . pdf . [ 5 ] The Steadman Group , Uganda Audience Research Survey : Final Report , Kampala , March 2009 [ 6 ] “Uganda : A Survey . ” Public Broadcasting in Africa . Africa Governance Monitoring and Advocacy Project ( AfriMAP ) , Open Society Initiative for East Africa ( OSIEA ) and Open Society Media Program ( OSMP ) , 2010 . http : / / www . afrimap . org / english / images / report / OSI - Uganda - - Public - Broadcasting . pdf . [ 7 ] “The Economics of Rural Radio in Africa : An Introductory Study into the Costs and Revenues . ” The Communication Initiative Network . Accessed January 18 , 2016 . http : / / www . comminit . com / edutain - africa / content / economics - rural - radio - africa - introductory - study - costs - and - revenues . [ 8 ] Pavarala , Vinod . “Ten Years of Community Radio in India : Towards New Solidarities . ” EduComm Asia 17 , no . 2 ( 2013 ) : 2 – 4 . [ 9 ] Sullivan , Bartholomew . “The New Age of Radio : How ICTs Are Changing Rural Radio in Africa . ” African Farm Radio Research Initiative . Farm Radio International , 2011 . [ 10 ] Csikszentmihalyi , Christopher . “Engineering Collectives : Technology From the Coop . ” Limn , no . 2 ( 2012 ) . http : / / limn . it / engineering - collectives - technology - from - the - coop / . [ 11 ] Kelty , Christopher M . Two Bits : The Cultural Significance of Free Software . Duke University Press Books , 2008 . [ 12 ] Baldwin , Carliss Y . , and Eric von Hippel . “Modeling a Paradigm Shift : From Producer Innovation to User and Open Collaborative Innovation — HBS Working Knowledge , ” December 1 , 2009 . http : / / hbswk . hbs . edu / item / 6325 . html . [ 13 ] Hess , David J . “Technology - and Product - Oriented Movements : Approximating Social Movement Studies and Science and Technology Studies . ” Science , Technology , & Human Values 30 , no . 4 ( Autumn 2005 ) : 515 – 35 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 25046621 .