Correction : Stoichiometry of Nck - dependent actin polymerization in living cells Jonathon A . Ditlev , Paul J . Michalski , Greg Huber , Gonzalo M . Rivera , William A . Mohler , Leslie M . Loew , and Bruce J . Mayer Vol . 197 No . 5 , May 28 , 2012 . Pages 643 – 658 . Several months ago it came to our attention that one of the expression constructs used in this publication , which we had obtained as a gift from another laboratory , was incorrect . What we had described as a fusion of GFP with full - length N - WASp was in fact a fusion of GFP with the proline - rich SH3 - binding region of N - WASp ( “CB6 GFP – N - WASp - polyPRO” originally described in Moreau et al . [ 2000 ] ) . This construct was used in experiments described in Fig . 6 C and Fig . S3 of the original publication . We have now repeated the experiments in Fig . 6 C with a new construct that we have confirmed contains full - length N - WASp , and the results of these new experiments are shown in the revised Fig . 6 . The conclusions are essentially unchanged , and the new data fully support the original model presented in Fig . 7 . We chose not to attempt to reproduce the experiments shown in Fig . S3 with the new construct , but have relabeled the figure to accurately describe the actual construct used in the experiment shown . We have revised the text of the results to ac - curately describe the experiments and the implications of the results . Minor changes were also made to figure legends , Materials and methods , and Acknowledgments . Although the conclusions of our study are not significantly affected by these changes , we are sincerely sorry for the mistake in the original publication and apologize for any inconvenience or confusion that it might have caused our colleagues . A summary of the changes is included here , and the amended figures are included below . 1 . New Fig . 6 C : New data for experiments done since publication of the original paper . It replaces the original Fig . 6 C , with no change to other panels of Fig . 6 . 2 . New Fig . S3 : Replaces the original Fig . S3 . Image data are unchanged ; the only difference is that the label of the left column is changed to “GFP – N - WASp - Pro” from “GFP - NWASp” to correctly identify the construct used in the experiment . 3 . Results , p . 650 , last paragraph in the left column : References to “GFP – N - WASp” changed to “emerald – N - WASp” to reflect actual construct used in recent experiments . 4 . Results , p . 650 , right column : Paragraph revised to reflect that experiment shown in Fig . S3 was in fact done with GFP – N - WASp - Pro instead of full - length GFP – N - WASp as originally reported . 5 . Figure legend , p . 651 : Legend of Fig . 6 changed to reflect use of emerald – N - WASp ( not GFP – N - WASp ) in new experiments . 6 . Materials and Methods , p . 656 : Details of the GFP – N - WASp - Pro and emerald – N - WASp constructs actually used are provided . 7 . Acknowledgments , p . 656 : Changed to reflect actual construct received from M . Way . 8 . Supplemental figure legend , p . S3 : Legend of Fig . S3 changed to reflect that GFP – N - WASp - Pro instead of GFP – N - WASp was used in this experiment . The HTML and PDF versions of this article have been corrected . The errors remain only in the print version . JCB : Correction T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : CORRECTION We would also like to discuss the results published in the original Fig . 6 C , in light of our current understanding that the GFP - tagged construct used contained only the proline - rich region of N - WASp . The fact that the proline - rich region would bind to Nck SH3 domain aggregates in WIP wild - type ( WT ) but not WIP knockout ( KO ) cells is rather puzzling , as in vitro binding studies using purified proteins have shown that this region of N - WASp is sufficient to bind to Nck SH3 domains ( Rohatgi et al . , 2001 ) . Several factors may be at play here . First , multiple groups have shown that WIP expression is important to stabilize endogenous WASp ( Chou et al . , 2006 ; Sawa and Takenawa , 2006 ; de la Fuente et al . , 2007 ) , and thus may also affect N - WASp stability and / or localization . Consistent with this , the WIP KO cells are quite sickly , with a number of actin - related defects ( Ramesh et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , we have noted that high - level expression of N - WASp - Pro was rather toxic in WIP KO cells and as a result the average expression level of GFP – N - WASp - Pro was z 50 % higher in WT cells compared to WIP KO cells , based on fluorescence intensity . Not only did the KO cells lack WIP , but they also typically expressed less GFP – NWASp - Pro than the controls . It is important to note that others have reported that GFP – N - WASp - Pro does not bind detectably to vaccinia virus – induced comets ( either in the presence or absence of WIP ) , even though Nck is present at high levels on those comets ( Moreau et al . , 2000 ) . This suggests that recruitment of GFP – N - WASp - Pro to Nck in vivo is close to the limit of detection , and thus could easily be affected by factors such as differences in its expression level and the presence / absence of other components in the WIP KO cells versus WT controls . Importantly , we did not see enhanced toxicity upon expression of full - length GFP – N - WASp in WIP KO versus control cells , and we were therefore able to use WT and KO cells with similar GFP – N - WASp expression levels for imaging ; so this is not a concern with the revised figure . References Chou , H . C . , I . M . Antón , M . R . Holt , C . Curcio , S . Lanzardo , A . Worth , S . Burns , A . J . Thrasher , G . E . Jones , and Y . Calle . 2006 . WIP regulates the sta - bility and localization of WASP to podosomes in migrating dendritic cells . Curr . Biol . 16 : 2337 – 2344 . de la Fuente , M . A . , Y . Sasahara , M . Calamito , I . M . Antón , A . Elkhal , M . D . Gallego , K . Suresh , K . Siminovitch , H . D . Ochs , K . C . Anderson , F . S . Rosen , R . S . Geha , and N . Ramesh . 2007 . WIP is a chaperone for Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 926 – 931 . Moreau , V . , F . Frischknecht , I . Reckmann , R . Vincentelli , G . Rabut , D . Stewart , and M . Way . 2000 . A complex of N - WASP and WIP integrates signal - ling cascades that lead to actin polymerization . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 441 – 448 . Ramesh , N . , M . J . Massaad , L . Kumar , S . Koduru , Y . Sasahara , I . Anton , M . Bhasin , T . Libermann , and R . Geha . 2014 . Binding of the WASP / N - WASP - interacting protein WIP to actin regulates focal adhesion assembly and adhesion . Mol . Cell Biol . 34 : 2600 – 2610 . Rohatgi , R . , P . Nollau , M . W . Kirschner , and B . J . Mayer . 2001 . Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergistically activate actin polymer - ization through the N - WASP - ARP2 / 3 pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 26448 – 26452 . Sawa , M . , and T . Takenawa . 2006 . Caenorhabditis elegans WASP - interacting protein homologue WIP - 1 is involved in morphogenesis through mainte - nance of WSP - 1 protein levels . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 340 : 709 – 717 . JCB : CORRECTION Figure 6 . WIP is an essential component of the Nck – N - WASp – Arp2 / 3 pathway . Confocal images of either WIP WT and KO or N - WASp WT and KO MEFs transfected with a combination of mCherry - actin , membrane - bound Nck SH3 fusion , and GFP - WIP or GFP – N - WASp demonstrate the necessity of WIP for Nck - induced , N - WASp – dependent actin polymerization . Higher magnifications of clusters are shown in the insets . Bars , 10 µm . ( A ) Antibody - induced aggregation of Nck SH3 domains ( green ) induces the formation of actin comet tails ( red ) in WIP WT MEFs ( top ) but does not induce actin polymerization in WIP KO MEFs ( bottom ) . ( B ) Aggregation of Nck SH3 domains ( cyan ) in WIP KO MEFs rescued with GFP - WIP ( green ) induces actin comet tails ( red ) similar to those seen in WIP WT MEFs . ( C ) Nck SH3 aggregates ( cyan ) neither efficiently recruit emerald – N - WASp ( green ) nor induce actin polymerization ( red ) in WIP KO MEFs ( top ) , whereas Nck SH3 aggregates in WIP WT MEFs both recruit emerald – N - WASp and induce actin polymerization ( bottom ) . ( D ) Nck SH3 aggregates ( cyan ) recruit GFP - WIP ( green ) in both N - WASp KO MEFs ( top ) and N - WASp WT MEFs ( bottom ) but only induce actin polymerization ( red ) in N - WASp WT MEFs . JCB : CORRECTION Figure S3 . Full activation of N - WASp requires both Nck SH3 ( 2 ) and Nck SH3 ( 1 + 2 + 3 ) in aggregates . Confocal microscopy images of NIH - 3T3 cells cotransfected with mCherry - actin , GFP – N - WASp - Pro ( containing the proline - rich segment of N - WASp that binds Nck ) , and CD16 - 7 – Nck SH3 ( 1 ) or CD16 - 7 – Nck SH3 ( 2 ) , CD16 - 7 – Nck SH3 ( 1 + 2 + 3 ) , CD16 - 7 – dummy , or a combination of CD16 fusion proteins . For all images , mCherry - actin is red , GFP – N - WASp - Pro is green , and CD16 aggregates are cyan . Nck SH3 ( 1 ) aggregates ( top ) did not recruit GFP – N - WASp - Pro or induce actin polymerization . Nck SH3 ( 2 ) aggregates ( second from top ) and Nck SH3 ( 1 + 2 + 3 ) / dummy aggre - gates ( bottom ) recruited GFP – N - WASp - Pro and induced actin polymerization in the form of actin spots . Both Nck SH3 ( 1 + 2 + 3 ) ( middle ) and Nck SH3 ( 2 ) / Nck SH3 ( 1 + 2 + 3 ) ( second from bottom ) aggregates induce actin comet tail – like structures . Higher magnifications of clusters are shown in the insets . Bars , 10 µm .