Worm holes in memory : Is memory one representation or many ? Dirk U . Wulff ( Wulff @ mpib - berlin . mpg . de ) Max - Planck - Institute for Human Development , Lentzeallee 94 , 14195 Berlin , Germany Thomas T . Hills ( T . T . Hills @ warwick . co . uk ) Department of Psychology , University of Warwick Coventry CV4 7AL , UK Ralph Hertwig ( Hertwig @ mpib - berlin . mpg . de ) Max - Planck - Institute for Human Development , Lentzeallee 94 , 14195 Berlin , Germany Abstract The analogy of space to human cognition has a long - standing tradition . Our study aims to elaborate on the validity of this analogy for search in memory . Using the search of associative memory framework ( SAM ) we show that people are able to dynamically recruit independent memory representations in the recall of country names . By instructing participants to use specific recall cues we also show that despite a strong effect on the retrieval sequence , total recall from memory remains unaffected . Whereas these findings strongly support a higher dimensionality to memory than often assumed , the simultaneous finding of severe retrieval time costs for non - default representations suggests that the use of particular retrieval structures may be adaptive . In sum , our results support local - to - global memory search strategies similar to foraging strategies in space , but further suggest that memory is not constrained to one local representation , but may indeed support many . Keywords : Free recall ; verbal fluency task ; memory representation ; Search of Associative Memory ( SAM ) . Introduction Memory has long been considered to represent a high - dimensional landscape over which we search for information . The recent proliferation of semantic space models , which acquire semantic similarity of words based on statistical processing of text corpora implicitly characterizes memory as embodying such a representation . This idea is not new . In his “Principles of Psychology” William James wrote “We make search in memory . . . just as we rummage our house for a lost object“ ( 1890 , p . 654 ) , suggesting that search in memory is comparable to search in space . But how comparable is it ? Research on spatial imagery and cognitive maps suggests that mental operations share much in common with the way we move around the physical world ( e . g . Kosslyn , Ball , and Reiser , 1978 ) . Almost all models of long - term memory incorporate a dimension of similarity ( inverse of distance ) in order to explain priming and serial position effects ( e . g . Anderson , & Pirolli , 1984 ; Brown , Neath , & Chater , 2007 ) . Shepherd’s account of distance in mental representations ( Shepard , & Metzler , 1971 ) , as well as models of categorization ( e . g . Nosofsky , 1988 ) , suggests a similar conceptual landscape , in which similar items reside near one another and less similar items reside further apart . Underlying these approaches is an implicit assumption , one that is highlighted by James . If searching memory is like rummaging our house for a lost object , is there just one house ( i . e . , representation ) or are there many ? Could an item be in more than one representation , and if so , does one representation facilitate memory search better than another ? If memories reside in multiple representations , this presents a problem for many existing models of knowledge representation—that is , especially those that produce but one representation . Moreover , multiple representations would exemplify a feature of memory that clearly separates memory from space : outside of wormholes , the only way to get from one point in space to another is to travel the distance between them . Memory , on the other hand , may have no such constraints . Before we describe how we investigated the possibility of multiple memory representations , we first describe some of the previous research that has highlighted the relationship between memory and space . Memory and Space Following this analogy between space and memory , Hills and colleagues recently put forth a model wherein free recall from memory produces patterns that can be predicted by a classical theorem of optimal foraging theory , the marginal value theorem ( Hills , Jones , Todd , 2012 ) . This theory describes optimal switching between explorative and exploitative search in response to a patchy resource environments . Further supporting the notion that internal search may be similar to external search in space , Hills , Todd , and Goldstone ( 2008 ) found that priming search in space primes search in a lexical search task , suggesting that a shared cognitive process may search in both domains . 3817 Drawing from the search of associative memory framework ( SAM ) , Hills and colleagues’ model expresses search as an alternation between local and global memory search . In local search , sequential items are retrieved based on similarity to the last recalled item together with a position invariant context cue . In global search , this context cue is used exclusively . Interpreting the network of similarities as a landscape of distances , local search is spatially confined with nearer items in memory being more likely to be retrieved . Global search , on the other hand , is independent of this landscape allowing for jumps across the landscape that may utilize an alternative representation—much as wormholes do in science fiction . These aspects of local and global search capture the different search modes typical of exploration / exploitation trade - offs found in patch foraging models . However , they appear to break with the spatial analogy to the degree that the search process can escape the confines of one representation by switching to another . Recently , Abbott et al . ( 2012 ) proposed a slightly different model to explain the findings of Hills and colleagues with a stronger focus on the underlying representation . Their theoretical approach expresses the patterns of free recall as a random walk through a single partly connected graph ( see Steyvers , & Tenenbaum , 2005 ) . Their full random walk model also incorporates local - to - global transitions . However , compared to Hills et al . the switches between subsequent cues a ) are random and thus independent of local retrieval success , except in the case of allowing more time for a global jump to occur and , more importantly b ) do not imply any change of representation but rather a reset to the start point of search ( similar to the executive search process model used to describe search for anagrams in Hills , Todd , & Goldstone , 2010 ) . Additionally , the simulation results of Abbotts et al . also indicated that apparent optimal retrieval patterns were possible without local - to - global transitions . Together , this work provides only weak support for multiple representations and the presence of context - based local - to - global transitions in memory . Present Study Overall , the spatial analogy for memory and memory search has been successful , but existing theoretical approaches offer alternative hypotheses . Moreover , all of the previously described approaches have assumed that there is only one representation of memory that allows for local search . To investigate the potential for multiple representations in memory , we had people search their memory for country names . Friedman and Dewinstanley ( 2007 ) showed descriptively that at least three independent factors predict country retrieval : geographic distance to the previously recalled country , phonetic similarity to previously recalled countries and characteristics of the particular country itself ( e . g . their frequency in the news ) . The availability of these multiple objectively determinable cues within a single recall category suggest the potential for multiple representations , and allow us to address the following questions within a computational framework . First , we want to assess if these three cues are used and how and in what form they are integrated in the retrieval of countries . Is the default local search representation ( similarity - based ) best characterized by space ( e . g . , Euclidean distance ) or some other representation ? Further , are the local search cues integrated dynamically with the global cue ( item - based ) . To address this , we collected uninstructed recall data where people where simply asked to name all the countries they can think of . Our second question addresses more specifically the question of multiple representations : Specifically , how does a voluntary change of retrieval cues influence recall ? Assuming a unitary underlying representation , changing the retrieval cues should harm retrieval with respect to response times , number of retrieved items , or both . Provided representations are independently accessible , retrieval sequences should reflect changes in the representation , and may further reflect differences in the accessibility of information with a representation . To this end we ran two instructed conditions in which participants where asked to base their recall on the letters of the alphabet or on geographical neighbors . Method Participants We collected data from 71 students at the University of Basel . The sample had an average age of 24 . 7 and 71 % of the participants were female . Participation in the study was rewarded either by course credit or a fixed payment of 7 Swiss francs . Additionally the participants received 0 . 25 Swiss francs for every recalled country . Procedure Participants were seated in front of a computer . First , each participant’s typing speed was assessed . Next , they received the instructions to the country fluency task . In the control condition participants were asked to type all the countries they can think of , but were not given direction with regard to how to retrieve countries . In the alphabet condition participants were instructed to proceed by the letters of the alphabet . In the neighbor condition participants were asked to always first attempt to recall a neighboring country ( with a shared border ) before recalling a country from elsewhere . In both the alphabet and the neighbor condition participants were also instructed that whenever there were unable to recall a country by the first letter or a neighbor they could recall any other country . Scoring All country entries were checked for spelling and validity . Only the 193 current members of the United Nations as well as Kosovo , Taiwan , Vatican City and Palestine were accepted as valid countries . Some synonyms were accepted , for example “Holland” for Netherlands . As approximations for the spatial 3818 representations ( i . e . , retrieval structures ) we implemented three measures : Distance , calculated as shortest Euclidian distance between the borders ; Neighbor , indicating if two countries shared a border ; and Geodesic distance , determined by shortest number of border crossing required to move from one country to the other . All information used for the spatial representations were based on the CIA World DataBank II . To measure phonetic representation , three further retrieval structures were implemented : Levenshtein distance , which indicates the number of orthographic edits ; Initial letter , indicating if consecutive items share the same first letter ; and Phonetic similarity following Friedmann and deWinstanley ( 2007 ) , with phonetic similarity indicating the same letter in the first or the last three positions of two countries . To estimate the frequency we took two measures : Google , indicating the log number of hits for a country generated by a Google search , and News , indicating the log number of mentions in the weekly newspaper Die Zeit , which is widely read in all German speaking countries . Modeling The model framework we used to simulate the search process is based on SAM ( Raaijmaakers & Shiffrin , 1981 ) . The foundational assumption of the model is that recall is achieved by probing retrieval structures in memory with a specific cue set , that is , the memory probe . With I representing a possible target item for recovery in the search space , the probability of retrieving I is computed as the product of the individual retrieval strengths for I across a probe set of M cues , with S ( Q , I ) representing the semantic similarity between cue Q and item I . This is incorporated into an overall probability of retrieval for item I via the ratio rule : where N represents the total number of items available in the category for retrieval and β represents the saliency ( or attention weight ) assigned to a given cue . Every search cue generates a retrieval strength S ( Q , I ) for each item based on the items similarity to the last item , e . g . in terms of Euclidian distance , or the item’s own qualities , e . g . frequency in the newspapers or the Eigenvector of similarity - based cues . Using a maximum likelihood method , we fit β s to each participant’s data , using the participant’s individually generated sequence of items . This produced a log - likelihood fit , which was penalized based on the number of free parameters via the Bayesian information criterion . Results are presented as the median improvement in the Bayesian information criterion relative to a random model specifying that all remaining items in the search space are equally likely to be retrieved , with greater values of BIC indicating a better fit . We examined various static and dynamic models , using spatial , phonetic and frequency cues . In our terminology , static models rely on the same set of cues over the entire retrieval interval . Dynamic models on the other hand allow for a switching between cues . In SAM similarity - based cues are dropped when a threshold of retrieval failures is reached . This we modeled using an additional threshold parameter on the retrieval strengths of similarity - based local cues . Results Which cues are used ? As a first step in the analyses the predictive power of individual cues 1 was tested in a single cue version of our retrieval model . Figure 1 shows the BIC advantage over the random model for the unconstrained as well as the Alphabet and Neighbor condition . The results indicate that not all retrieval structures are equally predictive in the uninstructed ( control ) condition . Spatial representations seem clearly to be the dominating cue in this condition . Next to spatial information , only frequency of mentions in the news had predictive power . In contrast to the results of Friedmann and deWinstanley 1 The eigenvectors of the similarity - based cue representations were dropped from the analyses as none were predictive . Modeling Search in Semantic Memory To model search in semantic memory , a structural representa - tion of the search space is required in addition to a model of the search process . To represent the structure of semantic memory , we use both hand - coded ( Troyer ) and statistically derived ( BEAGLE ) schemes . We describe these two structural models next , followed by a description of the process model that will be applied to these structural representations . Representing the structure of semantic memory . The Troyer et al . ( 1997 ; see also Troyer , 2000 ) categorization scheme contains 22 nonexclusive animal categories ( e . g . , “African ani - mals , ” “water animals , ” “beasts of burden” ) . Support for the Troyer et al . categories comes via their usefulness in detecting specific clinical conditions in individuals , such as Alzheimer’s disease , depression , and Parkinson’s disease ( e . g . , Fossati , Le Bastard , Ergis , & Allilaire , 2003 ; Murphy , Rich , & Troyer , 2006 ; Raoux et al . , 2008 ; Troyer et al . , 1998 ) . The categorization scheme contains 155 unique animal names , which we supplemented with 214 additional names to cover the 369 animals reported by our participants . We classified the new animals according to the orig - inal 22 categories found in Troyer et al . , based on the descriptions of the additional animals found on Wikipedia . Our additions thus did not change Troyer et al . ’s categorization coding scheme , so that our new investigations remain fully compatible with previous results . Our extended categorization coding is available in the supplemental materials ( in Appendix 1 ) . To compute more fine - grained semantic similarities between words , we used the lexical semantic representations from the BEAGLE model ( Jones , Kintsch , & Mewhort , 2006 ; Jones & Mewhort , 2007 ) . BEAGLE representations have seen success at accounting for a variety of human semantic data including seman - tic typicality , categorization , and sentence completion ( Jones & Mewhort , 2007 ) , as well as for a range of semantic priming data ( Jones et al . , 2006 ) . In the simulations here , we specifically used the version of BEAGLE that learns from only contextual informa - tion , similar to other high - dimensional semantic space models ( e . g . , Landauer & Dumais , 1997 ; Lund & Burgess , 1996 ) . The model begins by assigning each word an initial vector with vector elements sampled randomly from a Gaussian distribution with ! " 0 and # " 1 / ! D , where D is the arbitrary vector dimensionality ( set to 1 , 000 in these simulations ) . As the text corpus is processed , each time a particular word is encountered a second vector , its memory vector , is updated as the sum of the initial vectors for the other words appearing in context with it . When the entire corpus has been learned , a word’s memory rep - resentation is then a vector pattern reflecting the word’s history of co - occurrence with other words . By this method , words that fre - quently co - occur will develop similar vector patterns ( e . g . , bee and honey ) , as will words that commonly occur in similar contexts , even if they never directly co - occur ( e . g . , bee and wasp ) . For all our comparisons , the similarity metric used is the vector cosine ( a normalized dot - product ) between two word vectors . BEAGLE was trained on a 400 - million - word Wikipedia corpus ( Willits , D’Mello , Duran , & Olney , 2007 ) , and its memory repre - sentations were used to compute the pairwise cosine similarity matrix for a list of 765 animals . The additional 396 animals that were not produced by our participants were added to the list to generate a richer memory space representing the semantic organi - zation of the entire category of animals . In addition , it is expected that items will affect search in semantic space even if they are not produced by participants , just as berries on a bush affect foragers’ external search behavior even if not consumed ( e . g . , by attracting the foragers to search in particular rich - looking areas of the bush ) . Details of the corpus preprocessing are found in the supplemental materials ( in Appendix 2 , as well as BEAGLE code and the animal similarity matrix ) . Modeling the search process . The model framework we used to simulate the process of search is common to both the SAM and ACT – R architectures ( described in Anderson , 1993 ; Raaij - makers & Shiffrin , 1981 ) . The foundational assumption of our model is that recall is achieved by probing retrieval structures in memory with a specific cue set , that is , the memory probe . With I representing a possible target item for recovery in the search space , the probability of retrieving I is computed as the product of the individual retrieval strengths for I across a probe set of M cues , with S ( Q , I ) representing the semantic similarity between cue Q and item I . This is incorporated into an overall probability of retrieval for item I via the ratio rule : P ( I i " Q 1 , Q 2 , . . . , Q M ) ! # j " 1 M S $ Q j , I i % & j $ k " 1 N # j " 1 M S $ Q j , I k % & j , ( 3 ) where N represents the total number of items available in the category for retrieval and & represents the saliency ( or attention weight ) assigned to a given cue . We examined various static and dynamic models ( defined next ) , using either one or both of two possible cues : frequency and / or the previous item recalled . Frequency represents a global search cue , which generates a retrieval strength S ( Q , I ) for each item based on that item’s frequency of occurrence in the Wikipedia corpus . The previous - item cue represents a local search cue , which generates a retrieval strength for a new item based on its semantic similarity with that item—here the S ( Q , I ) value is the cosine similarity in BEAGLE between the previous item generated and item I . Using the maximum likelihood method , we fit & to each participant’s data , for both cue types , using the participant’s individually gen - erated sequence of items . This produced a log - likelihood fit , which was penalized based on the number of free parameters via the Bayesian information criterion . Results are presented as the me - dian improvement in the Bayesian information criterion relative to a random model specifying that all remaining items in the search space are equally likely to be retrieved . Specific details of param - eter optimization and model comparison may be found in the supplemental materials ( in Appendix 3 ) . In our terminology , the static models we tested use the same memory probe ( i . e . , set of cues ) over the entire retrieval interval , effectively ignoring the patchy structure of the environment . In contrast , dynamic models exploit that patchy structure , switching from patch to patch by changing the contents of the memory probe where local - to - global transitions occur . Specifically , when leaving a patch , dynamic models switch from the use of the previous - item cue ( similarity - based local search ) to the frequency cue ( context - based global search ) to find a new appropriate patch , and then back 4 HILLS , JONES , AND TODD Figure 1 : Median of differences in BIC between the random model and single cue retrieval models . 3819 ( 2007 ) when our participants were not instructed to use any particular cue they do not seem to rely on any phonetic cue . The overall pattern changes substantially in the instructed conditions . When instructed to recall by the letters of the alphabet , the Phonetic and Initial cue models fit very well , whereas the individual spatial models do not exceed chance level . On the other hand , the fit in the Neighbor condition is best fit by the spatial models . Thus , people appear to have changed their retrieval behavior in both conditions . Are cues integrated dynamically or statically ? Contrary to the expectation that all cue classes – spatial , phonetic and frequency – contribute to the fits , the single cue data indicates that only two of three classes of cues are used in the individual conditions . We further asked how the cues are integrated and if the type of integration holds over the conditions and the particular cues used in these conditions . We compared two models : static , with both cue classes are used over the entire retrieval interval , and dynamic 2 , using the similarity - based cue together with the context cue or , when the similarity - based cue falls below a fitted threshold , the context cue alone . Figure 2 illustrates the results for these models . In line with the single cue models the models combining News with spatial cues fit the data of uninstructed and Neighbor condition best and provide a poor fit for the Alphabet condition . The Alphabet condition was best fit by phonetic information combined with frequency in the news . In regard to the state of integration the models also show a clear pattern . Irrespective of the condition , the dynamic models provide a better fit to the data than the static integration models . Does cue use affect performance ? The analyses thus far show a ) that cues can be voluntarily changed and b ) that this however has no effect on the dynamic integration of local information with global frequency information . But did the controlled choice of a particular retrieval impact memory accessibility ? Figure 3 shows the results for number of countries retrieved . An analysis of variance reveals that the slight advantage in the Neighbor condition is not greater than we would expect by chance ( F 2 , 68 = . 73 , p = . 48 ) . Thus , the overall accessibility in terms of number of countries was not dependent on using a particular cue . Item response times on the other hand reveal a substantial detriment when countries where retrieved by the letters of the alphabet . The median retrieval time in the alphabet condition ( mdn 2 The dynamic search model described in the text corresponds to the search models in Hills , Jones and Todd ( 2012 ) . An alternative version of the model was also tested , that uses the similarity - based cue when above threshold and the context - based cue when below threshold . However , the results were indistinguishable . = 7 . 7s ) was about five times higher than the retrieval times in the uninstructed ( mdn = 1 . 4s ) and neighbor condition ( mdn = 1 . 5s ) . Consequently , participants in the Alphabet condition also keep on searching for a much longer period than in the other two conditions . This is likely due to participants feeling that they could not go back to previous letters . Clearly , however , not all alphabet - based responses are slow . About 21 % of the response times in the alphabet condition fall below the medians of the other two conditions . Thus in a number of cases Alphabetic retrieval was faster than in the uninstructed and Neighbor condition . Discussion In this study we were interested in the utilization and integration of multiple cues in retrieval from memory . By having participants retrieve all the countries they know under three different instructions we were able to show that dynamic search models as proposed by Hills and colleagues ( Hills , Jones , Todd , 2012 ; Hills , & Pachur , 2012 ) provide the best account for the data in all conditions . Further , the data clearly demonstrated that people are able to deliberately change the cues they are using ( see Gronlund & Shiffrin , 1986 ) . This however had no impact on how these cues were combined with a global representation of frequency . Finally , our data Figure 2 : Median of differences in BIC between the random model and different cue integration models for the three conditions . All similarity - based cues are combined with the News cue . Dashed lines represent the best single cue model in the three datasets . 3820 shows that changing the cue is not necessarily harmful to the recall performance – the same performance level was reached in terms of total items retrieved , despite dramatic costs in overall retrieval times . What do our results mean with respect to our initial question whether memory is one or many representations ? Clearly , people are able to change the cues they are using and our results further suggest that they may access alternative representations However , these changes can come with costs . These costs can be interpreted as the result of different distances within a given representation . Thus , a wrong cue or retrieval structure might mean traveling greater or lesser distances in memory . Under this interpretation two speculations can be made . The comparable performance in terms of number of retrieved items would disappear under time pressure and , in the present case , the overall retrieval success is potentially a result of a relaxed retrieval failure threshold . It remains striking that the same overall performance was reached in our three conditions , as recognition data indicates that people have potentially about twice as many countries stored in their memory ( Friedman & deWinstanley , 2007 ) . Moreover , in every case , models using frequency in the news alone for stretches of the retrieval interval performed much better despite being penalized by the extra threshold parameter . This , there appears to be at least one alternative representation allowing for non - spatial movement in memory space . Combined with evidence for dynamic switching , this breaks with the spatial analogy by allowing for travel through memory via multiple representations . Both , the successful switch of representations under specific instructions and the independent use of frequency are difficult to explain within the model that is based on a unitary representation or space as proposed by Abbot et al . ( 2012 ) and others . Our results seem to be much better explained by frameworks allowing for the variable integration of multiple cues . The SAM - based memory search model developed by Hills and colleagues is but one model affording this possibility . Other models such as multi - trace memory models ( e . g . MINERVA ; Hintzman , 1986 ) or the recently proposed context maintenance and retrieval model ( CMR ; Polyn , Norman , & Kahana , 2008 ) are also in principle capable of utilizing multiple cues to varying degrees over time . However , in modeling and most experimental work the possibility of entirely switching between representations has been rather neglected . In our eyes this possibility should receive more attention in future research . Assuming that our current findings are not constrained to the recruitment of a spatial versus a phonetic or alphabetic local search representation leads to the question of what is the right retrieval strategy to use . Clearly , our data shows that , without instructions , alphabetic and phonetic retrieval strategies receive little support . The data also suggests that this is done for a good reason , as response times tend to be on average larger when using phonetic cues . On the other hand , a substantial number of alphabet retrievals were at least as fast as retrievals based on spatial information . A savvy memory forager could potentially exploit this fact by adaptively switching between retrieval cues – that is , by taking dimensional short - cuts through memory space . In principle , this is no different from the short - cuts made Figure 3 : Number of items retrieved ( A ) and bean plots of item level response times in seconds corrected for typing speed ( B ) in the three condtions . Error bars represent standard error of the mean . Shapes in the right hand plot represent the density , the solid red line the median . 3821 available by global transitions to frequency . But , cognitively , it represents the capacity to jump between local representations , or landscapes , in much the same way that children might enter an alternate universe by passing through a mirror . References Anderson , J . R . , & Pirolli , P . L . ( 1984 ) . Spread of activation . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 10 , 791 – 798 . Abbott , J . T . , Austerweil , J . L . , & Griffiths , T . L . ( 2012 ) . Human memory search as a random walk in a semantic network . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 25 . Brown , G . D . A . , Neath , I . , & Chater , N . ( 2007 ) . A Temporal Ratio Model of Memory . Psychological Review , 114 , 539 - 576 . Friedman , W . J . , & deWinstanley , P . A . ( 2006 ) . The mental representation of countries . Memory , 14 , 853 - 871 . Gronlund , S . D . , & Shiffrin , R . M . ( 1986 ) . Retrieval strategies in recall of natural categories and categorized lists . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 12 , 550 – 561 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , & Goldstone , R . G . ( 2008 ) . Search in external and internal spaces : Evidence for generalized cognitive search processes . Psychological Science , 19 , 676 – 682 . Hills , T . T . , & Pachur , T . ( 2012 ) . Dynamic search and working memory in social recall . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 38 , 218 – 228 . Hills , T . T . , Jones , M . N . , & Todd , P . M . ( 2012 ) . Optimal foraging in semantic memory . Psychological Review , 119 , 431 – 440 . Hintzman , D . L . ( 1986 ) . “Schema Abstraction” in a Multiple - Trace Memory Model . Psychological Review , 93 , 4 , 411 - 428 . James , W . ( 1890 ) . The Principles of Psychology . New York : Holt . Kosslyn , S . M . , Ball , T . M . , & Reiser , B . J . ( 1978 ) . Visual images preserve metric spatial information : Evidence from studies of image scanning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 4 , 46 - 60 . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1988 ) . Exemplar - based accounts of relations between classification , recognition , and typicality . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 700 – 708 . Polyn , S . M . , Norman , K . N . , & Kahana , M . J . ( 2008 ) . A context maintenance and retrieval model of organizational processes in free recall . Psychological Review , 116 , 1 , 129 - 156 . Raaijmakers , J . G . W . , & Shiffrin , R . M . ( 1981 ) . Search of associative memory . Psychological Review , 88 , 93 – 134 . Shepard , R . N . & Metzler , J . ( 1971 ) Mental rotation of three - dimensional objects . Science , 171 , 701 – 703 . Steyvers , M . , & Tenenbaum , J . B . ( 2005 ) . The large scale structure of semantic networks : Statistical analyses and a model of semantic growth . Cognitive Science , 29 , 41 – 78 . 3822