Molecular Basis of Mechanotransduction in Living Cells OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Physiology and Biophysics , University Of Texas Medical Branch , Galveston , Texas ; and Department of Pharmacology , University Of Western Australia , Nedlands , West Australia I . Introduction 686 A . Basic requirement for mechanosensitivity 687 B . Strategy and scope of this review 687 II . Lipid Bilayer Structure and Its Response to Mechanical Deformation 687 A . Membrane compression 688 B . Membrane area expansion / thinning 688 C . Membrane bending / curvature 689 D . Membrane extension / shear 689 E . Viscous properties and dynamic response of bilayer vesicles 689 III . Mechanical Deformation of the Bilayer by Membrane Protein Insertion 690 IV . Simple Peptides That Form Mechanically Gated Channels 691 A . Alamethicin 691 B . Gramicidin 692 V . Structure of Prokaryotic Cells 692 VI . Mechanically Gated Channels in Bacteria and Archaea 694 A . Identiﬁcation of the MscL gene / protein 694 B . Structure of MscL 694 C . Conductive properties of MscL 695 D . Is MscL a hexamer or a pentamer ? 696 E . Origin of MscL mechanosensitivity 696 F . Extrinsic and intrinsic factors that affect MscL and other MG channels 698 G . Where is the MscL gate ? 699 H . Mutagenesis studies 699 I . Models of MscL mechanosensitivity 699 J . Membrane localization and physiological function of MscL 702 K . MscS and MscM 703 L . MG channels in Archaea 703 M . MG channels in evolution 704 VII . The Structure of Animal Cells : Speciﬁc Roles of the Cortical Cytoskeleton and Extracellular Matrix in Mechanosensitivity 705 VIII . Mechanically Gated Channels in Animal Cells 706 A . Membrane patch mechanics and morphology 707 B . Discrepancy between membrane patch and whole cell mechanosensitivity 709 C . MG channel gating : “tethered” versus “bilayer” models 710 D . MG channel classiﬁcation : is there a unifying mechanism for activation and inactivation of MG channels ? 715 E . Rapid adaptation of MG channel activity 716 F . Structure of eukaryotic MG channels 719 IX . Mechanosensitive Elevation of Intracellular Calcium 723 A . MS Ca 2 1 inﬂux mechanisms 723 B . MS release of Ca 2 1 from internal Ca 2 1 stores 723 X . Mechanosensitive Release of Transmitter 724 A . Historical perspective 724 B . Tension - sensitive vesicle recruitment / exocytosis 725 C . Stretch - facilitated transmitter release at the vertebrate motor synapse 726 D . Mechanosensitive ATP release 726 E . Membrane resealing : Ca 2 1 - induced vesicle - vesicle fusion and exocytosis 728 XI . Conclusions and Outstanding Issues 728 P HYSIOLOGICAL R EVIEWS Vol . 81 , No . 2 , April 2001 Printed in U . S . A . http : / / physrev . physiology . org 685 0031 - 9333 / 01 $ 15 . 00 Copyright © 2001 the American Physiological Society b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Hamill , Owen P . , and Boris Martinac . Molecular Basis of Mechanotransduction in Living Cells . Physiol Rev 81 : 685 – 740 , 2001 . —The simplest cell - like structure , the lipid bilayer vesicle , can respond to mechanical deformation by elastic membrane dilation / thinning and curvature changes . When a protein is inserted in the lipid bilayer , an energetic cost may arise because of hydrophobic mismatch between the protein and bilayer . Localized changes in bilayer thickness and curvature may compensate for this mismatch . The peptides alamethicin and gramicidin and the bacterial membrane protein MscL form mechanically gated ( MG ) channels when inserted in lipid bilayers . Their mechanosensitivity may arise because channel opening is associated with a change in the protein’s membrane - occupied area , its hydrophobic mismatch with the bilayer , excluded water volume , or a combination of these effects . As a consequence , bilayer dilation / thinning or changes in local membrane curvature may shift the equilibrium between channel conformations . Recent evidence indicates that MG channels in speciﬁc animal cell types ( e . g . , Xenopus oocytes ) are also gated directly by bilayer tension . However , animal cells lack the rigid cell wall that protects bacteria and plants cells from excessive expansion of their bilayer . Instead , a cortical cytoskeleton ( CSK ) provides a structural framework that allows the animal cell to maintain a stable excess membrane area ( i . e . , for its volume occupied by a sphere ) in the form of membrane folds , rufﬂes , and microvilli . This excess membrane provides an immediate membrane reserve that may protect the bilayer from sudden changes in bilayer tension . Contractile elements within the CSK may locally slacken or tighten bilayer tension to regulate mechanosensitivity , whereas membrane blebbing and tight seal patch formation , by using up membrane reserves , may increase membrane mechanosensitivity . In speciﬁc cases , extracellular and / or CSK proteins ( i . e . , tethers ) may transmit mechanical forces to the process ( e . g . , hair cell MG channels , MS intracellular Ca 2 1 release , and transmitter release ) without increasing tension in the lipid bilayer . I . INTRODUCTION Cells experience a wide variety of mechanical stimuli ranging from thermal molecular agitation to potentially destructive osmotic pressure gradients . Therefore , from the onset , living organisms faced a basic dilemma in their evolution . As a ﬁrst priority , they required mechanisms that would protect their delicate cell membrane from potentially damaging mechanical stimuli . However , to in - teract with their changing mechanical environment ( e . g . , during feeding , escaping , or mating ) , they needed mech - anosensitivity . Different organisms have solved the di - lemma by different strategies . Bacteria and plants evolved a rigid cell wall that protects their plasma membrane from excessive dilation . However , with this strategy they sac - riﬁced not only cell deformability but also mechanosen - sitivity . In contrast , animals have adopted strategies that protect their cell membrane while preserving a high de - gree of cell deformability and mechanosensitivity . The ﬁrst mechanosensitive ( MS ) processes may have evolved as backup mechanisms for cell protection . For example , a large nonselective membrane pore activated by osmotic swelling will release the cell’s contents and thereby reduce intracellular pressure and membrane ten - sion . Similarly , tension - sensitive fusion of intracellular membrane vesicles with the cell membrane will act to reduce bilayer tension . These basic mechanisms of me - chanically gated ( MG ) channels and MS exocytosis may have been subsequently reﬁned to participate in cell sig - naling . For example , MG channels and / or MS transmitter release are implicated in a myriad of physiological pro - cesses , including touch and pain sensation ( 46 , 292 , 403 ) , hearing and vestibular function ( 148 , 190 ) , blood pressure control ( 45 , 61 ) , salt and ﬂuid balance ( 32 ) , micturition ( 36 ) , tissue growth ( 98 ) , cell volume regulation ( 301 , 308 , 430 ) , and turgor control ( 147 , 265 ) . Furthermore , abnor - malities in these mechanisms may contribute to neuronal ( 93 ) and muscular degeneration ( 116 ) , cardiac arrhythmia ( 86 , 117 , 162 ) , hypertension ( 224 ) , arteriosclerosis ( 90 ) , and glaucoma ( 282 ) . The external mechanical forces that dominate a cell vary depending on its size and relationship with other cells . For example , unicellular organisms like Esche - richia coli are constantly jostled by the forces of Brown - ian motion that tend to keep them in suspension . In contrast , multicellular organisms require speciﬁc MS mechanisms that constantly adjust their position in re - sponse to gravity . Furthermore , speciﬁc cells , depending on their location within an organism and association with ancillary structures , may be selectively exposed to spe - ciﬁc forms of mechanical stimuli , including steady in - dentations , high - frequency vibrations , osmotic pressure gradients , and hemodynamic pressure and ﬂuid shear stresses . All external stimuli act on top of a dynamic background of various internally generated forces ( e . g . , arising from hydrostatic pressure , cytoskeletal polymer - ization , and molecular motors ) that are important in de - termining cell shape , growth , mobility , and adhesion ( 15 , 201 ) . To monitor and respond selectively to these differ - ent forces most likely requires multiple , parallel signaling pathways , with each pathway designed to extract speciﬁc information regarding the “relevant stimulus” while ﬁlter - ing out irrelevant stimuli . Over the last 20 years , the molecular nature of spe - ciﬁc MS membrane processes has been identiﬁed . These include MG membrane ion channels ( 156 , 265 , 286 , 350 ) and MS receptors ( 53 , 320 ) , enzymes ( 241 , 270 ) , intracel - lular Ca 2 1 release ( 204 ) and transmitter release ( 63 ) . Be - 686 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m cause each of these elements or processes may interact with one another , as well as with other non - MS elements , difﬁculties can arise in distinguishing mechanisms that are directly or indirectly affected by mechanical forces . Furthermore , given that a single cell may express multiple mechanotransducers , a challenge can arise in determining which transducer mediates a speciﬁc MS function ( i . e , cause and effect relations ) . A notable example is verte - brate tactile sensation where the basic distinction be - tween physical and chemical mechanisms of mechano - transduction has yet to be made ( cf . Refs . 135 , 292 ) . In principle , one should be able to identify the mechano - transducer by comparing its speciﬁc properties ( i . e . , sen - sitivity , kinetics , and pharmacology ) with those of the MS function . A . Basic Requirement for Mechanosensitivity For a membrane protein to be directly MS , it must be sensitive to a membrane property that changes with me - chanical deformation . For the speciﬁc case of a simple two - state channel , a shift in the equilibrium between closed and open channel conformations may be caused by changes in bilayer tension , thickness , or local curva - ture or by direct “tugging” on the protein by cytoskeletal or extracellular tethers . Therefore , a fundamental issue in mechanotransduction is the identiﬁcation of the mem - brane parameter that actually confers mechanosensitivity on the membrane protein or process . B . Strategy and Scope of This Review The membrane of most animal cells is a composite structure of extracellular ( EC ) , bilayer , and cytoskeletal ( CSK ) layers . Because of its integrated nature , any exter - nally applied force produces varying tensions and strains in multiple elements within the three layers ( 200 ) . For this reason , it becomes problematic in identifying a single membrane property that may be directly involved in the mechanotransduction process . To overcome this prob - lem , we adopt a hierarchical approach and consider a variety of membrane preparations , progressing from the simple artiﬁcial bilayer vesicle to increasingly more com - plex cells ( i . e . , from bacteria to animal cells ) . The ratio - nale for this approach is that if characteristics of a par - ticular mechanism can be identiﬁed ( i . e . , “ﬁnger - printed” ) in a simple system , one should be better positioned to recognize its operation in more complex systems . Our approach would seem justiﬁed by the reoccurring theme in evolution in which basic mechanisms that ﬁrst evolved in prokaryotes are conserved and reﬁned to carry out more diverse and specialized functions in eukaryotes . However , some processes such as exocytosis / endocytosis and release of Ca 2 1 from intracellular membrane stores are unique to eukaryotes ( 54 ) , and therefore , their mech - anosensitivity must reﬂect more recently acquired mech - anisms of mechanotransduction . II . LIPID BILAYER STRUCTURE AND ITS RESPONSE TO MECHANICAL DEFORMATION Because the bilayer is the core structure around which all other membrane components are arranged , it is critical to understand its molecular packing and how this packing may change under steady state and dynamic me - chanical deformation . For example , intrinsic delays or relaxations in the response of the bilayer to deformation may be reﬂected in the functional dynamics ( i . e . , fre - quency response and adaptive behavior ) of MG channel activities . The bilayer is composed of lipid molecules that form two monolayers stabilized by van der Waals forces and the “hydrophobic” effect between the “hidden” acyl lipid chains . In addition , water molecules surrounding each lipid headgroup form hydrogen bonds that further stabilize the bilayer ( 180 ) . Water molecules also penetrate deeper into the bilayer , hopping between acyl chain pack - ing defects , such as trans - gauche kinks . For example , it is estimated that ; 4 , 000 water molecules pass a single phos - pholipid per second compared with 1 Na 1 every 70 h ( 85 ) . At reduced temperatures , lipid bilayers undergo a liquid - gel phase transition in which the acyl chain packing be - comes more ordered ( 187a ) . Furthermore , bilayers made up of more than one phospholipid can undergo lateral phase separations ( 138 , 221 ) . In the case of cell mem - branes , it is generally assumed that their complex lipid and cholesterol makeup ensure a highly ﬂuid state at physiological temperatures . However , recent studies indi - cate preferential packing of sphingolipids and cholesterol into ﬂoating platforms or rafts of lipid that can be isolated as detergent - insoluble membrane complexes ( 369a ) . Al - though the occurrence of such phase separations will complicate bilayer and cell membrane mechanics , their speciﬁc effects have been little studied . In principle , it is possible to study the mechanics of planar lipid bilayers , typically formed by painting a ﬁlm of phospholipid over a hole in a plastic barrier , ( e . g . , see Ref . 112 ) . However , such studies are complicated by the pres - ence of a torus of disordered lipid that can act as a lipid reservoir for formation of new bilayer ( 336 , 433a ) . In contrast , the lipid vesicle is a more “cell - like” structure in that it is a closed system that has its volume set by the osmotic activity of the aqueous environment . How the lipid vesicle responds to mechanical deformation de - pends on both extrinsic ( e . g . , size and geometry ) as well as intrinsic properties ( i . e . , material elastic properties ) ( see Refs . 107 , 109 ) . For example , a deﬂated vesicle ﬁlled with volumes insufﬁcient to form a sphere is highly de - April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 687 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m formable but somewhat unstable with a tendency to spon - taneously “bud” or vesiculate . In contrast , a vesicle in - ﬂated by osmotic or hydrostatic forces into a sphere is stable but shows limited deformability in that with further inﬂation ( i . e . , 2 – 4 % ) it either ruptures or under speciﬁc circumstances forms pores ( 452 ) . Transient pore forma - tion by releasing intravesicular pressure will preserve vesicle structure and thus may have served as an inbuilt protection mechanism for primordial cells before they evolved protein mechanisms . With the assumption that the lipid bilayer behaves as an elastic solid , its intrinsic mechanical properties can be characterized by four elasticity constants ( or moduli ) that describe the response of a unit area of bilayer to com - pression , expansion , bending , and extension ( 108 , 109 ) . The larger the moduli , the greater the resistance to that form of deformation . Elastic deformations are directly proportional to and follow instantaneously the applica - tion and removal of external forces . In comparison , vis - coelastic or plastic deformations show time dependence , and one has to take into account the different viscosity coefﬁcients for each type of deformation ( 108 ) . The elas - tic moduli of bilayer vesicles and human red blood cells ( RBCs ) have typically been measured with the micropi - pette aspiration technique ( 106 ) . A critical feature of this technique is that there is minimal membrane adherence to the pipette to ensure reversible and unimpeded move - ment of the aspirated portion of the membrane within the pipette . Under these circumstances , the membrane ten - sions developed during aspiration can be assumed isotro - pic throughout the vesicle , with the membrane protrusion drawn into the pipette serving as an ampliﬁed measure - ment of membrane area changes . In contrast , in patch - clamp recording , the membrane adheres tightly to the walls of the pipette ( 153 ) . As long as the membrane - glass adhesion is not disrupted ( i . e . , the patch boundary re - mains constant ) , tension changes will be restricted to the “free” membrane area that spans the inside of the pipette ( see sect . VIII A ) . A . Membrane Compression An early study based on the effects of pressure on the lipid bilayer phase transition demonstrated that hydro - static pressures up to ; 1 3 10 7 N / m 2 ( i . e . , 100 atmo - spheres ) did not signiﬁcantly alter the bilayer density change associated with the phase transition ( 378 ) . Based on this result , Evans and Hochmuth ( 108 ) estimated the bilayer compressibility modulus was between 10 9 and 10 10 N / m 2 , similar to that of most “incompressible” ﬂuids . A subsquent study based on X - ray diffraction analysis of osmotically stressed liposomes gave similar estimates ( 275 , see also Ref . 322 ) . Although higher compressive forces ( i . e . , 500 – 1 , 500 atm ) have since been shown to increase acyl chain packing density and squeeze water out of pure phospholipid bilayer , these effects are minimized in bilayers that include cholesterol ( 16 , 334a ) . Thus one may assume that the bilayer of the cell membrane is volumetrically incompressible and will maintain a con - stant density during the mechanical deformations en - countered under physiological conditions . As indicated below , the resistance to volume compression is at least an order of magnitude larger than the resistance to bilayer thickness and area changes . B . Membrane Area Expansion / Thinning The tight lateral packing of lipid molecules in the bilayer underlies its extremely low ion permeability and relatively low water permeability ( 85 ) . However , this fea - ture also contributes to the bilayer’s resistance to area expansion . This is because even slight additional separa - tion of lipid head groups ( i . e . , ; 2 % ) will allow more water to enter between the acyl chains and destabilize the hy - drophobic cohesive structure . Aspiration of spherical ves - icles indicates a simple linear relation between membrane tension ( t ) and the relative area expansion of the bilayer t 5 K A z D A / A 0 ( 1 ) where D A is the increase in surface area , A 0 is the original area , and K A is the area expansion modulus ( 108 ) . Typical values of K A range between 10 2 and 10 3 mN / m depending on the cholesterol content of the bilayer , while lytic ten - sions range between 3 and 30 mN / m , consistent with bilayers only being able to be expanded 2 – 4 % before rupture ( 108 , 296 , 298 ) . With the assumption of a bilayer compressibility modulus of 10 9 N / m 2 , the bilayer is at least 10 - fold more compressible in area than in volume ( given a K A of 200 mN / m divided by 3 nm for the bilayer thick - ness ) . Thus , at near lytic tensions , the area may increase by ; 4 % , but the volume by , 0 . 4 % so that the thickness will decrease by 3 . 6 % . Thus any fractional change in area should be accompanied by a proportional change in mem - brane thickness ( h ) so that D A / A 0 5 2D h / h 0 ( 2 ) where h 0 is the unstressed membrane thickness and the expansion and thickness moduli are related according to K A 5 K h z h 0 ( 108 ) . Estimates of K h based on capacitance measurements of bilayer thickness changes during elec - trocompression indicate values of ; 2 3 10 7 N / m 2 ( 5 ) , which would predict a K A of ; 70 mN / m assuming a bilayer membrane thickness of 3 nm ( 108 ) . Bilayer vesicles generated from membranes of RBC ( 183 , 295 , 296 ) and skeletal muscle ( 298 ) give values of K A of around 500 mN / m , similar to the K A measured for 688 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m osmotically swollen ( i . e , spherical ) RBCs ( 106 , 183 ) . This agreement has been taken to indicate that the CSK of the RBC does not limit the elastic expansion of the bilayer ( 108 ) . In studies of other cell types in which signiﬁcantly lower values of K A have been reported ( e . g . , 2 – 20 mN / m , e . g . , see Ref . 187 ) , it is not clear that elastic membrane expansion at constant area was being measured , since the cells were not preswollen to reduce excess membrane surface area . Interestingly , in the case of RBCs , it has been reported that K A values vary by 6 40 % with voltage changes of 6 200 mV ( 210 , 211 ) . Although the mechanism of this polarity - sensitive K A effect remains unknown , it may reﬂect electric forces acting on packing of the highly asymmetrical lipid bilayer of the RBC ( 458 ) . In this case , it will be interesting to examine the voltage effects on RBCs that have lost their phospholipid asymmetry due to lipid scrambling ( 152 , 458 ) . C . Membrane Bending / Curvature The resistance of the bilayer to bending arises be - cause of differential expansion or compression of the two monolayers within the bilayer and will depend on how tightly the two halves of the bilayer are coupled ( i . e . , degree of interdigitation between the acyl chains ) . If there is no coupling so that the two monolayers can rapidly slide past one another , there will be little resistance to bending . Bending rigidity is also dependent on the spon - taneous curvature of the bilayer , which depends on the lipid composition and area of each monolayer ( see sect . III ) as well as the coupling of the CSK to the bilayer ( 91 , 431 ) . In the speciﬁc case of a bilayer sealed tightly to the walls of the patch pipette , the bending rigidity of the membrane patch should be increased because the attach - ment of the outer monolayer to the pipette walls will restrict its movement relative to the inner monolayer . Although the estimated bending modulus of the bilayer ( K B ; 10 2 19 N z m ) indicates that bending resistance is signiﬁcantly less than resistance to expansion ( 108 ) , it is the bending rigidity that determines the shape of the lipid vesicle , its elastic response to membrane dimpling , and the amplitude of thermally induced ﬂuctuations in the vesicle ( 452a ; 276a and references therein ) . D . Membrane Extension / Shear Above the phase transition temperature , the bilayer has unrestricted internal ﬂuidity and displays negligible surface shear rigidity so that it ﬂows like a ﬂuid in re - sponse to shear or extension . Below the phase transition , the shear rigidity increases along with hydrocarbon chain order ( 108 ) . Furthermore , bilayers that undergo lipid phase separations may be expected to show heterogene - ities in shear rigidity ( 138 ) . Similarly , the existence of lipid rafts in cell membranes ( 369a ) may result in differential rates of lipid ﬂow in response to shear . However , more important is the cortical CSK that by providing the ﬂuid bilayer with a solid support signiﬁcantly increases the shear rigidity of the cell membrane and thereby allows elastic responses to membrane extension ( see sect . VII ) . For example , the human RBC has an elastic shear mod - ulus of ; 10 2 2 mN / m and can recover rapidly from large extensions . However , after treatments { e . g . , . 48°C or increase in intracellular Ca 2 1 concentration ( [ Ca 2 1 ] i ) } that disrupt the cortical CSK , the shear modulus is so diminished the RBC undergoes spontaneous fragmenta - tion ( e . g . , see Fig . 8 in Ref . 284 ; Ref . 152 ) . E . Viscous Properties and Dynamic Response of Bilayer Vesicles Elastic solids respond instantaneously to deforma - tion . However , a bilayer vesicle cannot be deformed in - stantaneously because of the inertia of surrounding water movement and in speciﬁc cases possibly due to the vis - cous properties ( e . g . , bending viscosity ) of the bilayer itself ( 24 ) . For bilayer expansion , hydrodynamic drag rather than expansion viscosity is most likely rate limit - ing . For example , based on ﬂuorescence polarization measurements of the bilayer hydrocarbon interior , the expansion viscosity ( y A ) of the bilayer has been estimated to be 10 2 10 N z s / m ( i . e . , comparable to a 10 - Å - thick layer of olive oil , Ref . 108 ) . In this case , the time constant for area relaxation ( t A ) will be 10 2 9 s according to the rela - tion t A 5 y A / K A and assuming a K A of 10 2 mN / m ( 108 ) . How does this value compare with experimentally mea - sured kinetics of bilayer expansion ? Clearly such mea - surements are limited by current methods . For example , even relatively sophisticated pressure - clamp techniques can only give pressure steps with a rise time of ; 1 ms ( 272 , 273 ) , and these cause membrane patch movements ( i . e . , expansion ) and MG channel activation with millisec - ond latencies ( 448 ) . In comparison , voltage steps ( i . e . , with a rise time , 10 m s ) applied to outer hair cells cause membrane patch expansions of ; 1 % with a t of 100 m s , while the underlying membrane charge movement has a t of 10 m s ( 119a ) . The discrepancy may reﬂect membrane damping by the ﬂuid movement in the pipette and / or the viscous drag of the cortical CSK . The relative contribu - tions may be separated by measurements on blebbed ( i . e . , CSK - disrupted ) hair cells . In terms of shear relaxation , the negligibly small shear modulus of the ﬂuid bilayer should allow even faster intrinsic kinetics ( i . e . , , 10 2 9 s ) . The shear relaxation of cell membranes may be rate limited by the larger shear viscosity of the underlying CSK . In the speciﬁc case of bilayer bending , the interfacial drag be - tween the two monolayers may be sufﬁciently large ( i . e . , 10 7 N z s / m 3 ) to slow membrane bending and shape recov - April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 689 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ery ( 110 ) . Evidence of slow bending kinetics may be reﬂected in the relaxation of ﬁne membrane tethers drawn from lipid vesicles ( 181 ) and possibly the adapta - tion of MG channel activity in liposome membrane patches ( see sect . VIII E ) . In summary , the mechanical equilibrium of a lipid vesicle is established by the balance of external forces applied to the membrane ( i . e . , expansion and bending ) opposed by the action of membrane tension and the bend - ing rigidity . In considering deformation - sensitive mem - brane parameters that might inﬂuence membrane protein conformational changes , it is often overlooked that dila - tion of the elastic bilayer ( i . e . , increasing the area occu - pied by lipid molecules ) should be accompanied by a proportional decrease in bilayer thickness ( i . e . , assuming volume incompressibility ) . In addition , and as described below , factors that affect spontaneous membrane curva - ture and bending rigidity may inﬂuence protein conforma - tional changes . In terms of bilayer dynamics , that rate of membrane deformations involving bilayer expansion and extension may be damped by the hydrodynamics of the adjacent water compartments . However , membrane bending and relaxation may be rate limited by viscous drag between the monolayers . III . MECHANICAL DEFORMATION OF THE BILAYER BY MEMBRANE PROTEIN INSERTION The next level of complexity that can be considered is how insertion of membrane proteins may mechanically distort the bilayer and , in turn , how mechanically induced bilayer distortions may inﬂuence protein conformational changes . The central idea to bilayer - protein interaction is that the hydrophobic thickness of the bilayer immediately adjacent to the membrane protein will tend to match the length of the protein’s hydrophobic exterior ( Fig . 1 ; Refs . 290 , 291 ) . This may be expected to occur because any uncompensated mismatch will add a high energetic cost by exposing hydrophobic groups to water . Because pro - teins are relatively rigid , whereas lipid hydrocarbon chains are ﬂexible , the condition of hydrophobic match - ing can be achieved by stretching , squashing , and / or tilt - ing of the lipid chains ( 172 , 193 ) . Recent direct evidence supporting protein - induced changes in lipid organization comes from the demonstration that hydrophobic a - helical peptides , including gramicidin A , can change a bilayer into a nonlamellar structure , with this transition depen - dent on the degree of hydrophobic mismatch ( 217 ) . Fur - thermore , insertion of peptides , including alamethicin , into bilayers causes a concentration - dependent thinning of the bilayer as measured by lamellar X - ray diffraction ( 173 ) . One of the consequences of the hydrophobic mis - match idea is that proteins will tend to surround them - selves with lipids of matching size and shape so that the mechanical strain on the bilayer will be minimized ( 82 , 111 , 125 , 140 , 352 ) . Furthermore , if the lipid composition of the membrane can be altered , one might expect to see shifts in protein conformational changes . Evidence sup - porting these ideas has come from studies of the effects of foreign phospholipids and lipophilic agents on MG chan - nel activities ( 53 , 251 , 253 ) . For example , the opposite effects observed with some lipophilic agents on gramici - din and N - methyl - D - aspartate ( NMDA ) channel kinetics may be explained by differences in lipid shape , as deﬁned by the ratio of head group size ( H ) to the acyl tail area ( T ) , on the localized curvature of the bilayer ( 53 , 253 ) . Lipids with H 5 T will tend to favor neutral curvature , lipids with H . T will favor positive curvature , and lipids with T . H FIG . 1 . A membrane protein in changing conformation also undergoes changes in hydrophobic mismatch with the lipid bilayer . A : positive hydrophobic mismatch in which the protein promotes local positive curvature in the lipid bilayer . B : a protein conformation that promotes local neg - ative curvature . C : neutral mismatch in which the protein does not distort the bilayer . [ Modiﬁed from Fattal and Ben - Shaul ( 111 ) . ] 690 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m will favor negative curvature . As described below , the effects of lipids of different geometry on MG channel gating provided the initial clue that changes in membrane thickness and / or local curvature may underlie one mech - anism of MG channel gating ( 136 , 251 ) . The importance of the surrounding lipids on protein function may also be reﬂected in the enzyme - regulated ( i . e . , ﬂoppase and trans - locase ) asymmetrical distribution of phospholipid in each monolayer , which is lost with scramblase activation ( 458 ) . Figure 1 considers the speciﬁc case of a membrane protein that has three stable conformational states , each with different types of hydrophobic mismatch with the bilayer ( i . e . , A positive , B negative , and C neutral ) . Inser - tion of foreign lipids or membrane thinning by altering the energetic cost of membrane deformation should cause shifts in the distribution among these conformations ( e . g . , membrane thinning would favor B ) . However , effects such as ligand binding , phosphorylation , or membrane polarization may cause shifts independent of hydrophobic mismatch . In this case , complex interactions may arise between mechanical and other forms of stimuli . IV . SIMPLE PEPTIDES THAT FORM MECHANICALLY GATED CHANNELS Alamethicin and gramicidin are the best - character - ized membrane channels in terms of their biophysics ( i . e , conductance and gating ) , structure - activity relations , and modeling of open - closed channel conformations ( 6 , 47 , 355 , 426 ) . Therefore , the demonstration that both chan - nels display mechanosensitivity in pure lipid bilayers , similar to prokaryotic MG channels , has provided the opportunity to analyze possible underlying molecular mechanisms in extremely well - deﬁned simple systems . A . Alamethicin Alamethicin is a 20 - amino acid peptide that forms voltage - gated multi - conductance state channels in lipid bilayers ( 47 , 355 ) . The most commonly evoked model to explain channel formation is a “barrel - stave” model in which each stave of the barrel is formed by a single a - helical monomer . To explain the voltage sensitivity of alamethicin , two main classes of mechanisms have been proposed ( 47 ) . In one , the channel exists as a preaggre - gate of subunits , and a voltage - dependent conformational change results in channel formation . In the other , ala - methicin exists predominantly as monomers and voltage - dependent insertion ( or partitioning ) with subsequent ag - gregation that leads to channel formation . Because evi - dence exists supporting both mechanisms ( 47 ) , analysis of the mechanosensitivity of alamethicin channel gating was used in an attempt to discriminate between the two mechanisms ( 313 ) . Initially , Opsahl and Webb ( 313 ) dem - onstrated in patch - clamped bilayers ( i . e . , using the “tip - dip” method ) that increased membrane tension increased the probability of the channel occupying higher conduc - tance states . Their quantitative analysis of the relation between the state of occupation and applied membrane tension ( t ) was interpreted in terms of the work done in channel opening W 5 t z D A , where the switch - ing between the adjacent states involves an increase in membrane occupied area of the channel complex ( D A ) of ; 1 . 2 6 0 . 10 nm 2 . Based on these area changes , they proposed that the mechanosensitivity of switching be - tween different conductance states could be explained by a model involving two tension - sensitive steps . Step 1 in - volved insertion or partitioning of an additional monomer ( cross - sectional area ; 0 . 8 nm 2 ) into the channel bilayer . Step 2 involved the subsequent association of the inserted monomer with the existing channel aggregate resulting in an increase in pore area ( ; 0 . 4 nm 2 ) . In favoring the subunit - recruitment model , Opsahl and Webb ( 313 ) pointed out that the observed area changes were most likely too large to be compatible with a model involving rearrangement ( expansion ) of the monomers within a ﬁxed aggregate ( 115a ) . Furthermore , their observation that the free energy difference between closed and open channel conformations varied linearly with tension con - ﬁrmed that ﬁrst - order area changes were responsible for the mechanosensitivity , while second - order ( quadratic ) effects due to compliance changes in channel states were not signiﬁcant ( 69 , 349 ) . An increase in pore area of 0 . 4 nm 2 would give an increase in pore volume of ; 1 . 3 nm 3 assuming a pore length of 3 nm . This volume change is at least of the same order predicted based on osmotic ex - periments that indicate channel switching involves up - take of up to 3 nm 3 of water ( 421 ) . Opsahl and Webb ( 313 ) demonstrated equivalent tension sensitivity for the three lowest adjacent conductance states in bilayers of ﬁxed composition . It will be interesting to see if these same states as well as the higher states generated in bilayers with high curvature ( 214 ) display the same tension sensi - tivity as might be expected from their model . Finally , Opsahl and Webb ( 313 ) did not consider the free energy contribution on changing the environment of one face of the recruited alamethicin subunit from that low dielectric of the lipid bilayer to the high dielectric of the aqueous pore . As described later for a bacterial MG channel , the large free energy change associated with channel opening may arise from the energetic cost of exposing pore - lining , hydrophobic residues to water in the open pore ( 443 , see sect . VI I ) . For alamethicin , the subunit recruitment model re - mains intuitively attractive and appears consistent with most of the experimental data . However , data on the effects of lipid composition on alamethicin conductance switching ( 214 ) may indicate an alternative mechanism April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 691 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m related to hydrophobic coupling between the peptide and bilayer . B . Gramicidin Gramicidin is a 15 - amino acid peptide that also forms channels in bilayers . Although a simple molecule , it ex - hibits two different folding motifs : a double helix and a helical dimer . This polymorphism in structure is manifest in solution , in bilayers , and in the solid state ( 426 ) . Al - though both folding motifs may form transmembrane pores or channels , there is substantial evidence that the most frequently observed channel arises through the dimerization reaction between two nonconducting mono - mers that insert into each monolayer as a - helices ( 306 ) . The length of the gramicidin dimer exterior is 2 . 2 nm , which can be compared with ; 3 nm for a phopholipid bilayer and 3 . 2 nm for the long axis of alamethicin ( 115a ) . As illustrated in Figure 1 B , because of gramicidin’s nega - tive mismatch , the bilayer hydrophobic core will tend to be compressed ( i . e . , seen as a negative curvature ) to match the channel’s hydrophobic exterior surface . Several groups have previously reported apparent ten - sion sensitivity in the gating of gramicidin channels ( 101 , 297 , 341 ) . However , interpretation of these early studies was complicated because channels were studied in black lipid bilayers where changes in tension remain undeﬁned and in some cases membrane thickness as well as tension was altered . In a more recent study , the pipette aspiration tech - nique was used to increase tension in bilayer vesicles ( 136 , see sect . II ) . With this technique it was demonstrated that tension increased the rate of gramicidin channel formation ( 2 - to 4 - fold ) and , to a lesser extent , the average channel lifetime ( 136 ) . Note this increase in lifetime was opposite to previous reports that increased tension decreased gramici - din channel lifetime ( 101 , 297 , 341 ) . For gramicidin , there is little difference in the mem - brane area occupied by monomers and dimers that might explain the tension sensitivity of channel gating . Instead , Goulian et al . ( 136 ) proposed that increased tension , by causing bilayer thinning ( see sect . II B ) , improved the hy - drophobic coupling between the bilayer and the dimer , thereby reducing the membrane deformation energy as - sociated with channel formation and increasing the acti - vation energy associated with channel dissociation . The smaller effect of tension on rates of channel dissociation compared with rates of formation were shown to be consistent with the smaller displacement ( ; 0 . 1 nm ) of monomers necessary for dissociation compared with the larger mismatch ( i . e . , ; 0 . 4 nm ) between the dimer and bilayer . In contrast to the linear dependence of free en - ergy change of alamethicin channel switching with ten - sion ( 313 ) , gramicidin displayed a quadratic dependence ( 136 ) , possibly reﬂecting the elastic properties of mem - brane deformation ( 252 ) . According to Nielsen et al . ( 300 ) , if a protein conformational change involves an increase in the hydrophobic mismatch from 0 . 1 to 0 . 13 nm , there will be a 10 - fold shift in the equilibrium distri - bution of protein conformations due to these elastic prop - erties of the membrane . In addition to the effects of membrane tension , a variety of other experimental maneuvers have been shown to alter gramicidin channel gating . These effects were also inter - preted as arising through changes in membrane deformation energy . The treatments include incorporation of membrane lipids , detergents , and cholesterol that tend to alter the membrane local curvature , thereby either stabilizing the channel , in the case of agents that promote positive curva - ture , or destabilizing the channel , in the case of agents that promote negative curvature ( 251 , 253 ) . Similarly , conditions such as elevated Ca 2 1 that decrease electrostatic energy of the bilayer by screening surface charge are proposed to promote channel dissociation by a mechanism involving changes in the membrane local curvature or thickness ( 254 ) . Note that although the gramicidin channel is axially symmetrical , its sensitivity to the sign of local curvature of the adjacent lipid is expected in terms of the mismatch model ( see Fig . 1 ) . One would also predict that changes in membrane voltage , by altering membrane thickness through electroconstriction ( 5 ) , would also al - ter membrane deformation energy and thereby gramicidin channel gating . However , voltage - sensitive gating of gramicidin has not been reported ( 6 ) . In summary , increased bilayer tension promotes dimer - ization of gramicidin and higher conductance states of ala - methicin . It may be that different mechanisms underlie the mechanosensitivity of the two channels . For alamethicin , a subunit recruitment model has been favored over the ﬁxed aggregate model . However , there is evidence that indicates the switching between alamethicin conductance states is dependent on lipid composition , similar to gramicidin ex - cept that the lipids that promote gramicidin dimerization favor lower conductance states of alamethicin ( 214 , 251 ) . Because other evidence indicates that membrane deforma - tion energy may be the major driving force for the alamethi - cin insertion transition ( see Ref . 171 ) , the hydrophobic mis - match model may also contribute to the mechanosensitivity of alamethicin . Finally , the existence of polymorphic struc - tures , ambiguities , and unresolved issues with such simple channel - forming peptides is a useful reminder of the com - plications that lie ahead for modeling larger and more com - plicated channel proteins as described in the next section . V . STRUCTURE OF PROKARYOTIC CELLS The discovery of Archaea ( formerly achaebacteria ) has clearly shown that the old prokaryote / eukaryote di - chotomy is obsolete by largely oversimplifying diversity 692 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of prokaryotic microbes in all its aspects including pro - karyotic cell envelopes ( 436 ) . Nevertheless , from the per - spective of the MG channel gating mechanism , bacterial as well as archaeal cells may be considered the next level of complexity after a bilayer vesicle . The cytoplasmic membrane of bacteria is a fragile structure composed of phospholipids and proteins enclosed by a cell wall ( i . e . , outer membrane ) that provides a strong , rigid structural component able to withstand the osmotic pressures caused by the intracellular concentration of various os - moticants in the cell ( 423 ) . Without the mechanical sup - port of the cell wall , a bacterial cell would behave as a tiny dialysis bag that would take up water from the envi - ronment , swell , and burst . Bacterial cell walls ( with the exception of the mycoplasma ) have a structural compo - nent called peptidoglycan that provides the rigidity nec - essary to maintain cell integrity . The major building blocks of peptidoglycan are N - acetylglucosamine and N - acetylmuramic acid that are unique to bacterial cells . On the basis of the Gram stain , a differential staining tech - nique invented in 1884 by Christian Gram , bacteria can be divided into two large groups : Gram positive and Gram negative , which differ in the peptidoglycan content of their cell wall ( i . e . , ; 5 times larger in Gram - positive cells ) ( Fig . 2 A ) than in Gram - negative cells ( see Fig . 2 B ) . In addition , Gram - negative bacteria have a second chemi - cally distinct outer membrane attached to the peptidogly - can layer on its external side . The lipid bilayer of the outer membrane is made of phospholipids in the inner leaﬂet of the bilayer and lipopolysaccharides ( LPS ) in its outer monolayer . Gram - positive cells lack the second outer membrane ( 300b ) . The situation with Archaea is more complicated , likely reﬂecting the large diversity of extreme habitats to which Archaea have adapted ( 318 ) . Archaea lack pepti - doglycan , which was one of the features used originally to deﬁne prokaryotes . Two types of archaeal cells , which to date were found to harbor MG channels in their cell membranes , may illustrate this . The cell wall in halophilic archaea , such as Haloferax volcanii , whose cell mem - brane was the ﬁrst to be examined for the presence of MG channels ( 239 ) , consists of the S layer formed by a hex - agonal arrangement of a glycoprotein ( 238 ) . The protein appears to be anchored in the cytoplasmic membrane by a hydrophobic stretch found near the COOH terminus of the H . volcanii glycoprotein sequence ( 392 ) . Thermo - plasma volcanii is the second archaeon found to have MG channels in its cell membrane ( 220 ) . This thermo - philic archaeon has no cell wall , but instead contains an outer meshlike lattice of elements similar to nuclear lamins that is reminiscent of the CSK in animal cells ( 179 ) . In addition , its cell membrane contains ether lipids based on 40 - carbon , isopranoid - branched diglycerol tethra - ethers ( 361 ) . In general , lipid bilayers of cell membranes of all archaea consist of diphytanylglycerol - diether or - tetraether or both ( 92 ) . It is worth mentioning that nei - ther bacteria nor archaea have a CSK in the eukaryotic sense . To describe the structural diversity of prokaryotic cell envelopes in its entirety would go over the scope of this review . What matters from the perspective of pro - karyotic MG channels is that despite this diversity , it is always the lipid bilayer that is the tension - bearing ele - ment . The cell wall functions as a parallel viscoelastic structure that constrains the bilayer from excessive dila - FIG . 2 . Cell envelope of Gram - positive ( A ) and Gram - negative bacteria ( B ) . [ From Volk ( 423 ) . ] April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 693 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tion and in this way may reduce MG channel activation ( 41 , 265 , 267 ) . The practical implication of the MG chan - nel’s sensitivity to bilayer tension is that , as discussed later , they retain their mechanosensitivity when reconsti - tuted in liposomes ( 239 , 388 ) . The physiological implica - tion is that they regulate cellular turgor by responding to bilayer stretch caused by osmotic swelling ( 2 , 244 ; see sect . VI J ) . VI . MECHANICALLY GATED CHANNELS IN BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA Since their initial discovery in giant spheroplasts of E . coli ( 267 ) , the existence of MG channels in Gram - negative and Gram - positive bacteria has been amply doc - umented ( 17 , 18 , 26 , 27 , 268 , 387 , 455 , 456 ) . The best - characterized are the MG channels of the Gram - negative bacterium E . coli , which have been studied by the patch - clamp technique in various giant spheroplasts ( 41 , 76 , 229 , 266 , 267 ) and in reconstituted membrane fractions fused with liposomes ( 18 , 87 ) . Based on their conductance and sensitivity to applied pressure , three types of mechano - sensitive channels ( Msc ) can be distinguished : MscM ( M for mini ) , MscS ( S for small ) , and MscL ( L for large ) ( 17 ) . The higher the conductance , the higher their activation pressure as evident in both in situ or in vitro recordings . Also , in Gram - positive S . faecalis and B . subtilis ( 397 , 398 , 455 ) , membrane stretch results in the activation of a whole array of conductances , ranging from 100 pS to up to several nS . A . Identiﬁcation of the MscL Gene / Protein The property of E . coli MG channels of being acti - vated by mechanical force transmitted via the lipid bilayer ( 266 ) allowed for detergent solubilization and functional reconstitution of these channels into artiﬁcial liposomes amenable to patch clamp ( 388 ) . Furthermore , it allowed application of a unique strategy of fractionation of E . coli membrane constituents by column chromatography and functional examination of the individual fractions for MG channel activity by patch clamp . This unusual approach led to the identiﬁcation of a membrane protein underlying the activity of MscL ( 386 , 388 ) . The MscL protein was partially sequenced , which enabled the cloning of the corresponding mscL gene ( 384 ) . The expression of the mscL gene alone in a heterologous and in an in vitro transcription / translation system demonstrated that the mscL gene alone was necessary and sufﬁcient for MscL activity . B . Structure of MscL The mscL gene encodes a 15 - kDa protein comprising 136 amino acid residues corresponding roughly to the 17 - kDa protein band on a SDS - PAGE originally identiﬁed as the MscL protein ( 386 , 388 ) . Manipulation of the mscL gene by recombinant DNA techniques enabled production of the MscL protein on a preparative scale , which in addition to functional studies allowed also for higher order structural studies of MscL . Two methods have been used for simple puriﬁcation of the MscL recombinant proteins . The ﬁrst method employs the glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) protein fusion technique to express MscL attached to a cleavable GST domain ( 168 ) , whereas the second method uses a 6xHis polyhistidine tag for puriﬁcation of the recombinant MscL protein on a Ni 1 - NTA column ( 27 ) . Both methods yielded functional MG channels in patch - clamp experiments . The 6xHis - tagged MscL protein was used for secondary structure analysis by employing both transmission Fourier transform infra - red spectroscopy ( FTIR ) and circular dichroism ( CD ) ( 7 ) . The MscL secondary structure includes two a - helical transmembrane domains ( M1 and M2 ) connected by a periplasmic loop ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . Thus MscL belongs to the family of structurally related ion channels with two membrane segments that include the epithelial sodium channel ( ENaC ) , the inward - rectiﬁer potassium channel ( Kir ) , and the ATP - gated ( P2X ) cation channel ( 37 , 302 ) . Using the PhoA fusion technique , Blount et al . ( 27 ) could demonstrate that the NH 2 as well as the COOH terminus of MscL were located within the cytoplasm . The higher order structure of MscL was ﬁrst assessed in cross - linking studies . In one study , the multimeric structure of MscL was examined either by cross - linking the protein in situ and visualizing the cross - linked prod - ucts by Western blotting using MscL antibodies against a COOH - terminal peptide or by cross - linking puriﬁed 6xHis - tagged MscL in which puriﬁed proteins were cross - linked . Both approaches indicated that MscL might form homo - hexameric channels ( 26 , 27 ) . In another study , various cross - linkers were applied directly to bacterial cells in which the MscL protein was radiolabeled by [ 35 S ] methi - onine ( 170 ) and left open the possibility that MscL forms multimers of higher order other than a hexamer . How - ever , recent reevaluation of cross - linking experiments us - ing various cross - linking reagents indicates that MscL is a homopentamer ( 389 , 270a ) . Preparative scale production of milligram amounts of the MscL protein allowed em - ployment of electron crystallography to study the struc - tural assembly of MscL . The crystallographic analysis of two - dimensional MscL crystals at 1 . 5 - nm resolution indi - cated that MscL forms homohexameric channels in lipid bilayers ( 353 ) . However , the three - dimensional X - ray crystallographic study by Chang et al . ( 60 ) solved the oligomeric structure of the MscL homolog from Mycobac - terium tuberculosis ( Tb - MscL ) to 0 . 35 - nm resolution and indicated this homolog is organized as a homopentamer ( Fig . 3 C ) ( for discussion of homohexamer versus homo - pentamer , see sect . VI D ) . 694 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m C . Conductive Properties of MscL MscL forms nonselective ion channels of a very large conductance . The absence of any cation / anion selectivity or saturation in channels conductance up to 2 M KCl indicates MscL forms a large water - ﬁlled pore ( 75 , 390 ) . The reported values for MscL conductance range from 0 . 9 to 4 . 4 nS . Some of the differences may reﬂect the different FIG . 3 . Large mechanosensitive chan - nel ( MscL ) membrane - spanning models . A : membrane topology of E . coli MscL mono - mer proposed by Sukharev et al . ( 387 ) . B : drawing of the MscL pentamer ( left ) and monomer ( right ) from M . tuberculosis ac - cording to the 3 - dimensional structural model proposed by Chang et al . ( 60 ) . [ Mod - iﬁed from Oakley et al . ( 305 ) . ] April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 695 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ionic composition of the recording solutions used for patch - clamp experiments . However , the variations in MscL conductance were also observed in recording solu - tions of the same or similar ionic composition ( 27 , 75 , 226 , 283 , 384 ) . The two extreme conductance values reported for MscL ( in a recording solution containing 200 mM KCl plus 40 mM MgCl 2 and 5 or 10 mM HEPES , pH 6 . 0 or 7 . 0 ) are 2 . 5 and 3 . 8 nS , although the exact reason for these diffferences remains unclear . As discussed in the next section , one explanation is that MscL can form more that one type of homomultimeric channel , perhaps analogous to the channel and pore forms of gramicidin ( see Ref . 426 ) . D . Is MscL a Hexamer or a Pentamer ? It is important to establish the multimeric organiza - tion of MscL because , as previously discussed for ala - methicin and gramicidin , this feature can have important implications for gating mechanisms . As indicated above , homohexameric ( Eco - MscL ) and homopentameric ( Tb - MscL ) structures have been reported from crystallo - graphic analysis ( 60 , 353 ) . In addition , several reports based on cross - linking experiments contributed to the MscL structural controversy by showing that MscL may form hexamers ( 27 ) as well as pentamers ( 389 ) . More - over , tandems of two MscL monomers expressed as a single dimer protein formed functional channels in giant E . coli spheroplasts , indicating that the functional chan - nels can be made from an even number of monomers ( 27 ) . On this last point , it would be interesting to obtain two - or three - dimensional crystals of channels made of the MscL protein dimers . Is MscL a hexamer or a pentamer ? Probably it is safe to say that MscL forms pentameric channels taking into account the resolution of 0 . 35 nm at which the Tb - MscL three - dimensional structure was obtained ( 60 ) . Moreover , at the resolution of 1 . 5 nm for the two - dimensional Eco - MscL crystals , a pentameric MscL structure is just as likely to be judged as a hexamer ( 353 ) . A resolution of at least 1 . 0 nm would be required to conclusively distinguish between hexameric and pentameric structures of the two - dimensional MscL crystals ( J . - L . Rigaud and J - . J . Lacaperre , personal communication ) . Nonetheless , it is worthwhile pointing out several peculiar details of the Tb - MscL structure and the experimental conditions at which the three - dimensional structure was obtained . Ac - cording to the Protein Data Base ( PDB ) summary report , the Matthews coefﬁcient ( V m ) of 5 . 98 for MscL is high compared with known structures of other proteins in the data base , indicating that the MscL structure is an outlier . The coefﬁcient is usually in the range between 1 . 5 and 4 . 0 for tightly and loosely packed proteins , respectively . Also , the Ramachandran Z - score of 2 5 . 671 for MscL appears very low and suggests a very unusual backbone confor - mation of Tb - MscL that is probably due to some local uncertainties in the backbone side chain conformation ( A . Oakley , personal communication ) . In addition , the Tb - MscL crystallization experiments were performed at a very low pH between 3 . 6 and 3 . 8 . This pH is below the p K a value of 4 . 25 of the glutamic acid residue E104 in the COOH - terminal domain of Tb - MscL , which probably had to be protonated to stabilize the MscL pentameric struc - ture . At higher pH one might expect the ﬁve E104 residues of the pentamer to become negatively charged causing destabilization of the multimeric structure , unless there is charge compensation by neighboring basic residues or cations present in the surrounding medium ( 305 ) . Change in pH is known to modulate signiﬁcantly the pressure sensitivity of MG channels ( as discussed later ) and also induce structural changes in proteins ( 42 ) . Therefore , at pH ; 7 the MscL tertiary structure might differ from the reported pentameric one . Obviously , it is not possible to compare directly the two - or three - dimensional structural data of MscL with the electrophysiological conductance measurements , since the crystallographic structures are depicting closed channels , whereas electrophysiology can detect only open conducting channels . For example , the three - dimen - sional crystal structures of the Tb - MscL pentamer re - vealed a transmembrane pore that narrows from 3 . 6 to 0 . 4 nm in diameter in going from the extracellular to the cytoplasmic surface ( 60 ) ( Fig . 3 B ) . In contrast , patch - clamp permeation studies indicated the open MscL has a channel pore of ; 4 . 0 nm diameter ( 75 ) . Consequently , a major structural rearrangement occurs when MscL “switches” between the two conformations ( 14 ) . To fully understand the process will most likely require the crystal structure of the open MscL . E . Origin of MscL Mechanosensitivity Bacterial and archaeal MG channels provide a clear demonstration that microbial MG channels can sense membrane tension directly . The tension develops in the lipid bilayer alone and directly gates these channels as described by the bilayer model . Since it was ﬁrst pro - posed in relation to bacterial MG channels ( 261 , 266 ) , the bilayer model has become , along with the tethered model , one of the two mechanisms used to describe MG channel gating ( see sect . VIII C ) . In the case of MscL , the validity of the bilayer model has been amply documented ( 28 , 168 , 384 , 387 , 388 , 390 ) . Interestingly , the well - studied stretch - activated cation ( SA - CAT ) channel endogenous to Xeno - pus oocytes also appears to be gated by bilayer tension ( 448 ) . As the amount of negative pressure ( i . e . , suction ) applied to a patch pipette increases , the MscL channel open probability also increases ( Fig . 4 A ) . Activation of MscL by pressure can be described by a Boltzmann dis - 696 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tribution function for the channel open probability ( P o ) ( Fig . 4 B ) P o / ~ 1 2 P o ! 5 exp @ a ~ p 2 p 1 / 2 ! # ( 3 ) where p is the applied negative pressure , p 1 / 2 is the suc - tion at which the channel is open half the time , and a is the slope of the plot ln [ P o / ( 1 2 P o ) ] . Because the Boltz - mann function is very often used to characterize the mechanosensitivity of MG channels in the literature , we will discuss the meaning of the terms p 1 / 2 and a , ﬁrst in relation to MscL and then other MG channels . The follow - ing exercise should be useful to laboratories studying MG channels that do not routinely image membrane patch movements and calculate the membrane tension changes . As shown previously ( 147 , 374 , 375 , 390 , 448 ) , most MG channels respond to mechanical forces along the plane of the cell membrane ( membrane tension ) , and not pressure perpendicular to it . According to the model of Howard et al . ( 190 ) , the free energy ( D G ) is a linear function of membrane tension t D G 5 t z D A 2 D G o ( 4 ) where D G o is the difference in free energy between the closed and open conformations of the channel in the absence of the externally applied membrane tension and D A is the assumed difference in membrane area occupied by an open and closed channel at a given membrane tension , whereas t D A is the work required to keep an MG channel open by external mechanical force at the open probability of 0 , P o , 1 . Consequently , in this model , the size of D A is considered the sole parameter determining the mechanosenitivity of channel gating ( i . e . , the larger D A the more sensitive the channel ) . Evidence indicates that for non - MG channels , like the ACh receptor channel ( 417 ) and speciﬁc voltage - gated K 1 channels ( 56 , 130 ) , the movement of transmembrane helices is quite small . In contrast , large movements of MscL are needed to account for the large pore formation and the steep tension - re - sponse relation of MscL ( 390 ) . Using the expression in Equation 4 , the Boltzmann function can be rewritten as P o / ~ 1 2 P o ! 5 exp @ ~ t z D A 2 D G o ! / kT # ( 5 ) In the case of MscL , which is activated by membrane tension near the lytic strength of the bilayer ( i . e . , maximal curvature ) , it has been demonstrated that in that activat - ing pressure range and assuming an elastic membrane with a K A 5 10 2 mN / m ( see Refs . 373 , 390 ) , the tension will be nearly proportional to the pressure ( i . e . , there will be little change in curvature ) . Using a version of Laplace’s law t 2 t 1 / 2 5 ~ p 2 p 1 / 2 ! ~ r / 2 ! ( 6 ) where r is the radius of curvature of the liposome mem - brane patch under external negative pressure p applied to the patch pipette . Thus , under these conditions , p 1 / 2 and t 1 / 2 , the characteristic negative pressure and membrane tension , respectively , at which the channel is open 50 % of the time can be assumed to remain constant for a mem - FIG . 4 . Activation of MscL by negative pressure applied to the patch - clamp pipette . A : current traces of the reconstituted recombinant 6xHis - MscL recorded from an isolated liposome patch at various nega - tive pressures applied to a patch pipette . Trace is a ; 100 - s - long record - ing at a pipette potential of 1 30 mV . C denotes the closed state , and O n denotes the open state of n number of channels . Nine channels were active in the patch shown . B : curve is a Boltzmann distribution function calculated for a single MscL shown in A . The function relates negative pressure ( suction ) and open channel probability ( P o ) . Boltzmann distri - bution for a single MS channel has a form P o / ( 1 2 P o ) 5 exp [ a ( p 2 p 1 / 2 ] , where p is the applied negative pressure , p 1 / 2 is the suction at which the channel is open 50 % of the time ( P o 5 0 . 5 ) , and a is the slope of the plot ln [ P o / ( 1 2 P o ) ] . The Boltzmann function is very often described in the MS channel literature in terms of p 1 / 2 and a . For the 6xHis - MscL in the particular recording shown in A , p 1 / 2 was estimated to be ; 77 mmHg , whereas the sensitivity to pressure 1 / a was ; 5 mmHg for e - fold change in P o , which corresponds to D G o ’ 15 kT ( Eq . 5 ) . Overall , D G o for the recombinant 6xHis - MscL was estimated to be 17 . 0 6 1 . 5 kT ( SE ; n 5 4 ) ( A . Kloda and B . Martinac , unpublished data ) . April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 697 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m brane patch during an experiment . Because the free en - ergy difference D G ( Eq . 4 ) is equal to zero when the open probability P o 5 0 . 5 ( P 5 p 1 / 2 and t 5 t 1 / 2 ) , consequently t 1 / 2 5 D G 0 / D A and p 1 / 2 5 2 D G 0 / r D A , whereas a 5 r D A / 2 kT . Thus it follows that at least in liposome or bleb experiments in which parallel CSK elements are not vari - ables in supporting bilayer tension , the slope term will provide a direct estimate of molecular rearrangements of a MG channel , as long as the diameter and shape of patch pipettes remain nearly constant throughout the experi - ments . A convenient expression can be obtained by mul - tiplying p 1 / 2 and a G MGC 5 p 1 / 2 z a5 D G o / kT ( 7 ) showing that the product G MGC is independent of the patch geometry . G MGC provides a direct estimate of the energy difference D G o between the closed and open state of an MS channel , and thus it presents the very charac - teristic of any type of MG channel reconstituted into a deﬁned lipid membrane . For example , according to sev - eral reports , a negative pressure ( p 1 / 2 ) ranging between ; 7 . 7 and 10 . 3 kN / m 2 ( i . e . , ; 58 and 77 mmHg ) is required to activate MscL 50 % of the time in liposome patches ( 3 , 141 , 246a , 220b ) , whereas the sensitivity to pressure ( 1 / a ) of the MscL channels was found to vary between 0 . 6 and 0 . 8 kN / m 2 ( i . e . , 4 . 5 and 6 . 0 mmHg ) with a ; 1 . 67 and 1 . 25 ( kN / m 2 ) 2 1 ( i . e . , 0 . 22 and 0 . 17 mmHg 2 1 ) , respectively ( 3 , 75 , 168 , 220b ) . It follows that on average G MscL ; 14 , and consequently , the average energy required for opening MscL is D G o ; 14 kT . This value is in reasonable agreement with an independent estimate of ; 18 . 6 kT obtained for D G o from P o - membrane tension curves for MscL ( 390 ) . Clearly , the interpretation of Equation 7 becomes more complicated for cell membranes in which the associated cortical CSK ( i . e . , an extrinsic factor ) can alter the tension seen by the bilayer and thereby change the shape of the Boltzmann independent of the intrinsic properties of the channel protein ( see Ref . 447 and sect . VII ) . F . Extrinsic and Intrinsic Factors That Affect MscL and Other MG Channels The apparent sensitivity of MG channels to mem - brane tension may be experimentally altered by the fol - lowing treatments . 1 ) Lysozyme , which disrupts the peptidoglycan of the bacterial cell wall , irreversibly increases the pressure sensitivity of MG channels in E . coli giant spheroplasts ( 41 , 268 ) . 2 ) Cytochalasin , which disrupts actin microﬁlaments , increases the pressure sensitivity of MG channels in chick muscle and snail neurons ( 142 , 370 ) . 3 ) Mechanical decoupling of the CSK from the plasma membrane ( i . e . , blebbing ) in Xenopus oocytes decreases the MG channel mechanosensitivity ( 154 , 160 , 447 ) . 4 ) Amphipatic ( amphiphilic ) compounds can in - crease mechanosensitivity of bacterial ( 266 ) and eukary - otic MG channels ( 323 , 372 ) . 5 ) Deletion , substitution , or single - site mutations can either increase or decrease the native MscL mechanosen - sitivity ( 25 , 28 , 170 , 316 , 317 ) . 6 ) Changes in pH can affect MG channel sensitivity in both ways , with alkaline pH increasing ( 143 ; Martinac , unpublished data ) and acidic pH decreasing the channel’s pressure sensitivity ( 28 ; Martinac , unpublished data ) . These examples illustrate how the apparent mech - anosensitivity of a channel may be altered by extrinsic , intrinsic , or possibly by a combination of mechanisms . Speciﬁcally , examples 1 – 4 may involve alteration in the way mechanical force is delivered to the channel ( i . e . , by alteration of CSK or bilayer properties ) without altering the intrinsic properties of the channel protein ( see also adaptation , sect . VIII E ) , example 5 may involve changes in the protein’s intrinsic mechanosensitivity , and example 6 may result from changes in both extrinsic ( bilayer ) and intrinsic ( protein ) properties . In the speciﬁc case of MscL reconstituted into lipo - somes , the following example illustrates how , for a MG channel activated by lipid bilayer tension , the measured changes in p 1 / 2 and a can provide an estimate of the channel’s intrinsic physical properties and identify the contribution of speciﬁc structural domains to the gating mechanism . Speciﬁcally , Ajouz et al . ( 3 ) studied the ef - fects of various proteases on pressure - dependent gating of MscL in an attempt to identify molecular domains of MscL responsible for mechanosensitivity . They demon - strated that both parameters , a and p 1 / 2 , were dramati - cally affected by protease treatment , with the slope term a signiﬁcantly increased and p 1 / 2 decreased ( i . e . , mech - anosensitivity increased ) . The quantitative changes in p 1 / 2 and a caused by protease treatment were such that G MscL ( Eq . 7 ) ranged between 12 and 18 ( i . e . , D G 0 ; 12 – 18 kT ) compared with ; 14 before protease treatment . Because G MscL and D G 0 were hardly affected by cutting the ex - tramembraneous domains , it was concluded that neither the cytoplasmic termini ( i . e . , the NH 2 and COOH termini ) nor the S2 - S3 periplasmic loop ( see Fig . 3 A ) contribute critically to the mechanical gating of MscL . Instead , it was proposed that these extramembranous domains resist the movement of the transmembrane helices that underlie the critical event in mechanical gating of MscL . Note this result disagrees with the electromechanical model de - scribed below that proposes the NH 2 termini gate MscL ( 141 ) . 698 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m G . Where Is the MscL Gate ? Based on a mutagenesis study in which Gly - 22 ( E . coli MscL ) was changed to all other 19 amino acid residues , Yoshimura et al . ( 443 ) concluded that by analogy with Ala - 20 of Tb - MscL , Gly - 22 should surround the Eco - MscL gate . Indeed , the Tb - MscL has been found to be extremely stiff when expressed in E . coli and examined by the patch clamp . Speciﬁcally , Moe et al . ( 283a ) found that the chan - nel required twice the membrane tension needed to gate the Eco - MscL . In addition , their study showed that amino acid substitutions at the neighboring residue V21 had severe effects on the channel mechanosensitivity , indi - cating that besides G22 , V21 also participates in the en - ergy barrier of MscL gating ( 283a ) . By using the program VOIDOO / FLOOD ( 222 ) , Oakley et al . ( 305 ) estimated that in the closed conformation MscL could be ﬁlled with water molecules to a point 2 . 4 nm below the periplasmic surface of the channel . Also , the second cavity at the cytoplasmic face of the channel was found to be water accessible . Consequently , most of the inside of the closed MscL contains water except for a hydophobic stretch of 0 . 8 nm that includes the Gly - 22 residue and forms a water - tight occlusion . Thus the hydrophobic channel gate is quite thin compared with the 3 - to 3 . 5 - nm - thick membrane bilayer ( 60 ) . If we accept that in the open state of MscL , the hydrophobic gate becomes exposed to water , as orig - inally proposed by Cruickshank et al . ( 75 ) and later reit - erated by Yoshimura et al . ( 443 ) , then can the value of 18 . 6 kT for D G 0 be explained solely by this process . Taking into account that 17 mJ / m 2 is necessary to transfer a hydrophobic protein from an organic solvent into an aqueous environment ( 66 ) , it follows that 18 . 6 kT sufﬁces to expose a hydrophobic area of 4 . 42 nm 2 to water ( 18 . 6 kT 5 7 . 521 3 10 2 20 J ) . This area is relatively small compared with the total membrane - associated area of MscL ( ; 140 nm 2 ) and roughly corresponds to a half sur - face of 5 a - helices , each having a diameter 2 r 5 0 . 68 nm ( 396 ) , with a height l 5 0 . 8 nm corresponding to the height of the hydrophobic gate ( i . e . , 2 r p l ; 5 / 2 5 4 . 27 nm 2 ) . Consequently , this result indicates that most , if not all , of the channel opening energy of 18 . 6 kT is used to expose a relatively small buried hydrophobic surface of the TM1 helices to the ionic environment of the bulk solution surrounding the channel . This may explain why Ajouz et al . ( 3 ) never observed a permanently open MscL and why the proteases did not affect the gating mechanism of the channel . H . Mutagenesis Studies Several studies have used recombinant DNA tech - niques ( 25 , 27 , 28 , 169 , 283 ) or a genetic approach ( 316 ) to dissect the MscL molecule in an attempt to identify the essential functional domains responsible for MscL mech - anosensitivity . Blount et al . ( 27 ) showed that a short deletion of 3 amino acids from the NH 2 terminus ( 14 residues long ) and the larger deletion of 27 amino acids from the COOH - terminal region ( 36 residues long ) had little or no effect on the channel properties . However , when 33 COOH - terminal residues were deleted that in - cluded a charged cluster RKKEEP of 6 more residues , the channel activity was abolished ( 387 ) . Furthermore , these studies demonstrated that single residue substitutions in the ﬁrst transmembrane domain TM1 of MscL , in partic - ular , lysine K31 ( 28 ) and glycine G22 ( 316 , 443 ) , led to major changes in the MscL activities that could be corre - lated with phenotypes with major impairments in re - sponse to osmotic stress . In addition to its structural conservation throughout bacterial species , these studies emphasized the importance of TM1 in the MS properties of MscL . Ha¨se et al . ( 169 ) dissected MscL systematically by introducing deletions , additions , or large substitutions into the extramembranous domains . They reconstituted the mutated proteins into liposomes and examined their function . Consistent with previous ﬁndings ( 27 , 387 ) , large NH 2 - terminal deletions or changes to the NH 2 - termi - nal amino acid sequence affecting the overall charge of the NH 2 terminus were poorly tolerated and resulted in channels that exhibited altered pressure sensitivity and gating . Ha¨se et al . ( 169 ) also conﬁrmed the result of Blount et al . ( 28 ) showing that deletion of the charged cluster RKKEE in the COOH - terminal domain abolished channel activity , possibly indicating MscL was no longer activatable by sublytic membrane tensions . I . Models of MscL Mechanosensitivity There is nothing in the three - dimensional structure of the closed conformation of Tb - MscL that unambiguously points toward a mechanism of how mechanical force gates the channel . However , several models based on structure - function relations are discussed below . 1 . Multimerization model One of the ﬁrst models used to explain MscL gating was a tension - sensitive recruitment of MscL monomers into a pore - forming channel multimer ( i . e . , analogous to the alamethicin recruitment model in sect . IV A ) . This idea was based on pressure - response relations seen in many liposomes , as well as native membrane patches , in which channel activity ( single - channel open probability and number of channels ) continued to increase without satu - ration until the patch ruptured ( 168 , but see Ref . 390 ) . Furthermore , this “multimerization model” seemed to be supported by in situ cross - linking studies that indicated MscL existed predominantly as a monomer ( of ; 15 kDa ) April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 699 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m in the E . coli cell envelope ( 170 ) and the observation that functional channels could be formed from reconstituted MscL monomers electroeluted from SDS gels ( Saint and Martinac , unpublished data ) . However , in contradiction of the model , it was found that a much larger functional channel complex ( ; 70 – 100 kDa ) could be identiﬁed in gel ﬁltration experiments ( 27 ) and that covalently linked tandem subunits produced the same size complex and MscL activity ( 27 ) . We now know that the tandem result may occur because either the extra subunit does not participate in the functional pentameric channel or it is incorporated into a neighboring pentameric channel ( e . g . , see Fig . 7 in Ref . 389 ) . Another result considered incon - sistent with multimerization was the rapid opening tran - sitions ( i . e . , ; 0 . 2 ms ) of single MscL channels that were independent of MscL concentration and applied steady - state pressure ( 383 ) . It was argued that fast transitions excluded diffusion - limited assembly of MscL monomers into functional multimers . However , it remains possible that there is an initial tension - triggered assembly of dis - persed monomers into a multimer that is then gated co - operatively under steady pressure . To exclude this possi - bility , the latency for MscL opening in response to fast pressure steps ( i . e . , ; 1 ms ) should be measured as a function of MscL concentration and step size . 2 . Open - channel model Based on a functional study in which large organic molecules were used to estimate the size of the MscL pore , an open - channel model of MscL was proposed that envisages 12 membrane - spanning a - helices of a hexa - meric channel lining the pore of ; 4 . 0 nm diameter ( 75 ) . Since the three - dimensional Tb - MscL structure indicates that MscL may be a pentamer rather than a hexamer ( 60 ) , 10 transmembrane helices may line the pore of a smaller diameter channel that would have to be shorter to main - tain the observed large conductance . The crystal struc - ture of the closed MscL ( Fig . 3 B , Ref . 60 ) and the perme - ability properties of the open MscL indicate that MscL must undergo a large conformational change . For exam - ple , in order for MscL to open and let through molecules the size of thioredoxin ( radius ; 3 . 5 nm ) ( 2 ) , both TM1 and TM2 helices would need to shift radially from the ﬁvefold axis of symmetry so that the pore size at the cytoplasmic end would match the MscL diameter of ; 3 . 6 nm at the periplasmic end of the channel ( 60 ) ( Fig . 3 B ) . Such a radial shift of helices corresponds to a substantial rearrangement of the channel structure that could ac - count for the large D A of ; 6 nm 2 calculated from the P o versus tension relations ( 390 ) [ the difference in area cal - culated from the radii of the pore at the periplasmic r p 5 1 . 8 nm and cytoplasmic side r c 5 0 . 2 nm of the pentam - eric channel D A 5 p ( r p2 2 r c2 ) ; 10 nm 2 ] . The same study calculated the free energy of transition from the closed to the open states to be 46 . 3 kJ / mol . This is comparable to the folding free energy of ; 54 kJ / mol required to com - pletely unfold the 136 residues of the MscL monomer ( ; 0 . 4 kJ z mol 2 1 z residue 2 1 ) ( 305 ) . Therefore , MscL must experience a radical structural change in channel opening that requires large molecular energies of the order expected during protein denaturation unless some unknown low - energy transition pathway exists between the two channel states . 3 . Electromechanical coupling model By recognizing the overall importance of charged residues , in particular in the NH 2 - and COOH - terminal domain , Gu et al . ( 141 ) proposed an electromechanical coupling ( EMC ) model for gating MscL . In essence , the model proposes that the pore region of MscL is present in the closed channel and that the NH 2 termini of the ﬁve subunits interact electrostatically with one another and pore regions to gate the channel ( i . e . , 5 swinging gates ) . Membrane tension by altering the tilt of the transmem - brane helices is proposed to interfere with the balance of coulombic forces between the various domains of the channel molecule . The actual channel gating is accom - plished by the ﬂexible NH 2 termini of each subunit pivot - ing around glycine G14 ( i . e . , located at the bilayer - water interface between the NH 2 terminus and the TM1 trans - membrane helix ) to occlude the pore . Although the EMC model could account for some differences in mechano - sensitivity of several MscL mutant channels ( 141 ) , in its original form and with its underlying assumptions it suf - fers basic limitations . For example , one assumption was the fractional increase in pore area ( D A ) and patch area during channel gating were the same ( i . e . , equal protein and patch elasticity ) so that D A was calculated ( using Eq . 4 ) as only 0 . 78 nm 2 with a free energy difference ( D G o ) of 2 kT . However , direct estimates D A and D G o from P o - tension curves give values of 6 . 5 nm 2 and 18 . 6 kT , respec - tively ( 390 ) . The model also did not take into account electrolyte screening of charged residues that would tend to negate any electrostatic interactions between the NH 2 termini and the pore over the necessary long distances ( i . e . , ; 1 nm ) . Furthermore , the model predicts that MscL gating should be strongly dependent on ionic strength and membrane potential . However , no signiﬁcant difference in MscL gating is observed in salt solutions ranging from 0 . 05 to 1 M or as a function of voltage ( 390 ) . Furthermore , despite EMC model expectations , MscL function is not critically dependent on the length or charge of the NH 2 terminal , since the removal of 3 , substitution of 8 , or addition of 20 new residues to this domain does not signiﬁcantly alter MscL gating ( 26 , 28 , 169 ) . Similarly , proteolytic cleavage of either the NH 2 and / or COOH ter - mini , rather than producing a permanently open channel as predicted , increases channel mechanosensitivity with - 700 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m out altering channel conductance ( 3 ) . Finally , the three - dimensional crystal structure of the closed state of Tb - MscL indicates the channel gate involves a narrow pore region ( ; 0 . 2 nm in diameter ) near the cytoplasmic ends of the TM1 domains ( 60 ) . Despite these limitations , there are speciﬁc MscL structure - function relations that seemed to support the EMC model and have yet to be explained by other models . For example , the importance of charged residues in MscL gating has been well demon - strated by the deletion of the charged cluster RKKEE in the COOH - terminal domain that renders the D 104 MscL mutant nonfunctional within the range of sublytic mem - brane tensions corresponding to pressures of 200 mmHg . The EMC model predicts the D 104 mutant should only be functional at negative pressures of ; 300 mmHg or more ( 141 ) . Also , the ﬁnding that very low pH ( i . e . , between 3 . 6 and 3 . 8 ) was a prerequisite for the successful three - di - mensional crystallization of Tb - MscL ( 60 ) supports the importance of charged residues . In particular , the glu - tamic acid residue E104 with a p K a 4 . 25 may need to be protonated to stabilize the closed conﬁguration of the MscL pentameric structure ( 305 ) . One might expect that at a higher pH the electrostatic repulsion between the E104 negatively charged residues would destabilize the closed MscL structure , thus contributing in some way to the channel opening . Nevertheless , evidence now indi - cates that rather than being involved in directly gating MscL , the NH 2 termini may modulate the MscL mechano - sensitivity , possibly by resisiting the movement of the transmembrane helices during channel opening as well as interfering with ion permeation to produce multiconduc - tance state behavior ( 3 ) . Therefore , the EMC model as well as another recently proposed molecular model for gating transitions of MscL ( 387a ) are most likely incorrect by assuming that the NH 2 termini function as the channel gate . However , the mobility of the NH 2 termini remains a valid assumption in both models . It may also turn out that the EMC - type model and its assumptions ( i . e . , small pore area change and a mechanoelectrical “triggered” swinging gate ) will be applicable to eukaryotic MG channels . 4 . Five - state kinetic model Based on an analysis of multiple conducting states of the single MscL currents , a ﬁve - state linear kinetic model was proposed ( 390 ) . The linear scheme of four conduct - ing and one closed state C 1 7 S 2 7 S 3 7 S 4 7 O 5 with sequentially increasing substate conductances was found to be the simplest model to estimate the transition rate constants k ij 5 k 0 exp ( a / kT ) and their dependence on mechanical force . In the expression for k ij , k 0 is the com - ponent independent of membrane tension , whereas a de - termines the tension sensitivity . According to the model , k 12 between the closed C 1 and the ﬁrst subconducting state S 2 is the only tension - dependent rate constant lim - iting MscL opening . The large energy of 18 . 6 kT ( 46 . 3 kJ / mol ) calculated for D G 0 accounts for MscL being al - most always shut in the resting membrane . ( Energy dif - ference of 18 . 6 kT can be calculated using Eq . 7 by divid - ing the tension of 11 . 8 mN / m required for the MscL open probability of 50 % with the maximal slope sensitivity of 0 . 63 mN z m 2 1 z e - fold 2 1 obtained from the Boltzmann distribution , Ref . 390 ) . However , the model is probably incorrect by describing the MscL gating in terms of only ﬁve conducting states . According to the molecular dynam - ics simulations of protein conformations , one would ex - pect the channel to exist in many relatively stable confor - mations on a very short time scale on the order of micro - to nanoseconds that would be well below the resolution of patch - clamp experiments . Thus only relatively long - lasting conducting states ( $ 10 2 4 s ) characterized by suf - ﬁciently large currents would be detected . This is in ac - cordance with another study proposing that the minimal number of the MscL conducting states was seven with one closed , ﬁve subconducting , and a fully open channel state ( 247 ) . The study determined that the number of subcon - ducting states varied with the applied pipette voltage ( Liu and Martinac , unpublished data ) , which is expected if the occupancy of different subconducting levels changes with voltage . This may explain why in the study by Sukharev et al . ( 390 ) fewer number of conducting states were de - tected , since the analysis was based on MscL currents recorded at a single membrane potential of 1 20 mV that was probably too low to resolve more than four conduct - ing states . Nevertheless , the ﬁve - state model provides a correct estimate of energies involved in MscL gating by showing that the energy D G 0 necessary to open MscL is largely used to open the pore of 6 nm 2 . 5 . Hydrophobic surface match model The hydrophobic surface match model derives from the original studies of the MS gating of gramicidin ( see sect . IV B ) and represents an additional mechanism that may explain MscL . This model assumes that the hydro - phobic match between the hydrocarbon bilayer thickness and the length of the hydrophobic surface of MscL is important in determining the stability of different channel conformations . The feasibility of the model will require information on the open MscL conformation so that esti - mates can be made of the free energy contributions of differences in hydrophobic mismatch between MscL states and the bilayer before and during stretch ( i . e . , bilayer thinning ) . Because it is already known that MscL gates close to lytic tensions , the bilayer must be near its maximal expansion and minimal thickness ( i . e . , 2 – 4 % according to D A / A 5 2D d / d ; see sect . II B ) . A 2 – 4 % change in bilayer with a thickness of 3 . 5 nm would thin the membrane ; 0 . 1 nm . If the thinned bilayer better matches the open channel than the closed channel by only 0 . 1 nm April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 701 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ( i . e . , because it gets shorter as well as wider ) , this would produce an improved surface mismatch between MscL and bilayer of ; 1 . 6 nm 2 , assuming the diameter of MscL is 5 nm ( 60 ) . Because the free energy increase for trans - ferring a hydrophobic protein surface from an organic solvent to an aqueous environment is ; 17 mJ / m 2 ( 66 ) , the energy corresponding to the improved MscL / bilayer match should be D G ; 2 . 7 – 4 . 8 3 10 2 20 J or ; 7 – 12 kT . This energy is of the same order as the free energy difference of 18 . 6 kT estimated between closed and open states of MscL ( 390 ) . Thus hydrophobic mismatch could presum - ably contribute to the mechanosensitiviy of MscL . Indeed , it was recently found that when placed in a thinner bilayer MscL required less energy for activation by membrane tension ; the opposite was true in a thicker bilayer ( B . Martinac , unpublished observations ) . In summary , the present experimental , structural , and theoretical evidence support the following simpliﬁed view of the MscL gating . The NH 2 terminus , although mobile , does not function as the channel gate . The gate is most likely formed by the hydrophobic constriction of the TM1 helices at the cytoplasmic end of the closed channel . The mobile NH 2 termini probably serve to stabilize the open channel conformation ( s ) and may interfere with the passage of ions , thus leading to channel subconductance states . The COOH termini possibly play a role in stabiliz - ing the closed conﬁguration of the channel , whereas the periplasmic loop may function as an elastic spring resist - ing the opening of the channel by membrane tension . J . Membrane Localization and Physiological Function of MscL MscL is a MG ion channel for which a physiological function can be correlated with its membrane localization and molecular properties . To begin with , two independent studies ( 27 , 170 ) have associated MscL activity with the inner cytoplasmic membrane of E . coli ( i . e . , the tension - bearing membrane ) . First , Blount et al . ( 27 ) , using su - crose gradient centrifugation to separate total membrane of E . coli into inner and outer membrane fractions , dem - onstrated the MscL protein was associated exclusively with the inner membrane fraction . Second , Ha¨se et al . ( 170 ) combined [ 35 S ] methionine radiolabeling of MscL with the detection of the NADH oxidase activity in the cytoplasmic membrane fraction and showed 90 % of 35 S - MscL was associated with the NADH oxidase - rich membrane fraction . These results conﬁrm the early study by Berrier et al . ( 18 ) that demonstrated MG channel ac - tivities were localized predominantly in the inner mem - brane fraction . Bacteria exposed to an hyposmotic shock rapidly release cytoplasmic contents into the surrounding me - dium ( 38 , 225 , 344 , 359 ) . Moreover , osmotically induced efﬂux of lactose and ATP from E . coli as well as ATP from S . faecalis can be blocked by Gd 3 1 ( 19 ) . Gd 3 1 blocks MG channels in E . coli and other cells ( 158 ) and is proposed to act by modifying the mechanical properties of the bilayer rather than binding to the different channel pro - teins ( 105 ) . Furthermore , two other types of MG channels found in E . coli , MscS and MscM , can also be activated by differences in osmotic pressure in patch - clamp experi - ments ( 77 , 268 ) . Although these results implicate MG channels in bacterial osmoregulation , what was lacking was a bacterial phenotype that would directly support such a role . Blount et al . ( 25 ) identiﬁed such a phenotype with several site - directed mutations ( e . g . , K31E or K31D in TM1 ) that led to dramatic changes in MG channel activities and also a “slow or no growth” phenotype that could be partially reversed by increasing osmolarity of the growth medium ( 25 ) . Furthermore , these mutants showed a correlation between the severity of phenotype and the severity of “abnormalities” in ion channel activities . A similar study by Ou and coworkers ( 316 ) found that when a randomly mutagenized mscL gene was expressed in an mscL 2 strain , which had no detectable phenotype on growth plates , most of the gain - of - function mutants , characterized by slow or no growth , could be associated with signiﬁcant changes in the MscL channel kinetics and pressure sensitivities . Moreover , the most severe muta - tions occurred when amino acid residues between R13 and K31 in the ﬁrst transmembrane TM1 segment of MscL were mutated . Signiﬁcantly , the TM1 domain is highly conserved among bacterial species ( 283 , 387 ) . Finally , Ajouz et al . ( 2 ) demonstrated that MscL opens in vivo during an osmotic downshock . Speciﬁcally , they investigated osmotically induced efﬂuxes in wild - type and mscL 2 mutant cells of small osmolytes such as potassium glutamate , trehalose , and glycine betaine that serve as osmoprotectants in bacteria . Although no differ - ence was found between the wild - type and the mscL 2 cells in the release of these osmoprotectants during os - motic challenge , thioredoxin , a small cellular protein , which is also excreted from E . coli upon osmotic down - shock , was completely released from the wild - type cells but retained by the mscL 2 cells . This result indicates that MscL is not required for the excretion of osmoprotectants but is apparently activated in vivo to facilitate the efﬂux of thioredoxin . The effect of efﬂux of thioredoxin and pos - sibly other small cytosolic proteins during osmotic down - shock remains to be determined . Note the apparent ex - cess MscL ( i . e . , 50 – 100 copies ) expressed in single bacterial cells ( 26 , 169 ) , together with the fact that open - ing of single MscL channel would sufﬁce to dissipate osmotic gradients within 1 ms , does not preclude their primary role in microbial osmoregulation or osmoprotec - tion . This is simply because biological designs , particular those underlying safeguard mechanisms , are not only based on economy but also redundancy . 702 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m K . MscS and MscM MscS was the ﬁrst MG channel activity described in bacteria ( 267 ) and was also the ﬁrst MG channel shown to respond to bilayer tension ( 266 ) . It has a conductance of ; 1 nS in 200 mM KCl / 40 MgCl 2 ( 388 ) and requires ; 0 . 7 the tension needed to open MscL ( 28 , 387 ) , but like MscL , it can also be activated by osmotic pressures ( 77 , 268 ) . MscS differs from MscL and MscM in that it exhibits a voltage dependence characterized by e - fold change in the open probability per ; 15 - mV depolarization ( 267 ) . MscS is relatively nonselective , displaying a slight preference for anions over cations ( 267 , 388 ) and is blocked by submillimolar Gd 3 1 ( 17 , 19 ) . Recently , Booth and co - workers ( 31 , 244 ) found that MscS activity in bacterial protoplasts is abolished by null mutations in two loci on E . coli chromosome , yggB and kefA . The MG channels affected by the kefA and yggB null mutations have similar thresholds of activation by pressure , and both channels exhibit a conductance of ; 1 nS . The activity of the YggB channel is encountered in almost 100 % of protoplast patches and is characterized by a large number of chan - nels gating simultaneously that inactivate rapidly with sustained pressure . The KefA activity is less frequently encountered ( 70 % of the patches ) and is characterized by fewer channels that do not inactivate . Whereas YggB is a small membrane protein of 286 amino acids , KefA is a large , multidomain 120 - kDa membrane protein ( 1 , 120 amino acid residues ) . Interestingly , the amino acid se - quence of YggB resembles highly the sequence of the last two domains of the KefA protein . MscM is less frequently encountered in membrane patches of giant E . coli spheroplasts compared with MscS ( 76 , 77 ) and MscL that are typically found in every patch ( 387 ) . The conductance of MscM is about half that of MscS and exhibits a slight preference for cations ( 17 , 18 ) , indicating it is molecularly distinct from MscS and MscL . However , MscM is also blocked by Gd 3 1 and activated by hyposmotic stress ( 77 ) . The different pressure sensitivi - ties of the three channels ( i . e . , their activation pressures increase with their conductance ) may indicate the chan - nels are activated sequentially to provide a graduation of efﬂux pathways ( 124 ) . However , apparently the activation of either MscS or MscL can maintain the integrity of E . coli during hyposmotic challenge , since single deletion mutants lacking either channel remain fully functional ( 31 ) . In contrast , double mutants die , indicating that MscM alone is not able to protect bacteria from osmotic downshock . L . MG Channels in Archaea Archaea ( formerly archaebacteria ) are unicellular prokaryotes like eubacteria . However , they constitute a separate domain on the phylogenetic tree different from those of Bacteria and Eukarya ( Fig . 5 A ) ( 318 , 436 ) . Ar - chaea encompass several distinct groups of microorgan - isms adapted to extreme environments such as super - hot ocean hydrothermal vents characterized by extreme tem - peratures or Dead Sea containing extreme salt concentra - tions ( 13 , 436 ) . The existence of ion channels in archaeal cell membranes has not been documented until the recent reports of porins ( 20 ) and MG channels ( 239 ) in the halophilic archaeon H . volcanii . Two types of MG channels have been identiﬁed in H . volcanii ( 239 ) and have been named MscA1 ( i . e . , Ar - chaeon 1 ) and MscA2 . Both have large conductances and display a similar mechanosensitivity as the E . coli MG channels , but they differ in their distinct rectiﬁcation properties . MscA1 has a conductance of 380 pS at 1 40 mV and of 680 pS at 2 40 mV , whereas MscA2 has a conduc - tance of 850 pS at 1 40 mV and of 490 pS at 2 40 mV . Like the bacterial MG channels , both channels are activated by mechanical force transmitted via the lipid bilayer , and both are blocked by submillimolar Gd 3 1 ( 19 ) . With the use of the same functional approach as used to identify the MscL protein ( 384 , 386 ) , a 15 - kDa mem - brane protein of the thermophilic archaeon Thermo - plasma volcanium was found to correspond to activities of a novel MG channel ( 220 ) . In symmetric 200 mM KCl plus 40 mM MgCl 2 , the channel has a conductance of ; 1 . 5 nS . Twenty NH 2 - terminal amino acid residues of the 15 kDa were determined by microsequencing and were found to match with 75 % identity the start of the open reading frame of a gene of unknown function in the genome of the related Thermoplasma acidophilum ( Kloda and Martinac , unpublished data ) . Computer - as - sisted secondary structure analysis of the protein en - coded by the T . acidophilum gene revealed two putative a - helical membrane - spanning regions , suggesting a struc - tural similarity with MscL . Helical wheel alignment of the two helices revealed that the ﬁrst helix is amphipathic in character , has a cluster of ﬁve charged residues on one side of the wheel , and has a mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues on the other side and thus most likely lines the pore of the putative channel . This would be consistent with the three - dimensional crystal structure of Tb - MscL that indicates TM1 creates the bulk of the pore of the pentameric channel ( 60 ) . The second helix has the usual a - helix with hydrophobic and hydrophilic resi - dues on both sides of the wheel . Recently , a new MG channel was identiﬁed in the archaeon Methanococcus jannashii by using the TM1 transmembrane domain of MscL as a genetic probe to search the microbial genomic database for MscL ho - mologs ( 220a , 269 ) . A hypothetical protein MJ0170 in the Methanococcus genome was found to contain a sequence that shares 38 . 5 % identity with the TM1 of Eco - MscL . The same protein was also found to share a high homology April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 703 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m with the YggB protein underlying the activity of MscS in E . coli . This may indicate that MJ0170 , which has been renamed to MscMJ for the MS channels of M . jannashii , is a hybrid of MscL and MscS , which may have evolved as a result of gene duplication of an ancestral mscL - like gene . Importantly , the alignment of sequences of MscL , MscS , and MscMJ homologs revealed that bacterial and archaeal channels form a phylogenetic tree composed of three main branches of prokaryotic MG channels ( see Fig . 5 B ) , indicating that the common ancestor of the prokary - otic MG channels most likely resembled MscL . When expressed in E . coli and examined in giant spheroplasts or after reconstitution into liposomes , the MJ0170 ( MscMJ ) protein expressed a channel with a conductance of ; 270 pS in 200 mM KCl and a cation selectivity ( P K / P Cl ; 6 ) somewhat similar to eukaryotic SA - CAT channels ( 158 , 265 , 286 ) . M . MG Channels in Evolution The ﬁnding of MG channels in organisms belonging to all three domains of the phylogenetic tree ( Fig . 5 A ) points toward their early evolutionary origins . A basic question is whether the mechanisms of mechanical gating that originated in bacterial channels have been conserved in eukaryotic MG channels ? Certain properties of the bacterial MG channels , including their extremely high FIG . 5 . Evolutionary aspects of mechanically gated ( MG ) channels . A : universal phylogenetic tree based on small subunit rRNA sequences . Representative organisms in each of the three domains with documented MG chan - nel activities are shown . [ Modiﬁed from Pace ( 318 ) . ] B : family of prokaryotic MG channels represented by the phylogenetic tree of aligned sequences of MJ0170 and MscL homologs . The homologs are clustered into three main branches based on their sequence similarity , suggest - ing that the common ancestor of all prokaryotic MG chan - nels resembled MscL . The mscL - like gene duplication was most likely followed by subsequent gene divergence sim - ilar to the evolution of voltage - gated ion channels . [ Mod - iﬁed from Kloda and Martinac ( 220a ) . ] 704 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m conductance , general lack of ion selectivity , and require - ment of near - lytic activation tensions , have been taken as evidence that a different type of gating mechanism under - lies the more MS and ion - selective eukaryotic MG chan - nels . However , we now know from mutational and pro - teolytic cleavage studies that MscL can be made as MS ( i . e . , gated at or near zero applied pressures ) as any eukaryotic MG channel studied in patch - clamp experi - ments . Furthermore , although a tethered mechanism ( i . e . , involving direct CSK - and / or EC - channel interactions ) is often evoked for eukaryotic MG channels ( see sect . VIII C ) , there is growing evidence that at least some eukaryotic channels ( e . g . , the SAT - CAT channel in Xenopus oocytes ) are gated by tension developed in the bilayer . As yet no sequence homologs for MscL have been identiﬁed in eu - karyotes . However , there are striking similarities in the basic structure and membrane topology of MscL and the putative MG channels ( MEC - 4 and MEC - 10 ) identiﬁed in C . elegans ( 403 ) . This observation alone may indicate common biophysical principles confer mechanosensitiv - ity on the two classes of channels . In the following section we discuss some of the additional cellular adaptations and specializations of animal cells ( i . e . , extrinsic factors ) that play an important role in inﬂuencing how animal cells sense and respond to mechanical inputs . VII . THE STRUCTURE OF ANIMAL CELLS : SPECIFIC ROLES OF THE CORTICAL CYTOSKELETON AND EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX IN MECHANOSENSITIVITY One of the most important structures in terms of modifying the animal cell’s response to mechanical defor - mation is the cortical CSK ( 102 , 108 ) . This structure , by providing bilayer protection while preserving cell deform - ability , allows dramatic changes in cell shape and size during growth and differentiation and permits rapid ani - mal movements . Furthermore , by removing the require - ment of a thick cell wall , the cortical CSK allows the animal cell to maintain a more intimate contact with its mechanical surroundings . The basic function of the cor - tical CSK is to structurally support the ﬂuid bilayer , thereby providing the cell membrane with a shear rigidity that is lacking in simple bilayer vesicles or spheroplasts / protoplasts . Furthermore , by acting as a membrane scaf - folding , the CSK allows the cell to assume nonspherical geometries . As a consequence , animal cells are able to maintain a stable , excess membrane surface area beyond that required to enclose their volume as a smooth sphere . The biconcave RBC has 40 % excess membrane area ( 107 ) , whereas other cells ( e . g . , lymphocytes , skeletal muscle , mast cells , hepatocytes , astrocytes , and oocytes ) may have between 100 and 1 , 000 % in the form of membrane folds , microvilli , and / or cavaeolae ( Fig . 8 ; Refs . 95a , 107 , 338a , 375a , 444 , 448 ) . This allows the cell to increase in volume without new membrane insertion ( 312a , 338a , 375a , 448 ) . Thus the additional surface area serves as an immediate membrane reserve providing compatibility be - tween the highly expandable CSK network ( K A of ; 10 2 2 mN / m ) and the nonexpandable lipid bilayer ( K A ; 10 2 mN / m ) ( 107 , 108 , 284 ) . During mechanical deformations ( e . g . , inﬂation , indentation , stretching ) , the CSK network may be expanded and the excess membrane smoothed out before signiﬁcant tension develops in the bilayer ( 223 , 330 , 375a , 448 ) . Several lines of evidence directly support this notion . First , scanning electron micrograph images of cultured mammalian cells indicate that osmotic swelling results in the surface microvilli “unfolding” as cells almost double in diameter ( see Fig . 1 in Ref . 223 ) . Second , mast cells can be inﬂated to nearly four times their volume with little increase in membrane capacitance ( C m ) ( i . e . , , 10 % ) ( 375a , see also Refs . 312a , 338a ) . Third , the force required to pull tethers ( i . e . , CSK - free membrane strands ) from ﬁbroblasts is independent of tether length up to ; 5 m m ( 330 ) . Fourth , direct inﬂation or osmotic swelling of oo - cytes to twice their normal diameter does not activate MG channels currents ( 448 , 449 ) . In contrast , only slight inﬂa - tion ( , 10 % ) of CSK - deﬁcient plasma membrane vesicles ( PMVs ) ( i . e . , formed from blebbed oocytes ) activates MG channels ( 447 ) . Another effect the cortical CSK may have on bilayer mechanics is through organizing the bilayer into local domains with smaller radii of curvature ( r c ) than that of the cell ( an extreme case is the microvilli , r c ; 0 . 1 m m , see below ) . According to Laplace’s law , this will effectively reduce the membrane tension ( t ) that develops in the local bilayer domain for a given osmotic or hydrostatic pressure ( p ) ( i . e . , t 5 p z r c / 2 , see Ref . 145 ) . Finally , the existence of contractile as well as load - bearing elements in the CSK allows the maintenance of resting cortical CSK tension that can actively resist membrane dilation caused by internally generated forces ( 15 , 200 ) . The structure of the cortical CSK has been studied in greatest detail in the human RBC where it shows up in spread membranes as a hexagonal network of spectrin tetramers interconnected at their ends to actin , tropomy - osin , and other proteins to form a multi - protein network ( 284 ) . In resting RBCs , this hexagonal arrangement is obscured and appears in electron micrographs as a dense ﬁlamentous network , indicating the links in the network are normally folded ( or bent ) but can be extended with applied tension ( 144 , 284 , 377 ) . For example , the distance between actin ﬁlaments in the resting RBC is ; 70 nm but can reach 200 nm at full extension . Several molecular models have been proposed to underlie this large elastic extension , including random coil ( 377 ) and helical spring models ( 144 , 274 ) . The cortical CSK is anchored to the lipid bilayer by interactions between ankyrin and other CSK proteins with various integral membrane proteins April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 705 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ( e . g . , the band 3 anion exchanger ) . Although in noneryth - roid cells there are many variations in both the speciﬁc cortical CSK elements ( e . g . , dystrophin in muscle ) and the CSK - bilayer connections , the general organizational themes seen in the RBC appear to be conserved ( 250 ) . The major difference between the anucleated human RBC and nucleated cells is that tension generated within the cortical CSK is not focused exclusively on the membrane but is also shared ( or resisted ) by the three - dimensional CSK network that suspends and transmits forces to the elastic nucleus . This CSK meshwork is highly integrated and has been proposed to behave as a tensegrity structure in which any mechanical deformation is transmitted glo - bally throughout the network ( 200 , 201 ) . However , a re - cent study has demonstrated that ﬁbroblasts show highly localized responses to mechanical deformation ( 171a ) . Also , mechanosensory neurons and receptors “sense” lo - cally and transmit global responses electrically . Although animal cells lack the rigid cell wall of bac - teria , many animal cells ( i . e . , in tissues ) possess a com - plex extracellular matrix ( ECM ) that serves as external scaffolding through which external forces can be ﬁltered or focused on the cell or distributed throughout the tis - sue . For example , the physical coupling between ECM molecules ( e . g . , ﬁbronectin ) and the CSK through trans - membrane proteins ( e . g . , integrins ) allows forces to be focused on CSK elements that may directly or indirectly interact with membrane proteins ( 63 , 327 , 429 ) . The vis - coelastic elements in the ECM may also ﬁlter out steady - state forces while allowing the transmission of fast me - chanical oscillations possibly through direct physical connections with membrane channels . Finally , special - ized mechanosensory cells often possess unique struc - tures ( e . g . , the tip links of stereocilia , Refs . 190 , 326 ) and ancillary cellular layers ( e . g . , the Pacinian cell capsule ) that confer high directional and vibrational sensitivity on the mechanotransduction process . VIII . MECHANICALLY GATED CHANNELS IN ANIMAL CELLS The original concept of MG channels arose from whole cell recordings of specialized mechanosensory neurons ( 89 , 212 , 249 ) . In these early studies a physical mechanism of channel gating was often favored over an indirect chemical mechanism because of the typical short latency ( i . e . , a few ms ) and high - frequency response ( kHz ) of the mechanotransduction process ( 70 , 135 , 242 , 409 ) . Tight - seal patch - clamp recording ( 153 ) allowed the direct measurement of single MG channels currents ( 37a , 142 , 151 ) , while pressure - clamp techniques ( 271 – 273 , 347 ) and , in particular , the ability to apply fast pressure steps , demonstrated that MG channels in speciﬁc cell types ( e . g . , Xenopus oocytes ) could be activated with millisecond latencies ( 271 , see Fig . 6 ) . However , not all cells show fast MG channel activation . For example , pressure steps ap - plied to cell - attached patches on chick skeletal muscle ( 375 ) and snail neurons ( 370 ) activate MG channels with delays of 1 – 30 s . Furthermore , in snail neurons , physical or chemical disruption of the CSK abolishes the delayed activation . This indicates that the intact cortical CSK prevents or slows tension development in these cells ( see sect . VII ) . This behavior illustrates how factors extrinsic to the channel protein can dramatically modify MG channel activity . Patch - clamp studies over nearly 20 years indicate that MG channels are widely expressed in both sensory and nonsensory cells and in cells from species spanning the full evolutionary spectrum ( see sect . VI M ) . This ubiq - FIG . 6 . Rapid activation of MG channel currents in cell - attached membrane patches on Xenopus oocytes . Top trace : the waveform of a suction step ( ; 15 mmHg ) applied to the patch pipette . The crosses on the rising phase indicate the time delay in reaching 5 mmHg ( 1 . 5 ms ) and 10 mmHg ( 4 ms ) , which represents the range of minimal suctions required to activate the Xenopus MG channels with standard size patch pipettes ( i . e . , ; 2 m m internal tip diameter ) . Middle trace : a membrane patch in which 5 MG channels were activated by the suction step . Bottom trace : another pipette slightly larger in tip diameter ( i . e . , ; 3 m m ) in which over 20 MG channels were activated . The estimated latency for ﬁrst channel activation varied between 0 . 5 and 2 . 5 ms . [ Modiﬁed from McBride and Hamill ( 271 ) . ] 706 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m uity has led to the idea that MG channels play a role in general cellular functions such as cell volume regulation ( 151 , 156 , 231 , 232 , 265 , 286 , 348 , 350 , 358 , 400 ) . However , the possibilility has also been raised that membrane changes induced by tight seal formation induce mechano - sensitivity in speciﬁc channels . The “artifact” idea origi - nally arose from a discrepancy observed between mem - brane patch and whole cell mechanosensitivity in snail neurons ( 287 ) . Speciﬁcally , it was reported that despite the consistent ability to activate single MG K 1 channels in membrane patches , macroscopic K 1 currents could not be mechanically activated in the whole cell ( 287 ) . Al - though this discrepancy has been shown not to be gener - alized to all cell types ( 55 , 77 , 84 , 147 , 192 , 356 , 362 , 419 , 433 , 453 , 445a , 454 ) , it has remained a high proﬁle con - troversy in the ﬁeld . The issue has most recently been addressed in studies of Xenopus oocytes , where speciﬁc attention was focused on differences in the geometry and mechanics of the cell membrane in the patch and whole cell recording conﬁgurations ( 446 – 449 ) . A . Membrane Patch Mechanics and Morphology The tightly sealed membrane patch spans the inside of the pipette with its circumference or boundary ﬁxed to the walls of the pipette ( 153 , 354 ) . High - resolution video images indicate that in the absence of stresses normal to the plane of the membrane ( i . e . , due to hydrostatic or osmotic pressures ) the patch appears to be pulled ﬂat and perpendicular to the walls of the pipette ( Fig . 7 , Refs . 314 , 373 , 374 , 448 ) . This is consistent with Laplace’s law if FIG . 7 . High - resolution video images of a cell - attached oocyte membrane patch and membrane currents activated during brief steps of pressure and suction . A and B : video images of a membrane patch before ( 0 ms ) , during ( 50 ms ) , and after ( 250 ms ) steps ( i . e . , of 100 ms duration ) of suction ( A ) and pressure ( B ) . C and D : the membrane patch currents recorded in the same patch imaged in A and B in response to the suction and pressure steps . The pipette tip ( not visible ) had a tip diameter of 4 m m , and the patch was located ; 20 m m from the tip . [ From Zhang and Hamill ( 448 ) . ] April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 707 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m there is a resting tension in the patch . Presumably , the adhesive forces at the membrane - glass interface and , in particular , where the membrane is bent at right angles generates this resting tension ( 314 , 373 , 448 ) . With applied suction ( negative pressure ) the patch ﬂexes out ( Fig . 7 A ) and with positive pressure ﬂexes in ( Fig . 7 B ) . The patch appears optically smooth , and electrical membrane ca - pacitance measurements indicate a patch area consistent with a ﬂat membrane disk ( 448 , see below ) . Furthermore , the expansion of the patch ( i . e . , , 10 % , Ref . 448 ) associ - ated with rapid activation of MG channels ( Fig . 7 , C and D ) indicates that little smoothing of the membrane is required before membrane tension develops . These ob - servations are also consistent with electron micrograph images of oocyte patches in pipette tips that indicate a trilaminar structure with no evidence of membrane folds or microvilli ( 345 ) . In contrast to the simple membrane geometry of the patch , the plasma membrane of the oocyte and other animal cells displays a far more complex geometry . For example , transmission and scanning electron micro - graphs of Xenopus oocytes ( Fig . 8 ) indicate extensive membrane folding and a high density of microvilli ( 29 , 324 , 444 , 447 ) . The quantitative analysis of freeze - fracture images of the oocyte indicate that membrane folding dou - bles the surface area while microvilli may further increase it by ﬁvefold ( 444 ) . This analysis is consistent with mem - brane capacitance measurements that indicate a mem - brane area that is 5 – 10 times larger than predicted for a smooth sphere ( 448 ) . In the electron micrographic analy - sis , the estimated microvilli density was 6 – 7 microvilli / m m 2 ( with a microvillus length of 1 . 4 m m and a diameter of 0 . 12 m m ) . If the membrane folds and microvilli were preserved during tight seal formation , a patch with an apparent geometric area of 50 m m 2 ( i . e . , see Fig . 7 ) would have ; 300 microvilli and an actual area between 250 and 500 m m 2 . However , C m measurements indicate an area of ; 50 m m 2 ( 448 ) , again consistent with electron micro - graph patch images that show no evidence of microvilli ( 345 ) . There are several scenarios by which tight - seal for - mation may alter membrane geometry ( Fig . 8 C ) . In one , FIG . 8 . Microvilli on the surface of Xe - nopus oocytes and their possible fates dur - ing tight seal formation . A : transmission electron microscopy of an oocyte showing prominent microvilli containing dark cyto - plasmic material . B : scanning electron mi - croscopy indicating the high density of mi - crovilli on the oocyte surface . [ Modiﬁed from Zhang et al . ( 447 ) . ] C : cartoon showing possible fates of microvilli during tight seal formation . Top panel shows a patch pipette pressed against the oocyte surface before application of suction . Middle left panel shows suction has drawn the membrane and tended to smooth out the microvilli both in and immediately outside the pipette . Middle right panel indicates suction shearing off ( or excising ) the microvilli in the patch . Bottom panel shows a tightly sealed ﬂat patch after removal of suction . 708 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m suction applied during sealing results in the lipid bilayer being decoupled from the underlying cortical CSK and dragged into the patch where it seals tightly to the pipette walls ( 281 ) . This may be analogous to the drawing out of thin bilayer tethers from RBCs and other cells ( 181 , 182 ) . However , such tethers are much thinner in diameter than the membrane patch ( i . e . , ; 0 . 2 vs . ; 2 m m ) and are com - pletely free of CSK ( 182 ) . In contrast , there is good evi - dence that a plug of CSK is drawn into the pipette along with the membrane ( 154 , 345 , 374 , 447 ) . Although , once the seal has formed the membrane cap can be mechani - cally decoupled from the underlying CSK to form a mem - brane bleb ( 154 , 160 , 374 , 447 ) . Thus a more likely sce - nario may involve the smoothing out of surface folds and microvilli ( Fig . 8 C ) while retaining interactions with a reorganized CSK within the patch . In a third scenario , the microvilli are sheared off by the initial pressure / suction applied during sealing . In this case , one might expect the microvilli to be pinched off at their base with the mem - brane rapidly resealing or fusing . This may be analogous to the situation with an inside - out or outside - out patch that seals as the patch pipette is withdrawn from the cell ( 153 ) . At least consistent with this idea is the observation that vesicles can be seen to be swept from the cell surface during tight - seal formation on chick skeletal muscle ( 374 ) . On the speciﬁc issue of membrane - CSK coupling , evidence indicates that both cell aspiration and tight - seal formation may alter the relationship between the bilayer and the cortical CSK . For example , in experiments in which RBCs were aspirated into pipettes without allow - ing tight - seal formation , ﬂuorescent labeling of the CSK indicates a steep decrease in density of the actin and spectrin network along the aspirated membrane projec - tion ( 91 ) . Interestingly , this density gradient was main - tained for the duration of the deformation ( i . e . , . 30 min ) but recovered rapidly ( seconds ) with release of suction . Similar changes may occur with “gentle” tight - seal forma - tion that results in expansion , but not irreversible disrup - tion , of the CSK network . As a consequence , the density of the network may decrease and membrane wrinkles and folds become smoothed out . However , stronger suction or pressure applied after the tight seal has formed may “overdilate” the network and thereby irreversibly disrupt links within the network as well as those between the network and the membrane ( 154 , 374 , 447 ) . In this case , the membrane patch would lose its shear rigidity and elastic response to mechanical deformation . As a conse - quence it would behave more like a ﬂuid ﬂowing into the pipette to form a CSK - free bilayer bleb ( e . g . , see Fig . 10 in Ref . 447 ) . Interestingly , Sokabe et al . ( 375 ) reported that suction steps caused slow progressive membrane patch movements with latencies of ; 200 ms and a rise time of 1 s . These slow movements clearly contrast with the fast patch movements seen in Figure 7 and may be associated with decoupling of the membrane from the underlying CSK ( see also Ref . 447 ) . As a consequence of this decou - pling , one might expect the ability to develop membrane tension in the patch would be reduced as more membrane ﬂows into the patch ( i . e . , from along the sides of the pipette and the cell ) . Consistent with this idea is the reported decrease in mechanosensitivity ( i . e . , shift in the stimulus - response relations to higher pressures ) in overstimulated patches and in blebbed membranes from Xenopus oocytes ( 375 , 447 , see Fig . 14 A ) . However , as mentioned earlier , the mechanosensitivity of MG chan - nels in snail neurons and chick skeletal muscle is in - creased after CSK disruption ( 370 , 375 ) . This may indicate that the CSK in these cells has a much higher resistance to expansion ( i . e . , . K A ) than the oocyte CSK and is more effective in preventing tension development in the bilayer . Such differences indicate that the viscoelastic properties of the CSK in each cell may be “tuned” to the mechanical requirements ( functions ) of the cell . B . Discrepancy Between Membrane Patch and Whole Cell Mechanosensitivity The above analysis provides some clues to the dis - crepancy between membrane patch and whole cell mech - anosensitivity ( 370 , 448 ) . Speciﬁcally , the simple ﬂat ge - ometry of the oocyte membrane patch ( i . e . , before any mechanical decoupling ) allows for rapid tension develop - ment and MG channel activation ( Fig . 7 ) . In comparison , the excess membrane area of the oocyte serves to buffer tension development and MG channel activation ( Fig . 8 ) . As mentioned previously , this explanation is also sup - ported by the observation that while macroscopic MG currents cannot easily be activated in whole oocytes , they can be activated in oocyte PMVs ( 447 ) . The PMVs lack a cortical CSK and take on a spherical geometry with no excess membrane area ( i . e . , as judged by electron micros - copy ) so that even slight inﬂation ( 1 – 2 % ) should increase bilayer tension . A similar explanation may account for why macroscopic currents can be activated in sphero - plasts formed from E . coli , yeast , and other microbial cells ( 77 , 146 , 147 , 454 ) . To form sphereoplasts , the parent cells are enzymatically treated to remove the cell wall and , as a consequence , the membrane blebs assume a simple spherical geometry so that even slight inﬂation causes MG channel activation ( 77 , 146 , 147 , 454 ) . Simi - larly , to evoke whole cell MS responses in smooth muscle cells , the cells apparently must be inﬂated to the point that they form whole cell membrane blebs or ghosts ( see Fig . 1 in Ref . 362 ) . One would also predict that in snail neurons , if the CSK can be disrupted ( i . e . , the cell blebbed ) without causing cell rupture , then whole cell MG K 1 currents would be activated similar to the single MG K 1 channels in mechanically traumatized patches ( see April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 709 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Ref . 428 ) . It remains to be determined whether the applied mechanical stimuli cause changes in membrane - CSK in - teractions in other cell types , such as vascular smooth muscle ( 84 ) , urinary bladder myocytes ( 433 ) , and cardiac myocytes ( 192 ) , where whole cell MS currents have been reported . Another cell type where membrane geometry may be important in determining mechanosensitivity is the kid - ney proximal tubule cell . In this highly polarized cell , two classes of MG channels have been recognized in mem - brane patches , a weakly cation - selective MG channel that is localized to the apical microvilliated surface and a K 1 - selective MG channel that is localized on the relatively smooth proximal cell surface ( see Ref . 351 ) . Signiﬁcantly , osmotic swelling or direct inﬂation of the cell can activate a whole K 1 conductance without activating the cation - selective conductance ( 55 , 419 ) . This differential sensitiv - ity may reﬂect the location of the channels in regions of membrane with different geometry ( i . e . , different radii of curvature ) such that they experience different tensions for the same applied pressure according to Laplace’s law ( 448 ) . One can also imagine that other cells ( e . g . , mech - anosensory neurons ) possess localized regions of bilayer that are prestressed by CSK and / or ECM interactions to enable rapid tension increase in response to mechanical stress ( i . e . , analogous to the patch ) . C . MG Channel Gating : “Tethered” Versus “Bilayer” Models Bilayer reconstitution experiments have provided un - equivocal evidence for a bilayer model of mechanical gating of alamethicin , gramicidin , and bacterial MG chan - nels ( see sects . IV and VI ) . However , it was apparently not intuitively obvious to early investigators ( 170a ) that the ﬂuid lipid bilayer with its low tolerance to dilation could develop and maintain tensions sufﬁcient to inﬂuence membrane proteins . Indeed , in bilayer reconstitution ex - periments , phospholipid and cholesterol content are often adjusted to increase the expansion modulus of the bilayer and thereby shift the lytic tensions to higher values than those displayed by cell membranes ( 296 ) . Furthermore , as discussed above , the excess membrane area of animal cells tends to buffer rapid increases in bilayer tension that otherwise might rupture the cell ( 79 , 80 , 330 , 448 ) . These apparent biases against the bilayer model would seem ample reason to consider an alternative model in which mechanical force is transmitted directly to the channel protein through CSK and / or ECM tethers . As discussed below , there are several lines of evidence that indicate a “tethered” mechanism may gate speciﬁc MG channels . However , as yet , there is no single experimental result ( i . e . , analogous to liposome reconstitution ) that provides unequivocal support for this class of model . 1 . Physical and chemical disruption of putative tethers One strategy to identify a tethered mechanism is to show that disruption of the putative tethers abolishes MG channel activity . This strategy has been most successfully used in studies of audio - vestibular hair cells where extra - cellular “tip links” connecting stereocilia tips are hypoth - esized to act as external gating springs for MG channels ( 71 , 326 ; Fig . 9 ) . This model proposes that hair bundle displacement stretches the tip links and thereby inﬂu - ences the transition between the closed and open states FIG . 9 . Diagram of a pair of stereocilia illustrating two different hypothesized sites of mechanotransduction . A : the tip - link between the stereocilia ( a ) is proposed to exert a gating tension on MG channels located at each attach - ment point ( Pickles - Hudspeth model ) . Horizontal connec - tions ( exaggerated at b ) between the stereocilia mem - branes where they come into closest contact are proposed to exert a shear displacement and gate MG channels lo - cated in the region of membrane abutment ( Furness - Hack - ney model ) . B : force applied to the stereocilia ( arrow ) may cause distortion ( stretch ) of the membrane at a and b . 710 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of the MG channel ( 69 , 71 , 73 , 188 – 190 , 263 , 326 , see Ref . 260 for recent review ) . Consistent with the model is the demonstration that tip - link disruption with external solu - tions in which Ca 2 1 is reduced by the presence of tet - racarboxylate chelators ( e . g . , BAPTA ) also abolishes mechanotransduction ( 10 , 97 , 263 ) . Furthermore , after regeneration of the tip links ( i . e . , that takes several hours after disruption and chelator removal ) , mechanotransduc - tion can be restored , although without the strong adapta - tion seen before disruption ( 451 ) . In the original version of the gating spring model , a two - state channel model was proposed ( 71 , 188 – 190 ) . However , this simple model ( 150 ) could not account for several features of hair cell mechanotransduction ( see Ref . 260 for review ) . Therefore , a three - state model in - volving two closed states and a single open state ( C 1 7 C 2 7 O ) was suggested ( 73 , 260 ) . In the ﬁrst closed state C 1 , it was assumed that a portion of its gating spring was immobilized so that part of the spring’s tension was not transmitted to the gate . As a consequence , this “latched” closed state would have a lower compliance than either the unlatched closed state ( C 2 ) or the open state ( O ) . It was assumed that the energy of channel opening de - pended linearly on hair bundle displacement such that the gating force was a constant independent of bundle posi - tion ( 69 , 260 ) . However , because the gating springs resist extension but not compression , they should slacken at negative displacement such that the channel’s total en - ergy should become independent of negative displace - ment . This model could reproduce the observed asymmet - rical displacement - response relation and account for the measured differences in bundle stiffness at negative and positive displacements as well as provide a good ﬁt to experimental data from vestibular and cochlear hair cells ( 260 ) . In this model , it was originally assumed that the gating springs were linearly elastic . However , recently it has been shown that their stiffness increases with ten - sion , similar to other elastic materials ( 263 ) . Despite the necessary added assumptions , the tip - link / gating - spring model remains the main theoretical framework for hair cell studies . However , more recent observations have challenged the model ( 278 ) . Speciﬁ - cally , it was reported that tip - link disruption by either BAPTA or elastase resulted in a sustained inward current that could be blocked by dihydrostreptomycin ( 100 m M ) , amiloride ( 300 m M ) , or Gd 3 1 ( 1 mM ) ( 278 ) . Because these three agents are known to block MG channels ( although nonspeciﬁcally , see Ref . 158 ) , it was proposed that the sustained inward current was carried through perma - nently open MG channels . This was considered inconsis - tent with the tip - link model because without the tip links , MG channels should be either closed or only show a low P o consistent with their displacement independent energy evident at negative displacements ( 260 ) . An alternative model referred to as the “abutment” model ( Fig . 9 ) was proposed to explain the permanently open MG channels ( 119 , 148 , 278 ) . This model originally arose from immu - nocytochemical localization of the putative MG channels near , but not at , the points of tip - link attachment ( 148 ) . The putative MG channels were identiﬁed using a poly - clonal antibody for the rat kidney amiloride - sensitive Na 1 channel ( rENaC ) based on the observation that amiloride blocks both channels ( 158 ) . However , amiloride blocks MG channels with a much lower afﬁnity , and amiloride derivatives block with a different order of potency com - pared with the rENaC ( 343 ) , raising questions regarding the speciﬁcity of the ENaC antibody for the MG channel . Furthermore , recent studies using a - ENaC knockout mice indicate that the a - subunit is not required for hair cell mechanotransduction ( 342 ) . However , this may only indi - cate that other non - a ENaC subunits make up the hair cell MG channel ( see sect . VI F2 ) . In the abutment model , the MG channels are located at the junctionlike structures where the stereocilia ad - here . The resultant shearing forces at the membrane junc - tions during bundle displacement are proposed to cause channel opening , analogous to stretch - activated channels ( see Refs . 142 , 161 ) . Recent kinematic analysis indicates that the putative channels at the abutment region could be operated as well as if they were located at the tip links ( 119 ) . In particular , a linear change in shear displacement ( i . e . , at the contact region between the stereocilia ) occurs as one deﬂects a sterocilia pair ( within the physiological range of deﬂections ) , and these changes are comparable to the predicted tip link elongations ( see Fig . 4 in Ref . 119 ) . Furthermore , if the disruption of the tip links results in membrane junctions being exposed to increased ten - sion , due for example to splaying of the stereocilia , then the abutment model might also explain why MG channels are permanently open ( 278 ) . It should be pointed out that others have reported even larger sustained inward currents following BAPTA treatment ( 10 ) [ i . e . , . 400 pA ( 10 ) cf . with 40 pA ( 278 ) ] . However , the currents were interpreted as arising from Ca 2 1 - dependent shifts in voltage - gated Ca 2 1 channel ac - tivation ( i . e . , to more negative potentials ) and increased monovalent cation ﬂux through the Ca 2 1 channels in the absence of external Ca 2 1 . Signiﬁcantly , the three agents used to implicate MG channels also block Ca 2 1 channels ( 158 ) . On the other hand , there is no evidence that elas - tase could act this way on Ca 2 1 channels to produce the sustained current . Clearly , more selective agents will be required to unequivocally identify the nature of the sus - tained current and its relationship with MG channels . However , discrimination between the two models will probably only come with determination of the exact lo - calization and nature of interactions between MG chan - nels and speciﬁc stereocilia structures . Another MG channel initially proposed to operate by a tethered mechanism is the endogenous SA - CAT channel April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 711 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m in Xenopus oocytes ( 154 ) . This idea arose because repet - itive mechanical stimulation of oocyte patches irrevers - ibly abolished rapid adaptation and reduced patch mech - anosensitivity ( 154 , see Fig . 14 ) . On this basis it was proposed that critical CSK elements involved in gating and adaptation of MG channels were selectively de - coupled from the MG channel . Consistent with this idea was the observation that during mechanical stimulation a clear space developed between the membrane and the underlying cytoplasmic structures ( 154 , 447 ) . However , subsequent studies found that MG channel activity was retained in membrane blebs and PMVs that lack any or - ganized CSK based on immunocytochemical and electron microscopic evidence . This activity did not display adap - tation , and the stimulus - response relation was shifted to higher pressures ( 447 ) . On the basis of these new ﬁnd - ings , it has been suggested that tension in the bilayer actually gates the oocyte MG channel but that the cortical CSK modulates the development and relaxation of bilayer tension ( 447 ) . Interestingly , recent studies indicate that the CSK modulates the functional properties of non - MG channels ( 365 , 399 ) . Speciﬁcally , two independent groups have shown that mechanical - induced decoupling of the oocyte membrane patch from the underlying CSK ( as described above ) can alter the inactivation of voltage - gated Na 1 channels by irreversibly switching the gating mode from a slow to a fast inactivation . The mechanism of this effect remains unknown . However , the Na 1 chan - nel is not stretch sensitive , since suction alone cannot activate the channel nor modify its voltage - dependent activation ( cf . , Refs . 365 , 399 ) . Concerning attempts to biochemically disrupt CSK tethers , it has been demonstrated that cytochalasin not only does not block MG channel activation , it increases the mechanosensitivity of speciﬁc MG channels ( 142 , 158 , 370 , 375 ) . This indicates that actin microﬁlaments may normally constrain the development of tension in either the bilayer or other CSK proteins . Often spectrin ( i . e . , fodrin ) has been proposed to act as a tether for MG channels ( 156 , 348 , 350 ) . However , this idea has come from exclusion of other CSK proteins rather than any direct evidence , since there are no reagents that selec - tively disrupt spectrin . On the other hand , the recent demonstration that oocyte MG channel activity is retained in PMVs devoid of spectrin ( i . e . , based on electron micro - graph images , Ref . 447 ) indicates that neither spectrin nor any other CSK protein is required to gate this channel . The lack of effect of colchicine on MG channel ac - tivity in skeletal muscle ( 142 ) and Xenopus oocytes ( 158 ) and on tactile sensation in the cockroach ( 233 ) would also seem to rule out microtubules as gating tethers . However , colchicine treatment does abolish touch sensitivity in the nematode C . elegans and the cricket Acheta domesticus ( 59 , 104 ) . Furthermore , genetic and electron microscopic studies indicate that microtubules may be part of a com - plex that mediates touch sensitivity in nematodes and insects ( 161 , 403 , 409 , 410 ) . 2 . Genetic disruption of putative tether proteins Different genetic mutants provide evidence both for and against the involvement of speciﬁc EC and CSK proteins in MG channel gating . For example , the dystrophic ( mdx ) mouse , an animal model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy ( DMD ) , is characterized by the absence of dystrophin , a large CSK protein normally expressed in vertebrate skeletal muscle . If dystrophin transmits force directly to the MG channels in skeletal muscle , then MG channels in mdx and DMD should be mechanically insensitive . However , stretch - inactivated Ca 2 1 - permeable channels are upregulated in mdx muscle ( 116 ) , and stretch - activated Ca 2 1 - permeable channels can still be activated , although they may display abnormally slow closing ( 271 ) . Therefore , although the ab - sence of dystrophin may contribute to the elevation of [ Ca 2 1 ] i ( i . e . , via MG channels ) that contribute to muscle degeneration ( 129 , 416 ) , the fact that MG channel activity is retained indicates dystrophin is not required for mechanical gating . In studies of touch - insensitive mutants of C . elegans , Chalﬁe and colleagues have shown that mutations in the genes encoding a speciﬁc collagen in the mantle ( i . e . , mec - 5 ; Ref . 95 ) and the a - and b - microtubulin subunits in the CSK ( mec - 7 and mec - 12 ; Refs . 195 , 357 ) block touch sensation . This has led to the idea that proteins in the extracellular and cytoplasmic domains are tethered to the putative MG channels ( i . e . , MECs / DEGs , see sect . VIII F2 ) . Interestingly , these studies indicate little redundancy in terms of transmitting mechanical force to the channel , since a single mutation in any one element is sufﬁcient to abolish touch sensitivity . Although various models have been put forward for how these proteins may be orga - nized ( see Fig . 10 A , Refs . 120 , 161 , 403 ) , direct evidence of MG channel activation ( i . e . , from patch - clamp studies ) is still lacking . It remains possible that forces transmitted through ECM and CSK proteins do not directly gate the channel but instead stretch the bilayer . For example , early electron microscopic studies of the campaniform recep - tor of the ﬂy by Thurm et al . ( 411 ) indicated a complex involving microtubules , membrane cones , and extracellu - lar elements proposed to interact with MG channels anal - ogous to the Chalﬁe model ( Fig . 10 B ) . However , it may be that the channels rather than being directly connected to the microtubules through the membrane cones are actu - ally localized in the intervening bilayer regions that un - dergo increase in tension when the dendritic sheaf and membrane cones are compressed . 3 . Identiﬁcation of CSK protein binding sequences The basic idea of the tethered model is that mole - cules in the CSK and / or ECM domains directly interact 712 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m with the MG channel protein . In this case , one would expect to ﬁnd speciﬁc consensus regions or domains in the membrane channel protein that would allow such interactions . For example , COOH - terminal cysteine - rich regions ( 208 ) and NH 2 - terminal repetitive ankyrin repeats ( 425 ) , identiﬁed in two recently cloned MG channels can - didates , Mid1 and NompC ( see sect . VIII F ) , may mediate the protein - protein interactions of a tethered mechanism . On the other hand , they may serve to localize or cluster the MG channels in specialized regions of the cell rather than mechanically gate the channel . Certainly , there are other membrane transport proteins , including the RBC Cl 2 exchanger ( band 3 ) and various ligand - and voltage - gated channels that interact with that CSK but are gener - ally not thought to be mechanosensitive . Furthermore , a mutant form of the NMDA receptor channel in which the COOH terminus that normally links the channel to the CSK was deleted still displayed the same stretch sensitiv - ity as the wild - type NMDA channels ( 53 ) . This result , together with the observation that amphiphilic com - pounds modulate the NMDA channel’s stretch sensitivity , indicates a bilayer rather than a tethered model of gating . 4 . Voltage sensitivity of patch mechanics and MG channels Initial studies of membrane patch mechanics were interpreted as indicating that gating tension was devel - oped in the CSK rather than the lipid bilayer ( 375 ) . How - ever , more recent studies indicate that the bilayer can FIG . 10 . Models of the supramolecu - lar complexes proposed to underlie MG channel activation in the touch - sensitive neurons of C . elegans and A . domesticus ( house ﬂy ) . A : individual molecular com - ponents identifed in touch - insensitive C . elegans mutants . The uppermost struc - ture in each panel represents the man - tle ( sheath ) that requires the presence of MEC - 1 ( unidentiﬁed ) and MEC - 5 ( a unique collagen ) . MEC - 9 is also an extra - cellular protein but does not form the mantle . Instead , it is proposed to form the extracellular link ( i . e . , gating spring ) be - tween the MG channel and the mantle . Here the MG channel is formed from ﬁve subunits involving the membrane pro - teins MEC - 4 , MEC - 10 , and MEC - 6 . MEC - 2 is also an integral membrane protein that shows strong homology to stomatin , a red blood cell protein that binds to the cy - toskeleton and regulates cation conduc - tance . In this model MEC - 2 is proposed to connect the MG channel to the microtu - bules composed of a - and b - tubulin and encoded by mec - 12 and mec - 7 , respec - tively . The proposed shearing force ( ar - row ) on the mantle results in opening of the MG channel . [ From Hamill and McBride ( 161 ) . ] B : schematized version of microtubule - membrane complex visual - ized by electron microscopy of the ﬂy campaniform sensilla . Cone - shaped mem - brane bridges ; 18 nm long are connected at their tips with microtubules that are embedded in an amorphous material . In this model , each cone - membrane com - plex is proposed to represent a single MG channel unit , and the indentation of the neuronal dendrite compresses this struc - ture , thereby activating MG channels . [ Modiﬁed from Thurm et al . ( 411 ) . ] April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 713 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m develop tension ( 4 ) . In the initial study , prolonged pres - sure steps ( i . e . , ; 5 s ) were shown to increase membrane patch area beyond the expected elastic limit of the bilayer ( i . e . , . 10 % ) . This increase occurred with an initial delay of several 100 ms followed by a slow exponential ( i . e . , t ; 1 s ) rise during the pressure step and a slow exponen - tial fall after the pressure step . These changes in area indicated K A values of ; 50 mN / m , compared with values of ; 500 mN / m for lipid bilayers ( see sect . II B ) . The lower K A values were interpreted as reﬂecting the more elastic ( expandable ) properties of the CSK network ( 107 , 375 ) . However , the authors also concluded that inﬂux of new lipids from stores along the walls of the pipette could contribute to the large increase in patch area . The latter effect would also tend to lower estimates of K A , but it was assumed that the bilayer alone could not produce an elastic recovery after the stimulus was removed ( but see below ) . In the more recent study ( 4 ) , the effects of mem - brane potential on patch breakdown were examined . In the case of lipid bilayers , it was already known that breakdown occurs when the sum of the energy due to tension - induced thinning and electrically induced com - pression exceeds a critical value ( 295 ) . Therefore , it was argued that if the cell membrane breakdown was also voltage sensitive it would indicate the bilayer supports a signiﬁcant fraction of the membrane tension ( 4 ) . Indeed , patch - clamp results indicated that ; 40 % of the membrane tension was supported by the bilayer . To explain the reversible movements of the patch after the pressure steps ( 375 ) , it was proposed that restoring forces were generated by the tendency of the membrane to be drawn back into the cell ( 4 ) . This elastic recoil may be analogous to that displayed by thin lipid tethers that are pulled back by the lowered energy state associated with reestablish - ing interactions with the CSK ( 182 ) . Reports indicating membrane polarization causes membrane patch movement and activates MG channels are also consistent with bilayer tension gating the MG channel ( 127 , 159 , 177 , 368 , 449 ) . However , although dif - ferent groups agree that depolarization causes membrane patch movements , they disagree on the direction and reversibility of the movements and their contribution to MG channel activation . Speciﬁcally , Gil et al . ( 126 ) re - ported that depolarization ( 1 50 mV ) causes a slow ( 10 – 60 s ) displacement of the membrane plug up the pipette ( i . e . , 1 – 2 m m away from the cell ) as would be expected with applied suction . Furthermore , they pro - posed that this patch movement caused the slow depolar - ization - induced activation of MG channels . However , it was not reported whether the plug could return to its original position to turn off the channels ( see Figs . 1 and 2 in Ref . 126 ) . In contrast , Zhang and Hamill ( 449 ) found that depolarization caused the patch to ﬂex inward to - ward the cell ( i . e . , as occurs with applied pressure ) with - out disrupting the patch boundary . This movement was reversible but did not consistently activate MG channels . Further studies on the role of patch geometry in the different patch pipettes may resolve the basis for the discrepancies . However , it does not appear to be due to difference in glass composition ( 126 , 449 ) . Both groups agree that the depolarization of the whole oocyte does not cause MG channel activation , presumably because the excess membrane area of the oocyte reduces the ability of electromechanical forces to create bilayer stress in the whole cell membrane ( 448 ) . 5 . Effects of lipophilic compounds Recent studies indicate that the same lipophilic com - pounds that gate gramicidin ( i . e , lysophospholipids and arachidonic acid ; Ref . 251 ) and MscS ( i . e . , trinitrophenol and chlorpromazine ; Ref . 266 ) in lipid bilayers also gate SA - CAT channels and MG K 1 channels ( i . e . , TREK / TRAAK ) as well as modulate NMDA - R channels ( 53 , 257 , 323 , 372 ; see sect . VIII F3 ) . This indicates that these eukary - otic MG channels may also be gated by bilayer tension similar to prokaryotic channels . However , because the compounds may act on the channel protein itself or on CSK proteins , liposome reconstitution of MG channel ac - tivity will be required to conﬁrm a bilayer mechanism . 6 . Reconstitution of puriﬁed proteins in lipid bilayers The single criterion that can disprove the tethered model is demonstration that the puriﬁed MG channel protein retains mechanosensitivity when reconstituted into lipid bilayers . At this time , the only eukaryotic chan - nel that this criterion has been applied is the ENaC ( see sect . VIII F2 ) . ENaC was reconstituted into planar lipid bilayers ( PLBs ) and a hydrostatic pressure gradient ap - plied to stretch the bilayer ( 11 , 202 ) . This protocol was reported to reveal an unusual mechanosensitivity involv - ing MS relief from Ca 2 1 block ( 203 ) . In the past , the ability to develop tension in the PLB has been questioned be - cause of the presence of a lipid torus ( 158 , 350 ) . Although it was argued the torus may be exhausted by large bilayer expansions ( 203 ) , liposome patch - clamp studies of the ENaC ( i . e . , similar to MscL ) should be carried out to conﬁrm any tension sensitivity . More signiﬁcantly , the reported mechanosensitivity seen in PLBs is not recapit - ulated in cell membranes ( e . g . , see Ref . 12 ) . This leaves open the possibility that contaminant proteins form chan - nels or that puriﬁcation and reconstitution of the ENaC introduces novel properties due to incorrect folding and / or oligomerization . On the other hand , it may indicate that interactions with the CSK suppress the properties seen in the bilayer ( 51 , 340 ) . Studies of the ENaC in CSK - deﬁcient PMVs from Xenopus oocytes ( 447 ) may discriminate between these possibilities . The PMV prep - aration should also be helpful in testing the feasibility of 714 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m reconstituting other MG channels heterologously ex - pressed in the oocyte . D . MG Channel Classiﬁcation : Is There a Unifying Mechanism for Activation and Inactivation of MG Channels ? Like voltage - and receptor - gated channels , MG chan - nels can be classiﬁed according to differences in their ion selectivity , conductance , and / or pharmacology . However , a more meaningful classiﬁcation relates to their response to mechanical stimulation . For example , different MG channels vary in their sensitivity and response to pressure and suction applied to the membrane patch . A common classiﬁcation is whether they are opened ( i . e . , stretch - activated channels ; SAC ) or closed ( i . e . , stretch - inacti - vated channels ; SIC ) by membrane stretch ( 143 , 288 ) . This classiﬁcation refers to steady - state responses and ignores dynamic behaviors such as adaptation in which sustained mechanical stimulation may close SACs and open SICs ( see below ) . Both SACs and SICs respond symmetrically to pressure and suction ( i . e . , PASA and PISI , respectively , see Fig . 11 ) , indicating that it is membrane tension that actually activates or deactivates the channel . This sym - metrical behavior may be mediated by tension developed in the bilayer or in CSK / EC elements that lie parallel to the plane of the bilayer . However , there are also MG channels that respond asymmetrically to pressure and suction and therefore may constitute additional classes . The ﬁrst channel reported to display asymmetrical responses was a MG cation channel in rat astrocytes that was activated by pressure and inactivated by suction ( PASI ) ( 33 – 35 ) . Subsequently , other groups reported similar behavior for MG cation channels in toad smooth muscle cells ( 178 ) and rat endothelial cells ( 191 , 259 ) . Recently , a possible fourth class of channel has been identiﬁed ( PISA ) in which suc - tion activates a neuronal K 1 channel but pressure has little effect ( 257 , 323 ) . Figure 11 summarizes the four basic types of channel behavior in terms of idealized Boltzmann distributions . The asymmetrical responses to suction and pressure ( Fig . 11 , C and D ) may arise with either a bilayer or tethered model of gating . For example , in the case of audio - vestib - ular hair cells , displacement of the stereocilia in opposite directions with respect to the graduated stereocilia axis either opens or closes the MG channels . This polarity - dependent behavior has been explained in terms of stretching or relaxing the extracellular gating spring ( i . e . , FIG . 11 . Idealized Boltzmann distributions for different classes of channel behavior seen in response to suction and pressure applied to the membrane patch . A : the stretch - activated channel ( SAC ) is symmetrically activated by pres - sure and suction ( i . e . , PASA ) , indicating it is responding to membrane tension . B : the stretch - inactivated channel ( SIC ) is symmetrically inactivated by suction and pressure ( PISI ) . C : a channel that is activated by pressure but inactivated by suction ( PASI ) . D : a channel inactivated by pressure and activated by suction ( PISA ) . April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 715 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tip links , see sect . VIII B2 ) . Perhaps analogous CSK / EC structures that lie perpendicular to the plane of the bi - layer , and are stretched in one direction and compressed in the other direction , are responsible for the asymmetri - cal responses to pressure and suction . However , asym - metrical effects may also arise in a bilayer model if pres - sure and suction cause differential expansion and compression of the inner and outer monolayer during patch movements . The following simple calculation indi - cates that this source of asymmetry may be signiﬁcant . If suction deforms the patch from a ﬂat circular disk to a hemisphere with a radius of curvature of 1 m m , then for a membrane thickness of 5 nm , the radii of curvature of the outer and inner monolayers will be 1 and 0 . 995 m m , respectively . This will result in monolayer areas of 6 . 28 and 6 . 22 m m 2 , respectively ( the reverse changes would be expected with a pressure - induced deformation ) . If the monolayers are coupled so that they cannot slide past one another and the number of lipid molecules in each mono - layer remains ﬁxed , then this would translate into propor - tional differences in both the area and the thickness of each monolayer . The difference , although only 1 % , may be signiﬁcant considering that the bilayer can rupture with dilations of ; 2 % . If it is further assumed that the mech - anosensitivity of the channel arises because of differ - ences in protein bilayer mismatch associated with differ - ent conformations ( see sect . III ) , then a unifying mechanism may explain all forms of MG channel behavior seen in Figure 11 . For example , the symmetrical SAC ( Fig . 11 A ) and SIC ( Fig . 11 B ) channel activity may arise be - cause positive and negative mismatch that is symmetrical with respect to each monolayer favors opposite but sym - metrical shifts in the closed - open distribution with changes in membrane curvature . The symmetry in the mismatch ( i . e . , at the external and internal interface ) means that the channel would respond the same to either sign of curvature , since in one direction one monolayer is compressed and the other monolayer expanded , and vice versa in the other direction . On the other hand , a channel that displays asymmetrical mismatch with respect to each monolayer might be expected to respond differentially depending on the direction of membrane curvature ( Fig . 11 , C and D ) . In one case it could be activated by positive curvature and inactivated by negative curvature , and vice versa in another case . It may be possible to test this uniﬁed hypothesis by examining speciﬁc lipids that pro - duced either positive or negative curvature when they are only allowed to partition into one monolayer . E . Rapid Adaptation of MG Channel Activity Adaptation to sustained stimulation is an important feature of many sensory receptors and is critical in allow - ing a receptor to ignore continuous or static stimuli and respond to transient or dynamic stimuli . Speciﬁc mech - anoreceptor functions such as the pulsatile pressure sen - sitivity of arterial baroreceptors , the movement ( acceler - ation ) detection by vestibular hair cells , and the high vibration sensitivity of certain tactile receptors all depend on adaptation to maintain their high dynamic sensitivity over a broad stimulus domain . Although adaptation can arise at any stage of the transduction process , it is clear that single MG channel activity can display adaptation to sustained mechanical stimulation ( 35 , 147 , 154 , 155 , 168 , 226 , 285 , 382 ) . Figure 12 illustrates rapidly adapting MG channel currents recorded from an inside - out patch of a Xenopus oocyte ( Fig . 12 A ) , an isolated liposome patch in which MscL was reconstituted ( Fig . 12 B ) , and from a mouse utricle hair cell ( Fig . 12 C ) . The decay of the oocyte MG current is well approximated by an exponential with a time constant of ; 100 ms similar to the initial fast decay of the hair cell current but 10 times faster that the decay of MscL activity . Because mechanical gating arises from the channel protein being sensitive to some mechanical - induced de - formation ( i . e . , either in the bilayer or in CSK / ECM ele - ments ) , then adaptation could arise because of a relax - ation in the force causing the deformation or a relaxation in the sensitivity to that deformation . Consider the sim - plest case of a two - state channel in which the rate con - stants for channel opening ( b ) and closing ( a ) are dis - placement sensitive ( i . e . , for a tethered MG channel ) or tension sensitive ( i . e . , for bilayer - gated MG channel ) . The probability of the channel being open ( P o ) will be given by P o 5 1 / ~ 1 1 K ! ( 8 ) where K 5 b / a ( 9 ) or in terms of displacement K 5 K 0 e s ~ x o 2 x ! ( 10 ) where K 0 is the equilibrium constant when the displace - ment x is equal to the set point x 0 and determines the number of channels open at zero relative displacement , and s is the sensitivity to the relative displacement change ( x 0 2 x ) . For a bilayer - gated channel , we could substitute displacement with area change . An exponential time re - laxation in either s or x 0 can produce the same adapting MG currents ( see Ref . 155 ) . However , in one case there will be a reduction in sensitivity ( i . e . , a change in the slope of the response - displacement , P o - x , Boltzmann ) while in the other case there will be a shift along the x - axis with no change in slope . [ Note that in the simple and probably unrealistic two - state kinetic scheme ( 150 , 260 ) , the shift 716 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m and shape changes are clearly independent . However , in a three - state scheme , a change in set point may change the shape as well as produce a shift in the relation . ] The latter mechanism is true adaptation because sensitivity is main - tained , whereas the other mechanism is more akin to receptor desensitization or voltage - gated channel inacti - vation , where the stimulus must be removed for sensitiv - ity to recover . For MG channel activity in the hair cell , the predominant effect of adaptation is a shift in the P o - x curve along the x - axis ( 8 ) . Similarly , double steps of suc - tion or pressure ( Fig . 13 ) indicate that after oocyte MG channels have fully adapted they retain the same sensi - tivity to reactivation ( 154 ) . A number of factors have been shown to alter the rate of adaptation of MG channel activity in hair cells and oocytes . In both cell types , membrane depolarization causes a slowing of adaptation , and in the speciﬁc case of the oocyte MG channel , the slowing is a monotonic func - tion of voltage with ; 150 mV depolarization causing an e - fold decrease in the rate of decay . However , unlike adaptation in audio - vestibular hair cells ( 9 , 74 , 98a ) , the oocyte adaptation and its voltage dependence is Ca 2 1 independent ( 154 ) . The oocyte adaptation mechanism may be located in the bilayer where it senses the electric ﬁeld or alternatively coupled to a membrane protein that transmits electric ﬁeld effects through a conformational change . Another notable difference between the hair cell and oocyte MG channel adaptation is the former’s direc - tional sensitivity . For example , negative displacement of the hair bundle ( i . e . , toward the short - ended stereocilia ) tends to turn off the channels , but then when the stimulus is removed , a rebound activation of channels occurs ( Fig . 12 C ) . This phenomenon presumably arises because adap - tation results in the P o - x relation being transiently shifted to the left so that more channels will be open at zero displacement . In contrast , the oocyte MG channel shows no directional sensitivity to suction / pressure stimuli and no rebound channel reopening after the stimulus is re - moved . This difference most likely reﬂects the absence in the oocyte of the hair cell Ca 2 1 - sensitive myosin motor FIG . 12 . Adaptation of MG channel ac - tivity in response to sustained stimulation measured in different membrane systems . A : inside - out patch recording from a Xeno - pus oocyte in response to a 10 - mmHg suc - tion step measured at a patch potential of 2 130 mV . The MG channel activity turned off with a time constant of 163 ms . B : MscL activity in a liposome patch in response to a suction step of 40 mmHg measured at a patch potential of 2 10 mV . The MscL activ - ity turned off with a time constant of ; 2 s to leave some residual activity . [ Modiﬁed from Ha¨se et al . ( 168 ) . ] C : whole cell re - cording from a mouse utricular hair cell that was deﬂected ( ; 1 nm ) with a ﬂuid jet under pressure - clamp control . There was an initial fast decay of current ( i . e . , over in , 50 ms ) followed by a sustained current . When the pressure pulse was turned off , there was a rebound outward current , indi - cating the MG channels at rest had been turned off . [ Modiﬁed from Holt et al . ( 183a ) . ] April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 717 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m that is proposed to actively reset the gating spring tension ( see below ) . For the hair cell , the voltage sensitivity of adaptation derives from voltage - dependent Ca 2 1 inﬂux through the MG channel ( 9 , 74 , 189 ) . However , within this framework , two distinctly different molecular mechanisms have been evoked to explain how Ca 2 1 might mediate adaptation . In one mechanism , internal Ca 2 1 interacts directly with the channel protein causing it to favor the initial closed state conformation C 1 ( i . e . , in the kinetic scheme C 1 7 C 2 7 O , see Ref . 260 ) , thus reducing the tension sensitivity be - cause it would require more tension to put the channel in C 2 . As the channels close , Ca 2 1 sequestering processes lower internal Ca , and the C 2 conformation is favored ( 73 ) . This model has been recently revised to speciﬁcally account for the initial fast phase of adaptation ( t ; 1 ms ) that displays symmetrical kinetics ( i . e . , mirrored images ) for small positive and negative displacements and is in - sensitive to myosin ATPase inhibitors such as vanadate ( 440 ) . Furthermore , the fast kinetics of this phase con - trast with the slower cycle time of a myosin ATPase motor that may contribute to the slow phase ( t ; 50 ms ) of adaptation . In the second mechanism , the internal Ca 2 1 reduces the gating tension by causing a movement ( i . e . , by slip - page of a myosin motor ) of the tip link anchoring point to the MG channel , thus relaxing the tip link spring tension and thereby favoring the closed states . As MG channels close and internal Ca 2 1 falls , active motoring of the an - choring point retensions the gating spring . Consistent with this model , it has been shown that myosin ATPase inhibitors block the slower phase of adaptation ( 196 , 440 ) . It therefore seems possible that a combination of distinct mechanisms may contribute to adaptation . Overall evi - dence would seem to favor the second model in which the predominant effect of voltage , as with adaptation , is to shift the P o - x curve along the x - axis rather than reduce its slope ( i . e . , sensitivity ) ( 8 ) . On the other hand , evidence indicates that Ca 2 1 may directly interact with the channel in a number of ways to either block the channel or induce channel conformational changes ( see Ref . 155 ) . Most re - cently , it has been demonstrated that external Ca 2 1 af - fects tip link elastic properties as well as their integrity ( 263 ) . In contrast to MG channel adaptation in the oocyte , there is no intrinsic voltage sensitivity in either model of hair cell adaptation ( i . e . , it comes from voltage - dependent Ca 2 1 inﬂux ) . However , both oocyte and hair cell MG channels show evidence of an intrinsic voltage - dependent conformational change that is proposed to underlie the voltage - dependent amiloride channel block ( 234 , 343 ) . The relationship between this voltage - dependent confor - mation change and other aspects of mechanotransduction has yet to be determined . In oocyte patches , it is possible to irreversibly abol - ish adaptation of MG channel activity by either repetitive application of moderate stimuli ( Fig . 14 A ) or by applica - tion of a single strong stimulus . This apparent fragility of adaptation ( to sealing and stimulation protocols ) explains why some groups have reported stationary kinetic behav - ior for the Xenopus oocyte MG channel ( 154 , 442 ) . Inter - estingly , it illustrates an example where a single MG channel may be changed from a highly phasic receptor into a tonic receptor most likely by a change in the extrinsic properties of the membrane ( see below ) . On the basis of the observation that during the loss of adaptation the membrane patch could be seen to be decoupled from the underlying cytoskeletal structures ( 154 ) , it was sug - gested that viscous elements ( dashpots ) in the cytoskel - FIG . 13 . After adaptation , MG channel activity in oocyte membrane patches can be reactivated by increase in suction or pressure . A : MG channel activity in response to an initial 8 - mmHg suction step com - pletely adapted but could be reactivated by a 16 - mmHg suction step . Pipette solution contained ( in mM ) 100 KCl , 2 CaCl 2 , and 10 HEPES , with a patch potential of 2 100 mV . [ Modiﬁed from Hamill and McBride ( 154 ) . ] B : MG channel activity in another patch completely adapted to a 10 - mmHG pressure but could be reactivated by an increase to 20 mmHg . Pipette solution contained ( in mM ) 100 KCl , 10 EGTA , and 10 HEPES , with a patch potential of 2 130 mV . Note a larger tip pipette was used in A ( ; 4 m m ) than in B ( ; 2 m m ) . This accounts for the difference in peak currents . [ Modiﬁed from McBride and Hamill ( 271 ) . ] 718 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m eton become frozen or decoupled without disconnecting the gating springs ( 154 , see also Ref . 35 ) . Consistent with this idea was that MG channel activity recorded in CSK - deﬁcient plasma membrane blebs or vesicles displayed little or no adaptation to sustained mechanical stimula - tion ( 447 ) . The above studies point to EC / CSK proteins tethered to the channel as being critical for adaptation of MG channel activity . However , recent studies of MscS in E . coli protoplasts ( 226 ) and MscL in liposomes ( 168 ) indi - cate that channel activities may display adaptation in the absence of CSK proteins ( Fig . 12 C ) . The adaptation of the E . coli channel activity is slower than that in Xenopus oocytes or hair cells ( i . e . , t ; 1 s vs . 50 – 200 ms at similar voltages ) , is not voltage sensitive , and is not abolished by strong repetitive mechanical stimulation of the patch . Limited proteolysis applied to the cytoplasmic side of the patch reduces the number of MscS without removing adaptation , whereas stronger proteolysis abolishes mech - anosensitivity ( 226 ) . Note this proteolytic inhibition of MscS activity is opposite to the potentiation of MscL activity ( 3 ) . Given that a bilayer rather than a tethered mechanism gate MscS , it was proposed that adaptation might be associated with insertion of the cytoplasmic domain of MscS in the bilayer ( 226 ) . An alternative expla - nation is that the expansive force in the bilayer ( i . e . , due to bilayer bending , see sect . VIII D ) relaxes as the mono - layers slip past one another or lipids move from one monolayer to the other may ( see Ref . 350 ) . In this case , adaptation should be sensitive to the lipid make up of the monolayers and the degree of coupling between the two monolayers . F . Structure of Eukaryotic MG Channels Recent progress has been made in identifying several eukaryotic genes that encode MG or putative MG chan - nels . However , so far none of the structurally identiﬁed channels has been characterized in the same detail as FIG . 14 . The voltage - dependent adaptation of MG channel activity in the Xenopus oocyte is mechanically fragile . A : repetitive pulses of suction of 30 mmHg applied to the patch 30 s apart results in a progressive loss in adaptation and irreversible reduction in the MG channel current . [ Modiﬁed from McBride and Hamill ( 271a ) . ] B : loss of adaptation due to repetitive suction pulses also dramatically alters the voltage - sensitive response of the MG channel currents . The initial response to the suction step ( i 1 ) shows highly asymmetrical currents at 2 100 mV / 100 mV due to adaptation only at the negative potential ( reversal potential was ; 0 mV ) . The response to the third suction step ( i 3 ) shows a more symmetrical current due to the irreversible loss of adaptation . The larger current noise at 2 100 mV compared with 100 mV reﬂects more rapid closing of MG channels at the negative potential ( i . e . , shorter channel lifetime ) . This voltage dependence is not fragile and presumably reﬂects an intrinsic property of the channel protein . [ Modiﬁed from Hamill and McBride ( 154 ) . ] April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 719 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m MscL , and in some cases ( e . g . , MECs , NOMPC ) , patch - clamp measurements have yet to conﬁrm single MG chan - nel activity . Nevertheless , the preliminary ﬁndings indi - cate that a number of different molecular designs and mechanisms have evolved to confer mechanosensitivity on membrane ion channels . Below we discuss their key structural ( i . e . , topology , subunit stoichiometry , and pro - tein - protein consensus domains ) and mechanistic ( i . e . , bilayer vs . tethered ) features . 1 . A Ca 2 1 - permeable cation MG channel in yeast Mid1 was originally identiﬁed from a mutant screen of yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) induced to undergo Ca 2 1 - dependent mating - induced differentiation ( 199 ) . Cloning and sequencing of mid1 indicated an integral membrane protein of 548 amino acids with at least 4 ( and possibly 6 ) transmembrane domains ( H1 - H4 ) and 2 COOH - terminal cysteine - rich regions that may be in - volved in protein - protein interactions ( i . e . , that may local - ize and / or activate the channel ) ( 208 ) . Although Mid1 does not appear closely related to other membrane pro - teins , its H4 sequence shows similarities to the S3 / H3 hydrophobic segment of voltage - gated Ca 2 1 and Na 1 channels ( 208 and references therein ) . Heterologous ex - pression of mid1 in Chinese hamster ovary cells was reported to increase resting Ca 2 1 membrane permeabil - ity , whereas stretch of the cell substrate ( i . e . , a silicon elastic membrane ) resulted in elevation in [ Ca 2 1 ] i ( 208 , but see Refs . 207 , 208a for corrections ) . Patch - clamp stud - ies indicate that Midl is a SA - CAT channel with a high Ca 2 1 permeability ( P Ca / P K ; 7 ) . Although the Mid1 chan - nel conductance ( 32 pS in 150 mM CsCl ) is similar to that of a SAC previously characterized in S . cerevisiae proto - plasts ( 36 pS in 170 mM CsCl ) , the protoplast channel displays a lower Ca 2 1 permeability ( P Ca / P K ; 0 . 54 ) and signiﬁcant anion permeability ( 147 ) . Furthermore , recent results ( X . L . Zhou , C . Palmer , and C . Kung , personal communication ) indicate that protoplasts prepared from S . cerevisiae with the mid1 gene deleted still express the MG channel activity of the wild - type yeast protoplast ( 147 ) . Although no homologs of Mid1 have been identiﬁed in higher eukaryotes , a potential Mid1 homolog , yam8 , has been cloned from the ﬁssion yeast S . pombe and demonstrated to partially rescue S . cerevisiae from the mid1 mutant phenotype ( 402 ) . 2 . MECs : putative MG channels in C . elegans Members of the Mec ( mechanosensory abnormal ) family in C . elegans were originally identiﬁed in mutant screens for touch - insensitive animals ( 57 , 58 , 59 , 93 , 122 , 161 , 403 ) . The initial clue that speciﬁc mec genes may encode MG channels was that while recessive mutations in mec - 4 resulted in touch insensitivity , dominant muta - tions in the same gene resulted in swelling - induced de - generation and lysis of the mechanosensory neurons ( i . e . , consistent with continuously open channels ) ( 93 ) . The cloning of mec - 4 demonstrated that it was homologous to deg - 1 that mediates swelling induced degeneration in other neurons ( 403 ) . Together , Mec - 4 , Mec - 10 , and Deg - 1 were proposed to belong to a protein superfamily called degenerins ( DEGs ) . Other members of the MEC / DEG family in C . elegans include unc - 8 ( uncoordinated ) , ex - pressed in motor neurons and required for normal loco - motion ; unc - 105 , expressed in muscle and required for stretch sensitivity ; and ﬂr - 1 ( ﬂuoride resistance ) required for normal defecation rhythm ( 248 , 401 , 404 ) . As yet , no MEC family member has been directly demonstrated to form MG channels . However , when unc - 105 genes with gain - of - function mutations ( i . e . , predicted to cause constitutive channel activation ) are expressed in Xenopus oocytes , they form spontaneous opening cation channels that display a variety of conductances ( i . e . , 2 – 30 pS ) with no Ca 2 1 permeability ( 121 ) . Amiloride blocks the Unc - 105 channels , apparently by binding to a single site in the pore . This is similar to the amiloride block of ENaC ( 123 ) but different from the block of MG channels in Xenopus oocytes and hair cells where a voltage - depen - dent conformational change is proposed to expose mul - tiple amiloride binding sites outside the membrane ﬁeld ( 234 , 343 ) . On the basis of sequence similarities , several other amiloride - sensitive Na 1 channels have been classiﬁed as MEC / DEG family members . These include the ENaCs ( 50 , 123 ) , acid - sensing ion channels ( ASIC ) ( 424a ) , molluscan FMRFamide - gated channels , and Drosophila Na 1 chan - nels expressed in gonads [ dGNaC1 or RPK ( for ripped pocket ) and in multiple dendritic neurons dmdNaC1 or PPK ( for pickpocket ) ( 1 , 424a ) ] . The RPK and PPK were identiﬁed in Drosophila database searches that initially recognized a sequence homologous with a conserved re - gion ( i . e . , in M2 ) in other MEC / DEG genes ( 1 ) . All mem - bers of the MEC / DEG family are characterized by 1 ) two transmembrane domains ( M1 and M2 ) with a single P - loop structure believed to line the channel pore , 2 ) intra - cellular NH 2 and CCOH termini , and 3 ) a large extracel - lular loop ( e . g . , see Refs . 49 , 403 ) . In terms of secondary structure and membrane topology ( but not primary amino acid sequence ) , the DEG / MEC family members are similar to MscL from prokaryotes ( see sect . IV B ) and also to the ATP - gated ( P 2X receptor ) channels ( 302 ) . Of all the DEG / MEC family members , the ENaC has been studied in greatest detail ( 50 , 123 ) . ENaC in most epithelia is composed of three homologous subunits : a , b , and g , with each subunit proposed to contribute to the pore walls ( 357a ) . A fourth subunit , d , mainly expressed in the testis and ovaries , shows properties similar to a and may form heteromultimers with b and g in these tissues ( 82a ) . Controversy exists regarding the subunit stoichi - ometry of the ENaCs , with some studies indicating a 2 bg 720 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ( 113 ) and others a 3 b 3 g 3 ( 371a ) . Because the discrepancy may relate to different detergents used to solubilize and purify the ENaC protein , the results of a recent study that did not attempt to purify the channel complex are signif - icant ( 105a ) . Instead , freeze - fracture electron microscopy was used to visualize the ENaC complexes expressed on the surface of Xenopus oocytes . The individual ENaC complex was seen as a square particle of ; 24 nm 2 , indi - cating 17 6 2 transmembrane a - helices ( i . e . , assuming 1 . 4 helix / nm 2 ) or 8 or 9 subunits ( 105a ) . The fact that ENaC is a member of the MEC / DEG protein family has naturally led to the hypothesis that it is also a MG channel . Although some electrophysiological ( 11 , 202 , 203 , 219 ) and immunocytochemical localization studies ( 94 , 118 , 148a ) support this hypothesis , various methodological concerns and problems with interpreta - tion have been raised ( see Refs . 12 , 158 , 339 , 350 , 427 ) . For example , the reported mechanosensitivity of ENaCs reconstituted into bilayers ( 11 , 202 , 203 but see sect . VIII C6 ) is not evident in the ENaCs expressed in cell membranes ( 12 , 319 ) . Furthermore , the report that heter - ologous expression of a - ENaC in LM ( TK ) ﬁbroblasts re - sults in MG channels ( 219 ) appears problematic because that cell line expresses endogenous MG channels with similar properties to the presumed a - ENaC ( 428 ) . Finally , the results indicating that the abg - ENaC subunits trans - fected in oocytes express a volume - sensitive inward cur - rent ( cf . , Refs . 11 , 205 ) indicate , if anything , that the ENaC is a SIC , since cell shrinkage activates , while oocyte swell - ing inactivates the current ( 32 , 288 ) . The contribution of a recently reported endogenous shrinkage - activated cur - rent that is not mediated by the SA - CAT channel remains unclear ( 448 , 449 ) . Despite the lack of compelling biophysical evidence for the ENaC being a MG channel , there are several immunocytochemical studies that have localized ENaC subunits in mechanosensory cells ( 94 , 118 , 148 , 148a , but see Refs . 128 , 342 ) . One study reported expression of the b - and g - ENaC subunits , but not the a - subunit , in barore - ceptor nerve terminals ( 94 ) . Because b - and g - subunits cannot form channels in the absence of the a - subunit ( 50 ) , another unidentiﬁed subunit must combine with the ENaC subunits to form the baroreceptor MG channel ( 94 ) . The unidentiﬁed subunit may also confer Ca 2 1 permeabil - ity on the channel ( e . g . , see Refs . 363 , 391 ) , since the abg - ENaC is Na 1 selective ( 123 ) . Interestingly , a more recent study has reported that a - , b - , and g - ENaC subunits are all localized in the perikarya of the trigeminal mech - anosensory nerve terminals innervating the rat vibrissal follicle sinus complex ( 118 ) . Furthermore , the subunits are colocalized with stomatin , a RBC protein homologous to C . elegans Mec - 2 proposed to form the molecular link between the Mec4 / Mec10 channel and the CSK ( Fig . 10 A , Refs . 195 , 258 ) . Signiﬁcantly , the ENaC subunits and sto - matin are not expressed in other specialized mechanore - ceptors , although they are expressed in autonomic nerve cells ( 118 ) . This may indicate that other MG channels ( e . g . , NOMPC , see below ) or mechanisms are involved in mediating mechanotransduction in different mechanore - ceptors or that the ENaC has another role in speciﬁc neurons not directly related to mechanotransduction . 3 . NOMPC : putative MG channels in Drosophila and C . elegans The gene nompC was identiﬁed in mechanorecep - tive - defective ( i . e . , uncoordinated ) Drosophila mutants that also showed an absence or reduction in the mech - anoreceptor potentials ( i . e . , no mechanosensory poten - tial ) recorded from external sensory bristles ( 215 , 425 ) . NompC predicts a protein of 1 , 619 amino acids of which 1 , 150 NH 2 - terminal residues consist of 29 ankyrin ( ANK ) repeats . ANK repeats have previously associated with forming complexes between membrane and CSK proteins ( 425 ) and may couple the channel to a CSK protein that gates and / or anchors ( i . e . , clusters ) the channel in a sub - cellular region of the dendrite . The remaining 469 resi - dues of NOMPC share some sequence identity ( ; 20 % ) to the transient receptor potential ( TRP ) and TRP - like ( TRPL ) class of ion channels ( 67 , 166a ) . The TRP chan - nels also share structural similarities with vertebrate volt - age - gated Ca 2 1 and Na 1 channels , including six trans - membrane domains ( S1 - S6 ) and a predicted pore region between S5 and S6 . However , they lack the positive charged amino acids in the S4 region that confers voltage sensitivity on the channels . Three nompC mutants with severely reduced MG currents had single nucleotide changes that introduced premature termination codons into their sequence . How - ever , a fourth mutant ( nompC 4 ) with normal - amplitude MG currents but accelerated adaptation involved a cys - teine to tyrosine substitution at amino acid residue 1400 ( i . e . , between the S3 and S4 domains ) . This may be a critical residue underlying protein - protein or protein - lipid interactions that inﬂuence adaptation kinetics . Interest - ingly , screening of a C . elegans library revealed a homolog ( Ce - NOMPC ) that showed 40 % identity with NOMPC and included the S1 - S6 domains and the 29 ANK repeats . Furthermore , NOMPC and Ce - NOMPC were shown to be selectively expressed in ciliated mechanoreceptors ( 425 , see also Ref . 209 ) , whereas MEC / DEGs are expressed only in nonciliated touch cells ( 1 , 403 ) . Heterologous expression and patch - clamp studies have yet to demonstrate that NOMPC actually forms a MG channel . Therefore , it remains unclear whether NOMPC can exist as a functional homomultimeric complex or whether it must interact with other protein subunits to form a MG channel ( i . e . , analogous to the MEC / ENaCs ) . The similar properties of mechanotransduction in Dro - sophila bristles and vertebrate hair cells ( i . e . , submilli - April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 721 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m second latencies , high directional sensitivity , and fast adap - tation ) may indicate a common tethered mechanism of gating ( Figs . 9 and 10 B , Ref . 411 ) . However , liposome recon - stitution or expression in CSK - deﬁcient PMVs will ultimately be required to exclude a bilayer type mechanism . 4 . SIC : a stretch - inactivated channel cloned from rat kidney The capsaicin or vanilloid receptor ( VR1 ) originally cloned from dorsal root ganglia ( DRG ) encodes a Ca 2 1 - permeable , nonselective cation channel and is a member of the TRP family ( 53a ) . In addition to being activated by capsaicin , it is also activated by heat , consistent with a role in nociception . Recently , a homolog of VR1 was cloned from rat kidney and shown to encode a large - conductance chan - nel ( 250 pS ) that was weakly cation selective and permeable to Ca 2 1 ( 393 ) . Furthermore , the channel appeared to be a SIC because it was activated by cell shrinkage and inhibited by cell swelling ( i . e . , of sic transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells ) . The sic gene encodes a 563 - amino acid protein with 6 transmembrane domains and a single pore region common to VR1 . However , the NH 2 terminal of the SIC is shorter than the VR1 . Although it was reported that SIC was turned off by increased suction applied to the patch , it showed particularly slow recovery of activity ( . 1 min ) after removal of the suction . The effect of increased pressure on channel activity was not reported ( 393 ) . Other SICs in snail neurons ( 288 ) , skeletal muscle ( 116 ) , smooth muscle ( 178 ) , and supraoptic neurons ( 311 , 350a ) display a signiﬁcantly lower conductance ( , 50 pS ) , so it remains to be demon - strated whether they are structurally related to the rat kid - ney SIC . 5 . TREK - 1 and TRAAK : MG K 1 channels in mammalian neurons Recently , a new protein superfamily of weakly inward rectifying K 1 channels has been identiﬁed that is character - ized by four transmembrane domains and two pore - forming regions called P domains . The ﬁrst family member identiﬁed was TWIK - 1 ( i . e . , for tandem of P domains in a weakly inward rectifying K 1 channel ) ( 243 ) . Subsequently , two other members , TREK - 1 ( related to TWIK - 1 ) and TRAAK ( opened by arachidonic acid ) , have been demonstrated to form MG K 1 channels ( 257 , 323 ) . For example , when TREK - 1 is expressed in oocytes , it shows a comparable sensitivity to suction as the endogenous channel but is less sensitive to pressure activation ( 323 ) . Unlike the endoge - nous oocyte MG channel ( 448 , 449 ) , osmotic swelling and shrinkage increase and decrease , respectively , whole cell TREK currents . This may indicate the two channels are localized in different membrane regions ( e . g . , nonvilliated membrane vs . microvilli , respectively ) so that they experi - ence different tensions ( i . e . , due to the different radii of curvature , see Ref . 448 ) . Alternatively , the two channels may involve different mechanisms of activation . For example , while the endogenous channel is most likely bilayer gated ( 448 , 447 ) , TREK - 1 may be tethered . However , neither cy - tochalasin nor colchicine treatment was found to alter TREK activity ( 323 , see below for TRAAK ) . Arachidonic acid and trinitrophenol ( TNP ) also open TREK - 1 . TNP is an an - ionic crenator of RBCs that activates bacterial MG channels . It may be that these amphipaths act on MG channels by altering the mechanics of the bilayer . However , direct ef - fects on the channel proteins have yet to be excluded . It is also possible that stretch activation is mediated by stretch - induced release of arachidonic acid ( e . g . , via phospholipase activation ) . However , the lack of effect of delipidated bovine serum albumin , which should intercept fatty acid transmis - sion ( i . e . , unless the release and receptor sites are extremely close ) , indicates stretch more likely acts by mechanical deformation of the bilayer . Kinetic measurements and the demonstration that mechanosensitivity is preserved in ex - cised patches would reinforce this idea . Structure - activity studies of TREK - 1 indicate that the COOH - terminal region is necessary but not sufﬁcient for mechanosensitivity . Even more interesting , a charge cluster region resembling the COOH terminus of the MscL protein ( RKKEE ) appears cru - cial for the mechanosensitivity of both MG channels , indi - cating that a protein domain important in bacterial MG channel gating has been conserved in the eukaryotic chan - nel ( 323 ) . TRAAK is similar to TREK - 1 in that it can be activated by arachidonic acid , but it is only activated by suction in the cell - attached patch conﬁguration and positive pressure in the outside - out conﬁguration ( 257 ) . This asymmetrical sen - sitivity indicates that a speciﬁc membrane curvature ( i . e . , convex ) may be required for the channel to be activated ( see sect . VIII D ) . Consistent with this idea is the observation that external but not internal application of TNP activates TRAAK . TNP is negatively charged and presumably acts by partitioning into and expanding the less negative external monolayer to induce a convex curvature . Unlike TREK - 1 ( 323 ) , it was reported that both colchicine and cytochalasin enhance TRAAK activity , indicating that these CSK elements may constrain tension development in the bilayer . As with TREK - 1 ( and MscL ) , there is a charged cluster region in the COOH terminus that is critical for both arachidonic acid activation and mechanosensitivity . Finally , although TRAAK is expressed in DRG neurons , indicating a possible role in mechanotransduction ( 257 ) , it is also widely expressed in the brain , spinal cord , and retina , indicating a more general function in neuronal excitability ( 257a ) . 6 . Orbiter , mercury , and gemini : mechanotransduction mutants in zebraﬁsh Speciﬁc genes encoding MG channels in specialized mechanoreceptors of vertebrates have yet to be identi - ﬁed . However , recent studies of zebraﬁsh have identiﬁed 722 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m a group of mutants that show defects in balance and swimming patterns ( 299 ) . Of particular interest are three mutants , orbiter , mercury , and gemini , that have normal hair cell morphology ( i . e . , no signs of hair cell degenera - tion or hair bundle disorganization ) and normal synaptic transmission but do not express a “microphonic” current when the hair bundle is mechanically defected . Conse - quently , it was suggested that these genes may encode MG channels or ancillary proteins associated with trans - mitting force to the channels ( 299 ) . IX . MECHANOSENSITIVE ELEVATION OF INTRACELLULAR CALCIUM Changes in [ Ca 2 1 ] i regulate a wide variety of cellular processes , including cell growth and differentiation , cell motility and contraction , intercellular coupling , synaptic transmission , fertilization , apoptosis , and necrosis . It is therefore signiﬁcant that mechanical stimulation triggers elevation in [ Ca 2 1 ] i in many cells , including cardiac ( 366 ) and smooth muscle cells ( 218 ) , ﬁbroblasts ( 22 ) , glia ( 62 ) , osteoblasts ( 327 ) , vascular endothelial cells ( VECs ) ( 88 , 293 , 294 , 307 , 364 , 367 ) , epithelial cells ( 30 , 240 , 435 ) , hair cells ( 196 ) , and neurons ( 65 , 132 , 332 , 363 , 391 ) . In prin - ciple , an increase in [ Ca 2 1 ] i may be caused by one or a combination of mechanisms involving 1 ) increased Ca 2 1 inﬂux from the external solution , 2 ) increased Ca 2 1 mo - bilization from internal stores , and / or 3 ) decreased Ca 2 1 efﬂux from the cell . Thus mechanical stimulation may increase [ Ca 2 1 ] i by 1 ) gating MG channels located in the plasma or internal membranes , 2 ) affecting MS enzymes that regulate second messengers that in turn modulate Ca 2 1 channels , 3 ) causing MS release of transmitter ( e . g . , ATP ) that then activates Ca 2 1 - permeable channels , and / or 4 ) reducing Ca 2 1 efﬂux through speciﬁc pathways ( e . g . , Na 1 / Ca 2 1 exchanger ) . Direct evidence exists for the ﬁrst three mechanisms . A . MS Ca 2 1 Inﬂux Mechanisms An early patch - clamp study of VECs identiﬁed a Ca 2 1 - permeable MG channel ( 235 ) . Subsequently , MG Ca 2 1 channel activities have been proposed to mediate MS elevation of [ Ca 2 1 ] i in heart cells ( 366 ) , sensory neu - rons ( 134 , 322 , 363 ) , hair cells ( 163 ) , GH 3 cells ( 65 ) , ﬁbroblasts ( 22 ) , and keratocytes ( 240 ) . Apart from direct patch recording of channel activity , the other criteria used to evoke the MG Ca 2 1 channel mechanism has been the block of [ Ca 2 1 ] i elevation by removal of external Ca 2 1 or by addition of Gd 3 1 ( 293 , 294 , 312 , 366 , 367 , but see below ) . In addition to mediating direct Ca 2 1 inﬂux , the MG channel may also indirectly activate voltage - gated Ca 2 1 channels by causing depolarization ( 65 , 218 ) . The Ca 2 1 entry through MG and voltage - gated Ca 2 1 channels may then trigger either Ca 2 1 - induced Ca 2 1 release ( 294 ) or activate phospholipase C activity and inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) - sensitive Ca 2 1 release ( 30 , 39 , 270 ) , thereby further amplifying the increase in [ Ca 2 1 ] i . In turn , Ca 2 1 store emptying may produce a sustained Ca 2 1 inﬂux through store depletion - activated ( i . e . , capacitative ) Ca 2 1 channels in the plasma membrane that reﬁlls the empty stores ( 321 ) . B . MS Release of Ca 2 1 From Internal Ca 2 1 Stores Mechanical stimulation , even in the complete ab - sence of external Ca 2 1 , can elevate [ Ca 2 1 ] i by promoting Ca 2 1 release from internal stores ( 30 , 62 , 88 , 197 , 204 , 300a , 307 , 435 ) . Two classes of mechanisms , indirect and direct , have been proposed to underlie this MS Ca 2 1 release . Examples of indirect mechanisms include the mechanical activation of either a MS phospholipase C ( 30 , 39 , 270 ) or a phospholipase A 2 ( 206 , 241 , 307 ) that results in activation of the IP 3 - sensitive Ca 2 1 release channel . Interestingly , addition of Ca 2 1 channel blockers ( i . e . , Gd 3 1 , Ni 2 1 , nifedipine , and nimodipine ) in the absence of external Ca 2 1 causes a larger MS increase in [ Ca 2 1 ] i , presumably because they block Ca 2 1 efﬂux through MG channels , voltage - gated Ca 2 1 channels ( 30 ) , and / or store depletion - activated Ca 2 1 channels in the plasma mem - brane ( 307 ) . Although it is possible that permeation of Gd 3 1 ( and Ni 2 1 ) through open MG channels could acti - vate the fura 2 used to monitor [ Ca 2 1 ] i and thereby pro - duce an apparent rise in [ Ca 2 1 ] i , this mechanism could hardly explain the similar potentiation caused by dihydro - pyridines . Another type of indirect mechanism involves MS release of transmitter ( e . g . , ATP ) and activation of receptor - gated Ca 2 1 - permeable channels ( see sect . X D ) . This mechanism has recently been shown to mediate the mechanically triggered spread of Ca 2 1 waves in prostate cancer cells ( 356a ) . Evidence for a direct mechanical activation of Ca 2 1 release from internal stores has come from the response of VECs to osmotic swelling ( 204 ) and mechanical acti - vation by twisting magnetic beads attached to the cell surface ( 300a ) . In the ﬁrst case , Jena et al . ( 204 ) identiﬁed a novel internal Ca 2 1 store that can still release Ca 2 1 in response to hypotonic stress even after the plasma mem - brane’s permeability barrier had been selectively dis - rupted with the detergent saponin . Under these circum - stances , mechanical forces are presumably transmitted to the Ca 2 1 channel in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) by direct osmotic swelling of the ER . It was also demon - strated that under these conditions removal of external Ca 2 1 can rapidly deplete internal Ca 2 1 stores , and high concentrations of Gd 3 1 can block the internal Ca 2 1 re - lease channel . These last results indicate the need for caution in using these criteria alone to implicate the Ca 2 1 April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 723 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m inﬂux mechanism . In the second case , Niggel et al . ( 300a ) demonstrated that VECs , astrocytes , and C6 glioma cells displayed a fast transient increase in [ Ca 2 1 ] i in response to twisting magnetic beads attached to the plasma mem - brane ( but see below ) . Because the Ca 2 1 increase also occurred in “sugar water” ( i . e . , ion - free solution ) , it did not involve Ca 2 1 inﬂux . Instead , it was proposed that Ca 2 1 was released from IP 3 - sensitive stores by different cell - speciﬁc mechanisms . For example , in VECs , the Ca 2 1 release appeared to be mediated by an MS increase in IP 3 ( based on inhibitor efffects ) , whereas in C6 glioma cells it appeared to be mediated by direct mechanical activation of MG channels in the ER . The exact pathway by which forces are transmitted to the ER remains unknown . Inter - nal Ca 2 1 release has been shown to be dependent on integrins ( 327 ) , microtubules ( 406 ) , and / or actin micro - ﬁlaments ( 227 ) . It has also been shown that the ER can be intimately associated with the plasma membrane ( e . g . , Ref . 122a ) . At least in C6 cells , neither cytochalasin D nor colchicine was found to block MS Ca 2 1 release ( 300a ) . A ﬁnal question that arises concerns whether cells ever normally experience the mechanical stresses generated by twisting beads that attached to their cell surface . For example , if the beads undergo phagocytosis and / or cause reorganization of the surface membrane or CSK , then internal membrane Ca 2 1 stores may be made hypermech - anosensitive , analogous to MG channels in tightly sealed membrane patches . For this reason , it is important to conﬁrm that other forms of mechanical stimuli ( e . g . , ﬂuid shear stress , cell stretch , or osmotic swelling ) produce similar responses in the same cells . X . MECHANOSENSITIVE RELEASE OF TRANSMITTER Although the major focus of research on mechano - sensitivity over the last 15 years has been on the ubiqui - tous MG channel , it has recently become clear that MS release of transmitter , most notably ATP , is as equally ubiquitous in eukaryotic cells ( 45 , 63 , 139 , 280 , 292 ) . Fur - thermore , in speciﬁc cell types such as the Xenopus oo - cyte , where both MG channels and MS ATP release are expressed , it is the MS ATP release that is more sensitive to mechanical stimuli ( 262 , 292 , 448 ) . Perhaps most sur - prisingly is that MS ATP release has been implicated in vertebrate touch and stretch sensation ( 68 , 292 ) , two MS processes commonly assumed to be mediated by MG channels . Although MS ATP release has yet to be con - ﬁrmed in mechanosensory neurons in situ , the question naturally arises how more than 50 years of research has failed to make the fundamental distinction between phys - ical and chemical mechanisms of transduction . A . Historical Perspective From a historical perspective , one can see how early studies of touch sensors may have been biased toward one mechanism or the other depending on the discipline of study . For example , the anatomists Spencer and Schaumburg studying the ultrastructure of Pacinian cor - puscles ( 376 ) came to the conclusion that “a simple phys - ical hypothesis of transduction does not take account of the elaborate array of organelles present at the base of each axon process . These organelles include numerous clear - core vesicles having the appearance and propor - tions of synaptic vesicles . ” They further noted “that these clear - core vesicles in sensory axon terminals contain a substance which is released during the postulated me - chanical distortion of an axon process and is then able to affect the ionic conductance of the axolemma , is an in - teresting speculation . ” On the other hand , electrophysi - ologists in favoring a physical mechanism appeared to be more impressed by the speed and high - frequency response of speciﬁc tactile receptors . For example , Gottschaldt and Vahle - Hinz ( 135 ) studying Merkel cells concluded “the characteristics of the vibratory responses can hardly be explained in terms of chemosynaptic trans - mission . It is unlikely that a transmitter release mecha - nism could operate in phase with a vibratory stimulus of 1 , 200 Hz or more . Also , at such high frequencies an accu - mulation of released transmitter would be likely . ” That the physical view has often prevailed would appear well justiﬁed in speciﬁc sensory systems such as hearing where the frequency response can be as high as 100 kHz ( 70 , 196 ) . Indeed , mechanically and ATP - activated cur - rents in mouse outer hair cells have been shown to be independent and differentially blocked by D - tubocurarine ( 132 ) . Nevertheless , the presumption that moderately fast kinetics ( ; 10 kHz ) must necessarily mean a physical rather than a chemical mechanism can no longer be jus - tiﬁed by experimental evidence . For example , it has been demonstrated that transmitter release can be activated with latencies as short as ; 150 m s ( i . e . , after the start of the action potential ) and rise times in transmitter concen - tration can be as fast as 60 m s ( 40 , 346 ) . Furthermore , the idea that accumulation of transmitter may severely limit the frequency response needs to be revised in the light of rapid mechanisms for terminating the action of neuro - transmitters , most notably ATP . Speciﬁcally , it has been demonstrated that nerve stimulation not only releases ATP but also soluble nucleotidases that would facilitate the ATP breakdown ( 413 ) . Although the kinetics of trans - mitter release and breakdown are still not rapid enough to account for the . 20 - kHz frequency response of auditory transduction , they could be fast enough to mediate a tactile vibration sensitivity in the 1 – 2 kHz range ( 135 ) . Below , we examine the kinetics and other features of 724 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m mechanisms that may mediate chemical forms of mech - anotransduction . B . Tension - Sensitive Vesicle Recruitment / Exocytosis Tension - sensitive vesiculation and recruitment can occur in artiﬁcial bilayer vesicles and speciﬁc cell types . For example , a ﬂaccid bilayer vesicle will tend to lose smaller membrane vesicles by a process of budding and vesiculation until it becomes a sphere ( i . e . , the lowest energy state for a symmetrical structure under centripe - dal tension , Ref . 107 ) . Similar membrane vesiculation / fragmentation also occurs in human and frog RBCs after disruption of their CSK ( 152 , 284 ) . Depending on a variety of factors that determine the spontaneous curvature of the bilayer ( see sect . II C ) , the parent vesicle ( or RBC ) may either eject vesicles into the external solution or inject them internally to produce an internal membrane reser - voir . Increased membrane tension will tend to inhibit the budding ( vesiculation ) process by inhibiting the mem - brane invagination and neck formation between the par - ent membrane and the vesicle ( 78 ) . On the other hand , increased tension should promote membrane fusion be - tween the shed internal vesicles and the parent membrane because fusion ( i . e . , membrane area recruitment ) will lower the energy ( tension ) of the system ( see exception below ) . In other words , the surface tension ( area ) of the parent vesicle may be adjusted according to the free energy difference per lipid molecule in the reservoir and parent membrane ( 437 ) . Membrane tension homeostasis has been described in isolated plant protoplasts ( 184 , 185 , 213 , 230 , 438 , 457 ) and more recently evoked to explain membrane reorga - nization in animal cells ( 78 , 79 , 149 , 174 , 279 , 331 , 337 , 427 ; for recent review , see Ref . 286a ) . In plant cells , turgor pressure ensures the resting membrane is fully distended ( i . e . , no excess membrane ) so that a rapid regulatory feedback loop exists between tension and surface area regulation . However , most animal cells maintain a stable excess membrane area that buffers rapid ﬂuctuations in tension ( see sect . VII and below ) . Membrane area adjust - ments in response to osmotic swelling and shrinkage have been directly monitored by changes in membrane capac - itance ( 80 , 185 , 427 , 457 ) . For example , swelling and shrinking of guard cell protoplasts cause discrete upward and downward deﬂecting capacitance ( 2 fF ) steps that have been interpreted as reﬂecting osmotically driven unitary membrane fusion ( exocytotic ) and ﬁssion ( endo - cytotic ) of vesicles of ; 300 nm ( 185 ) . However , in some studies , membrane conductance changes have been re - ported to exactly mirror C m changes ( 457 ) . Although such parallel changes may reﬂect the addition and removal of channels to the plasma membrane corresponding to mem - brane insertion and retrieval events , they may also arise because of incorrect phase settings in which the imagi - nary capacitance changes ( i . e . , due to conductance in - crease ) contribute to the apparent C m ( 129a ) . Pharmaco - logical agents that block the conductance but not the C m increase may be used to exclude this form of artifact . Certainly , there are examples where osmotic swelling can activate a conductance increase without accompanying C m increase ( 137 , 338a ) , and vice versa ( 80 , 129a , 427 ) . Tension - sensitive vesicle recruitment also results in exocytosis , since the vesicle will release its contents upon fusion with the plasma membrane . Stretching or inﬂating some cells has been reported to promote or facilitate exocytosis / release ( 63 , 149 , 262 , 309 , 352a , 435 ) . However , the response is not universal ( 375a ) . For example , inﬂa - tion of mast cells ( i . e . , to ; 4 times their volume ) actually causes a reversible block of exocytosis that recovers rapidly with deﬂation ( 375a ) . In this cell , exocytosis may require initial membrane dimpling to form the fusion pore with the mast cell granule , and tension presumably inhib - its this dimpling ( 375a ) . Xenopus oocytes can also be inﬂated ( e . g . , to more that twice their volume ) without increasing C m and / or activating MG channels ( 448 ) . Both oocytes and mast cells display a large excess membrane area ( i . e . , $ 500 % ) that most likely protects their bilayer from tension changes except under the most extreme ( pathological ) conditions . In contrast , cells that respond to frequent changes in passive stretch and / or osmotic swelling ( e . g . , ﬁbroblasts , urinary bladder epithelial cells , and mechanosensory neurons ) may lack such a large excess membrane and thus rely on vesicle recruitment to accommodate stretch and cell volume changes ( 245b , 286a , 330 ) . For example , during expansion of the urinary bladder , the epithelial cells undergo an initial smoothing out of surface folds on the urine - facing ( i . e . , apical ) mem - brane followed by fusion of cytoplasmic vesicles with the apical membrane ( 245a ) . The membrane fusion / retrieval ( i . e . , as reﬂected in C m changes ) is reversible and occurs within 5 min ( 245b ) . In comparison , snail neurons show an increase ( ; 10 % ) in C m that takes between 0 . 5 and 3 . 0 min after exposure to a 50 % hypotonic solution ( 80 ) , and plant protoplasts undergo a pressure - induced increase in C m that occurs with a latency of ; 100 ms and a rise time of several minutes ( 457 ) . In this case , membrane recruit - ment may be rate limited by random collisions between the vesicle and the membrane . In both cells , the decrease in C m after return to isotonic ( or hypertonic ) solution ( 80 ) or release of pressure took 5 – 10 min . Although these kinetics may be adequate for preserving cell membrane integrity during relatively slow and sustained changes in membrane tension , they are too slow to enable responses to rapid cell deformations or movements and certainly could not transduce rapid oscillations in mechanical stim - ulation ( i . e . , necessary for tactile sensation ) . In contrast , stretch - facilitated transmitter release at synapses can dis - April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 725 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m play very fast kinetics ( , 1 ms , Ref . 63 , see below ) , pre - sumably because the vesicles are docked next to the cell membrane ready for rapid fusion . Another difference be - tween synaptic exocytosis and tension - dependent vesicle recruitment is that the latter shows little or no Ca 2 1 dependence ( see Refs . 174 , 184 ) . C . Stretch - Facilitated Transmitter Release at the Vertebrate Motor Synapse It has long been recognized that stretching skeletal muscle promotes transmitter release from the motor syn - apse ( 198 , 415 ) . This stretch facilitation is functionally signiﬁcant because it can amplify the spinal stretch reﬂex . Most recently , Chen and Grinell ( 63 ) have shown that stretching frog muscle in the physiological range results in a 10 % increase in release per 1 % muscle stretch that is reﬂected in both increased frequency of miniature end - plate potentials ( mepps ) and amplitude of evoked end - plate potentials . The kinetics of the effect are extremely rapid , with the development and decay of the enhance - ment occurring in , 1 – 2 ms . The stretch - induced enhance - ment of mepps is not dependent on Ca 2 1 inﬂux and is not blocked by Gd 3 1 ( 63 ) . At this stage , the enhancement mechanism remains unclear . However , the fast and sym - metrical on - off kinetics as well as the low temperature sensitivity ( i . e . , Q 10 ; 1 ) seem most consistent with a direct physical mechanism , although biochemical changes occurring within a highly conﬁned space cannot be excluded . The fact that the facilitation still occurs when incremental changes in intraterminal Ca 2 1 have been blocked ( i . e . , “clamped” at 100 nM ) rules out stretch - induced Ca 2 1 release ( 63 ) . Because integrin antibodies and binding peptides ( arginine - glycine - aspartic acid , RGD ) block the facilitation , mechanical forces may be transmitted intracellularly ( via integrins ) to alter the po - sition or conformation of molecules controlling release ( see Fig . 12 in Ref . 63 ) . Although the RGD peptides block facilitation , they do not prevent stretch - induced elonga - tion of the nerve terminal , indicating that other interac - tions between the muscle and the nerve remain intact but are incapable of transmitting stretch to the release mech - anism . Interestingly , RGD peptides also block MS ATP release from Xenopus oocytes ( 262 , see below ) . However , although ATP been shown to be coreleased with acetyl - choline at the motor synapse ( 369 ) and a recent report indicates evoked ATP release from sensory neurons ( 381 ) , evidence described below indicates that several mechanisms may contribute to MS ATP release . D . Mechanosensitive ATP Release Burnstock and colleagues ( 43 – 46 ) have advocated ATP’s role as a neurotransmitter for over 30 years . More recently , ATP has been implicated in mechanosensation and cell volume regulation , by the demonstration that mechanical stimuli ( including cell inﬂation , direct inden - tation , and osmotic swelling ) can cause nonlytic ATP ( and UTP ) release from excitable and nonexcitable cells ( 139 , 236 , 237 , 280 , 292 , 420 , 430 ) . The MS release of ATP ( or UTP ) may in turn induce an electrical or biochemical signal by activating purinergic receptors on the same cell ( autocrine ) and / or neighboring cells ( paracrine ) . Two broad purinergic receptor families have been identiﬁed ( 303 ) . One is the ionotropic receptor ( P 2X ) family , in which the ion channel is an integral part of the receptor protein ( 37 , 64 , 245 ) . The other is the metabotropic recep - tor ( P 2Y ) family , in which the receptor is indirectly cou - pled to membrane ion channels either via soluble second messenger pathways or via membrane - delimited path - ways ( 255 , 289 ) . Clearly , the class of receptor will inﬂu - ence the kinetics of channel activation and inactivation and thereby set limits on the frequency response of the transducer . This may vary from submilliseconds for the fastest ionotropic receptor channel to several minutes for metabotropic receptors ( 167 , 176 , 256 , 264 ) . A key question for ATP release mechanisms is the nature of the driving force for ATP efﬂux . ATP in the extracellular milieu is normally kept extremely low ( i . e . , , 1 m M ) by extracellular ectonucleotidases ( 133 ) . For ex - ample , Forrester ( 115 ) has measured basal levels of ATP of , 2 3 10 2 8 M in human venous plasma that may be increased ; 50 - fold ( i . e . , to ; 1 m M ) by partial arterial occlusion and exercise . Although ATP may be still higher in the interstitial ﬂuid and even higher at the membrane surface near vesicular release sites , there should always be a steep gradient for ATP efﬂux , given that intracellular [ ATP ] is in the 1 – 5 mM range ( 360 ) . The fact that ATP is also stored in cytoplasmic vesicles ( 424 ) indicates the existence of distinct pools of ATP that may be released by different mechanisms . For example , any stimulus that is strong enough to cause tissue damage will result in mas - sive ATP release . It is presumably this mechanism that releases the ATP that mediates pain sensation . However , it is unlikely that ATP release caused by gentle mechani - cal stimulation arises from cell damage . For example , MS ATP release can occur without associated membrane con - ductance changes ( i . e . , in high impedance cells ) and can be blocked by speciﬁc agents ( 262 , 292 , 448 ) . Electroneu - tral ATP release can be monitored by the luciferin - lucif - erase luminescence assay or by the use of endogenous or heterologously expressed purinergic receptors as biosen - sors ( 139 , 262 , 292 , 405 , 430 ) . A recent study using the luminescence assay has shown that collagenase treat - ment , RGD peptides , and cytochalasin can block MS ATP release from Xenopus oocytes . Furthermore , the ATP release saturates with repetitive mild mechanical stimuli ( i . e . , puffs of solution ) at levels four orders of magnitude below those reached immediately after oocyte damage 726 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ( 262 ; R . Maroto and O . P . Hamill , unpublished observa - tions ) . Electroneutral release of ATP may be mediated by an ATP electroneutral transporter and / or by vesicular re - lease . Speciﬁc ATP transporters have been identiﬁed in the ER and the Golgi apparatus that translocate cytoplas - mic ATP ( 176a , 328a ) . It is unknown whether these are functionally expressed in the plasma membrane . If ATP is released by exocytosis , one may be able to correlate it with changes in C m if there is a net increase in membrane area ( see Ref . 129a ) . However , when exocytosis and en - docytosis are exactly balanced , vesicular release can pro - ceed with no detectable change in C m . This is likely the case for the Xenopus oocyte that undergoes high rates of vesicle fusion ( exocytosis ) and ﬁssion ( endocytosis ) ( i . e . , 2 , 000 – 16 , 000 vesicles / s corresponding to 60 – 500 um 2 membrane / s ) capable of replacing the cell membrane ev - ery 24 h ( 444 ) . This membrane turnover , which proceeds under basal ( unstimulated ) conditions , is associated with the delivery via vesicle trafﬁcking from the Golgi appara - tus and removal of membrane proteins . The vesicle traf - ﬁcking between the Golgi apparatus and the plasma mem - brane can be blocked by brefeldin A ( BFA ) ( 118a ) . Interestingly , BFA also blocks basal and MS ATP release from Xenopus oocytes ( 262 ) . Although membrane traf - ﬁcking / ATP release does not require Ca 2 1 inﬂux , recent evidence indicates it may be increased by mechanical stimulation ( 262 ) . The interesting implication here is that the protein and lipid composition of the surface mem - brane may be rapidly altered under speciﬁc mechanical environments . Because most eukaryotic cells share this vesicle trafﬁcking pathway , it may account for the ubiq - uitous nature of ATP release from animal cells . It has also been proposed that ATP permeates through speciﬁc membrane ion channels , most notably the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) ( 52 , 335 ) and the multidrug resistance ( MDR ) Cl 2 channels ( 4a ) . This idea remains somewhat controversial ( 360 ) . However , the original argument that ATP was too large to permeate these Cl 2 channels appears invalid ( 246 ) . On the other hand , there is no evidence to indicate that either CFTR or MDR are MG channels . Another chan - nel that might mediate ATP release is the hemi - gap - junc - tional channel ( 72 ) . However , mechanical stimulation ap - pears to close rather than open this class of channel ( 448 , 450 ) . Furthermore , it has been shown that submillimolar concentrations of Gd 3 1 block the hemi - gap channel , yet even higher concentrations of Gd 3 1 ( 1 – 10 mM ) fail to block either basal or MS ATP release ( 262 , Maroto and Hamill , unpublished data ) . Most recently , it has been reported that ATP is carried by a membrane conductance activated by strong hyperpolarizations of around 2 200 mV ( 29a ) . However , others have concluded that this con - ductance reﬂects reversible dielectric breakdown of the membrane , based on its lack of ion selectivity , failure to saturate , and slow ( up to 10 min ) recovery upon repolar - ization ( 449 ) . ATP release in the oocyte may be important in the cross talk with the surrounding follicular cells that ex - press purinergic receptor - gated Cl 2 channels ( 324a ) . To account for the ubiquitous expression of ATP release from mammalian cells , it has been proposed that external ATP plays some role in establishing a set point for signal transduction pathways , in particular , those involved in changing [ Ca 2 1 ] i , cAMP , and activating protein kinases ( 315 ) . This set point may be important in inﬂuencing speciﬁc steps in cell development and differentiation . For example , ATP released from developing sensory neurons delays the terminal differentiation of surrounding Schwann cells and nerve myelination until they are ex - posed to axon - derived signals ( 381 ) . Nakamura and Strittmatter ( 292 ) have hypothesized that vertebrate touch sensation is mediated by an ATP - dependent mechanism of mechanotransduction . They propose that mechanical stimulation of the afferent nerve terminal causes ATP release that then results in autocrine activation of P 2Y1 receptors . In support of this hypothesis , they demonstrated that touch - induced action potentials in frog sensory nerve were increased in frequency by sub - cutaneous injection of ATP , and this increase could be blocked by injection within the receptive ﬁeld of a P 2 purinoceptor antagonist ( suramin ) or a ATP - degrading enzyme ( apyrase ) . Subsequently , Svichar et al . ( 394 , 395 ) demonstrated that ATP induces Ca 2 1 release from IP 3 - sensitive Ca 2 1 stores in large DRG but not in small DRG neurons . Interestingly , they also found that ATP activated a large transient inward current that was over before the [ Ca 2 1 ] i began to rise , ruling out the transient current being activated by IP 3 - sensitive Ca 2 1 release . Another DRG study indicated a cation conductance activated by release of intracellular Ca 2 1 stores ( 333 ) . However , this conductance was also activated by heat and most likely mediates pain sensation . It remains unknown whether a related Ca 2 1 - sensitive conductance coupled to P 2Y1 recep - tor activation mediates the generator ( receptor ) current in speciﬁc touch receptors . Although the ATP hypothesis is attractive , several key elements of the hypothesis lack experimental sup - port . To begin with , MS ATP release and its underlying mechanism need to be determined in the same large ﬁber DRG neurons that show the P 2Y responses . Second , the relationship of this release process with Ca 2 1 - dependent exocytosis in DRGs ( e . g . , see Ref . 194 ) needs to be deter - mined . For example , does the mechanosensitivity derive from Ca 2 1 inﬂux through MG cation channels ? Third , the speciﬁc channel or conductance mechanism coupled to the P 2Y1 receptor that presumably mediates the generator potential needs to be identiﬁed . Fourth , the underlying kinetics and sensitivity of both ATP release , channel ac - tivation , and ATP removal must be demonstrated to be April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 727 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m compatible with the fast kinetics , high mechanosensitiv - ity , and in some cases rapid adaptation of mechanotrans - duction in speciﬁc touch receptors . Fifth , it must be dem - onstrated that all the phenomena operate in the intact DRG nerve endings / specializations ( see Ref . 379 ) . Finally , the alternative hypothesis that tactile sensation is medi - ated directly by MG channels ( e . g . , MECs / DEGs and / or NOMPC homologs ) needs to be rigorously examined at the functional level in different classes of tactile recep - tors . On the last issue , although it has recently been demonstrated that mechanical stimulation of the soma ( 273a , 400a ) and growth cones ( 199a ) of DRG neurons can induce conductance changes , they have yet to be related to speciﬁc single MG channel activities . E . Membrane Resealing : Ca 2 1 - Induced Vesicle - Vesicle Fusion and Exocytosis Apart from releasing cytoplasmic contents ( e . g . , ATP ) , a more fundamental response to membrane dam - age in terms of cell survival is the activation of mecha - nisms that repair or reseal the damaged membrane . Mem - brane repair / resealing may represent the most primitive form of cellular mechanotransduction . Studies in several different cell types have led to different models of mem - brane repair / resealing . One model , the “vesicle plug” model , has been used to explain the resealing of transected squid and crab axons ( 23 , 100 , 276 ) , where it is proposed that Ca 2 1 - dependent formation and accumula - tion of endocytotic vesicles fuse to form a vesicular plug that reseals the transected axon . The resealing process requires high [ Ca 2 1 ] i ( i . e . , . 100 m M ) and calpain activa - tion and occurs over a relatively slow time scale ( i . e . , minutes to hours ) ( 23 ) . A second model referred to as the “exocytotic” model has been used to explain resealing of micropunctures in sea urchin eggs and 3T3 ﬁbroblasts ( 21 ) . The resealing requires high [ Ca 2 1 ] i , is completed within seconds , and has been correlated with bursts of exocytosis near the wound site ( 21 ) . It is proposed that the vesicle fusion events supply the extra membrane needed to reseal the membrane wound . Unlike the ﬁrst model , the vesicles are most likely present in the cyto - plasm , possibly even docked close to the plasma mem - brane . Furthermore , because the resealing can be inhib - ited by neurotoxins that selectively interact with the SNARE complex proteins ( e . g . , synaptobrevin and syn - taxin ) , the delivery , docking , and fusion of these vesicles with the membrane surrounding the wound site may in - volve a process similar to transmitter release ( 21 , 382c ) . More recently , it has been reported that faciliation of resealing of 3T3 cells in response to a second disruption is blocked by BFA and cytochalasin , indicating that vesi - cle trafﬁcking from the Goli apparatus is involved ( 413a ) . A third model , representing a composite of the plug and exocytosis models , has been used to explain the resealing of large disruptions of marine eggs and oocytes ( 407 ) . Here , Ca 2 1 elevation induces preexisting vesicles to fuse with one another to form a large single “wound vesicle” that then somehow fuses with the discontinuous bilayer ( 407 ) . In both the exocytosis and composite models , the membrane repair may result in the release of signaling molecules ( i . e . , stored in the preformed vesicles ) that mediate further responses , including cellular hyperplasia and / or hypertrophy that are commonly associated with mechanical stress ( 276 ) . In the speciﬁc case of matured eggs , it is interesting that membrane damage ( e . g . , needle pricking ) can promote the fertilization response , which involves Ca 2 1 - activated fusion of cortical granules with the plasma membrane ( 416a ) . Clearly , the secondary re - sponses related to membrane repair will depend on the nature of the vesicles and their intracellular contents . For example , preliminary studies indicate that the yolk plate - lets , rather than cortical granules or endosomal vesicles , may mediate resealing of sea urchin eggs ( 407 ) . The feature common to all models is that elevation of intra - cellular Ca 2 1 triggers the resealing mechanism . It may be that sublytic membrane tension , by promoting Ca 2 1 inﬂux through SA - CAT channels , elevates local [ Ca 2 1 ] i and thereby primes the Ca 2 1 - sensitive repair mechanisms . In this case , the MG channel would act as a safety device somewhat analogous to MscL in E . coli . Patch - clamp recordings indicate the tensions that activate MG chan - nels and cause patch rupture are within the same order of magnitude . XI . CONCLUSIONS AND OUTSTANDING ISSUES The response of both simple bilayer vesicles and cells to mechanical stimulation is determined by both extrinsic ( e . g . , size and surface area to volume ) and intrinsic ( i . e . , material properties ) properties . The deformation - sensi - tive membrane parameters that may likely inﬂuence mem - brane protein conformational changes include membrane dilation ( i . e . , increased area occupied by lipid molecules ) , the accompanying membrane thinning ( i . e . , assuming membrane incompressibility ) , and local changes in mem - brane curvature or bending . When a membrane protein is inserted in a bilayer it produces a mechanical deformation that depends on the coupling between the hydrophobic regions of the protein and the bilayer . A protein confor - mational change that involves a change in hydrophobic mismatch will be sensitive to both membrane thickness and local membrane curvature , each of which may be altered by changing either the lipid bilayer composition or by mechanically stretching or bending the membrane . The two simple channel - forming peptides , alamethicin and gramicidin , display MS channel gating that have been explained by two different classes of mechanisms . The 728 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m important distinction between the two is that whereas alamethicin channel formation may involve relatively large changes in membrane occupied area ( i . e . , associated with subunit recruitment into a barrel - staved complex ) , gramicidin channel formation involves insigniﬁcant area changes ( i . e . , a dimerization between monomers in each monolayer ) . As a consequence , the energy of gating of alamethicin but not gramicidin may reﬂect the product of the membrane tension ( membrane dilation ) and the oc - cupied area change associated with channel opening . On the other hand , increased tension may act on gramicidin indirectly by causing membrane thinning , thereby affect - ing the free energy components that depend on bilayer - gramicidin hydrophobic coupling . The puriﬁcation , cloning , and recent determination of the crystal structure of the MscL protein from E . coli and M . tuberculosis have provided a rich environment for model building and testing . The present evidence favors a pentameric channel complex with the channel gate most likely formed by the hydrophobic constriction formed by the TM1 helices at the cytoplasmic end of the channel in the closed conﬁguration . The large energy required to open the channel ( ; 18 kT ) may be needed to compensate for the exposure of the hydrophobic region to water that enters the open channel . The NH 2 terminus , although mobile , does not function as the channel gate but instead serves to stabilize the open conformation ( s ) of the chan - nel and may interfere with the passage of ions , thus leading to the appearance of the channel subconducting levels . The COOH termini play a role in stabilizing the closed conﬁguration of the channel , whereas the periplas - mic loop may function as an elastic spring resisting the opening of the channel by membrane tension . Clearly , future studies that provide structural information on the open conformation of MscL ( e . g . , by recently employed cysteine scanning mutagenesis combined with electro - paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to probe the struc - ture of MscL , Ref . 269a ) will further reﬁne this model . Growing evidence in the form of amphipath activa - tion and MG channel activity in CSK - deﬁcient PMVs indi - cates that MG channels in speciﬁc animals cells ( e . g . , Xenopus oocytes ) are gated by increase in bilayer tension similar to prokaryotic MG channels . However , structural studies of several eukaryotic MG and putative MG chan - nels ( Table 1 ) indicate that a variety of molecular mech - anisms may confer mechanosensitivity on membrane pro - teins . In some cases , a tethered mechanism of gating is favored ( e . g . , hair cell MG channels , MECs / DEGs , and NOMPC ) , but unequivocal evidence is lacking . Such evi - dence may come with the demonstration that 1 ) deletion of CSK binding sequences abolish mechanosensitivity , 2 ) rearrangement of CSK / membrane proteins ( e . g . , mea - sured with ﬂuorescence energy transfer ) correlates with channel activation , and 3 ) mechanosensitivity can be re - stored in channel proteins reconstituted into liposomes by pulling on CSK / ECM labeled microspheres ( i . e . , that act as molecular handles ) . In addition to the intrinsic properties of MG channel proteins , there are also various extrinsic mechanisms that modify the animal cell’s response to mechanical stimula - tion . For example , the excess membrane area of animal cells in the form of microvilli , membrane folds , and in - vaginations ( i . e . , caveolae ) acts as a membrane reservoir to buffer sudden and / or large changes in bilayer tension TABLE 1 . A list of MG and putative MG channels with details regarding their biophysics , structure , and favored gating mechanisms Channel Protein ( Organism ) Conductance / Ion Selectivity AminoAcids TransmembraneDomains Oligomerization MS Gating Mechanism Reference No . Gramicidin ( B . brevis ) 15 pS / cation 15 1 2 Bilayer 6 , 426 Alamethicin ( T . viride ) 20 – 200 pS / nonselective 20 1 $ 3 Bilayer 47 , 355 MsCL ( E . coli ) ; 3 nS / nonselective 136 2 5 Bilayer 60 , 387 MscS ( YggB ) ( E . coli ) ; 1 nS / nonselective 286 Bilayer 31 , 244 MscMJ ( MJ0170 ) ( M . jannashii ) 270 pS / cation 350 3 Bilayer 220a , 269 MID1 ( Yeast ) 35 pS / cation 548 4 199 , 208 TRAAK ( Human ) 30 pS ( 0 mV ) / K 1 300 4 / 2P Bilayer 257 TREK - 1 / - 2 ( Mammalian neurons ) 48 pS / 68 pS / K 1 538 4 / 2P Bilayer† 12a , 323 SIC ( Rat kidney ) 250 pS / cation 563 6 393 ENaC * ( Rat ) 10 pS / Na 1 638 2 5 or 9 Bilayer ( MS Ca 2 1 block ) 50 , 105a , 113 , 203 , 371a MEC - 4 ( C . elegans ) 768 2 Tethered† 93 , 403 NOMPC ( Drosophila ) 1 , 619 6 Tethered† 215 , 425 MGXO ( Xenopus occyte ) ; 80 pS / cation Bilayer 277 , 447 MGHC ( Vertebrate hair cell ) ; 100 pS / cation Tethered† 74 , 260 * Mechanosensitivity has been reported for abg - epithelial Na 1 channel ( ENaC ) reconstituted in bilayers but not in cells . † Evidence for the mechanism is less compelling than liposome reconstitution . MG , mechanically gated . April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 729 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m that might otherwise rupture the cell ( 330 , 448 ) . As a consequence , bilayer - gated MG channels detected in tight - seal patch - clamp recording that tends to smooth out the membrane patch may not be exposed to activating tensions in the cell membrane except under special cir - cumstances ( 447 ) . For example , specialized mechanosen - sors may possess highly localized regions of bilayer that are prestressed ( i . e . , by CSK / ECM elements ) to enable rapid response to mechanical deformation . Furthermore , cells that undergo changes in membrane geometry during growth and differentiation ( 96 ) or experience membrane reorganization or blebbing during speciﬁc cellular and physiological processes , including mitosis ( 328 ) , apopto - sis ( 216 ) , cell locomotion ( 103 ) , cell spreading ( 240 ) , and organ distension ( 245b ) , may use up their membrane reserves and thus expose their bilayer to increased ten - sion . However , some channels that display mechanosen - sitivity in patch - clamp recordings [ e . g . , NMDA and S - type K 1 ( TREK / TRAAK ) channels ] may be of biophysical rather than physiological signiﬁcance ( 287 ) . Clearly , the identiﬁcation of toxins that selectively block MG channels ( e . g . , the peptide toxin from Grammastola spatulata spi - der venom , Ref . 382b ) and the development of genetic MG channel knock - outs should prove useful in demonstrating the function of speciﬁc MG channels ( 380 , 434 ) . It will be particularly interesting to use these tools to determine the possible relationship between MG channels and the MS processes controlling membrane turnover , vesicle traf - ﬁcking , and membrane repair . We thank Peter Gage for suggesting we write this review . We also thank him for his insight , input , and support . We thank Olaf Andersen , Evan Evans , Anna Kloda , Jean - Jacques Lacaperre , Rosario Maroto , David Needham , Aaron Oakley , and Jean - Louis Rigaud for advice and input . Finally , we thank Paul Blount , Paul Moe , Cathy Morris , and Ching Kung for sharing unpublished information . Our research is supported by the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases Grant RO1 - AR - 42782 , the National Science Foundation , the Muscular Dystro - phy Association , the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia Grant 960591 , the Australian Research Council Grants A09701150 and A23387847 , and the Raine Med - ical Foundation . Address for correspondence : O . P . Hamill , Physiology and Biophysics , UTMB , Galveston , TX 77555 ( E - mail : ohamill @ utmb . edu ) . REFERENCES 1 . A DAMS CM , A NDERSON MG , M OTTO DG , P RICE MP , J OHNSON WA , AND W ELSH MJ . Ripped pocket and pickpocket , novel Drosophila DEG / ENaC subunits in early development and mechanosensory neu - rons . J Cell Biol 140 : 143 – 152 , 1998 . 2 . A JOUZ B , B ERRIER C , G ARRIGUES A , B ESNARD M , AND G HAZI A . Release of thioredoxin via mechanosensitive channel MscL during osmotic downshock of Escherichia coli cells . J Biol Chem 273 : 26670 – 26674 , 1998 . 3 . A JOUZ B , B ERRIER C , B ESNARD M , M ARTINAC B , AND G HAZI A . Contri - butions of the different extramembraneous domains of the mech - anosensitive ion channel MscL to its response to membrane ten - sion . J Biol Chem 275 : 1015 – 1022 , 2000 . 4 . A KINLAJA J AND S ACHS F . The breakdown of cell membranes by electrical and mechanical stress . Biophys J 75 : 247 – 254 , 1998 . 4a . A L - A WQATI Q . Regulation of ion channels by ABC transporters that secrete ATP . Science 269 : 805 – 806 , 1995 . 5 . A LVAREZ O AND L ATORRE R . Voltage - dependent capacitance in lipid bilayers made from monolayers . Biophys J 21 : 1 – 17 , 1978 . 6 . A NDERSEN OS AND K OEPPE RE . Molecular determinants of channel function . Physiol Rev 72 Suppl : S89 – S158 , 1992 . 7 . A RKIN IT , S UKHAREV SI , B LOUNT P , K UNG C , AND B RUNGER AT . Helicity , membrane incorporation , orientation and thermal stability of the large conductance mechanosensitive ion channel from E . coli . Biochim Biophys Acta 1369 : 131 – 140 , 1998 . 8 . A SSAD JA AND C OREY DP . An active motor model for adaptation by vertebrate hair cells . J Neurosci 12 : 3291 – 3309 , 1992 . 9 . A SSAD JA , H ACOHEN N , AND C OREY DP . Voltage dependence of adap - tation and active bundle movement in bullfrog saccular hair cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86 : 2918 – 2922 , 1989 . 10 . A SSAD JA , S HEPHARD GMG , AND C OREY DP . Tip - link integrity and mechanical transduction in vertebrate hair cells . Neuron 7 : 985 – 994 , 1991 . 11 . A WAYDA MS , I SMAILOV II , B ERDIEV BK , AND B ENOS DJ . A cloned renal epithelial Na 1 channel protein displays stretch activation in planar lipid bilayers . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 268 : C1450 – C1459 , 1995 . 12 . A WAYDA MS AND S UBRAMANYAM M . Regulation of the epithelial Na 1 channel by membrane tension . J Gen Physiol 112 : 97 – 111 , 1998 . 12a . B ANG H , K IM Y , AND K IM D . TREK - 2 , a new member of the mech - anosensitive tandem - pore K 1 channel family . J Biol Chem 275 : 17412 – 17419 , 2000 . 13 . B ARINAGA M . Molecular evolution . Archaea and eukaryotes grow closer . Science 264 : 1251 , 1994 . 14 . B ATIZA AF , R AYMENT I , AND K UNG C . Channel gate ! Tension , leak and disclosure . Struct Fold Design 7 : R99 – R103 , 1999 . 15 . B EREITER - H AHN J . Mechanical principles of architecture of eucary - otic cells . In : Cytomechanics : The Mechancial Basis of Cell Form and Structure , edited by Bereiter - Hahn J , Anderson O , and Reif W - E . Berlin : Springer - Verlag , 1987 , p . 3 – 30 . 16 . B ERNSDORFF C , W OLF A , W INTER R , AND G RATTON E . Effects of hy - drostatic pressure on water penetration and rotational dynamics in phospholipid - cholesterol bilayers . Biophys J 72 : 1264 – 1277 , 1997 . 17 . B ERRIER C , B ESNARD M , A JOUZ B , C OULOMBE A , AND G HAZI A . Multiple mechanosensitive ion channels from Escherichia coli , activated at different thresholds of applied pressure . J Membr Biol 151 : 175 – 187 , 1996 . 18 . B ERRIER C , C OULOMBE A , H OUSSIN C , AND G HAZI A . A patch - clamp study of inner and outer membranes and of contact zones of E . coli , fused into giant liposomes Pressure - activated channels are local - ized in the inner membrane . FEBS Lett 259 : 27 – 32 , 1989 . 19 . B ERRIER C , C OULOMBE A , S ZABO I , Z ORATTI M , AND G HAZI A . Gadolin - ium ion inhibits loss of metabolites induced by osmotic shock and large stretch - activated channels in bacteria . Eur J Biochem 206 : 559 – 565 , 1992 . 20 . B ESNARD M , M ARTINAC B , AND G HAZI A . Voltage - dependent porin - like ion channels in the archaeon Haloferax volcanii . J Biol Chem 272 : 992 – 995 , 1997 . 21 . B I GQ , A LDERTON JM , AND S TEINHARDT RA . Calcium - regulated exo - cytosis is required for cell membrane resealing . J Cell Biol 131 : 1747 – 1758 , 1995 . 22 . B IBBY KJ AND M C C ULLOCH CAG . Regulation of cell volume and [ Ca 2 1 ] in attached human ﬁbroblasts responding to anisosmotic buffers . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 266 : C1639 – C1649 , 1994 . 23 . B ITTNER GD AND F ISHMAN HM . Axonal sealing following injury . In : Nerve Regeneration , edited by Ingola N and Murray M . New York : Dekker , 2000 , chapt . 12 , p . 1 – 30 . 24 . B LOOM M , E VANS E , AND M OURISTEN OG . Physical properties of the ﬂuid lipid - bilayer component of cell membrane : a perspective . Q Rev Biophys 24 : 293 – 397 , 1991 . 25 . B LOUNT P , S CHROEDER M , AND K UNG C . Mutations in a bacterial mechanosensitive channel change the cellular response to osmotic stress . J Biol Chem 272 : 32150 – 32157 , 1997 . 730 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 26 . B LOUNT P , S UKHAREV SI , M OE P , M ARTINAC B , AND K UNG C . Mechano - sensitive channels in bacteria . Methods Enzymol 294 : 458 – 482 , 1999 . 27 . B LOUNT P , S UKHAREV SI , M OE P , S CHROEDER G UY MJ , AND K UNG C . Membrane topology and multimeric structure of a mechanosensi - tive channel protein of Escherichia coli . EMBO J 15 : 101 – 108 . 1996 . 28 . B LOUNT P , S UKHAREV SI , S CHROEDER MJ , N AGLE SK , AND K UNG C . Single residue substitutions that change gating properties of a mechanosensitive channel in Escherichia coli . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 11652 – 11657 , 1996 . 29 . B LUEMINK JG , H AGE WJ , V AN D EN H OEF MH , AND D ICTUS WJ . Freeze - fracture electron microscopy of membrane changes in progester - one - induced maturing oocytes and eggs of Xenopus laevis . Eur J Cell Biol 31 : 85 – 93 , 1983 . 29a . B ODAS E , A LEU J , P UJOL G , M ARTIN - S ATUE M , M ARSAL J , AND S OLSONA C . ATP crossing the cell plasma membrane generates an ionic current in Xenopus oocytes . J Biol Chem 275 : 20268 – 20273 , 2000 . 30 . B OTIANO S , S ANDERSON MJ , AND D IRKSEN ER . A role for Ca 2 1 con - ducting ion channels in mechanically induced signal transduction in airway epithelial cells . J Cell Sci 107 : 3037 – 3044 , 1994 . 31 . B OOTH IR AND L OUIS P . Managing hypoosmotic stress : aquaporins and mechanosensitive channels in Escherichia coli . Curr Opin Micro 2 : 166 – 169 , 1999 . 32 . B OURQUE CW AND O LIET SHR . Osmoreceptors in the central nervous system . Annu Rev Physiol 59 : 601 – 619 , 1997 . 33 . B OWMAN CB , D ING JP , S ACHS F , AND S OKABE M . Mechanotransducing ion channels in astrocytes . Brain Res 584 : 272 – 286 , 1992 . 34 . B OWMAN CB AND L OHR JW . Curvature sensitive mechanosensitive ion channels and osmotically evoked movements of the patch membrane ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 70 : A365 , 1996 . 35 . B OWMAN CB AND L OHR JW . Mechanotransducing ion channels in C6 glioma cells . Glia 18 : 161 – 176 , 1996 . 36 . B RADING AF . The physiology of the mammalian urinary outﬂow tract . Exp Physiol 84 : 215 – 221 , 1999 . 37 . B RAKE AJ , W AGENBACH MJ , AND J ULIUS D . A new structural motif for ligand - gated ion channels deﬁned by an ionotropic ATP receptor . Nature 371 : 519 – 523 , 1994 . 37a . B REHM P , K ULLBERG R , AND M OODY - C ORBETT F . Properties of non - junctional acetylcholine receptor channels on innervated muscle of Xenopus laevis . J Physiol ( Lond ) 350 : 631 – 648 , 1984 . 38 . B RITTEN RJ AND M C C LURE FT . The amino acid pool of Escherichia coli . Bacteriol Rev 26 : 292 – 300 , 1962 . 39 . B ROPHY CM , M ILLS I , R OSALLES O , I SALES C , AND S UMPIO BE . Phos - pholipase C : a putative mechanotransducer for endothelial cell response to acute hemodynamic changes . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 109 : 576 – 581 , 1993 . 40 . B RUNS D AND J AHN R . Real - time measurement of transmitter release from single synaptic vesicles . Nature 377 : 62 – 65 , 1995 . 41 . B UECHNER M , D ELCOUR AH , M ARTINAC B , A DLER J , AND K UNG C . Ion channel activities in the Escherichia coli outer membrane . Bio - chim Biophys Acta 1024 : 111 – 119 , 1990 . 42 . B ULLOUGH PA , H UGHSON F , S KEHEL JJ , AND W ILEY DC . Structure of infuenza haemagglutinin at the pH of membrane fusion . Nature 371 : 37 – 43 , 1994 . 43 . B URNSTOCK G . Purinergic nerves . Pharm Rev 24 : 509 – 581 , 1972 . 44 . B URNSTOCK G . Purinergic mechanisms . Ann NY Acad Sci 603 : 1 – 19 , 1990 . 45 . B URNSTOCK G . Release of vasoactive substances from endothelial cells by shear stress and purinergic mechanosensory transduction . J Anat 194 : 335 – 342 , 1999 . 46 . B URNSTOCK G AND W OOD JN . Purinergic receptors : their role in nociception and primary afferent neurotransmission . Curr Opin Neurobiol 6 : 526 – 532 , 1996 . 47 . C AFISO DS . Alamethicin : a peptide model for voltage gating and protein - membrane interactions . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 23 : 141 – 165 , 1994 . 48 . C ANESSA CM , H ORISBERGER JD , AND R OSSIER BC . Epithelial sodium channel related to proteins involved in neurodegeneration . Nature 361 : 467 – 470 , 1993 . 49 . C ANESSA CM , M ERILLAT AM , AND R OSSIER BC . Membrane topology of the epithelial sodium channel . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 267 : C1682 – C1690 , 1994 . 50 . C ANESSA CM , S CHILD L , B UELL G , T HORENS B , G AUTSCHI I , H ORISBERGER JD , AND R OSSIER BC . Amiloride sensitive epithelial Na 1 channel is made of three homologous subunits . Nature 367 : 463 – 467 , 1994 . 51 . C ANTIELLO HF . Role of the actin cytoskeleton on epithelial Na 1 channel regulation . Kindey Int 48 : 970 – 984 , 1995 . 52 . C ANTIELLO HF , J ACKSON GR J R , G ROSMANN CF , P RAT AG , B ORKAN CS , W ANG Y , R EISIN IL , O’R IORDAN CR , AND A USIELLO DA . Electrodiffu - sional ATP movement through the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 274 : C799 – C809 , 1998 . 53 . C ASADO M AND A SCHER P . Opposite modulation of NMDA receptors by lysophospholipids and arachidonic acid : common features with mechanosensitivity . J Physiol ( Lond ) 513 : 317 – 330 , 1998 . 53a . C ATERINA MJ , S CHUMACHER MA , T OMINAGA M , R OSEN TA , L EVINE JD , AND J ULIUS D . The capsaicin receptor : a heat - activated ion channel in the pain pathway . Nature 389 : 816 – 824 , 1997 . 54 . C AVALIER - S MITH T . The origin of eukaryotic and archaebacterial cells . Ann NY Acad Sci 503 : 17 – 54 , 1987 . 55 . C EMERIKIC D AND S ACKIN H . Substrate activation of mechanosensi - tive , whole cell currents in renal proximal tubule . Am J Physiol Renal Fluid Electrolyte Physiol 264 : F697 – F714 , 1993 . 56 . C HA A , S NYDER GE , S ELVIN PR , AND B EZANILLA F . Atomic scale movement of the voltage - sensing region in a potassium channel measured via spectroscopy . Nature 402 : 809 – 813 , 1999 . 57 . C HALFIE M . Touch receptor development and function in Caeno - rhabditis elegans . J Neurobiol 24 : 1433 – 1441 , 1993 . 58 . C HALFIE M AND A U M . Genetic control of differentiation of the Caenorabditis elegans touch receptor neurons . Science 243 : 1027 – 1033 , 1989 . 59 . C HALFIE M AND T HOMSON JN . Structural and functional diversity in the neuronal microtubules of Caenorhabditis elegans . J Cell Biol 93 : 15 – 23 , 1982 . 60 . C HANG G , S PENCER R , L EE A , B ARCLAY M , AND R EES C . Structure of the MscL homologue from Mycobacterium tuberculosis : a gated mech - anosensitive ion channel . Science 282 : 2220 – 2226 , 1998 . 61 . C HAPLEAU MW Cardiovascular mechanoreceptors . Adv Comp En - viron Physiol 10 : 138 – 164 , 1992 . 62 . C HARLES AC , M ERRILL JE , D IRKSEN ER , AND S ANDERSON MJ . Intercel - lular signalling in glial cells : calcium waves and oscillations in response to mechanical stimulation and glutamate . Neuron 6 : 983 – 992 , 1991 . 63 . C HEN BM AND G RINNELL AD . Kinetics , Ca 2 1 dependence and bio - physical properties of integrin mediated mechanical modulation of transmitter release from frog motor nerve terminals . J Neurosci 17 : 904 – 916 , 1996 . 64 . C HEN CC , A KOPLAN AN , S IVILOTTI L , C OLQHOUN D , B URNSTOCK G , AND W OOD JN . A P 2x purinoceptor expressed by a subset of sensory neurons . Nature 377 : 428 – 431 , 1995 . 65 . C HEN Y , S IMASKO SM , N IGGEL J , S IGURDSON WJ , AND S ACHS F . Ca 2 1 uptake in GH 3 cells during hypotonic swelling : the sensory role of stretch - activated ion channels . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 270 : C1790 – C1798 , 1996 . 66 . C HOTHIA C . Hydrophobic bonding and accessible surface area in proteins . Nature 248 : 338 – 339 , 1974 . 67 . C OLBERT HA , S MITH TL , AND B ARGMANN CI . Osm - 9 , a novel protein with structural similarity to channels , is required for olfaction , mechanosensation , and olfactory adapation in Caenorhabditis el - egans . J Neurosci 17 : 8259 – 8269 , 1997 . 68 . C OOK SP , V ULCHANOVA L , H ARGRAEVES KM , E LDE R , AND M C C LESKEY EW . Distinct ATP receptors on pain - sensing and stretch - sensing neurons . Nature 387 : 505 – 508 , 1997 . 69 . C OREY DP AND H OWARD J . Models for ion channel gating with compliant states . Biophys J 66 : 1254 – 1257 , 1994 . 70 . C OREY DP AND H UDSPETH AJ . Response latency of vertebrate hair cells . Biophys J 26 : 499 – 506 , 1979 . 71 . C OREY DP AND H UDSPETH AJ . Kinetics of the receptor current in bullfrog saccular hair cells . J Neurosci 3 : 962 – 976 , 1983 . 72 . C OTRINA ML , L IN JHC , A LVES - R ODRIGUES A , L IU S , L IU S , L I J , A ZMI - G HADIMI H , K ANG J , N AUS CCG , AND N EDERGAARD M . Connexins regulate calcium signaling by controlled ATP release . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 15735 – 15740 , 1998 . 73 . C RAWFORD AC , E VANS MG , AND F ETTIPLACE R . Activation and adap - tation of turtle hair cells . J Physiol ( Lond ) 419 : 405 – 434 , 1989 . 74 . C RAWFORD AC , E VANS MG , AND F ETTIPLACE R . The actions of calcium April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 731 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m on the mechano - electrical transducer current of turtle hair cells . J Physiol ( Lond ) 434 : 369 – 398 , 1991 . 74a . C RUICKSHANK CC . Estimation of the Pore Size of the Large - Conduc - tance Mechanosensitive Ion Channel ( MscL ) of E . coli ( Honors thesis ) . Nedlands : Univ . of Western Australia , 1996 . 75 . C RUICKSHANK CC , M INCHIN R , L E D AIN A , AND M ARTINAC B . Estimation of the pore size of the large - conductance mechanosensitive ion channel of Escherichia coli . Biophys J 73 : 1925 – 1931 , 1997 . 76 . C UI C AND A DLER J . Effect of mutation of potassium - efﬂux system , KefA , on mechanosensitive channels in the cytoplasmic membrane of Escherichia coli . J Membr Biol 150 : 143 – 152 , 1996 . 77 . C UI C , S MITH DO , AND A DLER J . Characterization of mechanosensi - tive channels in Escherichia coli cytoplasmic membrane by whole - cell patch - clamp recording . J Membr Biol 144 : 31 – 42 , 1995 . 78 . D AI J AND S HEETZ MP . Regulation of endocytosis , exocytosis , and shape by membrane tension . Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant Biol 60 : 567 – 571 , 1995 . 79 . D AI J AND S HEETZ MP . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys J 77 : 3363 – 3370 , 1999 . 80 . D AI J , S HEETZ MP , W AN X , AND M ORRIS CE . Membrane tension in swelling and shrinking molluscan neurons . J Neurosci 18 : 6681 – 6692 , 1998 . 81 . D AI J , T ING - B EALL HP , S HEETZ MP . The secretion - coupled endocyto - sis correlates with membrane tesnion changes in RBL 2H3 cells . J Gen Physiol 110 : 1 – 10 , 1997 . 82 . D AN N AND S AFRAN SA . Effect of lipid characteristics on the struc - ture of transmembrane proteins . Biophys J 75 : 1410 – 1414 , 1998 . 82a . D ARBOUX I , L INGUEGLIA E , C HAMPIGNY G , C OSCOY S , B ARBRY P , AND L AZDUNSKI M . dGNaCl , a gonad - speciﬁc amiloride sensitive Na 1 channel . J Biol Chem 273 : 9424 – 9429 , 1998 . 83 . D AVIES PF . Flow - mediated endothelial mechanotransduction . Physiol Rev 75 : 519 – 560 , 1995 . 84 . D AVIS MJ , D ONOVITZ JA , AND H OOD JD . Stretch - activated single - channel and whole cell currents in vascular smooth muscle cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 262 : C1083 – C1088 , 1992 . 85 . D EAMER DW AND B RAMHALL J . Permeability of lipid bilayers to water and ionic solutes . Chem Phys Lipids 40 : 167 – 188 , 1986 . 86 . D EAN JW AND L AB MJ . Arrhythmia in heart failure : role of mechan - ically induced changes in electrophysiology . Lancet 1 : 1309 – 1312 , 1989 . 87 . D ELCOUR AH , M ARTINAC B , A DLER J , AND K UNG C . Modiﬁed reconsti - tution method used in patch - clamp studies of Escherichia coli ion channels . Biophys J 56 : 631 – 635 , 1989 . 88 . D EMER LL , W ORTHAM CM , D IRKSEN ER , AND S ANDERSON MJ . Mechan - ical stimulation induces intracellular calcium signaling in bovine aortic endothelium cells . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 264 : H2094 – H2102 , 1993 . 89 . D ETWEILER PB . Sensory transduction . In : Textbook of Physiology : Excitable Cells and Neurophysiology , edited by Patton HD , Fuchs AF , Hille B , Sher AM , and Streiner R . Philadelphia , PA : Saunders , 1989 , p . 98 – 129 . 90 . D IMMELER S , H ERMANN C , AND Z EIHER AM . Apoptosis of endothelial cells . Contribution to the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis ? Eur Cytokine Network 9 : 698 – 698 , 1998 . 91 . D ISCHER DE , M OHANDAS N , AND E VANS EA . Molecular maps of red cell deformation : hidden elasticity and “in situ” connectivity . Science 266 : 1032 – 1035 , 1994 . 92 . D OOLITTLE WF . Phylogenetic classiﬁcation and the universal tree . Science 284 : 2124 – 2128 . 1999 . 93 . D RISCOLL M AND C HALFIE M . The mec - 4 gene is a member of a family of Caenorhabditis elegans genes that can mutate to induce neuro - nal degeneration . Nature 349 : 588 – 593 , 1991 . 94 . D RUMMOND HA , P RICE MP , W ELSH MJ , AND A BBOUD FM . A molecular component of the arterial baroreceptor mechanotransducer . Neu - ron 21 : 1435 – 1441 , 1998 . 95 . D U H , G U G , W ILLIAM CM , AND C HALFIE M . Extracellular proteins needed for C . elegans mechanosensation . Neuron 16 : 183 – 194 , 1996 . 95a . D ULHUNTY AF AND F RANZINI - A RMSTRONG C . The relative contributions of the folds and caveolae to the surface membrane of frog skeletal muscle ﬁbers at different sarcomere lengths . J Physiol ( Lond ) 250 : 513 – 539 , 1975 . 96 . D UMONT JN . Oogenesis in Xenopus laevis ( Daudin ) . I . Stages of oocyte development in laboratory maintained animals . J Morphol 136 : 153 – 180 , 1972 . 97 . D UNCAN RK , D YCE OH , AND S AUNDERS JC . Low calcium abolishes tip links and alters stereocilia motion in chick cochlear hair cells . Hear Res 124 : 69 – 77 , 1998 . 98 . D UNCAN RL AND T URNER CH . Mechanotransduction and the func - tional response of bone to mechanical strain . Calcif Tissue Int 57 : 344 – 358 , 1995 . 98a . E ATOCK RA . Adaptation in hair cells . Annu Rev Neurosci 23 : 285 – 314 , 2000 . 99 . E ATOCK RA , C OREY DP , AND H UDSPETH AJ . Adaptation of mechano - sensitive transduction in hair cells of the bull frog’s sacculus . J Neurosci 7 : 2821 – 2836 , 1987 . 100 . E DDLEMAN CS , B ALLINGER ML , S MYERS ME , G ODELL CM , F ISHMAN HM , AND B ITTNER GD . Repair of plasmalemmal lesions by vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 4745 – 4750 , 1997 . 101 . E LLIOT JR , N EEDHAM D , D ILGER JP , AND H AYDON DA . The effect of bilayer thickness and tension on gramicidin single channel lifetime . Biochim Biophys Acta 735 : 95 – 103 , 1983 . 102 . E LSON EL . Cellular mechanics as an indicator of cytoskeletal struc - ture and function . Annu Rev Biophys Biophys Chem 17 : 397 – 430 , 1988 . 103 . E RIKSON CA AND T RINKAUS JP . Microvilli and blebs as sources of reserve surface membrane during cell spreading . Exp Cell Res 99 : 375 – 384 , 1976 . 104 . E RLER G . Reduction of mechanical sensitivity in an insect mech - anoreceptor correlated with destruction of the tubular body . Cell Tissue Res 234 : 451 – 461 , 1983 . 105 . E RMAKOV YA , A VERBAKH AZ , A RBUZOVA AB , AND S UKHAREV SI . Lipid and cell membranes in the presence of gadolinium and other ions with high afﬁnity to lipids . 2 . A dipole component of the boundary potential on membranes with different surface charge . Membr Cell Biol 12 : 411 – 426 , 1998 . 105a . E SKANDARI S , S NYDER PM , K REMAN M , Z AMPIGHI GA , W ELSH MJ , AND W RIGHT EM . Number of subunits comprising the epithelial sodium channel . J Biol Chem 274 : 27281 – 27286 , 1999 . 106 . E VANS E . Structure and deformation properties of red blood cells : concepts and quantitative methods . Methods Enzymol 173 : 3 – 35 , 1989 . 107 . E VANS E . Composite membranes and structured interfaces : from simple to complex designs in biology . In : Biomembranes Structure and Function—The State of the Art , edited by Gaber BP and Easwaran KRK . New York : Adenine , 1992 , p . 81 – 101 . 108 . E VANS E AND H OCHMUTH RM . Mechanical properties of membranes . In : Topics in Membrane and Transport , edited by Kleinzeller A and Bronner F . New York : Academic , 1978 , vol . 10 , p . 1 – 64 . 109 . E VANS E AND S KALAK R . Mechanics and thermodynamics of mem - branes . CRC Crit Rev Bioeng 3 : 181 – 418 , 1980 . 110 . E VANS E , Y EUNG A , W AUGH R , AND S ONG J . Dynamic coupling and nonlocal curvature elasticity in bilayer membranes . In : The Struc - ture and Conformation of Amphiphilic Membranes . Spriner Pro - ceedings in Physics , edited by Lipowsky R , Richter D , and Kramer K . Berlin : Springer - Verlag , 1992 , vol . 66 , p . 148 – 153 . 111 . F ATTAL DR AND B EN - S HAUL A . A molecular model for lipid - protein interaction in membranes : the role of hydrophobic mismatch . Bio - phys J 65 : 1795 – 1809 , 1993 . 112 . F ETTIPLACE R , A NDREWS DM , AND H AYDON DA . The thickness , com - position and structure of some lipid bilayers and natural mem - branes . J Membr Biol 5 : 277 – 296 , 1971 . 113 . F IRSOV D , G AUTSCHI I , M ERILLAT AM , R OSSIER BC , AND S CHILD L . The heterotetrameric architecture of the epithelial sodium channel ( ENaC ) EMBO J . 17 : 344 – 352 , 1998 . 114 . F ISHMAN HM , T EWARI KP , AND S TEIN PG . Injury - induced vesiculation and membrane redistribution in squid giant axon . Biochim Bio - phys Acta 1023 : 421 – 435 , 1990 . 115 . F ORRESTER T . An estimate of adenosine triphosphate release into the venous efﬂuent from exercising human forearm muscle . J Physiol ( Lond ) 244 : 611 – 628 , 1972 . 115a . F OX RO AND R ICHARDS FM . A voltage - gated ion channel model inferred from the crystal structure of alamethicin at 1 . 5 A resolu - tion . Nature 300 : 325 – 330 , 1982 . 116 . F RANCO A AND L ANSMAN JB . Calcium entry through stretch - inacti - vated channels in mdx myotubes . Nature 344 : 670 – 673 , 1990 . 732 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 117 . F RANZ MR , C IMA R , W ANG D , P ROFITT D , AND K URZ R . Electrophysi - ological effects of myocardial stretch and mechanical determinants of stretch - activated arrhythmias . Circulation 86 : 968 – 978 , 1992 . 118 . F RICKE B , L INTS R , S TEWART G , D RUMMOND H , D ODT G , D RISCOLL M , AND V ON D URING M . Epithelial Na 1 channels and stomatin are expressed in rat trigeminal mechanosensory neurons . Cell Tissue Res 299 : 327 – 334 , 2000 . 118a . F UJIWARA T , O DA K , Y OKOTA S , T AKATSUKI A , AND I KEHARA Y . Brefeldin A causes disassembly of the Golgi complex and accumulation of secretory protein in the endoplasmic reticulum . J Biol Chem 263 : 18545 – 18552 , 1998 . 119 . F URNESS DN , Z ETES DE , H ACKNEY CM , AND S TEELE CR . Kinematic analysis of shear displacement as a means for operating mechano - transduction channels in the contact region between adjacent ste - reocilia of mammalian cochlear hair cells . Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 264 : 45 – 51 , 1997 . 119a . G ALE JE AND A SHMORE JF . An intrinsic frequency limit to the co - chlear ampliﬁer . Nature 389 : 63 – 66 , 1997 . 120 . G ARCIA - A N ˜ OVERNOS J AND C OREY DP . The molecules of mechanosen - sation . Annu Rev Neurosci 20 : 567 – 594 , 1997 . 121 . G ARCIA - A N ˜ OVERNOS J , G ARCIA JA , L IU JD , AND C OREY DP . The nema - tode degenerin UNC - 105 forms ion channels that are activated by degeneration - or hypercontraction - causing mutations . Neuron 20 : 1231 – 1241 , 1988 . 122 . G ARCIA - A N ˜ OVERNOS J , M A C , AND C HALFIE M . Regulation of Caeno - rhabditis elegans degenerin proteins by a putative extracellular domain . Curr Biol 5 : 441 – 448 , 1995 . 122a . G ARDINER DM AND G REY RD . Membrane junctions in Xenopus eggs : their distribution suggests a role in calcium regulation . J Cell Biol 96 : 1159 – 1163 , 1983 . 123 . G ARTY H AND P ALMER LG . Epithelial sodium channels ; function , structure and regulation . Physiol Rev 77 : 359 – 396 , 1997 . 124 . G HAZI A , B ERRIER C , A JOUZ B , AND B ESNARD M . Mechanosensitive ion channels and their mode of activation . Biochimie 80 : 357 – 362 , 1998 . 125 . G IL T , I PSEN JH , M OURITSEN OG , S ABBRA MC , S PEROTTO MM , AND Z UCKERMANN MJ . Theoretical analysis of protein organization in lipid membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta 1376 : 245 – 266 , 1998 . 126 . G IL Z , M AGLEBY KL , AND S ILBERBERG SD . Membrane - pipette interac - tions underlie delayed voltage activation of mechanosensitive channels in Xenopus oocytes . Biophys J 76 : 3118 – 3127 , 1999 . 127 . G IL Z , S ILBERBERG SD , AND M AGLEBY KL . Voltage - induced membrane displacement in patch pipettes activates mechanosensitive chan - nels . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 14594 – 14599 , 1999 . 128 . G ILLESPIE PG . Molecular machinery of auditory and vestibular transduction . Curr Opin Neurobiol 5 : 449 – 455 , 1995 . 129 . G ILLIS JM . Membrane abnormalities and Ca homeostasis in muscles of the mdx mouse , an animal model of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy : a review . Acta Physiol Scand 156 : 397 – 406 , 1996 . 129a . G ILLIS KD . Techniques for membrane capacitance measurements . In : Single Channel Recording ( 2nd ed . ) , edited by Sakmann B and Neher E . New York : Plenum , 1995 , p . 155 – 198 . 130 . G LAUNER KS , M ANNUZZU LM , G ANDHI CS , AND I SACOFF EY . Spectro - scopic mapping of voltage sensor movement in the Shaker potas - sium channel . Nature 402 : 813 – 817 , 1999 . 131 . G LOCAUER M , F ERRIER J , AND M C C ULLOCH CAG . Magnetic ﬁelds ap - plied to collagen - coated ferric oxide beads induced stretch - acti - vated Ca 2 1 ﬂux in ﬁbroblasts . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 269 : C1093 – C1093 , 1995 . 132 . G LOWATZKI E , R UPPERSBERG JP , Z ENNER HP , AND R UESCH A . Mechan - ically and ATP - induced currents of mouse outer hair cells are independent and differentially blocked by D - tubocurarine . Neuro - pharmacology 36 : 1269 – 1275 , 1997 . 133 . G ORDON JL . ATP : effects , sources and fate . Biochem J 233 : 309 – 319 , 1986 . 134 . G OTOH H AND T AKAHASHI A . Mechanical stimuli induce intracellular calcium response in a subpopulation of cultured rat senory neu - rons . Neuroscience 92 : 1323 – 1329 , 1999 . 135 . G OTTSCHALDT KM AND V AHLE - H INZ C . Merkel cell receptors : structure and transducer function . Science 214 : 183 – 186 , 1981 . 136 . G OULIAN M , M ESQUITA ON , F YGENSON DK , N IELSEN C , A NDERSEN OS , AND L IBCHABER A . Gramicidin channel kinetics under tension . Bio - phys J 74 : 328 – 337 , 1998 . 137 . G RAF J , R UPNIK M , Z UPANCIC G , AND Z OREC R . Osmotic swelling of hepatocytes increases membrane conductance but not membrane capacitance . Biophys J 68 : 1359 – 1363 , 1995 . 138 . G RANT CWM , W U SHW , AND M C C ONNELL HM . Lateral phase separa - tions in binary lipid mixtures : correlations between spin labels and freeze - fracture electron microscopic studies . Biochim Biophys Acta 363 : 151 – 158 , 1974 . 139 . G RYGORCZYK R AND H ANRAHAN JW . CFTR - independent ATP release from epithelial cells triggered by mechanical stimuli . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 272 : C1058 – C1066 , 1997 . 140 . G RUNER SM . Intrinsic curvature hypothesis for biomembrane lipid composition : a role for nonbilayer lipids . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82 : 3665 – 3669 , 1985 . 141 . G U L , L IU W , AND M ARTINAC B . Electromechanical coupling model of gating the large mechanosensitive ion channel ( MscL ) of Esche - richia coli by mechanical force . Biophys J 74 : 2889 – 2902 , 1998 . 142 . G UHARAY F AND S ACHS F . Stretch - activated single ion channel cur - rents in tissue cultured embryonic chick skeletal muscle . J Physiol ( Lond ) 352 : 685 – 701 , 1984 . 143 . G UHARAY F AND S ACHS F . Mechanotransducer ion channels in chick skeletal muscle : the effects of extracellular pH . J Physiol ( Lond ) 363 : 119 – 134 , 1985 . 144 . G RUM VL , L I D , M AC D ONALD RI , AND M ONDRAGON A . Structures of two repeats of spectrin suggest models of ﬂexibility . Cell 98 : 523 – 535 , 1999 . 145 . G UREN DWR AND W OLFE J . Lateral tensions and pressures in mem - branes and lipid monolayers . Biochim Biophys Acta 688 : 572 – 580 , 1982 . 146 . G USTIN MC , S ACHS F , S IGURDSON W , R UKNUDIN A , B OWMAN C , M ORRIS CE , AND H ORN R . Single - channel mechanosensitive currents . Sci - ence 253 : 800 , 1991 . 147 . G USTIN MC , Z HOU XL , M ARTINAC B , AND K UNG C . A mechanosensitive ion channel in the yeast plasma membrane . Science 242 : 762 – 765 , 1988 . 148 . H ACKNEY CM AND F URNESS DN . Mechanotransduction in vertebrate hair cells : structure and function of the stereociliary bundle . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 268 : C1 – C13 , 1995 . 148a . H ACKNEY CM , F URNESS DN , B ENOS DJ , W OODLEY JF , AND B ARRATT J . Putative immunolocalization of the mechano - electrical transduc - tion channels in mammalian cochlear hair cells . Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 248 : 215 – 221 , 1992 . 149 . H AGMANN J , D AGAN D , AND B URGER MM . Release of endosomal content induced by plasma membrane tension : video image inten - siﬁcation time - lapse analysis . Exp Cell Res 198 : 298 – 304 , 1992 . 150 . H AMILL OP . Membrane ion channels . In : Topics in Molecular Phar - macology , edited by Burgen A and Roberts AK . Amsterdam : Elsevier , 1983 , vol . 3 , p . 183 – 205 . 151 . H AMILL OP . Potassium and chloride channels in red blood cells . In : Single - Channel Recording , edited by Sakmann B and Neher E . New York : Plenum , 1983 , p . 451 – 471 . 152 . H AMILL OP , H OLUBEC KV , AND G AO F . Calcium - activated apoptosis in frog ( Xenopus laevis ) red blood cells ( Abstract ) . J Physiol ( Lond ) 527P : 46P , 2000 . 153 . H AMILL OP , M ARTY A , N EHER E , S AKMANN B , AND S IGWORTH FJ . Im - proved patch - clamp techniques for high - resolution current record - ing from cells and cell - free membrane patches . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 391 : 85 – 100 , 1981 . 154 . H AMILL OP AND M C B RIDE DW J R . Rapid adaptation of single mech - anosensitive channels in Xenopus oocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89 : 7462 – 7466 , 1992 . 155 . H AMILL OP AND M C B RIDE DW J R . Molecular mechanisms of mech - anoreceptor adaptation . News Physiol Sci 9 : 53 – 59 , 1994 . 156 . H AMILL OP AND M C B RIDE DW J R . Mechanoreceptive membrane ion channels . Am Sci 83 : 30 – 37 , 1995 . 157 . H AMILL OP AND M C B RIDE DW J R . The cloning of a mechano - gated membrane ion channel . Trends Neurosci 17 : 439 – 443 , 1994 . 158 . H AMILL OP AND M C B RIDE DW J R . The pharmacology of mechano - gated membrane ion channels . Pharmacol Rev 48 : 231 – 252 , 1996 . 159 . H AMILL OP AND M C B RIDE DW J R . Membrane voltage and tension interactions in the gating of the mechano - gated cation channel in Xenopus oocytes ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 70 : A348 , 1996 . 160 . H AMILL OP AND M C B RIDE DW J R . Induced membrane hypo / hyper - April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 733 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m mechanosensitivity : a limitation of patch - clamp recording . Annu Rev Physiol 59 : 621 – 631 , 1997 . 161 . H AMILL OP AND M C B RIDE DW J R . A supramolecular complex under - lying touch sensitivity . Trends Neurosci 19 : 258 – 261 , 1996 . 162 . H ANSEN DE , C RAIG CS , AND H ONDEGHEM LM . Stretch induced arrhyth - mias in the isolated canine ventricle . Circulation 81 : 1094 – 1105 , 1990 . 163 . H ARADA N , E RNST A , AND Z ENNER HP . Hyposmotic activation hyper - polarizes outer hair cells of guinea pig cochlea . Brain Res 614 : 205 – 211 , 1993 . 164 . H ARRIS N , P RESNELL S , AND C OHEN FE . Four helix bundle diversity in globular proteins . J Mol Biol 236 : 1356 – 1368 , 1994 . 165 . H ARROUN TA , H ELLER WT , W EISS TM , Y ANG L , AND H UANG HW . Experimental evidence for hydrophobic matching and membrane - mediated interactions in lipid bilayers containing gramicidin . Bio - phys J 76 : 937 – 945 , 1999 . 166 . H ARROUN TA , H ELLER WT , W EISS TM , Y ANG L , AND H UANG HW . Theoretical analysis of hydrophobic matching and membrane - me - diated interactions in lipid bilayers containing gramicidin . Biophys J 76 : 3176 – 3185 , 1999 . 166a . H ARTENECK C , P LANT TD , AND S HULTZ G . From worm to man : three subfamilies of TRP channels . Trends Neurosci 23 : 159 – 166 , 2000 . 167 . H ARTZELL HC . Activation of different Cl 2 currents in Xenopus oo - cytes by Ca 2 1 liberated from stores and by capacitive Ca inﬂux . J Gen Physiol 108 : 157 – 175 , 1996 . 168 . H A ¨ SE CC , L E D AIN AC , AND M ARTINAC B . Puriﬁcation and functional reconstitution of the recombinant large mechanosensitive ion channel ( MscL ) of Escherichia coli . J Biol Chem 270 : 18329 – 18334 , 1995 . 169 . H A ¨ SE CC , L E D AIN AC , AND M ARTINAC B . Molecular dissection of the large mechanosensitive ion channel ( MscL ) of Escherichia coli : mutants with altered channel gating and pressure sensitivity . J Membr Biol 157 : 17 – 25 , 1997 . 170 . H A ¨ SE CC , M INCHIN RF , K LODA A , AND M ARTINAC B . Cross - linking studies and membrane localization and assembly of radiolabelled large mechanosensitive ion channel ( MscL ) of Escherichia coli . Biochim Biophys Res Commun 232 : 777 – 782 , 1997 . 170a . H AYDON DA . A critique of the black lipid ﬁlm as a membrane model . In : Permeability and Function of Biological Membranes , edited by Bolis L , Katchalsky A , Keynes RD , Lowenstein WR , and Pethica BA . Amsterdam : North - Holland , 1970 . 171 . H E K , L UDTKE SJ , H ELLER WT , AND H UANG HW . Mechanism of alam - ethicin insertion into lipid bilayers . Biophys J 71 : 2669 – 2679 , 1996 . 171a . H EIDEMANN SR , K AECH S , B UXBAUM RE , AND M ATUS A . Direct obser - vations of the mechanical behaviors of the cytoskeleton in living ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 145 : 109 – 122 , 1999 . 172 . H ELFRICH P AND J AKOBSSON E . Calculation of deformation energies and conformations in lipid membranes containing gramicidin chan - nels . Biophys J 57 : 1075 – 1084 , 1990 . 173 . H ELLER WT , W ARING AJ , L EHRER RI , H ARROUN TA , W EISS TM , Y ANG L , AND H UANG HW . Membrane thinning effect of the b - sheet antimi - crobial protegrin . Biochemistry 39 : 139 – 145 , 2000 . 174 . H ERRING TL , S LOTIN IM , B ALTZ JM , AND M ORRIS CE . Neuronal swelling and surface area regulation : elevated intracellular calcium is not a requirement . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 274 : C272 – C278 , 1998 . 175 . H ILLE B . Pharmacological modiﬁcation of the sodium channels of frog nerve . J Gen Physiol 51 : 199 – 219 , 1968 . 176 . H ILLE B . G - protein - coupled mechanisms and nervous signaling . Neuron 9 : 187 – 195 , 1992 . 176a . H IRSCHBERG CB , R OBBINS PW , AND A BEIJON C . Transporters of nucle - otide sugars , ATP and nucleotide sulphate in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus . Annu Rev Biochem 67 : 49 – 69 , 1998 . 177 . H ISADA T , O RDWAY RW , W ALSH JV , AND S INGER JJ . Hyperpolarization - activated cationic channels in smooth muscle cells . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 417 : 493 – 499 , 1991 . 178 . H ISADA T , W ALSH JV , AND S INGER JJ . Stretch - inactivated cationic channels in single smooth muscle cells . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 422 : 393 – 396 , 1993 . 179 . H IXON WG AND S EARCY DG . Cytoskeleton in the archaebacterium Thermoplasma acidophilum ? Viscosity increase in soluble ex - tracts . Biosystems 29 : 151 – 160 , 1993 . 180 . H O C , S LATER SJ , AND S TUBBS CD . Hydration and order in lipid bilayers . Biochemistry 34 : 6188 – 6195 , 1995 . 181 . H OCHMUTH RM AND E VANS EA . Extensional ﬂow of erythrocyte membrane from cell body to elastic tether . I . Analysis . Biophys J 39 : 71 – 81 , 1982 . 182 . H OCHMUTH RM , S HAO J , D AI J , AND S HEETZ MP . Deformation and ﬂow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophys J 70 : 358 – 369 , 1996 . 183 . H OCHMUTH RM AND W AUGH RE . Erythrocyte membrane elasticity and viscosity . Annu Rev Physiol 49 : 209 – 219 , 1987 . 183a . H OLT JR , C OREY DP , AND E ATOCK RA . Mechanoelectrical transduc - tion and adaptation in hair cells of the mouse utricle , a low - frequencey vestibular organ . J Neurosci 17 : 8739 – 8748 , 1997 . 184 . H OMANN U . Fusion and ﬁssion of plasma - membranes material ac - comodates for osmotically induced changes in the surface area of guard - cell protoplasts . Planta 206 : 329 – 333 , 1998 . 185 . H OMANN U AND T HIEL G . Unitary exocytotic and endocytotic events in guard - cell protoplasts during osmotically driven volume changes . FEBS Lett 460 : 495 – 499 , 1999 . 186 . H ONG K AND D RISCOLL M . A transmembrane domain of the putative channel subunit MEC - 4 inﬂuences mechanotransduction and neu - rodegeneration in C . elegans . Nature 367 : 470 – 473 , 1994 . 186a . H ONG K , M ANO I , AND D RISCOLL M . In vivo structure - function analysis of Caenorhabditis elegans MEC - 4 , a candidate mechanosensory ion channel subunit . J Neurosci 20 : 2575 – 2588 , 2000 . 187 . H ORIE H , I KUTA S , AND T AKENAKA T . Membrane elasticity of mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons decreases with aging . FEBS Lett 269 : 23 – 25 , 1990 . 187a . H OUSLAY MD AND S TANLEY KK . Dynamics of Biological Membranes . New York : Wiley , 1982 , p . 1 – 330 . 188 . H OWARD J AND H UDSPETH AJ . Mechanical relaxation of the hair bundle mediates adaptation in mechanoelectrical transduction by the bullfrog’s saccular hair cell . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84 : 3064 – 3068 , 1987 . 189 . H OWARD J AND H UDSPETH AJ . Compliance of the hair bundle associ - ated with gating of mechanoelectrical transduction channels in the bullfrog’s saccular hair cell . Neuron 1 : 189 – 199 , 1988 . 190 . H OWARD J , R OBERTS WM , AND H UDSPETH AJ . Mechanoelectrical trans - duction by hair cells . Annu Rev Biophys Chem 17 : 99 – 124 , 1988 . 191 . H OYER J , K OEHLER R , H AASE W , AND D ISTLER A . Up - regulation of pressure - activated Ca 2 1 permeable cation channel in intact vacular enothelium of hypertensive rats . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 11253 – 11258 , 1996 . 192 . H U H AND S ACHS F . Single channel and whole cell studies of mech - anosensitive channels in the chick heart . J Membr Biol 154 : 205 – 216 , 1996 . 193 . H UANG HW . Deformation free energy of bilayer membrane and its effect on gramicidin channel lifetime . Biophys J 50 : 1061 – 1070 , 1986 . 194 . H UANG LYM AND N EHER E . Ca 2 1 - dependent exocytosis in the somata or dorsal root ganglion neurons . Neuron 17 : 135 – 145 , 1996 . 195 . H UANG M , G U G , F ERGUSON EL , AND C HALFIE M . A stomatin like protein necessary for mechanosensation in C . elegans . Nature 378 : 292 – 295 , 1995 . 196 . H UDSPETH AJ AND G ILLESPIE PG . Pulling strings to tune transduction : adaptation by hair cells . Neuron 12 : 1 – 9 , 1994 . 197 . H ULSMANN S , M USSHOF U , M ADEJA M , F ISCHER B , AND S PECKMANN EJ . Characterization of ion channels elicited by a stream of ﬂuid during spontaneous and ligand - induced chloride current oscillations in Xenopus laevis oocytes . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 436 : 49 – 55 , 1988 . 198 . H UTTER OF AND T RAUTWEIN W . Neuromuscular facilitation by stretch of motor nerve endings . J Physiol ( Lond ) 133 : 610 – 625 , 1956 . 199 . I IDA H , N AKAMURA H , O NO T , O KUMURA M , AND A NRAKU Y . Mid1 , a novel Sacharomyces cerevisiae gene encoding a plasma membrane protein , is required for Ca 2 1 inﬂux and mating . Mol Cell Biol 14 : 8259 – 8271 , 1994 . 199a . I MAI K , T ATSUMI H , AND K ATAYAMA Y . Mechanosensitive chloride channels on the growth cones of cultured rat dorsal root ganglion neurons . Neuroscience 97 : 347 – 355 , 2000 . 200 . I NGBER DE . Cell tensegrity : deﬁning new rules of biological design that govern the cytoskeleton . J Cell Sci 104 : 613 – 627 , 1993 . 201 . I NGBER DE . Tensegrity : the architectural basis of cellular mechano - transduction . Annu Rev Physiol 59 : 575 – 599 , 1997 . 202 . I SMAILOV II , A WAYDA MS , B ERDIEV BK , B UBIEN KK , L UCAS JE , F ULLER 734 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m CM , AND B ENOS DJ . Triple barrel organization of ENaC , a cloned epithelial Na 1 channel . J Biol Chem 271 : 807 – 816 , 1996 . 203 . I SMAILOV II , B ERDIEV BK , S HLYONSKY VG , AND B ENOS DJ . Mechanosen - sitivity of an epithelial Na 1 channel in planar lipid bilayers : release from Ca 2 1 block . Biophys J 72 : 1182 – 1192 , 1997 . 204 . J ENA M , M INORE JF , AND O’N EILL WC . A volume - sensitive , IP 3 - insen - sitive Ca 2 1 store in vascular smooth muscle . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 273 : C316 – C322 , 1997 . 205 . J I HL , F ULLER CM , AND B ENOS DJ . Osmotic pressure regulates abg - rENaC expressed in Xenopus oocytes . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 275 : C1182 – C1190 , 1998 . 206 . J UKKA Y , L EHTONEN A , AND K INNUNEN PKJ . Phospholipase A 2 as a mechanosensor . Biophys J 68 : 1888 – 1894 , 1995 . 207 . K ANZAKI M . Molecular identiﬁcation of a eukaryotic , stretch - acti - vated nonselective cation channel ( correction ) . Science 285 : 1493 , 1999 . 208 . K ANZAKI M , N AGASAWA M , K OJIMA I , S ATO C , N ARUSE K , S OKABE M , AND I IDA H . Molecular identiﬁcation of a eukaryotic , stretch - activated nonselective cation channel . Science 285 : 882 – 886 , 1999 . 208a . K ANZAKI M , N AGASAWA M , K OJIMA I , S ATO C , N ARUSE K , S OKABE M , AND I IDA H . Report clariﬁcation . Science 288 : 1347 , 2000 . 209 . K APLAN JM AND H ORVITZ HR . A dual mechanosensory and chemo - sensory neuron in Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90 : 2227 – 2231 , 1993 . 210 . K ATNIK C AND W AUGH R . Electric ﬁelds induce reversible changes in the surface to volume ratio of micropipette - aspirated erythrocytes . Biophys J 57 : 865 – 875 , 1990 . 211 . K ATNIK C AND W AUGH R . Alterations of the apparent expansivity modulus of red blood cell membrane by electric ﬁelds . Biophys J 57 : 877 – 882 , 1990 . 212 . K ATZ B . Depolarization of sensory terminals and the initiation of impulses in the muscle spindle . J Physiol ( Lond ) 111 : 261 – 282 , 1950 . 213 . K ELL A AND G LASER RW . On the mechanical and dynamic properties and plant cell membranes : their role in growth , direct gene transfer and protoplast fusion . J Theor Biol 160 : 41 – 62 , 1993 . 214 . K ELLER SI , B EZRUKOV SM , G UNER SM , T ATE MW , V ODYANOY I , AND P ARSEGIAN VA . Probability of alamethicin conductance states varies with nonlamellar tendencey of bilayer phospholipids . Biophys J 65 : 23 – 27 , 1993 . 215 . K ERNAN M , C OWAN D , AND Z UCKER C . Genetic dissection of mech - anosensory transduction of mechanosensory - defective mutations of Drosophila . Neuron 12 : 1195 – 1206 , 1994 . 216 . K ERR JFR , W ILEY AH , AND C URRIE AR . Apoptosis : a basic phenom - enon with wide ranging implications in tissue kinetics . Br J Cancer 26 : 239 – 357 , 1972 . 217 . K ILLIAN JA . Hydrophobic mismatch between proteins and lipids in membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta 1376 : 401 – 415 , 1998 . 218 . K IRBER MT , G UERRERO - H ERNANDEZ A , B OWMAN DS , F OGARTY KE , T UFT RA , S INGER JJ , AND F AY FS . Multiple pathways responsible for the stretch - induced increase in Ca 2 1 concentration in toad stomach smooth muscle cells . J Physiol ( Lond ) 524 : 3 – 17 , 2000 . 219 . K IZER N , G UO XL , AND H RUSKA K . Reconstitution of stretch - activated cation channels by expression of the a - subunit of the epithelial sodium channel cloned from osteoblasts . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 1013 – 1018 , 1997 . 220 . K LODA A AND M ARTINAC B . A novel mechanosensitive ion channel in the thermophilic cell wall - less archaeon Thermoplasma volcanium ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 76 : A201 , 1999 . 220a . K LODA A AND M ARTINAC B . Molecular identiﬁcation of a mechano - sensitive ion channel in Archaea . Biophys J 80 : 229 – 240 , 2001 . 221 . K LEEMANN W , G RANT CW , AND M C C ONNELL HM . Liquid phase sepa - rations and protein distribution in membranes . J Supramol Struct 2 : 609 – 616 , 1974 . 222 . K LEYWEGT GJ AND J ONES TTA . Detection , delineation , measurement and display of cavities in macromolecular structures . Acta Cryst 50 : 178 – 185 , 1994 . 223 . K NUTTON S , K ACKSON D , G RAHAM JM , M ICKLEM KJ , AND P ASTERNAK CA . Microvilli and cell swelling . Nature 262 : 52 – 53 , 1976 . 224 . K OHLER R , D ISTLER A , AND H OYER J . Increased mechanosensitive currents in aortic endothelial cells from genetically hypertensive rats . J Hypertens 17 : 365 – 371 , 1999 . 225 . K OO SP , H IGGINS SF , AND B OOTH IR . Regulation of compatible solute accumulation in Salmonella typhimurium : evidence for glycine betaine efﬂux system . J Gen Microbiol 137 : 2617 – 2625 , 1991 . 226 . K OPROWSKI P AND K UBALSKI A . Voltage - independent adaptation of mechanosensitive channels in Escherichia coli protoplasts . J Membr Biol 164 : 253 – 262 , 1998 . 227 . K RAUS - F RIEDMANN N . Signal transduction and calcium : a suggested role for the cytoskeleton in inostol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphospahte action . Cell Motil Cytoskelet 28 : 279 – 284 , 1994 . 228 . K UBALSKI A . Generation of giant protoplasts of Escherichia coli and an inner - membrane anion selective conductance . Biochim Biophys Acta 1238 : 177 – 182 , 1995 . 229 . K UBALSKI A , M ARTINAC B , L ING KY , A DLER J , AND K UNG C . Activities of a mechanosensitive ion channel in an E . coli mutant lacking the major lipoprotein . J Membr Biol 131 : 151 – 160 , 1993 . 230 . K UBITSCHECK U , H OMANN U , AND T HIEL G . Osmotically evoked shrink - ing of guard - cell protoplasts causes vesicular retrieval of plasma membrane into the cytoplasm . Planta 210 : 423 – 431 , 2000 . 231 . K UNG C AND S AIMI Y . Solute sensing vs . solvent sensing , a specula - tion . J Eukaryot Microbiol 42 : 199 – 200 , 1995 . 232 . K UNG C , S AIMI Y , AND M ARTINAC B . Mechanosensitive ion channels in microbes and the early evolutionary origin of solvent sensing . In : Current Topics in Membranes and Transport , edited by Claudio T . New York : Academic , 1990 , chapt . 36 , p . 9451 – 9455 . 233 . K USTER JE , F RENCH AS , AND S ANDERS EJ . The effects of microtubule dissociating agents on the physiology and cytology of the sensory neuron in the femoral tactile spine of the cockroach , Periplaneta americana L . Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 219 : 397 – 412 , 1983 . 234 . L ANE JW , M C B RIDE DW J R , AND H AMILL OP . Amiloride block of the mechanosensitive cation channel in Xenopus oocytes . J Physiol ( Lond ) 441 : 347 – 366 , 1991 . 235 . L ANSMAN JB , H ALLAM TJ , AND R INK TJ . Single stretch - activated ion channels in vascular endothelial cells as mechanotransducers ? Na - ture 325 : 811 – 813 , 1987 . 236 . L AZAROWSKI ER AND H ARDEN TK . Quantitation of extracellular UTP using a sensitive enzymatic assay . Br J Pharmacol 127 : 1272 – 1278 , 1999 . 237 . L AZAROWSKI ER , H OMOLYA L , B OUCHER RC , AND H ARDEN TK . Direct demonstration of mechanically - induced release of cellular UTP and its implication for uridine nucleotide receptor activation . J Biol Chem 272 : 24348 – 24354 , 1997 . 238 . L ECHNER J AND W EILAND F . Structure and biosynthesis of prokary - otic glycoproteins . Annu Rev Biochem 58 : 173 – 194 , 1989 . 239 . L E D AIN AC , S AINT N , K LODA A , G HAZI A , AND M ARTINAC B . Mechano - sensitive ion channels of the archaeon Haloferax volcanii . J Biol Chem 273 : 12116 – 12119 , 1998 . 240 . L EE J , I SHIHARA A , O XFORD G , J OHNSON B , AND J ACOBSON K . Regulation of cell movement is mediated by stretch - activated calcium chan - nels . Nature 400 : 382 – 386 , 1999 . 241 . L EHTONEN JYA AND K INNUNEN PKJ . Phospholipase A 2 as a mech - anosensor . Biophys J 68 : 1888 – 1894 , 1995 . 242 . L ELE PP , S INCLAIR DC , AND W EDDELL G . The reaction time to touch . J Physiol ( Lond ) 123 : 187 – 203 , 1954 . 243 . L ESAGE F , G UILLEMARE E , F INK M , D UPRAT F , L AZDUNSKI M , R OMEY G , AND B ARHANIN J . Twik - 1 , a ubiquitous human weakly inward recti - fying K 1 channel with a novel structure . EMBO J 15 : 1004 – 1011 , 1996 . 244 . L EVINA N , T OTEMEYER S , S TOKES NR , L OUIS N , J ONES MA , AND B OOTH IR . Protection of Escherichia coli cells against extreme turgor by activation of MscS and MscL mechanosensitive channels : identiﬁ - cation of genes required for MscS activity . EMBO J 18 : 1730 – 1737 , 1999 . 245 . L EWIS C , N EIDHART S , H OLY C , N ORTH RA , B UELL A , AND S URPRENANT A . Coexpression of P2X 2 and P2X 3 receptor subunits can account for ATP - gated currents in Sensory neurons . Nature 377 : 432 – 435 , 1995 . 245a . L EWIS SA . Everything you wanted to know about the bladder epi - thelium but were afraid to ask . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 278 : F867 – F874 , 2000 . 245b . L EWIS SA AND D E M OURA JL . Apical membrane area of rabbit urinary bladder increases by fusion of intracellular vesicles : an electro - physiologcial study . J Membr Biol 82 : 123 – 136 , 1984 . 246 . L INSDELL P AND H ANRAHAN JW . Adenosine trisphosphate - dependent asymmetry of anion permeation in the cystic ﬁbrosis transmem - April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 735 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m brane conductance regulator chloride channel . J Gen Physiol 111 : 601 – 614 , 1998 . 246a . L IU W . The Role of the N - terminal Domain S1 in Gating of the Large Mechanosensitive Ion Channel ( MscL ) of E . coli by Mechan - ical Force ( PhD thesis ) . Nedlands : Univ . of Western Australia , 1998 . 247 . L IU W , D EITMER JW , AND M ARTINAC B . Multiple conductances in the wild - type and wild - type / D G14 MscL hybrid channels ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 76 : A203 , 1999 . 248 . L IU J , S CHRANK B , AND W ATERSTON RH . Interaction between a puta - tive mechanosensory membrane channel and a collagen . Science 273 : 361 – 364 , 1996 . 249 . L OEWENSTEIN WR . The generation of electric activity in a nerve ending . Ann NY Acad Sci 81 : 367 – 387 , 1959 . 250 . L UNA EJ AND H ITT AL . Cytoskeleton - plasma membrane interactions . Science 258 : 955 – 964 , 1992 . 251 . L UNDBAEK JA AND A NDERSEN OS . Lysophospholipids modulate chan - nel activity by altering the mechanical properties of the bilayer . J Gen Physiol 104 : 645 – 673 , 1994 . 252 . L UNDBAEK JA AND A NDERSEN OS . Spring constants for channel - in - duced lipid bilayer deformations estimates using gramicidin chan - nels . Biophys J 76 : 889 – 895 , 1999 . 253 . L UNDBAEK JA , B IRN P , G IRSHMANN J , H ANSEN AJ , AND A NDERSEN OS . Membrane stiffness and channel function . Biochemistry 35 : 3825 – 3830 , 1996 . 254 . L UNDBAEK JA , M AER AM , AND A NDERSEN OS . Lipid bilayer electro - static energy , curvature stress , and assembly of gramicidin chan - nels . Biochemistry 36 : 5695 – 5701 , 1997 . 255 . L USTIG KD , S HIAU AK , B RAKE AJ , AND J ULIUS D . Expression cloning of an ATP receptor from mouse neuroblastoma cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90 : 5113 – 5117 , 1993 . 256 . M ACONOCHIE DJ AND S TEINBACH JH . The channel opening rate of adult - and fetal - type mouse muscle nicotinic receptors activated by acetylcholine . J Physiol ( Lond ) 506 : 53 – 72 , 1998 . 257 . M AINGRET F , F OSSET M , L ESAGE F , L AZDUNSKI M , AND H ONORE ´ E . Traak is a mammalian neuronal mechano - gated K 1 channel . J Biol Chem 274 : 1381 – 1387 , 1999 . 257a . M AINGRET F , P ATEL AJ , L ESAGE F , L AZDUNSKI M , AND H ONORE E . Lysophospholipids open the two - pore domain mechano - gated K 1 channels TREK - 1 and TRAAK . J Biol Chem 275 : 10128 – 10133 , 2000 . 258 . M ANNSFELDT AG , C ARROLL P , S TUCKY CL , AND L EWIN GR . Stomatin , a MEC - 2 like protein , is expressed by mammalian sensory neurons . Mol Cell Neurosci 13 : 391 – 404 , 1999 . 259 . M ARCHENKO SM AND S AGE SO . A novel mechanosensitive cationic channels from the endothelium of rat aorta . J Physiol ( Lond ) 498 : 419 – 425 , 1997 . 260 . M ARKIN VS AND H UDSPETH AJ . Gating - spring models of mechanoelec - trical transduction by hair cells of the internal ear . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 24 : 59 – 83 , 1995 . 261 . M ARKIN VS AND M ARTINAC B . Mechanosensitive ion channels as reporters of bilayer expansion . A theoretical model . Biophys J 60 : 1120 – 1127 , 1991 . 262 . M AROTO R AND H AMILL OP . Integrin - dependent mechanosensitive release of ATP from Xenopus oocytes is blocked by Brefeldin A ( Abstract ) . J Physiol ( Lond ) 527P : 45P , 2000 . 263 . M ARQUIS RE AND H UDSPETH AJ . Effects of extracellullar Ca 2 1 con - centration on hair - bundle stiffness and gating - spring integrity in hair cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 11923 – 11928 , 1997 . 264 . M ARRION NV AND T AVALIN SJ . Selective activation of Ca 2 1 - activated K 1 channels by co - localized Ca 2 1 channels in hippocampal neu - rons . Nature 395 : 900 – 905 , 1998 . 265 . M ARTINAC B , . Mechanosensitive ion channels : biophysics and phys - iology . In : Thermodynamics of Membrane Receptors and Chan - nels , edited by Jackson MB . Boca Raton , FL : CRC , 1993 , p . 327 – 351 . 266 . M ARTINAC B , A DLER J , AND K UNG C . Mechanosensitive ion channels of E . coli activated by amphipaths . Nature 348 : 261 – 263 , 1990 . 267 . M ARTINAC B , B UECHNER M , D ELCOUR AH , A DLER J , AND K UNG C . Pressure - sensitive ion channel in Escherichia coli . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84 : 2297 – 2301 , 1987 . 268 . M ARTINAC B , D ELCOUR AH , B UECHNER M , A DLER J , AND K UNG C . Mechanosensitive ion channels in bacteria . In : Comparative As - pects of Mechanoreceptor Systems , edited by Ito F . Berlin : Spring - er - Verlag , 1992 , p . 3 – 18 . 269 . M ARTINAC B AND K LODA A . Mechanosensitive ( MS ) ion channel of the archaeon Methanococcus jannashii with structural and functional homology to bacterial ( MS ) channels ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 78 : A124 , 2000 . 269a . M ARTINAC B , K LODA A , AND P EROZO E . Structural dynamics of MscL ﬁrst transmembrane segment . A site directed spin - labeling study ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 78 : A805 , 2000 . 270 . M ATSUMOTO H , B ARON CB , AND C OBURN RF . Smooth muscle stretch - activated phospholipase C activity . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 268 : C458 – C465 , 1995 . 270a . M AURER JA , E LMORE DE , L ESTER HA , AND D OUGHERTY DA . Comparing and contrasting E . coli and M . tuberculosis mechanosensitive channels ( MscL ) . New gain of function mutations in the loop region . J Biol Chem 275 : 22238 – 22244 , 2000 . 271 . M C B RIDE DW J R AND H AMILL OP . Pressure - clamp : a method for rapid step perturbation of mechanosensitive channels . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 421 : 606 – 612 , 1992 . 272 . M C B RIDE DW J R AND H AMILL OP . A fast pressure clamp technique for studying mechanogated channels . In : Single Channel Recording ( 2nd ed . ) , edited by Sakmann B and Neher E . New York : Plenum , 1995 , p . 329 – 340 . 273 . M C B RIDE DW J R AND H AMILL OP . A simpliﬁed fast pressure clamp technique for studying mechanically gated channels . Methods En - zymol 294 : 482 – 489 , 1999 . 273a . M C C ARTER GC , R EICHLING DB , AND L EVINE JD . Mechanical transduc - tion by dorsal root ganglion neurons in vitro . Neurosci Lett 273 : 179 – 182 , 1999 . 274 . M C G OUGH A . Membrane skeleton : how to build a molecular shock absorber . Curr Biol 9 : R887 – R889 , 1999 . 275 . M C I NTOSH TJ AND S IMON SA . Hydration force and bilayer deforma - tion : a reevaluation . Biochemistry 25 : 4058 – 4066 , 1986 . 276 . M C N EIL PL AND S TEINHARDT RA . Loss , restoration , and maintenance of plasma membrane integrity . J Cell Biol 137 : 1 – 4 , 1997 . 276a . M ELEARD P , G ERBEAUD C , B ARDUSCO P , J EANDAINE N , M ITOV MD , AND F ERNANDEZ - P UENTE L . Mechanical properties of model membranes studied from shape tranformations of giant vesicles . Biochimie 80 : 401 – 413 , 1998 . 277 . M ETHFESSEL C , W ITZEMANN V , T AKAHASHI T , M ISHINA M , N UMA S , AND S AKMANN B . Patch clamp measurements on Xenopus laevis oocytes : currents through endogenous channels and implanted acetylcho - line receptor and sodium channels . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 407 : 577 – 588 , 1986 . 278 . M EYER J , F URNESS DN , Z ENNER HP , H ACKNEY CM , AND G UMMER AW . Evidence for opening of hair - cell transducer channels after tip - link loss . J Neurosci 18 : 6748 – 6756 , 1998 . 279 . M ILLS LR AND M ORRIS CE . Neuronal plasma membrane dynamics evoked by osmomechanical perturbations . J Membr Biol 166 : 223 – 235 , 1998 . 280 . M ILNER P , B ODIN P , L OESCH A , AND B URNSTOCK G . Rapid release of endothelin and ATP from isolated aortic endothelial cells exposed to increased ﬂow . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 170 : 649 – 658 , 1990 . 281 . M ILTON RL AND C ALDWELL JH . Membrane blebbing and tight seal formation : are there hidden artifacts in single - channel patch clamp recordings ? Comments Theoret Biol 3 : 265 – 284 , 1994 . 282 . M ITCHELL CH , C ARRE DA , M C G LINN AM , S TONE RA , AND C IVAN MM . A release mechanism for stored ATP in ocular ciliary epithelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 7174 – 7178 , 1998 . 283 . M OE PC , B LOUNT P , AND K UNG C . Functional and structural conser - vation in the mechanosensitive channel MscL implicates elements crucial for mechanosensation . Mol Microbiol 28 : 583 – 592 , 1998 . 283a . M OE PC , L EVIN G , AND B LOUNT P . Pursuing the roots of mechanosen - sation : a structure - based genetic analysis of the M . tuberculosis MscL channel ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 78 : 137A , 2000 . 284 . M OHANDAS N AND E VANS E . Mechanical properties of the red cell membrane in relation to molecular structure and defects . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 23 : 787 – 818 , 1994 . 285 . M OODY WJ AND B OSMA MM . A nonselective cation channel activated by membrane deformation in oocytes of the Ascidian Boltenia villosa . J Membr Biol 107 : 179 – 188 , 1989 . 286 . M ORRIS CE . Mechanosensitive ion channels . J Membr Biol 113 : 93 – 107 , 1990 . 286a . M ORRIS CE AND H OMANN U . Cell surface area regulation and mem - brane tension . J Membr Biol . In press . 736 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 287 . M ORRIS CE AND H ORN R . Failure to elicit neuronal macroscopic mechanosensitive currents anticipated by single - channel studies . Science 251 : 1246 – 1249 , 1991 . 288 . M ORRIS CE AND S IGURDSON WJ . Stretch inactivated ion channels coexist with stretch activated channels . Science 243 : 807 – 809 , 1989 . 289 . M OSBACHER J , M AIER R , F AKLER B , G LATZ A , C RESPO J , AND B ILBE G . P 2y receptor subtypes differentially couple to inwardly - rectifying potassium channels . FEBS Lett 436 : 104 – 110 , 1998 . 290 . M OURITSEN OG AND B LOOM M . Mattress model of lipid - protein inter - actions in membranes . Biophys J 46 : 141 – 153 , 1984 . 291 . M OURITSEN OG AND B LOOM M . Models of lipid - protein interactions in membranes . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 22 : 145 – 171 , 1993 . 292 . N AKAMURA F AND S TRITTMATTER SM . P 2y1 , purinergic receptors in sensory neurons : contribution to touch - induced impulse genera - tion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 10465 – 10470 , 1996 . 293 . N AKAO M , O NO K , F UJISAWA S , AND I IJIMA T . Mechanical stress - induced Ca 2 1 entry and Cl 2 currents in cultured human aortic endothelial cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 276 : C238 – C249 , 1999 . 294 . N ARUSE K AND S OKABE M . Involvement of stretch - activated ion chan - nels in Ca 2 1 mobilization to mechanical stretch in endothelial cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 264 : C1037 – C1044 , 1993 . 295 . N EEDHAM D AND H OCHMUTH RM . Electro - mechanical permeabiliza - tion of lipid vesicles . Biophys J 55 : 1001 – 1009 , 1989 . 296 . N EEDHAM D AND N UNN RS . Elastic deformation and failure of lipid bilayer membranes containing cholesterol . Biophys J 58 : 997 – 1009 , 1990 . 297 . N EHER E AND E IBL HJ . The inﬂuence of phospholipid polar groups on gramicidin A channels . Biochim Biophys Acta 464 : 37 – 44 , 1977 . 298 . N ICHOL . JA AND H UTTER OF . Tensile strength and dilatational elas - ticity of giant sarcolemmal vesicles shed from rabbit muscle . J Physiol ( Lond ) 493 : 187 – 198 , 1996 . 299 . N ICOLSON T , R USCH A , F RIEDRICH RW , G RANATO M , R UPPERSBERG JP , AND N USSLEIN - V OLHARD C . Genetic analysis of veretebrate sensory hair cell mechanosensation : the zebraﬁsh circler mutants . Neuron 20 : 271 – 283 , 1998 . 300 . N IELSEN C , G OULIAN M , AND A NDERSEN OS . Energetics of inclusion - induced bilayer deformations . Biophys J 74 : 1966 – 1983 , 1998 . 300a . N IGGEL J , S IGURDSON W , AND S ACHS F . Mechanically - induced calcium movements in astrocytes , bovine aortic endothelial cells and C6 glioma cells . J Membr Biol 174 : 121 – 134 , 2000 . 300b . N IKAIDO H . Outer membrane . In : Escherichia coli and Salmonella . Cellular and Molecular Biology ( 2nd ed . ) , edited by Neidhard FC . Washington , DC : ASM , 1996 , vol . I . 301 . N ILIUS B , E GGERMONT J , V OETS T , B UYSE G , M ANOLOPOULOS V , AND D ROOGMANS G . Properties of volume - regulated anion channels in mammalian cells . Prog Biophys Mol Biol 68 : 69 – 119 , 1997 . 302 . N ORTH RA . Families of ion channels with two hydrophobic seg - ments . Curr Opin Cell Biol 8 : 474 – 483 , 1996 . 303 . N ORTH RA AND B ARNARD EA . Nucleotide receptors . Curr Opin Neu - robiol 7 : 346 – 357 , 1997 . 304 . O AKLEY AJ , L O B ELLO M , R ICCI G , F EFERICI G , AND P ARKER MW . Evidence for an induced - ﬁt mechanism operating in P i class gluta - thione transeferases . Biochemistry 37 : 9912 – 9917 , 1998 . 305 . O AKLEY AJ , M ARTINAC B , AND W ILCE MCJ . Structure and function of the bacterial mechanosensitive channel of large conductance . Pro - tein Sci 8 : 1915 – 1921 , 1999 . 306 . O’C ONNELL AM , K OEPPE RE , AND A NDERSEN OS . Kinetics of gramici - din channel formation in lipid bilayers : transmembrane monomer association . Science 250 : 1256 – 1260 , 1990 . 307 . O IKE M , D ROOGMANS G , AND N ILIUS B . Mechanosensitive Ca 2 1 tran - sients in endothelial cells from human umbilical vein . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91 : 2940 – 2944 , 1994 . 308 . O KADA Y . Volume expansion - sensing outward - rectiﬁer Cl 2 channel : fresh start to the molecular identity and volume sensor . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 273 : C755 – C789 , 1997 . 309 . O KADA Y , H AZAMA A , H ASHIMOTO A , M ARUYAMA Y , AND K UBO M . Exo - cytosis upon osmotic swelling in human epithelial cells . Biochim Biophys Acta 1107 : 201 – 205 , 1992 . 310 . O LESEN SP , C LAPHAM DE , AND D AVIES PF . Haemodynamic shear stress activates a K 1 current in vascular endothelial cells . Nature 331 : 168 – 170 , 1988 . 311 . O LIET SHR AND B OURQUE CW . Mechanosensitive channels transduce osmosensitivity in supraoptic neurons . Nature 364 : 341 – 343 , 1993 . 312 . O LIVER JA AND C HASE HS J R . Changes in luminal ﬂow rate modulate basal and bradykinin - stimulated cell [ Ca 2 1 ] in aortic endothelium . J Cell Physiol 151 : 37 – 40 , 1992 . 312a . O LSON JE AND L I GZ . Increased potassium , chloride and taurine conductances in astrocytes during osmotic swelling . Glia 20 : 254 – 261 , 1997 . 313 . O PSAHL L AND W EBB WW . Transduction of membrane tension by the ion channel alamethicin . Biophys J 66 : 71 – 74 , 1994 . 314 . O PSAHL LR AND W EBB WW . Lipid - glass adhesion in giga - sealed patch clamped membranes . Biophys J 66 : 75 – 79 , 1994 . 315 . O STROM RS , G RAGORIAN C , AND I NSEL PA . Cellular release of and response to ATP as key determinants of the set - point of signal transduction pathways . J Biol Chem 275 : 11735 – 11739 , 2000 . 316 . O U X , B LOUNT P , H OFFMAN R , K USANO A , AND K UNG C . Random mutagenesis of a mechanosensitive channel identiﬁes regions of the protein crucial for normal function ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 72 : A139 , 1997 . 317 . O U X , B LOUNT P , H OFFMAN RJ , AND K UNG C . One face of a transmem - brane helix is crucial for mechanosensitive channel gating . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 11471 – 11475 , 1998 . 318 . P ACE NR . A molecular view of microbial diversity and the bio - sphere . Science 276 : 734 – 740 , 1997 . 319 . P ALMER LG AND F RIDT G . Gating of Na channels in the rat cortical collecting tubule : effects of voltage and membrane stretch . J Gen Physiol 107 : 35 – 45 , 1996 . 320 . P AOLETTI P AND A SCHER P . Mechanosensitivity of NMDA receptors in cultured mouse central neurons . Neuron 13 : 645 – 655 , 1994 . 321 . P AREKH AB AND P ENNER R . Store depletion and calcium inﬂux . Physiol Rev 77 : 902 – 930 , 1997 . 322 . P ARSEGIAN VA , F ULLER N , AND R AND RP . Measured work of defor - mation and repulsion of lecithin bilayers . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 76 : 2750 – 2754 , 1979 . 323 . P ATEL A , H ONORE ´ E , M AINGRET F , L ESAGE F , F INK M , D UPRAT F , AND L AZDUNSKI M . A mammalian two pore domain mechano - gated S - like K 1 channel . EMBO J 17 : 4283 – 4290 , 1998 . 324 . P ERES A AND B ERNARDINI G . The effective membrane capacity of Xenopus eggs : its relations with membrane conductance and cor - tical granule exocytosis . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 404 : 266 – 272 , 1985 . 324a . P EREZ - S AMARTIN AL , M ILEDI R , AND A RELLANO RO . Activation of vol - ume - regulated Cl 2 channels by ACh and ATP in Xenopus follicles . J Physiol ( Lond ) 525 . 3 : 721 – 734 , 2000 . 325 . P EROZO E , C ORTES DM , AND C UELLO LG , . Structural rearrangements underlying K 1 - channel activation gating . Science 285 : 73 – 78 , 1999 . 326 . P ICKLES JO , C OMIS SD , AND O SBORNE MP . Cross - links between stereo - cilia in the guinea pig organ of Corti , and their possible relation to sensory transduction . Hear Res 15 : 103 – 112 , 1984 . 327 . P OMMERENKE H , S CHREIBER E , D URR F , N EBE B , H AHNEL C , M OLLER W , AND R YCHLY J . Stimulation of integrin receptors using a magnetic drag force device induces an intracellular free calcium response . Eur J Cell Biol 70 : 157 – 164 , 1996 . 328 . P ORTER KR , P RESCOTT D , AND F RYE J . Changes in the surface mor - phology of Chinese hamster cells during the cell cycle . J Cell Biol 57 : 815 – 836 , 1973 . 328a . P UGLIELLI L , M ANDON EC , AND H IRSCHBERG CB . Identiﬁcation , puriﬁ - cation and characterization of the rat liver Golgi membrane ATP transporter . J Biol Chem 274 : 12665 – 12669 , 1999 . 329 . R AND RP AND P ARSEGIAN VA . The forces between interacting bilayer membranes and the hydration of phospholipid assemblies . In : The Structure of Biological Membranes , edited by Yeagle P . Boca Raton , FL : CRC , 1992 , p . 251 – 306 . 330 . R AUCHER D AND S HEETZ MP . Characteristics of a membrane reser - voir buffering membrane tension . Biophys J 77 : 1992 – 2002 , 1999 . 331 . R AUCHER D AND S HEETZ MP . Membrane expansion increases endo - cytosis rate during mitosis . J Cell Biol 144 : 497 – 506 , 1999 . 332 . R AYBOULD HE , G SCHOSSMAN JM , E NNES H , L EMBO T , AND M AYER EA . Involvement of stretch - sensitive calcium ﬂux in mechanical trans - duction in visceral afferents . J Auton Nerv Syst 75 : 1 – 6 , 1999 . 333 . R EICHLING DB AND L EVINE JD . Heat transduction in rat sensory neurons by calcium - dependent activation of a cation channel . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 7006 – 7011 , 1997 . 334 . R EIFARTH FW , C LAUSS W , AND W EBER WM . Stretch - independent ac - April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 737 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tivation of the mechanosensitive cation channel in oocytes of Xe - nopus laevis . Biochim Biophys Acta 1417 : 63 – 76 , 1999 . 334a . R EIS O , W INTER R , AND Z ERDA TW . The effect of high external pressure on DPPC - cholesterol multilamellar vesicles : a pressure - tuning Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy study . Biochim Biophys Acta 1279 : 5 – 16 , 1996 . 335 . R EISIN IL , P RAT AG , A BRAHAM EH , A MARA RJ , G REGORY DA , A USIELLO DA , AND C ANTIELLO HF . The cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conduc - tance regulator is a dual ATP and chloride channel . J Biol Chem 269 : 20584 – 20591 , 1994 . 336 . R EQUENA J , H AYDON DA , AND H LADKY SB . Lenses and the compres - sion of black lipid membranes by an electric ﬁeld . Biophys J 15 : 77 – 81 , 1975 . 337 . R EUZEAU C , M ILLS LR , H ARRIS JA , AND M ORRIS CE . Discrete and reversible vacuole - like dilations induced by osmomechanical per - turbation of neurons . J Membr Biol 145 : 33 – 47 , 1995 . 338 . R EYES R , L AURITZEN I , L ESAGE F , E TTAICHE M , F OSSET M , AND L AZDUN - SKI M . Imunolocalization of the arachidonic acid and mechanosen - sitive baseline TRAAK potassium channel in the nervous system . Neuroscience 95 : 893 – 901 , 2000 . 338a . R OSS PE , G ARBER SS , AND C AHALAN MD . Membrane chloride conduc - tance and capacitance in Jurkat T lymphocytes during osmotic swelling . Biophys J 66 : 169 – 178 , 1994 . 339 . R OSSIER BC . Mechanosensitivity of the epithelial sodium channel ( ENaC ) : controversey or pseudocontroversey ? J Gen Physiol 112 : 95 – 96 , 1998 . 340 . R OTIN D , B AR - S ARGI D , O’B RODOVITCH H , M ERILAINEN J , L EHTO VP , C ANESSA CM , R OSSIER BC , AND D OWNEY GP . An SH3 binding region in the epithelial Na 1 channel ( a ENaC ) mediates its localization at the apical membrane . EMBO J 13 : 4440 – 4450 , 1994 . 341 . R UDNEV VS , E RMISHKIN LN , F ONINA LA , AND R OVIN YU . The depen - dence of the conductance and life time of gramicidin channels on the thickness and tension of lipid bilayers . Biochim Biophys Acta 642 : 196 – 202 , 1981 . 342 . R UESCH A AND H UMMLER E . Mechano - electrical transduction in mice lacking the a - subunit of the epithelila sodium channel . Hear Res 131 : 170 – 176 , 1999 . 343 . R UESCH A , K ROS CJ , AND R ICHARDSON GP . Block by amiloride and its derivatives of mechano - electrical transduction in outer hair cells of mouse cochlear cultures . J Physiol ( Lond ) 474 : 75 – 86 , 1994 . 344 . R UFFERT S , L AMBERT C , P ETER H , W ENDISH F , AND K RA ¨ MER R . Efﬂux of compatible solutes in Corynebacterium glutamicum mediated by osmoregulated channel activity . Eur J Biochem 247 : 572 – 580 , 1997 . 345 . R UKNUDIN A , S ONG MJ , AND S ACHS F . The ultrastructure of patch - clamped membranes : a study using high voltage electron micros - copy . J Cell Biol 112 : 125 – 134 , 1991 . 346 . S ABATINI BL AND R EGEHR WG . Timing of neurotransmission at fast synapses in the mammalian brain . Nature 384 : 170 – 172 , 1996 . 347 . S ACHS F . Baroreceptor mechanism at the cellular level . Federation Proc 46 : 12 – 16 , 1987 . 348 . S ACHS F . Mechanical transduction in biological systems . CRC Crit Revs Biomed Eng 16 : 141 – 169 , 1988 . 349 . S ACHS F AND L ECAR H . Stochastic models for mechanical transduc - tion . Biophys J 59 : 1143 – 1145 , 1991 . 350 . S ACHS F AND M ORRIS CE . Mechanosensitive ion channels in nonspe - cialized cells . Revs Physiol Biochem Pharmacol 132 : 1 – 77 , 1998 . 350a . S ACHS F , M ORRIS CE , H AMILL OP , B OURQUE CW , AND C HAFKE Y . Does a stretch - inactivated cation channel integrate osmotic and pepti - dergic signals ? Nature 3 : 847 – 848 , 2000 . 351 . S ACKIN H . Mechanosensitive channels . Annu Rev Physiol 57 : 333 – 353 , 1995 . 352 . S ACKMANN E . Molecular and global structure and dynamics of mem - branes and lipid bilayers . Can J Physiol 68 : 999 – 1012 , 1990 . 352a . S ADOSHIMA J , X U Y , S LAYTER HS , AND I ZUMO S . Autocrine release of angiotension II mediates stretch - induced hypertrophy of cardiac myocytes in vitro . Cell 75 : 977 – 984 , 1993 . 353 . S AINT N , L ACAPERE JJ , G U L , G HAZI A , M ARTINAC B , AND R IGAUD JL . A hexameric transmembrane pore revealed by two - dimensional crys - tallization of the large mechanosensitive ion channel ( MscL ) of Escherichia coli . J Biol Chem 273 : 14667 – 14669 , 1998 . 354 . S AKMANN B AND N EHER E . Geometric parameters of pipettes and membrane patches . In : Single Channel Recording , edited by Sak - mann B and Neher E . New York : Plenum , 1983 , p . 31 – 51 . 355 . S ANSOM MSP . The biophysics of peptide models or ion channels . Prog Biophys Mol Biol 55 : 139 – 235 , 1991 . 356 . S ASAKI N , M ITSUIYE T , AND N OMA A . Effects of mechanical stretch on membrane currents of single ventricular myocytes of guinea pig heart . Jpn J Physiol 42 : 957 – 970 , 1992 . 356a . S AUER H , H ESCHELER J , AND W ARTENBERG M . Mechanical strain - induced Ca 2 1 waves are propagated via ATP release and purinergic receptor activation . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 279 : C295 – C307 , 2000 . 357 . S AVAGE C , X UE Y , M ITANI S , H ALL D , Z AKHARY R , AND C HALFIE M . Mutations in the Caenorhabditis elegans b - tubulin gene mec - 7 : effects on microtubule assembly and stability and on tubulin auto - regulation . J Cell Sci 107 : 2165 – 2175 , 1994 . 357a . S CHILD L , S CHNEEBERGER E , G AUTSCHI I , AND F IRSOV D . Identiﬁcaion of amino acid residues in the alpha , beta , and gamma subunits of the epithelial sodium channel ( ENaC ) involved in amiloride block and ion permeation . J Gen Physiol 109 : 15 – 26 , 1997 . 358 . S CHUTT W AND S ACKIN H . A new technique for evaluating volume sensitivity of ion channels . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 433 : 368 – 375 , 1997 . 359 . S CHLEYER M , S CHMID R , AND B AKKER EP . Transient , speciﬁc and extremely rapid release of osmolytes from growing cells of Esch - erichia coli . Arch Microbiol 160 : 424 – 431 , 1993 . 360 . S CHWIEBERT EM . ABC transporter - facilitated conductive transport . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 276 : C1 – C8 , 1999 . 361 . S EGERER A , L ANAWORTHY TA , AND S TETTER KO . Thermoplasma aci - dophilum and Thermoplasma volcanium sp . from Solfatara Fields System . Appl Microbiol 10 : 161 – 171 , 1988 . 362 . S ETOGUCHI M , O HYA Y , A BE I , AND F UJISHIMA M . Stretch - activated whole - cell currents in smooth muscle cells from mesenteric resis - tance artery of guinea - pig . J Physiol ( Lond ) 501 : 343 – 353 , 1997 . 363 . S HARMA RV , C HAPLEAU MW , H AAJDUCZOK G , W ACHTEL RE , W AITE LJ , B HALLA RC , AND A BBOUD FM . Mechanical stimulation increases in - tracellular calcium concentration in nodose sensory neurons . Neu - roscience 666 : 433 – 441 , 1995 . 364 . S HEN J , L USCINSKAS FW , C ONNOLLY A , D EWEY CF J R , AND G IMBRONE MA J R . Fluid shear stress modulates cytosolic free calcium in vascular endothelial cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 262 : C384 – C390 , 1992 . 365 . S HCHERBATKO A , O NO F , M ANDEL G , AND B REHM P . Voltage - dependent sodium channel function is regulated through membrane mechan - ics . Biophys J 77 : 1945 – 1959 , 1999 . 366 . S IGURDSON W , R UKNUDIN A , AND S ACHS F . Calcium imaging of me - chanically induced ﬂuxes in tissue cultured chick heart : role of stretch - activated channels . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 262 : H1110 – H1115 , 1992 . 367 . S IGURDSON WJ , S ACHS F , AND D IAMOND SL . Mechanical perturbation of cultured human endothelial cells causes rapid increases of in - tracellular calcium . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 264 : H1745 – H1752 , 1993 . 368 . S ILBERBERG SD AND M AGLEBY KL . Voltage - induced slow activation and deactivation of mechanosensitive channels in Xenopus oo - cytes . J Physiol ( Lond ) 505 : 551 – 569 , 1997 . 369 . S ILINSKY EM AND R EDMAN RS . Synchronous release of ATP and neurotransmitter within milliseconds of motor nerve impulse in the frog . J Physiol ( Lond ) 492 : 815 – 822 , 1996 . 369a . S IMONS K AND I KONEN E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 : 569 – 572 , 1997 . 370 . S MALL DL AND M ORRIS CE . Delayed activation of single mechano - sensitive channels in Lymnaea neurons . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 267 : C598 – C606 , 1994 . 371 . S MART OS , B REED J , S MITH GR , AND S ANSOM MS . A novel method for structure - based prediction of ion channel conductance properties . Biophys J 72 : 1109 – 1126 , 1997 . 371a . S NYDER PM , C HENG C , P RINCE LS , R OGERS JC , AND W ELSH MJ . Elec - trophysiological and biochemical evidence that DEG / ENaC cation channels are composed of nine subunits . J Biol Chem 273 : 681 – 684 , 1998 . 372 . S OKABE M , H ASEGAWA N , AND Y AMAMORI K . Blockers and activators for stretch - activated ion channels of chick skeletal muscle . Ann NY Acad Sci 707 : 417 – 420 , 1993 . 373 . S OKABE M , N ARUSE K , AND N UNOGAKI K . Mechanosensitive ion chan - nels : single channel vs . whole cell activities . Prog Cell Res 6 : 139 – 149 , 1997 . 374 . S OKABE M AND S ACHS F . The structure and dynamics of patch 738 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m clamped membrane : a study using differential interference contrast microscopy . J Cell Biol 111 : 599 – 606 , 1990 . 375 . S OKABE M , S ACHS F , AND J ING Z . Quantitative video microscopy of patch clamped membranes—stress , strain , capacitance and stretch channel activation . Biophys J 59 : 722 – 728 , 1991 . 375a . S OLSONA C , I NNOCENTI B , AND F ERNANDEZ JM . Regulation of exocy - totic fusion by cell inﬂation . Biophys J 74 : 1061 – 1073 , 1998 . 376 . S PENCER PS AND S CHAUMBURG HH . An ultrastructural study of the inner core of the Pacinian corpuscle . J Neurocytol 2 : 217 – 235 , 1973 . 377 . S PEICHER DW AND M ARCHESI VT . Erythrocyte spectrin is comprised of many homologous triple helical segments . Nature 311 : 177 – 180 , 1984 . 378 . S RINIVASAN KR , K AY RL , AND N AGLE JF . The pressure dependence of the lipid bilayer phase transition . Biochemistry 13 : 3494 – 3496 , 1974 . 379 . S TEBBING MJ , M C C LACHLAN EM , AND S AH P . Are there functional P 2X receptors on cell bodies in intact dorsal root ganglia of rats ? Neuroscience 86 : 1235 – 1244 , 1998 . 380 . S TEFFENSEN I , B ATES WR , AND M ORRIS CE . Embryogenesis in the presence of blockers of mechanosensitive ion channels . Dev Growth Differ 33 : 437 – 442 , 1991 . 381 . S TEVENS B AND F IELDS RD . Response of Schwann cells to action potentials in development . Science 287 : 2267 – 2271 , 2000 . 382 . S TOCKBRIDGE LL AND F RENCH AS . Stretch - activated cation channels in human ﬁbroblasts . Biophys J 59 : 722 – 728 , 1988 . 382a . S TRONG M , C HANDY KG , AND G UTMAN GA . Molecular evolution of voltage sensitive ion channel genes : on the origins of electrical excitability . Mol Biol Evol 10 : 221 – 242 , 1993 . 382b . S UCHYNA TM , J OHNSON JH , H AMER K , L EYKAM JF , G AGE DA , C LEMO HF , B AUMGARTEN CM , AND S ACHS F . Identiﬁcation of a peptide toxin from Grammostola spatulata spider venom that blocks cation - selective stretch - activated channels . J Gen Physiol 115 : 583 – 598 , 2000 . 382c . S U ¨ DHOF TC . The synaptic vesicle cycle . Nature 375 : 645 – 653 , 1995 . 383 . S UKHAREV SI . Dynamics of bacterial mechanosensitive channel complexes ( MscL ) as viewed by time - resolved current records ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 74 : A324 , 1998 . 384 . S UKHAREV SI , B LOUNT P , M ARTINAC B , B LATTNER FR , AND K UNG C . A large mechanosensitive channel in E . coli encoded by mscL alone . Nature 368 : 265 – 268 , 1994 . 385 . S UKHAREV SI , B LOUNT P , M ARTINAC B , G UY HB , AND K UNG C . MscL : a mechanosensitive ion channel of Escherichia coli . In : Organellar Ion Channels and Transporters , edited by Clapham DE and Ehr - lich B . New York : Rockefeller Univ . Press , 1996 , vol . 51 , p . 133 – 141 . ( Soc Gen Physiol Ser ) 386 . S UKHAREV SI , B LOUNT P , M ARTINAC B , AND K UNG C . Functional recon - stitution as an assay for biochemical isolation of channel proteins : application to the molecular identiﬁcation of a bacterial mechano - sensitive channel . Methods 6 : 51 – 59 . 222 , 1994 . 387 . S UKHAREV SI , B LOUNT P , M ARTINAC B , AND K UNG C . Mechanosensitive channels of Escherichia coli : the MscL gene , protein , and activities . Annu Rev Physiol 59 : 633 – 657 , 1997 . 387a . S UKHAREV SI , D URELL SR , AND G UY HR . Structural models of the gating mechanism of MscL channels ( Abstract ) . Biophys J 78 : 473A , 2000 . 388 . S UKAHREV SI , M ARTINAC B , A RSHAVSKY VY , AND K UNG C . Two types of mechanosensitive channels in the E . coli cell envelope : solubiliza - tion and functional reconstitution . Biophys J 65 : 177 – 183 , 1993 . 389 . S UKHAREV SI , S CHROEDER MJ , AND M C C ASLIN DR . Stoichiometry of the large conductance bacterial mechanosensitive channel of E . coli : a biochemical study . J Membr Biol 171 : 183 – 193 , 1999 . 390 . S UKHAREV SI , S IGURDSON WJ , K UNG C , AND S ACHS F . Energetic and spatial parameters for gating of the bacterial large conductance mechanosensitive channel , MscL . J Gen Physiol 113 : 525 – 539 , 1999 . 391 . S ULLIVAN MJ , S HARMA RV , W ACHTEL RE , C HAPLEAU MM , W AAITE LJ , B HALLA RC , AND A BBOUD FM . Non - voltage - gated Ca 2 1 inﬂux through mechanosensitive ion channels in aortic baroreceptor neurons . Circ Res 80 : 861 – 867 , 1997 . 392 . S UMPER M , B ERG E , M ENGELE R , AND S TROBEL I . Primary structure and glycosylation of the S - layer protein of Haloferax volcanii . J Bacteriol 172 : 7111 – 7118 , 1990 . 393 . S USUKI M , S ATO J , K UTSUWADA K , O OKI G , AND I MAI M . Cloning of a stretch - inhibitable nonselective cation channel . J Biol Chem 274 : 6330 – 6335 , 1999 . 394 . S VICHAR N , S CMIGOL A , V ERKHRANTSKY A , AND K OSTYUK P . IP 3 - induced Ca 2 1 release in dorsal root ganglion neurones . Neurosci Lett 227 : 107 – 110 , 1997 . 395 . S VICHAR N , S CMIGOL A , V ERKHRANTSKY A , AND K OSTYUK P . ATP induces Ca 2 1 release from IP 3 - sensitive Ca 2 1 stores exclusively in large DRG neurons . Neuroreport 8 : 1555 – 1559 , 1997 . 396 . S YBESMA C . An Introduction to Biophysics . New York : Academic , 1977 , p . 54 . 397 . S ZABO I , P ETRONILLI V , AND Z ORATTI M . A patch - clamp study of Bacillus subtilis . Biochim Biophys Acta 1112 : 29 – 38 , 1992 . 398 . S ZABO I , P ETRONILI V , AND Z ORATTI M . A patch - clamp investigation of the Streptococcus faecalis membrane . J Membr Biol 131 : 203 – 218 , 1993 . 399 . T ABAREAN LV , J URANKA P , AND M ORRIS CE . Membrane stretch affects gating modes of a skeletal muscle sodium channel . Biophys J 77 : 758 – 774 , 1999 . 400 . T AGLIETTI V AND T OSELLI M . A study of stretch - activated channels in the membrane of frog oocytes : interactions with Ca 2 1 ions . J Physiol ( Lond ) 407 : 311 – 328 , 1988 . 400a . T AKAHASHI A AND G OTOH H . Mechanosensitive currents in cultured somatosensory neurons . Brain Res 869 : 225 – 230 , 2000 . 401 . T AKEUCHI M , K AWAKAMI M , I SHIHARA T , A MANO T , K ONDO K , AND K ATSURA I . An ion channel of the degenerin / epithelial sodium chan - nel superfamily controls the defecation rhythm in Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 11775 – 11789 , 1998 . 402 . T ASAKA Y , N AKAGAWA Y , S ATO C , M INO M , U OZUMI N , M ARATA N , M UTO S , AND I IDA H . yam8 1 , a Schizosaccharomyces pombe gene , is a potential homologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae MID1 gene encoding a stretch - activated Ca 2 1 - permeable channel . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 269 : 265 – 269 , 2000 . 403 . T AVERNARAKIS N AND D RISCOLL M . Molecular modelling of mechano - transduction in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . Annu Rev Physiol 59 : 659 – 689 , 1997 . 404 . T AVERNARAKIS N , S HREFFLER W , W ANG S , AND D RISCOLL M . Unc - 8 , a DEG / ENaC family member , encodes a subunit of a candidate me - chanically gated channel that modulates C . elegans locomotion . Neuron 18 : 107 – 119 , 1997 . 405 . T AYLOR AL , K UDLOW BA , M ARRS KL , G RUENERT DC , G UGGINO WB , AND S CHWIEBERT EM . Bioluminescence detection of ATP release mech - anisms in epithelia . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 275 : C1391 – C1406 , 1998 . 406 . T ERASAKI M , C HEN LB , AND F UJIWARA K . Microtubules and the endo - plasmic reticulum are highly interdependent structures . J Cell Biol 103 : 1557 – 1568 , 1986 . 407 . T ERASAKI M , M IYAKE K , AND M C N EIL PL . Large plasma membrane disruptions are rapidly resealed by Ca 2 1 - dependent vesicle - vesicle fusion events . J Cell Biol 139 : 63 – 74 , 1997 . 408 . T HIEL G , S UTTER JU , AND H OMANN U . Ca 2 1 - sensitive and Ca 2 1 - insen - sitive exocytosis in maize coleoptile protoplasts . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 439 : R152 – R153 , 2000 . 409 . T HURM U . Mechanoreceptors in the cuticle of the honeybee : ﬁne structure and stimulus mechanism . Science 145 : 1063 – 1065 , 1964 . 410 . T HURM U . Mechano - electrical transduction . In : Biophysics , edited by Hoppe W , Lohman W , Markl H , and Ziegler H . Berlin : Springer , 1983 , p . 666 – 671 . 411 . T HURM U , E RLER G , G OEDDE J , K ASTRUP H , K EIL TH , V OELKER W , AND V OHWINKEL B . Cilia specialized for mechanoreception . J Submi - crosc Cytol 15 : 151 – 155 , 1983 . 412 . T ODOROV AT , P ETROV AG , AND F ENDLER JH . First observation of the converse ﬂexoelectric effect in lipid bilayers . J Phys Chem 98 : 3076 – 3079 , 1994 . 413 . T ODOROV LD , M IHAYLOVA - T ODOROVA S , W ESTFALL TD , S NEDDON P , K ENNEDY C , B JUR RA , AND W ESTFALL DP . Neuronal release of soluble nucleotidases and their role in neurotransmitter inactivation . Na - ture 387 : 76 – 79 , 1997 . 413a . T OGO T , A LDERTON JM , B I G - Q , AND S TEINHARDT RA . The mechanism of facilitated cell membrane resealing . J Cell Sci 112 : 719 – 731 , 1999 . 414 . T RINKHAUS JP . Formation of protrusions of the cell surface during cell movement . Prog Clin Biol Res 41 : 887 – 906 , 1980 . 415 . T URKANIS SA . Effects of muscle stretch on transmitter release at end - plates of rat diaphragm and frog sartorius muscle . J Physiol ( Lond ) 230 : 391 – 403 , 1973 . April 2001 MECHANISMS OF MECHANOTRANSDUCTION 739 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 416 . T URNER PR , F ONG P , D ENETCLAW WF , AND S TEINHARDT RA . Increased calcium inﬂux in dystrophic muscle . J Cell Biol 115 : 1701 – 1712 , 1991 . 416a . U EHARA T AND Y ANAGIMACHI R . Activation of hamster eggs by prick - ing . J Exp Biol 199 : 269 – 274 , 1977 . 417 . U NWIN N . Acetylcholine receptor channel imaged in the open state . Nature 373 : 37 – 43 , 1995 . 418 . V ALERA S , H USSY N , E VENS RJ , A DAMI N , N ORTH RA , S URPRENANT A , AND B UELL G . A new class of ligand - gated ion channel deﬁned by P 2x receptor for extracellular ATP . Nature 371 : 516 – 519 , 1994 . 419 . V ANOYE CG AND R EUSS L . Stretch - activated single K 1 channels ac - count for whole - cell currents elicited by swelling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 6511 – 6516 , 1999 . 420 . V IZI ES , S PERLAGH B , AND B ARANYI M . Evidence that ATP , released from the postsynaptic site by noradrenaline , is involved in mechan - ical responses of guinea pig vas deference : cascade transmission . Neuroscience 50 : 455 – 465 , 1992 . 421 . V ODYANOY I , B EZRUKOV SM , AND P ARSEGIAN VA . Probing alamethicin channels with water soluble polymers . Size modulated osmotic action . Biophys J 65 : 2097 – 2105 , 1993 . 422 . V OLK T , F ROMTER E , AND K ORBMACHER C . Hypertonicity activates nonselective cation channels in mouse cortical collecting duct cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 : 8478 – 8482 , 1995 . 423 . V OLK WA . Basic Microbiology ( 7th ed ) . New York : Harper Collins , 1992 . 424 . V OLKNANDT W AND Z IMMERMANN H . Acetylcholine , ATP , and proteo - glycan are common to synaptic vesicles isolated from the electric organs of electric eel and electric catﬁsh as well as from rat diaphragm . J Neurochem 47 : 1449 – 1462 , 1986 . 424a . W ALDMANN R AND L AZDUNSKI M . H 1 - gated cation channels ; neuronal acid sensors in the NaC / Deg family of ion channels . Curr Opin Neurobiol 8 : 418 – 424 , 1998 . 425 . W ALKER RG , W ILLINGHAM AT , AND Z UKER CS . A Drosophilia mech - anosensory transduction channel . Science 287 : 2229 – 2234 , 2000 . 426 . W ALLACE BA . Recent advances in the high resolution structural studies of bacterial channels : gramicidin A . J Struct Biol 121 : 123 – 141 , 1998 . 427 . W AN X , H ARRIS JA , AND M ORRIS CE . Responses of neurons to ex - treme osmomechanical stress . J Membr Biol 145 : 21 – 31 , 1995 . 428 . W AN X , J URANKA P , AND M ORRIS CE . Activation of mechanosensitive currents in traumatized membrane . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 276 : C318 – C327 , 1999 . 429 . W ANG N , B UTLER JP , AND I NGBER DE . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 : 1124 – 1127 , 1993 . 430 . W ANG Y , R OMAN R , L IDOFSKY SD , AND F ITZ JG . Autocrine signalling through ATP release represents a novel mechanism for cell volume regulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 12020 – 12025 , 1996 . 431 . W AUGH RE . Elastic energy of curvature - driven bump formation on red blood cell membrane . Biophys J 70 : 1027 – 1035 , 1996 . 432 . W EBB TE , S IMON J , K RISHEK BJ , B ATESON AN , S MART TG , K ING BF , B URNSTOCK G , AND B ARNARD EA . Cloning and functional expression of a brain G - protein - coupled ATP receptor . FEBS Lett 324 : 219 – 225 , 1993 . 433 . W ELLNER MC AND I SENBERG G . Stretch effects on whole - cell currents of guinea - pig urinary bladder myocytes . J Physiol ( Lond ) 480 : 439 – 448 , 1994 . 433a . W HITE SH . Analysis of the torus surrounding planar lipid bilayer membranes . Biophys J 12 : 432 – 445 , 1972 . 434 . W ILKINSON NC , G AO F , AND H AMILL OP . Effects of mechanogated channel blockers on oocyte growth , fertilization and embryogene - sis . J Membr Biol 165 : 161 – 74 , 1998 . 435 . W IRTZ H AND D OBBS LG . Calcium mobilization and exocytosis after one mechanical stretch of lung epithelial cells . Science 250 : 1266 – 1269 , 1990 . 436 . W OESE CR . There must be a prokaryote somewhere : microbiology’s search for itself . Microbiol Rev 58 : 1 – 9 , 1994 . 437 . W OLFE J , D OWGERT MF , AND S TEPONKUS PL . Mechanical study of the deformation and rupture of the plasma membranes of protoplasts during osmotic expansions . J Membr Biol 93 : 63 – 74 , 1986 . 438 . W OLFE J AND S TEPONKUS PL . The stress - strain relation of the plasma membrane of isolated plant protoplasts . Biochim Biophys Acta 643 : 663 – 668 , 1981 . 439 . W U G , M C B RIDE DWJ , AND H AMILL OP . Mg 2 1 block and inward rectiﬁcation of mechanosensitive channels in Xenopus oocytes . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 435 : 572 – 574 , 1998 . 440 . W U Y , R ICCI AJ , AND F ETTIPLACE R . Two components of transducer adaptation in auditory hair cells . J Neurophysiol 82 : 2171 – 2181 , 1999 . 441 . Y ANG XC AND S ACHS F . Block of stretch - activated ion channels in Xenopus oocytes by gadolinium and calcium ions . Science 243 : 1068 – 1071 , 1989 . 442 . Y ANG XC AND S ACHS F . Characterization of stretch - activated ion channels in Xenopus oocytes . J Physiol ( Lond ) 431 : 103 – 122 , 1990 . 443 . Y OSHIMURA K , B ATIZA A , S CHROEDER M , B LOUNT P , AND K UNG C . Hydrophilicity of a single residue within MscL correlates with increased mechanosensitivity . Biophys J 77 : 1960 – 1972 , 1999 . 444 . Z AMPIGHI GA , K REMAN M , B OORER KJ , L OO DDF , B EZANILLA F , C HANDY G , H ALL JE , AND W RIGHT EM . A method for determining the unitary functional capacity of cloned channels and transporters expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes . J Membr Biol 148 : 65 – 78 , 1995 . 445 . Z AMPIGHI GA , L OO DDF , K REMAN M , E SKANDARI S , AND W RIGHT EM . Functional and morphological correlates of connexin50 expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes . J Gen Physiol 113 : 507 – 523 , 1999 . 445a . Z ENG T , B ETT GCL , AND S ACHS F . Stretch - activated whole cell cur - rents in adult cardiac myocytes . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 278 : H548 – H557 , 2000 . 446 . Z HANG Y . Membrane Patch and Whole Cell Response of Xenopus Oocytes to Mechanical , Electrical and Osmotic Stimulation ( PhD dissertation ) . Galveston : Univ . of Texas Medical Branch , 1998 . 447 . Z HANG Y , G AO G , P OPOV VL , W EN JW , AND H AMILL OP . Mechanically gated channel activity in cytoskeleton deﬁcient plasma membrane blebs and vesicles . J Physiol ( Lond ) 523 : 117 – 129 , 2000 . 448 . Z HANG Y AND H AMILL OP . On the discrepancy between whole cell and membrane patch mechanosensitivity of Xenopus oocytes . J Physiol ( Lond ) 523 : 101 – 115 , 2000 . 449 . Z HANG Y AND H AMILL OP . Calcium , voltage and osmotic stress sensitive currents in Xenopus oocytes and their possible relationship to single mechanically - gated channels . J Physiol ( Lond ) 523 : 83 – 99 , 2000 . 450 . Z HAO HB AND S ANTOS - S ACCHI J . Effect of membrane tension on gap junctional conductance of supporting cells in Corti’s organ . J Gen Physiol 112 : 447 – 455 , 1998 . 451 . Z HAO YD , Y AMOAH EN , AND G ILLESPIE PG . Regeneration of broken tip links and restoration of mechanical transduction in hair cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 15469 – 15474 , 1996 . 452 . Z HELEV DV AND N EEDHAM D . Tension - stabilized pores in giant vesi - cles : determination of pore size and pore line tension . Biophys Biochim Acta 1147 : 89 – 104 , 1993 . 452a . Z HELEV DV , N EEDHAM D , AND H OCHMUTH RH . A novel micropipette method for measuring the bending modulus of vesicle membranes . Biophys J 67 : 720 – 727 , 1994 . 453 . Z HOU XL AND K UNG C . A mechanosensitive channel in Schizosac - charomyces pombe . EMBO J . 11 : 2869 – 2875 , 1992 . 454 . Z HOU XL , S TUMPF MA , H OCH HC , AND K UNG C . A mechanosensitive channel in whole cells and in membrane patches of the fungus Uromyces . Science 253 : 1415 – 1417 , 1991 . 454a . Z IGANSHIN AU , Z IGANSHINA LE , K ING BF , P INTOR J , AND B URNSTOCK G . Effects of P2 - purinoceptor antagonists on degradation of adenine nucleotides by ecto - nucleotidases in folliculated oocytes of Xeno - pus laevis . Biochem Pharmacol 51 : 897 – 901 , 1996 . 455 . Z ORATTI M AND P ETRONILLI V . Ion - conducting channels in a Gram - positive bacterium . FEBS Lett 240 : 105 – 109 , 1988 . 456 . Z ORATTI M , P ETRONILI V , AND S ZABO I . Stretch - activated composite ion channels in Bacillus subtilis . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 168 : 443 – 450 , 1990 . 457 . Z OREC R AND T ESTER M . Rapid pressure driven exocytosis - endocy - tosis cycle in a single plant cell : capacitance measurements in aleurone protoplasts . FEBS Lett 333 : 283 – 286 , 1993 . 458 . Z WAAL RFA AND S CHROIT AJ . Pathophysiologic implications of mem - brane phospholipid asymmetry in blood cells . Blood 89 : 1121 – 1132 , 1997 . 740 OWEN P . HAMILL AND BORIS MARTINAC Volume 81 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 6 on J une 2 0 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m