Skidmore College Creative Matter Mathematics Faculty Scholarship Mathematics 2017 Backlash against Gender Stereotype - violating Preschool Children Jessica Sullivan Skidmore College , jsulliv1 @ skidmore . edu Corinne Moss - Racusin Skidmore College , cmossrac @ skidmore . edu Michael J . Lopez Skidmore College , mlopez1 @ skidmore . edu Katherine Williams Skidmore College Follow this and additional works at : https : / / creativematter . skidmore . edu / math _ fac _ schol This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Mathematics at Creative Matter . It has been accepted for inclusion in Mathematics Faculty Scholarship by an authorized administrator of Creative Matter . For more information , please contact jluo @ skidmore . edu . Recommended Citation Sullivan J , Moss - Racusin C , Lopez M , Williams K ( 2018 ) Backlash against gender stereotype - violating preschool children . PLoS ONE 13 ( 4 ) : e0195503 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 RESEARCH ARTICLE Backlash against gender stereotype - violating preschool children Jessica Sullivan 1 * , Corinne Moss - Racusin 1 , Michael Lopez 2 , Katherine Williams 1 1 Departmentof Psychology , SkidmoreCollege , SaratogaSprings , United States of America , 2 Department of Mathematics , Skidmore College , SaratogaSprings , United States of America * jsulliv1 @ skidmore . edu Abstract While there is substantial evidence that adults who violate gender stereotypes often face backlash ( i . e . social and economic penalties ) , less is known about the nature of gender stereotypes for young children , and the penalties that children may face for violating them . We conducted three experiments , with over 2000 adults from the US , to better understand the content and consequences of adults’ gender stereotypes for young chil - dren . In Experiment 1 , we tested which characteristics adults ( N = 635 ) believed to be descriptive ( i . e . typical ) , prescriptive ( i . e . required ) , and proscriptive ( i . e . forbidden ) for preschool - aged boys and girls . Using the characteristics that were rated in Experiment 1 , we then constructed vignettes that were either ‘masculine’ or ‘feminine’ , and manipu - lated whether the vignettes were said to describe a boy or a girl . Experiment 2 ( N = 697 ) revealed that adults rated stereotype - violating children as less likeable than their stereo - type - conforming peers , and that this difference was more robust for boys than girls . Experiment 3 ( N = 731 ) was a direct replication of Experiment 2 , and revealed converg - ing evidence of backlash against stereotype - violating children . In sum , our results sug - gest that even young children encounter backlash from adults for stereotype violations , and that these effects may be strongest for boys . Introduction Psychologists Sandra and Daryl Bem famously sought to raise their children without the con - straints of gender stereotypes [ 1 ] . Specifically , the Bems encouraged both Jeremy and Emily to wear whatever clothes and accessories they loved , play with whatever toys were compelling to them , and behave in whatever ways felt natural , regardless of whether these things were typi - cally ascribed to girls or boys . Although this “gender aschematic” parenting was in some ways successful , the Bems also encountered roadblocks ( in the form of negative reactions from oth - ers ) that are emblematic of the strong role of gendered expectations in shaping the behavior of even very young children [ 1 ] . For example , in one much - shared anecdote , when Jeremy decided to wear pink barrettes to preschool , a male classmate taunted him repeatedly , claiming that “Jeremy must be a girl , not a boy , because ‘only girls wear barrettes’” [ 1 ] . This case study suggests that even very purposeful attempts to mitigate the early impact of gendered expecta - tions often encounter pushback from the broader culture . PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 1 / 24 a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111 OPEN ACCESS Citation : SullivanJ , Moss - Racusin C , LopezM , Williams K ( 2018 ) Backlash againstgender stereotype - violating preschoolchildren . PLoS ONE 13 ( 4 ) : e0195503 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 Editor : Andrew Soundy , University of Birmingham , UNITEDKINGDOM Received : August23 , 2017 Accepted : March 23 , 2018 Published : April 9 , 2018 Copyright : © 2018 Sullivanet al . This is an open access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproductionin any medium , provided the original authorand source are credited . Data Availability Statement : Data are available on the Open Science Framework here : https : / / osf . io / pwnxj / . Funding : This work was supported by start - up fundingprovided by Skidmore College to JS and CMR . The funders had no role in studydesign , data collection and analysis , decisionto publish , or preparationof the manuscript . Competinginterests : The authorshave declared that no competinginterestsexist . Indeed , within the first years of life , children develop increasingly rigid beliefs about the behaviors , preferences , and traits associated with particular genders ( see [ 2 – 16 ] ) . The internal - ization of these stereotypes can profoundly shape an individual’s goals and actions [ 17 ] . More generally , we know that children’s books convey strong messages about gender stereotypical behavior [ 18 ] , that parent - child play and conversation are impacted by both gender and gen - der stereotypes [ 19 – 22 ] , and that children often receive positive feedback when they conform to gender stereotypes [ 23 ] . One possible explanation for children’s development of strong gen - der stereotypes early in life is that structures in adult society provide strong cues to gender ste - reotypical behaviors [ 23 – 24 ] . However , this raises an additional question : what is the nature of adults’ gender stereotypes of children , and what are the consequences of these stereotypes ? In the present study , we investigated the nature and consequences of adults’ gender stereotypes about young children . There is strong evidence that adults penalize other adults who violate gender stereotypes [ 25 ] , raising the possibility that adults might also penalize children who violate gender stereo - types . In order to understand how such penalizations function , it is important to first clarify the content and nature of gender stereotypes about adults . In general , women are stereotyped as being communal ( e . g . , supportive , nurturing ) , while men are stereotyped as being agentic ( e . g . , independent , able to lead [ 26 ] ) . However , gender stereotypes take three distinct forms . Descriptive stereotypes describe how individuals of a particular gender are typically perceived . When an individual violates a descriptive gender stereotype , they are rarely penalized for doing so [ 27 ] ; instead , individuals may treat a descriptive stereotype - violating individual as an exception to the rule ( i . e . individuation ) , or may create a new subtype of their existing stereo - type to accommodate these new “data” ( i . e . sub - typing ; [ 28 – 29 ] ) . However , stereotypes can also be prescriptive ( what an individual should be like / do ; e . g . , [ 30 ] ) , as well as proscriptive ( what an individual should not be like / do ; [ 31 ] ) . In contrast to those who violate descriptive stereotypes , adults who violate prescriptive and proscriptive ste - reotypes often encounter backlash ( i . e . social and economic penalties [ 32 – 35 ] ) . Backlash mani - fests as prejudice ( i . e . social penalties , reflecting the fact that stereotype - violators are liked less than stereotype - conformers ) , and sometimes also discrimination ( i . e . economic penalties , as when stereotype - violators are less likely to be hired than stereotype - conformers ; [ 36 – 38 ] ) . Typically , although stereotype - violating individuals are acknowledged as equally competent relative to stereotype - conforming counterparts when their credentials are made clear , they still suffer social ( and sometimes economic ) penalties [ 25 ] . Indeed , while competence penalties are rare and economic penalties are not universal , social penalties ( e . g . , being rated as less likeable ) appear to be a consistent reaction to stereotype - violators [ 39 ] ) . Thus , dislike is the primary indicator of backlash . There is evidence of backlash against gender stereotype - violating adults across a host of contexts . For example , women encounter backlash when they violate gender stereotypes by seeking political office [ 40 ] , expressing anger [ 41 ] , or vying for a managerial role [ 39 ] . Although the majority of existing work has focused on backlash against stereotype - violating women , recent evidence suggests that stereotype - violating men encounter backlash as well . For example , men encounter backlash when they violate gender stereotypes by working in early elementary education [ 42 ] , requesting a family leave from work [ 43 ] , and behaving mod - estly on a job interview [ 44 ] . Indeed , stereotype - violating men may actually be more suscepti - ble to backlash than women [ 39 ] . Specifically , while women typically experience backlash only when displaying female - proscriptive traits ( but not when they fail to display female - prescrip - tive traits ) , men experience backlash when they display male - proscriptive traits and when they fail to display male - prescriptive traits [ 25 ] . Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 2 / 24 While we know a substantial amount about the content and consequences of gender stereo - types for adults , there is little experimental evidence of the content or consequences of adults’ gender stereotypes about children . There is some experimental evidence that adults treat infants and children who are labeled as girls differently from those who are labeled as boys ( [ 45 – 48 ] , but see [ 49 – 50 ] ) . For example , when shown a video of an infant reacting negatively to a stimulus , one study found that participants were more likely to label the infant’s reaction as anger if they believed the infant to be a boy , and fear if they believed it to be a girl ( [ 45 ] ; but see [ 49 , 51 ] ) . There is also some limited experimental evidence that adults treat gender stereotype - violat - ing children differently from stereotype - conforming children , and that this effect may be larg - est for stereotype - violating boys [ 52 – 54 ] . For example , boys labeled as “sissies , ” boys described as feminine , and boys described as playing with girls’ toys were rated as less acceptable than stereotype - violating girls [ 53 , 55 ] . Interestingly , adults also appear to be more likely to assume that stereotype - violating children are gay / lesbian , relative to stereotype - conforming individu - als , and this effect appears largest for stereotype - violating boys [ 55 – 56 ] . Further , adults respond more negatively to children when they were engaged in “cross - sex - preferred” activi - ties [ 20 , 53 – 54 ] . Despite the presence of several studies ( described above ) exploring the role of gender in shaping perceptions of children , there has been no systematic study of the traits that adults consider to be descriptive , prescriptive , and proscriptive for young boys and girls . More gener - ally , while we have anecdotal evidence [ 1 ] and limited experimental evidence [ 20 , 54 , 55 ] for backlash against gender stereotype - violating children , there has been no systematic investiga - tion of gender backlash against children by adults . Specifically , to our knowledge , none of the work investigating the consequences of gender - stereotype - violation in children has tested for evidence of backlash using the gold - standard methods typical in studies of backlash against gender stereotype - violating adults : by systematically manipulating , between - subjects , both ( a ) the nature of a target’s gendered behavior and ( b ) the target’s stated sex . Instead , parents’ spon - taneous interactions with their own children were coded [ 20 ] , or college students were asked explicitly e . g . , about the acceptability of being a “sissy” as a child , sometimes as part of a larger survey on gender stereotypes [ 54 – 55 ] . While these studies provide some of the first insights into adults’ judgments about gender - stereotype violating behavior in children , the small sam - ple sizes and restricted participant pool limit the conclusions that we can ( and should ) draw . Perhaps more importantly , demand characteristics and social desirability constraints may have impacted performance on these previous tasks , and the lack of a true experimental design limits our ability to draw conclusions about backlash against children . Given the current state of the literature , it is not immediately clear whether the content of gender stereotypes for children is similar to those for adults . That is , we do not yet know whether descriptive , prescriptive , and proscriptive stereotypes for children map onto those for adults , or whether adults might have different types of gendered expectations for children than for other adults . Further , it is not immediately apparent whether we should expect backlash against stereotype - violating children at all . On the one hand , because we know that adults experience gender backlash , it might be reasonable to assume that children will as well . On the other hand—at least in Western society—children are often thought of as needing protection , and their actions , even when failing to conform to cultural norms , frequently go unpenalized [ 57 ] . In addition , gender backlash is often most robust in cases where stereotype - violations dis - rupt existing power hierarchies ( e . g . , when women strive for power [ 38 ] ) . Because children’s stereotype - violations are unlikely to be viewed as posing a direct threat to the existing gender power hierarchy , children may be less likely than adults to encounter backlash for disconfirm - ing gender stereotypes . Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 3 / 24 Gaining a better understanding of the impact of gender stereotypes on young children is important for at least three reasons . First , there is correlational evidence that gender non - con - forming and non - binary adolescents are often bullied , and that this bullying increases mental distress and suicidality [ 58 – 59 ] ; gaining insight into the early obstacles that stereotype - violat - ing children may face is therefore of critical importance . Second , backlash against children may contribute to a vicious cycle , whereby those most likely to challenge existing stereotypes ( i . e . stereotype - violators ) are unwilling to do so , for fear of experiencing social [ 60 ] . As a result of gender backlash , the underlying gender stereotypes may then be reinforced , and applied to children as well as adults . Third , as described earlier , gender stereotypes are acquired early by children—understanding the ways in which adults enforce gender stereotypes may give insight into the mechanisms supporting the development of children’s gender cognition . Present study The present research contains three preregistered experiments designed to systematically test the content of descriptive , prescriptive , and proscriptive gender stereotypes for preschool - aged children ( Exp . 1 ) , and to determine whether preschoolers who violate gender stereotypes encounter backlash from adults ( Exps . 2 and 3 ) . To do this , we conducted three online studies , recruiting a total sample of over 2 , 000 English speakers located in the US . In Experiment 1 , we modified existing methods from the adult literature [ 38 ] to test which traits and behaviors adults consider to be descriptive , prescriptive , and proscriptive for three - year - old boys and girls . The results of Experiment 1 not only allowed us to provide novel insight into the content of gender stereotypes for young boys and girls , but also to construct rigorously controlled sti - muli to test for evidence of adults’ gender backlash against . Specifically , in Experiments 2 and 3 , we explored whether stereotype - violating children encounter backlash by presenting adults with three - year - old “applicants” for preschool—these applicants were labeled as either boys or girls , and were also described in short vignettes . These vignettes were either ’masculine’ ( con - taining male - descriptive , male - prescriptive , and female - proscriptive characteristics ) or ’femi - nine’ ( containing female - descriptive , female - prescriptive , and male - proscriptive characteristics ) . We then measured a host of indicators of gender backlash modified from the existing adult literature including the primary measure of backlash ( i . e . , the likeability of the applicant ) and other , potentially secondary measures ( e . g . , the applicant’s desirability as a stu - dent ; [ 25 ] ) , as well as novel indicators of backlash against children developed for the purposes of the current research . Experiment 1 Method Participants . Data were collected from 635 adults 18 years or older . All participants were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk . Any person who had completed between 100 and 10 , 000 prior HITs ( Human Intelligence Tasks on Amazon Mechanical Turk ) , had at least a 97 % approval rating for prior HITs , and was a fluent English speaker from the US was eligible to participate . Participants received $ 1 compensation for their participation in the study . Material and procedure . Participants completed the task independently on their own computer using the survey program Qualtrics ; we used Turk Prime to manage participant recruitment [ 61 ] . The study took an average of 9 minutes to complete , and included 96 ques - tions and two attention checks , displayed in random order across four pages . Upon consenting , participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions ; half of the participants were asked to rate how typical particular characteristics were ( reflecting descriptive judgements ) , and half were asked to rate how desirable particular characteristics Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 4 / 24 were ( reflecting prescriptive and proscriptive judgements ) . Additionally , half of the partici - pants were asked to rate the characteristics for 3 - year - olds girls , and half were asked to rate characteristics for 3 - year - old boys . Participants then saw the following instructions : “In this study , we are interested in your beliefs about 3 - year - old [ girls / boys ] . You will see some descriptions about [ girls / boys ] , and you will be asked to make judgments about them . Please think about what is [ desirable / typical ] for 3 - year - old [ girls / boys ] . ” Participants then provided ratings for each of the characteristics . To develop the list of char - acteristics to be rated , we first began with the adult literature [ 38 ] , and selected items that could be reasonably extended to children ; next , we added additional characteristics that were likely to be specific to children , as informed by the previous literature [ 62 ] , along with other characteristics that have been observed to be gendered ( full study materials available at : https : / / osf . io / 7rtca / ) . Of note , the list of characteristics used in this study contained many more behaviors ( e . g . , “cries often” ) and preferences ( e . g . , “likes to play with tools” ) than is typi - cal in adult research ( where most items are traits ; e . g . , “is sensitive to others’ needs” [ 38 ] ) ; also , we included clothing choices and choices of toys ( as these are important features of a child’s world and are frequently noted in studies of children’s gender development ) , even though such items would not typically be included in adult studies . At the top of each page , participants were reminded of the instructions for the task : “Indi - cate how [ desirable / typical ] it is in American society for a 3 - year - old [ girl / boy ] to possess each of the following characteristics . ” Participants responded on a scale ranging from 1 ( Not at all desirable / typical ) to 9 ( Very desirable / typical ) . We included two attention check items that embedded an instruction ( e . g . , “please select 9 so that you say strongly agree” ) within our typi - cal question frame ( e . g . , “How desirable is . . . ” ) , to ensure that participants were paying ade - quate attention . At the end of the study , participants were asked to identify themselves as Male or Female or say that they Preferred not to Answer . Participants also identified their race ( Black , Asian , American Indian / Alaska Native , Hawaiian Native / Pacific Islander , White , Two or more Races , Prefer not to answer ) . Participants had the option to skip any questions without penalty . At the end of the study , participants were fully debriefed and compensated . Results Data management . As outlined in our preregistration ( https : / / osf . io / za6ah / ) , participants who responded to < 80 % of the questions ( n = 45 ) were excluded . Any participant ( n = 28 ) who failed any one attention check question was also excluded . This left us with a final N = 562 . Participant race was self - reported as follows : White ( 80 % ) , Black ( 7 % ) , Other ( 7 % ) , Asian ( 3 % ) , American Indian ( 2 % ) , Hawaiian Native / Pacific Islander ( 1 % ) ; 50 % self - reported as male and 50 % as female . Analyses . The primary goal of Experiment 1 was to identify characteristics ( i . e . traits , behaviors , and preferences ) that were gender - stereotypical for young boys and girls ; our inten - tion from the outset was to use these characteristics in constructing vignettes for Experiments . 2 and 3 that would reflect gender stereotypic and counterstereotypic children . Specifically , we wanted to identify descriptive characteristics for each gender , in order to create vignettes that were matched on typicality . More importantly , we sought to identify which characteristics were prescriptive and proscriptive for girls and for boys . We began by identifying characteristics that were descriptive for boys and girls . To do so , for each characteristic , we conducted an independent samples t - test comparing ratings of typi - cality ( i . e . our descriptive scale ) for girls to ratings of typicality for boys ; we then calculated Cohen’s d in order to determine the effect size for each descriptive stereotype . In keeping with Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 5 / 24 our preregistration ( https : / / osf . io / q63ae / ) and prior research [ 38 ] , we classified characteristics as descriptive for a particular gender if they were rated above ‘6’ for typicality for that gender on our descriptive scale , with a | d | > . 4 when comparing ratings between the two genders . Table 1 shows the descriptive characteristics for boys and girls . There are several findings of note . First , for boys , the vast majority of descriptive characteristics were behaviors and prefer - ence . In contrast , half of the descriptive characteristics for girls were traits , and there were a large number of appearance - relevant characteristics . Second , nearly twice as many characteris - tics met the descriptivity threshold for boys ( n = 19 ) than for girls ( n = 10 ) . Third , 80 % of descriptive characteristics for girls were also either prescriptions for girls or proscriptions for boys , while only 57 . 8 % of male - descriptive characteristics were also pre - / proscriptions . Fourth , on the whole , the characteristics that were descriptive of boys were quite negative ; more than half of the characteristics had desirability ratings lower than the midpoint of the scale , and the average desirability rating of these descriptive characteristics was similarly below the midpoint of the scale ( M = 4 . 95 , SD = . 87 ) . In contrast , the descriptive characteristics for girls were quite positive : no characteristic was below the midpoint of the desirability scale , and the average desirability was quite high ( M = 6 . 53 , SD = . 81 ) . Next , we identified prescriptive and proscriptive characteristics for each sex by comparing ratings of desirability ( i . e . our prescriptive / proscriptive scale ) for girls to ratings of desirability for boys ; again , we calculated Cohen’s d in order to determine the prescriptive and proscriptive stereotype gender effect sizes for each characteristic . We identified each characteristic as pre - scriptive for a particular gender if it was rated above a ‘6’ on our desirability scale and there was a | d | > . 4 when comparing ratings for girls vs . boys . Table 2 shows the prescriptive charac - teristics for boys and girls . Similarly , characteristics were labeled as proscriptive for a particular Table 1 . Descriptive characteristics for girls ( left ) and boys ( right ) . Characteristic d Characteristic d Enjoys wearing skirts and dresses - 2 . 59 Plays with trucks 2 . 06 Likes princesses - 2 . 35 Likes to pretend to be a soldier 1 . 96 Loves pink - 2 . 13 Handsome 1 . 74 Wears Tutus - 2 . 03 Likes superheroes 1 . 61 Likes to play with dolls - 1 . 48 Likes to play with tools 1 . 37 Pretty - 0 . 61 Loves to get dirty 1 . 16 Gentle - 0 . 55 Dirty 0 . 998 Caring - 0 . 55 Rowdy 0 . 93 Emotional - 0 . 5 Has unbrushed hair 0 . 76 Sensitive Has a big appetite 0 . 7 Messy 0 . 61 Has bruised knees 0 . 6 Adventurous 0 . 959 Wears clothes that don’t match 0 . 53 Sometimes hits others 0 . 53 Doesn’t wait turn 0 . 46 Interrupts others 0 . 44 Refuses to pick up 0 . 43 Likes playing outside 0 . 42 Note : Positive d indicates characteristic was rated as more typical for boys and a negative d indicates characteristic was rated as more typical for girls . Bold indicates that the characteristic was prescriptive for that gender and / or proscriptive for the opposite gender . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 . t001 Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 6 / 24 gender if they were rated at or below a ‘4’ on our desirability scale and there was a | d | > . 4 when comparing ratings for girls vs . boys . There were relatively few proscriptive characteristics for girls ; in fact , unlike for adult women ( [ 38 ] ; see Table 2 ) , we only found three proscriptive traits for girls ( “is dirty , ” “has unbrushed hair , ” and “likes to pretend to be a soldier” ) . How - ever , for boys , we found 9 proscriptive traits ( Table 2 ) . Finally , we developed a list of ungendered traits such that ratings were as close to ‘5’ as pos - sible on the descriptive and prescriptive / proscriptive scales , and such that no | d | was greater than . 2 when comparing boys to girls ; this table is available in the Supplemental Online Materi - als ( [ S1 Text ] ; [ Gender Backlash Manuscript Supplementary Materials . docx ] ) . Of note—and perhaps surprisingly—a number of characteristics that are frequently discussed in the popular media as being gendered , were actually quite neutral in our study ( e . g . , bossy , anxious , ener - getic , disobedient , self - reliant ) . Experiment 1 discussion In Experiment 1 , we explored the content of adults’ gender stereotypes for three - year - old boys and girls . To do this , we asked participants to rate the typicality and desirability of characteris - tics for boys and girls . Consistent with the adult literature , we found a large number of Table 2 . Prescriptive and proscriptive characteristics for boys and girls . Characteristics Girls Boys Prescription De - d Pre - d Prescription De - d Pres - d Enjoys wearing skirts and dresses - 2 . 6 - 1 . 92 Handsome 1 . 74 1 . 51 Likes to play with dolls - 2 . 03 - 1 . 69 Plays with trucks 2 . 06 1 . 31 Likes princesses - 2 . 34 - 1 . 49 Likes to play with tools 1 . 37 1 . 17 Loves pink - 2 . 13 - 1 . 37 Likes to pretend to be a soldier 1 . 96 1 . 14 Wears Tutus - 2 . 03 - 1 . 34 Loves sports 1 . 09 0 . 87 Likes to wear nail polish - 1 . 68 - 1 . 17 Likes superheroes 1 . 61 0 . 86 Pretty - 1 . 48 - 1 . 15 Has a big appetite 0 . 7 0 . 66 Graceful - 0 . 73 - 0 . 69 Strong 0 . 31 0 . 59 Helps mom bake - 0 . 57 - 0 . 57 Tough 0 . 43 0 . 56 Gentle - 0 . 61 - 0 . 56 Adventurous 0 . 6 0 . 54 Sweet - 0 . 17 - 0 . 41 Loves to get dirty 1 . 16 0 . 54 Sensitive - 0 . 5 - 0 . 41 Brave 0 . 31 0 . 52 Likes playing outside 0 . 42 0 . 48 Proscriptive De - d Pro - d Proscriptive De - d Pro - d Likes to pretend to be a soldier 1 . 96 1 . 14 Enjoys wearing skirts and dresses - 2 . 6 - 1 . 92 Has unbrushed hair 0 . 76 0 . 55 Likes to play with dolls - 2 . 03 - 1 . 69 Dirty 1 0 . 4 Likes princesses - 2 . 34 - 1 . 49 Loves pink - 2 . 13 - 1 . 37 Wears Tutus - 2 . 03 - 1 . 34 Likes to wear nail polish - 1 . 68 - 1 . 17 Pretty - 1 . 48 - 1 . 15 Fragile - 0 . 56 - 0 . 55 Pays attention to what other people are wearing - 0 . 74 - 0 . 43 Characteristics are listed in order of largest prescriptive / proscriptive d to smallest . Positive d indicates characteristic was rated as more typical , desirable or forbidden for boys . Negative d indicates characteristic was rated as more typical , desirable or forbidden for girls . Descriptives that were prescriptive for one gender and proscriptive for opposite genders appear in bold . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 . t002 Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 7 / 24 prescriptive and descriptive traits for both boys and girls . In an interesting divergence from the adult literature , we found relatively few proscriptive traits for children , particularly for girls ( indeed , there were only three : dirty , has unbrushed hair , and likes to pretend to be a soldier ) . The paucity of proscriptive characteristics for girls may suggest that adults are somewhat more tolerant of deviations from gender - stereotypical behavior from girls than they are from adult women or from young boys . However , such interpretations should be made with caution—as described earlier , our initial list of characteristics differed substantially from the lists typically administered to assess stereotypes about adults . More generally , even comparisons between the number of male vs . female proscriptions in our dataset should be done with caution ; for example , more than half of proscriptions were about the child’s appearance ; however , an inspection of the list of characteristics tested shows that we tested more items related to girls’ appearance than to boys’ , and this could have caused such an asymmetry . Thus , while sugges - tive , we urge caution in interpreting the relative lengths of the lists of descriptive , prescriptive , and proscriptive characteristics . Most importantly , we were able to use these ratings to develop a list of characteristics that were prescriptive and proscriptive for boys and girls , and these characteristics formed the basis of our stimuli in Experiments 2 and 3 . Experiments 2 and 3 The purpose of Experiments 2 and 3 was to test for evidence of backlash against stereotype - violating children . Experiment 3 is a direct replication of Experiment 2 : Conducting direct rep - lications can increase the precision of effect estimates , while also allowing us to assess the robustness of our main findings [ 63 – 65 ] . Because the methods and analyses were identical across experiments , and the findings highly similar , we report Experiments 2 and 3 together , and make all materials available online on the Open Science Framework ( OSF ; Exp 2 : https : / / osf . io / q63ae / ; Exp . 3 : https : / / osf . io / pwnxj / ) . In Experiments 2 and 3 , we constructed ’feminine’ and ’masculine’ vignettes ( described below ) , and paired them with preschool applications for boys and girls . Thus , we orthogonally manipulated applicant sex ( male vs . female ) and vignette type ( ’masculine’ vs . ’feminine’ ) , such that participants could see a stereotype - conforming girl ( feminine girl ) , a stereotype conform - ing boy ( masculine boy ) , a stereotype - violating girl ( masculine girl ) , or a stereotype - violating boy ( feminine boy ) . We refer to these vignettes as ’feminine’ and ’masculine’ for ease of read - ability . However , from a theoretical perspective , it might be more appropriate to think of the ’masculine’ vignettes as instead being ‘unfeminine’ ( in that they contain traits that are descrip - tive of boys , prescriptive for boys , and proscriptive for girls ) . Similarly , it might be more appro - priate to think of the ’feminine’ vignettes as being ‘masculine’ ( because they contain characteristics that are descriptive of girls , prescriptive for girls , and proscriptive for boys ) . The goal of these experiments was to test for evidence of backlash against gender noncon - forming three - year - olds . At the outset , based on the adult literature , we had two main hypoth - eses . First , consistent with past literature showing that gender stereotype - violating individuals are reliably rated as less likeable than similar stereotype - conforming targets ( see [ 39 , 66 ] ) , we hypothesized that we would find evidence of gender backlash when measuring an applicant’s likeability . In particular , we expected that stereotype - violating individuals would be rated as less likeable than identical stereotype - conforming individuals . In this experimental context , such an effect would manifest as an interaction of sex and vignette on ratings of likeability . We also hypothesized that , consistent with the literature on backlash against adults ( e . g . , [ 25 , 38 , 66 ] ) , because children’s competence was clearly communicated , there would be no effect of applicant sex or vignette type on perceptions of children’s competence . For the Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 8 / 24 remaining outcome variables , there was not sufficient pre - existing literature to warrant specific a priori predictions . Therefore , we examined whether there were effects of the target child’s sex , vignette type , and / or their interaction on ratings of admissibility to preschool ( our con - ceptual analogue of “hireability” in the adult literature ) , the amount of scholarship offered to the child , willingness to interact with the child , moral outrage regarding the child , and percep - tions of the child’s parents . Method Timeline and preregistration . We collected data for Experiment 3 in June of 2017 , 2 month after completing data collection for Experiment 2 ( which was collected in April , 2017 ) , and thus Experiments 2 and 3 were preregistered separately ( https : / / osf . io / zudta / and https : / / osf . io / 2yu3b / ) . Participants . Data were collected from 697 ( Exp . 2 ) and 731 ( Exp . 3 ) adults from the United States , aged 18 years or older , on Amazon Mechanical Turk . Recruitment procedure , criteria , and compensation were as in Exp . 1 . Material and procedure . Participants completed the task independently on their own computer using the web survey program Qualtrics ; we used Turk Prime to manage participant recruitment [ 61 ] . The study took an average of 11 . 5 minutes to complete , and included 57 questions and 2 attention checks . Participant consent was obtained as in Experiment 1 . Participants were instructed that they would read an actual application “of a child who recently applied to a daycare / preschool with limited space available , ” and that they were going to be asked to evaluate and provide feedback for the child . As in previous work , we noted that that their honest opinion was requested ( adapted from [ 67 ] ) . To ensure comprehension of the task at hand , these instructions were broken into four paragraphs ; after each paragraph , the participant was asked to answer a comprehension question ( https : / / osf . io / q63ae / for full mate - rials ) . Participants who did not answer a comprehension question were reminded to answer it ; those who responded incorrectly to the comprehension questions were excluded ( described below ) . After participants demonstrated their comprehension of the task at hand , they saw the fol - lowing instructions : “Below is the actual application of a child who recently applied to a day - care / preschool with limited space available . Please read the applicant’s profile carefully . You will be asked questions about the child . ” Participants were then randomly assigned to view one of four profiles as part of our 2 ( sex : boy , girl ) x 2 ( vignette : masculine , vignette ) between - sub - jects design . Participants either learned ( through the child’s name , pronouns , and noted sex ) that the child was a boy or a girl . We selected the names ( Jennifer vs . Jonathan ) because they had been previously rated similarly on a host of measures [ 68 ] , allowing us to focus on effects of sex ( and not of , for example , name - based biases ) . Participants were then exposed to vignettes ( supposedly constructed from note from a previous teacher ) demonstrating the child’s behavior as either ’feminine’ or ’masculine’ . We designed our vignettes by relying on the norming data from Experiment 1 . First , both vignettes contained the neutral characteristic “clever” ( descriptive d = - . 07 ; pre / proscriptive d = . 08 ) The ’feminine’ vignette also contained 1 female - descriptive characteristic ( “sensitive” ) , 1 female - prescriptive and male - proscriptive characteristic ( “loves playing with dolls” ) , and 1 male - proscriptive characteristic ( “pays attention to the outfits that other people are wearing” ) . The ’masculine’ vignette contained 1 male - descriptive characteristic ( “strong” ) , 1 male - pre - scriptive and female - proscriptive characteristic ( “loves pretending to be a soldier” ) , and 1 female - proscriptive characteristic ( “has unbrushed hair” ) . Within the constraints of the char - acteristics rated in Experiment 1 , we constructed these vignettes to be as closely matched as Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 9 / 24 possible thematically ( soldiers vs . dolls ; sensitive vs . strong ; unbrushed hair vs . pays attentions to outfits ) . We also aimed to equate the vignettes as much as possible based on the ratings pro - vided in Exp . 1 . To do this , we computed the average typicality and desirability ratings for the characteristics included in each vignette ; this allowed us to ensure that one vignette was not wildly more positive or normative than the other . The mean typicality and desirability of the traits in the ’feminine’ vignette ( 5 . 12 typical , 5 . 14 desire ) was similar to the ’masculine’ vignette ( 5 . 04 typical , 5 . 05 desire ) ; similarly , the mean effect size ( for boy vs . girl comparisons from Exp . 1 ) for the descriptive and pre / proscriptive traits was comparable for the ’feminine’ ( 1 . 09 descriptive , . 85 pre / proscriptive ) and ’masculine’ ( . 85 descriptive , . 76 pre / proscriptive ) vignettes . The vignettes were as follows : “ [ Jennifer / Jonathan ] is a healthy three - year - old [ girl / boy ] who [ absolutely loves playing with dolls ] / [ loves pretending to be a soldier ] . [ He / She ] frequently [ pays attention to the outfits that other people are wearing ] / [ has unbrushed hair ] . When asked to list the two adjectives that best described [ Jennifer / Jonathan ] , the adjectives that [ his / her ] previous teacher provided were “ [ sensitive ] / [ strong ] ” and “clever . ”” After viewing the vignettes , participants evaluated the applicant by responding to questions on a likert scale ranging from 1 ( not at all ) to 7 ( very much ) . Within each page , the order of the scales and questions within scales were randomized , although the order of pages within the survey was fixed . On the first page , participants were asked about the applicant’s : likeability ( n = 4 questions ; Cronbach’s alpha = . 88 Exp2 ; . 89 Exp3 ; e . g . , “How much do you think this child’s teachers would like this child ? ” ) , competence ( n = 5 questions ; Cronbach’s alpha = . 94 Exp2 / 3 ; e . g . , “To what extent do you think this child would do well in this school ? ” ) , and “admissibil - ity” ( n = 3 questions ; Cronbach’s alpha = . 85 Exp2 ; . 84 Exp3 ; e . g . , “How likely do you think it is that the child was actually accepted into the daycare to which they applied ? ” ) . On the next page , they were asked how much of a scholarship they would give to the appli - cant : “If you had the option of giving this applicant a scholarship to attend daycare / preschool , how much of a scholarship would you give ? ” , and they indicated their answer on $ 0 - $ 1000 sliding scale ( $ 0 = no scholarship ; $ 1000 = full scholarship ) . Participants also made judgments about their willingness to interact with the applicant ( n = 3 questions ; Cronbach’s alpha = . 79 Exp2 ; . 76 Exp3 ; e . g . , “If you had a three year old child , how likely would you be to invite this child over for a playdate ? ” ) , their moral outrage at the applicant ( n = 3 questions ; Cronbach’s alpha = . 94 Exp2 ; . 93 Exp3 ; e . g . , “To what extent would you describe this child’s behavior as mor - ally wrong ? ” ) , and their perceptions of the applicant’s parents ( n = 6 questions ; Cronbach’s alpha = . 82 Exp2 ; . 84 Exp3 ; e . g . , “To what extent did you think that this child’s parents were doing a good job raising them ? ” ) . Next , participants were asked to guess the purpose of the study ( “Please summarize , to the best of your ability , the purpose of this study” ) and were then presented with two measures of their recall of the applicant’s profile ( “What was the applicant’s gender ? [ boy , girl , do not recall ] ” ; “What was the applicant’s age ? [ 3 , 4 , do not recall ] ” ) . They were then asked to freely respond to the following question : “What do you remember about the applicant’s play - time activities ? ” . On the next page , participants were asked to make inferences about the child’s gender and sexuality ( Antill , 1987 ; Martin , 1990 ) . First , participants were asked : “If you had to guess , do you believe that this child is gay / lesbian ? [ Yes , No , Not Possible to Tell ] ” . Second , participants were asked : “If you had to guess , do you believe that this child is transgender ? [ Yes , No , Not Possible to Tell ] ” . Next , participants continued to the Participant Characteristics portion , for which they saw the following : “Now , you will answer questions about yourself . ” Participants completed the Modern Sexism Scale 1 – 7 ( e . g . , “Discrimination against women is no longer a problem in the Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 10 / 24 United States . ” ; 1 = not at all ; 7 = very much ; [ 69 ] ) , an experience with infants and kids scale ( e . g . , “How much experience have you had with INFANTS ( 18 months or under ) in the last 5 years ? ” ; [ 45 ] ) , and the same demographic questionnaire ( asking participants to self - report race and gender ) from Experiment 1 . They were also asked to identify their political orientation on a 7 - point scale , their teacher status ( Teacher , Never Teacher ) , and their parenting status ( Par - ent , Never Parent ) . After completing all evaluation measures , participants were asked to note any questions , comments , or concerns they had about their participation or the task itself . At the end of the study participants were debriefed and fully compensated . Results Data management . We excluded a total of 59 Exp2 / 95 Exp3 participants , leaving final Ns = 595 Exp2 / 636 Exp3 . As planned in our preregistrations ( https : / / osf . io / zudta / and https : / / osf . io / 2yu3b ) participants were excluded for the following reasons : failure to complete at least 80 % of the experiment ( n = 21 Exp2 / 36 Exp3 ) , failure to demonstrate understanding of experimental instructions as indicated by at least 1 incorrect response for our task - comprehension questions ( n = 25 Exp2 / 26 Exp3 ) , failure of one or more attention checks ( n = 12 Exp2 / 29 Exp3 ) . One partici - pant in Experiment 2 was excluded because they reported not having been able to see our experimental vignette ; four participants in Exp . 3 were excluded for guessing the purpose of the study . There were no trial - level exclusions , and recall of vignettes was strong : 98 . 9 % of par - ticipants recalled the applicant’s Sex and 98 . 1 % of participants recalled the applicant’s age ( rec - ollection of sex / age was not an exclusion criterion ) . Our participants were 78 Exp2 / 75 . 8 Exp3 % White ( 8 . 1 Exp2 / 7 . 7 Exp3 % Black ; 5 . 9 Exp2 / 7 . 9 % Asian ; < 5 % each “American Indian / Alaska Native” , “Hawaiian Native / Pacific Islander” , “Other / pre - fer not to answer” , and “Two or more races” ) . We had not specified in our preregistration for Experiment 2 how we would analyze race , although we did in Experiment 3 : Consistent with previous research ( e . g . , [ 70 ] ) , we recoded race as “White” vs . “Person of color , ” and omitted participants who selected ‘Other / prefer not to answer’ from only analyses that include race as a factor . Among our participants , 51 . 9 Exp2 / 53 . 6 Exp3 % of identified themselves as Female ( < 1 % failed to identify or identified as “Other” ) . As planned in both Experiments , we also omitted participants who identified their gender as ‘Other / prefer not to answer’ only from analyses that included participant gender as a factor . Just over 52 Exp2 / 50 Exp3 % of participants identified themselves as parents , while 47 . 9 Exp2 / 49 . 8 Exp3 % identified themselves as “Never a parent” ; 13 . 1 Exp2 / 14 . 6 Exp3 % of our participants identified as teachers . For 97 Exp2 / 96 . 3 Exp3 % of partici - pants , English was a first language , and 95 . 6 Exp2 / 94 . 1 Exp3 % of participants reported having been born in the United States . On a 1 – 7 scale ( 1 being extremely liberal , 7 being extremely conservative ) , our participants had an average score of 3 . 42 Exps2and3 ; on a scale of 0 – 10 ( 0 being no contact with infants / children ; 10 being large amounts of contact with infants / chil - dren ) , our participants had an average score of 5 . 62 Exp2 / 5 . 74 Exp3 ; on a scale of 1 – 7 ( 1 reflecting low levels of modern sexism and 7 reflecting high levels of modern sexism ) , our participants had an average score of 3 . 14 Exp2 / 3 . 21 Exp3 on the Modern Sexism Scale . We constructed scales in keeping with our preregistrations by taking the average rating for the items within each scale ( reverse coding when relevant ) ; we did not remove any outliers . Analyses . Our analyses are as planned in our preregistrations ( https : / / osf . io / zudta / and https : / / osf . io / 2yu3b ) , unless otherwise noted . Our main goal was to test for backlash against preschool applicants . If children experience gender backlash , then stereotype - violating chil - dren whose sex differs from their gendered actions ( i . e . girls who are described as masculine , and boys who are described as feminine ) will be rated more negatively than the identical Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 11 / 24 stereotype - conforming children ( i . e . girls who are described as feminine , and boys who are described as masculine ) . To this end , we submitted each dependent variable to a 2 ( applicant Sex ) X 2 ( vignette type : ’feminine’ , ’masculine’ ) ANOVA , in order to detect an interaction of Sex and vignette . As planned at the outset , we explored the direction of effects using Tukey’s HSD , and used a critical cut - off of . 05 for these analyses , since Tukey’s HSD is a conservative test that adjusts for multiple comparisons . Consistent with previous work in this area ( e . g . , [ 38 ] ) , in Experiment 2 we did not establish a plan for controlling for false discovery rate ( FDR ) , instead specifying in our preregistration an alpha of 0 . 05 for each of our analyses . However , given the large number of primary and sec - ondary effects included in our design , we invited a statistician co - author to join our research team , and made the decision ( after collecting Experiment 2 data but prior to preregistering or collecting data for Experiment 3 ) to control our Type - I error rate using the Benjamini - Hoch - berg ( B - H ) criteria to determine significance [ 71 – 72 ] . As such , we deviated from our preregis - tration for Experiment 2 ( but not for Experiment 3 ) in this regard . The B - H method of controlling the FDR is straightforward to implement , and has previously been proposed as a useful statistical tool in the educational and psychological literatures [ 73 – 75 ] . Specifically , we tallied the number of p - values for each Experiment that we planned to calculate in our two sets of analyses : ( 1 ) our main analyses , which tested only for the effects of Sex and vignette ( and their interaction ) on ratings ( n = 21 ) ; and ( 2 ) our analyses that aimed to detect a three - way - interaction of Sex , vignette , and Participant Characteristics on ratings ( n = 49 ) . For each set of analyses , we divided . 05 by the number of analyses ( e . g . , . 05 / 21 ) and constructed ordered quantiles such that the upper bound of quantile n was ( . 05 / 21 ) (cid:3) n ( e . g . , the upper bound of the 1st quantile was . 00238 , for the 2nd it was . 0047 , for the 21st it was . 05 ) . We then ordered the p - values that resulted from our analyses from smallest to largest , and compared each p - value to its rank - matched quantile ( such that n th smallest p - value was compared to the critical value represented by the upper bound of the n th quantile ) . As such , we treat only those analyses for which the p - values fell below the Benjamini - Hochberg threshold as meeting our significance criteria . For the sake of comparison to previous literature ( which typically has used a cutoff of . 05 ) , we report additional p - values in the SOM [ S1 Text ] , and make our dataset , analysis code , and analysis outputs freely available for this and all analyses analysis at our OSF site ( https : / / osf . io / pwnxj / ) In our preregistration for Experiment 3 , we described our criteria for replicating a particu - lar effect across experiments as being the overlap of 95 % CIs . As a supplement , we added un - preregistered analyses to estimate effect sizes across Experiments 2 and 3 using the single paper meta - analysis ( SPM ) approach proposed by McShane and Bo¨ckenholt [ 76 ] . SPM is designed to aggregate information from multiple studies produced using identical sets of con - ditions and outcomes to estimate a single effect size . Given the number of variables in our study , SPM will often be preferable for identifying our best estimate of true effect sizes , in place of providing intervals from both experiments in the main text ( these are available in our analyses and code ; in no case does SPM give meaningfully different outcomes than emerged from a simple interval comparison ) . While not relevant to our question of backlash , we first explored the presence ( or absence ) of simple effects of sex and vignette type . Sex and vignette - level analyses revealed an overall preference for female applicants and , to a lesser extent , ’feminine’ vignettes . Fig 1 highlights average sex - differences calculated using SPM . In Fig 1 , each point roughly reflects a weighted average of the sex - or vignette - level differences observed in both Experiments 2 and 3 , with weights proportional to the number of respondents . At the 0 . 05 level , the six dependent vari - ables shown in Fig 1 differed by sex , with four differences ( Likeability , Admissibility , Compe - tence , Willingness to interact ) significant after controlling for FDR using the B - H adjustment . Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 12 / 24 In other words , girls were viewed as more likeable , hireable , competent , and were more likely to inspire adults to interact with them relative to identical boys , regardless of the child’s behav - ior . Ratings on our Willingness to interact and Parent Perception scales were also significantly higher for ’feminine’ vignettes than for ’masculine’ vignettes . Our primary measure of interest was likeability—as has been previously noted ( Moss - Racu - sin , 2014 ) , likeability has been identified as the most critical and consistent indicator of back - lash against stereotype violators . Consistent with this , we found interactions of sex and vignette in Experiment 2 ( p < . 0001 , η 2 = . 04 ) and Experiment 3 ( p = . 04 , η 2 = . 007 ) , the former of which met our B - H cutoff for significance . The magnitudes ( with 50 % and 95 % intervals ) for backlash ( likeability ) are visualized in Fig 2 , which shows estimates from Experiment 2 and Experiment 3 , as well as the SPM estimate . As described in our preregistration for Experiment 3 , the overlapping 95 % CIs met our criteria for replication of findings across experiments . For visualization purposes , differences in Fig 2 reflect the change in average likeability score for each sex when assigned a vignette of the opposite gender ( about 0 . 6 lower , averaged across the two experiments ) , relative to what we’d expect given sex and vignette averages alone . If there were no likeability backlash effects , we’d expect estimated differences near 0 . The direc - tions of the estimates in Fig 2 reflect the reference group choices for sex and vignette ; our find - ings can also be interpreted to mean that children whose vignette matched their sex scored about 0 . 6 higher on the likeability scale . We next used Tukey’s HSD to conduct pairwise comparisons for the four cells of our design ( Boy vs . Girl x ’Feminine’ vs . ’Masculine’ ) . Analyses for each Experiment separately are avail - able in the SOM [ S1 Text ] and at our repository linked to above ; because the combined dataset likely provides our best estimation of the size and direction of our effects , we report Tukey’s HSD for the combined dataset here . Stereotype - conforming girls were rated as significantly more likeable than stereotype - violating girls ( p = . 001 , d = . 30 ) and than stereotype - violating boys ( p < . 0001 , d = . 55 ) . Also consistent with backlash against stereotype - violators , we found Fig 1 . Single paper meta - analysis ( SPM ) estimated change in response for ( a ) girls ( relative to boys ) and ( b ) ’feminine’ vignettes ( relative to ’masculine’ ) , shown with 50 % and 95 % confidence intervals . Scholarship conferral is not shown as it was measured on a different scale . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 . g001 Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 13 / 24 that stereotype - conforming boys were rated as significantly more likeable than stereotype - vio - lating boys ( p = . 004 , d = . 27 ) . Finally , consistent with evidence from the adult literature [ 77 ] , there was evidence that girls were , overall , more likeable than boys : stereotype - conforming girls were rated as more likeable than stereotype - conforming boys ( p = . 002 , d = . 28 ) , and ste - reotype - violating girls were rated as more likeable than stereotype - violating boys ( p = . 008 , d = . 26 ) . As has been previously reported in adults , measures of Competence typically do not show evidence of backlash in cases where competence was clearly demonstrated in each applicant profile [ 25 , 38 , 66 ] . Consistent with this , we found no backlash effects for competence ( all unadjusted p > . 05 , see SOM [ S1 Text ] for full statistical reporting ) . We next assessed ratings of admissibility . Diverging from the adult literature [ 34 ] , we found no evidence of admissibility backlash in either of our experiments ( all unadjusted p > . 05 ) . We next considered several variables that were new to our study ; because these variables had not previously been studied in adult backlash work , we did not make strong a priori pre - dictions about them , but instead included them in our study on the logic that they would be Fig 2 . Likeability backlash effect estimates in Experiment 2 ( original ) and 3 ( replication ) , as well as the single paper meta - analysis ( SPM ) estimate of the true effect ( 50 % and 95 % intervals also shown ) . The scale of the response corresponds to the average change in Likeability rating when assigned a vignette of the opposite gender , relative to expectations given sex and vignette averages alone . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 . g002 Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 14 / 24 useful for understanding the ways in which backlash against stereotype - violating preschoolers might manifest . Across both experiments , there were was no evidence of backlash for Scholar - ship Conferral , Moral Outrage , Willingness to Interact , or Perceptions of Parents ( all unad - justed p > . 05 ) . Thus far , our data revealed evidence of backlash against stereotype - violating boys and girls with respect to the critical likeability outcome . However , Experiment 2 revealed multiple examples of backlash effects interacting with Participant Characteristics ( see SOM [ S1 Text ] ) . We had not anticipated this possibility at the outset of our study , largely because participant - level demographics rarely impact backlash against stereotype - violators ( e . g . , [ 25 , 39 , 66 ] ) . Thus , we deviated from our preregistration for Experiment 2 ( although not from our preregis - tration for Experiment 3 ) in another important way , by analyzing the effects of Participant Characteristics ( Race , Male / Female , Teacher Status , Parent Status , Political Orientation , Mod - ern Sexism Score ) variables which initially showed no initial evidence of backlash ( Moral Out - rage , Competence , Admissibility , Perceptions of Parents , Willingness to Interact , and Scholarship Conferral ) in addition to the variable which did show evidence of backlash ( Like - ability ) . These analyses were post - hoc and exploratory for Experiment 2 , and confirmatory for Experiment 3 . We constructed models estimating Moral Outrage , Competence , Admissibility , Perceptions of Parents , Likeability , Willingness to Interact , and Scholarship Conferral from Sex , vignette , each Participant Characteristic , and their interaction ; for this analysis , we were primarily inter - ested in the three - way interaction of Sex , vignette , and Participant Characteristic . Using SPM and accounting for FDR using the B - H criteria , seven sex (cid:3) vignette (cid:3) Participant Characteristic interactions emerged when combining Experiments 2 and 3 . Each of these three - way interactions are shown via lines of best fit in Fig 3 ( shown with fit uncertainty ) . For all of these interactions , the direction was such that backlash effects on likeability ratings were larger for politically conservative individuals and for individuals who scored higher on the modern sexism scale . By and large , these effects seemed driven by ratings of feminine boys , shown in Fig 3 using the dark , undotted lines . The interactions depicted include sex (cid:3) vignet - te (cid:3) sexism ( with Likeability : p = . 005 , η 2 = . 007 ; Perceptions of Parents : p < . 0001 , η 2 = . 015 ; Willingness to Interact : p < . 0001 , η 2 = . 013 ) , and sex (cid:3) vignette (cid:3) political orientation ( shown with Likeability : p = . 005 , η 2 = . 007 ; Perceptions of Parents : p < . 0001 , η 2 = . 017 ; Willingness to Interact : p < . 0001 , η 2 = . 0096 ; Competence : p = . 001 , η 2 = . 009 ) . For each of these seven inter - actions , corresponding intervals between Experiment’s 2 and 3 were near perfect overlaps ( see SOM [ S1 Text ] ) . Using the B - H criteria , there were no 3 - way interactions for any dependent variables when participant gender , participant race , experience with children , participant parent - status , or participant teacher - status were added to the model ( but see our full dataset / analyses and SOM [ S1 Text ] for cases meeting traditional significance thresholds , but not B - H thresholds ) . As reported in our SOM , there were also no interactions in models estimating scholarship confer - ral , admissibility , or moral outrage . We also measured whether participants believed that the applicant was ( a ) transgender and / or ( b ) gay / lesbian . The analyses below were exploratory in Experiment 2 and confirma - tory in Experiment 3 . While the vast majority of participants either said that the applicant was not transgender ( 40 . 7 Exp2 / 40 . 9 Exp3 % ) and not gay / lesbian ( 33 . 4 Exp2 / 34 . 1 Exp3 % ) or that it was not possible to tell ( Transgender : 58 . 3 % Exps2and3 , Gay / Lesbian : 61 . 8 Exp2 / 63 . 5 Exp3 % ) , a subset asserted that the child was transgender ( n Exp2 = 6 ; n Exp3 = 5 ) or gay / lesbian ( n Exp2 = 28 ; n Exp3 = 15 ) . Using Fisher’s Exact Test to compare rates of “yes” vs . “no” responses , we found that in Experiment 2 , only feminine boys were ever described as transgender or gay ( simulated p - values < 0 . 001 ) . In Experiment 3 , we similarly found that feminine boys were more likely to be Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 15 / 24 described as transgender ( p = . 03 ) and gay ( p < . 001 ) compared to any other group . These data are consistent with at least two previous studies [ 55 – 56 ] in which stereotype - violating boys Fig 3 . Participant characteristics (cid:3) Sex (cid:3) Vignette interactions . Higher values on the x - axis indicate higher levels of political conservatism or sexism . Shading represents fit confidence . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 . g003 Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 16 / 24 were more likely to be rated as gay than were stereotype - violating girls or stereotype - conform - ing individuals . Experiments 2 and 3 discussion In Experiments 2 and 3 , we asked whether there was evidence of backlash against gender ste - reotype - violating three - year - olds . We had four main findings . First , across several of our mea - sures , girls were rated more favorably than boys , and ’feminine’ vignettes were rated more favorably than ’masculine’ vignettes . While these findings do not speak directly to gender backlash , they suggest that in our experimental context , there was some evidence of a “women are wonderful” effect [ 77 ] . Second , we found that , like adults , three - year - olds who violate gen - der stereotypes are rated as less likeable that three - year - olds who conform to gender stereo - types . Third , we found that , unlike in previous work ( for a discussion , see [ 66 ] ) , political orientation and scores on the modern sexism scale are linked to backlash effects . Finally , we found that , across a host of measures , stereotype - violating boys were penalized the most . General discussion The present study represents one of the first efforts to experimentally determine the content of gender - stereotypes for young children , and to test for evidence of backlash from adults against children who violate those stereotypes . To do this , in Experiment 1 , we first measured adults’ beliefs about which characteristics are descriptive , prescriptive , and proscriptive for young boys and girls . We then used the characteristics that were rated as descriptive , prescriptive , and proscriptive for each sex to constructed short vignettes aimed at capturing ’feminine’ and ’masculine’ characteristics . In Experiments 2 and 3 , we presented participants with these ’femi - nine’ and ’masculine’ vignettes , and , critically , manipulated whether the vignette was attrib - uted to a three - year - old girl or a three - year - old boy . We then asked whether adults penalized gender - stereotype violating children . Our main finding was that three - year - old children , like adults [ 25 , 38 ] , experience gender backlash from adults . Specifically , children who violate gender stereotypes were rated by adults as less likeable than their stereotype - conforming peers . Most striking was the difference in likeability between feminine boys and feminine girls : when displaying identical ( feminine ) characteristics , boys were rated as substantially less likeable than girls . While the size of the backlash effect on likeability was smaller in Experiment 3 than Experiment 2 ( suggesting some attenuation towards the null ) , using both our preregistered criteria of overlapping confidence intervals and single paper meta - analytic techniques [ 76 ] , evidence of gender backlash with respect to likeability persisted . There were several other ways in which our findings for children mirrored previous research on backlash against stereotype - violating adults . First , we found evidence of backlash from adults against feminine boys . Both early work [ 52 , 54 – 56 ] and more recent cross - cultural work ( e . g . , [ 78 ] ) suggests that boys may be most likely to be penalized for violating gender ste - reotypes , and the current work supports this finding ( but see [ 79 ] ) . Specifically , we found that feminine boys were rated as least likeable ( relative to all other target children ) , and when back - lash emerged , it appeared to be more extreme for feminine boys than for masculine girls . This extends previous work in a substantial way by demonstrating that in carefully controlled experimental contexts , feminine boys experience uniquely robust social penalties from adults . Second , we found that , consistent with previous work [ 77 ] , there was evidence of a “women are wonderful” effect in children : girls , and especially feminine girls , were generally rated more positively by adults than all other targets in our experimental context . In fact , this work shows the first ( to our knowledge ) evidence of a “girls are wonderful” effect , consistent with the Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 17 / 24 established “women are wonderful” effect in the literature . Why might this be ? There are at least three possibilities ( not mutually exclusive with one another ) . One possibility is that , con - sistent with existing theories of the “women are wonderful” effect , in cases where existing power structure are not threatened by women , girls are evaluated positively [ 80 ] . In other words , because our target children were 3 - year - olds , their characteristics may not have been viewed as potentially threatening to existing power structure , resulting in a “girls are wonder - ful” effect . A second possibility is that our data actually show a “boys are bad” effect [ 81 ] . Previ - ous research has shown that when presented with another child’s ambiguous actions , school - aged children tend to assume boys to be bad [ 81 ] ; consistent with this , more than half of the descriptive characteristics for boys found in Experiment 1 were negative ( e . g . , interrupts oth - ers , refuses to pick up ) , and , on average , boys’ descriptive characteristics were rated as undesir - able . In contrast , none of the descriptive characteristics for girls were rated as undesirable . A final possibility is that the school - related framing of our study encouraged higher ratings for girls and femininity . Specifically , our experiment was framed in terms of preschool admissions , and previous work has shown that childhood educational spaces are typically perceived as fem - inine . For example , there is evidence of backlash against men who want to be teachers [ 42 ] . It may be the case that by describing the targets as preschool applicants , we established a context in which girls and feminine characteristics would be prioritized . To test this possibility , future researchers should test for evidence of backlash against children in contexts like competitive sports , where boys and masculine characteristics are traditionally more valued . While we found evidence that stereotype - violating children , like adults , experience backlash from adults , our present study revealed findings that diverged in several important ways from the existing adult literature . First , we found no evidence of backlash in preschool admissions decisions ; while there has been some evidence of economic and social penalties ( i . e . backlash effects in “hireability” ) in the adult literature , our child - relevant measure of “admissibility” did not elicit such backlash effects . This could be for a number of reasons : perhaps children truly do not experience backlash from adults in the form of hiring / admissions ; perhaps our partici - pants were hesitant to deny educational opportunities to young children ( e . g . , we had many participants who , in the comments section , advocated for universal admission to preschool— we assume it is unlikely that they would also advocate that all people should be hired for all jobs ) ; perhaps preschool admissions ( unlike hiring ) doesn’t measure economic penalties ; and / or perhaps individuals do not reason about school admissions to preschool in the same way they reason about hiring . For example , jobs are often thought to be earned and merit - based , while school admissions decisions ( and perhaps especially preschool / daycare admissions deci - sions ) may be viewed as less dependent on merit than potential , or may even be viewed as unrelated to the child’s traits , characteristics , and actions . Also , it is often only possible to hire a single individual for a job ( making the hiring stakes very high ; hiring one person entails not hiring others and therefore is a moment in which existing power structures can either be chal - lenged or maintained ) while typically multiple children are admitted to a particular daycare / preschool at a time ( thus lowering the stakes of any individual admissions decision ) . Thus , future work should further explore whether backlash against stereotype - violating children can comprise economic penalties by exploring alternate operationalizations of “hireability” or additional economic consequences . More broadly , future work should consider alternative ways of assessing prejudice and discrimination targeting children rather than adults . A second way in which our study differed from the studies of in which adults are the stereo - type - violators was that we found several cases in which Participant Characteristics impacted the presences of backlash . Political Orientation and Modern Sexism Score both predicted backlash in the form of lower ratings for stereotype - violating targets on likeability , willingness to interact with the target child , and perceptions of the target child’s parents . Political Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 18 / 24 Orientation also impacted evidence of backlash in ratings of competence . Specifically , our results revealed that higher levels of political conservatism and modern sexism were associated with more negative reactions to gender stereotype - violating individuals , and this effect appeared to be driven by stereotype - violating boys . These data were surprising for several rea - sons . In cases where adults violate gender stereotypes , there is little evidence that Participant Characteristics impact backlash [ 66 ] ; also , there are rarely effects of backlash on ratings of an applicant’s competence [ 25 ] . From the present study , it is still unclear why we found effects of Participant Characteristics on backlash . One possibility is that these effects are present in adults , too , but previous studies lacked the power to detect them . For example , in the present study ( with over 1200 participants across Exps . 2 and 3 ) , our power was only . 80 to detect the three - way sex (cid:3) vignette (cid:3) modern sexism score interaction on likeability ; if we had had ( as is typ - ical ) only 20 – 40 participants per cell , our power to detect such an effect would have been only . 11 - . 17 . A second possibility is that political orientation and modern sexism score predict back - lash against children , but not adults . Because the present study only tested for backlash against children by adults , we cannot differentiate between these possibilities . Future work should thus recruit large samples and include assessments of similar stereotype - violating and stereo - type - conforming adults and children within the same paradigm , in order to determine whether Participant Characteristics may also shape backlash against adults . One additional finding worth considering is that , while the vast majority of participants did not infer that the children in our study were gay / lesbian or transgender , we did find that femi - nine boys were most likely to be assumed transgender and gay . Previous literature has sug - gested that adults sometimes make inferences about gender and sexuality on the basis of children’s violations of gender stereotypes , and that they are somewhat more likely to assume that stereotype - violating boys ( relative to stereotype - violating girls ) are gay [ 55 – 56 ] . Further , previous work has shown that acceptance of gender - stereotype violation in children is nega - tively correlated with homophobia [ 52 ] . While very few participants believed that the target child was gay / lesbian / trans (cid:3) , our data are consistent with these previous studies showing that stereotype - violating boys may be more likely to be perceived as gay . As this is one of the first studies to experimentally measure adults’ backlash against stereo - type - violating children , there is substantial additional future work to be done . First , there is good reason to assess the presence of backlash against children both younger and older than those tested in our study . Critically , our study revealed neither the age of onset of backlash or adult - like backlash . In the interest of understanding the developmental trajectory of children’s experiences of gender backlash , future work should extend the age range of the child targets to include both younger ( into infancy ) and older ( through adolescence ) . Second , future work should systematically investigate whether children themselves enact backlash against stereo - type - violating children and stereotype - violating adults . Doing so will greatly expand our understanding of the ways in which gender stereotypes impact ( and are policed by ) even very young children . More generally , future work should directly investigate whether backlash rein - forces gender stereotypes against children by exploring whether stereotype - violating kids dis - play a fear of backlash , and whether this fear of backlash limits their future gender - nonconforming behavior the way it does for adults [ 60 ] . Because the present study opens up several productive future avenues for research , we want to highlight several methodological and analytical choices in the present study that we ( a ) believe strengthen our results and ( b ) hope future researchers adopt . First , by using experi - mental methods ( as opposed to observational or correlational methods ) , we could manipulate both the sex of the target and the femininity / masculinity of the target’s characteristics , and could also maintain careful control over the target characteristics across conditions ( such that the feminine boy displayed literally the same behaviors as the feminine girl ) ; this allows us to Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 19 / 24 draw relatively stronger conclusions about the causal effects of sex and masculinity / femininity on perceptions . Second , the use of a relatively larger sample size allowed us to avoid some of the risks typical of underpowered studies . Third , our use of preregistration allowed us to be clear about the confirmatory vs . exploratory nature of each of our analyses ; given the density of this dataset and the complexity of reasoning about higher order interactions , internal repli - cations , etc . . . , the use of preregistered analyses ( and the ability to clearly describe moments when we deviated from our preregistration ) promotes greater confidence in the findings we present . Fourth , by controlling for the False Discovery Rate , we have increased assurance that our significant findings represent a true , underlying signal . Finally , we included both an initial experiment and a replication , and used single paper meta - analytic techniques [ 76 ] to aggregate information across two datasets while accounting for variation within and between experi - ments . This final step allows us to estimate aggregated effect sizes with the appropriate precision . To conclude , the present study provided some of the first experimental evidence of the con - tent and consequences of gender stereotypes for young children . Specifically , we found that adults rated 3 - to 4 - year - old children who violated gender stereotypes as less likeable than their stereotype - conforming peers . Across a host of measures , we also found that boys , in gen - eral , were rated less positively than girls , and that this effect was most pronounced for stereo - type - violating boys . These results suggest that gender backlash is not limited to adults , and instead , reinforces traditional gender roles by penalizing the stereotype violations of even very young children . Supporting information S1 Text . Supplemental online materials . ( DOCX ) Author Contributions Conceptualization : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin . Data curation : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin , Michael Lopez , Katherine Williams . Formal analysis : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin , Michael Lopez . Investigation : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin . Methodology : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin , Michael Lopez , Katherine Williams . Project administration : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin , Katherine Williams . Resources : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin . Software : Jessica Sullivan , Michael Lopez , Katherine Williams . Supervision : Jessica Sullivan . Visualization : Jessica Sullivan , Michael Lopez , Katherine Williams . Writing – original draft : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin , Katherine Williams . Writing – review & editing : Jessica Sullivan , Corinne Moss - Racusin , Michael Lopez , Kather - ine Williams . References 1 . Bem S . An UnconventionalFamily . New Haven : Yale University Press ; 1998 . Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 20 / 24 2 . Brown C , Bigler R . Children’s perceptions of genderdiscrimination . Dev Psychol . 2004 ; 40 : 714 – 726 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 40 . 5 . 714PMID : 15355161 3 . Carter D , McCloskeyL . Peers and the maintenance of sex - typed behavior : The development of chil - dren’s conceptions of cross - gender behaviorin their peers . Soc Cogn . 1984 ; 2 : 294 – 314 . 4 . Coker D . The relationshipsamong genderconceptsand cognitivematurity in preschool children . Sex Roles . 1984 ; 10 : 19 – 31 . 5 . Fagot B , LeinbachM . The young child’sgenderschema : Environmentalinput , internalorganization . ChildDev . 1989 ; 60 : 663 – 672 . PMID : 2737015 6 . Fagot B , LeinbachM . Gender - roledevelopment in youngchildren : From discrimination to labeling . Dev Rev . 1993 ; 13 : 205 – 224 . 7 . Fagot B , LeinbachM , O’Boyle C . Gender labeling , genderstereotyping , and parentingbehavior . Dev Psychol . 1992 ; 28 : 225 – 230 . 8 . Fast A , Olson K . Gender development in transgender preschool children . ChildDev . In press . 9 . Grace DM , David BJ , Ryan MK . Investigatingpreschoolers’ categorical thinkingabout genderthrough imitation , attention , and the use of self - categories . Child Dev . 2008 ; 79 : 1928 – 1941 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2008 . 01234 . x PMID : 19037958 10 . HaughS , Hoffman C , CowanG . The eye of the very youngbeholder : Sex typingof infants by youngchil - dren . ChildDev . 1980 ; 51 : 598 – 600 . PMID : 7398456 11 . Martin C , HalversonC . The effects of sex - typingschemas on young children’smemory . ChildDev . 1983 ; 54 : 563 – 574 . 12 . Parmley M , Cunningham JG . Children’sgender - emotion stereotypes in the relationshipof anger to sad - ness and fear . Sex Roles . 2008 ; 58 : 358 – 370 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11199 - 007 - 9335 - 9 13 . RowleyS , Kurtz - Costes B , Mistry R , Feagans L . Social status as predictor of race and genderstereo - types in late childhoodand early adolescence . Soc Dev . 2007 ; 16 : 150 – 168 . 14 . RubleD , Taylor L , Cyphers L , Greulich F , Lurye L , Shrout P . The role of genderconstancy in early gen - der development . ChildDev . 2007 ; 78 : 1121 – 1136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2007 . 01056 . x PMID : 17650129 15 . SignorellaML , Liben LS . Recall and reconstruction of gender - related pictures : Effects of attitude , task difficulty , and age . ChildDev . 1984 ; 52 : 393 – 405 . 16 . Slaby R , Frey K . Development of genderconstancy and selective attentionto same - sexmodels . Child Dev . 1975 ; 45 : 849 – 856 . 17 . Evans C , Diekman A . On motivated role selection : Gender beliefs , Distant goals , and Career Interest . Psychol Women Q . 2009 ; 33 : 235 – 249 . 18 . Diekman A , Murnen S . Learningto be little women and little men : The inequitablegenderequality of nonsexist children’s literature . Sex Roles . 2004 ; 50 : 373 – 385 . 19 . EndendijkJ , GroeneveldM , van der Pol L , van Berkel S , Hallers - Haalbom E , Medman J et al . Boys don’t play with dolls : Mothers’ and Fathers’ Gender Talk during Picture Book Reading . Parenting . 2014 ; 14 : 141 – 161 . 20 . Fagot B . The influenceof sex of child on parentalreactionsto toddler children . ChildDev . 1978 ; 49 : 459 – 465 . 21 . Gelman S , Taylor M , NguyenS , LeaperC , Bigler R . Mother - childconversations about gender : under - standingthe acquisitionof essentialistbeliefs . Monogr Soc Res Child Dev . 2004 ; 69 : 1 – 142 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 0037 - 976X . 2004 . 00296 . x 22 . LeaperC . Gender , affiliation , assertion , and the interactive context of parent - child play . Dev Psychol . 2000 ; 36 : 381 – 393 . PMID : 10830981 23 . Bussey K , BanduraA . A social cognitivetheory of genderdevelopment and differentiation . Psychol Rev . 1999 ; 106 : 676 – 713 . PMID : 10560326 24 . Bem S . Gender schema theory : A cognitiveaccount of sex typing . Psychol Rev . 1981 ; 88 : 354 – 364 . 25 . RudmanLA , Moss - Racusin CA , Glick P , & PhelanJE . Reactionsto Vanguards : Advancesin Backlash Theory . Adv Exp Soc Psychol . 2012 ; 45 : 167 . 26 . Williams JE , Best DL . Measuringsex stereotypes : A multinationalstudy . ThousandOaks , CA : SAGE Publications ; 1990 . 27 . Gill MJ . When information does not deter stereotyping : Prescriptive stereotyping can foster bias under conditions that deter descriptivestereotyping . J Exp Soc Psychol . 2004 ; 40 : 619 – 632 . 28 . Brewer MB . A dual process model of impressionformation . LawrenceErlbaum Associates , Inc ; 1988 . Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 21 / 24 29 . Fiske ST , NeubergSL . A continuumof impressionformation , from category - basedto individuatingpro - cesses : Influencesof information and motivationon attention and interpretation . Adv Exp Soc Psychol . 1990 ; 23 : 1 – 74 . 30 . Diekman A , GoodfriendW . Rollingwith the changes : A role congruityperspectiveon gendernorms . Psychol Women Q . 2006 ; 30 : 369 – 383 . 31 . Prentice DA , CarranzaE . What women and men shouldbe , shouldn’tbe , are allowedto be , and don’t have to be : The contents of prescriptive genderstereotypes . Psychol Women Q . 2002 ; 26 : 269 – 281 . 32 . HeilmanME , Wallen AS , Fuchs D , Tamkins MM . Penaltiesfor success : Reactionsto women who suc - ceed at male gender - typed tasks . J Appl Psychol . 2004 ; 89 : 416 – 427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 89 . 3 . 416 PMID : 15161402 33 . RudmanLA . Self - promotion as a risk factor for women : The costs and benefits of counterstereotypical impressionmanagement . J Pers Soc Psychol . 1998 ; 74 : 629 – 645 . PMID : 9523410 34 . RudmanLA , Glick P . Feminizedmanagement and backlashtoward agenticwomen : The hiddencosts to women of a kinder , gentler image of middle - managers . J Pers Soc Psychol . 1999 ; 77 : 1004 – 1010 . PMID : 10573877 35 . RudmanLA , Glick P . Prescriptive genderstereotypes and backlashtoward agentic women . J Soc Issues . 2001 ; 57 : 743 – 762 . 36 . Burgess D , BorgidaE . Who women are , who women should be : Descriptive and prescriptive gender stereotyping in sex discrimination . Psychol Public Policy Law . 1999 ; 5 : 665 . 37 . HeilmanME . Descriptionand prescription : How genderstereotypes prevent women’s ascent up the organizational ladder . J Soc Issues . 2001 ; 57 : 657 – 674 . 38 . RudmanLA , Moss - Racusin CA , PhelanJE , Nauts S . Status incongruityand backlash effects : Defend - ing the genderhierarchymotivates prejudiceagainstfemale leaders . J Exp Soc Psychol . 2012 ; 48 : 165 – 179 . 39 . Moss - Racusin CA . 11 . Male backlash : penaltiesfor men who violate genderstereotypes . Gender in Organizations : Are Men Allies or Adversariesto Women’s Career Advancement ? . 2014 Jan 31 : 247 . 40 . Okimoto TG , Brescoll VL . The price of power : Power seekingand backlashagainstfemale politicians . Pers Soc Psychol Bull . 2010 ; 36 : 923 – 936 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0146167210371949PMID : 20519573 41 . Brescoll VL , Uhlmann EL . Can an angry woman get ahead ? Status conferral , gender , and expressionof emotionin the workplace . Psychol Sci . 2008 ; 19 : 268 – 275 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2008 . 02079 . xPMID : 18315800 42 . Moss - Racusin CA , JohnsonER . Backlashagainst male elementary educators . J App Soc Psychol . 2016 ; 46 : 379 – 393 . 43 . RudmanLA , Mescher K . Penalizing men who request a family leave : Is flexibility stigma a femininity stigma ? J Soc Issues . 2013 ; 69 : 322 – 340 . 44 . Moss - Racusin CA , PhelanJE , Rudman LA . When men break the genderrules : Status incongruity and backlashagainstmodest men . Psychol Men Masc . 2010 ; 11 : 140 – 151 . 45 . Condry J , Condry S . Sex differences : A study of the eye of the beholder . Child Dev . 1976 ; 47 : 812 – 819 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1128199 46 . Fagot BI , LeinbachMD , O’Boyle C . Gender labeling , genderstereotyping , and parenting . Dev Psychol . 1992 ; 28 : 225 – 230 . 47 . Smith C , Lloyd B . Maternal behavior and perceivedsex of infant : Revisited . ChildDev . 1978 ; 49 : 1263 – 1265 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1128775 48 . Will JA , Self PA , Datan N . Maternalbehaviorand perceivedsex of infant . Am J Orthopsychiatry . 1976 ; 46 : 135 – 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1939 - 0025 . 1976 . tb01234 . x PMID : 1247092 49 . BogdanE , JohnsonR , Mekler L , NahabedianD , NeglioB , Vuvan D , et al . Replicationof Condry & Con - dry , 1976 . 2017 ; Materials , analyses , and data available at osf . io / vgebr . 50 . Steuer FB , Bode BC , Rada KA , Hittner JB . Gender labeland perceivedinfant emotionality : A partialrep - lication of a classic study . Psychol Rep . 2010 ; 107 : 139 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2466 / 07 . 10 . 17 . PR0 . 107 . 4 . 139 - 144 PMID : 20923057 51 . Stern M , Karraker KH . Sex stereotyping of infants : A review of genderlabelingstudies . Sex Roles . 1989 ; 20 : 501 – 522 . 52 . Cahill B , Adams E . An exploratory study of early childhood teachers’ attitudes toward genderroles . Sex Roles . 1997 ; 36 : 517 – 529 . 53 . FeinmanS . Approvalof cross - sex - role behavior . Psychol Rep . 1974 ; 35 : 643 – 648 . Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 22 / 24 54 . FeinmanS . Why is cross - sex - role behavior more approvedfor girls than for boys ? A status characteris - tic approach . Sex Roles . 1981 ; 7 : 289 – 300 . 55 . Martin C . Attitudes and expectations about childrenwith nontraditional and traditionalgenderroles . Sex Roles . 1990 ; 22 : 151 – 165 . 56 . Antill J . Parents’ beliefs and values about sex roles , sex differences , and sexuality : Their sources and implications . In Shaver P . & HendrickC . ( Eds . ) , Review of personality and social psychology , Vol . 7 , Sex and gender : p . 294 – 328 ; ThousandOaks , CA : Sage Publications ; 1987 . 57 . Lancy D . The Anthropology of Childhood . CambridgeUniversity Press : Cambridge , UK ; 2015 . 58 . FriedmanM , Koeske G , Silvestre A , Korr W , Sites E . The impact of gender - role nonconforming behav - ior , bullying , and social support on suicidalityamong gay male youth . J AdolescHealth . 2006 ; 38 : 621 – 623 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jadohealth . 2005 . 04 . 014PMID : 16635780 59 . Toomey R , Ryan C , Diaz R , Card N , RussellS . Gender - nonconforminglesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender youth : School victimization and youngadult psychosocial adjustment . Dev Psychol . 2010 ; 46 : 1580 – 1589 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0020705PMID : 20822214 60 . RudmanLA , Fairchild K . Reactionsto counterstereotypic behavior : The role of backlashin cultural ste - reotype maintenance . J Pers Soc Psychol . 2004 ; 87 : 157 – 176 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 87 . 2 . 157 PMID : 15301625 61 . Litman L , RobinsonJ , Abberbock T . TurkPrime . com : A versatilecrowdsourcing data acquisitionplat - form for the behavioralsciences . Behav Res Methods . 2017 ; 49 : 433 – 442 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3758 / s13428 - 016 - 0727 - z PMID : 27071389 62 . HaughS , Hoffman CD , Cowan G . The eye of the very youngbeholder : Sex typing of infants by young children . ChildDev . 1980 ; 51 : 598 – 600 . PMID : 7398456 63 . Klein RA , Ratliff KA , VianelloM , Adams RB Jr , Bahnı´k Sˇ , Bernstein MJ , et al . Investigatingvariationin replicability . Soc Psychol . 2014 ; 45 : 142 – 152 . 64 . Nosek BA , Spies JR , Motyl M . Scientific utopia : II . Restructuring incentivesand practices to promote truth over publishability . Perspect Psychol Sci . 2012 ; 7 : 615 – 631 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1745691612459058PMID : 26168121 65 . Simons DJ . The value of direct replication . Perspect Psychol Sci . 2014 ; 9 : 76 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1745691613514755PMID : 26173243 66 . RudmanLA , PhelanJE . Backlasheffects for disconfirming genderstereotypesin organizations . Res Organ Behav . 2008 ; 28 : 61 – 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . riob . 2008 . 04 . 003 67 . Moss - Racusin CA , DovidioJF , Brescoll VL , Graham MJ , Handelsman J . Sciencefaculty’s subtle gen - der biases favor male students . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 2012 ; 109 : 16474 – 16479 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1211286109PMID : 22988126 68 . Brescoll VL , Uhlmann EL . Attitudes toward traditionaland nontraditional parents . Psychol Women Q . 2005 ; 29 : 436 – 445 . 69 . Swim JK , Aikin KJ , Hall WS , Hunter BA . Sexism and racism : Old - fashioned and modernprejudices . J Pers Soc Psychol . 1995 ; 68 : 199 . 70 . Moradi B , Wiseman MC , DeBlaereC , Goodman MB , Sarkees A , Brewster ME , et al . LGB of color and white individuals’perceptions of heterosexist stigma , internalizedhomophobia , and outness : Compari - sons of levels and links . CounsPsychol . 2010 ; 38 : 397 – 424 . 71 . BenjaminiY , HochbergY . Controllingthe false discoveryrate : A practicaland powerfulapproachto mul - tiple testing . J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol . 1995 ; 57 : 289 – 300 . 72 . Williams V , Jones L , Tukey J . Controlling error in multiplecomparisons , with examplesfrom state - to - state differencesin educationalachievement . J Educ Behav Stat . 1999 ; 24 : 42 – 69 . 73 . KeselmanH , CribbieR , HollandB . Controlling the rate of Type I error over a large set of statistical tests . Br J Math Stat Psychol . 2002 ; 55 : 27 – 39 . PMID : 12034010 74 . SteinbergL . The consequence of pairingquestions : Context Effects in Personality Measurement . J Pers Soc Psychol . 2001 ; 81 : 332 – 342 . PMID : 11519936 75 . Thissen D , SteinbergL , Kuang D . Easy implementation of the Benjamini - HochbergProcedurefor Con - trollingthe False Positive Rate in MultipleComparisons . J Educ Behav Stats . 2002 ; 27 : 77 – 83 . 76 . McShaneBB , Bo¨ckenholtU . Single - PaperMeta - Analysis : Benefits for Study Summary , Theory Test - ing , and Replicability . J ConsumRes . 2017 ; 43 : 1048 – 1063 . 77 . Eagly AH , MladinicA . Are peopleprejudicedagainst women ? Some answers from research on atti - tudes , genderstereotypes , and judgments of competence . Eur Rev Soc Psychol . 1994 ; 5 : 1 – 35 . 78 . Yu C , Zuo X , Blum R , Tolman D , Kagesten A , Mmari K , et al . Marchingto a different drummer : A cross - cultural comparisonof adolescents who challengegendernorms . J AdolescHealth . 2017 ; 61 : S48 – S54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jadohealth . 2017 . 07 . 005PMID : 28915993 Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 23 / 24 79 . Owens BlakemoreJ . Children’sbeliefs about violatinggendernorms : Boys shouldn’t look like girls , and girls shouldn’t act like boys . Sex Roles . 2003 ; 48 : 411 . 80 . Eagly AH , MladinicA . Gender stereotypes and attitudes toward women and men . Pers Soc Psychol Bull . 1989 ; 15 : 543 – 558 . 81 . HeymanG . Children’s interpretation of ambiguousbehavior : Evidencefor a ‘boys are bad’ bias . Soc Dev . 2001 ; 10 : 230 – 247 . Backlashagainst genderstereotype - violatingpreschool children PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0195503 April 9 , 2018 24 / 24