Markets as Politics : A Political - Cultural Approach to Market Institutions * Neil Fligstein University of California , Berkeley * Direct correspondence to Neil Fligstein , Department of Sociology , University of California , Berkeley , Ca . 94720 ( fligst @ uclink4 . berkeley . edu ) . This paper is a revised version presented at the annual meetings of the Society for the Advancement of Socio - Economics , New York City , March 1993 . I would like to thank Haldor Byrkjeflot , John Campbell , Bruce Carruthers , Frank Dobbin , Mark Granovetter , Gary Hamilton , Neil Smelser , Linda Stearns , Art Stinchcombe , Richard Swedburg , Charles Tilly , and Loic Wacquant for comments . I also thank Paula England , ASR Editor , and the reviewers for their comments . I partially prepared this paper while a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences ( supported by NSF Grant # SBR - 9022192 ) . Abstract I use the metaphor " markets as politics " to create a sociological view of action in markets . I develop a conceptual view of the social institutions that comprise markets , discuss a sociological model of action in which market participants try to create stable worlds and find social solutions to competition , and discuss how markets and states are intimately linked . From these foundations , I generate propositions about how politics in markets work during various stages of market development - - formation , stability , and transformation . At the formation of markets , when actors in firms are trying to create a status hierarchy that enforces noncompetitive forms of competition , political action resembles social movements . In stable markets , incumbent firms defend their positions against challengers and invaders . During periods of market transformation , invaders can reintroduce more fluid social - movement - like conditions . 1 Introduction Most key insights of the sociology of markets have been framed as reactions to neoclassical economic views of the functioning of markets . White ( 1981 ) suggested that stable production markets were only possible if actors took one another into account in their behavior , contrary to the basic assumption of the neoclassical economic view which stresses anonymity of actors . Granovetter ( 1985 ) extended this argument , suggesting that all forms of economic interaction were centered in social relations , what he called the embeddedness of markets . Various scholars have presented evidence that market embeddedness produced effects that economic models could not predict ( Burt 1983 ; Zelizar 1983 ; Baker 1984 ; Fligstein 1990 ) . The empirical literature has failed to clarify the precise nature of the social embeddedness of markets . Granovetter ( 1985 ) argued that network relatedness is the most important construct . Burt ( 1983 ) proposed that networks stand in for resource dependence . Podolny ( 1993 ) uses networks as a cause and consequence of the creation of a status hierarchy . Fligstein ( 1990 ) and Fligstein and Brantley ( 1992 ) argued that the social relations within and across firms and their more formal relations to the state are pivotal to understanding how stable markets emerge . Campbell and Lindberg ( 1990 ) and Campbell , Hollingsworth , and Lindberg ( 1991 ) took a similar approach and 2 focused on the emergence of what they call governance structures in industries . Institutional theory in the organizational literature argued that institutional entrepreneurs create new sets of social arrangements in organizational fields with the aid of powerful organized interests , both inside and outside of the state ( DiMaggio 1989 ; DiMaggio and Powell 1991 ) . These latter perspectives have been buttressed by studies on comparative industrial organization ( Hamilton and Biggart 1988 ; Chandler 1990 ; Gerlach 1992 ) that show how state - firm interactions in various societies have produced unique cultures of production . Industrial countries are not converging towards a single form ( Fligstein and Freeland 1995 ) . Instead a plurality of social relations have been observed that structure markets within and across societies . These observations have challenged the neoclassical economists ' view that markets select efficient forms which , over time , produce converge to a single form . 1 To push this debate forward , sociologists must go beyond documenting the shortcomings of the neoclassical model . Thus , in this paper , I begin to structure a new view from the existing literature . The basic insight is that the social structures of markets and the internal organization of firms are best viewed as attempts to mitigate the effects of competition with other firms . I outline a political - cultural approach and I use the metaphor " markets as politics " to discuss how these social structures come into existence , produce stable worlds , and are transformed . 2 The " markets as politics " metaphor has two dimensions . I view the formation of markets as part of state - building . Modern states with capitalist economies create the institutional conditions for markets to be stable . I identify what institutions are contested and view their construction as a political project undertaken by powerful actors . Great societal crises , such as war , depression , or the entry of a nation into modern development are pivotal to understanding a society ' s economic development . Once in place , these " rules " of market - building and market intervention are keys to understanding how new markets develop in a society . Second , I argue that processes within a market reflect two types of political projects : the internal firm power struggle and the power struggle across firms to control markets . These are related " control " projects ( White 1992 ) . The internal power struggle is about who will control the organization , how it will be organized , and how situations will be analyzed and responded to . The winners of the internal power struggle will be those with a compelling vision of how to make the firm work internally and how to interact with the firm ' s main competitors . I use a social movement metaphor to characterize action in markets during market creation or crisis . The production of market institutions is a cultural project in several ways . Property rights , governance structures , conceptions of control , and rules of exchange define the social 3 institutions necessary to make markets . Economic worlds are social worlds ; therefore , they operate according to principles like other social worlds . Actors engage in political actions vis - a - vis one another and construct local cultures to guide that interaction ( Geertz 1980 ) . An important purpose of this paper is to bring together the versions of economic sociology that stress institutions with those that stress networks and population ecology . I use the metaphor of " markets as politics " as the unifying construct which focusses on how social structures are produced to control competition and organize the firm . My approach combines key features of the other perspectives , but fills in what I consider to be important shortcomings of those theories . Institutional theory in the organizational literature is concerned with the construction of rules . But it lacks a theory of politics and agency . Networks are at the core of markets to the degree that they reflect social relations between actors . The major limitation of the network approaches is that networks are sparse social structures and it is difficult to see how they can account for what we observe in markets . Put another way , they contain no model of politics , no social preconditions for the economic institutions in question , and no way to conceptualize how actors construct their worlds ( Powell and Smith - Doerr 1994 ) . Population ecology has usually taken the existence of niches or markets as a given , which would seem to be antithetical to a more social 4 constructionist approach . However , Hannan and Freeman ( 1985 ) have argued that niches are social and political constructions , and they discussed how boundaries are formed . I elaborate such a perspective , but with a more explicitly political model . MARKETS INSTITUTIONS : SOME DEFINITIONS My focus is on the organization of modern production markets ( White 1981 ) . Markets refer to situations in which some good or service is sold to customers for a price that is paid in money ( a generalized medium of exchange ) . The first problem for developing a sociology of markets is to propose theoretically the social institutions necessary as preconditions to the existence of such markets . Institutions refer to shared rules , which can be laws or collective understandings , held in place by custom , explicit , or tacit agreement . These institutions - - what can be called property rights , governance structures , conceptions of control , and rules of exchange - - enable actors in markets to organize themselves , to compete and cooperate , and to exchange . Property rights are social relations that define who has claims on the profits of firms ( akin to what agency theorists call " residual claims " on the free cash flow of firms ( Jensen and Meckling 1974 ; Fama 1980 ) ) . This leaves open the issues of legal forms exist ; the relationship between shareholders and employees , local communities , suppliers , and customers ; and the role of the 5 state in directing investment , owning firms , and protecting workers . Unlike agency theory , I argue that the constitution of property rights is a continuous and contestable political process , not the outcome of an efficient process ( Roe 1994 ) . Organized groups from business , labor , government agencies , and political parties will try to affect the constitution of property rights . Governance structures refer to the general rules in a society that define relations of competition , cooperation , and market - specific definitions of how firms should be organized . These rules define the legal and illegal forms of how firms can control competition . They take two forms : ( 1 ) laws and ( 2 ) informal institutional practices . Laws called antitrust , competition , or anticartel laws , exist in all advanced industrial societies . The passage , enforcement , and judicial interpretation of these laws is contested ( Fligstein 1990 ) , and the content of such laws varies widely across societies from allowing cooperation or mergers between competitors to enforcing competition . Market societies also develop more informal institutional practices which are embedded in existing organizations as routines and are available to actors in other organizations . Some mechanisms of transmission are professional associations , management consultants , and the exchange of professional managers ( DiMaggio and Powell 1983 ) . These informal practices include how 6 to arrange a work organization ( such as the multidivisional form ) , how to write labor and management contracts , and where to draw the boundaries of the firm . They also include current views of what constitutes legal and illegal behavior of firms . The purpose of action in a given market is to create and maintain stable worlds within and across firms that allow firms to survive . Conceptions of control refer to understandings that structure perceptions of how a market works , that allow actors to interpret their world , and act to control situations . A conception of control is simultaneously a worldview that allows actors to interpret the actions of others and a reflection of how the market is structured . Conceptions of control reflect market specific agreements between actors in firms on principles of internal organization ( ie . , forms of hierarchy ) , tactics for competition or cooperation , and the hierarchy or status ordering of firms in a given market . A conception of control can be thought of as " local knowledge " ( Geertz 1980 ) . The state must ratify , help create , or at the very least , not oppose a conception of control . Rules of exchange define who can transact with whom and the conditions under which transactions are carried out . Rules must be established regarding shipping , billing , insurance , the exchange of money ( i . e . , banks ) , and the enforcement of contracts . These rules become even more important across societies . As with property rights , governance structures , and 7 conceptions of control , states are essential to the creation and enforcement of rules of exchange . THE MODEL OF ACTION The key insight of the perspective I propose here is that there are two forms of potential sources of instability in markets : ( 1 ) the tendency of firms to undercut one another ' s prices and ( 2 ) the problem of keeping the firm together as a political coalition ( March 1961 ) . Market actors try to control both sources of instability to promote the survival of their firm . The goal of a conception of control is to erect social understandings whereby firms can avoid direct price competition and can solve their internal political problems . 2 These problems are related , and the solution to one will be part of the solution to the other . The potential of price competition to undermine market structures is always there . Stable markets may last from a few years to decades . In some classically competitive markets , such as restaurants and barber shops , stability has never emerged . Even in these markets , actors try to differentiate their products to form niches to protect them from price competition ( for example , restaurants serving high - priced California cuisine ) . My claim is not that actors in firms are always successful at creating stable shelters from price competition , but the politics 8 of markets and the social organization of markets involve attempts to do so . Market actors live in murky worlds where it is never clear which actions will have which consequences . Yet , actors must construct an account of the world that interprets the murkiness , motivates and determines courses of action , and justifies the action decided upon . In markets , the goal of action is to ensure the survival of the firm . No actor can determine which behaviors will maximize profits ( either a priori or post hoc ) and action is therefore directed toward the creation of stable worlds . Issues of internal organization revolve around producing stable ( reproducible ) social relations . The intraorganizational power struggle is about actors within the organization making claims to solve the " critical " organizational problems ( Pfeffer 1981 ; March 1961 ) . Actors need to have a coherent view of organizing that allows them to simplify their decision - making processes . Those actors that convince or defeat others will be able to define , analyze , and solve problems in their own terms . They will also be the leaders of the organization ( Fligstein 1987 ) . Once in place , a firm - specific conception of control operates as a corporate culture . What are some of the common competitor - oriented strategies used to control price competition ? Actors often try to cooperate with competitors to share markets . Cartels , price controls , creating barriers to entry , limiting production , patents , 9 licensing agreements , and joint ownership of production facilities are all tactics that firms use to divide markets . A related tactic is to involve the state in regulation or protective legislation that increases the odds of firm survival . Actors simultaneously use two internal principles of organization to indirectly control competition : ( 1 ) integration and ( 2 ) diversification which is often accompanied by producing multiple divisions in the organization . Integration can be vertical ( the merger of suppliers or customers ) or horizontal ( the merger with competitors ) . Vertical integration prevents others from threatening valued inputs or outputs . The integration or merger of a large share of an industry means that a few firms can control the market by tacitly agreeing not to threaten one another ' s position through a price war . They often publicly announce pricing and production decisions so that other firms can follow suit . Diversification implies entering new markets to increase the probability of firm survival . It begins with the differentiation of a single product on the basis of quality or price ( White 1981 ) . To the degree that firms are not competing because their products differ , price competition will not threaten firm existence . 3 Through diversification , a firm that produces multiple products can reduce their dependence on any one product , and hence , increase the likelihood that the firm will survive . This allows the firm to grow larger which increases firm 10 stability as well . Firms search for new markets because there can be huge gains to the first mover . Such gains help stabilize the firm . If markets fail to materialize or market conditions deteriorate , a diversified firm can exit a failed market without threat to the larger corporate entity . The production of multiple products introduces internal control problems and actors are constantly reorganizing around variations of the holding company and multidivisional form ( Fligstein 1985 ; Prechel 1994 ) . Actions to control competition can be thought of as a cultural tool kit ( Swidler 1986 ) . Actors are prepared to take what they can get and work toward a more stable market situation . In this way , conceptions of control are inspired solutions based in the pragmatics of experience ( Padgett and Ansell 1992 ) . Conceptions of control refer to broader cultural conceptions in which these " tool kit " tactics are embedded . Actors in two different markets might use product diversification , but one might view it as diversifying the financial portfolio ( a financial perspective ) while the other might see it as carrying a full line of goods ( a marketing perspective ) ( Fligstein 1990 ) . Conceptions of control also allow actors to interpret what a particular strategic move by competitors might mean . Actors stick with the conception they believe works . After some period of time , others will recognize some key set of factors and begin to imitate them . But these factors are rarely articulated before the fact ; they become accepted or common 11 knowledge only after they operate to produce stability for some firms . Such tactics and conceptions create cultural stories that can be used over and over again to justify an action or produce a new one . STATE - BUILDING AS MARKET - BUILDING One implication of my metaphor , " markets as politics " , is that states play an important role in the construction of market institutions . Why are states so important ? The organizations , groups , and institutions that comprise the state in modern capitalist society claim to make and enforce the rules governing economic interaction in a given geographic area ( Krasner 1988 ) . 4 Capitalist firms could not operate without collective sets of rules governing interaction . While most modern discussions of state - building have focused on welfare and warfare , modern capitalist states have been constructed in interaction with the development of their economies , and the governance of economies is part of the core of state - building ( Fligstein 1990 ; Hooks 1990 ; Campbell et . al . 1991 ; Dobbin 1994 ; Evans 1995 ) . 5 Property rights , governance structures , and rules of exchange are arenas in which modern states establish rules for economic actors . States provide stable and reliable conditions under which firms organize , compete , cooperate , and exchange . The enforcement of these laws affects what conceptions of control can 12 produce stable markets . There are political contests over the content of laws , their applicability to given firms and markets , and the extent and direction of state intervention into the economy . Such laws are never neutral . They favor certain groups of firms . My argument is that it is likely that states are important to the formation and ongoing stability of markets . How they will be important and to what degree is a matter of context . Some states have greater capacities for intervention than others , and the likelihood of intervention depends on the nature of the situation and the institutional history of the state ( Evans , Skocpol , and Rueschmeyer , 1988 ; Laumann and Knoke , 1989 ) . 6 Property rights define the relation between an economic elite and the state . Business elites struggle to keep states from owning property , but they want states to enforce property rights . States differ with regard to their rules for cooperation and competition . Some allow extensive cooperation between firms , particularly in export markets ( e . g . , Germany ) while others restrict the ability of firms in similar industries to cooperate ( e . g . , the United States ) . All states restrict competition to some degree by not allowing certain forms of predatory competition or by restricting entry into certain industries by using trade barriers ( both tariff or nontariff ) and regulation . The political processes that generate these rules often reflect the organized interests of a given set of firms in one market . A 13 good working hypothesis is : One way to produce stable markets is to get the state to intervene to restrict competition . This is a " normal " firm strategy . One important dimension of state involvement into markets is captured by the distinction between direct intervention and regulation . Interventionist states ( e . g . , France ) are involved with making substantive decisions for many markets . They may own firms , direct investment , and heavily regulate firm entries , exits , and competition in markets . In contrast , regulatory states ( e . g . , the U . S . ) create agencies to enforce general rules in markets , but do not decide who can own what and how investments proceed . Both strategies of intervention can be captured by firms . States can either intentionally or unintentionally upset the status quo of a given market by changing rules . Below I advance some propositions about the interactions between states and other organized societal groups under different social conditions . These propositions imply research agendas that have been only partially exploited . Proposition 1 : The entry of countries into capitalism pushes states to develop rules about property rights , governance structures , and rules of exchange in order to stabilize markets for the largest firms . The timing of entry of countries into capitalism has had huge effects on societal trajectories ( Westney 1980 ; Chandler 1990 ; Fligstein 1990 ; Dobbin 1994 ) . For countries just establishing modern capitalist markets , creating stable conceptions of control is more difficult precisely because 14 property rights , governance structures , and rules of exchange are not well specified . Firms are exposed to the ravages of cutthroat competition and demand that the state establish rules about property rights , governance structures , and rules of exchange . Creating these new institutions requires the interaction of firms , political parties , states , and newly invented conceptions of regulation . Proposition 2 : Initial regulatory institutions shape the development of new markets because they produce cultural templates that affect how to organize . The shape of these initial regulatory institutions has a profound effect on subsequent capitalist development . Indeed , any new markets that come into existence do so under a given set of institutions . One can observe that as countries industrialize , the demand for laws or enforceable understandings is high , and that once they are produced , they are stable , and demand for laws lessens . As new industries emerge or old ones are transformed , new rules are made in the context of the old rules . Dobbin ( 1994 ) has argued that societies create " regulatory styles . " These styles are embedded in regulatory organizations and in the statutes that support them . New rules follow the contours of old ones . States are often the focus of market crises , but actors continue to use an existing set of laws and practices to resolve crises . Proposition 3 : State actors are constantly attending to some form of market 15 crisis or another . This is because markets are always being organized or destabilized , and firms are lobbying for state intervention . In normal times , change in markets will be incremental and dependent upon the construction of interests of actors in and around the state . 7 Having stable rules is often more important than the content of the rules . However , rules do embody the interests of dominant groups , and state actors will not intentionally transform rules unless dominant groups are in crisis . Because of their central place in the creation and enforcement of market institutions , states will become the focus of crisis in any important market . Given the constant turmoil inherent in markets , one can expect the state to be constantly attending to some form of market crisis . Pressure on states can from come two sources : other states ( and by implication , their firms ) and existing markets that can be constructed either locally ( within the geography of the state ) or globally ( across states ) . As economic interdependence across societies has increased , there has been an explosion of cross - state agreements about property rights , governance structures , and rules of exchange . Proposition 4 : Laws and accepted practices often reflect the interests of the most organized forces in society . These groups support wholesale transformation of institutions only under crisis circumstances like war , depression , or state collapse . The possibility for wholesale transformation occurs when 16 there is an economy - wide failure of existing rules . Wars , depression , and possibly international economic competition can undermine society - wide arrangements . Massive economic crises will bring about political demands for changes in the rules . These propositions illuminate the kinds of problems confronting the late - comers to capitalist social relations in Eastern Europe . The international organization of markets means that firms in developed product markets are poised to invade these societies and take over the local product markets . Moreover , there exist few market institutions , such as property rights , governance structures , or rules of exchange , to guide actors in new firms ( Stark 1992 ; 1996 ; Burawoy and Krotov 1994 ) . It is interesting to consider Hungary more closely . Stark ( 1992 ; 1996 ) found that state actors in Hungary have turned state owned ministries into corporations . The government holds the bulk of stock in these corporations , although control appears to have devolved to managers . Eventually , state actors appear willing to have firms sold off to private interests . Complicated patterns of shareholding have developed whereby the state owns all of some firms and parts of others . What is particularly interesting is how managers have responded to the problem of competition . Stark ( 1996 ) documents that managers have reorganized firms into complex structures in which large firms incorporate satellites of smaller firms in which the large firms hold equity shares . Firms have taken up two tactics . First , they have taken 17 ownership stakes in firms producing similar products and have tried to control both the inputs and outputs of production . Second , groups of firms with related and unrelated products have joined together . These are the two tactics , integration and diversification , I earlier described that are used by firms to avoid direct competition . There are a number of problems that this particular combination of nascent property rights and conceptions of control engenders . State actors have recently forced western - style accounting standards to attract western investment , which has resulted in many bankruptcies ( Stark 1996 ) . As a result , the state is pressured to prop firms up . Moreover , the state is the holder of equity and debt , and making the financial situation more precarious makes it harder to appeal to western investors . It is not clear whether integration and diversification , will produce stable outcomes . The problem is that these strategies may not be able to stand up to invasion by western firms , particularly given the financial problems firms face . While my approach cannot say how these transformations will turn out , it suggests how to study these processes . One begins by locating a set of policy changes in property rights , governance structures or rules of exchange , and then tracking how these policies restructure social relations in markets . This would include detecting emerging conceptions of control and whether or not they produce successful outcomes for firms . If firms fail , 18 there will be demands for new institutional changes . One potential objection to my focus on states is that it fails to deal with the fact that the world economy is now truly global . But I believe that this state - centered approach is quite useful in analyzing so - called global markets . A market is " globalized " if there are a small number of participants who know one another and operate across countries with a common conception of control . Automobiles , computers , software , and pharmaceuticals may fit this definition . The emergence of these markets depends on cooperation between firms and states to produce rules of exchange and provide guarantees that firms can compete and expropriate profits . One hypothesis is that the increases in world trade produce demand for more of these agreements and greater extensiveness of these agreements . The European Union , the North American Free Trade Area , and the recently completed GATT Treaty can all be analyzed according to whether or not they consider issues around property rights , governance structures , and rules of exchange . They can also be broken down by sectors that involve or do not involve exporters to see if rules tend to apply more or less exclusively to those sectors ( Fligstein and Mara - Drita forthcoming ) . One arena in which agreements have not occurred is the creation of a world market for corporate control . It is very difficult to engage in hostile takeovers in any society except 19 the United States and Great Britain . Earlier I suggested that property rights were at the core of the relations between national elites and states . Most national elites have resisted having transfer property rights transferred to the highest bidder because they would lose power . States remain players in the creation of the global economy because their elites depend on them to preserve their power and guarantee entry to global markets . THE PROBLEM OF CHANGE AND STABILITY IN MARKETS There are three phases in market formation : emergence , stability , and crisis . 8 My concern is to specify how actors ' perceptions of the current social structure affects the tactics they use to seek stability for their firms . It is here that the second part of my metaphor , " markets as politics , " comes into play . In any market , participants can usefully be distinguished in terms of their size relative to their market . Large firms control more external resources than small firms , including pricing from suppliers , financial assistance , and legitimacy , and they may possess control over key technologies or large customers ( Pfeffer and Salancik 1978 ; Burt 1983 ) . As a result , it makes sense to distinguish market participants as incumbents and challengers ( Gamson 1975 ) . Incumbent firms are large and actors in those 20 firms know their major competitors and frame their actions on other large competitors . Challenger firms are smaller and frame their actions in terms of the largest firms . But , they will experience the world as a given - - one out of their control . Differing conditions of market stability produce different kinds of politics . A stable market is defined as a situation in which the identities and status hierarchy of firms ( the incumbents and the challengers ) is well known , and a conception of control that guides actors who lead firms is shared . Firms resemble one another in tactics and organizational structure . Politics will reproduce the position of the advantaged groups . In new markets , the politics resemble social movements . Actors in different firms are trying to convince other firms to go along with their conception of the market . If they are powerful enough , they try to force their view . If there are many different firms of equivalent size , then the possibility for alliances around conceptions of control are possible . Conceptions of control may become political compromises that bring market stability to firms . Markets in crisis are susceptible to transformation . On rare occasions , the push for change may come from within the firms in a market . More frequently , firms invade the market and transform the conception of control . This can look like a social movement , in the sense that the invading firms are trying to establish a new conception of control and in doing so are likely to ally 21 themselves with some of the challengers or existing incumbents . The most fluid period in a market is during its emergence . The roles of challengers and incumbents have yet to be defined , and there is no accepted set of social relations . It is useful to explore the metaphor of a social movement and its application to an emerging market . The ability of groups in a social movement to attain success depends on factors similar to firms trying to produce a stable market : the size of groups , their resources , the existence of a political opportunity to act , state actors willing to negotiate grievances , and the ability to build a political coalition around a collective identity ( Tarrow 1994 ; Snow , Rochford , Worden , and Benford 1980 ; McAdam 1982 ) . A new market spawns the growth of new firms as well as entrance of firms operating in other markets just as a political opportunity creates new social movement organizations . Firms are trying to take advantage of a market opening in the same way that organizations in social movements try to take advantage of a political opportunity . In a new market , the situation is fluid and is characterized by multiple conceptions of control proposed by actors from various firms . A stable market requires the construction of a conception of control to promote noncutthroat ways to compete that all can live with and that state actors can accept . A conception of control operates as a kind of collective identity that many groups can attach to in order to produce a successful market . 22 Proposition 5 : At the beginning of a new market , the largest firms are the most likely to able to create a conception of control and a political coalition to control competition . At the origination of a market , all interorganizational relations must be constructed . Markets are the outcome of an institutionalization project which is the equivalent of discovering a conception of control ( DiMaggio 1989 ) . In this way , markets are social constructions . Making these institutional projects successful is inherently a political project . Actors need to find conceptions of control to signal to other firms in the moment of market formation what one ' s intentions are . One can predict that the largest firms in an emerging market are likely to create a conception of control and persuade others to go along with it because of the perceived advantages that size entails . Proposition 6 : Power struggles within firms are over who can solve the problem of how to best organize the firm to deal with competition . The winners of the struggle will impose their organizational culture and design on the firm . A firm ' s internal power struggle depends on actors coming up with coherent conceptions of control that they can impose on others within the firm . The internal power struggle is likely to be most intense during the emergence of markets . Different groups believe that they hold the solution to the problem of how to organize the firm to best deal with competition . Those actors that win impose their organizational design and culture on the firm . Internal firm 23 structure and who controls the firm result from the conception of control that deals with the problem of market competition . These conceptions of control are available to other firms and help produce a stable status hierarchy of firms . Proposition 7 : Through intended and unintended actions , states can thwart the actions of firms to create stable conceptions of control . All conceptions of control are built around current understandings of legal and illegal market behavior . Firms avoid conceptions of control that are illegal , but occasionally find themselves scrutinized by government officials . More frequently , state regulation of economic activities changes the balance of power in a market away from one conception of control and towards another . This occurs in regulated markets such as drugs , food , telecommunications , utilities , banks , and media . Proposition 8 : The " liability of newness " in new markets reflects , in part , their lack of social structure and a conception of control ie . , it reflects participants ' inability to control competition . It is at the emergence of markets that competition and price mechanisms exact their greatest toll . With no established conception of control to structure nonpredatory forms of competition , price has its strongest effect ( Stinchcombe 1965 ; Hannan and Freeman 1977 ) . There is a tendency to blame business failures on a lack of resources or the inability of managers to construct organizations that reliably deliver products . I argue that part of what is going on is the lack of a social structure 24 to control competition . Markets in which a conception of control never emerges continue to have relatively high rates of firm death , while markets that are able to produce conceptions of control stabilize at lower death rates . Proposition 9 : New markets will borrow conceptions of control from nearby markets , particularly when firms from other markets choose to enter the new market . New markets are born in close social proximity to existing markets . Earlier , I argued that diversifying products is a way to produce more stable firms . Entering new markets does not require confronting entrenched interests and does not directly threaten the stability of the firm . If new markets succeed , then firm stability is enhanced . The differentiation and creation of new products is most frequently the spinoff of existing products . The start of a new market is not random , but is shaped by existing conceptions of control , legal conceptions of property and competition , and the existing organization of related markets . To illustrate these principles , it is useful to consider examples . The creation of the U . S . steel industry is a clear case of firms struggling to create a social structure to control competition . 9 In the nineteenth century , firms in the steel industry faced the problem that their industry was susceptible to huge price swings because of its role in the railroad industry and building trades , and these price swings were devastating because of the large amounts of fixed capital invested in the industry . There was a great deal of incentive to find legal 25 mechanisms to stabilize prices ( Hogan 1970 ) . The basic problem for the steel industry was to discover a conception of control that controlled competition . Cartels and monopolies were illegal in the U . S . ( Thorelli 1955 ) . The choice that remained was to integrate firms to control the market . My proposition that the largest firms in the market are the leaders in such efforts is historically accurate in this case ( Hogan 1970 ) . During the turn of the century merger movement , the largest industrial corporation in the world emerged : the U . S . Steel Corporation . The merger created a large corporation that controlled inputs into the steel - making process as well as divisions that produced outputs for every segment of the market . The company controlled more than 65 percent of the market for steel and 75 percent of the industry ' s iron ore reserves ( Hogan 1970 ) . In spite of being in a strong position , the firm found itself confronted by wild swings in product demand and unstable prices well into the twentieth century . It faced a dilemma in enforcing its position against its competitors . If the firm vigorously pursued price cutting to gain monopoly control over the industry , it would find itself a target of antitrust authorities ; if it did nothing , it found its large investment threatened . U . S . Steel began to pursue an alternative tactic . It posted its prices and production schedules and defended them by 26 decreasing production in the face of aggressive competitors ( Fligstein 1990 ) . U . S . Steel tried to cajole others into going along with its prices by threatening to use its control over inputs and its huge capacity to produce . If all behaved " reasonably , " then some price stability could result . This strategy worked to stabilize steel prices from 1904 until the depression in 1929 ( Kolko 1963 ) . U . S . Steel ' s strategy of integrating production , setting prices , and daring others to undercut them was ratified as a legal way to control competition when it won its antitrust lawsuit in 1920 . This conception of control spread in social movement - like fashion during the 1920s merger movement , when oligopoly structures emerged in all of the core metal making and petroleum industries ( Eis 1978 ) . This structure proved durable in the U . S . steel industry and lasted until the 1960s ( Hogan 1970 ) . It is useful to examine an emerging industry where there is not yet a conception of control and apply the perspective advanced here to predict an outcome . The biotechnology industry has sprung up from common technologies that developed at major universities . To figure out which conceptions of control are contenders for organizing the industry , one asks : " What problem of competition would a social structure need to resolve ? " One way to control competition is patent laws . Firms who discover a product first can extract monopoly rents from their investment in that product , thereby avoiding competition . The game is to find 27 new products that can be patented . Two competing conceptions of control can be identified to take advantage of patent laws . Powell and Brantley ( 1992 ) have argued that the critical problem for biotechnology firms is to control the supply of scientists who have the knowledge about the products . They view a network organization as a stable conception of control because it is a political compromise in which scientists may be able to leave a firm with knowledge of products , but firms have extensive organizational ties so that they will not have to depend on just one or two scientists for information or products . If the arrangements one firm has with other firms are alliances , then the collapse of any given alliance will not necessarily lead to a collapse of a given firm , either by denying it products or information . If a given scientist leaves , firms will presumably have a number of other scientists or alliances who can take up the slack . In this way , a networked firm oriented toward producing patents to control competition might prove stable . Two other features of the biotechnology industry imply an alternative conception of control ( Barley , Freeman , and Hybels 1992 ; Powell and Brantley 1992 ) . Most biotechnology products must undergo extensive testing by the Food and Drug Administration . Firms need money to survive this period of testing before bringing products to market . Thus , the state , through FDA regulation of the market , shifts the competitive conditions in the market from the discovery of new products to the ability to 28 survive the testing and approval process . Once through the testing phase , firms will have to reliably produce , market , and distribute the product . This creates a second arena of competition that relies on production and marketing expertise . These two competition problems imply that a different conception of control might emerge . I suggested earlier that one source of conceptions of control were nearby markets . The drug industry has extensive experience with the same testing and production processes used by the biotechnology industry , and is built on the creation , production , and control of proprietary drugs . I predict that to the degree that surviving the testing process and producing and marketing the product are pivotal , biotechnology firms will be tempted to form alliances with drug companies . Moreover , drug companies would be tempted to buy out the most successful of the biotechnology firms . The drug companies ' conception of control ( integrated firms that produce drugs with monopoly patent rights to eliminate competition to gain back the cost of producing the drug ) would dominate . A more hybrid form could emerge that would focus on maintaining the network organizations by keeping the discovery of products separate from the production and distribution of those products . This has advantages for both drug companies and biotechnology firms . The biotechnology firms maintain some control , while the drug companies lower their risk . There is evidence that all three conceptions of control are 29 practiced ( Barley et . al . 1992 ; Powell and Brantley 1992 ) . The earlier discussion might predict that the most likely outcome is a merger between the two industries , whereby large biotechnology companies become drug companies or divisions thereof . The largest players in the market are the drug companies ; their conception of control solves competition problems in the pharmaceutical industry ; they already have negotiated the legitimacy of that solution with states . The problem of controlling the defection of scientists would be more ephemeral to solving the problem of getting products through the patent process . Proposition 10 : In markets with stable conceptions of control , there is a great deal of agreement by market participants on the conception of control and the status hierarchies and strategies it implies . Once a stable market emerges , the roles of incumbents and challengers are defined and the power structure of the market becomes apparent . Actors in firms throughout the market will be able to tell observers who occupies what position and what their central tactics are . They will be able to make their actions contingent on their interpretation of those tactics . Proposition 11 : Incumbent firms pay attention to the actions of other incumbent firms , not challenger firms , while challenger firms focus on incumbent behavior . A stable world depends on social relations between the largest firms . The central players will generally ignore challenger organizations under most circumstances because they pose little threat to the overall stability of the market . If these organizations live up to their name and begin to challenge 30 the existing order , incumbent organizations will confront them and attempt to reinforce the governing conception of control . Proposition 12 : Firms in stable markets continue to use the governing conception of control , even when confronted with outside invasion or general economic crisis . The major force that holds a market together over a period of time is the ability of the incumbent firms to continue to enforce a conception of control vis - a - vis one another . Incumbents are constantly trying to edge one another ( and challengers ) out for market share , but they refrain from direct confrontation that might prove the ruin of all . These actions will be guided by the existing conception of control ( i . e . , the conception of what is a reasonable action ) . This requires actors to frame action for their firm against their competitors and to have the resources ( power ) to make it stick . They know the identity of the important firms in the market , they try and make sense of their moves , and they respond to those moves . This accounts for the relative stability of established markets , both in the identities of the participants and their tactics . To produce a stable order where firms survive is a relatively difficult problem . Once stability is attained , actors in firms are loathe to engage in actions that undermine their incumbency . If challengers shift tactics or invaders come into the market , incumbent firms continue to engage in the same kinds of actions that produced the stable order in the first place . Incumbent firms may allow some redefinition of who is an 31 incumbent and who is a challenger , but they will remain committed to the overall conception of control that lessens competition . To break down the stable order could potentially bring more chaos than would enforcing the " way things are done " . Actors are also cognitively constrained by a conception of control . Their analysis of a crisis will be framed by the current conception of control and their attempts to alleviate the crisis by applying " the conventional wisdom " . The case of the Japanese keiretsu illustrates how a stable conception of control has withstood both political and economic assaults . Japanese keiretsu are families of firms in different industries that share ownership ties . The overall structure of the keiretsu is to cement important interdependencies and allow various keiretsu members to survive economic downturns . Often banks are at the center of keiretsu and they function as an internal capital market for the firms . The keiretsu show high growth , high investment , and relatively low , but stable profits ( Aoki 1988 ) . In economic downturns , keiretsu structures allow workers to be transferred across firms rather than being laid off ( Lincoln , Gerlach , and Takahashi 1992 ) . This exerts downward pressure on profits , but secures employee loyalty . When firms within the structure are experiencing economic troubles , managers in other firms respond by helping to reorganize the troubled firm ( Gerlach 1992 ) . After World War II , keiretsu were reformed from prewar 32 economic conglomerates ( zaibatsu ) that were family controlled . The zaibatsu were broken up during the American occupation , but began slowly to reform in a looser manner ( Hadley 1970 ) . Since World War II , they have been directed by state actors to enter new markets , and they have proved adept at producing new products ( Johnson 1981 ) . The keiretsu structure contains firms with activities spread across a wide spectrum of industries and markets . The keiretsu structure , as a conception of control , does not directly control competition in a given market . Its advantage is how it stabilizes competition across markets . It has been noted that within given product markets , the firms from different keiretsu compete quite vigorously ( Aoki 1988 ) . The keiretsu structures operate to mitigate competition across markets in a number of ways . First , firms tend to purchase goods and services from inside the keiretsu . This means that some markets are captive and price competition is held down . Second , if a given firm faces an economic crisis , the other firms will attempt to support it . Management expertise , capital , and the ability to place workers with other firms during slumps , mitigate short - run competitive processes . Third , the focus on market share implies that firms invest for the long run and expectations for short - run profits are not high which gives managers latitude in dealing with competitive conditions . Fourth , because of the ownership relations between firms and banks , the cost of capital 33 tends to be lower ( see Gerlach 1992 for a review of the literature ) . One can see the intimate connection between the problem of trying to control competition externally and the internal social organization working to solve that problem . Recently , two forces began to close in on the keiretsu . First , the U . S . government applied pressure to open up Japanese markets , part of which was directed against the keiretsu structures ( Gerlach 1992 ) . The U . S . wanted to break open the procurement arrangements of the keiretsu and demanded that the Japanese open their financial markets and allow a market for corporate control to develop . Second , the economic downturn of the early 1990s has put pressure on the permanent employment system of the keiretsu . It has been more difficult to pass workers onto other firms in the keiretsu . The managers who controlled the keiretsu have been able to use their traditional methods to fight off these attacks . They were politically connected enough to fight off reforms within Japan and economically able to endure a long recession ( Gerlach 1992 ) . Proposition 13 : Market crisis is observed when incumbent organizations begin to fail . Crisis comes to markets when the largest firms are unable to reproduce themselves from period to period . This can be caused by three kinds of events : ( 1 ) decrease in demand due for the firm ' s products can result from bad economic conditions or a shift in buyers ' preferences , ( 2 ) an invasion by other firms can upset the conception of control and introduce procedures which force a 34 reorganization of the market , or ( 3 ) the state can intentionally or unintentionally undermine the market by changing rules . Incumbents rarely become innovators because they are busy defending the status quo ; market transformation is precipitated by invaders . The reorganization of a market around a new conception of control resembles a social movement and is very much like what occurs at the formation of markets . Invading firms can form alliances with existing firms around a new conception of control , or a compromise conception of control , and this makes the reorganization of the market more predictable than it was at market formation . 10 Proposition 14 : Transformation of existing markets result from exogenous forces : invasion , economic crisis , or political intervention by states . One of the key features of capitalist society is the dynamic interplay of markets , whereby some markets are emerging , others are stable , and still others are in crisis and undergoing transformation . I propose an exogenous theory of market transformation that views the basic cause of changes in market structure as resulting from forces outside the control of producers , due either to shifts in demand , invasion by other firms , or actions of the state . Incumbent firms will respond to these destabilizing forces by trying to reinforce the status quo . Markets are connected in a wide variety of ways . Firms rely on suppliers , capital markets , labor markets , and customers as well as on states for their stability . It follows that these 35 market and state forces are always interacting and thereby producing potential problems for an existing conception of control in a given market . Crisis in relations across markets can undermine existing agreements by threatening the well - being of all firms , either by withholding key resources or through the direct invasion of firms from nearby markets . Proposition 15 : Invaders are more likely to come from nearby rather than distant markets . This argument parallels the argument about where new markets come from . Firms seek stability by finding new markets . The invasion of an existing market can occur in a couple of ways . First , firms in closely related markets enter existing markets where they can successfully introduce a new conception of control to increase their advantage . Second , firms might enter into the same product market in different geographic areas , thereby undermining a local stable order . Proposition 16 . When firms begin to fail , the intraorganizational power struggle heats up , leading to higher turnover of top personnel and greater activism by boards of directors and nonmanagement shareholders . New sets of organizational actors attempt to reconstruct the firm along the lines of the invaders . Conceptions of control are used by actors in incumbent firms to ward off market crises . The internal firm power struggle will become more intense as market crises become more pronounced and the reigning conception of control proves to be inadequate to deal with the crisis . Consider the example of the transformation of the finance 36 conception of control as the guiding principle in the market for corporate control in the U . S . during the 1980s . The financial conception of control dominated the actions of many large U . S . firms between 1950 and 1970 ( Fligstein 1990 ) . This view held that firms were composed of assets that could be deployed and redeployed by financial actors within firms in order to promote firm growth . The major tactics of this conception were the use of financial tools to internally monitor divisional performance , and the use of mergers to buy and sell divisions that produced diversification for firms ( Fligstein 1990 ) . These tactics solved the competition problems of large firms by allowing them to exit and enter businesses and stabilize the overall corporate structure . Firms were the principle actors in the market for corporate control as they sought to use the stock market to add to or subtract from their " portfolios . " What crisis made this conception of control no longer viable for large corporations ? The high inflation rates during the 1970s meant that interest rates were high , stock prices were low , and the value of assets was inflated , thereby making returns on investments poor ( Friedman 1985 ) . The financial conception of the firm , with its focus on the profitability of product lines and market diversification , suggested that " good " managers would deal with these problems by keeping debt low and funding investments from cash generated internally . The market for corporate control was in crisis because managers were not reorganizing their 37 assets , even though corporate profits were low . This presented a new opportunity for actors to seek a new rationale to reorganize the market for corporate control . What was this " new " conception of control , and who were its proponents ? Davis and Thompson ( 1994 ) have argued that the language of " shareholder value " and the discourse that blamed managers for being ineffective spread amongst institutional investors in a social movement fashion in the early 1980s . The financial strategy of holding undervalued assets , funding investment internally , and keeping debt low was viewed as a problem . This language was allied with " agency theory " from economics ( Jensen 1989 ) to emphasize that if managers were not going to maximize shareholder value , then they should be replaced by management teams who would . Institutional investors are a heterogeneous group and include investment bankers and representatives from pension funds , mutual funds , and insurance companies . They were from a closely related industry , financial services , and they invaded the turf of financial managers who controlled the largest U . S . corporations . Their goal was to force these managers to redeploy their assets to reflect how the 1970s had affected their balance sheets . They wanted managers to sell off overvalued assets , assume debt to keep firms disciplined , and to remove layers of management to save money . They also forced managers to focus their business by buying up competitors and selling off their 38 most diversified assets ( Davis , Diekmann , and Tinsley 1994 ) . They , of course , benefitted by making money on organizing and executing mergers . Research shows that firms that were merger targets tended to ignore financial reorganization to increase " shareholder value " ( Davis and Stout 1992 ; Fligstein and Markowitz 1993 ) . Useem ( 1993 ) has shown how managers adopted this language and the behaviors it proscribed . The merger movement of the 1980s resembled a social movement whereby , some financial executives and the various actors within the financial services industry discovered a common language and produced a conception of control to reorganize the market for corporate control . The federal government played both direct and indirect roles . The Reagan Administration passed a huge tax cut that produced windfalls for corporate America in 1981 . The Administration expected firms to reinvest that capital in new plants and equipment , but instead firms bought other firms . The Administration also announced that they would not vigorously enforce the antitrust laws ( Fligstein and Markowitz 1993 ) . Davis and Stout ( 1992 ) argue that the Reagan Administration became a cheerleader for the shareholder value conception of control . The shareholder value conception of control is related to the finance conception of the firm , but it uses a stark discourse that only recognizes the rights of one group : those who own stock . All other concerns are subordinated to maximizing the 39 returns for owners . The attention of top managers is focused on evaluating their product markets , but more importantly how the financial markets evaluate their stock price . How does this new conception of control affect competition in the market for corporate control ? If managers are paying attention to shareholder value in a narrow sense , they will be less likely to become merger targets . To the degree that the " game " is to avoid becoming the object of acquisition from outsiders ( i . e . , mergers ) , managers with a narrow focus are likely to maintain control . I hypothesize that the managers who win the internal power struggle will be those who can claim to maximize shareholder value . This process explains the spread of these tactics to most large firms during the 1980s . Conclusions Markets are social constructions that reflect the unique political - cultural construction of their firms and nations . The creation of markets implies societal solutions to the problems of property rights , governance structures , conceptions of control , and rules of exchange . There are many paths to those solutions , each of which might promote the survival of firms . I have sketched how states and markets are interconnected and what actions produce various outcomes . I have extracted general principles by which these outcomes can be understood . I now 40 relate this framework back to current perspectives in economic sociology : networks , population ecology , institutional theory , and the problem of constructing action . While these perspectives differ , I believe that the political - cultural approach I have advanced here unites many of the positive features of each . Network perspectives have been used to document a large number of social relationships in markets . They have indexed resource dependence , status hierarchies , brokering , channels of information , and trust relations . I have argued that stable markets reflect status hierarchies that define incumbents and challengers and that market leaders enforce the market social order and signal how crises are to be handled . These complex role structures in markets operate through networks . My view of markets takes seriously the problem of how states interact with markets to produce general rules by which social structures can be formed . It also makes market structures easier to observe , takes into account the role of actors ' intentions in the production of market structures , and makes more sense of how firms are likely to behave under different market conditions . Ecological approaches have focussed on the problem of how firms establish a niche , the population dynamics of firms , and the process of legitimation of firms in a niche . A political reading of these processes is consistent with the approach I developed here . The liability of newness results , at least partially , from the lack of social structure in a market and the 41 social movement - like search for such a structure . Legitimacy is bestowed by states on markets . A " stable " market for an ecologist resembles one in which a conception of control is shared . Similarly , as in ecology , the transformation of markets results from external sources of change . Much of the perspective developed here is latent in institutional theories and the organizational theories they rely on . My approach focuses more than most institutional theories on political processes , both in the formal structuring of institutions by the state , and in the formation , stability , and transformation of markets . But the goal of action is to build stable markets , a view I have adopted from institutional and organizational theory . I have tried to take the problem of agency quite seriously and to predict how actors ' choices depend upon market structures and sets of rules . I have argued that what goes into these choices is more open to contestation during fluid market conditions , and that Padgett and Ansell ' s conception of robust action ( 1992 ) captures how actors come to take advantage of such situations . To this , I have added the broader notion that conceptions of control capture an important aspect of how actors frame action vis - a - vis one another . Conceptions of control are shared cognitive structures within and across organizations that have profound effects on organizational design and competition . The metaphor of " markets as politics " is the theme used to 42 unite these ideas . I have shown how this view makes possible a unified approach to the study of markets - - an approach that focuses on the political processes that underlie market interactions . Ultimately , however , the usefulness of any metaphor is in the research it generates and the intuitive and counterintuitive insights it creates . 43 References Aoki , Mashiko . 1988 . Information , Incentives , and Bargaining in the Japanese Economy . Cambridge , England . : Cambridge University Press . Arthur , Brian . 1989 . " Competing Technologies and Lock - In by Historical Events : The Dynamics of Allocation Under Increasing Returns . " Economic Journal 99 : 116 - 31 . Barley , Stephen , John Freeman , and Richard Hybels . 1992 . " Strategic Alliances in Biotechnology . " Pp . 311 - 47 in Networks and Organizations , edited by N . Nohria and R . Eccles . Boston MA . : Harvard University Business School Press . Baker , Wayne . 1984 . " The Social Structure of a Securities Market . " American Journal of Sociology 89 : 775 - 811 . Burt , Ronald 1983 . Corporate Profits and Cooptation . New York : Academic Press . Burawoy , Michael and Pavel Krotov . 1992 . " The Soviet Transition from Socialism to Capitalism : Worker Control and Economic Bargaining in the Wood Industry . " American Sociological Review 57 : 16 - 38 . Campbell , John and Leon Lindberg . 1990 . " Property Rights and the Organization of Economic Activity by the State . " American Sociological Review 55 : 3 - 14 . Campbell , John , J . Rogers Hollingsworth , and Leon Lindberg . 1991 . 44 Governance in the American Economy . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Chandler , Alfred . 1990 . Scale and Scope . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Davis , Gerald and Susan Stout . 1992 . " " Organization Theory and the Market for Corporate Control . " Administrative Science Quarterly 37 : 605 - 33 . Davis , Gerald and Suzanne Thompson . 1994 . " A Social Movement Perspective on Corporate Control . " Administrative Science Quarterly 39 : 141 - 73 . Davis , Gerald , Kristina Diekmann , and Catherine Tinsley . 1994 . " The Deinstitutionalization of the Conglomerate Firms in the 1980s . " American Sociological Review 59 : 547 - 570 . DiMaggio , Paul 1989 . " Interest and Agency in Institutional Theory " . pp . 3 - 21 in Research on Institutional Patterns : Environment and Culture edited by L . Zucker . Cambridge , MA : Ballinger Press . DiMaggio , Paul and Walter Powell . 1983 . " The Iron Cage Revisited : Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields . " American Sociological Review 48 : 147 - 60 . - - - - - - . 1991 . " Introduction " . Pp . 3 - 45 in The New Institutionalism In Organizational Theory edited by W . Powell and P . DiMaggio . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Dobbin , Frank . 1994 . Forging Industrial Policy . Cambridge , 45 England . : Cambridge University Press . Eis , Carl . 1978 . The 1919 - 30 Merger Movement in American Industry . New York : Arno Press . Evans , Peter . 1995 . Embedded Autonomy . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Evans , Peter , Theda Skocpol , and Dietrich Rueschemeyer . 1985 . " On the Road Toward a More Adequate Understanding of the State . " Pp . 347 - 66 in Bringing the State Back In edited by P . evans , D . Rueschmeyer , and T . Skocpol . New York : Cambridge University Press . Fama , Eugene . 1980 . " Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm . " Journal of Political Economy 88 : 288 - 307 . Fligstein , Neil . 1985 . " The Spread of the Multidivisional Form . " American Sociological Review 50 : 377 - 91 . - - - - - - . 1987 . " The Intraorganizational Power Struggle : the Rise of Finance Presidents in Large Corporations . " American Sociological Review 52 : 44 - 58 . - - - - - - . 1990 . The Transformation of Corporate Control . Cambridge , MA . : Harvard University Press . Fligstein , Neil and Peter Brantley . 1992 . " Bank Control , Owner Control or Organizational Dynamics : Who Controls the Modern Corporation . " American Journal of Sociology 98 : 280 - 307 . Fligstein , N . and Robert Freeland . 1995 . " Theoretical and Comparative Perspectives on Corporate Organization . " Annual Review of Sociology 21 : 21 - 43 . 46 Fligstein , Neil and Iona Mara - Drita . Forthcoming . " How to Make a Market : Reflections on the European Community ' s Single Market Program " . American Journal of Sociology , forthcoming . Fligstein , Neil and Linda Markowitz . 1993 . " The Finance Conception of the Corporation and the Financial Reorganization of Large American Corporations , 1979 - 1988 . " Pp . 185 - 206 in Sociology and the Public Agenda edited by W . J . Wilson . Beverly Hills , CA . : Sage . Friedman , Benjamin . 1985 . " The Substitutability of Debt and Equity Structures . " Pp . 23 - 39 in Corporate Capital Structures in the United States edited by Benjamin Friedman . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Gamson , William . 1975 . The Strategy of Social Protest . Homewood , IL : Dorsey Press . Geertz , Clifford . 1983 . Local Knowledge . New York : Basic Books . Gerlach , Michael . 1992 . Alliance Capitalism . Berkeley , CA . : University of California Press . Granovetter , Mark . 1985 . " Economic Action , Social Structure , and Embeddedness . " American Journal of Sociology 91 : 481 - 510 . Hadley , Eleanor . 1970 . Antitrust in Japan . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Hall , Peter . 1989 . The Political Power of Economic Ideas . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Hamilton , Gary and Nicole Biggart . 1988 . " Market Culture and Authority : a Comparative Analysis of Management and 47 Organization in the Far East . " American Journal of Sociology 94 : S52 - 94 . Hannan , Michael and John Freeman . 1977 . " The Population Ecology of Organizations " . American Journal of Sociology 82 : 929 - 64 . - - - - - - . 1985 . " Where Do Organizations Come From ? " Sociological Forum 1 : 50 - 72 . Hogan , William . 1970 . Economic History of the Iron and Steel Industry . Lexington , MA : D . C . Heath . Hooks , Greg . 1990 . " The Rise of the Pentagon and U . S . State Building . " American Journal of Sociology 96 : 358 - 404 . Jensen , Michael . 1989 . " Eclipse of the Public Corporation . " Harvard Business Review : 61 - 73 . Jensen , Michael and Paul Meckling . 1974 . " Theory of the Firm : Managerial Behavior , Agency Costs , and Ownership Structure . " Journal of Financial Economics 3 : 305 - 360 . Johnson , Chalmers . 1981 . MITI and the Japanese Miracle . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Kolko , Gabriel . 1963 . The Triumph of Conservatism . New York : Free Press . Krasner , Stephen . 1988 . " Sovereignty : An Institutional Perspective . " Comparative Political Studies 21 : 66 - 94 . Laumann , Edward and David Knoke . 1989 . The Organizational State . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Lincoln , James , Michael Gerlach , and Peggy Takahashi . 1992 . " Keiretsu networks in Japan " . American Sociological Review 48 57 : 561 - 85 . March , James . 1961 . " The Firm as a Political Coalition . " Administrative Science Quarterly 2 : 23 - 41 . March , James and Johan Olsen . 1989 . Rediscovering Institutions . New York : Free Press . McAdam , Doug . 1982 . Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Nelson , Richard and Sidney Winter . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Cambridge , MA . : Harvard University Press . Padgett , John and Chris Ansell . 1992 . " Robust Action and the Rise of the Medici . " American Journal of Sociology 98 : 1259 - 1320 . Pfeffer , Jeffrey . 1981 . Power in Organizations . Marshfield , MA . : Pittman . Pfeffer , Jeffrey and Gerald Salancik . 1978 . The External Control of Organizations . New York : Harper Row . Podolny , Joel . 1993 . " A Status Based Model of Market Competition . " American Journal of Sociology 98 : 829 - 72 . Powell , Walter and Peter Brantley . 1992 . " Competitive Cooperation in Biotechnology : Learning Through Networks ? " Pp . 366 - 94 in Networks and Organizations edited by N . Nohria and R . Eccles . Boston , MA . : Harvard University Business School Press . Powell , Walter and Laurel Smith - Doerr . 1994 . " Networks and Economic life . " Pp . 368 - 403 in The Handbook of Economic 49 Sociology edited by N . Smelser and R . Swedburg . New York : Russell Sage . Prechel , Harland . 1994 . " Economic Crisis and the Centralization of Control . " American Sociological Review 59 : 723 - 45 . Roe , M . 1994 . Strong owners , Weak managers . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Snow , David , E . B . Rochford , S . Worden , and R . Benford . 1986 . " Frame Alignment and Mobilization . " American Sociological Review 51 : 464 - 481 . Stark , David 1992 . " Path Dependence and Privatization Strategies in East Central Europe . " Eastern European Politics and Societies 6 : 17 - 51 . - - - - - - . 1996 . " Recombinant Property in East European Capitalism . " American Journal of Sociology 101 : 993 - 1028 . Stinchcombe , Arthur . 1965 . " Social Structure and Organization . " Pp . 142 - 93 in The Handbook of Organizations edited by J . March . Chicago , IL : Rand McNally . Swidler , Ann . 1986 . " Culture in Action . " American Sociological Review 51 : 273 - 286 . Steinmo , Svein , Katherine Thelen , and Frederick Longstreth . 1992 . Structuring Politics . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Tarrow , Sidney . 1994 . Power in Movement . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Thorelli , Hans 1955 . Federal Antitrust Policy . Baltimore , MD : 50 Johns Hopkins Press . Useem , Michael . 1993 . Executive Defense . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . White , Harrison . 1981 . " Where Do Markets Come From ? " American Journal of Sociology 87 : 517 - 47 . - - - - - - . 1992 . Identity and Control . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Williamson , Oliver . The Economic Institutions of Capitalism . New York : Free Press . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . 1991 . " Comparative economic organization . " Administrative Science Quarterly 36 : 269 - 96 . Zelizar , Viviana . 1983 . Markets and Morals . Princeton , N . J . : Princeton University Press . Footnotes 1 . Finance economics , agency theory , and transaction cost theory are all attempts to specify how profit maximizing social relations evolve to govern firms and industries . Some proponents argue that all firms in every market ( defined in product or geographic terms ) will ultimately converge ( Jensen , 1989 ) , but others are prepared to recognize that preexisting social relations might provide additional efficiencies ( Williamson , 1991 ) . Evolutionary theory ( Nelson and Winter 1980 ) and path dependence arguments ( Arthur 1989 ) can be used in a very similar way to account for the dynamics of real markets . 2 . In White ' s ( 1981 ) model , this is done by firm ' s watching one another ' s pricing and production behavior and then deciding to differentiate their product from their competitors . The main difference between White ' s argument and the argument proposed here is that I want to view this process as a political process as opposed to an economic one . 3 . White ' s ( 1981 ) model is very close to what the population ecologists would call firms trying to create a " niche . " The search for a niche is an attempt to avoid direct competition by differentiating your product from those of your competitors . 4 . One could argue that markets for illegal goods develop and that this negates the arguments about the role of states in markets . My view is that illegal markets depend on states in a great many ways as well . For instance , illegal markets use many of the commercial channels that were set up by legal markets ( e . g . shipping and banking ) . The definition of a market as illegal implies much about how it is likely to be organized . Hence , the conception of control governing illegal markets will not be ratified by states , but will be a reaction against them . 5 . Much of this discussion is inspired by the recent literature in political science that defines itself as historical institutionalism ( March and Olsen 1989 ; Hall 1989 ; Steinmo , Thelen , and Longstreth 1992 ) . 6 . This perspective does not imply that the state is pivotal for every economic process . Even in societies where states have a history of intervention , state involvement is variable and its effects are variable as well . The state ' s role depends on which market is being discussed and the current conditions in that or related markets . 7 . The purpose here is not to develop a theory of the forms of states , but only to note their potential influence on market formation through their power to make the rules that govern all forms of social activity in a given geographic area . 8 . My view of markets is roughly consistent with the idea of organizational fields , in that a market consists of firms who orient their actions towards one another ( DiMaggio and Powell , 1983 ) . I have elaborated this view by considering how markets are constructed and the roles that conceptions of control and politics play in this process . 9 . I do not mean to imply that markets and industries are the same thing . Markets involve buyers and sellers of a commodity whereby industries refer to producers of similar commodities . Another issue is that most large firms participate in many markets . For instance , there are a number of markets where steel is sold . The firms who produce the product often sell into different markets . Since the basic product is similar across the markets ( although its end use may be different ; i . e . , rails , automobiles , bridges ) and the participants in these markets take one another into account in their actions , it is useful to speak of the steel industry . The general abstract dynamics discussed within markets can be played out across producers of some product or set of related products . 10 . Invader organizations or new actions by challenger organizations do not necessarily produce a new conception of control . Actions can be oriented toward shifting the identities of challengers and incumbents within a market , and thereby preserving the basis of the noncompetitive order . It is only when 54 the situation is fluid ( i . e . , the market is in crisis ) that it is possible to create a " social movement " around a new conception of control .