1 Co - entangled actin - microtubule composites exhibit tunable stiffening and power - law stress relaxation Shea N . Ricketts a , Jennifer L . Ross b and Rae M . Robertson - Anderson * a a Department of Physics and Biophysics , University of San Diego , 5998 Alcala Park , San Diego , CA 92110 b Department of Physics , University of Massachusetts , Amherst , 666 N . Pleasant St . , Amherst , MA 01003 * randerson @ sandiego . edu Abstract We use optical tweezers microrheology and fluorescence microscopy to characterize the nonlinear mesoscale mechanics and mobility of in vitro co - entangled actin - microtubule composites . We create a suite of randomly - oriented , well - mixed networks of actin and microtubules by co - polymerizing varying ratios of actin and tubulin in situ . To perturb each composite far from equilibrium , we use optical tweezers to displace an embedded microsphere a distance greater than the lengths of the filaments at a speed much faster than their intrinsic relaxation rates . We simultaneously measure the resistive force the filaments exert and the subsequent force relaxation . We find that the presence of a large fraction of microtubules ( > 0 . 7 ) is needed to substantially increase the resistive force , which is accompanied by large heterogeneities in force response . Actin minimizes these heterogeneities by reducing the mesh size of the composites and supporting microtubules against buckling . Composites also undergo a sharp transition from stress - softening to stiffening when the fraction of microtubules ( φ T ) exceeds 0 . 5 , by microtubules suppressing actin bending fluctuations . The induced force following strain relaxes via two time - dependent power - law decays . The first decay phase , with scaling exponents that increase proportionally with the fraction of actin , signifies actin bending fluctuations . Alternatively , the second phase , with a φ T - independent scaling exponent of ~ 0 . 4 , is indicative of filaments reptating out of deformed entanglement constraints . Corresponding mobility measurements of steady - state actin and microtubules show that both filaments are more mobile in equimolar composites ( φ T = 0 . 5 ) compared to networks of primarily actin or microtubules . This non - monotonic dependence of mobility on φ T , which further demonstrates the important role mesh size plays in composites , highlights the surprising emergent properties that can arise in composites . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 2 Introduction The cytoskeleton is a complex network of protein filaments that gives eukaryotic cells structural integrity and shape while enabling cell motility , division and morphogenesis . Such multifunctional mechanics and processes are possible because of the varying structural properties of cytoskeletal proteins , as well as the interactions between them ( 1 - 4 ) . Actin and tubulin are two such proteins that form filaments with very different stiffnesses . Tubulin dimers ( ~ 110 kDa ) polymerize into 25 nm wide hollow , rigid microtubules with persistence lengths of l p ≈ 1 mm , whereas actin monomers ( ~ 42 kDa ) polymerize into ~ 7 nm wide semiflexible filaments ( F - actin ) with l p ≈ 10 µ m ( 5 , 6 ) . At high concentrations , both actin filaments and microtubules form sterically interacting entangled networks with filament dynamics that can be described by the reptation or tube model . Within this framework , each filament is confined to a tube - like region formed by surrounding constraining filaments , and is forced to relax induced stress by diffusing curvilinearly ( i . e . reptating ) out of its deformed tube ( 7 , 8 ) . The timescale for this process , often termed disengagement , is on the order of minutes to hours for actin and microtubules ( 9 - 11 ) . Entangled actin can also partially relax via faster mechanisms such as bending fluctuations ( 12 - 14 ) . The degree of filament entanglement and density in networks of actin and microtubules can be characterized by their respective mesh sizes , ξ A = 0 . 3 / c A 1 / 2 and ξ M = 0 . 89 / c T 1 / 2 , where c A and c T are the corresponding protein concentrations in units of mg / ml and the resulting mesh sizes are in units of microns ( 15 - 17 ) . As can be seen from these equations , because of the differences in molar mass and filament structure of the two proteins , the mesh size for a microtubule network of a given molarity is ~ 2 x larger than that for actin . Steric interactions between actin and microtubules within cells directly influence cell shape and mechanics by regulating filament mobility and providing coordinated reinforcement to the cytoskeleton ( 6 , 18 ) . Processes such as cell motility and cytokinesis also rely on the physical interactions between these filaments ( 6 , 19 ) . Further , while individual microtubules buckle under substantial compressive forces ( 20 - 23 ) , steric interactions with the elastic actin network allow microtubules to bear larger compressive loads within the cell ( 6 , 10 , 20 , 24 ) . Studies of composite networks of actin and microtubules are further motivated by materials engineering , in which soft elastic networks are often reinforced with stiff fibers or rigid rods . By tuning the concentration of rigid rods relative to the flexible filaments , bulk properties of composites can be optimized to create lightweight materials with high strength and stiffness ( 19 , 25 ) . Such composites also offer enhanced control over large - scale mechanics and increased failure limits , tuned by the mechanical differences of the two composite constituents . Finally , composites both in nature and in industry often exhibit emergent properties in which the resulting mechanical properties are not a simple sum of the single - component network mechanics . In vitro studies of cytoskeleton networks have largely focused on single - component systems of either actin or microtubules ( 15 , 26 - 28 ) . One previous passive microrheology study of an equimolar composite of actin and microtubules showed that while entangled actin solutions appeared incompressible , the composite displayed a finite compressibility resulting from the high stiffness of microtubules ( 10 , 29 ) . This same study showed that the crossover to viscous behavior that microtubule networks exhibit at low strain rates was not observed for actin solutions or equimolar composites . A previous nonlinear bulk rheology study of crosslinked actin networks doped with low concentrations of microtubules ( ~ 3 – 10 x lower than the actin concentration ) showed that the addition of microtubules led to nonlinear strain - stiffening as compared to the signature strain - softening behavior of entangled and weakly - crosslinked actin networks ( 19 , 30 , 31 ) . The authors explained this shift as due to stiff microtubules suppressing actin bending modes and local fluctuations , leading to enhanced stretching and affine deformation . While these few studies revealed important emergent properties in actin - microtubule composites , they were limited in the parameter space of composite makeup . Thus , the question remains as to how the relative concentrations of actin and microtubules impact the mechanical properties of composites . Further , these studies probed the bulk response resulting from large - scale nonlinear strains , and the microscopic linear response due to passively diffusing microspheres . Yet , the relevant . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 3 lengthscales in actin - microtubule composites are in between these two scales , with persistence lengths of ~ 10 µ m to 1 mm , filament lengths of ~ 5 – 20 µ m , and mesh sizes on the order of a micron . Finally , in these prior studies , composites were created by adding pre - polymerized microtubules to actin , rather than polymerizing both proteins together . This method often induces flow alignment of filaments , shearing of microtubules , and bundling of actin filaments , preventing the formation of truly isotropic , well integrated , co - entangled composites . Here , we create co - polymerized , co - entangled actin - microtubule composites with systematically varying actin : tubulin molar ratios . We characterize the nonlinear mesoscale mechanics of composites by pulling optically - trapped microspheres a distance of 30 µ m through the composites at a rate much faster than the system relaxation rates while measuring the local force induced in the composites . These measurements perturb the composites far from equilibrium , and are uniquely able to probe possible buckling , rupture , and rearrangement events , as well as micro - and mesoscale spatial heterogeneities in the composites . We complement these nonlinear measurements with image analysis of steady - state composites . We find that composites with more microtubules than actin ( φ T > 0 . 5 ) exhibit stress - stiffening as opposed to the softening displayed in actin - dominated composites . The onset of stiffening is coupled with a large drop in steady - state filament mobility . We also find that high concentrations of microtubules ( φ T > 0 . 7 ) are needed to substantially increase resistive force and induce more pronounced heterogeneities in force response , which we show arises from the smaller mesh size of actin relative to microtubules . This mesh size mismatch also leads to an emergent non - monotonic dependence of filament mobility on φ T , with equimolar composites ( φ T = 0 . 5 ) displaying the most pronounced steady - state mobility . Following strain , the induced force relaxes via two power - law decays for all composites . The initial fast decay , arising from actin bending modes , is increasingly suppressed as the relative concentration of microtubules increases . Conversely , the second phase slow decay is robust to changes in network composition and is indicative of entangled filaments diffusing out of non - classical entanglement tubes . Materials and Methods Rabbit skeletal actin , porcine brain tubulin , and rhodamine - labeled tubulin were purchased from Cytoskeleton ( AKL99 , T240 , TL590M ) , and Alexa - 488 - labeled actin was purchased from Thermofisher ( A12373 ) . To form actin - microtubule composites , varying ratios of unlabeled actin monomers and tubulin dimers were suspended in an aqueous buffer containing 100 mM PIPES , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA , 1 mM ATP , 1 mM GTP , and 5 µ M Taxol to a final total protein concentration of 11 . 3 µ M ( Fig 1A ) . This buffer was optimized to achieve co - polymerization and stabilization of actin and microtubules . To image composite architecture , 0 . 13 µ M of pre - assembled Alexa - 488 - labeled actin filaments , at a 1 : 1 labeled : unlabeled monomer ratio , and 0 . 19 µ M pre - assembled rhodamine - labeled microtubules , at a 1 : 5 labeling ratio , were also added to the solution as tracer filaments ( Fig 1B ) . For microrheology measurements ( Fig 1C , D ) , a sparse amount of 4 . 5 µ m microspheres ( probes , Polysciences , Inc . ) , coated with Alexa - 488 BSA ( Invitrogen ) , were added . This protein and bead mixture was pipetted into a sample chamber made from a glass slide and coverslip , separated by ~ 100 µ m with double - sided tape to accommodate ~ 20 µ L , and sealed with epoxy . Co - polymerization of both proteins was achieved by incubating the sample for 1 hour at 37 ºC prior to measurement , resulting in a well - integrated and stable co - entangled composite ( Fig S1 in the Supplemental Materials ) . The molar fraction of tubulin in composites , φ T = [ tubulin ] / ( [ actin ] + [ tubulin ] ) where [ actin ] and [ tubulin ] are the molar concentrations of each protein , was varied from 0 to 1 while total protein concentration ( labeled and unlabeled actin and microtubules ) was held fixed at 11 . 6 µ M . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 4 The optical trap used in microrheology measurements was formed using an IX71 fluorescence microscope ( Olympus ) outfitted with a 1064 nm Nd : YAG fiber laser ( Manlight ) focused with a 60 x 1 . 4 NA objective ( Olympus ) . A position - sensing detector ( Pacific Silicon Sensor ) measured the deflection of the trapping laser , which is proportional to the force acting on the trapped probe . Trap stiffness was calibrated using the Stokes drag method ( 32 - 34 ) . During force measurements , a probe embedded in the composite was trapped and moved a distance x = 30 µ m at a constant speed of 20 µ m / s relative to the sample chamber using a nanopositioning piezoelectric stage ( Mad City Labs ) ( Fig 1C , D ) . Laser deflection and stage position were recorded at a rate of 20 kHz using custom - written Labview code . Post - measurement data analysis was done using custom - written MATLAB software . Displayed force curves in Figures 2 and 4 are averages over an ensemble of 25 different trials , i , with each i th trial located in a different region of the network separated by > 100 µ m . To visualize network mobility ( Fig 5 ) and architecture ( Fig S1 ) , we used a Nikon A1R laser scanning confocal microscope with 60 x objective to collect 2D images , 2D time - series , and 3D images of composites . The microscope has 488 nm and 532 nm lasers to alternately record separate images in green and red channels to visualize 488 - actin and rhodamine - tubulin , respectively . To characterize filament mobility within composites , 512x512 pixel time - series with pixel size of 0 . 41 µ m were recorded at 30 fps for 3 minutes in green and red channels . Post - imaging analysis was carried out using ImageJ / Fiji . Color channels were separated upon import and analyzed separately . To reduce noise , each time - series was averaged over every 30 frames , resulting in 1 fps time - series of 180 frames . We then computed the standard deviation ( SD ) of intensity values over time for each pixel of the time - series , and displayed the result as a single 512x512 , 32 - bit image which we call the “ mobility image ” ( Fig 5A ) . In these images , SD intensity correlates with filament mobility such that a low ( black ) SD results from a filament remaining in the same position over time ( no change in pixel intensity over time ) while a high ( white ) SD indicates high filament mobility ( pixel intensity changing a lot over time ) . The intensity of each pixel of the mobility image was then averaged over the entire image ( 44 µ m 2 ) to give a spatial average of the standard deviation for each time - series ( < SD > ) . We performed this measurement on 3 - 5 movies for each network composition ( φ T ) . The average standard deviation < SD > and the corresponding standard error was computed for each φ T and plotted for the actin ( green ) and the microtubule ( red ) channels separately ( Fig 5B ) . Results and Discussion While actin and microtubules coexist in cells , the standard in vitro polymerization and network formation conditions for the two proteins are incompatible . The few previous studies that have investigated actin - microtubule networks have pre - polymerized and stabilized microtubules before adding to actin monomers to polymerize ( 3 , 10 ) , which can lead to flow alignment and rupturing of microtubules upon pipetting into actin monomer solutions and / or the experimental sample chamber . We instead sought to assemble unperturbed co - polymerized networks of actin and microtubules entangled with one another within an experimental sample chamber . To do so , we designed hybrid buffers and polymerization methods detailed in the Materials and Methods . Our methods result in isotropic , well - integrated composite networks of co - entangled actin and microtubules ( Fig 1B , Fig S1 ) . We use active microrheology to measure the local force response of actin - microtubule composites with varying tubulin molar fractions , φ T , subject to nonlinear strains . The data presented in Figure 2 shows the ensemble - averaged force , < F i ( x ) > , exerted on optically trapped microspheres as they are pulled a distance x through each composite . As shown , introducing higher fractions of tubulin to composites increases resistive force ( Fig 2A ) and stiffness ( Fig 2B , C ) . The differential modulus , K ( x ) = d < F i ( x ) > / dx , quantifies the degree of network stiffness , so increasing and decreasing K ( x ) values during strain signify . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 5 stress stiffening and softening , respectively . As shown in Figure 2B , composites comprised of mostly actin ( tubulin fraction φ T ≤ 0 . 5 ) are initially relatively stiff but quickly soften . However , beyond φ T = 0 . 5 , composites undergo a stark transition , displaying an initially soft / viscous force response followed quickly by stress stiffening ( Fig 2B ) . We can quantify the degree of stiffening / softening during the strain by averaging K ( x ) over different strain distances x , which we denote as K avg , and normalizing K avg by the value measured at x = 0 , K 0 ( Fig 2C ) . As shown , for strains up to x = 1 µ m , the average differential modulus increases by an order of magnitude from its initial value for composites with mostly microtubules ( φ T ≥ 0 . 7 ) , while it drops by an order of magnitude for φ T ≤ 0 . 5 composites . As the strain continues ( i . e . x increases ) all composites exhibit increased softening as the force response approaches a viscous steady - state regime , as indicated by the measured forces approaching x - independent plateaus ( Fig 2A ) and the reduced K avg / K 0 values for x = 10 µ m compared to those for x = 1 µ m ( Fig 2C ) . These results are qualitatively in line with previous bulk rheology results for crosslinked actin networks doped with microtubules . As described in the Introduction , these studies found that the addition of microtubules led actin networks to stress - stiffen rather than soften , due to microtubules suppressing actin bending modes ( 15 , 19 , 35 ) . However , even for weakly - crosslinked actin networks , these studies found that microtubule fractions as low as φ T ≈ 0 . 3 induced stiffening ( 19 ) , as opposed to φ T > 0 . 5 in our experiments . Because crosslinking in actin networks can suppress bending modes and lead to stress stiffening ( 36 ) , this difference likely arises from the lack of crosslinking in our composites . Further , it has been suggested that microtubules are able to propagate mechanical loads long distances across the cytoskeleton , enhancing the large - scale elastic response of otherwise flexible networks ( 29 ) . Thus , the differences between our results and those of macrorheology may suggest that actin - microtubule composites have the ability to exhibit lengthscale - dependent nonlinear stress response , such as softening at the micro - and mesoscales but stiffening on a macroscopic scale . In fact , previous studies have shown that entangled actin networks can display scale - dependent nonlinear elasticity , exhibiting stress - stiffening at the microscale and stress - softening in bulk ( 37 ) . Increasing the fraction of tubulin in composites also increases the heterogeneities in force response ( Fig 3 ) . Microscale heterogeneities are displayed by increased noise or “bumpiness” in the individual force curves ( Fig 3A ) , while large - scale heterogeneities can be seen by comparing the force curves for all i trials measured in different regions of the sample ( separated by > 100 µ m ) . Figure 3A , which shows the individual force curves , F i ( x ) , for all i measurements for actin networks ( φ T = 0 ) , microtubule networks ( φ T = 1 ) , and φ T = 0 . 5 composites , clearly shows that increasing the fraction of microtubules increases heterogeneity at both scales . To quantify the microscale heterogeneity and its dependence on tubulin fraction , we calculate the standard deviation of F i ( x ) values during the strain for each i th trial , which we denote as Δ x F i . As shown in Fig 3B , Δ x F i remains relatively small and unchanged until a tubulin fraction of φ T ≈ 0 . 7 after which the standard deviation values significantly increase . The large peaks and dips in force curves responsible for the increased Δ x F i in microtubule - dominated composites are suggestive of microtubule buckling events . Previous studies have shown that microtubules buckle under large compressive loads ( 22 , 23 ) , except when they are integrated within the cytoskeletal matrix ( 20 , 24 , 29 , 38 ) . In line with these results , we interpret the displayed reduced standard deviation and elimination of large dips in the force during strain for φ T < 0 . 7 composites as due to the elastic actin network providing reinforcement to microtubules against buckling . To evaluate the large - scale heterogeneities , we average each F i ( x ) over the strain x , which we signify as F i - avg , and calculate the ensemble - averaged F i - avg , < F i - avg > , as well as the corresponding percent range , Δ avg = 100 * ( F i - avg _ max – F i - avg _ min ) / ( 2 < F i - avg > ) . As shown in Figure 3C we find that the average force , ( < F i - avg > ) is ~ 3 x larger for microtubule networks than that for actin networks and the corresponding . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 6 percent range ( Δ avg ) is doubled . However , surprisingly , the resistive force and heterogeneities do not increase smoothly as φ T increases . Rather , they remain relatively unchanged until the tubulin fraction exceeds 0 . 7 . To understand these results , we calculate the predicted mesh size for single - species actin and microtubule networks , ξ A and ξ M , at each concentration present in composites . As displayed in the top axis of Figure 3C , ξ M / ξ A remains larger than 1 up to φ T ≈ 0 . 8 , with the actin mesh size ranging from ~ 6 to 1 . 25 x smaller than that for microtubules . Only at tubulin molar fractions of 0 . 9 and 1 do we see a marked increase in average force and range in force as the tubulin mesh size becomes smaller than that for actin ( ξ M / ξ A < 1 ) . Thus , up to φ T ≈ 0 . 8 a tighter , more entangled actin network pervades the system and suppresses the heterogeneities caused by larger , more rigid microtubules . In other words , the effective mesh formed in the co - entangled composite is dominated by actin rather than microtubules until tubulin comprises ~ 80 % of the proteins present in the composite ( Fig 3C , D ) . Further , the “ effective ” composite mesh size ( i . e . the smaller of the two mesh sizes , ξ A and ξ M ) increases as φ T increases from 0 to 0 . 7 . So while semiflexible actin filaments are being replaced by rigid microtubules , the decrease in filament density / entanglements offsets the increase in filament rigidity such that the resistive force remains relatively unchanged until φ T > 0 . 7 . This effect is also seen in our steady - state image analysis described below ( Fig 5 ) . We also characterize the relaxation of induced force following strain for all composites . As shown in Figure 4A , the force relaxations for all composites display two phases of power - law relaxation in time ( < F i > ~ t - α ) , an initial fast decay followed by a slow decay . Scaling exponents for the fast decay decrease roughly linearly , from α 1 ≈ 1 . 7 to 0 . 5 , with increasing fractions of tubulin , and essentially disappear for microtubule networks ( Fig 4B , C ) . Conversely , the exponents for the slow decay are largely insensitive to composite composition , displaying an average exponent of α 2 ≈ 0 . 4 independent of tubulin fraction ( Fig 4C ) . These unique relaxation characteristics are in opposition to expected dynamics for entangled polymer systems , in which force relaxation is typically described by a sum of exponential decays due to distinct relaxation mechanisms with well - separated timescales ( 12 , 39 ) . The slowest of these relaxation mechanisms is predicted to be that of the entangled polymers diffusing out of deformed entanglement tubes ( i . e . disengagement ) . However , previous studies have shown that entangled biopolymer networks can exhibit power - law force relaxation when subject to nonlinear strains ( 40 , 41 ) . In these studies , force relaxation transitioned from exponential to power - law when the strain rate exceeded a critical value ( ~ 2 x slower than the rate used here ) . The power - law exponent of ~ 0 . 5 could be explained as arising from non - classical disengagement of entangled polymers from strain - dilated entanglement tubes ( 40 , 42 , 43 ) . Namely , the nonlinear strain dilates the entanglement tubes , so , following strain , tubes shrink back to their original size over the timescale that filaments reptate out of the deformed tubes . The result is that , as each filament attempts to reptate out of its tube , the characteristic disengagement time grows longer , thereby producing power - law decay . Our second relaxation phase , with scaling exponent close to the previous finding of 0 . 5 for actin networks , can likewise be explained by this non - classical disengagement mechanism ( 40 ) . Further , the insensitivity of α 2 to φ T indicates that entanglements rather than filament flexibility drive the relaxation . Unlike the slow relaxation rate , the fast relaxation has a clear dependence on composite composition . As α 1 scales roughly linearly with the fraction of actin in composites , this fast mode likely arises from actin filaments in the composite . In contrast to rigid microtubules , entangled actin can partially relax induced stress via bending fluctuations , on faster timescales than that of disengagement ( 12 , 14 ) . However , introducing microtubules can reduce these non - affine bending deformations ( 15 ) , which can also promote stress - stiffening ( as seen in Fig 2 ) . Because composites exhibit a clear transition to stiffening behavior as φ T increases , we can understand this fast relaxation mode as arising from actin bending fluctuations that microtubules increasingly suppress as φ T increases . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 7 To correlate the measured nonlinear stress characteristics with the corresponding steady - state dynamics we quantify the mobility of actin and microtubules in steady - state composites by analyzing time - series acquired using two - color fluorescence confocal microscopy ( Fig 5 ) . As described in the Materials and Methods , we use the standard deviation of pixel intensities over time ( SD ) as a measure of mobility . As shown in Figure 5 , the mobility of both actin and microtubules within composites display a surprising non - monotonic dependence on tubulin fraction : mobility increases as φ T increases to 0 . 5 after which mobility is reduced . The drop in mobility occurs at the same tubulin fraction at which composites transition from stress - softening to stiffening , further demonstrating that stiffening indeed arises from microtubules suppressing filament fluctuations . The increase in mobility as φ T increases to 0 . 5 is less intuitive as semiflexible actin filaments are being replaced with more rigid microtubules . However , while the composite is becoming more rigid the “ effective ” mesh size actually increases with φ T until φ T ≈ 0 . 7 , allowing both actin and microtubules to more easily move . This increasing mobility also aligns with our finding that the force response is largely insensitive to φ T until ~ 0 . 7 ( Fig 3C ) . While network rigidity increases , which would increase resistive force , the mesh size is also increasing , allowing filaments to more easily move to alleviate stress , offsetting this resistance . Conclusion We use optical tweezers microrheology and two - color fluorescence microscopy to characterize the mesoscale force response and mobility of co - entangled composites of actin and microtubules , which we create by in situ co - polymerization of actin monomers and tubulin dimers using custom - designed hybrid conditions . By systematically varying the relative concentrations of actin and microtubules ( quantified by the molar fraction of tubulin φ T ) , we show that composites exhibit a wide range of dynamical properties that can be tuned by φ T . Our collective results demonstrate that microtubules suppress actin bending fluctuations , enabling composites to stiffen in response to strain and relax induced force more slowly ; while actin supports microtubules against buckling by providing a soft semiflexible mesh that permeates the larger microtubule mesh and partially absorbs induced stress . We also show that the interplay between varying mesh sizes and filament rigidity leads to emergent fast mobility in equimolar composites compared to networks of mostly actin or microtubules . These results demonstrate the synergistic ways in which thin , semiflexible actin filaments and thick , rigid microtubules can sterically interact to enable the myriad of mechanical processes and properties the cytoskeleton exhibits . Our quantitative analysis of the dependence of mechanical properties and mobility on composite composition also provides important new insights into how composite materials can be tuned to display user - defined mechanics , and how cells can likewise tune their mechanical properties by using varying cytoskeletal filament networks . This study provides the groundwork for future investigations on in vitro cytoskeletal composites that include crosslinking proteins , intermediate filaments , and motor proteins . These future studies will expand the phase space of mechanical properties that these bio - inspired composite materials can exhibit , and shed light onto the role that each of these additional components play in the mechanics of the cytoskeleton . Author Contributions S . N . R . designed experiments , conducted experiments , analyzed data and wrote the manuscript ; J . L . R . designed experiments , analyzed and interpreted data , and helped write the manuscript . R . M . R . - A . designed experiments , analyzed and interpreted data , and wrote the manuscript . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 8 Acknowledgements This research was funded by a Scialog Collaborative Innovation Award from Research Corporation and the Gordon & Betty Moore Foundation ( grant no . 24192 , awarded to RMR - A and JLR ) ; an NSF CAREER Award ( grant no . 1255446 , awarded to RMR - A ) ; References 1 . Rodriguez , O . C . , A . W . Schaefer , C . A . Mandato , P . Forscher , W . M . Bement , and C . M . Waterman - Storer . 2003 . Conserved microtubule – actin interactions in cell movement and morphogenesis . Nature cell biology 5 : 599 - 609 . 2 . López , M . P . , F . Huber , I . Grigoriev , M . O . Steinmetz , A . Akhmanova , G . H . Koenderink , and M . Dogterom . 2014 . Actin – microtubule coordination at growing microtubule ends . Nature communications 5 . 3 . López , M . P . , F . Huber , I . Grigoriev , M . O . Steinmetz , A . Akhmanova , M . Dogterom , and G . H . Koenderink . 2014 . In vitro reconstitution of dynamic microtubules interacting with actin filament networks . Reconstituting the cytoskeleton 540 : 301 - 320 . 4 . Jensen , M . H . , E . J . Morris , R . D . Goldman , and D . A . Weitz . 2014 . Emergent properties of composite semiflexible biopolymer networks . Bioarchitecture 4 : 138 - 143 . 5 . Gittes , F . , B . Mickey , J . Nettleton , and J . Howard . 1993 . Flexural rigidity of microtubules and actin filaments measured from thermal fluctuations in shape . The Journal of cell biology 120 : 923 - 934 . 6 . Huber , F . , A . Boire , M . P . Lopez , and G . H . Koenderink . 2015 . Cytoskeletal crosstalk : when three different personalities team up . Current opinion in cell biology 32 : 39 - 47 . 7 . De Gennes , P . - G . 1979 . Scaling concepts in polymer physics . Cornell university press . 8 . Doi , M . , and S . F . Edwards . 1988 . The theory of polymer dynamics . oxford university press . 9 . Isambert , H . , and A . Maggs . 1996 . Dynamics and rheology of actin solutions . Macromolecules 29 : 1036 - 1040 . 10 . Pelletier , V . , N . Gal , P . Fournier , and M . L . Kilfoil . 2009 . Microrheology of microtubule solutions and actin - microtubule composite networks . Physical review letters 102 : 188303 . 11 . Gardel , M . L . , K . E . Kasza , C . P . Brangwynne , J . Liu , and D . A . Weitz . 2008 . Mechanical response of cytoskeletal networks . Methods in cell biology 89 : 487 - 519 . 12 . Gurmessa , B . , R . Fitzpatrick , T . T . Falzone , and R . M . Robertson - Anderson . 2016 . Entanglement density tunes microscale nonlinear response of entangled Actin . Macromolecules 49 : 3948 - 3955 . 13 . Xu , J . , Y . Tseng , and D . Wirtz . 2000 . Strain Hardening of actin filament networks regulation by the dynamic cross - linking protein α - actinin . Journal of Biological Chemistry 275 : 35886 - 35892 . 14 . Semmrich , C . , R . J . Larsen , and A . R . Bausch . 2008 . Nonlinear mechanics of entangled F - actin solutions . Soft Matter 4 : 1675 - 1680 . 15 . Lin , Y . - C . , G . H . Koenderink , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz . 2007 . Viscoelastic properties of microtubule networks . Macromolecules 40 : 7714 - 7720 . 16 . Gardel , M . , M . Valentine , J . C . Crocker , A . Bausch , and D . Weitz . 2003 . Microrheology of entangled F - actin solutions . Physical review letters 91 : 158302 . 17 . Schmidt , C . F . , M . Baermann , G . Isenberg , and E . Sackmann . 1989 . Chain dynamics , mesh size , and diffusive transport in networks of polymerized actin : a quasielastic light scattering and microfluorescence study . Macromolecules 22 : 3638 - 3649 . 18 . Shabbir , S . H . , M . M . Cleland , R . D . Goldman , and M . Mrksich . 2014 . Geometric control of vimentin intermediate filaments . Biomaterials 35 : 1359 - 1366 . 19 . Lin , Y . - C . , G . H . Koenderink , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz . 2011 . Control of non - linear elasticity in F - actin networks with microtubules . Soft Matter 7 : 902 - 906 . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 9 20 . Wang , N . , K . Naruse , D . Stamenovi ć , J . J . Fredberg , S . M . Mijailovich , I . M . Toli ć - Nørrelykke , T . Polte , R . Mannix , and D . E . Ingber . 2001 . Mechanical behavior in living cells consistent with the tensegrity model . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98 : 7765 - 7770 . 21 . Gupton , S . L . , W . C . Salmon , and C . M . Waterman - Storer . 2002 . Converging populations of f - actin promote breakage of associated microtubules to spatially regulate microtubule turnover in migrating cells . Current biology 12 : 1891 - 1899 . 22 . Dogterom , M . , and B . Yurke . 1997 . Measurement of the force - velocity relation for growing microtubules . Science 278 : 856 - 860 . 23 . Gittes , F . , E . Meyhöfer , S . Baek , and J . Howard . 1996 . Directional loading of the kinesin motor molecule as it buckles a microtubule . Biophysical Journal 70 : 418 - 429 . 24 . Brangwynne , C . P . , F . C . MacKintosh , S . Kumar , N . A . Geisse , J . Talbot , L . Mahadevan , K . K . Parker , D . E . Ingber , and D . A . Weitz . 2006 . Microtubules can bear enhanced compressive loads in living cells because of lateral reinforcement . J Cell Biol 173 : 733 - 741 . 25 . Das , M . , and F . MacKintosh . 2011 . Mechanics of soft composites of rods in elastic gels . Physical Review E 84 : 061906 . 26 . Stricker , J . , T . Falzone , and M . L . Gardel . 2010 . Mechanics of the F - actin cytoskeleton . Journal of biomechanics 43 : 9 - 14 . 27 . Gardel , M . L . , M . T . Valentine , and D . A . Weitz . 2005 . Microrheology . In Microscale diagnostic techniques . Springer . 1 - 49 . 28 . Hawkins , T . , M . Mirigian , M . S . Yasar , and J . L . Ross . 2010 . Mechanics of microtubules . Journal of biomechanics 43 : 23 - 30 . 29 . Das , M . , A . J . Levine , and F . MacKintosh . 2008 . Buckling and force propagation along intracellular microtubules . EPL ( Europhysics Letters ) 84 : 18003 . 30 . Gardel , M . , J . Shin , F . MacKintosh , L . Mahadevan , P . Matsudaira , and D . Weitz . 2004 . Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science 304 : 1301 - 1305 . 31 . Xu , J . , D . Wirtz , and T . D . Pollard . 1998 . Dynamic cross - linking by α - actinin determines the mechanical properties of actin filament networks . Journal of Biological Chemistry 273 : 9570 - 9576 . 32 . Williams , M . C . 2002 . Optical tweezers : measuring piconewton forces . Biophysics Textbook Online : http : / / www . biophysics . org / btol . 33 . Brau , R . , J . Ferrer , H . Lee , C . Castro , B . Tam , P . Tarsa , P . Matsudaira , M . Boyce , R . Kamm , and M . Lang . 2007 . Passive and active microrheology with optical tweezers . Journal of Optics A : Pure and Applied Optics 9 : S103 . 34 . Segur , J . B . , and H . E . Oberstar . 1951 . Viscosity of glycerol and its aqueous solutions . Industrial & Engineering Chemistry 43 : 2117 - 2120 . 35 . Bai , M . , A . R . Missel , W . S . Klug , and A . J . Levine . 2011 . The mechanics and affine – nonaffine transition in polydisperse semiflexible networks . Soft Matter 7 : 907 - 914 . 36 . Gurmessa , B . , S . Ricketts , and R . M . Robertson - Anderson . 2017 . Nonlinear Actin Deformations Lead to Network Stiffening , Yielding , and Nonuniform Stress Propagation . Biophysical Journal . 37 . Falzone , T . T . , and R . M . Robertson - Anderson . 2015 . Active entanglement - tracking microrheology directly couples macromolecular deformations to nonlinear microscale force response of entangled actin . ACS Macro Letters 4 : 1194 - 1199 . 38 . Robison , P . , M . A . Caporizzo , H . Ahmadzadeh , A . I . Bogush , C . Y . Chen , K . B . Margulies , V . B . Shenoy , and B . L . Prosser . 2016 . Detyrosinated microtubules buckle and bear load in contracting cardiomyocytes . Science 352 : aaf0659 . 39 . Robertson , R . M . , and D . E . Smith . 2007 . Direct measurement of the intermolecular forces confining a single molecule in an entangled polymer solution . Physical review letters 99 : 126001 . 40 . Falzone , T . T . , S . Blair , and R . M . Robertson - Anderson . 2015 . Entangled F - actin displays a unique crossover to microscale nonlinearity dominated by entanglement segment dynamics . Soft matter 11 : 4418 - 4423 . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 10 41 . Chapman , C . D . , and R . M . Robertson - Anderson . 2014 . Nonlinear microrheology reveals entanglement - driven molecular - level viscoelasticity of concentrated DNA . Physical review letters 113 : 098303 . 42 . Sussman , D . M . , and K . S . Schweizer . 2012 . Microscopic theory of quiescent and deformed topologically entangled rod solutions : General formulation and relaxation after nonlinear step strain . Macromolecules 45 : 3270 - 3284 . 43 . Sussman , D . M . , and K . S . Schweizer . 2013 . Entangled rigid macromolecules under continuous startup shear deformation : Consequences of a microscopically anharmonic confining tube . Macromolecules 46 : 5684 - 5693 . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 11 Figures FIGURE 1 Schematic of experimental approach . ( A ) Cartoon of molecular components used in actin - microtubule composites . The tubulin molar fraction , φ T = [ tubulin ] / ( [ actin ] + [ tubulin ] ) , is varied from 0 to 1 with total protein concentration fixed at 11 . 6 µ M . ( B ) To display network architecture , 0 . 13 µ M of actin and microtubules are labeled with Alexa - 488 ( green ) and rhodamine ( red ) , respectively . The image shown is a two - color laser scanning confocal image of a φ T = 0 . 5 composite . ( C ) For microrheology measurements an optically - trapped microsphere probe embedded in the composite is displaced a distance x = 30 µ m ( Strain , magenta ) at a speed of 20 µ m / s while the resistive force , F i ( x , t ) , that the composite exerts on the probe is measured ( Force , blue ) . ( D ) Sample microrheology data showing the resistive force ( blue ) and probe position ( magenta ) during ( Strain ) and following ( Relaxation ) probe displacement . Data shown is for the φ T = 0 . 5 composite . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 12 FIGURE 2 Mesoscale force response of actin - microtubule composites display a φ T - dependent crossover from stress - softening to stress - stiffening . ( A ) Ensemble - averaged resistive force , < F i ( x ) > , exerted on moving probe by actin - microtubule composites of varying tubulin molar fraction φ T ( listed in legend ) . Data shown is an average over 25 individual , i , measurements . ( B ) Differential modulus , K ( x ) , calculated as the derivative of the average force with respect to strain distance x ( K ( x ) = d < F i ( x ) > / dx ) . ( C ) Differential modulus values averaged over strain distances of x = 1 µ m ( black ) and x = 10 µ m ( grey ) , and normalized by the corresponding value at x = 0 ( K 0 ) for each composite ( K avg / K 0 ) . Strain distances averaged over are shown as dotted vertical lines in A . As shown , composites transition from stress - softening ( K avg / K 0 < 1 ) to stress - stiffening ( K avg / K 0 > 1 ) when the tubulin molar fraction φ T exceeds 0 . 5 . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 13 FIGURE 3 Microtubules increase average resistive force and heterogeneity of force response during strain . ( A ) Force curves for all 25 measurements , i , of composites with tubulin molar fractions of φ T = 0 ( red ) , 0 . 5 ( green ) and 1 ( purple ) . Distribution of force values during strain ( i . e . noise in force curves ) as well as trial - to - trial variability are much higher for 100 % microtubules compared to composites . ( B ) Standard deviation of the force values for each trial , Δ x F i , shows increasing microscale heterogeneity in the force response during strain with more microtubules . ( C ) Average force during strain , < F i - avg > , for each composite ( black ) , as well as the corresponding percent range in strain - averaged force , Δ avg = 100 * ( F i - avg _ max – F i - avg _ min ) / ( 2 < F i - avg > ) ( grey ) as a function of φ T ( bottom axis ) and ratio of microtubule mesh size to actin mesh size ξ M / ξ A ( top axis ) . As shown , both the average and range in force values are surprisingly unaffected by the presence of microtubules until a tubulin fraction of 0 . 9 . At these molar fractions ( φ T ≤ 0 . 7 ) , the mesh size of actin remains smaller than microtubules ( ξ M / ξ A > 1 ) . The dotted vertical line shows when the mesh sizes for both filaments are equal ( ξ M = ξ A ) . ( D ) Illustration of equimolar actin - microtubule composite ( φ T = 0 . 5 ) . As depicted , the actin mesh size is ~ 2 x smaller than the microtubule mesh , with ξ A = 0 . 6 µ m and ξ M = 1 . 1 µ m . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 14 FIGURE 4 Force relaxation of actin - microtubule composites following strain exhibits two - phase power law decay . ( A ) Relaxation of ensemble - averaged induced force following strain as a function of time for composites of varying tubulin fractions φ T . Color scheme is as in Figures 3 and 4 . Induced force relaxes via two distinct power law decays : an initial fast decay , < F i > ~ t - α 1 , followed by a slow decay , < F i > ~ t - α 2 . The vertical dotted line guides the eye to separate the two phases . The dashed lines are fits of the data to power laws with exponents α 1 ( fast decay ) and α 2 ( slow decay ) . ( B ) Zoomed - in fast decay curves with black lines corresponding to scaling exponents of 1 . 7 and 0 . 4 . ( C ) Scaling exponents measured for fast ( α 1 ) and slow ( α 2 ) decays . The fast scaling exponent decreases proportionally with decreasing actin concentration ( i . e . increasing φ T ) , and becomes indistinguishable from α 2 when φ T = 1 . Conversely , slow relaxation is independent of composite composition , with an average exponent of α 2 ≈ 0 . 4 . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ; 15 FIGURE 5 Mobility of both actin and microtubules in composites exhibit a non - monotonic dependence on tubulin fraction . ( A ) Each image displays the temporal standard deviation of intensity values for each pixel of a two - color confocal time - series ( 180 frames , 1 fps ) . Images show the standard deviation for actin ( green ) and microtubules ( red ) in a 44 µ m 2 area for composites of varying tubulin fractions ( φ T ) listed below the corresponding image . As described in Materials and Methods , these “ mobility images ” show the extent to which filaments move , with higher pixel intensities signifying more motion . ( B ) The average of all standard deviation intensity values from mobility images vs tubulin fraction φ T . Error bars are the standard error from averaging over 512x512 pixels in 3 - 5 images for each φ T . As shown , the mobility of both actin ( circles ) and microtubules ( squares ) increases as φ T increases to 0 . 5 , followed by a subsequent drop . . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license peer - reviewed ) is the author / funder . It is made available under a The copyright holder for this preprint ( which was not . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 262089 doi : bioRxiv preprint first posted online Feb . 7 , 2018 ;