The EMBO Journal Vol . 17 No . 16 pp . 4626 – 4638 , 1998 Cholesterol - dependent retention of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes Satyajit Mayor 1 , Shefali Sabharanjak and Frederick R . Maxﬁeld 2 National Centre for Biological Sciences , TIFR Centre , Bangalore 560012 , India and 2 Department of Biochemistry , Cornell University Medical College , New York , NY 10021 , USA 1 Corresponding author e - mail : mayor @ ncbs . tifrbng . res . in Several cell surface eukaryotic proteins have a glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) modiﬁcation at the C - terminal end that serves as their sole means of membrane anchoring . Using ﬂuorescently labeled ligands and digital ﬂuorescence microscopy , we show that contrary to the potocytosis model , GPI - anchored proteins are internalized into endosomes that contain markers for both receptor - mediated uptake ( e . g . trans - ferrin ) and ﬂuid phase endocytosis ( e . g . dextrans ) . This was conﬁrmed by immunogold electron microscopy and the observation that a ﬂuorescent folate derivative bound to the GPI - anchored folate receptor is internal - ized into the same compartment as co - internalized horseradish peroxidase – transferrin ; the folate ﬂuores - cence was quenched when cells subsequently were incubated with diaminobenzidine and H 2 O 2 . Most of the GPI - anchored proteins are recycled back to the plasma membrane but at a rate that is at least 3 - fold slower than C 6 - NBD - sphingomyelin or recycling receptors . This endocytic retention is regulated by the level of cholesterol in cell membranes ; GPI - anchored proteins are recycled back to the cell surface at the same rate as recycling transferrin receptors and C 6 - NBD - sphingomyelin in cholesterol - depleted cells . Cholesterol - dependent endocytic sorting of GPI - anchored proteins is consistent with the involvement of specialized lipid domains or ‘rafts’ in endocytic sorting . These results provide an alternative explana - tion for GPI - requiring functions of some GPI - anchored proteins . Keywords : cholesterol / endocytosis / folate receptor / GPI anchoring / retention Introduction A diverse set of cell surface eukaryotic proteins including several receptors , enzymes and adhesion molecules have a glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) moiety at their C - terminal end that serves as a membrane anchor ( Field and Menon , 1992 ; McConville and Ferguson , 1993 ) . This ubiquitous protein modiﬁcation has been implicated in a variety of cell biological processes ( Ferguson , 1994 ) . It acts as an apical targeting signal for proteins in some epithelial cell types via its association with putative 4626 © Oxford University Press glycolipid rafts in the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) ( Harder and Simons , 1997 ) . GPI anchoring has also been shown to be important for the intracellular signaling capacity of several proteins especially in lymphocytes ( Robinson , 1991 ; Brown , 1993 ) . Although in immunolocalization studies GPI - anchored proteins were reported to be clustered at the cell surface , with a signiﬁcant fraction of the clusters associated with 50 – 60 nm caveolin / VIP - 21 - coated membrane invagina - tions called caveolae ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Dupree et al . , 1993 ) , we and others have shown that these proteins are not constitutively concentrated in caveolae ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ; Parton et al . , 1994 ; Mayor and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ; Fujimoto , 1996 ) . Instead , they are enriched in these structures only after cross - linking with polyclonal second - ary antibodies . Numerous GPI - anchored proteins are internalized and recycled back to the cell surface ( Kamen et al . , 1988 ; Lisanti et al . , 1990 ; Rothberg et al . , 1990b ; Taraboulos et al . , 1990 ; Keller et al . , 1991 ; Borchelt et al . , 1992 ) . It was proposed that GPI - anchored proteins are internalized via the pinching off of caveolae in a process called potocytosis ( Keller et al . , 1991 ; Anderson , 1993 ; Turek et al . , 1993 ) . The ﬁndings that these proteins are distributed diffusely at the cell surface , being neither enriched nor excluded from coated and non - coated pits at the cell surface , reopened the question about the mechanisms and pathways involved in the internalization and trafﬁcking of GPI - anchored proteins . Electron microscopic studies have shown that GPI - anchored folate receptors are in endosomes ( Birn et al . , 1993 ; Rijnboutt et al . , 1996 ) . However , a recent study used cell fractionation to study the uptake of 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate via GPI - anchored folate receptors and reported that the folate was not found in endosomes in MA104 cells , suggesting that folate was transported to the cytoplasm without passage through endosomes ( Smart et al . , 1996 ) . Thus , there are conﬂicting interpretations of the endocytic itinerary followed by GPI - anchored proteins and their ligands . Regardless of the initial step in internalization , the endocytic trafﬁcking of GPI - anchored proteins has features that are different from that of other membrane components . For example , the recycling of folate receptors in MA104 cells ( Kamen et al . , 1988 ) is signiﬁcantly slower than the typical recycling rates of lipids or recycling receptors ( Koval and Pagano , 1989 ; Mayor et al . , 1993 ) . This could be consistent either with a specialized endocytic pathway ( Anderson , 1993 ) or with altered kinetics of passage through the typical endocytic recycling itinerary . To study the intracellular trafﬁcking pathways of GPI - anchored proteins , we have used the GPI - anchored folate receptor as a model since its kinetics of trafﬁcking have been studied extensively ( Kamen et al . , 1988 , 1989 ; Hjelle Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes et al . , 1991 ; Birn et al . , 1993 ) . We have employed quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy of a ﬂuorescent ana - log of folic acid [ N α - pteroyl - N ε - ( 4 (cid:2) - ﬂuorescein - thiocarba - moyl ) - L - lysine ( PLF ) ] which binds the folate receptor monovalently and with an afﬁnity similar to folic acid ( McAlinden et al . , 1991 ; Mayor and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) . Here we show that GPI - anchored proteins are endocytosed into sorting endosomes that contain markers for both receptor - mediated uptake and ﬂuid phase endocytosis . The GPI - anchored proteins then follow the endocytic recycling route but at a rate that is 3 - fold slower than N - [ N - ( 7 - nitro - 2 , 1 , 3 - benzoxadiazol - 4 - yl ) - ε - aminohexanoyl ] - sphingosyl - phosphorylcholine ( C 6 - NBD - SM ) or recycling transferrin receptors . We ﬁnd that the GPI - anchored proteins are retained mainly in the peri - centriolar endocytic recycling compartment in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) ﬁbroblasts . Here we show for the ﬁrst time that sorting / retention in the endocytic pathway is dependent on lipid levels in cell membranes since in cholesterol - depleted cells GPI - anchored proteins are no longer retained relative to C 6 - NBD - SM or other recycling transmembrane proteins such as the transferrin receptor . Results UptakeofaﬂuorescentfolateanaloginMA104cells To validate the use of PLF as a reagent to study the trafﬁcking of the GPI - anchored folate receptor , MA104 cells were incubated with PLF at 37°C for 0 – 3 h , and the ﬂuorescence intensity was measured . The binding of PLF is competed effectively by unlabeled folic acid ( 1 μ M ; data not shown ) . Figure 1A shows the time - dependent increase in cell - associated PLF , relative to the surface binding ( 1 h at 0°C ) . When steady - state labeling has been achieved at 37°C , twice as much PLF binds to these cells compared with binding at 0°C . This indicates that unoccupied internal receptors are delivered to the surface and become available for binding PLF . As described in Materials and methods , the kinetics of approach to steady state reﬂect the rate of export of the folate receptor to the cell surface with a rate constant of 0 . 023 / min ( t 1 / 2 ~ 30 min ) if we assume a single ﬁrst order kinetic process . It is possible that there is more than one process for delivery of folate receptors to the surface , but the data ﬁt within experimental error as a single ﬁrst order process ( Figure 1A ) . The kinetics of PLF association with MA104 cells are similar to the results reported for [ 3 H ] folic acid ( Kamen et al . , 1988 ) . Figure 2A shows the distribution of PLF ﬂuorescence after binding to MA104 cells at 0°C . This ﬂuorescence is consistent with uniform surface labeling containing some brightness variations due to membrane topography . After 37°C incubation ( Figure 2B ) , there is an accumulation of ﬂuorescence near the center of the cell . The diffuse surface ﬂuorescence could be removed by incubation of the cells at 0°C with acid saline , while the perinuclear ﬂuorescence in Figure 2B is not acid - releasable , conﬁrming that it is internalized ( data not shown ) . TrafﬁckingofGPI - anchoredproteinsinCHOcells We characterized the trafﬁcking pathway of endocytosed folate receptors in a CHO cell line which expresses a 4627 transfected human transferrin receptor and human GPI - anchored folate receptor ( FR α Tb - 1 cells ; Mayor and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) . The distribution of PLF ﬂuorescence after binding to FR α Tb - 1 cells at 0°C is also consistent with uniform surface labeling ( Figure 2C ) . After 37°C incubation , there is an accumulation of ﬂuorescence near the center of the cell ( Figure 2D ) . To measure the relative size of the surface and internal pools of receptors in FR α Tb - 1 cells , cell - associated PLF was measured at 0°C ( Figure 1B , Surface ) or after 3 h at 37°C ( Figure 1B , Total ) . As with endogenous folate receptors in MA104 cells , at steady state about half the transfected folate receptors in FR α Tb - 1 cells are on the surface . When surface receptors were blocked by pre - incubation with folate at 0°C , and the cells were then incubated with PLF for 3 h at 37°C , internal receptors came to the surface and became labeled ( Figure 1B , Internal ) . The time dependence of delivery of unoccupied receptors to the cell surface is shown in Figure 1C . In this experiment , the surface receptors had been blocked by pre - incubation with unlabeled folate at 0°C , so only newly externalized receptors would bind the PLF . The export of receptors to the cell surface is well described as a single ﬁrst order process with a rate constant of 0 . 022 / min ( Figure 1C ) . To rule out the possibility that the delivery of unoccupied folate receptors to the surface had a large component of biosynthetic delivery of folate receptors , we repeated the experiment shown in Figure 1C in the presence of cycloheximide . The data obtained in the presence of cycloheximide are similar to those obtained in its absence ( compare open circles with closed circles in Figure 1C ) , conﬁrming that the kinetics of approach to steady state are measuring mainly the export of recycling folate receptors . To characterize the kinetics of endocytosis and the trafﬁcking pathway of a different GPI - anchored protein in CHO cells , we measured the trafﬁcking of decay accelerating factor ( DAF ) in a DAF - expressing CHO cells which also expresses the human transferrin receptor ( DAFTb - 1 ; Mayor and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) using labeled Fab fragments of an anti - DAF mouse monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) . The time course of labeling DAFTb - 1 cells with the Cy3 - labeled Fab fragment of anti - DAF monoclonal antibody ( Cy3 - anti - DAF ) at 37°C is shown in Figure 1D . The t (cid:3) 0 time point in Figure 1D is the cell - associated Cy3 - anti - DAF after a 3 h incubation at 0°C . For all other time points , the cells were incubated with Cy3 - anti - DAF for the indicated time at 37°C . The export of unlabeled DAF to the surface is well described as a single ﬁrst order process ( k e (cid:3) 0 . 028 / min ; Figure 1D ) , although again we cannot rule out undetected contributions from additional processes . The externalization rate constants for folate receptor and DAF are similar , and both are ~ 3 - fold lower than the rate constants for externalization of recycling transferrin receptors in TRVb - 1 cells ( Table I ) . EndocyticrouteofGPI - anchoredproteinsinCHO cells The pathways of several different endocytosed molecules have been characterized in the parent CHO cell line TRVb - 1 cells ( from which DAFTb - 1 and FR α Tb - 1 have been derived ; McGraw et al . , 1991 ) . Recycling receptors , S . Major , S . Sabharanjak and F . R . Maxﬁeld membrane markers and lysosomally directed molecules are ﬁrst detected in peripheral compartments called sorting endosomes . Recycling molecules are removed from these endosomes with a t 1 / 2 of 2 – 3 min , and then they are delivered to a peri - centriolar compartment called the endocytic recycling compartment ( Dunn et al . , 1989 ; Mayor et al . , 1993 ; Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ) . Lysosomally directed molecules continue to accumulate in the vacuolar portion of the sorting endosomes which form late endo - somes with a t 1 / 2 of ~ 8 min ( Salzman and Maxﬁeld , 1988 ; Dunn and Maxﬁeld , 1992 ) . To observe the endocytic compartments that folate receptors traverse , we incubated FR α Tb - 1 cells at 37°C Fig . 1 . Trafﬁcking kinetics of GPI - anchored proteins in MA104 cells and CHO cells . ( A ) MA104 cells were incubated with 10 nM PLF for 1 h at 0°C ( Surface binding ; t (cid:3) 0 ) or for 30 min to 3 h at 37°C and then taken for analysis of PLF binding by quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy . Each data point is an average of two independent experiments . Data for each experimental condition were obtained from two separate dishes from which 9 – 10 ﬁelds per dish were imaged . The points were ﬁtted to a curve y (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) 0 . 97 (cid:5) [ 1 – e ( – 0 . 023 t ) ] by the method of least squares ( R (cid:6) 0 . 97 ) . Error bars in all panels represent standard errors . ( B ) FR α Tb - 1 cells were incubated with 10 nM PLF for 3 h at 0°C ( Surface ) or 37°C ( Total ) . Internal receptors ( Internal ) were determined by ﬁrst incubating the cells at 0°C with 30 nM folic acid , prior to labeling with 10 nM PLF at 37°C for 3 h . PLF binding was determined by quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy . Each data point is an average of four independent experiments . Data for each experimental condition were obtained from two separate dishes from which 9 – 10 ﬁelds per dish were imaged . Data from individual experiments were combined by normalizing to the 0°C ( Surface ) condition . ( C ) FR α Tb - 1 cells were incubated in the presence of cycloheximide ( d ; 25 μ g / ml ) or without cycloheximide ( s ) for 1 h prior to incubation with 30 nM folic acid for 1 h at 0°C to saturate cell surface folate receptors . After rinsing with folate - free F - 12 medium , the cells were incubated further for the indicated times with 10 nm PLF at 37°C in the continuous presence ( d ) or absence of cycloheximide ( s ) . Total PLF binding to internal receptors was quantiﬁed for each time point . The data shown are an average of three independent experiments . The points ( s ) were ﬁtted to a curve y (cid:3) 0 . 025 (cid:4) 0 . 95 (cid:5) [ 1 – e ( – 0 . 022 t ) ] by the method of least squares ( R (cid:6) 0 . 98 ) . ( D ) DAFTb - 1 cells were incubated with Cy3 - anti - DAF Fab ( 25 μ g / ml ) for 3 h at 0°C ( surface ; t (cid:3) 0 ) or for 20 min to 3 h at 37°C . At the end of the incubations , the cells were rinsed and taken for analysis of Cy3 - anti - DAF binding by quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy . Each data point is an average of two independent experiments . Data for each experimental condition were obtained from two separate dishes from which 9 – 10 ﬁelds per dish were imaged . Data from individual experiments were combined by normalizing to the 0°C ( surface ) condition . The points were ﬁtted to a curve y (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) 0 . 7 (cid:5) [ 1 – e ( – 0 . 028 t ) ] by the method of least squares ( R (cid:6) 0 . 99 ) . 4628 with PLF and Cy3 - labeled transferrin ( Cy3 - Tf ) for 3 h . Surface - bound Cy3 - Tf and PLF were removed by acid stripping . Both PLF ( Figure 3A ) and Cy3 - Tf ( Figure 3B ) were found in peripheral endosomes ( arrows ) and central compartments ( arrowheads ) . A major site for intracellular accumulation of the PLF - labeled folate receptor overlaps the ﬂuorescence of Cy3 - Tf in the endocytic recycling compartment near the cell center . Many of the peripheral compartments also contain both probes . However , the relative intensities of the two probes were different in the two compartments ; the folate receptor is distributed somewhat more peripherally than the transferrin receptors . These data indicate that at steady state there is considerable Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes overlap in the distribution of transferrin receptors and folate receptors , but there may be quantitative differences in their partitioning among the compartments . In a separate experiment , we found that the major site for the intracellul - arly retained DAF also overlaps the endocytic recycling compartment and the peripheral endosomes ( data not shown ) . To characterize better the early steps in the pathway taken by the folate receptor and DAF after internalization , we co - incubated cells with PLF and Cy3 - Tf ( Figure 3C and D ) or Cy3 - anti - DAF and ﬂuorescein - labeled Tf ( data not shown ) for short periods . GPI - anchored proteins are internalized into endosomes that are co - localized extens - ively with Tf - containing endosomes . After a 10 min continuous incubation , a substantial fraction of transferrin has passed from the peripheral sorting endosomes into the peri - centriolar endocytic recycling compartment ( Figure 3D ) . The GPI - anchored proteins have also started to move into the recycling compartment , but the relative distribution of the GPI - anchored proteins may be more heavily weighted to the peripheral endosomes than is the case for transferrin ( Figure 3C ) . This would suggest a slower rate Fig . 2 . Visualization of folate receptors in MA104 and CHO cells . MA104 cells ( A and B ) or FR α Tb - 1 cells ( C and D ) were incubated with 10 nM PLF for 3 h at 0°C ( A and C ) or 37°C ( B and D ) and then rinsed and taken for visualization of PLF ﬂuorescence by digital ﬂuorescence microscopy . Bar (cid:3) 20 μ m . Table I . Effect of cholesterol depletion on the exocytic and internalization rates of GPI - anchored proteins Cell line Membrane markers Treatment a Internal (cid:3) L·R i , ss Externalization Internalization Surface L·R s rate ( k e / min ) rate ( k i / min ) MA104 folate receptor – 1 . 0038 ( 0 . 09 ) 0 . 023 ( 0 . 001 ) 0 . 023 ( 0 . 09 ) FR α Tb - 1 folate receptor – 0 . 979 ( 0 . 063 ) 0 . 022 ( 0 . 004 ) 0 . 022 ( 0 . 004 ) FR α Tb - 1 folate receptor cholesterol depleted 0 . 41 ( 0 . 025 ) 0 . 075 ( 0 . 0154 ) 0 . 030 ( 0 . 007 ) DAFTb - 1 DAF – 0 . 748 ( 0 . 034 ) 0 . 028 ( 0 . 003 ) 0 . 021 ( 0 . 002 ) DAFTb - 1 DAF cholesterol depleted 0 . 348 ( 0 . 027 ) 0 . 061 ( 0 . 016 ) 0 . 021 ( 0 . 006 ) FR α Tb - 1 NBD - SM – – 0 . 075 ( 0 . 006 ) – FR α Tb - 1 NBD - SM cholesterol depleted – 0 . 061 ( 0 . 004 ) – TRb - 1 b TfR – – 1 . 67 ( 0 . 005 ) 0 . 081 ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 135 ( 0 . 025 ) TRVb Δ 3 - 59 b Δ 3 - 59 - TfR – 0 . 412 ( 0 . 019 ) 0 . 08 ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 033 ( 0 . 001 ) TRVb Δ 3 - 59 c Δ 3 - 59 - TfR cholesterol depleted 0 . 285 ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 068 ( 0 . 027 ) 0 . 019 ( 0 . 002 ) The exocytic rate ( k e ) and surface and internal pools were determined experimentally as described in Materials and methods . The internalization rate ( k i ) and the internal to surface ratio were determined by rearrangements of Equation ( 5 ) . a Cholesterol depletion , where indicated , was carried out as described in the text . b Data for these cell lines were obtained from Johnson et al . ( 1993 ) . c The exocytic rate constant and surface to internal ratios were determined from an approach to steady state experiment exactly as described in Johnson et al . ( 1993 ) . 4629 of exit of the GPI - anchored proteins from the peripheral sorting endosomes . However , this is a subtle effect that will require further investigation . If the peripheral endosomes that contain GPI - anchored proteins are sorting endosomes , they should also accumu - late ﬂuid markers at short incubation times ( Gruenberg and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ; Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ) . To conﬁrm that the peripheral compartments are sorting endosomes , we co - internalized ﬂuorescein - labeled dextrans with Cy3 - anti - DAF ( Figure 3E and F ) . After an 8 min incubation , we found that the two ﬂuorophores are co - localized extensively . These observations show that GPI - anchored proteins are internalized into sorting endosomes and then leave the sorting endosomes and are delivered to the endocytic recycling compartment . Although GPI - anchored proteins appeared to be in endosomes that also contain transferrin , it was possible that the two proteins were in separate compartments that were unresolvable using light microscopy . This was particularly a concern in the center of the cell where many organelles are concentrated . To determine if this was the case , we devised an assay that would indicate the presence of transferrin and PLF in the same intracellular compart - ment . This assay is based on the property of horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) to generate reactive species when incub - ated with di - amino benzidine ( DAB ) and hydrogen perox - ide ( H 2 O 2 ) , which are capable of quenching ﬂuorescence ( Angelov et al . , 1995 ) . Figure 4 shows that the formation of the HRP reaction products by HRP - labeled Tf ( HRP - Tf ) in endosomes resulted in almost complete loss of internal endocytic PLF ﬂuorescence ( Figure 4A ) as com - pared with cells that had been incubated without HRP - Tf ( not shown ) or when HRP - Tf uptake was competed by unlabeled Tf ( 100 - fold excess ; Figure 4C ) . To rule out the possibility that the reactive species that are generated by the HRP reaction are able to cross intracellular mem - branes , we labeled cells at the surface with HRP - Tf ( not shown ) , or ﬁlled late endosomes and lysosomes with free HRP using a 1 h pulse followed by a 3 h chase . Under these conditions , the HRP reaction with DAB did not result in any signiﬁcant loss of PLF ﬂuorescence ( Figure 4B ) . Similarly , HRP - Tf did not quench a ﬂuorescent S . Major , S . Sabharanjak and F . R . Maxﬁeld Fig . 3 . Co - localization of GPI - anchored proteins with endocytic markers . FR α Tb - 1 cells were incubated with 10 nM PLF ( A and C ) and 5 μ g / ml Cy3 - Tf ( B and D ) for 3 h ( A and B ) or 10 min ( C and D ) at 37°C . The cells were rinsed in ice - cold medium 1 followed by ice - cold acid acid saline ( pH 3 . 5 ) , and neutralized with medium 1 . Alternatively , DAFTb - 1 cells were incubated with Cy3 - anti - DAF ( E ) and 1 mg / ml F - dextran ( F ) for 8 min at 37°C and processed for microscopy . The cells were then taken for visualization of ﬂuorescein ﬂuorescence ( A , C and F ) and Cy3 ﬂuorescence ( B , D and E ) by digital ﬂuorescence microscopy . Arrows indicate peripheral endosomes and arrowheads indicate central ﬂuorescence which is presumably recycling compartments . Bar (cid:3) 10 μ m . antibody delivered to the TGN via a TGN38 construct ( F . R . Maxﬁeld , unpublished ) . Quantitative analyses of PLF ﬂuorescence after different treatments with HRP - Tf are shown in Figure 4D . HRP - Tf - generated DAB reaction products quenched 68 (cid:7) 7 % ( n (cid:3) 6 ) of internal PLF ﬂuorescence , and competition with excess unlabeled transferrin restored PLF ﬂuorescence to untreated levels . PLF ﬂuorescence was relatively unaf - fected by the DAB / H 2 O 2 reaction if HRP - Tf was pulsed into cells for 40 min along with PLF and then chased out of the cells during the remaining 140 min of the incubation ( Figure 4D , Chase Out ) . Free HRP added at the same concentration as HRP - Tf quenched a negligible fraction of internal PLF ﬂuorescence . These results show that a substantial portion of the folate receptor is present in the same endocytic compartments as the transferrin receptor . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of Tf - and DAF - containing subcellular compartments was accomplished using col - loidal gold probes ( Figure 5 ) . Tf - containing compartments were marked by incubating cells with diferric ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - Tf conjugated to 6 nm colloidal gold particles ( FITC - Tf – Au - 6 ) which was shown to recycle similarly to Cy3 - Tf . For electron microscopy , TRVb - 1 cells or DAFTb - 1 cells were loaded with FITC - Tf – Au - 6 for 90 min at 37°C in the presence of 3 μ g / ml anti - DAF monoclonal antibody and preserved for cryo - ultramicro - tomy . Anti - DAF antibody was localized with rabbit anti - mouse polyclonal antiserum followed by protein A conjug - ated with 15 nm colloidal gold ( protein A – Au - 15 ) . Protein A – Au - 15 was not observed in thin sections ( 110 nm ) of TRVb - 1 cells treated with the anti - DAF antibody but 4630 stained both the cell surface and intracellular compartments in DAF - expressing cells treated with the anti - DAF anti - body . Most of the internalized transferrin and DAF were localized in compartments that were (cid:8) 100 nm in diameter ( Figure 5D ) , and many of them were tubular or tubulo - vesicular in shape ( Figure 5A – C ) . The morphology of these structures is consistent with the morphology of the endocytic recycling compartment ( Tooze and Hollinshead , 1991 ; Marsh et al . , 1995 ) . Only a subset of the labeled organelles contained both labeled Tf and DAF ( Figure 5C and D ) . This may be due to the low number of gold particles per vesicle proﬁle which makes it unlikely that labeling with both types of gold will be seen in a single organelle . Some images of small tubulo - vesicular complexes revealed FITC - Tf – Au - 6 and protein A – Au - 15 in apparently unconnected compartments ( e . g . Figure 5A ) . We cannot tell from electron microscopy if these are actually connected parts of the endocytic recycling com - partment or separate compartments that are in close proximity . Protein A – Au - 15 staining was also found in multivesicular compartments as well as other large membrane proﬁles ( Figure 5C , inset ) . Cholesteroldepletionacceleratestheexportrates ofGPI - anchoredproteins To determine the effect of cholesterol depletion on the trafﬁcking of GPI - anchored proteins , FR α Tb - 1 cells were treated with lipoprotein - depleted serum and compactin , an inhibitor of HMG - CoA synthetase , to reduce exogenous and endogenous sources of cholesterol . The cells were incubated in the presence of small amounts of mevalonate Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes Fig . 4 . Co - localization of folate receptors with HRP - Tf . FR α Tb - 1 cells were incubated with 10 nM PLF for 140 min at 37°C , and then incubated with HRP - Tf ( A ) , pre - pulsed with 0 . 5 mg / ml HRP for 1 h and chased for 3 h in the presence of PLF ( B ) , or incubated with HRP - Tf in the presence of 100 - fold excess unlabeled transferrin ( C ) for an additional 40 min , and processed for DAB cytochemistry as described in Materials and methods . PLF ﬂuorescence images were obtained as described . Quantitative analyses ( D ) of PLF for the conditions indicated were carried out as described in Materials and methods . PLF ﬂuorescence in each case was normalized to the untreated samples . Bar (cid:3) 10 μ m . to allow the synthesis of essential metabolites of mevalon - ate ( Ryan et al . , 1981 ) . Compactin - treated cells had 36 . 8 (cid:7) 3 . 5 nmol cholesterol / mg cell protein compared with untreated or cholesterol - replete cells which had 67 (cid:7) 3 . 5 nmol cholesterol / mg cell protein ( Figure 6A ) . The phospholipid levels in these cells were relatively unaf - fected ( data not shown ) . The rate of export of C 6 - NBD - SM was relatively unchanged in cells depleted of cholesterol compared with cells grown in the presence of control complete medium : the rate constants for exit of C 6 - NBD - SM are 0 . 075 and 0 . 061 / minincontrolandcholesterol - depletedcells , respect - ively ( Figure 6B ; Table I ) . As an additional control , we measured the rate of export of a transferrin receptor with a truncated cytoplasmic domain ( Δ 3 - 59 - TfR ; McGraw et al . , 1991 ) in cholesterol - depleted cells and found that these proteins are also exported at rates comparable with that measured in cholesterol - replete cells ( Table I ) . In contrast , reduction in cholesterol levels resulted in a dramatic increase in the export rates of the GPI - anchored proteins : the rate constants for export of the folate receptor and DAF were 0 . 075 / min and 0 . 061 / min , respectively ( Figure 7A and C ) , indistinguishable from the export rate constants of C 6 - NBD - SM and recycling receptors ( Table I ) . Measurement of the extent of intracellular sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins showed that cholesterol depletion 4631 also caused a drastic reduction in the fraction of GPI - anchored proteins that were intracellular ( Figure 7B and D ; Table I ) . After cholesterol depletion at steady state , only ~ 29 % of the folate receptor and ~ 26 % of DAF are found inside the cell . A similar reduction in intracellular folate receptors was observed following treatment with lovastatin ( not shown ) . The reduction in intracellular levels of GPI - anchored proteins can be reversed by the inclusion of exo - genous low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) in the presence of compactin for 16 h , showing that cholesterol levels in cell membranes are responsible for reduction in the intracellular pool of GPI - anchored proteins ( Figure 7B ) . To conﬁrm that cholesterol depletion did not grossly alter the intracellular trafﬁcking pathway of the GPI - anchored proteins , exogenously added PLF was co - intern - alized with Cy3 - Tf . Figure 8 shows that after cholesterol depletion the internal folate receptor pools are still co - localized with internalized Tf . Similar results were obtained when DAF - expressing cells were depleted of cholesterol ; the internalized pool of DAF was co - localized extensively with internalized transferrin . InternalizationofGPI - anchoredproteinsis unaffectedbycholesteroldepletion As described in Materials and methods , the rates of internalization of the folate receptor and DAF in CHO S . Major , S . Sabharanjak and F . R . Maxﬁeld Fig . 5 . Ultrastructural localization of DAF and transferrin . ( A – C ) DAFTb - 1 cells were incubated with FITC - Tf – Au - 6 ( arrows ) and anti - DAF which was detected by protein A – Au - 15 ( arrowheads ) . Both transferrin and DAF were found in similar intracellular compartments which were mainly small vesicles and tubular structures ( A and B ) . Some of these tubules were labeled with both markers ( C ) . Occasionally , multivesicular compartments were observed containing transferrin and DAF ( C , inset ) . ( D ) A quantitative analysis of the diameter of organelles containing transferrin and anti - DAF was carried out . The smallest diameter of each organelle containing a gold particle was measured , and each ﬁlled symbol represents one organelle . Organelles containing both transferrin and DAF are shown by open symbols . Bars (cid:3) 100 nm . cells can be calculated from the externalization rates and the surface to internal ratios with the assumption that both internalization and externalization are described by single ﬁrst order rate processes . Table I shows that cholesterol depletion does not signiﬁcantly affect internalization rate constants and that these rates are similar to the rate of bulk membrane internalization measured in many different ﬁbroblast lines . For example , the k i for folate receptor and DAF are close to the k i for Δ 3 - 59 - TfR expressed in TRVb cells ( McGraw et al . , 1991 ; Johnson et al . , 1993 ) . Discussion InternalizationofGPI - anchoredproteins There is considerable uncertainty regarding the means of internalization of GPI - anchored proteins , which resemble phospholipids with a large proteinaceous head group . Since GPI - anchored proteins in their native state are distributed diffusely at the cell surface in many different cell types ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ; Parton et al . , 1994 ; Mayor and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) , it seems likely that they are internalized non - selectively , via clathrin - coated and non - coated invaginations ( Lamaze and Schmid , 1995 ; Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ) . In support of this , we have found , using ﬂuorescently labeled reagents ( PLF and anti - DAF Fab ) , that GPI - anchored proteins are endocytosed at overall rates that are indistinguishable from rates of internalization of a modiﬁed transferrin receptor that lacks a functional internalization motif ( Table I ) . This is similar to other membrane proteins lacking functional endocytosis signals which are internalized 5 – 20 times more slowly than proteins with intact signals ( Trowbridge et al . , 1993 ) . In our assays , we did not measure internalization rates directly , but we measured the surface to internal ratio at 4632 steady state and the rate of delivery of recycling receptors to the cell surface . As described in the Materials and methods , the internalization rate can be inferred from such measurements if the internalization and externalization are both ﬁrst order kinetic processes . The data on externaliz - ation of folate receptors and DAF are all consistent with a single ﬁrst order rate process . It is possible that our measurements would miss a rapidly equilibrating endo - cytic recycling process , and in that case our measurements would report net internalization after equilibration of the fast recycling . However , we could detect no evidence for such a fast process . Furthermore , the rates of internalization that we determined for MA104 cells are not very different from the values obtained using [ 3 H ] folate in an internaliz - ation assay ( Chang et al . , 1992 ) . Cholesterol - dependentsortingofGPI - anchored proteinsintheendocyticpathway Similar to other cell surface molecules , internalized GPI - anchored proteins are delivered rapidly to early sorting endosomes wherein recycling components ( e . g . the trans - ferrin receptor or the LDL receptor ) are sorted from lysosomally directed components ( e . g . acid - released ligands such as LDL or α 2 - macroglobulin ) . From our studies , we cannot exclude the possibility that GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to sorting endosomes via parallel endocytic pathways ( Lamaze and Schmid , 1995 ) , different from the pathway of receptor - mediated endo - cytosis . However , our data as well as other electron microscopic studies ( Birn et al . , 1993 ; Rijnboutt et al . , 1996 ) show that internal GPI - anchored proteins are mainly in endosomes . We have shown that after internalization , C 6 - NBD - SM and related ﬂuorescent lipid analogs transit the endocytic Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes Fig . 6 . C 6 - NBD - SM recycling is unaffected by cholesterol depletion . ( A ) Cholesterol levels in FR α Tb - 1 cells grown with or without compactin for 4 days . After growing the cells under the indicated conditions , cholesterol levels in the cells were analyzed . Control , cells incubated with complete medium ( folate - free F - 12 with 5 % fetal bovine serum ) ; LD (cid:4) Mev , cells grown in lipoprotein - deﬁcient serum in the presence of 200 μ M mevalonic acid ; LD (cid:4) Mev (cid:4) Compactin , cells grown in LD (cid:4) Mev in the presence of 10 μ M compactin . Error bars represent standard deviation of the mean from two separate dishes . ( B ) Recycling of C 6 - NBD - SM in cholesterol - depleted and control cells . FR α Tb - 1 cells were grown under control conditions ( d ) or with LD (cid:4) Mev (cid:4) Compactin ( s ) as described above and labeled with C 6 - NBD - SM . Following a 10 min pulse , the rate of export of internalized C 6 - NBD - SM during the chase period was determined as described in Materials and methods . The curves were ﬁt to a ﬁrst order exponential by the method of least squares . The two equations with the best ﬁt ( R (cid:6) 0 . 99 ) are y (cid:3) 0 . 81 (cid:5) e – 0 . 075 t and y (cid:3) 0 . 85 (cid:5) e – 0 . 061 t for the control and compactin - treated conditions , respectively . Error bars represent standard deviation of the mean values from two separate dishes . system in a way that is kinetically and morphologically indistinguishable from recycling receptors . These data have provided evidence for a default recycling pathway for membrane proteins and lipid ( Dunn et al . , 1989 ; Mayor et al . , 1993 ) . These data also imply that retention of membrane proteins in the endocytic pathway should require speciﬁc sorting mechanisms . GPI - anchored proteins , although lacking cytoplasmic domains , are recycled at a 3 - fold slower rate than C 6 - NBD - SM or transferrin receptors ( Table I ) . This retard - ation in export rates leads to a dramatic intracellular accumulation of GPI - anchored proteins ( 50 % of the recyc - ling pool ) , revealing a novel function for the GPI - anchoring of proteins . This intracellular retention of GPI - anchored proteins is regulated by the levels of cholesterol in the membrane since GPI - anchored proteins are trafﬁcked with the same kinetics and via the same pathways as other 4633 recycling components in cells depleted of cholesterol ( Figure 8 ; Table I ) . Lipid - dependent trafﬁc of proteins has been observed previously . For example , in the biosynthetic pathway in yeast , sphingolipid levels modulated the egress of GPI - anchored proteins out of the endoplasmic reticulum ( Sutterlin et al . , 1997 ) , and in MDCK cells the inhibition of sphingolipid biosynthesis resulted in a general loss of polarized delivery to the apical cell surface ( Mays et al . , 1995 ) . In addition , it has been shown recently that choles - terol depletion in MDCK cells results in the missorting of an apically delivered protein , hemagglutinin , and pos - sibly a GPI - anchored protein ( Keller and Simons , 1998 ) . These observations are consistent with the involvement of raft - dependent mechanisms for the apical sorting and transport of a select class of proteins in the biosynthetic pathway ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ) . The inﬂuence of cholesterol levels on the retention of GPI - anchored pro - teins in endosomes strongly suggests that these mechan - isms are also involved in the sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes . Consistent with this , we have found recently that depletion of sphingolipid levels in FR α Tb - 1 cells also accelerates the recycling of GPI - anchored proteins similarly to that observed under choles - terol depletion conditions ( S . Chatterjee , E . Smith , V . L . Ste - vens and S . Mayor , in preparation ) , and that GPI - anchored proteins occur in cholesterol - dependent sub - micron domains in cell membranes ( Friedrichson and Kurzchalia , 1998 ; Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) . ImplicationsforGPI - anchoredproteinfunction The major site for intracellular accumulation of GPI - anchored proteins is the peri - centriolar endocytic recycling compartment . However , following endocytosis , the GPI - anchored proteins are distributed somewhat more peripher - ally than transferrin receptors . This suggests that GPI - anchored proteins may be retained in sorting endosomes to some extent . Since sorting endosomes become maturing endosomes or endosome carrier vesicles with a t 1 / 2 of 8 – 10 min ( Dunn and Maxﬁeld , 1992 ; Gruenberg and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) , this retention would cause some GPI - anchored proteins to reach late endosomes . Delivery of some folate receptors to late endosomes is supported by an electron microscopic study which showed that the entire endocytic pathway , including both early and late endosomes , contains immunoreactive folate receptors ( Rijnboutt et al . , 1996 ) . Our electron microscopy immunol - ocalization of internalized DAF also showed delivery to multivesicular bodies . The ability of GPI - anchored proteins to be sorted from bulk membrane in endosomes has signiﬁcant implications for GPI anchor function . The retention in endosomes will expose these proteins to the acidic milieu of both sorting and recycling endosomes for longer times than recycling receptors with conventional transmembrane tails . Further - more , this retention may take place in specialized mem - brane domains ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ) . GPI - anchored cellular scrapie protein is processed to the infectious proteinase K - resistant prion form more efﬁciently than a form of the scrapie protein with a transmembrane peptide anchor . This processing is dependent on acidic pH in endosomes and is inhibited by the depletion of cholesterol in membranes ( Taraboulos et al . , 1995 ) . We propose that S . Major , S . Sabharanjak and F . R . Maxﬁeld Fig . 7 . Trafﬁcking kinetics of GPI - anchored proteins in cholesterol - depleted cells . ( A ) FR α Tb - 1 cells were depleted of cholesterol , and the rate of export of the folate receptor was determined exactly as described in Figure 1C . The data shown are an average of two independent experiments . The points were ﬁtted to a curve y (cid:3) 0 . 05 (cid:4) 0 . 38 (cid:5) [ 1 – e ( – 0 . 075 t ) ] by the method of least squares ( R (cid:3) 0 . 98 ) . Error bars in all panels represent standard errors from the weighted means . ( B ) FR α Tb - 1 cells were depleted of cholesterol ( Cholesterol depleted ) or ﬁrst depleted and then replenished with a cholesterol source , LDL ( 20 μ g / ml ) , for 16 h in the presence of lipoprotein - deﬁcient serum and compactin ( Cholesterol replete ) . The surface and internal receptors were then quantiﬁed as described in Figure 1B . Each data point is an average of two independent experiments . ( C ) DAFTb - 1 cells were depleted of cholesterol , and the rate of export of DAF was determined exactly as described in Figure 1D . The data shown are an average of two independent experiments . The points were ﬁtted to a curve y (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) 0 . 35 (cid:5) [ 1 – e ( – 0 . 061 t ) ] by the method of least squares ( R (cid:3) 0 . 97 ) . ( D ) DAFTb - 1 cells were depleted of cholesterol and the surface and internal pools of DAF were then quantiﬁed as described in Figure 1D . Each data point is an average of two independent experiments . the GPI anchor causes retention of the cellular scrapie protein in acidic endosomes which would be lost with a transmembrane anchor . This cholesterol - dependent reten - tion mechanism could facilitate the efﬁcient conversion of native scrapie protein into prions , possibly in distinct membrane domains or aggregates . It has been proposed that GPI - anchored proteins such as the folate receptor take up small molecules in caveolae via a process called potocytosis which involves the transi - ent closure of cell surface caveolae containing clustered folate receptors and other molecules , during which the caveolae are acidiﬁed and the receptors release their ligands into the caveolar lumen ( Anderson , 1993 ) . This would increase the effective concentration of the released folate molecules several fold , thereby facilitating the ability of folate transporters to transfer folate across the cell membrane . We propose , instead , that it is the retention / sorting of the GPI - anchored folate receptor in acidic endosomes which increases the local concentration of GPI - anchored folate receptors in endosomes for efﬁcient 4634 delivery of folate to the cytoplasm . This would also make the GPI - anchored folate receptors more efﬁcient in folate uptake than the protein - anchored form ( Ritter et al . , 1995 ) . Furthermore , our data also provide an explanation for the drastic reduction in folate uptake efﬁciency in cells depleted of cholesterol ( Rothberg et al . , 1990a ; Chang et al . , 1992 ) . Conclusion In this report , we demonstrate a novel function of GPI anchoring of proteins , namely , retention in endosomes . This has important implications for the biology of some GPI - anchored proteins . We provide evidence that the ability of GPI - anchored proteins to sort from bulk mem - brane proteins and lipids in a manner dependent on the cholesterol content of membranes provides greater access to specialized environments in endosomes , and this sorting may be functionally signiﬁcant . Finally , our data are con - sistent with the involvement of raft - dependent mechanisms for the sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes Fig . 8 . Endocytic pathway of folate receptors in cholesterol - depleted FR α Tb - 1 cells . FR α Tb - 1 cells were depleted of cholesterol as described in Materials and methods . The cells were then incubated with 10 nM PLF ( A ) and 5 μ g / ml Cy3 - Tf ( B ) for 3 h at 37°C and processed for microscopy . PLF ﬂuorescence ( A ) and Cy3 - transferrin ( B ) were imaged by digital ﬂuorescence microscopy and printed using identical contrast settings . Arrows indicate peripheral endosomes , and arrowheads indicate central recycling compartments . Bar (cid:3) 10 μ m . Materials and methods Materials Mouse mAb to the human folate receptor ( MOv19 ; Coney et al . , 1991 ) was a gift from Dr Richard Anderson and Centocor Corp . ( Malvern , PA ) . Species - speciﬁc polyclonal IgGs to primary antibodies were obtained from Pierce Chemical Co . ( Rockford , IL ) . Mouse mAb to DAF , 1A10 ( Davitz et al . , 1986 ) , was a gift of from M . Davitz ( New York University ) . Fab fragments of mAb 1A10 were generated according to published procedures ( Howard and Lane , 1988 ) and found to be free of contaminating intact antibody . Labeling of mAbs , Fab fragments and transferrin with the ﬂuorophore Cy3 ( Biological Detection Systems , Inc . , Pittsburgh , PA ) or ﬂuorescein succinimidyl ester ( Molecular Probes , OR ) was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions . PLF ( McAlinden et al . , 1991 ) was obtained from Dr J . Hynes ( Medical University of South Carolina ) . Poly - D - lysine - treated coverslip bottom dishes were made and used for growing cells for all microscopy studies as previously described ( Mayor et al . , 1993 ) . C 6 - NBD - SM from Molecular Probes was puriﬁed by thin layer chromatography before use . Fluorescein - labeled dextran ( 10 kDa ; F - Dex ) was obtained from Molecular Probes , Inc . and used after extensive dialysis . Lipoprotein - deﬁcient serum was prepared as described ( Pitas et al . , 1981 ) . Compactin ( mevastatin ) from Sigma ( St . Louis , MO ) was converted to its sodium salt as previously described ( Ryan et al . , 1981 ) . The sodium salt of lovastatin and human LDL were kindly supplied by Dr Ira Tabas ( Columbia University , NY ) . DiI - labeled LDL was prepared as described 4635 previously ( Dunn and Maxﬁeld , 1992 ) . HRP was obtained from Bangalore Genei ( Bangalore , India ) . All chemicals were from Sigma and tissue culture supplies were from Gibco - BRL ( Gaithersburg , MD ) unless otherwise speciﬁed . Cellsandcellculture CHO cell lines were maintained in Hams F - 12 medium supplemented with 5 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 100 U / ml penicillin and 100 μ g / ml streptomycin unless otherwise speciﬁed . DAF - expressing CHO cells ( DAFTb - 1 cells ) and folate receptor - expressing CHO cells ( FR α Tb - 1 cells ) were derived from the human transferrin receptor - expressing CHO line , TRVb - 1 , as described previously ( Mayor and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) . FR α Tb - 1 cells were maintained in folate - free Ham’s F - 12 medium ( Specialty Media , Lavallette , NJ ) with 5 % FBS , 100 μ g / ml geneticin and 200 μ g / ml hygromycin ( Calbiochem ) . MA104 cells , a monkey kidney epithelial cell line , were maintained in folate - deﬁcient RPMI ( Specialty Media ) with 5 % FBS and plated 5 days prior to the experiment in folate - deﬁcient RPMI containing 5 % dialyzed FBS . The speciﬁcity and phosphatidylinositol - speciﬁc phospholipase C ( PI - PLC ) sensitivity of ﬂuorescence labeling of the folate receptors in FR α Tb - 1 cells with PLF , and DAF in DAFTb - 1 cells with Cy3 - anti - DAF Fab fragments have been described previously ( Mayor and Maxﬁeld , 1995 ) . Cholesteroldepletion Cells were grown for 4 days in 5 % lipoprotein - deﬁcient serum with 200 μ M mevalonate and 5 – 10 μ M compactin to deplete cholesterol stores ( Rothberg et al . , 1990a ) . In some experiments , 10 μ M lovastatin was used instead of compactin . Cholesterol - replete cells were grown either in medium containing 5 % lipoprotein - deﬁcient serum with 200 μ M mevalonate and 25 μ g / ml exogenous human LDL or in 5 % complete serum with similar results . Sterolanalysesandmembranerecyclingassays Cholesterol and lipid phosphorus were assayed in cells grown in 6 - well plates as described previously ( Tabas et al . , 1985 ) . Compactin ( 10 μ M ) was included in all incubation buffers that were used with cells depleted of cholesterol . Membrane export rates in cholesterol - replete and depleted cells were determined using C 6 - NBD - SM as a membrane marker in biochemical experiments as described previously ( Mayor et al . , 1993 ; Presley et al . , 1993 ) . Kineticsassays The efﬂux kinetics of the different GPI - anchored proteins were obtained in an assay used previously to measure the exocytic rate constant of transferrin receptors ( Johnson et al . , 1993 ) . Cells were incubated in the presence of saturating amounts of ligand until they achieved a steady state value at 37°C . In the presence of saturating ligand , the amount of surface - bound ligand ( L·R s ) can be treated as a constant because relative to the time course of the assay , the binding of PLF to folate receptors and mAbs ( 1A10 or F1A10 ) to DAF is relatively rapid even at 0°C ( half - maximal binding is observed in (cid:8) 5 min at 0°C in both cases ) . The total number of occupied receptors ( L·R t ) is thus a sum of this constant and the ligand bound to the receptors inside the cells ( L·R i ) . L·R t (cid:3) L·R s (cid:4) L·R i ( 1 ) The rate of accumulation of ligand - bound receptors is thus dependent on the rate at which unoccupied receptors arrive at the cell surface and is equal to the rate of loss of unoccupied internal receptors . This may be described by the following ﬁrst order rate equation L·R i (cid:3) L·R i , ss (cid:5) [ 1 – e ( – k e t ) ] ( 2 ) where L·R i is the amount of internal ligand - bound receptor at time t , and L·R i , ss is the total ligand - bound receptors at steady state . Combining equations 1 and 2 , L·R t (cid:3) L·R s (cid:4) L·R i , ss (cid:5) [ 1 – exp ( – k e t ) ] ( 3 ) The values for k e are determined as the values for the best ﬁt to this function where the values for L·R i , ss , L·R t , and k e are ﬁt by a least squares analysis . The rate of internalization of ligand - bound receptors may be described by the following differential equation dL·R i (cid:3) L·R s (cid:5) k i d t – L·R i (cid:5) k e d t ( 4 ) S . Major , S . Sabharanjak and F . R . Maxﬁeld where k i is the ﬁrst order internalization rate constant . At steady state dL·R i / dt (cid:3) 0 , therefore L·R i , ss (cid:5) k e k i (cid:3) ( 5 ) L·R s Celllabeling To determine L·R s , L·R i and L·R t in MA104 and DAFTb - 1 cells , the following protocols were followed . MA104 cells were incubated in the presence of 20 nM PLF in folate - free Hams F - 12 medium ( F – HF ) supplemented with 1 mg / ml chicken ovalbumin and 4 . 5 g / l HEPES pH 7 . 4 ( F – HF - ova ) at 0 or 37°C for various lengths of time , and rinsed in ice - cold medium 1 ( 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 ) . The cells were then incubated for 30 min at 0°C in ice - cold F – HF - ova containing 4 μ g / ml Cy3 - labeled mAb to the folate receptor ( Cy3 - MOv19 ) ( to normalize for the number of surface receptors per ﬁeld ) . DAFTb - 1 cells were pre - incubated in F - 12 medium supplemented with 0 . 2 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , 1 . 2 g / l glucose and 4 . 5 g / l HEPES pH 7 . 4 ( HF - BSA ) for 10 min at 37°C . The cells were then incubated for various lengths of time at 0 or 37°C with Cy3 - labeled Fab fragment ( Cy3 - anti - DAF ) at 20 μ g / ml . The cells were rinsed in ice - cold medium 1 and incubated with ﬂuorescein - labeled goat anti - mouse IgG ( F - GAM ; 100 μ g / ml ) at 0°C for 30 min ( to normalize for surface receptor expression per ﬁeld ) , rinsed and taken for ﬂuorescence imaging . Control incubations were performed with an irrelevant mouse mAb at 20 μ g / ml or with DAFTb - 1 cells which had been treated with PI - PLC for 3 h prior to labeling with Cy3 - anti - DAF . The level of ﬂuorescence observed in these control incubations was (cid:8) 5 % of the average signal obtained in a surface - binding assay . In some experiments with FR α Tb - 1 cells , the internal pool of receptors ( L·R i ) was determined directly by pre - incubating the cells with folic acid ( 20 nM ) for 1 h at 0°C to block surface - exposed folate receptors , before incubation with PLF at 37°C for various periods to label the newly externalized receptors directly . The surface receptors ( L·R s ) in the same experiment were quantiﬁed separately by incubating cells at 0°C with PLF . The extent of binding of PLF at 0°C to folic acid - incubated cells was (cid:8) 5 % of the PLF ﬂuorescence obtained under surface - binding conditions . The extent of combined autoﬂuorescence and non - speciﬁc PLF binding to the cells at 37°C was measured in the presence of 500 - fold excess folic acid ( 10 μ M ) . In FR α Tb - 1 cells , the non - speciﬁc values were (cid:8) 5 % of the surface ﬂuorescence values . For MA104 cells , non - speciﬁc ﬂuorescence was between 5 and 14 % of the surface - binding values . All the cells were rinsed at room temperature in a high potassium buffer ( 120 mM KCl , 5 mM NaCl , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 ) in the presence of 10 μ M nigericin before quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy to collapse the endosomal pH gradients . Fluorescencemicroscopyandquantitativeanalyses Fluorescence microscopy and digital image collection were performed using a Leitz Diavert ﬂuorescence microscope equipped with a Photo - metrics ( Tucson , AZ ) cooled CCD camera and driven by software from Inovison Corp . ( Durham , NC ) as described previously ( Mayor et al . , 1993 ) . In some instances , ﬂuorescence images were collected using a Nikon TMD ﬂuorescence microscope equipped with a Princeton Instru - ments ( Princeton , NJ ) cooled CCD camera driven byMetamorph software ( Universal Imaging Corporation , West Chester , PA ) . For output purposes , the digital images were intensity mapped through logarithmic look up tables ( luts ) . Fluorescence quantiﬁcation was carried out with a low magniﬁcation objective ( 25 (cid:5) , NA 0 . 8 ) to obtain 30 – 100 cells per ﬁeld , while the images for visualization purposes were obtained with a 63 (cid:5) , NA 1 . 4 objective . For the efﬂux assays , a phase contrast image and two ﬂuorescence images with ﬂuorescein and rhodamine optics were obtained for each ﬁeld as described earlier ( Mayor et al . , 1993 ) . Total ﬂuorescence per ﬁeld was obtained by summing the pixel intensity over the whole ﬁeld after subtracting a background image obtained from six to eight ﬁelds that did not contain any cells . Images including autoﬂuorescence and non - speciﬁc ﬂuorescence were obtained under the same illumination and exposure conditions , and these were used to determine appropriate threshold criteria to determine the total ﬂuorescence per ﬁeld . Because of the cell to cell variability in receptor expression , thePLFﬂuorescenceperﬁeldandCy3 - anti - DAFﬂuorescence per ﬁeld were corrected for the total surface receptors per ﬁeld . Cy3 - MOv19 was used to detect surface folate receptors and F - GAM was used to detect anti - DAF present at the surface of cells at the end of the 4636 incubations , thereby providing a normalization factor proportional to the total surface receptors per ﬁeld . The ﬂuorescence from each of the ﬁelds was normalized using this factor . A mean value and standard deviation were obtained from 9 – 11 ﬁelds per dish . The mean values , μ 1 and μ 2 , and deviations , σ 1 and σ 2 , from the two independent determinations ( two dishes per data point of a single experiment ) were combined and represented as a weighted mean μ of these two independent determinations . Horseradishperoxidase - dependentﬂuorescencequenching HRP was conjugated to iron - loaded transferrin using sodium meta - periodate . Brieﬂy , 2 mg of HRP in 400 μ l of water was reacted with 0 . 1 ml of 0 . 1 M sodium metaperiodate for 20 min at room temperature . HRP was separated from the reaction mixture by passing through a 2 ml Sephadex G - 25 column with 1 mM sodium acetate buffer , pH 4 . 5 . Transferrin ( 2 mg ) was mixed with oxidized HRP in 0 . 1 M sodium carbonate buffer , pH 9 . 5 and incubated at room temperature for 2 h in a ﬁnal volume of 1 ml . Then 0 . 1 ml of a freshly prepared 4 mg / ml solution of sodium borohydride was added to the reaction mixture , and it was incubated further at 4°C for 2 h . The reaction mixture was then dialyzed against phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , pH 7 . 2 . The mixture was fractionated by FPLC using a Superose 6 gel ﬁltration column ( Pharmacia , Sweden ) , and the fractions were analyzed on an 8 % polyacrylamide gel . Conjugate fractions corresponding to approximate mol . wts of 120 – 160 kDa were pooled and used as HRP - Tf in the ﬂuorescence quenching assay . These conjugate species have 1 – 2 HRP molecules per molecule of transferrin . To measure the extent of overlap between the folate receptor and transferrin receptor in endosomes , FR α Tb - 1 cells were incubated with 20 nM PLF for 3 h at 37°C , and in the last 40 min of incubation HRP - Tf ( 10 μ g / ml ) was added to label the endocytic recycling pathway . For some experiments , excess transferrin ( 1 mg / ml ) was added to block uptake of HRP - Tf . In separate dishes , PLF - labeled cells were incubated with HRP ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) for 1 h and chased for 3 h to deliver HRP to late endosomes and lysosomes . In one experiment ( Figure 4D , Chase Out ) , HRP - Tf was present only during the ﬁrst 40 min of the 3 h incubation with PLF . At the end of the labeling reactions , the cells were cooled on ice and washed twice with ice - cold medium 1 – 5 min each . The cells were then washed four times ( 2 min each ) with ice - cold citrate buffer ( 25 mM sodium citrate , 135 mM NaCl ; pH 3 . 0 ) to strip surface - bound ligands . The cells were rinsed with medium 1 ( two washes of 5 min each ) and incubated with DAB ( 250 μ g / ml ) and H 2 O 2 ( 0 . 0025 % ) in the dark for 30 min on ice . Excess DAB and H 2 O 2 were rinsed off with two washes of medium 1 ( 5 min each ) , and the cells were processed for ﬂuorescence microscopy . To label only the surface with HRP - Tf , some cells were incubated with HRP - Tf for 30 min on ice after completion of steady - state PLF labeling and acid rinses . UltrastructuralimmunolocalizationoftransferrinandDAF TRVb - 1 cells or DAFTb - 1 cells were incubated in culture medium with 5 μ M deferoxamine for 24 h prior to the experiment . Cells were incubated for 90 min at 37°C with a combination of FITC – transferrin coupled to 6 nm colloidal gold [ FITC - Tf – Au - 6 ; prepared as described in Marsh et al . ( 1995 ) ] and 3 μ g / ml monoclonal anti - DAF ( clone 1A10 ) in 1 % BSA in Ham’s F - 12 medium . The correct trafﬁcking of FITC - Tf – Au - 6 as a ligand for the transferrin receptor was validated as described previously ( Marsh et al . , 1995 ) . Following the incubation , cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde , 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in a 1 : 1 mixture of medium 1 and 200 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 for 15 min at room temperature . Cells were removed from the plastic culture dish by scraping , centrifuged at 1000 g , overlaid with fresh ﬁxative , and maintained at 4°C overnight . Cell pellets were infused with 1 . 2 M sucrose in sodium phosphate buffer for 30 min , 2 . 3 M sucrose in phosphate buffer for 30 min , mounted on aluminum pins , and frozen in liquid nitrogen . Thin sections ( 110 nm ) were cut at – 80°C using an RMC MT7 ultramicrotome equipped with an RMC CR21 cryobox attachment and transferred to grids ( Tokuyasu , 1973 ) . Immunogold staining was performed essentially as described ( Grifﬁths , 1993 ) . Grids were treated with 1 % BSA , 5 % goat serum , 0 . 12 % glycine in PBS , pH 7 . 4 ( ‘blocking solution’ ) for 20 min and then transferred to blocking solution containing 1 : 100 dilution of rabbit anti - mouse IgG polyclonal antibody ( Cappel , Inc . ) for 30 min . Grids were washed once with 1 % BSA / PBS , and three times in PBS before application of protein A conjugated with 15 nm colloidal gold ( J . Slot , Utrecht ) in 1 % BSA / PBS for 30 min , washed once in 1 % BSA / PBS , three times with PBS , stabilized with 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS ( 5 min ) , exchanged with distilled water , counterstained with a 1 : 10 dilution of saturated aqueous Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes uranyl acetate in 2 % methylcellulose for 10 min , air dried in 3 . 5 mm nichrome loops ( Electron Microscopy Sciences , Inc . ) , and observed using a JEOL 100 CX II transmission electron microscope operating at 80 keV . Acknowledgements We are grateful to Dr Philip Leopold and Ms Leona Cohen - Gould for expert assistance with electron microscopy . We thank Dr M . Low ( Columbia University ) for a gift of Bacillus thuringienses PI - PLC , Centocor Corp . , Drs R . G . W . Anderson ( University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center ) and Dr M . Davitz ( New York University ) for providing monoclonal antibodies MOv19 and 1A10 , Dr M . Davitz for the transfec - tion of DAF into TRVb - 1 cells , Dr Sankoli ( Bangalore Genie , Bangalore , India ) for help in preparation of HRP - Tf conjugates , and Dr M . Ratnam ( Medical College of Ohio , Toledo , OH ) for providing the cDNA for the human folate receptor . We thank Sonia Kim and Rose Soe for assistance . This work was supported by a grant from the Helen Hay Whitney Foundation ( S . M . ) , NIH grant DK27083 ( F . R . M . ) and Human Frontiers Science Program grant ( S . M . and F . R . M . ) . References Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1993 ) Potocytosis of small molecules and ions by caveolae . Trends Cell Biol . , 3 , 69 – 72 . Angelov , D . N . , Gunkel , A . , Stennert , E . and Neiss , W . F . ( 1995 ) Phagocytic microglia during delayed neuronal loss in the facial nucleus of the rat : time course of the neuronofugal migration of brain macrophages . Glia , 13 , 113 – 129 . Birn , H . , Selhub , J . and Christensen , E . I . ( 1993 ) Cell fractionation and electron microscope studies of kidney folate - binding protein . Am . J . Physiol . , 264 , C302 – C310 . Borchelt , D . R . , Taraboulos , A . and Prusiner , S . B . ( 1992 ) Evidence for synthesis of scrapie prion proteins in the endocytic pathway . J . Biol . Chem . , 267 , 16188 – 16199 . Brown , D . ( 1993 ) The tyrosine kinase connection : how GPI - anchored proteins activate T cells . Curr . Opin . Immunol . , 5 , 349 – 354 . Chang , W . - J . , Rothberg , K . G . , Kamen , B . A . and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1992 ) Lowering cholesterol content of MA104 cells inhibits receptor - mediated transport of folate . J . Cell Biol . , 118 , 63 – 69 . Coney , L . R . , Tomassetti , A . , Carayannopoulos , L . , Frasca , V . , Kamen , B . A . , Colnaghi , M . I . and Zurawski , V . J . ( 1991 ) Cloning of a tumor - associated antigen : MOv18 and MOv19 antibodies recognize a folate - binding protein . Cancer Res . , 51 , 6125 – 6132 . Davitz , M . A . , Low , M . G . and Nussenzweig , V . ( 1986 ) Release of decay - accelerating factor ( DAF ) from the cell membrane by phosphatidylinositol - speciﬁc phospholipase C ( PIPLC ) : selective modiﬁcation of a complement regulatory protein . J . Exp . Med . , 163 , 1150 – 1161 . Dunn , K . W . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1992 ) Delivery of ligands from sorting endosomes to late endosomes occurs by maturation of sorting endosomes . J . Cell Biol . , 117 , 301 – 310 . Dunn , K . W . , McGraw , T . E . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1989 ) Iterative fractionation of recycling receptors from lysosomally destined ligands in an early sorting endosome . J . Cell Biol . , 109 , 3303 – 3314 . Dupree , P . , Parton , R . G . , Raposo , G . , Kurzchalia , T . V . and Simons , K . ( 1993 ) Caveolae and sorting in the trans - Golgi network of epithelial cells . EMBO J . , 12 , 1597 – 1605 . Ferguson , M . A . J . ( 1994 ) What can GPI do for you . Parasitol . Today , 10 , 48 – 52 . Field , M . C . and Menon , A . K . ( 1992 ) Glycolipid - anchoring of cell surface proteins . In Schlesinger , M . J . ( ed . ) , Lipid Modiﬁcation of Proteins . CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL , pp . 83 – 134 . Friedrichson , T . and Kurzchalia , T . V . ( 1998 ) Microdomains of GPI - anchored proteins in living cells revealed by chemical cross - linking . Nature , in press . Fujimoto , T . ( 1996 ) GPI - anchored proteins , glycosphingolipids and sphingomyelin are sequestered to caveolae only after crosslinking . J . Histochem . Cytochem . , 44 , 929 – 941 . Grifﬁths , G . ( 1993 ) Fine structure immunochemistry . Springer - Verlag , Heidelberg , Germany , pp . 1 – 159 . Gruenberg , J . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1995 ) Membrane transport in the endocytic pathway . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 7 , 552 – 563 . Harder , T . and Simons , K . ( 1997 ) Caveolae , DIGs and the dynamics of sphingolipid - cholesterol microdomains . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 9 , 534 – 542 . 4637 Hjelle , J . T . , Christensen , E . I . , Carone , F . A . and Selhub , J . ( 1991 ) Cell fractionation and electron microscope studies of kidney folate - binding protein . Am . J . Physiol . , 260 , C338 – C346 . Howard , E . and Lane , D . ( 1988 ) Antibodies : A Laboratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . Johnson , L . S . , Dunn , K . W . , Pytowski , B . and McGraw , T . E . ( 1993 ) Endosome acidiﬁcation and receptor trafﬁcking : baﬁlomycin A1 slows receptor externalization by a mechanism involving the receptor’s internalization motif . Mol . Biol . Cell , 4 , 1251 – 1266 . Kamen , B . A . , Wang , M . T . , Streckfuss , A . J . , Peryea , X . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1988 ) Delivery of folates to the cytoplasm of MA104 cells is mediated by a surface membrane receptor that recycles . J . Biol . Chem . , 263 , 13602 – 13609 . Kamen , B . A . , Johnson , C . A . , Wang , M . T . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1989 ) Regulation of the cytoplasmic accumulation of 5 - methyl - tetrahydrofolate in MA104 cells is independent of folate receptor regulation . J . Clin . Invest . , 84 , 1379 – 1386 . Keller , P . and Simons , K . ( 1998 ) Cholesterol is required for surface transport of inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin . J . Cell Biol . , 140 , 1357 – 1367 . Keller , G . - A . , Siegel , M . W . and Caras , I . W . ( 1991 ) Endocytosis of glycophospholipid - anchored and transmembrane forms of CD4 by different endocytic pathways . EMBO J . , 11 , 863 – 874 . Koval , M . and Pagano , R . E . ( 1989 ) Lipid recycling between the plasma membrane and intracellular compartments : transport and metabolism of ﬂuorescent sphingomyelin analogues in cultured ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . , 108 , 2169 – 2181 . Lamaze , C . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) The emergence of clathrin - independent pinocytic pathways . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 7 , 573 – 580 . Lisanti , M . P . , Caras , I . W . , Gilbert , T . , Hanzel , D . and Rodriguez , B . E . ( 1990 ) Vectorial apical delivery and slow endocytosis of a glycolipid - anchored fusion protein in transfected MDCK cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 87 , 7419 – 7423 . Marsh , E . W . , Leopold , P . L . , Jones , N . L . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1995 ) Oligomerized transferrinreceptors are selectivelyretained bya lumenal sorting signal in a long - lived endocytic recycling compartment . J . Cell Biol . , 129 , 1509 – 1522 . Mayor , S . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1995 ) Insolubility and redistribution of GPI - anchored proteins at the cell surface after detergent treatment . Mol . Biol . Cell , 6 , 929 – 944 . Mayor , S . , Presley , J . P . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1993 ) Sorting of membrane components from endosomes and subsequent recycling to the cell surface occurs by a bulk ﬂow process . J . Cell Biol . , 121 , 1257 – 1269 . Mayor , S . , Rothberg , K . G . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1994 ) Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science , 264 , 1948 – 1951 . Mays , R . W . , Siemers , K . A . , Fritz , B . A . , Lowe , A . W . , van Meer , G . and Nelson , W . J . ( 1995 ) Hierarchy of mechanisms involved in generating Na / K - ATPase polarity in MDCK epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . , 130 , 1105 – 1115 . McAlinden , T . P . , Hynes , J . B . , Patil , S . A . , Westerhof , G . R . , Jansen , G . , Schornagel , J . H . , Kerwar , S . S . and Freisheim , J . H . ( 1991 ) Synthesis and biological evaluation of a ﬂuorescent analogue of folic acid . Biochemistry , 30 , 5674 – 5681 . McConville , M . J . and Ferguson , M . A . ( 1993 ) The structure , biosynthesis and function of glycosylated phosphatidylinositols in the parasitic protozoa and higher eukaryotes . Biochem . J . , 294 , 305 – 324 . McGraw , T . E . , Pytowski , B . , Arzt , J . and Ferrone , C . ( 1991 ) Mutagenesis of the human transferrin receptor : two cytoplasmic phenylalanines are required for efﬁcient internalization and a second - site mutation is capable of reverting an internalization - defective phenotype . J . Cell Biol . , 112 , 853 – 861 . Mukherjee , S . , Ghosh , R . G . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1997 ) Endocytosis . Physiol . Rev . , 77 , 759 – 803 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . and Simons , K . ( 1994 ) Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . , 127 , 1199 – 1215 . Pitas , R . E . , Innerarity , T . L . , Weinstein , J . N . and Mahley , R . W . ( 1981 ) Acetoacetylated lipoproteins used to distinguish ﬁbroblasts from macrophages in vitro by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Arteriosclerosis , 1 , 177 – 185 . Presley , J . F . , Mayor , S . , Dunn , K . W . , Johnson , L . S . , McGraw , T . E . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1993 ) The End2 mutation in CHO cells slows the exit of transferrin receptors from the recycling compartment but bulk membrane recycling is unaffected . J . Cell Biol . , 122 , 1231 – 1241 . Rijnboutt , S . , Jansen , G . , Posthuma , G . , Hynes , J . B . , Schornagel , J . H . and Strous , G . J . ( 1996 ) Endocytosis of GPI - linked membrane folate receptor - α . J . Cell Biol . , 132 , 35 – 47 . S . Major , S . Sabharanjak and F . R . Maxﬁeld Ritter , T . E . , Fajardo , O . , Matsue , H . , Anderson , R . G . and Lacey , S . W . ( 1995 ) Folate receptor targeted to clathrin - coated pits cannot regulate vitamin uptake . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 92 , 3824 – 3828 . Robinson , P . J . ( 1991 ) Phosphatidylinositol membrane anchors and T - cell activation . Immunol . Today , 12 , 35 – 41 . Rothberg , K . G . , Heuser , J . E . , Donzell , W . C . , Ying , Y . - S . , Glenney , J . R . and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1992 ) Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell , 68 , 673 – 682 . Rothberg , K . G . , Ying , Y . - S . , Kamen , B . A . and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1990a ) Cholesterol controls the clustering of the glycophospholipid - linked membrane receptor for 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate . J . Cell Biol . , 111 , 2931 – 2938 . Rothberg , K . G . , Ying , Y . - S . , Kolhouse , J . F . , Kamen , B . A . and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1990b ) The glycophospholipid - linked folate receptor internalizes folate without entering the clathrin - coated pit endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . , 110 , 637 – 649 . Ryan , J . , Hardeman , E . C . , Endo , A . and Simoni , R . D . ( 1981 ) Isolation and characterization of cells resistant to ML236B ( compactin ) with increased levels of 3 - hydroxy - 3 - methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase . J . Biol . Chem . , 256 , 6762 – 6768 . Salzman , N . H . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1988 ) Intracellular fusion of sequentially formed endocytic compartments . J . Cell Biol . , 106 , 1083 – 1091 . Simons , K . and Ikonen , E . ( 1997 ) Functional rafts in membranes . Nature , 387 , 569 – 570 . Smart , E . J . , Mineo , C . and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1996 ) Clustered folate receptors deliver 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate to cytoplasm of MA104 cells . J . Cell Biol . , 134 , 1169 – 1177 . Sutterlin , C . , Doering , T . L . , Schimmoller , F . , Schroder , S . and Riezman , H . ( 1997 ) Speciﬁc requirements for the ER to Golgi transport of GPI - anchored proteins in yeast . J . Cell Sci . , 110 , 2703 – 2714 . Tabas , I . , Weiland , D . A . and Tall , A . R . ( 1985 ) Unmodiﬁed low density lipoprotein causes cholesteryl ester accumulation in J774 macrophages . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 82 , 416 – 420 . Taraboulos , A . , Serban , D . and Prusiner , S . B . ( 1990 ) Scrapie prion proteins accumulate in the cytoplasm of persistently infected cultured cells . J . Cell Biol . , 110 , 2117 – 2132 . Taraboulos , A . , Scott , M . , Semenov , A . , Avraham , D . , Laszlo , L . and Prusiner , S . B . ( 1995 ) Cholesterol depletion and modiﬁcation of COOH - terminal targeting sequence of the prion protein inhibit formation of the scrapie isoform . J . Cell Biol . , 129 , 121 – 132 . Tokuyasu , K . T . ( 1973 ) A technique for ultracryotomy of cell suspensions and tissues . J . Cell Biol . , 57 , 551 – 565 . Tooze , J . and Hollinshead , M . ( 1991 ) Tubular early endosomal networks in AtT20 and other cells . J . Cell Biol . , 115 , 635 – 653 . Trowbridge , I . S . , Collawn , J . F . and Hopkins , C . R . ( 1993 ) Signal - dependent membrane protein trafﬁcking in the endocytic pathway . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . , 9 , 129 – 161 . Turek , J . J . , Leamon , C . P . and Low , P . S . ( 1993 ) Endocytosis of folate – protein conjugates : ultrastructural localization in KB cells . J . Cell Sci . , 106 , 423 – 430 . Varma , R . and Mayor , S . ( 1998 ) GPI - anchored proteins are organised in sub - micron sized domains at the cell surface . Nature , in press . Received May 14 , 1998 ; revised June 25 , 1998 ; accepted June 26 , 1998 4638