Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Computer Support and Facilitated Structure in Meetings - An Empirical Comparison of their Impact Henrik Lewe Universitat Hohenheim , Lehrstuhl fur Wirtschaftsinformatik ( 51 OH ) , Postfach ( P . 0 . Box ) 70 05 62 , 0 - 70599 Stuttgart , Germany E - Mail : lewe 8 uni - hohenheim . de Abstract This paper explores , if computer support provides benefits beyond facilitation , one of the keys to success in GSS environments and one of the possible explanations of inconsistent GSS results . The analysis is based on an empirical study of 40 meetings with 360 participants in the Hohenheim CATeam Meeting Room Teams of different size worked on an experimental task under one of three working conditions . They had either full computer support , a structured and moderated meeting process including manual support tools or no support at all . This experimental design allowed the isolation of the impact of computers , a structured intervention in the meeting process l ~ y a facilitator and an increasing number of meeting participants . Results show that overall the introduction of GSS into meetings has stronger effects than merely facilitation or moderation without GSS support though the type of effects dirers for the observed variables . As most important effects which computer usage introduces to meetings an increased perceived speed of the meeting process and stronger anonymization as well as more directness of the participant contributions were identfjied . Facilitated structure improves task understanding , reduces dominance of meeting participants and enables team to stay focused on the issues at hand . In consequence computer supported meetings are especially worth their additional effort over moderated meetings , when speed and anonymous as well as direct input are more important to meeting success than equal participation and a straightforward discussion among meeting participants . Moderators should consider adding computer supported meeting tools to their toolset . 1 Motivation Meetings make up an important part of the office workers ' everyday life ( and not only theirs ) . However , meeting problems like a lack of meeting preparation , dominance of meeting participants , lack of enough ' air time ' for everybody to contribute sufficiently , unfocussed discussions , etc . make these meetings very unproductive [ 28 , p . 46 ; 331 . For this reason , people have always looked for tools and methods to help them make their meetings more productive . Meetings have quite a productivity gain potential . It is one of the most important yet untapped productivity gain potential for organizations . Various types of interventions into group processes have been studied to assess their contribution concerning meeting improvements . Two very common types of interventions are computer support and facilitated structure . Facilitated structure is the combined application of meeting moderation by a facilitator who assists the group interaction and manual tools to put some structure on the issues at hand and on the meeting process . In computer supported meetings the manual tools are complemented by information - technology based tools . CSCW researchers are mainly interested in the impact of information technology based tools and methods to improve meetings [ 20 ] . Most of their empirical studies of impact assessment examine a particular Group Support System ( GSS ) applied in a particular ' Electronic Meeting Room ' , which support teams to generate , structure , evaluate , and communicate information . In GSS studies other interventions such as structured procedures applied by a facilitator or moderator are usually controlled so that they are not a source of confounding variance . However , previous research identified significant effects on team performance for both types of interventions in group processes , facilitation and computer support , and in practice including flexible and active facilitation IS typical in GSS environments to take the fluidity and unpredictability of group interaction into consideration [ I ] . There is a need to compare and differentiate the degree and the type of improvements these interventions in the meeting process can offer . Therefore this study tries to answer the following question with an investigation under experimental conditions : " Compared to structured facilitation . what is the contribution of computer siipport to the success of meetings ? " Based on the previous research findings the hypothesis is : " Facilituted structure improves meetings , but in general to a lesser degree than U computer supported facilitated structure would do . " 1060 - 3425 / 96 $ 5 . 00 0 1996 IEEE 24 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 2 Previous Empirical Research Results Influence of facilitators Facilitators obtain a special role in teams 1351 . Their job is to intervene in the meeting process and the team structure to assist teams to improve their work . In general they deal with substantial , procedural and relational problems of teams [ 161 . They overcome limitations in the availability or use of information in the meetings , they sequence group discussions and they deal with the relationships among teammembers . Intervention by a facilitator can reach from very neutral behaviour , when they detach themselves from the meeting content so that they can concentrate on process and structure , to active ' coaching ' of the teams , when behavior of single team members or the team as a whole needs to be influenced . His activities should ensure that meeting participants focus their discussion , that everybody has the opportunity to contribute , that team conflicts are solved and an appropriate meeting process is followed . He maintains coordination of the meeting process structure and provides or applies tools and ( problem solving ) methods to help accomplish the group tasks ( for a list of successful non - GSS group process intervention structures see [ I , p . 190 - 191 ] ) . Facilitation also extends beyond the meeting process itself . To ensure meeting success pre - meeting planning to identify the objective of the meeting , to create an agenda and to invite appropriate meeting participants is recommended . At the end the facilitator summarizes the discussions , decisions and action items [ I I . p . 3 15 ) . Research has shown that facilitation can effectively harness the knowledge and skills in groups by promoting constructive group behaviour . In general facilitators achieve this by applying structured communication and decision - making procedures . Providing structure in the process has a positive influence on the accomplishments of teams [ 25 ] . Even minimal facilitation improves the effectiveness of meetings [ 4 ] . Though it is evident that trained facilitators [ 4 , 25 , 311 are more effective in producing higher quality meeting results the expertise in " How - to - " he an effective facilitator is still developing [ SI . An empirical study of the most important aspects of facilitator behavior revealed meeting process planning , information handling and flexible reactions as key factors for effective facilitation [ 6 ] . Influence of computer technology Many empirical studies have looked at computer support as a means of intervention in meetings though the number of ' Electronic Meeting Rooms ' and number of computer supported meetings therein is low compared to the number of traditional meeting rooms and the frequency of traditional meetings . Computer supported teams make much better use of the potential of performance in teams . Process gains can be realized through parallel work , tapping synergy and anonymity [ 7 , 18 , 19 , 28 , 34 ) . The breadth and depth of idea analysis increases so that output quantity of the meeting increases . With the help of the computer more different ideas or solutions for the problems the meeting are produced . Meta - analysis summarizing the results of current empirical research on computer support of teamwork in meetings refer to more than 100 studies . many of which examine a particular GSS applied in a particular ' Electronic Meeting Room ' [ 8 , 30 , 14 , 15 , 2 , 231 . Overall it is hard to derive conclusive GSS effects from these analysis . Positive effects , such as better quality decisions and improvements in participation possibilities , negative effects , such as reduced consensus , confidence and satisfaction , as well as neutral effects are found for laboratory experiments , while positive effects prevail in field studies . In general facilitation moderates GSS effects as it is alike with support type , task and group characteristics [ 8 , 28 , 121 . The differences in findings between experimental and field studies can be associated with the difference how facilitation is conducted in the different settings . A fixed , scripted , and neutral facilitation approach is mostly applied in laboratory settings to control for confounding variance . Field studies usually include flexible and active facilitation approaches on the interaction process to meet evolving group needs [ 3 ] . Here facilitation is part of the treatment . Plenty of the studies were conducted with GroupSystems , one of the most common groupware products for computer supported meetings . Efficiency improvements and higher meeting participant involvement are a major impact of GroupSystems [ 28 , 321 . Facilitation is an integral part of GroupSystems and most other GSS . Meetings supported by these systems need company of a facilitator , who not only operates the technology but also moderates the teams [ 28 ] . At least one person in the meeting is assumed to run the software and sequence the agenda items . Some systems even provide a built - in structure for facilitation by offering agenda templates or by imposing a certain communication pattern while applying a specific problem solving method in certain tools , e . g . brainstorming [ I I , p . 3 171 . Several researchers have studied the effectiveness of facilitation in experimental GSS settings . Anson et al . [ 11 could not detect significant performance differences between groups that applied no structures and those which were provided structures by a facilitator , by a GSS or by both . High variability among scores clouded evidence of performance effects and suggests that other mediating factors may have entered into those results . Differences due to providing these structures were only found for group cohesion factors and process factors such as behavior and communication quality . Providing structure through GSS only showed no effects . Dickson et al . [ IO ] and George et al . 1131 demonstrated that higher consensus can be reached in facilitated meetings . 25 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 However , consensus was lower in meetings with an active facilitator compared to meetings with a more neutral facilitator who adapted a chauffeur role only . The structure imposed by an active facilitator following an ( for experimental reasons ) scripted process was not appreciated by the teams though they were able to achieve greater decision quality [ IO ] . These findings indicate that providing technical or process assistance offers at least the potential to improve meetings , though from these findings it is hard to say if and when improvements actually occur and whether the technology or the structured facilitation is the major source of improvements . It is an open question , whether these effects can be related to computer usage since most computer supported meetings include moderation by a facilitator . For teams applying manual facilitation techniques it is therefore not evident whether they can even more improve their meetings when using computer supported facilitated structure instead of using merely traditional moderation techniques . This still is an open question which this study tries to answer through an comparative assessment of the amount and types of effectiveness improvements for these different meeting interventions . 3 Research Design The impact of structured facilitation and computers on meetings can be determined by comparing meetings with these forms of support relatively to meetings without any support . To allow for comparison experimental empirical research is recommended . It ensures a better control and isolation of the varied independent and compared dependent variables . These variables are represented in the contingency model of productivity impact of computer support in meetings which has already been successfully applied in comparable other studies as part of the theoretical framework [ 8 , 301 . According to this model ( a simplified version is shown in Figure 1 ) aspects like V a r la te control , ranaomize measure I Characteristic of the teamwork situation : - team characcerisrics urganizdtional - type and mount sf r ; echnolow usage Figure 1 . Simple research model for studying team productivity impact of technology ( based on [ 8 ] ) ' team , task , context und technological support situation ' are independent variable ( - set ) s , which influence the meeting process and its results . To adequately measure changes of the dependent variable ( - set ) s of the meeting process and its outcomes the experimental design had to ensure that exept for the varied support situation and teamsize all other independent variables would not bias the measured results . Therefore attempts were made to control for most potential confounds like gender , nge and background of the participants , task , and context situation . The experimental meetings were conducted in the % " Team Room " [ 24 , 211 of the University of Hohenheim . In this " Electronic Meeting Room " participants meet around a round table to collaborate supported by advanced information technology including GSS such as Group Systems . It lets the meeting participants enjoy a relaxed meeting atmosphere since technology is integrated in the room without impairing interaction and discussions . To meet the needs of research and users as well quick and easy change between computer supported and traditional , non - computer supported work in the same meeting room without placing a disadvantage to one or the other meeting situation is possible . When the computers are not used monitors can disappear in the table . Since all the meetings were conducted in a very similar environment bias of data was reduced . This study intended to contrast freely interacting , non - supported team meetings meetings including structured facilitation and meetings with computers support & structured facilitation . It went without a contrast against a purely computer respectively GSS supported meeting situation without structured facilitation , since previous research has shown no significant difference compared to non - supported situation [ I ] and providing facilitation is almost a requirement to be able to apply GSS . Most of the GSS today go with facilitation only which would almost automatically lead to a similar working condition as it is provided in a ' computer support & structured facilitation ' working condition , if at all teams are experienced enough to make use the computer equipment they a provided with . The strong relationship of teamsize with performance shown in previous research suggested to include different teamsizes in the research study . Thus the research design used for this study to assess the effects of a GSS and facilitated structure was a 3x2 design crossing technology support situation ( ' With Computer ' , ' Structure Support ' or ' No Support ' ) with teamsize ( ' 6 - or 12 - members ' ) [ see Table I ] . The treatment ' With Ccomputer ' actually involved GSS and structured facilitation . Teams treated ' With Computer ' used Groupsystems a & were moderated by the facilitator . Teams working ' With Structure ' , received and used manual tools ( paper and pencil ) as well as a moderator . To control for the facilitator as a source of confounding variance , the two treatments ' With Computer ' and ' With Structure ' were conducted with a single , experienced 26 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Teamsize facilitator ( experimenter ) who followed a scripted procedural structure to meet the treatment requirements . Teams ' Without Support ' received no support . , They determined their approach on how to accomplish their assigned task on their own . Subjects worked in one of the six different treatments only . There was no repeated involvement of subjects in this experiment so that learning effects could not have confounding intluence on results . The assigned task of all the teams in the experiment was to develop and prioritize solutions of the waste problem . Every team had a maximum of 60 minutes available to come up with their concept . All teams were confronted with three typical meeting tasks to acomplish their experimental assignment : idea generation , idea organization and idea evaluation ( voting ) . GroupSystems explicitly supports teams to accomplish these tasks . Idea generation was supported by the tool " Electronic Brainstorming " . The " Categorizer " was used for ordering , sorting and condensing the ideas . Finally , the " Voting " tool was used for the decision on the rank order of the potential solutions . Participation in the experiment was voluntary but for each type of technology support treatment the better half of teams , according to a rating of their solutions by an independent jury of waste problem experts , entered a drawing of significant cash prizes . Assignment to a particular treatment was randomized . Subjects were recruited from the University of Hohenheim student body . The analysis of the subject characteristics showed no evidence of biased distribution of meeting participants [ 23 ] . Tecliiiolopicd Support Situation With Computer Structure Support No Support Total ~ 6 P . irticipaiits 12 Participants R Tennis 6 Te . iiii \ 6 Tedms 20 Terns ( 50 % ) X Tennis 6 Tedms 6 Teams 70 Tams ( 50 % ) Total Altogether 40 meetings with 360 participants were included in the research experiment . This sample size promised to provide significant data . Questionnaires and , in computer supported meetings , system monitoring providing statistical data on computer usage were the major data sources . Likert - scales were used in the questionnaires to have the subject rate their consent with the statements presented . The meeting participants were asked about their personal impression on the meeting process and its outcome , on team - related meeting issues , as well as their opinion about " GroupSystems " in case this system was used . Also , the meetings were recorded by video and interaction of participants via Groupsystems was I6 Teams I2 Tenms I2 Teams 40 Trams ( 40 % ) ( 30 % ) ( 10 % ) ( 100 % ) documented . Raw data resulting from the questionnaires alone includes more than 100 variables . for which indicators were partially derived from previous experimental research instruments . These indicators covered quality ( effectiveness ) , quantity ( efficiency ) , satisfaction , participation and consensus information about the meetings ( the source and validity of the indicators is discussed in [ 23 , chapter 111 . 31 ) . Data was analysed with different statistical methods . The following results are based on applying analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) procedures for unbalanced designs using an error level of 5 % with the Tuckey - Cramer test method . The size of significant changes of the observed ( dependent ) variables in conjunction with a different degree of technology intervention ( facilitated structure and computer supported facilitated structure ) is calculated as effect size d = ( ml - m & where mi is the variable mean of each of the two compared treatment populations and o is the standard deviation of the total population compared . Refer to Lewe [ 22 ] for a more detailed discussion of the teamsize related effects in conjunction with increasing technology support intervention in meetings . Here the results of 6 - and 12 - person groups were combined for the assessment of GSS and facilitated structure effects . A complete discussion of the results is documented in Lewe [ 23 ] . 4 Findings Table 2 provides an overview which meeting variables significantly changed in meetings due to increased technology intervention through facilitated structure or computer supported facilitated structure according to the analysis of variance tats . Significant differences between treatments occur only in a certain subset of all the variables observed . Depending on where signiticant differences between the different treatments can be observed eight different effect patterns of technology impact on a meeting variable can be distinguished [ 23 ] : I ) Successive Effects 2 ) Persistent Structure Effects 3 ) Isolated Structure Effects 4 ) Isolated Computerization Effects 5 ) Limited Computerization Effects 6 ) Limited Structure Effects 7 ) Limited Successive Effects 8 ) No Effect In case of the " Successive Effect " pattern significant differences can be observed between the variable means of all different treatments of support technology intervention . Significant change is observed for meeting variables following this pattern when facilitated structure is applied instead of having no support at all and significant change is again observed when computer support is introduced . A " Persistent Structure Effect " can be observed when significant changes 27 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I996 of the means of a meeting variable result from structured facilitation and no further change can be observed when computer supported facilitated structure is applied . An " Iso - lated Structure Effect " significantly changes a variable only when structured facilitation is applied . With the introduction of computer support the strong impact of structured facilitation is no longer noticeable . The variable only shows marginal differences between teams working with computer support and teams having no support in their meetings . An " Isolated Computerization Effect " means that only computer supported teams can realize significant advantages . There is hardly a difference between variable means of the population having no support at all and the one having only structure support . Limited effects cause minor changes . Here small changes add up to at least one significant difference between variable means of different treatment populations . For the " Limited Computerization Effect " pattern to occur it requires that influence of structured facilitation and computer support proceed to opposite directions of the variable value . Thus a significant difference between computer supported teamwork and structured facilitation can be observed , however there is no difference against non - supported meetings noticeable . A " Limited Structure Effect " pattern exists , if the facilitated structured situation is significantly different exactly from one of the two other conditions of support technology intervention . For " Limited Successive Effects ' ' to occur it is neccessary that small ( limited ) changes of the observed variable build upon each other to create one significant difference between the non - supported meeting situation and the computer supported facilitated structure meeting situation . Most effects observed in this study were isolated computerization effects , limited sucessive effects and persistent structure effects refraining from those variables showing no effect at all . Table 2 shows which of the measured meeting characteristics changed significantly , which effect pattern they follow , what the effect direction was ( first column ) , and , besides showing means and standard deviations for these variables , what effect sizes occurred . A ' + I infront of a variable means the variable ' s value increases with increased technology intervention . Vice - versa a ' - I infront of a variable means a reduced value . Note that the effect size value increases when the treatment had a stronger impact on the meeting aspect . Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of the effect sizes in a portfolio which contrasts the effect size amounts of the structured facilitation intervention with the effect size amounts of the computer supported facilitated structure intervention ( negative effect sizes are depicted with their positive values ) . The further a meeting variable appears to the right in the portfolio , the stronger the computerization effect of facilitated structure was . The further a variable appears upwards in the portfolio , the stronger the effect of providing facilitated structure support was . To understand the meaning of a position of a variable in Figure 2 , look for example at the variable , Emergence of an informal leader " which indicates treatment effects on ' participation ' ( in the center of Figure 2 ; variable values and effect size reported in the center of Table 2 ) . When compared with a non - supported meeting situation , the effect of introducing facilitated structure support is relatively low and not significant according to the analysis of variance test ( effect size : d = - 0 , 83 [ as reported in Table 21 ) . The effect on this variable of introducing computer supported facilitated structure is so much stronger ( effect size : d = - I , 87 ) , that the treatments cause an ' Isolated Computerization Effect ' effect pattern for this variable . Variables on a parallel line to the dotted lines in the portfolio have shown the same total amount of effect size for facilitated structure support and for computer supported facilitated structure when compared against meetings with no support at all , though the total change can result from different influencing effects of these sources . The charts show that acceleration of the meeting as perceived by the meeting participants is the strongest effect of both interventions in the meeting process . Since the total amount of meeting time was one hour in each treatment for the experiment , the accelerating effect was measured here by asking the meeting participants for a relative judgement , if the meeting was faster than they expected . There is no difference in how long it actually took people to do the task since all teams but two faster ones ( one computer supported team and one with structure support ) used up all the time available to complete their task . Actual meeting time needed to be a control in this experiment to explore effects for each team reaching the same amount of task , namely the end of the process when a concept with prioritized solutions to the waste problem was delivered , with quantity and quality of the concept as the meeting product besides perceived acceleration as dependent measures . Otherwise the difference where teams were at in the process would have been a potential confound . This type of measuring speed effects and the result of this experiment correspond to previous empirical studies of the use of GSS which have uncovered extreme time savings through computer supported meetings [ 29 , 321 . The perceived speed increase of the meeting process is the only variable in this study which followed the successive effect pattern , meaning that substantial perceptual acceleration can be achieved by providing facilitated structure in meetings but even more perceptual efficiency can be gained hy providing computer support . An indication of significant actual time savings through computer use is provided by data on the amount of ideas produced and the actual number of solutions considered to the problem at hand in the given time . Effect sizes on these variables are smaller but still show significant effects from introducing computers . Isolated computerization and limited successive effects were observed for these variables meaning that facilitated structure only contributes to small improvements 28 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Suppon ' support ' Mean Std Dev Mean Std - Dev Mean Sld Dev Mean Sld Dev Vanables Successive Effect t Meeting was laster than e 2 , 51 0 , 91 1 . 84 Persistent Structure Effect t Understanding 01 task - Meeting result determined by daminant person t Equality of participatm t Saltsfacton with own meeting performance 3 , 45 0 , 23 3 . 15 0 , t Satisfaction wilh meeting process dunng idea generation 3 , 92 0 , 56 4 , 14 1 4 . 03 0 , 23 3 . 51 - Digresson from actual task 1 , 78 0 , 38 2 , 40 0 , 433 0 , 33 4 , 41 444 023 4 , 11 0 . Isolated Structure Effect - Possibtltty to trace origin of ideas based nl their content 2 , 41 0 , 42 2 . 53 9 0 , 60 3 2 , 39 0 , 51 2 - 29 0 , - Necessity of aoonymlty durin 3 , 18 0 , 72 3 , 77 2 , 77 0 , 74 281 0 , 3 . 17 0 , 37 3 . 35 0 , - Exploration of ideas of othe 3 , 03 0 , 48 2 , 68 t Coordinated meeting process $ 62 0 . 67 4 , 07 - impact 01 mcderatoc on 07 0 . 65 2 , 59 UPPOfl Hth computer suppo Limited Computerization Effect - Cnlical argueing with the ideas 3 , 69 0 . 40 3 , 48 0 , 45 3 . 90 0 . 30 3 . 78 0 . 29 - 0 . 81 0 , 37 0 , 53 - 0 . 40 t Number of solutions considered in result 10 . 90 529 13 , 25 3 , 47 8 . 17 5 . 04 10 . 50 6 , 40 0 , 40 - 0 , 62 t Impact of moderator on turn taking 1 . 80 0 . 55 2 . 04 0 , 46 1 , 47 0 , 36 1 . 81 0 , 68 Limited Successive Effect $ 22 0 . 58 2 , 81 9 3 , 49 0 , 1 3 . 33 0 , 1 $ 03 0 , 4 , OO 0 , 45 4 , OO 0 . 187 0 , 57 225 0 , 6 Explanation : + EnectcausedanlncreasemthevaMblevalue Table 2 . Significantly intluenced meeting characteristics and their effect size . Ellect caused a decrease n the varlable value 29 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I996 m 3 " 0 m m 0 rz - . N CD S U U 0 & " U - 0 w i i / I / Y m / - - L " 0 / / / / / / 30 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 concerning idea quantity but computerization leads to a clear increase . The second most important impact of computer support in meetings is its capability to provide unonymity . In meetings with this type of support it was signiticantly more difficult to relate contributions to specific persons . Furthermore participants in those meetings noted that there were many ideas presented which otherwise would not have been presented . Having experienced this type of anonymity meeting participants rated the necessity to provide anonymity during the generation and evaluation of ideas much higher than p - articipants in meetings with facilitated structure only or without support . Finally , the possibility to provide immediate and direct contributions was seen as an important effect of computer support in meetings . All these effects are isolated computerization effects , meaning that they were not seen in free - flow meetings or the meetings with facilitated structure . The most important effect of an intervention by facilitated structure is an improved understanding of the task ( its content and how to accomplish it ) . This is a persistent structure effect , which does not disappear when structured facilitation is complemented or substituted by computer support . Similarly the next most important effects which can be attributed to facilitated structure according to this study are persistent structure effects . These are a significantly reduced dominance of certain meeting participants leading to a fair chance to contribute and a more focussed discussion . This is exactly what facilitated structure is aiming at . 5 Discussion The research results show that computer supported facilitation is stronger than the impact of facilitation alone . As visualized in Figure 2 the effect sizes observed in conjunction with a facilitated structure intervention are in general about half as strong as the effect sizes observed in conjunction with computer supported facilitated structure . Furthermore the direction of the effects tend to point to the same direction . This should encourage both , teams and their moderators , to switch from structured facilitation meetings 10 computer supported meetings . Usage of computer support in meetings hardly harms the positive effects gained from applying structured facilitation in meetings . It complements it and adds value to it . Most important it provides means to accomplish more in a given meeting time by accelerating it and it provides better anonymity for discussion contributions , a feature which especially the computer supported teams recognized as an advantage in accomplishing their task . This supports the position of the hypothesis derived from previous research that facilitated structure improves meetings to a lesser degree than meetings with computer supported facilitation . Furthermore , a large number of limited successive effects was observed . The research results also provide an explanation why for many meetings moderators are called in to provide structured facilitation . In the business world , especially in workshop mee - tings , teams often work with structured and moderated techni - ques . Well known examples are the " 6 - 3 - 5 " - or the " Meta - plan " - Card - Technique [ 261 . Here ideas and statements are exchanged in a structured manner on cards or paper sheets as manual tools . As it is evident by practice and confirmed by the results presented here , that structured facilitation of meetings already provides some positive impact . By applying these techniques moderators help teams to understand their own tasks ( and goals ) , they take care that everybody gets involved in accomplishing the task and they show ways how to proceed during the meeting without loosing focus . In consequence of this line of thought improvements of meetings should not merely be seen as a matter of information technology and its proper application in meetings . In many cases structured facilitation alone provides some improve - ments . However , computer use in meetings leads to further and really significant improvements . The total set of small im - provements through moderation alone can provide enough im - provements to produce a significant advance compared to traditional meetings . But the question then is whether structured facilitation alone is sufficient to meet the teams goals in an effective and efficient manner . Computerization effects are larger . But computerized meetings also mean ad - ditional expenses over moderation - only meetings . These expenses need to be justified by those effects which can be attributed to computerization . In all this means that the availability of computer technology to support meetings will probably not threat moderators and moderated meetings . It will rather become a tool for moderators to add value ( esp . efficiency and more anonymity ) to their moderation services . This study revealed differences of ' the impact of structured facilitation and computer supported facilitated structure in meetings under experimental conditions . An experimental study allows for a good control of the aspects studied and increases internal validity . But it also requires to be very careful with generalizing results and interpretations . In this study it is probably not so much a problem of having studied students ( for a discussion of the suitability to study students as surrogates for managers see [ 171 ) in a GSS lab environment since the experimental design established a business - work - shop - like situation . The same professional GSS meeting environment , the CATeam Room , was used in all treatments and the experimental task ( solving the complex problem of how to handle pollution by waste under time pressure ) was oriented on real problems which teams face in business - 31 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 meetings . Furthermore a comparison of the characteristics of the MBA students studied here with ( top - ) manager profiles of a recent German study showed that the students did not signifi - cantly differ from top - managers in behavioral aspects [ 27 , 231 . What probably causes a stronger problem for the generalizability of the results is the fact that the study was conducted with the same , skilled facilitator in both treatments . the treatment " With Structure " and " With Computer " ( no facilitator was present in meetings with " No Support " ) and that a specific GSS was used . This study kept these factors constant to increase internal validity , though the characteristics and skills of moderators and their specific ' art ' of intervention in meeting processes can differ . Therefore it is likely that the effects of facilitated structure and computer supported facilitated structure as well as their ratio in effect size will differ , too , when meetings with different facilitator - types and meetings with different GSS - types are studied . The study here was not designed to show the extent to which effect variations occur due to variations in facilitator - and GSS - type . Research in which different moderator characteristics and skills as well as different GSSs are tested concerning their impact is recommended to identify the extent to which the results presented here can be generalized . It is possible that this re - search will show that a well skilled facilitator and a GSS appropriate to the task at hand increase the ( mostly positive ) effects and their sizes while a non - skilled facilitator and inap - propriate GSSs decrease them . The study has shown that by using computer supported facilitated structure in meetings most advantages of moderation and the manual techniques which moderators apply remain available and new possibilities for improvements open up . Computer supported meetings are especially worth their ad - ditional effort over moderated meetings when perceived speed and anonymous as well as direct input are more important to meeting success than equal participation and a straightforward discussion among meeting participants . In consequence moderators should consider adding computer supported meeting tools to their toolset . This could help managers with their common problems concerning meetings . Literature [ I ] Anson , Robert G . ; Bostrom . Robert P . ; Wynne , Bayard E . : Group Support Systems ad Facilitator Effects on Meeting Outcomes . In : Management Science , 4 ( I995 ) 2 , p . 189 - 208 . [ 2 ] Benbasat , I . ; Lim , L . - H . : The Effects of Group Task , Context and Technology Variables on the Usefulness , of Group Support Systems - A Meta - Analysis of Experimental Studies . In : Small Group Research , 24 ( 1993 ) 4 , p . 430 - 462 . [ 3 ] Bostrom , R . P . ; Anson , R . : The Face - to Face Electronic Meeting : A Tutorial . In : Computer Augmented Teamwork : a guided tour . Publ . : Bostrom , R . P . ; Watson , R . T . ; Kinney , S . T . Van Nostrand Reinhold . New York 1992 , p . 16 - 33 . [ 4 ] Bostrom . R . P . ; Anson . R . ; Clawson , V . : Group Facilitation and Group Support Systems . In : Group Support Systems : New Perspectives . Publ . : Jessup , L . M . ; Valacich , J . Van Nostrand Reinhold , New York 1993 , p . 146 - 168 . [ 5 ] Breiner , S . : Sitzungen - Zum Stand ihrer empirischen Erforschung . Working Paper Nr . 70 of the IS Department at the University of Hohenheim , November 1994 . [ 6 ] Clawson , V . ; Bostrom , R . ; Anson , R . : The Role of the Facilitator in Computer Supported Meetings . In : Journal of Small Group Research , November 1993 . [ 7 ] Connolly , T . ; Jessup , L . M . ; Valacich , J . S . : Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea Generation in Computer - Mediated Groups . In : Management Science , [ SI Dennis , A . ; George , J . ; Jessup , L . ; Nunamaker , J . ; Vogel , D . : Information Technology to Support Electronic Meetings . In : MIS Quarterly , 12 ( 1 9 8 ~ 4 , p . 59 1 - 624 . [ 9 ] Dennis , A . R . ; Valacich , J . S . ; Nunamaker , J . F . : Group , Sub - group and Nominal Group Idea Generation in an Electronic Meeting Environment . In : Proceedings 24 . Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences ( HICSS - 24 ) . Vol . 3 . Kauai , Hawaii , 1991 , p . 573 - 579 . [ 101 Dickson , G . ; Patridge , J . ; Robinson , L . : Exploring Modes of Facilitative Support for CDSS Technology . In : MIS Quarterly , I7 ( I993 ) 2 , p . 173 - 194 . [ I I J Dubs , S . ; Hayne , Stephen C . : Distributed Facilitation : A Concept Whose Time Has Come ? In : Sharing Perspectives . CSCW 92 . Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , Toronto , Canada , October 3 1 - November4 , 1992 , p . 314 - 321 . [ 12 ] Gallupe , B . ; DeSanctis , G . ; Dickson , G . : The Impact of Computer Based Support on the Process and Outcomes of Group Decision Making . In : Management Information Systems Quarterly , 2 ( 1988 ) 12 , p . 277 - 298 . [ I31 George , J . F . ; Dennis , A . ; Nunamaker , J . F . : An Experimental Investigation of Facilitation in an EMS Decision Room . In : Group Decision and Negotiation , ( 1992 ) I , p . 57 - 70 . [ 141 Gray , P . ; Vogel , D . ; Beauclair , R . : Assessing GDSS Empirical Research . In : European Journal of Operational Re - search , ( 1990 ) 46 , p . 162 - 176 . [ 151 Graslund . K . ; Lewe , H . : Krcmar , H . : Neue Ergebnisse der empirischen Forschung auf dem Gebiet der computer - unterstiitzten Gruppenarbeit - Group Support Systems ( GSS ) . Working Paper Nr . 43 of the University of Hohenheim IS Department , May 1993 . [ I61 Hirokawa , R . Y . ; Gouran , D : Facilitation of group communication : A critique of prior research and an agenda for future research . In : Management Communication Quarterly , 3 [ 171 Hughes , C . T . ; Gibson , M . L . : Students as Surrogates for Managers in a Decision - making Environment : An Experi - mental Study . In : Journal of Management Information Systems , 8 ( 1991 ) 2 , S . 153 - 166 . [ 181 Jessup , L . M . : Connolly , T . ; Galegher , J . : The Effects of Anonymity on GDSS Group Process With an Idea - Generating Task . In : MIS Quarterly , I4 ( I990 ) 3 , p . 3 13 - 32 1 . [ I91 Jessup , L . M . ; Tansik , D . A . : Decision Making in an 36 ( 1990 ) 6 , p . 689 - 703 . ( I 989 ) 1 , p . 7 1 - 92 . Automated Environment : The Effects of Anonymity and Pro - 32 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Kommunikationstechniken fur Fuhrungskrafte . Top - Manager 199 1 ; Amsterdam , p . 8 1 - 95 . ximity with a Group Decision Support System . In : Decision Sciences , 22 ( 1991 ) , p . 266 - 279 . [ 20 ] Krcmar , H . : Computer Supported Cooperative Work - State of the Art . In : Bullinger , H . - J . ( Hrsg . ) : Human Aspects in Computing : Design and Use of’ Interactive Systems and Information Management . Elsevier Science Publishers B . V . , [ 21 ] Krcmar , H . ; Lewe , H . ; Schwabe , G . : Empirical CATeam Research of Meetings . In : Proceedings 29 . Hawaii Inter - national Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS - 27 ) . Vol . 3 . Wailea , Hawaii , 1994 , p . 31 - 40 . [ 22 ] Lewe , H . : Der EinfluR der TeamgroBe und Computerunterstutzung auf Sitzungen . In : “Einfuhrung von CSCW - Systemen in Organisationen” . Proceedings of the D - CSCW 94 . Publ . : Hasenkamp , U . Vieweg , Braunschweig [ 23 ] Lewe , H . : Computer Aided Team und Produktivitat - Einsatzmoglichkeiten und Erfolgspotentiale . Gabler Verlag , Wiesbaden 1995 . [ 24 ] Lewe , H . ; Krcmar , H . : The Design Process for a Compu - ter - Supported Cooperative Work Research Laboratory : The Hohenheim CATeam Room . In : Journal of Management Information Systems , 8 ( 199 1 - 92 ) 3 , p . 69 - 85 . 1251 Maier , N . R . F . ; Hoffman , L . R . : Using trained developmental discussion leaders to improve further the quality of group decisions . In : Journal of Applied Psychology , [ 26 ] Moore , C . M . : Group Techniques For Idea Building . Sage Publications , Newbury Park - Beverly Hills - London - New Dehli 1987 . 1271 Muller - BBling , D . ; Ramme , I . : Informations - und 1991 , p . I 113 - 1 117 . 1994 , p . 147 - 166 . 44 ( 1960 ) , p . 247 - 25 1 . zwischen Technikeuphorie und Tastaturphobie . Oldenbourg Verlag , Munchen - Wien 1990 . [ 28 ] Nunninaker , J . ; Dennis , A . ; Valacich , J . ; Vogel , D . ; George . J . : Electronic Meeting Systems to Support Group Work . In : Communications of the ACM ( CACM ) , 34 ( l991 ) 7 , [ 29 ] Nunamaker , J . F . ; Vogel , D . R . ; Heminger , A . ; Martz , B . ; Grohowski . R . ; McGoff , C . : Experiences at IBM with Group Support Systems : A Field Study . In : Decision Support Systems . ( 1989 ) 5 , p . 183 - 196 . [ 30 ] Pinsonneault , A . ; Kraemer , K . : The effects of electronic meetings on group process and outcomes : An assessment of the empirical research . In : European Journal of Operational Research , 46 ( 1990 ) , p . 143 - 161 . [ 31 ] Phillips , L . D . ; Phillips , M . C . : On Facilitating Groups . Working Paper London School of Economics and Political Science , 1990 . [ 32 ] Post , B . Q . : Building the Business Case for Group Support Technology . In : Proceedings IV of the 25th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS - 25 ) . Kailua - Kona , Hawaii , Januar 1992 , p . 34 - 45 . [ 33 ] Schmidt , C . ; Elgass , P . ; Krcmar , H . : Beobachtete Proble - me in Sitzungen und Losungsansatze durch Groupware . Working Paper Nr . 48 of the IS Department of the University of Hohenheim . Hohenheim 1993 . [ 34 ] Valacich , J . S . ; Dennis , A . R . ; Nunamaker , J . F . : Group Size and Anonymity Effects on Computer - Mediated Idea Generation . In : Small Group Research , 23 ( 1992 ) I , p . 49 - 73 . [ 35 ] Viller , S . : The Group Facilitator : A CSCW Perspective . In : Proceedings of the Second European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 24 . - 27 . September S . 40 - 6 I . 33