A Feature Integration Theor y of Attention A . Treisman and G . Gelade ( 1980 ) Analytic vs Synthetic Gestalt Doubts • Conforms to subjective experience • No guarantee that this represents early stage of perception • Needs more evidence as theory of actual coding Features and Dimensions • A “feature” is a particular value on a dimension • Separable features determined empirically Feature Integration Theory Treisman et al . 1980 110 TREISMAN AND SCHMIDT the processing operations we hypothesize and try to specify which of these operations affect conscious awareness ( see Fig . 1 ) . In doing so , we will speculate beyond what we would wish to defend as the essentials of the theory . We should also make it clear that we are discussing only one type of attention . We do not believe that all the limits on performance that have been attributed to attention can be subsumed by a single mechanism ( Treisman , 1969 ) . In this paper we use the term “attention” to refer to selective or focused scanning of competing external stimuli , the type of attention involved in “filtering” paradigms ( Broadbent , 1958 ) . We distin - guish this from the priming or expectancy effects studied , for example , by Laberge ( 1973 ) or Posner and Snyder ( 1975 ) , which selectively preactivate particular perceptual decisions . We also distinguish it from the limited span of conscious experience ; in the present theory , focused attention is used to construct the representations which may , but need not , then become “available” to subjective awareness . The basic claims made by Treisman and Gelade ( 1980 ) were ( 1 ) that there is an early stage of perceptual processing at which separable dimen - sions are coded , independently of each other , and form regions defined within separate maps by the presence of particular sets of features ; ( 2 ) that this stage is followed by a feature - integration stage , where focused attention mediates the formation of perceived objects . Feature registra - tion at the first stage occurs automatically , without attention , and in par - allel across the spatial display , although it is subject to “data limits” on accuracy ( Norman & Bobrow , 1975 ) and also to mutual interference be - P . 3Fillel feature analyr1s and texture segregatm Visual Semantic Memory Pred , cted features + correctly confoined . Unless expectatlonr * are m ! sleading Eplsodlc memory t . Conscious awareness Attended features correctly coqomed FIG . 1 . Flow diagram of processing operations involved in the perception of objects . Treisman & Schmidt 1982 Neural Basis Predictions • Parallel vs Serial search * • Texture segregation * • Illusory Conjunctions • Identity and Location * • Interference from unattended stimuli Experiments 1 - 3 : Visual Search • Single features can be processed in parallel • Conjunction of features processed serially • Self - terminating search T X T T T T X X T T X X X X T X T X T T X T X T X T X T 104 TREISMAN AND GELADE SEARCH FOR COLORED SHAPES - CONJUNCTION - - - DISJUNCTION I 1 I I I 5 15 30 DISPLAY SIZE FIG . 1 . Search times in Experiment I . size in the conjunction condition , the linear component accounting for more than 99 % of the variance due to display size . The ratio of the posi - tive to the negative slopes in the conjunction condition was 0 . 43 , which is quite close to half . These results suggest that search is serial and self - terminating with a scanning rate of about 60 msec per item . The variances increased more steeply for positive than for negative trials , and for posi - tives the root mean square of the RTs increased linearly with display size as predicted for serial self - terminating search . With the feature targets , the results were very different . For the posi - tive displays , search times were hardly affected by the number of dis - tractors , the slopes averaging only 3 . 1 msec . Deviations from linearity were significant , and the linear component accounted for only 68 % of the variance due to display size . For the negatives , the linear component accounted for 96 % of the variance due to display size , and departures from linearity did not reach significance . The slope was , however , less than 1664 Trials • 1664 Trials • No error bars—could lend support if pos . had greater variation • Positive color - only not signiﬁcantly linear • Negative conjunction has ~ twice the slope of positive conjunction ( 67 vs 29ms ) No switch from serial to parallel 106 TREISMAN AND GELADE P I , I I I I I I I 1 1 I I I INTERCEPTS 440 - NEGATIVE - POSITIVE - 360 - 320 - 280 - 240 : > I 1 I I I I 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 BLOCKS FIG . 2 . The effects of practice on the slope and intercept of the function relating search time to display size . ( The dotted lines are the data for the four subjects who did 7 sessions and the solid lines for the two subjects who continued for 13 sessions . ) size that was due to linearity was above 0 . 99 in every block except posi - tive blocks 3 and 12 , when it was 0 . 98 and 0 . 97 , respectively . Thus there is little indication of any change in the pattern of results and no sign of a switch from serial to parallel search over the 13 blocks of practice . The mean results for the two subjects who volunteered for this extensive practice were typical of the group as a whole on blocks 2 and 3 ( negative and positive slopes of 67 and 31 , respectively , compared to the group means of 67 and 29 ; intercepts 423 and 389 compared to 397 and 398 ) . Discussion We suggested that focal attention , scanning successive locations se - rially , is the means by which the correct integration of features into mul - tidimensional percepts is ensured . When this integration is not required by the task , parallel detection of features should be possible . The results , especially on positive trials , fit these predictions well . Despite the major changes in the feature search condition between this experiment and the The Hard and the Easy • Should be possible to affect speed of judgment based on similarity • Should still have the 2 / 1 ratio of negative to positive slopes O N O N O N O N O O N N O O N T X T X X T T X X T T X T X T T N ATTENTION AND FEATURE INTEGRATION 109 DISPLAY SIZE FIG . 3 . Search times in Experiment II . displays of 16 and 36 averaged 5 . 9 and 20 . 7 % false - negative errors , re - spectively , compared to a mean of 2 . 2 % errors for all other displays . Discussion In both conditions we have evidence supporting serial , self - terminating search through the display for the conjunction targets . The slopes are linear and the positives give approximately half the slope of the negatives . However , the rates vary dramatically : The more distinctive colors and TABLE 2 Linear Regressions of Search Times against Display Size in Experiment II Percentage variance with display size which is due to linearity Slope Intercept Difficult discrimination Easy discrimination Positives 55 . 1 453 99 . 8 Negatives 92 . 4 472 99 . 9 Positives 20 . 5 437 99 . 8 Negatives 39 . 5 489 99 . 9 ATTENTION AND FEATURE INTEGRATION 109 DISPLAY SIZE FIG . 3 . Search times in Experiment II . displays of 16 and 36 averaged 5 . 9 and 20 . 7 % false - negative errors , re - spectively , compared to a mean of 2 . 2 % errors for all other displays . Discussion In both conditions we have evidence supporting serial , self - terminating search through the display for the conjunction targets . The slopes are linear and the positives give approximately half the slope of the negatives . However , the rates vary dramatically : The more distinctive colors and TABLE 2 Linear Regressions of Search Times against Display Size in Experiment II Percentage variance with display size which is due to linearity Slope Intercept Difficult discrimination Easy discrimination Positives 55 . 1 453 99 . 8 Negatives 92 . 4 472 99 . 9 Positives 20 . 5 437 99 . 8 Negatives 39 . 5 489 99 . 9 Discussion • Higher error rates on “difﬁcult” condition • Still works on regular grid • Slopes still retain 2 : 1 ratio “Centrality” 110 TREISMAN AND GELADE shapes allow search to proceed nearly three times as fast as the less distinc - tive . The mean scanning rate of 62 msec per item obtained in the conjunc - tion condition of Experiment I lies between the rates obtained here with the confusable stimuli and with the highly discriminable stimuli . This wide variation in slopes , combined with maintained linearity and 2 / l slope ratios , is consistent with the theory , and puts constraints on alternative explanations . For example , we can no longer suppose that search be - comes serial only when it is difficult . The need for focused attention to each item in turn must be induced by something other than overall load . The fact that the intercepts were the same for the easy and the difficult conditions is also consistent with the theory . Experiment I used pseudo - random locations for the targets and dis - tractors . The present experiment extends the conclusions to displays in which the stimuli are arranged in a regular matrix . The serial scan is therefore not induced by any artifact of the locations selected or by their haphazard arrangement . EXPERIMENT III Experiment III explores an alternative explanation for the difference between conjunction and feature targets . This attributes the difficulty of the conjunction condition to the centrality of the target in the set of distracters : a conjunction target shares one or another feature with every distractor in the display , while each disjunctive feature target shares a feature with only half the distracters ( see Fig . 4 ) . In this sense , the con - junction targets are more similar to the set of distracters than the feature targets . We replicated this aspect of the similarity structure , but using uni - dimensional stimuli in which checking for conjunctions would not be necessary . We compared search times for a single unidimensional target , which was intermediate between two types of distracters on the single relevant dimension , with search times for either of two disjunctive Dl . SJUNCTlVE NON - CONJUNCTION NON - DISJUNCTIVE TARGET TARGET TARGET TARGET TARGET GREEN - GREEN - GREEN GROWN BLUE ‘S ‘X’ ‘T ‘T ‘T - - DlSJUNCTlVE NON - MEDIUM NON - DISJUNCTIVE TARGET TARGET TARGET TARGET TARGET - - - 0 FIG . 4 . Similarity relations between the stimuli in Experiments I and III . 112 TREISMAN AND GELADE SEARCH FOR ELLIPSES 3200 2400 800 0 I I I 5 15 3 I I I LARGE OR SMALL C LARGE + - - SMALL DISPLAY SIZE FIG . 5 . Search times in Experiment III . between conjunctions and disjunctions cannot be attributed simply to their relative difficulty . Search for the intermediate ellipses was consid - erably slower on average than for the color - shape conjunctions , yet the relation of latency to display size was linear for the conjunctions , and not for the ellipses . When a single feature ( size ) defines the target , search can be slow but need not be serial in the sense of checking each item in turn . Clearly , with search times which were sometimes as long as 3 set for the ellipses , some aspects of processing are likely to be serial . Subjects certainly changed fixation and scanned the display with their eyes , so that different areas of the display received foveal processing successively . In this sense processing was serial . However , serial eye fixations do not imply serial decisions about each item , one at a time , and we believe the two patterns have different theoretical implications which are worth dis - tinguishing . Serial fixations will be made when the discriminations require fovea1 acuity , either because they are below threshold with peripheral vision or because there is some form of lateral interference which in - creases towards the periphery . However , within each successive fixation it is at least logically possible that the whole display receives parallel processing , the fovea1 areas receiving the most detailed sensory informa - tion , but all or many stimuli being checked simultaneously . Since density increased with number of items in the present experiment , more stimuli would on average have been within foveal vision for each fixation with the Experiment 4 Compound shapes • Are letters perceptual “units” ? • Feature Integration : letters processed serially if : • They are analyzed as separate features • These features are interchangeable to form possible errors P + Q = R ? P + B ≠ R ATTENTION AND FEATURE INTEGRATION 117 LETTER SEARCH - R IN P . ( L AND T IN l . Z LETTER - - - R IN P . B AND T IN I . V CONTROL OJ ’ I 1 1 I 1 5 15 30 1 15 DISPLAY SIZE FIG . 6 . Search times in Experiment IV . tively . Errors averaged 3 . 5 % and were less than 7 % in every condition except the positives in the conjunction condition with display size 30 , where they increased to 15 . 5 % false negatives . These errors were on average 539 msec slower than the correct detections in the same blocks and conditions . Thus if subjects had continued to search until they found the target , the mean search time in this condition would have been 84 msec longer ( 0 . 155 x 539 ) , improving the linearity of the function . The ratio of positive to negative slopes differed for the conjunction and the similarity conditions : for the conjunctions it was 0 . 45 , which is close to half and suggests a serial self - terminating search . For the similarity condition it was much lower ( 0 . 26 ) , as it was with the single feature color TABLE 3 Linear Regressions of Search Times against Display Size in Experiment IV Conjunction Similarity Heterogeneity control T / IZ WPQ TIIY RJPB TIPQ Positives Negatives Slope Intercept Slope Intercept 12 . 2 363 34 . 7 349 27 . 2 362 52 . 1 388 5 . 3 363 18 . 1 417 9 . 7 403 40 . 5 446 4 . 9 340 20 . 5 386 • Ratio in R | PQ case close to 2 : 1 ( . 45 ) • In R | PB case , ratio is much lower ( 0 . 26 ) , suggests different processes Experiments 5 - 7 : Texture segregation • Figure / Ground separation preattentive • Determined by spatial discontinuities • Easy segregation when areas differ in one separable feature ( color , shape , etc . ) O V O V O V O V O V V O V V O O O V O O O V O V O V O V O V V O V V O O O V O O V O O V O V O O O O Vertical Boundary Horizontal Boundary O V O V O V O V O V V O V V O O O O O V O O V O V O V O V O V O V O V V O V V O O O O O V O O V O V Results • Took signiﬁcantly longer to sort conjunction sets than not ( ~ 25 s . vs . ~ 15 s ) • Conjunction sets did not differ from each other • Most subjects developed same strategy of locating all instances of one conjunction ( e . g . O ) Modiﬁcations • Use multiple dimensions : O π on one side and OV on the other . • Use letter sub - features : • PO vs RQ have diagonals only on one side • PQ vs RO has no simple features • Again , conjunction of features is the slower case • One subject had vastly slower times on letter parts , so different strategies are possible Experiments 8 - 9 : Identity and Location • If attention is prevented , features may be free - ﬂoating spatially and in relation to one another • Locating a single feature separate from identiﬁcation • Conjunctions require attention , so location and identity are linked X O O X O X X O H X O X X O O X O X X O X X O X Disjunctive Conjunctive X O O X O X X O X X O X X O O X O X X O O X O X Results • Conditional probability of reporting identity correctly given location was wrong • Chance performance = . 5 128 TREISMAN AND GELADE are different for inner and outer locations . The conditional probabilities were slightly higher for inner than for outer locations , but the pattern of results and the conclusions were essentially the same ; we therefore report only the pooled data . The upper half of Table 4 gives the conditional probabilities that the target was correct given each of the three categories of location response . Chance performance would be 5 . For conjunction trials on which a distant location error occurred , target identification was random , as predicted by our model . For feature targets , it was well above chance , again as predicted ( t ( 5 ) = 7 . 0 , p < . OOl ) . The chance level of performance is less clear for report of location , since neither the distribution of errors nor the distribution of missed targets was random for every subject . In order to control for bias on inner versus outer locations and top versus bottom rows , we compared the probability of reporting the correct lo - cation with the probability of re - porting its mirror image location . The median probability of correctly locating a target that was wrongly identified was at chance for conjunc - tions ( . 16 compared to . 15 ) . For the feature targets , subjects were a little more likely to place the incorrectly identified target in the correct than in the mirror image location ( . 16 compared to . 06 ) . The data for each subject were few , however , and the difference seems due to an unusually low conditional probability for the mirror image location . The results will be further discussed together with those of Experiment IX . EXPERIMENT IX There is a problem in interpreting the findings of Experiment VIII : the duration required for 80 % correct target identification was much greater for the conjunctions than for the feature targets . It is possible that this large difference in exposure duration affected performance in some qual - itative way . We therefore replicated the experiment using equal presenta - tion times for features and conjunctions . The times were chosen sepa - rately for each subject in each block , in order to ensure performance that TABLE 4 Median Probabilities of Reporting the Target Identity Correctly Given Different Categories of Location Responses Location response Correct Adjacent Distant Overall Experiment VIII Conjunction 0 . 930 0 . 723 0 . 500 0 . 793 Feature 0 . 897 0 . 821 0 . 678 0 . 786 Experiment IX Conjunction 0 . 840 0 . 582 0 . 453 0 . 587 Feature 0 . 979 0 . 925 0 . 748 0 . 916 Later work : Illusor y conjunction 2 X S T 5 2 X S T 5 • Low error rates on reporting digits ( attention directed ) • Conjunction errors far exceed errors which combined correct and non - existent features Problems with Feature Integration • Highly distinctive features and higher - order features can be searched in parallel • Retinotopy not consistent with eye movements • None of these kill the theory , only make it more complicated Summar y • Multiple feature detectors • Parallel vs . Serial Search • Free - ﬂoating features and locations