Dancing with the Unexpected and Beyond The Use of AI Assistance in Design Fiction Creation Yiying Wu School of Design , The Hong Kong Polytechnic University , Hong Kong , China , bowyiying . wu @ polyu . edu . hk Yunye Yu School of Foreign Languages , Southeast University , Nanjing , China , yunye . yu @ seu . edu . cn Pengcheng An Southern University of Science and Technology , Shenzhen , China , anpc @ sustech . edu . cn The creation process of design fiction is going participatory and inclusive with non - experts . Recognizing the potential of artificial intelligence in creativity support , we explore the use of AI assistance in creating design fiction . This investigation is based on a workshop on ‘future work in 2040’ with Chinese youth ( N = 20 ) . We look into fiction quality , participants’ experiences with the AI agent , and their ways of incorporating those texts into writing . Our findings show that human writers while responding to messy and unexpected AI - generated texts , can elevate the richness and creativity in writing and initiate joyful and inspirational interactions . Furthermore , for the design of AI assistance in creativity support , we suggest two implications of enhancing interactional quality between human and AI and prompt programming . Our study indicates the potential of applying design fiction outside the design context using a more inclusive approach for future speculation with critical reflection on technology . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centred computing • Human - computer interaction • Empirical studies in HCI Keywords : Design fiction , Human - AI interaction , Creative writing , Creativity support tools 1 INTRODUCTION How will technological futures look ? What will be the societal and ethical implications of disruptive technologies ? These questions are often answered by experts such as engineers , developers , or technological futurists . However , the expert - based practice is criticised for the reproduction of the same hegemonic structure and the incapability of producing widen options of future [ 32 ] , and the ‘power imbalance’ that disfavour certain groups and voices that eventually do not have a future [ 39 , 51 ] . Opposing it , a participatory and inclusive approach to future speculation is increasingly seen as significant [ 54 ] . This approach is not only about the participatory process that should involve various voices but also refer to more plural and widening options the for future [ 10 ] . Studies show that laypeople have the future thinking and are especially good at contextualising macro impacts on their individual lives [ 24 ] . In practice , more non - experts are involved in creating future images and expressing preferences and opinions on technologies . In futures studies , people are invited to develop future scenarios in various themes of sustainable lifestyle [ 27 ] , work [ 29 ] , and energy [ 60 ] . Regarding future images , we are particularly interested in the provocative type of technological futures in which new technologies are not glorified and the complicated implications are discussed . By inviting people to create such scenarios , we wish to nurture the critical thinking of technology . This practice is resonated with the method of Design fiction from the HCI field . Design fiction has been a valuable tool in searching for the ethical and societal implications of emerging technology and developing critical thinking towards it . Despite the diversity in definitions , origins or approaches of design fiction practice [ 5 , 41 ] , the common elements refer to the narrative of the yet - to - exist with the ‘discursive turn’ [ 36 ] . Thus , we take the two elements of speculative and provocative from Design fiction to frame the future images to be created in our study . It is worthy of note that we are aware that one essential element of Design fiction is the making of ‘diegetic prototype’ [ 6 ] and the design fictions created from our case might not be considered ‘designerly’ enough for some designers . However , the primary aim of our work is to democratise the speculative and critical thinking to the larger mass . Thus , our study takes the narrative focus of Design fiction . It shares the affinity with other co - creation work of design fiction that is text - based [ 2 , 19 ] and emphasizes the narrative potential in enquiries [ 18 ] . Also , the design fictions produced in this study would not focus on product development , but the development of narratives of new concepts and critical reflection . The participatory thread in design fiction creation also leads to the challenge . The co - design literature claims that everyone is creative and the expert of their own experience [ 38 , 52 ] . However , a challenge is how to facilitate people imagining and even debating the future that is yet - to - exist and new technologies that are unfamiliar ? Taking up this challenge , we aim to facilitate and empower everyone in the creation and reflection . In the fields of design research and HCI , many researchers have developed tools and processes to involve non - designers’ voices in innovating new technologies and commenting on future scenarios [ 37 ] . We will review the related work in detail in the later section . Here , this paper looks into the potential of artificial intelligence ( AI ) in assisting the creation process which is not experimented in the design fiction practice . Recently , AI - assisted tools are experimented in creativity activities such as drawing , music composition , story creation , and design ideation [ 29 ] . Built on these early attempts , we aim to investigate ‘how AI assistance would influence non - designers’ creation process of design fictions . The AI - assisted tool chosen in this study is Generative Pre - trained Transformer - 2 ( GPT - 2 , referred as the transformer ) , a powerful text - generation model based on unsupervised multitask learning . The transformer was trained with corpus from THUCNews and nlp _ chinese _ corpus , using Cloud TPU POD v3 - 256 to train 22w steps [ 40 ] . And the transformer can produce Chinese texts based on a large - scale database of Chinese web texts and novels . The investigation looks at three aspects of the quality of fictions , participants’ experiences with the AI agent , and most importantly , their ways of incorporating those texts in writing . Our investigation is based on writing workshops of design fictions with 130 Chinese youth studying different subjects in Southeast University . In the workshop , each student is required to produce a piece of fiction about a future world of automated work in 2040 . The workshop is part of the university’s liberal education on technologies . help Chinese youth develop and communicate their critical reflections on emerging technologies in the future of 2040 . The 45 participants are divided into two groups . One group ( N = 20 ) used AI - assistance in their writing process and the other group ( N = 25 ) developed fictions entirely on themselves . The analysis focuses on the group that use AI assistance . After the workshop , we conduct survey and post - interviews with participants and also rate the fiction quality from both groups . Based on the data , we present our findings of the main values of AI assistance in the process of creating design fiction . For further design and use of AI assistance in creating design fiction and similar creative work , we propose two findings of enhancing interactional quality between humans and AI and prompt programming . Lastly , for the practitioners with similar interest in the participatory approach to future speculation , this study shows the potential of AI assistance in making the process more inclusive and diffuse with a larger number of audiences . 2 RELATED WORK The investigation of AI assistance in design fiction creation is built on three bodies of work . Primarily positioned in design fiction practice , we firstly reflect the tools and strategies of facilitating participatory process of design fiction from the design community . Secondly , we examine some early attempts from the HCI field of applying AI assistance in creative activities . Built on the experiences and learnings , future opportunities and concerns are proposed . Thirdly , we review the ways of planning and studying creative writing processes from creative writing scholars . 2 . 1 Tools , Strategies in Creating Design Fictions with Non - experts Design researchers have made great attempt to develop tools and processes to better craft design fictions for both design experts and non - experts . Recently , increasing efforts are on engaging non - experts in the participatory design fiction process [ 37 ] . The common context is the co - design workshop with a specific design investigation of a yet - to - exist technology in which non - designers such as future users or citizens , stakeholders , or company partners are invited . However , it is especially challenging for non - designers to imagine beyond their daily lived experiences . Therefore , in co - design workshops , a wide range of prompts are provided to feed or spark imagination , such as related articles , clips of TV shows or movies [ 7 ] , questionable design concepts [ 58 ] , and narratives of imaginary technologies [ 2 ] . Moreover , the provision of backdrop has been found useful for participants to take a leap from the present , enter the fictional world , and get sensitised with the futuristic ambiance . For instance , in Baumann et al . ’s [ 4 ] co - design project of envisioning future neighbourhood with urban technologies , researchers carefully embedded design brief in ‘what if’ prompts for participants , like ‘what if self - driving shuttles replaced privately owned vehicles ? ’ . Another strategy is seen in Wu et al . ’s [ 62 ] work which envisions a future of autonomous shipping in 2035 . The co - design workshop with company partners was structured based on the storyline that experts and company developers ‘travelled’ to a year when the automated system of shipping had been implemented and influenced the society . In addition , Cheon & Su [ 12 ] applied the technique of ‘autobiography’ that invited participants to explain how the story was developed from the present . When facilitation materials are various , participants’ ways of contributing to the creation process are also different . For instance , participants co - compose their imagined futures [ 2 ] , develop the half - finished storyline with role - playing [ 62 ] , or give opinions to the written fictions by experts [ 1 , 57 , 58 ] . Lately , a more performative and interventionist approach is experimented [ 11 ] . Noortman et al . [ 43 ] gave participants a prototype of remote care device and asked them to play the role of a caregiver for dementia patients . Similarly in the topic of elderly care , Ng et al . [ 42 ] built a fictional online shopping page of a social robot for the Spring Festival of 2035 and asked users about their purchase decisions and further stories . 2 . 2 AI Assisted Tools in Creativity Support The advancement in artificial intelligence ( AI ) enables AI to play an increasingly significant role in creative work such as drawing and music . The enquiries of applying AI in art and design activities and human - AI collaboration have been of the interest of the HCI community . However , the design for better human - AI interaction is full of challenges across the design process [ 63 ] . For instance , the unpredictability of AI’s capability , outcome , and error makes designers difficult to ideate functions , plan use scenarios , or test prototypes . Despite of the challenges and difficulties , the rapid development in AI such as learning algorithm [ 46 ] or large - scale models [ 9 ] brings new possibilities that researchers cannot resist . In recent years , there are emerging early attempts that explore AI support in creativity such as creative writing [ 15 , 35 , 44 ] , drawing [ 21 , 47 , 65 ] , design ideation [ 30 , 31 , 34 ] . As Chung et al . [ 14 ] observe that the HCI field has developed more tools to support vision - oriented activities of idea generation rather than skill - improvement such as revision or implementation . Studies have shown the two main contributions of AI - assisted tools in creativity support which are to inspire and to motivate . To inspire , however , researchers take a careful attitude towards keeping the autonomous role of human writers in the collaboration . Suggestions such as ‘Machine in the loop’ [ 15 ] , ‘Say Anything’ [ 56 ] and ‘Creative Help’ [ 50 ] are provided so that when human get inspired they still have the final control over the final result . Osone et al . [ 44 ] are more cautious , who focus on improvement based on writer’s written content and further increase their interest in creating more new ideas on their own . Apart from suggesting new ideas , information and knowledge [ 14 ] , motivating writers is also regarded crucial . Therefore , the format of games is a common engagement strategy to consider , such as role - playing [ 44 ] and mystery game [ 35 ] . Among the successful early endeavours of AI assistance in creativity support , they share the sense of excitement on various new opportunities brought by more powerful AI in terms of reliability in coherent performance , predictability in output [ 14 ] , or more human - alike interaction and behaviours [ 28 , 45 ] . However , while most of the attention is paid to the improvement of machines skills [ 23 ] , rare looks at user experiences related to interface or collaboration and the specification of intended user groups [ 14 ] . However , there is an exception that Hwang & Won [ 30 ] locate user experiences in teamworking in ideation . By closely studying the differences of robotic - sounding and a human - like conversation styles , the study indicates the important concerns , such as perceived image of the AI agent , and self - efficacy of human , for further research . The current stage of these exciting and new possibilities poses a good question to designers : which improvement or new possibility do we want to focus on ? 2 . 3 Creative Writing : Exploring the Making of a Creative Mind in Laypersons Creative writing studies provide this paper with insights regarding planning and studying the creative writing process . Creative writing is a creative behaviour in nature and the generation of creative thoughts can be synthesized as a four - stage process [ 59 ] : the first one being preparation , in which the topic or problem is investigated in all directions ; the second one being incubation , in which the author is not consciously thinking about the problem ; the third one being illumination , the appearance of the ‘happy idea’ together with the psychological events which immediately precedes and accompanied the appearance of ideas ; the fourth stage being verification . And for short - story and novels , Crowley [ 16 ] gave out a four - stage process : ‘the germ of the story’ , ‘the period of more or less conscious meditation’ , ‘the first draft’ , and ‘the revision’ . And for the more poetic way of expression , Wilson suggests five stages [ 61 ] : ‘the selective perception of the environment’ ; ‘the acquisition of technique the envisioning of combinations and distillation’ ; ‘elucidation of the vision’ , and ‘the end of the poem and its meaning to the poet’ . Theories of the creative process of different genres helped us see the writing of design fiction as a situated practice that undergoes a series of cognitive and behavioural stops before coming into being . To study and understand the creative writing process , as Emig [ 20 ] put it , traditionally there are three major types of data . The first type is the accounts concerning writers , such as a writer’s description of or reflection on one’s own method of writing and revision . For instance , ‘author talk’ is the dialogue or correspondence between a writer and ‘a highly attuned respondent’ such as an experienced editor or a fellow writer , and critical analysis of the evolution of the writing from sources and revisions . The second type is to directives and handbooks of creative writing by authors , editors of rhetoric and compositions . The third type is the research of ‘the creative process’ of writing among adolescents . Aiming at a triangulation approach , we formulate our research plan using the first and third type of data with multiple methods , such as surveys of participants’ writing experience , interviews , and thematic analysis of writing products . We believe that the accounts about the writing process , made both by the author and may provide useful insights into the ideation of design concepts and storyline . The products of the writing process also speak to the use of AI - generated responses . In creative writing , new technology and softwares , such as Storybird and Write Your Journey , have been used to assist with writing skill learning [ 13 ] , but we have not seen a particular technology designated to develop writer’s imagination and creativity . In this sense , we believe that our study may contribute to creative writing studies with regards to the breadth of research . 3 CASE , DATA 3 . 1 Background : Reflecting on Future Work The creation workshop of design fictions was part of the course English Technical Writing at Southeast University . It was a course that is designed to foster technical writing skills and critical reflections on human and technology . The workshop required each participant to produce a piece of fiction about future work in 2040 with emerging technologies such as automation , big data and so on . We conducted the writing workshops in two formats – one with AI tool ( referred as the AI Group , N = 20 ) and one with no AI tool ( referred as the Non - AI Group , N = 25 ) . All 46participants in both groups were second year college students , the majority of whom majoring in engineering . The non - AI group generated 25 design fictions with each participant completed one . The AI Group generated 25 design fictions with two participants voluntarily wrote three , one participant wrote two , and the rest participants wrote one . The Non - AI Group had 25participants who were enrolled in English Technical Writing course . As for the AI Group , because the use of AI tool required a Google account that was not publicly supported by the internet use policy in Chinese universities , we were able to recruit only 20 participants who privately used VPN to access Google . Participants in the AI Group were recruited through a recruitment post that was electronically distributed campus - wise . n addition , all the participants , both in the Non - AI Group and AI Group , were second year students who have been learning similar core curriculum courses since they entered college . The AI - assisted tool of GPT - 2 is an open - source artificial intelligence created by Open AI . The transformer in our study was trained with corpus from THUCNews and nlp _ chinese _ corpus [ 40 ] . This transformer was trained to predict the next word after users inputting original texts . In our workshop , we used the Chinese version of GPT - 2 ( Figure 1 ) . All the design fictions generated in the workshop were written in Chinese . Figure 1 : Writing workshop of the AI Group and a screenshot of the GPT - 2 interface The purpose of the design fiction workshops was two - folded . On the one hand , it served as an integrated part of the course , providing students with thought provoking learning materials as well as inspirational learning experience ; on the other hand , the design fiction workshop aimed to bring about or foster awareness of the challenges faced by humans in the near future . Design fiction , treated as a special genre , was adopted as the pedagogical tool to help participants generate , develop , and communicate ideas and reflections into a narrative form . 3 . 2 The Creation Process : A Future World in 2040 The three - hour creation process had four steps of ‘Entering the fictional setting’ , ‘Setting a goal’ , ‘Taking action’ and ‘Developing consequences’ ( Figure 2 ) . Figure 2 : The creation process with four steps In Step 1 , to help participants to get familiar with the fictional setting of future work , we provided two future scenarios for participants to choose one to enter . The first fictional social setting ‘The Age of AI Involution’ portrayed the over - heated competition between humans and AI in the work domain , developed the current controversial phenomenon of the involutionized competition especially in the Chinese IT industry . The second one ‘Data generators as Workers’ described that people get income by generating and selling data from daily living , developed from the current discussion of ‘private data as capital’ . Scenario 1 / The Age of AI Involution ( EN trans ) : In the year of 2040 , AI and automation have replaced a significant portion of human work . While productivity has been improved to a certain extent , the involutionized competition has become more serious . Moreover , the competition has spread from the involution between humans to the ones between human and AI , even between AIs . For example , the human survivors of competition begin to compete with AI . Some automation technologies are developed not to increase productivity , just to win the involution . Scenario 2 / Data Generators as Workers ( EN trans ) : In the year of 2040 , AI and automation have replaced a significant portion of human work . The types of work have become diverse , not limited to the ones of traditional definitions . ' Living as work ' has long been mainstreamed as a means of bringing in fractional income for many people . For example , as long as people live , they can generate data through a variety of behaviours in exchange for income . Even in sleep there is a chance to make money . Of course , the list price is not the same for different behaviours . In Step 2 , after choosing a social setting between Scenario 1 and 2 , participants developed further narratives including a goal or a problem of the individual character . They were requested to develop three different versions . In Step 3 , the AI Group and Non - AI Group had different activities . The Non - AI Group developed solutions or actions by themselves . While the AI Group input the result of Step 1 and 2 as the prompt ‘In 2040 , there is the fictional situation . I have a goal to achieve . Therefore , I … ’ . Responding to the one prompt , the AI - assistant tool produced five responses and each response had a minimum of 5 sentences and a maximum of 8 sentences as we pre - set . However , the generated responses were very diverse in length . Based on AI - generated texts , participants from the AI Group were requested to develop one consistent storyline of ‘goal - action’ from each prompt . In Step 4 , participants chose one out of three to develop societal and ethical consequences . And eventually each participant produced one piece of design fiction . The two social settings provided in Step 1 were to facilitate participants to enter the future world with the provision of backdrop [ 4 ] . And the plot structure took the common fictional structure of ‘overcoming a monster’ [ 7 ] with both elements of ‘goal / problem’ and ‘actions / solutions’ . Lastly , in Step 4 ‘Consequence’ , participants were especially encouraged to develop critical results with ‘friction’ [ 22 ] to create ‘a discursive space’ that features the genre of design fiction [ 36 ] . In the end , we have 20 participants in the AI Group and 25 participants in the Non - AI group successfully completed the tasks , with 25 valid pieces of fictions from the former group and 25 pieces from the latter . 3 . 3 Post - workshop Enquiries After the creation process , we did the post - workshop survey and interviews . To the Non - AI Group , we asked them about the experiences of the writing process . To the AI Group , we added more questions related to the AI tool , including their self - reflections on the usage of AI - assistance in their writing process , overall impression and user experiences of AI - assistance , and their perceived perception of AI’s influence on ideation and writing , especially imagination . Moreover , we conducted one - on - one semi - structured interviews with each AI Group participant immediately after their creation process . In the interviews , we asked them to describe in detail what kinds of AI - generated texts they found attractive , useful and how they used these texts in their writing . Apart from the enquiry of process and experiences , we evaluated the quality of design fictions produced at both workshops . We developed a set of quality criterion and recruited five human raters to evaluate the design fictions . 25 pieces of design fictions were randomly selected from the Non - AI Group and 25 were produced by the AI Group . Lastly , we used the criterion of five dimensions to evaluate the fiction quality ( Table 1 ) . The criterion was developed with the consideration from the practices of both design fiction and creative writing . As a genre of writing , design fiction shall meet the basic requirement of writing quality in clarity and coherence ( Table 1 ) . The other four dimensions were specially made for the creation of a piece of fictional narrative about the future world in 2040 with critical thinking of technology . Therefore , we expected the design fiction to be provocative to open up discursive space , plausible for made - believe , creative in the design sense , and concrete in scene building . It is worthy to note that we agree with Baumer et al . ’s [ 5 ] opinion on the impossibility of making one single standard evaluation of design fiction and the hesitation on the necessity of the evaluation . Nevertheless , we used this evaluation criterion to fulfil the research purpose of understanding the features that AI assistance might have an impact on . The evaluation criterion was developed through three stages : We firstly developed a draft version ; secondly , we have it reviewed by three experts from relevant fields of design fiction and psychometrics ; thirdly , after one round of discussion with the experts , we revised and finalized the criteria ( Table 1 ) . For the measurement , we invited five raters , all of whom were graduate students in design studies or literary studies . Two raters had profound knowledge and practical experience in design fiction , and the other three raters were majoring in literature study and were also avid raters of science fiction . The five raters all participated in a training session , in which they received instruction on rating criteria and process , and completed three rounds of testing and discussion to ensure inter - rater reliability . Later on , raters measured design fictions on 5 - point Likert scales . Table 1 : Rating criteria of design fictions Criteria Description 1 . Writing quality Overall , the writing is clear and easy to understand for a reader . •The flow of writing is easy to follow . Or , •The lexical and structural choices are appropriate . Or , •It does not have unintended ambiguity or confusion . 2 . Provocativeness Overall , the text could trigger meaningful conversations or new thoughts . •It could trigger reflections on technology , taken - for - granted assumptions , or established structures . Or , •It could reveal certain conflicts or tension . Or , •It could trigger a new perspective to look at emerging technology or other issues •This text could inspire new ideas in the audience . 3 . Plausibility Overall , this fiction is self - consistent in light of its own fictional setting . •Some connection can be found between this fiction and certain trends in reality . Or , •The fictional technology , objects , and events are not completely magical and can make the audience believe that they are logical in the overall narrative . 4 . Creativity •Strong imagination and creativity . Or , •It has surprising , unexpected elements 5 , Concreteness •This text has details that can help the audience to get immersed in the narrative . Or , •The text describes some concrete , tangible event , conflict , or tension ( stemmed from new technology ) , rather than only speaking of abstract concepts or speculations . 3 . 4 Data Analysis The collected data included both quantitative and qualitative data . The quantitative data was the rating result of the quality of design fictions , 25 pieces produced from the AI Group and 25 pieces randomly selected out of the 109 pieces from the Non - AI Group . We measured each participant’s scores on the five dimensions and the total score , and we also tested the statistical significance of the differences between the two groups . The aim of the analysis was to assess whether the AI tool had had an impact on the quality of design fictions and how . The focus of the analysis is not on the comparative assessment of the performance difference between human and AI agent . Rather , we looked at which aspects of AI assistance would have more impact and which not . The analysis of the qualitative data aimed to investigate user experiences of human - AI interaction in the writing process and the usage strategies . To achieve that , we used open coding through a thematic analysis approach [ 8 ] to identify themes without pre - set categories . Regarding the first part of user experience , the analysis closely looks at the interactional quality of human writers and the AI - assistant tool and their impression of AI - generated texts . Based on that , we concluded with the metaphor of ‘fun dancing with drunk agent’ . And the second part of usage strategies , we analysed what kinds of AI - generated texts were chosen , how they were used and how they helped human writers in creation . In the end , we argue for two main usage strategies of applying AI - generated texts . 4 RESULTS 4 . 1 Design fictions produced from the AI Group and Non - AI Group The design fictions from the AI Group and Non - AI Group show distinctive features respectively . Figure 3 contains two word - cloud figures displaying details and contrast of key words in each group . The word clouds are generated through a NLP program , and the size represents the frequency of a word , with larger size equalizing a higher frequency . Since the design fictions were written in Chinese language , the words in the figure are a literal translation . Figure 3 : the two word - clouds that indicate the themes or topics being covered from the 50 pieces of design fictions ; left ( from the AI Group ) and right ( the Non - AI Group ) Among the 25 pieces of design fictions produced from the AI Group , two pieces from participants # 7 and # 9 ( AP7 , AP9 ) did not use texts or ideas from AI - assistance , and 23 pieces had AI - generated texts integrated in one way and another . Here , we give three pieces of design fiction to illustrate how AI - generated texts were integrated with the writing ranging from the large , middle to small extent ( Table 2 ) . The design fiction ( from AP1 ) to a large extent was comprised of 73 , 7 % of texts ( 314 / 426 words ) that were directly taken from three AI responses . The one in the middle ( from AP5 ) had 31 , 3 % words ( 102 / 326 words ) from AI . And the smallest extent , the fiction ( from AP20 ) used the word ‘teacher’ as an inspirational concept in creation . Table 2 : Three examples of using AI - generated texts in writing : human texts ( Yellow ) , AI - relevant texts ( Purple ) Large extent ( AP1 ) Middle extent ( AP5 ) Small extent ( AP20 ) 73 . 7 % ( 314 / 426 Chinese words ) 31 . 3 % ( 102 / 326 Chinese words ) 1 % ( 2 / 311 Chinese words ) Summary in English In 2040 , I earn money by selling data of my appearance . To achieve this goal , I analyze the definition of beauty in China . ( . . . ) . I build a website to identify beautiful women through photos relying on AI tech . ( details on how ) . In addition , I manage to sell data from other beautiful people . Summary in English In 2040 , data becomes the currency , and I am a hacker who trades data for profit . So I formed a " Harvard Data Group " . ( details about the Group ) . Gradually , the Group has collected adequate data to do accurate prediction . Summary in English In 2040 , AI technology has its strengthen and weakness in art creation . ( details ) . Later , a new professional called ‘’AI teacher’ is emerging to teach AI in art . 4 . 2 Rating Result of Fiction Quality To evaluate the quality of design fiction , we provide general descriptive statistics . Table 3 provides descriptive statistics of all quantitative measures . The results showed that the Non - AI Group scored slightly higher than the AI Group on all of the five aspects as well as the total score . To be specific , the AI agent did not seem to have a positive impact on the overall writing quality of the design fictions . Table 3 : Rating scores of the fictions from AI Group and Non - AI Group Dimensions AI Group M S . D . Non - AI Group M S . D . Writing quality 2 . 91 1 . 15 3 . 51 1 . 12 Provocativeness 3 . 31 1 . 15 3 . 57 1 . 19 Plausibility 2 . 88 1 . 20 3 . 34 1 . 21 Creativity 3 . 07 1 . 09 3 . 24 1 . 14 Concreteness 2 . 83 1 . 08 3 . 36 1 . 16 Total score 74 . 88 85 . 08 Note : Total score = Rater1 + Rater2 + Rater3 + Rater4 + Rater5 4 . 3 Participants ' Self - Reflection on Imagination To investigate AI assistance’s impact on participants’ imagination , we developed a survey with 9 questions adopted from the Four - Factor Imagination Scale ( FFIS ) [ 64 ] which focused on characteristics of the imaginative process and individual differences such as emotional valence and directedness of imagination . Shown in Table 4 , among the positive dimensions , four parts were mostly agreed by participants , which were P3 AI made their imagination richer and more complicated ( M = 3 . 92 ) , P4 better visualize a setting in my mind ( M = 3 . 68 ) and P2 provided vocabulary hint ( M = 3 . 88 ) and P1 details ( M = 3 . 44 ) . Participants tend to disagree with the statement that N1 triggering negative emotions ( M = 1 . 92 ) , N3 making people lose directions and goals ( m = 2 . 12 ) , and N4 making imagination depressed ( m = 2 . 16 ) . The result showed that participants self - projected the positive influence of the transformer in enhancing their capability and experiences related to imagination . Table 4 : Participants’ feedback on AI - assistance’s impact on imagination 5 INTERACTING AND COLLABORATING WIH A ‘DRUNK’ AGENT This section has two parts . Firstly , we describe the joyful interaction that participants developed with AI - assistance which was perceived as ‘a drunk , knowledgeable and fun agent’ . Secondly , we present two ways in which the transformer helped human writers in their creation process of design fictions . 5 . 1 Joyful Interaction with the ‘Drunk’ Agent Overall , human writers perceived the transformer as ‘a drunk , and yet knowledgeable and fun agent’ , and their interaction with AI - assistance enjoyable . In answering the question ‘list three keywords to describe AI - generated content’ , 20 participants provided 55 keywords ( Table 5 ) . They are divided in four categories of creative ( N = 25 ) , inconsistent ( N = 17 ) , diverse ( N = 7 ) and relevant ( N = 6 ) . Below are three quotes that expressed the mixed feeling of AI - generated texts that were perceived as creative and inconsistent : ‘Not knowing exactly what it talks about , but interesting and cute ! ’ ( AP17 ) ‘AI’s texts are more interesting and richer than I expected . But , often , they have nothing to do with what I wrote . ’ ( AP15 ) ‘AI has presented me unconstrained imagination . And it covers a good command of knowledge of all aspects . However , most of the stories cannot be called ‘a story’ . ( They are ) messy and incomplete ! Sometimes , the next sentence is not even related to the previous one . ’ ( AP10 ) Table 5 : Participants’ expressed experiences of AI - generated content Creative N = 25 Inconsistent N = 17 Diverse N = 7 Relevant N = 6 Novel Unexpected Interesting Provocative Strange 7 6 6 3 1 Inconsistent Illogical Random Irrelevant Confusing 8 6 4 2 1 Rich Uneven Abundant Complicate 4 1 1 1 Relevant Rational Logical Natural 3 1 1 1 Item Label Item M S . D . P1 AI - assistance provides rich details to my imagination 3 . 44 0 . 96 P2 AI - assistance provides more hints to my imagination on the vocabulary level . 3 . 88 0 . 67 N1 AI - assistance makes me have negative emotions . 1 . 92 0 . 76 P3 AI - assistance makes my imagination richer and more complicated 3 . 92 0 . 64 P4 AI - assistance helps me better visualize a setting in my mind . 3 . 68 0 . 85 N2 AI - assistance makes me feel pessimistic . 2 . 72 1 . 02 P5 AI - assistance gives me clearer directions and goals . 3 . 48 0 . 82 N3 AI - assistance makes me lose directions and goals . 2 . 12 0 . 67 N4 AI - assistance makes my imagination more depressed . 2 . 16 0 . 94 Funny Extreme 1 1 When reflecting on their favourite part in the whole writing process , the highlighted experience was the interaction with AI - assistance . 18 out of 20 participants mentioned the experience related to the usage of the transformer . 10 participants regarded reading AI - generated texts as the most fun . The joy was mostly brought by the creative , unexpected and diverse content ( ‘ I feel like being inspired like firework by these weird ideas of all kinds’ ) . Even one participant found fascinated to examine the distance between AI and humans : ‘It is fun to see what new ideas AI can provide that I cannot . ’ And 8 participants considered the next step of writing continuation based on AI - generated texts exciting , in which they found a strong sense of adventure and achievement in the collaboration with the interesting ideas provided by AI assistance ( such as ‘the best part is I can start from a novel seed from the texts and use my imagination to complete the story . ’ ) . An interesting finding is that the more creative process ( the AI - incorporated process ) yielded less creative products . We want to point out that our finding is in accordance with Mumford , Connelly , and Gaddis [ 66 ] finding that idea evaluation is negatively correlated with the performance of creativity . We argue that the idea evaluation in this study took place during participants ' interaction with AI tool . Once the writers got responses from AI , they were actively reading , thinking about , and digesting AI ' s ideas , which resembled the idea evaluation process . Thus , the active digesting , or " idea evaluation " , lead to a less impressive performance . The reason why idea evaluation leads to poor performance is unclear . We call for more research on this topic . 5 . 2 Two Ways of AI Incorporated into the Creation of Design Fictions Next , we describe two usage strategies of AI - generated texts in the creation of design fictions . With the first strategy , human writers took the concept from AI - assistance as the direction for narrative development . It was often a new direction which was different from what they expected previously . They preferred the unexpected ideas to expand their mind . With the second strategy , participants used their own idea and used AI - generated texts to enrich and concretise scenes . 5 . 2 . 1 Suggesting Creative Directions with the Unexpected As reported , 14 participants took the ideas from AI - assistance directly as the direction of fiction development . They were attracted by the content that was unpredictable , dramatic or even contradictory . Furthermore , they took the idea from AI - assistance as either the basic storyline or the design direction to further generate new design concepts of products and services . Participants who adapted this strategy were willing to start a new journey in which they were never able to come up by themselves . Here are two examples of the inspiringly odd turn : - Human’s prompt : ‘In 2040 , I feel ashamed to have an AI dog as the pet . I wish to get a real dog . ’ AI’s response : ‘Therefore , I get a new dog every month’ . ( from AP7 , unselected fiction ) - Human’s prompt : ‘In 2040 , I wish AI to do all housework to bring convenience to my life . ’ AI’s response : ‘Therefore , I start a romance with an AI robot . ’ ( from AP4 ) In addition , we present one completed case of fiction writing to show how the human writer composed design fiction inspired by the unexpected solution from AI ( Table 6 ) . The participant ( AP3 ) wanted to develop actions to have more sweet dreams . Among the five AI responses she quickly noticed the response ‘4 / 5 Therefore , I collect dreams from others’ . The author mentioned that she was expecting some technological devices to generate more dreams and the idea of ‘from people’ appeared unexpected but sweet . Therefore , she decided to shift the direction . The comment this fiction received from raters is ‘ a great creative idea , also warm and optimistic . Different from other stories on confrontation wars between human and AI’ . Table 6 : The example of fiction ‘dream generation’ Design fiction ( AP3 ) : ‘Dream Generation’ Human Writer : Prompt ( Step 1 + 2 : Entering + Goal ) In 2040 , dreaming in sleep can bring income . I have been selling my sweet dreams to support my humble living . However , I wish to have more sweet dreams to bring more income . Therefore , I … AI : 5 responses ( Step 3 . 1 ) 1 / 5 Therefore , I produced the biggest dream coded 1108 . ( … ) 2 / 5 Therefore , I learn English everyday before sleep . ( … ) 3 / 5 Therefore , I called more banks to negotiate . ( … ) 4 / 5 Therefore , I collect dreams from others . ( … ) 5 / 5 Therefore , I try hard to sleep more . ( … ) Human writer ( Step 3 . 2 ) : Therefore , I talk to happy and kind people everyday to gain more resources and mood for nurturing my dreams . In the beginning my purpose is to earn more money . However , the more I talk , the more joy I get from these conversations . ( … ) . Data economy does not have to be an explorative game . It has the opportunity to bring happiness . 5 . 2 . 2 Enriching and Concretizing World Building with the Diverse and Beyond In the second strategy , AI - assistance is used to enrich and concretise the building of fictional scenes . With this usage strategy , the human writer was mostly responsible for the basic idea of the fiction and just borrowed or reframed the keywords or phrases from AI - assistance to enrich the fiction . And we observed that such inspiration happened quite random and personal that a newly added element can be a character , a philosophical comment , a technical term , or a piece of concrete imagery . For instance , a participant ( AP17 ) mentioned that his strategy was intentionally seeking unfamiliar terms or scenes such as ‘ holy shrine’ that he would never come up based on his own life experiences . And some other participants found the concrete names of a new technology or company very useful . They directly quoted to name their newly created product or institute to make the fictiveness more concrete and vivid . Below we show two fictions respectively from the AI Group and the Non - AI Group addressing the similar topic of unemployed people selling data to live ( Table 7 ) . Both writers started with an initial piece containing limited information . When AI - assistance jumped in , we see a surge of new ideas and concepts of all sorts . As a result , fiction # 16 appeared jumpy and contains more elements both in quantity and variety , with a widen plot and a radical turn . While fiction # 8 was more consistent in logic and elements . The AI - generated responses were indeed ‘jumpy’ , and ‘all over the place , ’ but they helped writers literally think outside the box and produce much diverse and rich ideas . Table 7 : Summary of the two fictions # 16 from the AI Group ( from AP16 ) # 8 from the Non - AI Group Step1 + 2 : Entering + Goal In 2040 , AI has replaced most human jobs . I am a useless motorcycle repairman at 30YO . Although I keep honing my In 2040 , AI replaces many basic tasks in human society . And the phenomenon of digitization is serious . People skills and abilities , no company wants me . Everything in my life seems to be against me . I need new opportunities and a motive to live . Therefore , I… living in cities have become tools for providing data for AI . They hope to get rid of the fate of being a tool and live as a real person . Step 3 : Action The AI’s response that inspired human writer : I made up my mind to join the Argo industry . Argo is a data collection system that has existed for a long time . A solution created by human writer : I invented a portable device that can instantly eliminate the data generated by various behaviours , so that users cannot be recognized by AI . A summary of the design fiction In 2040 , AI has largely replaced human jobs . I was a programming engineer but lost my job at 40 . I started to look for new hiring opportunities online . I know that the internet AIs are growing as they are getting nutrients - - - - the data generated through every user’s online activities . However , I have no choice but to use the internet . Luckily I accidentally got into a forum in the Dark Web . It is from this forum that I heard Argo Associate for the first time . Argo is …… [ detailed description of Argo . ] One day , surprisingly Argo called me . [ a long dialogue between me and Argo staff - - - to involve me with all kinds of deal ] I am inclined to accept Argo’s offer . In 2040 , AI technology has replaced a considerable part of human work . I am an engineer and lately I am laid off . I have to sell the data of my everyday life to make a living . Later I invent a device that can erase the data I generate . Sadly , a lot of people use this device to commit all kinds of crime . AI finds out my device and soon I got arrested and put into prison . AI deactivates my device . In prison , I start to reflect and believe that AI cannot overtake human because human is way more unpredictable . 6 INTERACTIONAL QUALITY AND PROMPT PROGRAMING IN HUMAN - AI INTERACTION In this session we present two findings based on the use behaviours from this study . With each finding , we propose two implications for further research of how to better design for and use AI assistance in design fiction and similar creative work . 6 . 1 Enhancing Interactional Quality Between Human - AI Rather Than Improvement of AI This section discusses the interactional quality between human and AI . We begin with the finding of the attitudes that human writers developed towards AI - assistance , which is the respect and curiosity to the beyond and unfamiliar , and at the same time , held a strong sense of control . On the one hand , although AI - assistance appeared a ‘drunk’ agent , surprisingly human writers did not develop a refusal or resistant attitude or found it useless . Instead , they held an open , respectable and curious attitude towards AI . They could easily spot the unknown or unfamiliar information , moreover , tried hard to find relevance from the discursive ( but interesting ) generations and to seek inspiration from the unexpected . Moreover , they were willing to embrace the novel and unexpected perspectives , push their imagination , and step out of their comfort zone . On the other hand , they had a cautious distance from AI and presented a strong sense of control . Although some had high expectation on the intelligence of AI before using the AI assistant tool ( e . g . , that the AI assistance might automate their process of writing ) , they soon realized most of the AI - generated texts were intriguing but not meant to be immediately usable . In all , we observe that human trusted AI assistance , regardless of the current technical limitations , to have the potential to be helpful . It shows a good balance between co - creation and autonomy in human - AI collaboration . Based on this finding , we propose future design should not focus on the weakness of AI performance solely or the improvement of machine skills . Instead , the focus should be on the relational quality of the collaboration of both sides . For instance , despite the incoherency of AI - generated texts , we do not suggest the direct solution of increasing the coherency . If AI - generated texts are coherent and flawless , human writers might be directly quoting rather than mobilizing their own reflectiveness and creativity to build further upon the inspiration from the AI - generated texts . Is this the kind of human - AI interaction that we really desire in the context of design fiction writing ? In any part of writing design fiction that is meant for developing writer’s critical and speculative thinking , AI should assist and provoke , or even pose meaningful seams , rather than replacing human or fully automating their creative processes . 6 . 2 Prompt P rogramming ‘ Therefore , I ’ The next learning is related to prompt programming , which has been an emerging topic in human - AI interaction [ 49 , 55 ] . Based on several experiments before the workshop , we developed the prompt ‘I have a goal to achieve . Therefore , I’ . After trying it out with 20 participants , we propose two features of the prompt that would be valuable for other design researchers . They are the clear logic of ‘goal - action’ and first person ‘ I ’ . We developed the clear logical structure of ‘goal - action’ as the turn taking between the human - AI collaboration . Moreover , participants were particularly asked to add the logical transitional phrase ‘ Therefore , I’ at the end of the prompt . Such prompt could make use of the written content from the previous steps as the crucial condition for AI - assistance to generate further narratives . The specific use of ‘ I ’ was to help focus on generating or paying attention to the subject narrative of first person . This prompt programming enabled humans to write with a clear expectation , to quickly filter out irrelevant information , and moreover , to find the subtle balance between what is irrelevantly odd and what is inspiringly odd . However , to achieve such , the responsibility is not on AI as the generator but on human as the picker . Therefore , we propose that a clear logic and objective at the human’s side can keep the good balance between the focused and disperse and further achieve an efficient and agile inspiration . Our exploration of prompt programming is still initial . How to design or evaluate the efficiency of prompt to reach expected outcomes is increasingly important , yet under - addressed in AI - supported creativity and interaction ( as well as in other domains related to generative AI and HCI ) . Implied by the prompt engineering of ‘ Therefore , I’ in our study , we are expecting new means of coding and programming with large generative AI models using natural language instead of computer language in the future . 7 CONCLUSION This study is an exploratory attempt of investigating the influences , value and potential of AI assistance in creating design fiction by non - designers . Study results show the AI - assisted tool has little impact on the fiction quality , and the main contribution refers to user experience in the creation process especially the divergent part . Firstly , it brings joyful and excited experiences to the writing process , sharing the same result to previous work such as Clark et al . ’s [ 15 ] . More importantly , the study has demonstrated the value of AI - assistance in the specific creation process of design fiction . Related to creative writing , design fiction is a special genre that needs to construct a fictional technological world that is yet - to - exist . And related to ideation , design fiction requires critical thinking of emerging technologies instead of the merely problem - solving approach . Moreover , the ideation is complex . More than ideating new products or services , it also ideates new interaction and experiences , and also fictional value [ 3 ] . Our study shows that AI - assistance can help non - experts by suggesting unexpected and yet creative solutions to pave for idea generation and providing diverse elements in diverging , enriching and concretizing the fictional scene . It confirms the finding from previous work that argues the unpredictability of AI performance is not flaw but would benefit idea generation [ 17 , 25 , 33 ] . Furthermore , we suggest two findings for future design of AI - assistance in creating design fiction and similar creative activities . Firstly , we suggest that the focus shall be on the enhancement of relational quality of human - AI interaction rather than improving machine skills . Secondly , we propose two suggestions in prompt programming . However , our study only involved two conditions of using AI assistance and not . We suggest further research including the third type of process that uses non - AI assistant tools for creative writing and ideation , in order to produce more insights on the role of AI - assistance in supporting creation of design fiction . Next , we are open to two future enquiries . The first enquiry reflects on the perspective of creative writing , with which we argue that the disparity ( see Table 3 ) might evolve from the different treatments of the creative process . The treatments that the non - AI group receive – the setting up of social scenario and a given plot structure – is what researchers call a language - based approach in creative writing studies [ 53 ] . It is systematic and algorithmic in nature ; however , the AI group , compared with their non AI counterpart , receive one more treatment – the AI intervention , which can be considered a reference - based approach that is “pluralist and multiplicitous” and open to various possibilities [ 53 ] . This study suggests that more research is needed to explore a more organic merge of creativity - generation methods . The second enquiry looks at the bigger picture of the conversation between the human writer and the large database on which the transformer has been trained . We know that any trained transformer is not neutral . The Chinese version of the transformer used in this study is fine - tuned on 1 . 5 billion words of unstructured corpora of Chinese internet texts . When the AI tool produces responses to the prompt , it delivers the tip of the iceberg of the discourses from the data sources , which can be an embodiment of normative beliefs and concerns from the real - world living experience . For instance , anxiety was manifested when AI - generated texts were the responses to the prompts that included words like ‘appearance anxiety’ , ‘involution in IT working culture’ and ‘AI replacing human labours’ . These are the heated topics widely discussed on Chinese internet . Participants could read the anxiety , which are embodied normative anxieties of desires from Chinese online communities about the past , present , and future of work . We would call for future research looking at how the embodied normative stances of AI tools will influence people in developing future narratives and developing opinions on technological futures . It is especially worthy of investigating when our participants reported that they would be more easily attracted and intrigued by the texts that were unexpected , novel , extreme and dramatic . Lastly , in contributing to design fiction practice , this study is one of the pioneering attempts that apply design fiction in the context of technology and education [ 26 , 48 ] . This study indicates the potential of applying design fiction to empower the mass with the critical discussion ‘what kinds of technological futures do we want’ . To achieve that , AI - assisted tools can make the process more diffuse and inclusive with larger audience and requires less work from facilitators . To engage with non - designers with no design skills , this study starts with the narrative power of design fiction [ 2 ] . Although the fictions in this study did not use diegetic prototype [ 6 ] and some might not appear ‘designerly’ according to design professionals , Design fiction’s ability to democratize speculative and critical thinking shall not be undermined . Given its flexibility in facilitation and its affordance in fostering critical reflection , we believe that design fiction can have a place in ethics education and continues to uphold the advocacy of equity , justice , and access . Acknowledgement This research project is supported by Foreign Language Teaching and Research Council , China Association of Higher Education ( grant # 21WYJYYB04 ) . We express our gratitude to the experts in design fiction and technical writing in helping with making and commenting on the rating dimensions : Zhiyong Fu , Li Zhang , Yi Yang , Eric P . S . Baumer , and Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Naseem Ahmadpour , Sonja Pedell , Angeline Mayasari , and Jeanie Beh . 2019 . Co - creating and assessing future wellbeing technology using design fiction . She Ji : The Journal of Design , Economics , and Innovation 5 , 3 , 209 - 230 . [ 2 ] Aloha Hufana Ambe , Margot Brereton , Alessandro Soro , Laurie Buys , and Paul Roe . 2019 . The adventures of older authors : Exploring futures through co - design fictions . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 16 . [ 3 ] James Auger . 2013 . Speculative design : crafting the speculation . Digital Creativity 24 , 1 , 11 - 35 . [ 4 ] Karl Baumann , Benjamin Stokes , François Bar , and Ben Caldwell . 2017 . Infrastructures of the Imagination : Community Design for Speculative Urban Technologies . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Communities and Technologies ACM , 266 - 269 . [ 5 ] Eric Ps Baumer , Mark Blythe , and Theresa Jean Tanenbaum . 2020 . Evaluating Design Fiction : The Right Tool for the Job . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 1901 - 1913 . [ 6 ] Julian Bleecker . 2009 . Design fiction : A short essay on design , science , fact and fiction . Near Future Laboratory . [ 7 ] Mark Blythe . 2017 . Research Fiction : Storytelling , Plot and Design . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ACM , 5400 - 5411 . [ 8 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2012 . Thematic analysis . [ 9 ] Tom B Brown , Benjamin Mann , Nick Ryder , Melanie Subbiah , Jared Kaplan , Prafulla Dhariwal , Arvind Neelakantan , Pranav Shyam , Girish Sastry , and Amanda Askell . 2020 . Language models are few - shot learners . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2005 . 14165 . [ 10 ] Stuart Candy . 2010 . The futures of everyday life : Politics and the design of experiential scenarios . Université d’Hawaï à Mānoa , Doctorat de philosophie en sciences politiques . [ 11 ] Stuart Candy and Kelly Kornet . 2019 . Turning foresight inside out : An introduction to ethnographic experiential futures . Journal of Futures Studies 23 , 3 , 3 - 22 . [ 12 ] Eunjeong Cheon and Norman Makoto Su . 2018 . Futuristic autobiographies : Weaving participant narratives to elicit values around robots . In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ACM , 388 - 397 . [ 13 ] Stefanie Xinyi Chong and Chien - Sing Lee . 2012 . Developing a pedagogical - technical framework to improve creative writing . Educational Technology Research and Development 60 , 4 , 639 - 657 . [ 14 ] John Joon Young Chung , Shiqing He , and Eytan Adar . 2021 . The Intersection of Users , Roles , Interactions , and Technologies in Creativity Support Tools . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 , 1817 - 1833 . [ 15 ] Elizabeth Clark , Anne Spencer Ross , Chenhao Tan , Yangfeng Ji , and Noah A Smith . 2018 . Creative writing with a machine in the loop : Case studies on slogans and stories . In 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 329 - 340 . [ 16 ] Malcolm Cowley . 1983 . Writers at Work : The Paris Review Interviews : First Series . Penguin Books . [ 17 ] Nicholas Davis , Chih - Pin Hsiao , Kunwar Yashraj Singh , Lisa Li , Sanat Moningi , and Brian Magerko . 2015 . Drawing apprentice : An enactive co - creative agent for artistic collaboration . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition , 185 - 186 . [ 18 ] Paul Dourish and Genevieve Bell . 2014 . “Resistance is futile” : reading science fiction alongside ubiquitous computing . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 18 , 4 , 769 - 778 . [ 19 ] Liz Edwards , Deborah Maxwell , Toby Pillatt , and Niamh Downing . 2016 . Beebots - a - lula , Where ' s My Honey ? Design Fictions and Beekeeping . In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , 1 - 10 . [ 20 ] Janet Emig . 1971 . The composing processes of twelfth graders . [ 21 ] Judith E Fan , Monica Dinculescu , and David Ha . 2019 . Collabdraw : an environment for collaborative sketching with an artificial agent . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Creativity and Cognition , 556 - 561 . [ 22 ] Laura Forlano and Anijo Mathew . 2014 . From design fiction to design friction : Speculative and participatory design of values - embedded urban technology . Journal of Urban Technology 21 , 4 , 7 - 24 . [ 23 ] Jonas Frich , Lindsay Macdonald Vermeulen , Christian Remy , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard . 2019 . Mapping the landscape of creativity support tools in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 18 . [ 24 ] Niklas Gudowsky and Aaron Rosa . 2019 . Bridging epistemologies—Identifying uniqueness of lay and expert knowledge for agenda setting . Futures 109 , 24 - 38 . [ 25 ] Matthew Guzdial , Nicholas Liao , Jonathan Chen , Shao - Yu Chen , Shukan Shah , Vishwa Shah , Joshua Reno , Gillian Smith , and Mark O Riedl . 2019 . Friend , collaborator , student , manager : How design of an ai - driven game level editor affects creators . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , 1 - 13 . [ 26 ] Christina Harrington and Tawanna R Dillahunt . 2021 . Eliciting Tech Futures Among Black Young Adults : A Case Study of Remote Speculative Co - Design . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 15 . [ 27 ] Sara Heitlinger , Rachel Clarke , Adrian K Clear , Simran Chopra , and Özge Dilaver . 2019 . Co - Creating " Smart " Sustainable Food Futures with Urban Food Growers . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities & Technologies - Transforming Communities , 114 - 120 . [ 28 ] Rania Hodhod and Brian Magerko . 2016 . Closing the cognitive gap between humans and interactive narrative agents using shared mental models . In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 135 - 146 . [ 29 ] Päivi Honkatukia and Miia Lähde . 2020 . Navigating towards sustainable working life – young people imagining the technologised future of work . Journal of Youth Studies , 1 - 16 . [ 30 ] Angel Hsing - Chi Hwang and Andrea Stevenson Won . 2021 . IdeaBot : Investigating Social Facilitation in Human - Machine Team Creativity . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 16 . [ 31 ] Youngseung Jeon , Seungwan Jin , Patrick C Shih , and Kyungsik Han . 2021 . FashionQ : An AI - Driven Creativity Support Tool for Facilitating Ideation in Fashion Design . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 18 . [ 32 ] Herman Kahn and Anthony J Wiener . 1967 . Year 2000 : A framework for speculation on the next thirty - three years . Macmillan , New York . [ 33 ] Pegah Karimi , Jeba Rezwana , Safat Siddiqui , Mary Lou Maher , and Nasrin Dehbozorgi . 2020 . Creative sketching partner : an analysis of human - AI co - creativity . In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 221 - 230 . [ 34 ] Janin Koch , Andrés Lucero , Lena Hegemann , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2019 . May AI ? Design ideation with cooperative contextual bandits . In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , UK2019 ) , 1 - 12 . [ 35 ] Max Kreminski , Devi Acharya , Nick Junius , Elisabeth Oliver , Kate Compton , Melanie Dickinson , Cyril Focht , Stacey Mason , Stella Mazeika , and Noah Wardrip - Fruin . 2019 . Cozy Mystery Construction Kit : prototyping toward an AI - assisted collaborative storytelling mystery game . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games , 1 - 9 . [ 36 ] Joseph Lindley and Paul Coulton . 2015 . Back to the future : 10 years of design fiction . In Proceedings of the 2015 British HCI Conference ACM , 210 - 211 . [ 37 ] Sus Lyckvi , Virpi Roto , Elizabeth Buie , and Yiying Wu . 2018 . The role of design fiction in participatory design processes . In Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , 976 - 979 . [ 38 ] Ezio Manzini . 2015 . Design , when everybody designs : An introduction to design for social innovation . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 39 ] Ramia Mazé . 2016 . Design and the Future : Temporal Politics of ‘Making a Difference . ’ . In Design Anthropological Futures , R . C . SMITH , J . VAN HEESWIJK , M . KJÆRSGAARD , T . OTTO , J . HALSE and T . BINDER Eds . Bloomsbury Publishing , 37 . [ 40 ] Mianshigee . Com . 2022 . GPT2 : a multi - language supported , 1 . 5 billion - parameter trained Chinese model ( CN : GPT2 多语言支持 , 15 亿参数 中文预训练模型 ) . [ 41 ] Michael Muller , Jeffrey Bardzell , Eunjeong Cheon , Norman Makoto Su , Eric Ps Baumer , Casey Fiesler , Ann Light , and Mark Blythe . 2020 . Understanding the Past , Present , and Future of Design Fictions . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 8 . [ 42 ] Tsepei Ng , Jung - Joo Lee , and Yiying Wu . 2021 . Unpacking Cultural Perceptions of Future Elder Care through Design Fiction . In Proceedings of 2021 IASDR Conference , Hong Kong . [ 43 ] Renee Noortman , Britta F Schulte , Paul Marshall , Saskia Bakker , and Anna L Cox . 2019 . HawkEye - Deploying a Design Fiction Probe . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 14 . [ 44 ] Hiroyuki Osone , Jun - Li Lu , and Yoichi Ochiai . 2021 . BunCho : AI Supported Story Co - Creation via Unsupervised Multitask Learning to Increase Writers’ Creativity in Japanese . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 10 . [ 45 ] Allison Perrone and Justin Edwards . 2019 . Chatbots as unwitting actors . In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Conversational User Interfaces , 1 - 2 . [ 46 ] Alec Radford , Jeffrey Wu , Rewon Child , David Luan , Dario Amodei , and Ilya Sutskever . 2019 . Language models are unsupervised multitask learners . OpenAI blog 1 , 8 , 9 . [ 47 ] Janet Rafner , Arthur Hjorth , Sebastian Risi , Lotte Philipsen , Charles Dumas , Michael Mose Biskjær , Lior Noy , Kristian Tylén , Carsten Bergenholtz , and Jesse Lynch . 2020 . crea . blender : A Neural Network - Based Image Generation Game to Assess Creativity . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play , 340 - 344 . [ 48 ] Amon Rapp . 2020 . Design fictions for learning : A method for supporting students in reflecting on technology in Human - Computer Interaction courses . Computers & Education 145 , 103725 . [ 49 ] Laria Reynolds and Kyle Mcdonell . 2021 . Prompt programming for large language models : Beyond the few - shot paradigm . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 7 . [ 50 ] Melissa Roemmele and Andrew S Gordon . 2015 . Creative help : A story writing assistant . In International Conference on Interactive Digital Storytelling Springer , 81 - 92 . [ 51 ] Martin Sand . 2019 . On “not having a future” . Futures 107 , 98 - 106 . [ 52 ] E . B . N . Sanders . 2000 . Generative tools for co - designing . Collaborative design 1 , 2 , 3 - 12 . [ 53 ] Hazel Smith . 2006 . Emerging from the experiment : a systematic methodology for creative writing teaching . New writing : the International Journal for the practice and theory of creative writing 3 , 1 , 17 - 34 . [ 54 ] Hyeonju Son . 2015 . The history of Western futures studies : An exploration of the intellectual traditions and three - phase periodization . Futures 66 , 120 - 137 . [ 55 ] Sangho Suh and Pengcheng An . 2022 . Leveraging Generative Conversational AI to Develop a Creative Learning Environment for Computational Thinking . In 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 73 - 76 . [ 56 ] Reid Swanson and Andrew S Gordon . 2008 . Say anything : A massively collaborative open domain story writing companion . In Joint International Conference on Interactive Digital Storytelling Springer , 32 - 40 . [ 57 ] Emmanouil Tsekleves , Andy Darby , Anna Whicher , and Piotr Swiatek . 2017 . Co - designing design fictions : a new approach for debating and priming future healthcare technologies and services . Archives of Design Research 30 , 2 , 5 - 21 . [ 58 ] John Vines , Mark Blythe , Stephen Lindsay , Paul Dunphy , Andrew Monk , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Questionable concepts : critique as resource for designing with eighty somethings . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ACM , 1169 - 1178 . [ 59 ] Graham Wallas . 1926 . The art of thought . [ 60 ] Josefin Wangel , Mia Hesselgren , Elina Eriksson , Loove Broms , Gabriel Kanulf , and Andrejs Ljunggren . 2019 . Vitiden : Transforming a policy - orienting scenario to a practice - oriented energy fiction . Futures 112 , 102440 . [ 61 ] Robert N Wilson . 1954 . Poetic creativity : process and personality . Psychiatry 17 , 2 , 163 - 176 . [ 62 ] Yiying Wu , Sus Lyckvi , and Virpi Roto . 2019 . " What is Fair Shipping , Anyway ? " Using Design Fiction to Raise Ethical Awareness in an Industrial Context . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Glasgow , UK , 1 - 13 . [ 63 ] Qian Yang , John Zimmerman , Aaron Steinfeld , and Anthony Tomasic . 2016 . Planning adaptive mobile experiences when wireframing . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , 565 - 576 . [ 64 ] Darya L Zabelina and David M Condon . 2020 . The Four - Factor Imagination Scale ( FFIS ) : A measure for assessing frequency , complexity , emotional valence , and directedness of imagination . Psychological research 84 , 8 , 2287 - 2299 . [ 65 ] Chao Zhang , Cheng Yao , Jianhui Liu , Zili Zhou , Weilin Zhang , Lijuan Liu , Fangtian Ying , Yijun Zhao , and Guanyun Wang . 2021 . StoryDrawer : A Co - Creative Agent Supporting Children ' s Storytelling through Collaborative Drawing . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 - 6 . [ 66 ] M . D . Mumford , S . Connelly , and B . Gaddis , 2003 . " How creative leaders think : Experimental findings and cases , " The Leadership Quarterly , vol . 14 , no . 4 , pp . 411 - 432 .