Current Biology 17 , 79 – 84 , January 9 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 11 . 022 Report Organization of Actin Networks in Intact Filopodia Ohad Medalia , 1 , 2 Martin Beck , 1 Mary Ecke , 1 Igor Weber , 1 , 3 Ralph Neujahr , 1 Wolfgang Baumeister , 1 and Gu¨nther Gerisch 1 , * 1 Max - Planck - Institut fu¨r Biochemie D - 82152 Martinsried Germany 2 Department of Life Sciences and The NIBN The Ben - Gurion University PO Box 653 84120 Beer - Sheva Israel Summary Filopodia are ﬁnger - like extensions of the cell surface that are involved in sensing the environment [ 1 ] , in at - tachment of particles for phagocytosis [ 2 ] , in anchor - age of cells on a substratum [ 3 ] , and in the response to chemoattractants or other guidance cues [ 4 – 6 ] . Filopodia present an excellent model for actin - driven membrane protrusion . They grow at their tips by the assembly of actin and are stabilized along their length by a core of bundled actin ﬁlaments . To visualize actin networks in their native membrane - anchored state , ﬁlopodiaof Dictyostelium cellsweresubjectedtocryo - electron tomography . At the site of actin polymeriza - tion , a peculiar structure , the ‘‘terminal cone , ’’ is built of short ﬁlaments ﬁxed with their distal end to the ﬁlo - pod’s tip and with their proximal end to the ﬂank of the ﬁlopod . Thebackboneoftheﬁlopodiaconsistsofactin ﬁlaments that are shorter than the entire ﬁlopod and aligned in parallel or obliquely to the ﬁlopod’s axis . We hypothesize that growth of the highly dynamic ﬁlo - podia of Dictyostelium is accompanied by repetitive nucleation of actin polymerization at the ﬁlopod tip , followed by the rearrangement of ﬁlaments within the shaft . Results Membrane - Associated Actin Organization in a Filopod To visualize the organization of actin ﬁlaments in a near - to - live context with the plasma membrane , we made use of three advantages of cryo - electron tomography : ( 1 ) the instantaneous arrest of ﬁlament networks in their functional state by the vitriﬁcation of cells , ( 2 ) the pres - ervation of membranes to which the actin network is an - chored , and ( 3 ) no need for metal decoration to enhance contrast [ 7 ] . Whole cells that moved on EM - specimen supports were vitriﬁed . From these cells , tilt series were recorded and used for three - dimensional ( 3D ) reconstructions . Figure 1A provides an overview of ﬁlament arrangements and interactions with the mem - brane . In Figures 1B – 1D , portions of the same ﬁlopod are shown in stereo , beginning with its tip region , fol - lowed by the shaft and the root that anchors the ﬁlopod in the cortical actin network . The tip region comprises a zone of about 150 nm in length populated by short ﬁlaments . Most of these ﬁla - ments converge toward the hemispherical tip of the ﬁlo - pod , andseveralareconnectedtotheplasmamembrane at both their distal and proximal ends ( Figure 1B ) . We refer to this arrangement as the ‘‘terminal cone’’ of actin ﬁlaments . From cryo - electron tomograms of three ﬁlo - podia , quantitative information was extracted . The num - ber of ﬁlaments in cross - sections through the terminal cone varied around 10 , with average lengths in the three ﬁlopodiaof85 , 144 , and114nm . Intwoﬁlopodia , average angles q of actin ﬁlaments , measured relative to the di - rection of the ﬁlopod axis , were q 1 = 14 (cid:2) and q 2 = 11 (cid:2) . In the third ﬁlopod , which was thicker , the average angle was q 3 = 28 (cid:2) ( see Table S1 in the Supplemental Data available online ) . No continuity is evident in our images between these ﬁlaments and the mostly parallel ﬁlaments of the shaft ( Figure 1C ) , but the two categories of ﬁlaments are inter - spersed and connected to each other . Along the shaft , ﬁlaments have average lengths on the order of 200 nm ; the longest ones measured 440 nm . These actin ﬁla - ments are therefore substantially shorter than the ﬁlo - pod , which has a length of about 1 m m . At the base of the ﬁlopod , the bundled actin ﬁlaments are connected to a web of ﬁlaments that are linked to each other at var - ious angles , integrating the core of the ﬁlopod into the cortical actin network of the cell ( Figure 1D ) . Filaments in the cylindrical shaft of the ﬁlopod are often connected to the plasma membrane with their proximal or distal ends ( asterisks in Figures 2A – 2C and arrows in Figures 2D and 2E ) . Some of the ﬁlaments are oblique relative to the ﬁlopod axis , connecting one side of the ﬁlopod with the other . Actin ﬁlaments that ter - minate in free ends conﬁrm that ﬁlaments are not contin - uous from the ﬁlopod’s tip down to the base ( circle in Figure 2D ) . In addition , cross - bridges connect ﬁlaments along their length to each other or to the plasma mem - brane ( bracket and arrowheads in Figure 2E ) . Because of the abundance of ﬁlopodia in Rac1A - over - expressing cells , we have primarily used these cells for electron tomography . In order to verify that the overex - pression of Rac1A increases the number of ﬁlopodia without substantially changing their architecture , we have also applied the technique to wild - type cells ( Fig - ures 2F – 2I ) . Sections through a ﬁlopod from such a cell show the same characteristics as described for Rac1A overexpressors , in particular the presence of short con - verging ﬁlaments in the tip region . Extension and Retraction Phases of Filopodia Each electron tomogram shows a ﬁlopod in a transient stage of the protrusion - retraction cycle . Seeking criteria * Correspondence : gerisch @ biochem . mpg . de 3 Present address : Rudjer Boskovic Institute , Bijenicka cesta 54 , PO Box 180 , 10002 Zagreb , Croatia . to specify that stage , we monitored ﬁlopod dynamics in live cells . During protrusion , ﬁlopodia were straight and not expanded at their ends ( Figure 3A ) . During retrac - tion , the ﬁlopodia often bent near their base and tended to bulge at their tip ( Figure 3B ) . The ﬁlopodia of wild - type cells extended with initial velocities of about 1 m m 3 s 2 1 , reaching lengths of up to 5 m m ( Figure 3C ) . For compar - ison with electron tomograms , we also investigated ﬁlo - podia in cells that overexpress GFP - Rac1A . Figure 3D shows long ﬁlopodia with the typical pointed shape in cells strongly expressing GFP - Rac1A . These ﬁlopodia reached extension rates at least as high as in wild - type cells ( Figure 3E ) . The characteristics of extending and retracting ﬁlopo - dia observed in live cells were used to assign electron tomograms to a putative sequence of protrusion and retraction . In Figures 4A and 4B , ﬁlopodia are shown with an arrangement of actin ﬁlaments at their tip similar to that of Figure 1 , which we consider typical of protrud - ing ﬁlopodia . In the short ﬁlopod of Figure 4A , actin ﬁla - ments are not seen to be bundled along the length of the ﬁlopod , whereas in the ﬁlopod of Figure 4B , parallel ori - entation of ﬁlaments appears to commence . Bulbous ends ( Figures 4C and 4E ) and a bent base ( Figure 4D ) are characteristic of retracting ﬁlopodia in live cells . The electron - dense clusters colored in green might rep - resent complexes of monomeric actin or aggregates of short ﬁlaments . In the bent base of the ﬁlopod in Figure 4D , ﬁlaments originating in the actin network of the cell cortex are at - tached with their distal ends to the convex region of the ﬁlopod membrane ( see also Figure S1 ) . Other ﬁlaments are attached with their proximal ends to the membrane and extend into the shaft of the ﬁlopod . These differ - ences in ﬁlament orientation and membrane association conﬁrmthatthereisnocontinuityofactinﬁlamentsalongtheﬁlopod , andtheysuggestextensivereorganizationof ﬁlaments during the protrusion - retraction cycle . The ﬁlopod shown in Figure 4E is nearly depleted of ﬁlamentous structures at its end . It appears , therefore , that retraction of the ﬁlopodia lags behind the disassem - bly of bundled actin ﬁlaments , resulting in a transitory lack of local support for the ﬁlopod membrane . Discussion Topology of Actin Filaments at the Site of Force Production Filopodia are dynamic organelles in which net assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments are synchronized with phases of protrusion and retraction . They are well suited to study actin dynamics in connection with mem - braneprotrusion , becauseactinpolymerizesinacircum - scribed area at the tip of a ﬁlopod , in close apposition to the inner face of the plasma membrane where the machinery for protrusion is located [ 8 ] . The polymerization of actin is thought to provide the power for pushing the membrane forward [ 8 – 10 ] . Thus , thearrangement ofactinﬁlamentsinthisregioniscrucial to the capacity of a ﬁlopod to grow . Cryo - electron to - mography of Dictyostelium ﬁlopodia has revealed about 10 short ﬁlaments present in that region , arranged in a cone pointing toward the hemispherical tip of the ﬁlopod ( Figures 1A and 2A – 2C , and Table S1 ) . These short ﬁla - ments are not preserved in cytoskeletons of Dictyoste - lium prepared by combining Triton - X100 extraction with glutaraldehyde ﬁxation [ 11 ] . An example showing disappearance of the terminal cone upon membrane removal by detergent has been previously reported ( Figure 10B in [ 12 ] ) . The number and limited length of actin ﬁlaments in the terminal cone are relevant to force generation . Too few ﬁlaments cannot generate enough force to overcome the membrane resistance , whereas too many ﬁlaments with open plus - ends deplete the pool of actin subunits and therefore grow slowly [ 13 ] . If the free length of an ac - tin ﬁlament is too high , the ﬁlament will buckle even un - der a small load [ 14 , 15 ] . The force required for buckling is raised by one order of magnitude if the ﬁlament end contacting the membrane is tethered rather than free Figure 1 . A Filopod of Dictyostelium discoideum Reconstructed by Cryo - Electron Tomography andSurfaceRendered toIllustrate Actin Structures in Context with the Membrane ( A ) The actin network highlighted in reddish overlaid on a tomo - graphic slice . For reasons of clarity , lower structures of the actin network are not shown . ( B – D ) Stereopairsofthetip , shaft , andbaseofthe ﬁlopod . In ( D ) , the ﬁlopod extends from the cortical actin network toward the lower right border of the panels . Linear structures are subjectively colored in reddish , membrane areas in blue , and electron - dense material of undeﬁned shape in green . Filopod formation was enhanced in this cell by the expression of GFP - Rac1A . Current Biology 80 to slide [ 16 ] . This might be the case for actin ﬁlaments centered in the midpoint of the ﬁlopod’s tip . In none of the 12 tomograms analyzed did we observe vesicles within the ﬁlopodia . Therefore , our data do not provide evidence for the supply or removal of mem - brane material through vesicular transport along a ﬁlo - pod , suggesting that membrane area required for ﬁlo - pod growth is derived from the membrane of the cell body . Fast Extension of Filopodia in Dictyostelium In Dictyostelium cells , ﬁlopodia extend with velocities of 1 m m 3 s 2 1 or more ( Figures 3C and 3E ) , rates at least 60 - fold higher than the rate of actin assembly in neuronal ﬁlopodia [ 8 ] . Taking an increment in the ﬁlament length of 2 . 7 nm per actin monomer added and an average angle of 20 (cid:2) for the orientation of actin ﬁlaments relative to the axis of a ﬁlopod , the ﬁlopod will be elongated by 2 . 5 m m upon the addition of 1000 subunits to each force - producing ﬁlament ( neglectingelasticdeformation in the actin network ) . A ﬁlopod protrusion rate of 1 m m 3 s 2 1 will then correspond to the incorporation of 4 3 10 2 subunits per second into an actin ﬁlament . In the fastest ﬁlopodia shown in Figure 3 , the rates are close to the average extension rate of actin ﬁlaments in the cortical network of Dictyostelium cells , which cor - responds to11 3 10 2 subunits persecond andis thought to be a formin - mediated process [ 6 ] . It remains unknown whether the structural features found in Dictyostelium arespeciﬁctofast - growingﬁlopodia . Inslowerﬁlopodia , bundles of continuous actin ﬁlaments extending from the base to the tip of a ﬁlopod have been found [ 17 ] . Rearrangement of Actin Filaments along the Shaft of a Filopod Filaments in the tip region of a Dictyostelium ﬁlopod end up with both their proximal and distal ends at the mem - brane . These ﬁlaments are likely nucleated de novo dur - ing ﬁlopod extension . Subsequently , they must be rear - ranged to convert into the array of mostly parallel and Figure 2 . Interaction of Actin Filaments with the Plasma Membrane and Discontinuity of Filaments along the Shaft of Filopodia The tomograms of ( A ) – ( E ) were taken from GFP - Rac1A - expressing cells , those of ( F ) – ( I ) from wild - type cells . ( A – C ) Three consecutive tomographic slices through an entire ﬁlopod ( also shown in Figure 1 ) , illustrating the presence of transverse actin ﬁla - mentsinadditiontolongitudinallyorientedones . Asterisksindicateﬁlamentsthatpointwiththeirendstowardthelateralmembraneoftheﬁlopod . ( D and E ) Two slices through the shaft of ﬁlopodia oriented with their tips toward the upper right of the panels . Details shown demonstrate dis - continuity of ﬁlaments along the ﬁlopod : free ends of actin ﬁlaments within a ﬁlopod ( encircled ) , ﬁlaments attached with their ends to the lateral membrane ( arrows ) , short ﬁlamentous bridges that connect individual ﬁlaments along their length with the ﬁlopod membrane ( arrowheads and bracket ) . ( F – I ) Four consecutive sections through the reconstructed volume of a wild - type ﬁlopod , showing that the arrangement of ﬁlaments at the tip and along the shaft of a normal cell is similar to that observed in Rac1A - overexpressing cells . Note that slices in ( F ) – ( I ) are three times thicker than in ( A ) – ( C ) . In ( D ) and ( E ) , denoising was used to increase contrast . Scale bars represent 200 nm . Actin Networks in Intact Filopodia 81 bundled ﬁlaments that ﬁll the ﬁlopod shaft . In retracting ﬁlopodia , the actin ﬁlaments may be fragmented , as indi - cated by delayed ﬁlopod retraction at neuronal growth conesinmicedevoidoftheseveringproteingelsolin [ 18 ] . Support for our ‘‘sequential nucleation model’’ is pro - vided by the presence of DdDia2 speciﬁcally at the tip of Dictyostelium ﬁlopodia . This formin has nucleating ac - tivity and is required for the formation and maintenance of ﬁlopodia [ 19 ] . DdDia2 interacts with VASP [ 20 ] , an - other protein required for ﬁlopod formation [ 21 ] . Mem - bers of the ENA / VASP family are also present at the ﬁlo - pod tips of embryonic hippocampal neurons in mice [ 22 ] . Nucleation of actin ﬁlaments is implied by the ﬁnd - ing that Dictyostelium ﬁlopodia can repeatedly branch . Each of the branches retains the thickness of the com - mon stem [ 2 ] , suggesting that the number of actin ﬁla - ments doubles at a branch point . Since the actin ﬁlaments are shorter than the entire ﬁlopod , the integrity of the actin skeleton depends on the interconnections of ﬁlaments and on their bridges to the plasma membrane . This network of discontinuous ﬁlaments is subject to rapid reorganization . In particular , the bending of retracting ﬁlopodia , along their shaft or close to their base , requires a change from a radially symmetric to an asymmetric distribution of mechanical forces . The asymmetry is reﬂected in the arrangement of actin ﬁlaments in a bent ﬁlopod ( Figure 4D and Fig - ure S1 ) . Flexibility superimposed on mechanical stability is important for the role of ﬁlopodia in capturing bacteria andprocessingthemforphagocytosisatthecellsurface . In conclusion , cryo - electron tomography reveals structural details of the force - generating apparatus in its membrane - anchored state that are not recognized otherwise . The region of force production for membrane protrusion at the tip of ﬁlopodia is speciﬁed in Dictyoste - lium cells by the conical arrangement of short actin ﬁla - ments that are anchored at both their ends to the plasma membrane . Our data suggest that sites of de novo nu - cleation and growth of actin ﬁlaments are located near the tip of these ﬁlopodia and that rearrangement of actin Figure 3 . Filopod Dynamics Recorded in Live Cells by Confocal Fluorescence Scanning Microscopy ( A – C ) To simultaneously visualize the actin core and the membrane , wild - type cells expressing LimE D coil - GFP to label polymerized actin struc - tures ( green ) were incubated with the membrane - integrating dye FM4 - 64 ( red ) [ 30 ] . ( A ) Three sequences showing ﬁlopod extension . ( B ) Two sequences of retracting ﬁlopodia showing bending and the formation of membrane bulges at their tip . Numbers indicate seconds after beginning of the sequences shown . ( C ) Time course of elongation of the three ﬁlopodia presented in ( A ) : the left ( squares ) , middle ( diamonds ) , and the right one ( triangles ) . ( D and E ) Cells strongly labeled with GFP - Rac1A . ( D ) Stacks of confocal sections through the entire height of the cell bodies , superimposed on each other by maximum projection . ( E ) Time course of elongation of three fast - growing ﬁlopodia . Fluorescence imageswere taken ataplane remotefrom the substratetoascertain that ﬁlopodia were notarrested by attachment ; onlyﬁlopodia whose tips remained within the plane of focus during their extension or retraction phases were analyzed . Scale bars represent 1 m m in ( A ) and ( B ) and 10 m m in ( D ) . Current Biology 82 ﬁlaments throughout the shaft accompanies elongation and bending of the ﬁlopodia . In ﬁlopodia of Dictyoste - lium , the actin network switches within seconds from states of assembly to disassembly in accord with the rapid protrusion and retraction of ﬁlopodia . Further studies applying cryo - electron tomography to more slowly growing ﬁlopodia , such as those of neuronal growth cones , will show whether the arrangement of ac - tin ﬁlaments in a terminal cone as well as the discontinu - ity of ﬁlaments along the shaft is typical of ﬁlopodia in general or is characteristic of highly dynamic ﬁlopodia that require enhanced force production in order to accelerate membrane protrusion . Experimental Procedures Cells of D . discoideum strain AX2 ( ‘‘wild - type’’ ) and of the same strain expressing GFP - Rac1A - WT , a GFP - fusion of unmutated Rac1A [ 23 ] , were cultivated near to conﬂuency at 23 (cid:2) C in polysty - rene cell culture dishes containing nutrient medium with maltose [ 24 ] . Cells were harvested by washing them twice in 17 mM K / Na - phosphate buffer ( pH 6 . 0 ) . For confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy , cells were transferred onto glass coverslips , washed in the phos - phate buffer , and scanned with either a Zeiss LSM510 line - scan or a Perkin - Elmer Ultra View spinning disc microscope ( see Supple - mental Data ) . For cryo - electron tomography , cells were incubated on carbon - coated platinum grids for 30 to 60 min before they were rapidly frozen in liquid ethane [ 25 ] . Tilt series covering an angular range from – 60 (cid:2) to 60 (cid:2) with 1 . 5 (cid:2) tilt increments were recorded automati - cally [ 26 , 27 ] with a Philips CM 300 FEG microscope equipped with a Gatan GIF 2002 energy ﬁlter and at an underfocus of 14 m m . The projection images were aligned and reconstructed by a weighted back - projectionalgorithmasimplementedintheEMsoftwarepack - age [ 28 ] . For visualization purposes , the reconstructed volumes were processed by an anisotropic denoising algorithm [ 29 ] . Surface rendering was done with the Amira 3 . 1 software package . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include one ﬁgure , one table , and Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 17 / 1 / 79 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments This work was supported by grant SFB 413 / C9 of the Deutsche For - schungsgemeinschaft and by a fund of the Max Planck Society . We thank J . Faix , Medizinische Hochschule Hannover , for GFP - Rac1A cells . Received : December 31 , 2005 Revised : November 7 , 2006 Accepted : November 7 , 2006 Published : January 8 , 2007 References 1 . Wood , W . , and Martin , P . ( 2002 ) . Structures in focus—ﬁlopodia . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 34 , 726 – 730 . 2 . Rifkin , J . L . , and Speisman , R . A . ( 1976 ) . Filamentous extensions of vegetative amoebae of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium . Trans . Am . Microsc . Soc . 95 , 165 – 173 . 3 . Heid , P . J . , Geiger , J . , Wessels , D . , Voss , E . , andSoll , D . R . ( 2005 ) . Computer - assisted analysis of ﬁlopod formation and the role of myosin II heavy chain phosphorylation in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2225 – 2237 . 4 . Koleske , A . J . ( 2003 ) . Do ﬁlopodia enable the growth cone to ﬁnd its way ? Sci . STKE 2003 , pe20 . 5 . Zheng , J . Q . , Wan , J . - j . , and Poo , M . - m . ( 1996 ) . Essential role of ﬁlopodia in chemotropic turning of nerve growth cone induced by glutamate gradient . J . Neurosci . 16 , 1140 – 1149 . 6 . Diez , S . , Gerisch , G . , Anderson , K . , Mu¨ller - Taubenberger , A . , and Bretschneider , T . ( 2005 ) . Subsecond reorganization of the actin network in cell motility and chemotaxis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 7601 – 7606 . 7 . Medalia , O . , Weber , I . , Frangakis , A . S . , Nicastro , D . , Gerisch , G . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2002 ) . Macromolecular architecture in eu - karyotic cells visualized by cryoelectron tomography . Science 298 , 1209 – 1213 . 8 . Mallavarapu , A . , and Mitchison , T . ( 1999 ) . Regulated actin cyto - skeleton assembly at ﬁlopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1097 – 1106 . 9 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly anddisassemblyof actinﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . Erratum : Cell 113 , 549 . 10 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . , and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 . 11 . Claviez , M . , Brink , M . , and Gerisch , G . ( 1986 ) . Cytoskeletons from a mutant of Dictyostelium discoideum with ﬂattened cells . J . Cell Sci . 86 , 69 – 82 . 12 . Gerisch , G . , Albrecht , R . , DeHostos , E . , Wallraff , E . , Heizer , C . , Kreitmeier , M . , and Mu¨ller - Taubenberger , A . ( 1993 ) . Actin - asso - ciatedproteinsinmotilityandchemotaxisof Dictyostelium cells . Symp . Soc . Exp . Biol . 47 , 297 – 315 . 13 . Mogilner , A . , andEdelstein - Keshet , L . ( 2002 ) . Regulationofactin dynamics in rapidly moving cells : a quantitative analysis . Bio - phys . J . 83 , 1237 – 1258 . 14 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . Figure 4 . Three - Dimensional Reconstructions of Four Filopodia from GFP - Rac1A - Expressing Cells , Putatively Ordered According to Phases of Extension or Retraction ( A and B ) Extension . ( C – E ) Retraction . Bulges at the end of ﬁlopodia are characteristic of retraction as shown in Figure 3B . Structures are color - coded as in Figure 1 . Scale bars represent 100 nm in ( A ) and ( B ) and 200 nm in ( C ) – ( E ) . Actin Networks in Intact Filopodia 83 15 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 2003 ) . Polymer motors : pushing out the front and pulling up the back . Curr . Biol . 13 , R721 – R733 . 16 . Dickinson , R . B . , Caro , L . , and Purich , D . L . ( 2004 ) . Force genera - tion by cytoskeletal ﬁlament end - tracking proteins . Biophys . J . 87 , 2838 – 2854 . 17 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . - i . , Vasiliev , J . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 . 18 . Lu , M . , Witke , W . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , and Kosik , K . S . ( 1997 ) . Delayed retraction of ﬁlopodia in gelsolin null mice . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1279 – 1287 . 19 . Schirenbeck , A . , Bretschneider , T . , Arasada , R . , Schleicher , M . , and Faix , J . ( 2005 ) . The Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 is required for the formation and maintenance of ﬁlopodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 619 – 625 . 20 . Schirenbeck , A . , Arasada , R . , Bretschneider , T . , Stradal , T . E . B . , Schleicher , M . , andFaix , J . ( 2006 ) . The bundling activityofvaso - dilator - stimulated phosphoprotein is required for ﬁlopodium formation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 7694 – 7699 . 21 . Han , Y . - H . , Chung , C . Y . , Wessels , D . , Stephens , S . , Titus , M . A . , Soll , D . R . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 2002 ) . Requirement of a vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein family member for cell adhesion , the formation of ﬁlopodia , and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium . J . Biol . Chem . 51 , 49877 – 49887 . 22 . Lanier , L . M . , Gates , M . A . , Witke , W . , Menzies , A . S . , Wehman , A . M . , Macklis , J . D . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Soriano , P . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 1999 ) . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neuron 22 , 313 – 325 . 23 . Dumontier , M . , Ho¨cht , P . , Mintert , U . , and Faix , J . ( 2000 ) . Rac1 GTPases control ﬁlopodia formation , cell motility , endocytosis , cytokinesis and development in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2253 – 2265 . 24 . Watts , D . J . , and Ashworth , J . M . ( 1970 ) . Growth of myxameobae of the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum in axenic culture . Biochem . J . 119 , 171 – 174 . 25 . Dubochet , J . , Adrian , M . , Chang , J . J . , Homo , J . C . , Lepault , J . , McDowall , A . W . , and Schultz , P . ( 1988 ) . Cryo - electron micros - copy of vitriﬁed specimens . Q . Rev . Biophys . 21 , 129 – 228 . 26 . Dierksen , K . , Typke , D . , Hegerl , R . , Koster , A . J . , andBaumeister , W . ( 1992 ) . Towards automatic electron tomography . Ultramicro - scopy 40 , 71 – 87 . 27 . Grimm , R . , Singh , H . , Rachel , R . , Typke , D . , Zillig , W . , and Baumeister , W . ( 1998 ) . Electron tomography of ice - embedded prokaryotic cells . Biophys . J . 74 , 1031 – 1042 . 28 . Hegerl , R . ( 1996 ) . The EM program package : a platform for im - age processing in biological electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 30 – 34 . 29 . Frangakis , A . S . , and Hegerl , R . ( 2001 ) . Noise reduction in elec - tron tomographic reconstructions using nonlinear anisotropic diffusion . J . Struct . Biol . 13 , 239 – 250 . 30 . Bretschneider , T . , Diez , S . , Anderson , K . , Heuser , J . , Clarke , M . , Mu¨ller - Taubenberger , A . , Ko¨hler , J . , and Gerisch , G . ( 2004 ) . Dynamic actin patterns and Arp2 / 3 assembly at the substrate - attached surface of motile cells . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1 – 10 . Current Biology 84