Book Reviews . . . . . . . . Journ a l of Foo d Science EDUCATIO N (cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129)(cid:129) Review of Introduction to Rubrics : An Assessment Tool To Save Grading Time , Convey Effective Feedback and Promote Student Learning Dannelle Stevens and Antonia Levi . 2005 . Stylus Publishing , Sterling , Virginia “R ubrics save time , provide timely , meaningful feedback for students , and have the potential to become an effective part of the teaching and learning process . In fact , the main reason we don’t use rubrics more often is simply because most of us have been unaware of them . Rubrics were not part of our own experience as students , and most of us find that we often teach as we were taught . ” To test this theory , I conducted an informal survey of some of my faculty colleagues asking these 3 questions : 1 ) Do you use rubrics ? , 2 ) How do you use rubrics ? , and 3 ) Have you had formal instruction in how to construct rubrics ? Approximately one third responded with “What’s a rubric ? ” Others knew what rubrics were , and wanted to incorporate them into their classes in the future . The final group ( ∼ 30 % ) had previously used rubrics for grading , rubrics typically sourced from other instructors at teaching workshops . Only 1 person had actually created rubrics for her own use , a skill she learned from her own professor in graduate school . Clearly , I am not the only faculty member who could benefit from reading Introduction to Rubrics . Dannelle Stevens and Antonia Levi , associate professors at Portland State Univ . , do an outstanding job of defining rubrics and explaining how to create and use them in different contexts . The book is peppered with anecdotes drawn from their own teaching experiences , and the mechanistic aspects of rubric construction are presented in a straightforward , conversational style . Before describing rubric construction , the authors note that although it can be time consuming and intimidating at first , the process becomes easier with experience , particularly through adaptation of existing rubrics for other uses . Briefly , rubrics are scoring instruments in the form of a matrix or a grid . One axis of the matrix lists the specific components of the assignment while the other axis provides detailed descriptions of the levels of achievement for each task . In addition to facilitating a more rapid and equitable grading of papers , presentations , class participation , lab reports , and other assignments , rubrics clearly elaborate for students the specific expectations for an assignment . The process of creating rubrics is broken into 4 basic stages : ( 1 ) Reflecting on the purpose of the assignment , our expectations , and what we hope students will learn from it . ( 2 ) Listing the precise details of the assignment , including specific learning objectives . ( 3 ) Grouping and labeling expectations , using clear and neutral performance descriptions . ( 4 ) Applying the parameters outlined in stage 3 to the grid format of the rubric . The authors guide us through the reflection stage by posing precise questions that allow us to articulate what we already know : “Why did you create this assignment ? Have you given this assignment before ? How does this assignment relate to the rest of what you are teaching ? What exactly is the task assigned ? What are the highest expectations you have for student performance on this assignment ? ” Thoughtful answers to these questions lead us to a rubric design that encompasses the most important aspects of an assignment . Although all stages are clearly described in the text with meticulous instructions , the section on grouping and labeling expectations was the most useful for me . The authors give numerous examples of a variety of rubrics , including rubrics for students at various developmental learning stages , and rubrics with varying levels of detail ( 3 to 5 performance levels ) . My only criticism is that the book includes examples taken primarily from liberal arts and business disciplines . However , there is 1 sample rubric for laboratory science broken into 3 performance levels ( exemplary , competent , needs work ) and 7 task dimensions ( materials , procedure , safety , purpose , data collection , data analysis , and evaluation of experiment ) . This example could be slightly modified for use in food chemistry or other food science laboratory applications . C (cid:3) 2006 Institute of Food Technologists Vol . 5 , 2006 — JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE EDUCATION 63 JFSE : Journal of Food Science Education Part II of the book is targeted to teachers who already have a working knowledge of rubric construction and use , and are ready to move to a higher level . Chapter 4 deals specifically with involving students in rubric construction , detailing 5 models of collaborative rubric design . The rationales for including students in rubric construction are preventing misunderstandings that negatively influence grades , increasing student understanding of the importance of their assignments , and enhancing critical thinking skills . Student involvement can range from simple feedback about a rubric to construction of an entire rubric with final approval by the instructor . Other potential collaborators for rubric design and construction include teaching assistants , tutors , and colleagues who coteach our courses . This book , which is enjoyable to read , serves as an essential resource for higher education faculty by highlighting the important role of rubrics , and detailing the design and implementation process . In addition to a comprehensive description of how to integrate rubrics into your teaching , the book offers tips on fostering student feedback and gives an interesting perspective on how students think and what motivates them to learn . The authors also offer practical advice regarding which rubric models work best for different types of classes , students , and assignments . The authors state that “ because of the rubric format , students may notice for themselves the patterns of recurring problems or ongoing improvement in their work , and this self - discovery is one of the happiest outcomes of using rubrics . ” Sounds like reason enough to give them a try ! Denise Skonberg University of Maine 64 JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE EDUCATION — Vol . 5 , 2006 Available on - line at : www . ift . org 本 文献由“学霸图书馆 - 文献云下载”收集自网络，仅供学习交流使用。 学霸图书馆 （www . xuebalib . com） 是一个“整合众多图书馆数据库资源， 提供一站式文献检索和下载服务”的 24 小时在线不限 IP 图书馆。 图书馆致力于便利、促进学习与科研，提供最强文献下载服务。 图书馆导航： 图书馆首页 文献云下载 图书馆入口 外文数据库大全 疑难文献辅助工具