1 PICNIC identifies condensate - forming proteins across organisms Anna Hadarovich 1 , 2 , Hari Raj Singh 1 , Soumyadeep Ghosh 1 , 2 , Nadia Rostam 1 , 2 , Anthony A . Hyman 1 , 2 , 3 , Agnes Toth - Petroczy 1 , 2 , 3 * 1 : Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Dresden 01307 , Germany 2 : Center for Systems Biology Dresden , Dresden , 01307 Germany 3 : Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life , TU Dresden , 01062 Dresden , Germany * Corresponding author : Agnes Toth - Petroczy Email : toth - petroczy @ mpi - cbg . de Abstract Biomolecular condensates are membrane - less organelles that selectively concentrate biomolecules to perform a multitude of fundamental biochemical functions . Despite their biological and therapeutical interest , experimental identification of condensate - forming proteins on the entire proteome scale remains challenging . To enable systematic detection of condensate proteins , we developed an algorithm to recognize proteins involved in in vivo biomolecular condensates regardless of the mechanism of condensate formation . Using a curated dataset of condensates , we trained a machine learning classifier based on sequence - and structure - based features to predict if a protein is part of a condensate . Our model , PICNIC ( Proteins Involved in CoNdensates In Cells ) outperforms other prediction tools , and although it was trained on human data , it generalizes well to various organisms . Experimental validation of 24 proteins spanning a wide - range of functions , structural content and disease relevance confirmed that 18 of them localize to condensates with high confidence , while 3 form condensates with low confidence . Thus , our experimental validation suggests an ~ 87 . 5 % success rate ( 75 % with high confidence and 12 . 5 % with low confidence ) in identifying condensate - forming proteins . Proteome - wide predictions by PICNIC estimate that ~ 40 % of proteins partition into condensates across different organisms , from 2 bacteria to humans , with no apparent correlation with organismal complexity or disordered protein content . Our model will shed light on the evolution of biomolecular condensates and will help identify potential protein targets to modulate biomolecular condensate formation . Introduction Biomolecular condensates are membrane - less organelles that can selectively concentrate biomolecules ( 1 ) and are typically non - stochiometric assemblies of thousands of protein molecules and nucleic acids . The role of condensates has been implicated in several fundamental biochemical processes in physiology and disease ( 2 – 4 ) . Functions exerted by condensates include : i ) sequestering molecules and shutting down translation of specific mRNAs ( 5 ) ; ii ) buffering concentration of proteins ( 6 ) ; iii ) reservoir of proteins for fast assembly and disassembly of large complexes , such as the nuclear envelope ( 7 ) . While many proteins can phase - separate in the test - tube and form liquid - like condensates in vitro , studying if they form condensates in viv o is more challenging . Individual proteins can be labeled using fluorescent tags and imaged for testing droplet formation and liquid - like properties such as fusion , Oswald ripening , fluorescent recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) ( 8 , 9 ) . However , condensates may contain hundreds and even thousands of different proteins . Systematic detection of condensate proteomes is limited to a few mass spectrometry and proximity labeling studies : purified nucleoli ( 10 , 11 ) , P - bodies ( 12 ) and stress granules ( 13 , 14 ) were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis for enrichment . Systematically and experimentally testing if proteins are involved in condensates remains a bottleneck in the field . Therefore , computational methods can facilitate the process of characterizing proteins involved in biomolecular condensates at proteome - scale . The main limitation of computational method development is related to the sparse experimental data of verified condensate proteins . The first models were proposed based on properties of few protein families , such as CatGranule ( 15 ) and PScore ( 16 – 18 ) . While these methods aided the discovery of novel condensate forming proteins with similar properties , they do not generalize well . 3 In recent years , several data driven and machine learning based LLPS predictors have been developed ( 19 – 22 ) , making use of experimental data on condensates aggregated in four LLPS databases ( 23 – 26 ) . They have excellent performance compared to the first generation of predictors , nevertheless they have several shortcomings such as biased definition of the negative dataset based on a priori assumptions about driving features , such as using structured proteins from PDB as negative data . Here , we focused on predicting proteins involved in biomolecular condensate formation instead of in phase separation per se , and developed a new model . We took a data - driven approach , and trained a machine learning classifier to predict if a protein is part of a condensate . Our model , PICNIC ( Proteins Involved in CoNdensates In Cells ) is based on sequence - based features such as sequence complexity , disorder score ( 27 ) , amino acid co - occurrences , as well as structure - based features based on Alphafold2 models . We addressed the short - comings of previous methods by using a larger and highly curated database of in vivo condensates ( CD - CODE ) , and by defining the non - condensate forming , negative dataset , based on a protein - protein interaction network . Experimental validation of 24 proteins spanning a wide - range of functions , structural content and disease relevance confirmed that 18 of them localize to condensates with high confidence , while 3 form condensates with low confidence , and additionally 8 of them co - localize with known biomolecular condensates . Thus , our experimental validation suggests an ~ 88 % success rate in identifying condensate forming proteins . Overall , using an expanded manually curated dataset of condensate forming proteins and a new method to define the negative dataset allowed us to develop the model that outperforms existing tools . Although PICNIC was trained on the richest human data , it generalizes well to other organisms tested . Moreover , we trained another model with extended set of features which include Gene Ontology terms ( PICNIC GO ) . Although this model has several limitations , it provides useful insights about specific protein properties that are enriched in proteins of biomolecular condensate . We 4 provide our software and a web application ( picnic . cd - code . org ) with precomputed scores for ~ 200 , 000 proteins across the tree of life . Results Defining condensate - forming proteins In order to develop a model to identify condensate - forming proteins , we assembled a ground truth dataset for H . sapiens , that has the most experimentally studied condensates of all organisms to date . Since we aimed at developing a binary classifier , we considered two classes of proteins : 1 ) proteins involved in condensates ( positive dataset ) and proteins not involved in condensates ( negative dataset ) ( Figure 1A ) . The positive dataset was constructed from a semi - manually curated dataset of biomolecular condensates and their respective proteins , called CD - CODE ( CrowDsourcing COndensate Database and Encyclopedia ) , developed by our labs ( 28 ) . CD - CODE compiles information from primary literature and from four widely used databases of LLPS proteins ( 23 – 26 ) . Building the negative dataset is a complicated task as there is no publicly available resource that reports proteins that do not form condensates . Additionally , condensates may form only under specific conditions ( 29 ) . Here , we defined the negative dataset based on protein - protein interaction network ( InWeb database ( 30 ) for human proteins ) . We excluded all proteins that have direct connections with known condensate proteins . We reasoned that these proteins are potential condensate members that have not yet been studied . The remaining proteins comprised the negative dataset ( Figure 1A ) . Of course , this procedure doesn’t guarantee the absence of condensate proteins among the negative dataset ( false negatives ) . But exclusion of the proteins that directly interact with proteins that were reported as members of synthetic or biomolecular condensates is lowering the probability of mixing positive and negative data . Overall , our non - 5 redundant dataset ( filtered by 50 % sequence identity ) contained 2142 positive and 1709 negative human proteins , that were divided by 4 : 1 ratio into training and test datasets . PICNIC identifies sequence - and structure - determinants of condensate formation We hypothesized that the ability to form condensates is encoded in the proteins’ sequence and structure , and developed a machine learning classifier called PICNIC ( Proteins Involved in CoNdensates In Cell ) based on sequence - distance - based and structure - based features derived from Alphafold2 models ( Figure 1B , in total 65 sequence - distance - based and 21 structure - based features ) . It has been already shown that many proteins involved in condensates harbor intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) and low - complexity sequences . Due to their inherent flexibility , multi - valency and ability to sample multiple conformations , they are adept at a wide array of binding - related functions including macro - molecular assemblies ( 31 – 33 ) . We also tested several metrics of disorder and sequence complexity as features ( Suppementary Methods ) . Our final model contained several features related to disorder , such as IUPred scores ( 27 ) , that have a feature importance of 0 . 5 - 3 % . Although the presence of highly disordered residues is among most important features ( Figure 1F , red ) , it is not a prerequisite for the protein to have long disordered domains to be a member of the condensate . The proportion of human proteins of condensates with no disordered regions is 21 % ( disordered regions < 10aa . Figure S1 ) , while 33 % of all human proteomes have no disordered regions . For example , Human protein Guanine nucleotide exchange factor C9orf72 is a driver protein in stress granules ; Speckle - type POZ protein is a driver in nuclear speckle and SPOP / DAXX body . Both proteins consist of ordered domains only that were experimentally determined by electron microscopy and X - ray crystallography , respectively ( Figure S1 , PDB ids 6LT0 ad 3HU6 ) . Along with overall sequence complexity and disorder scores of a protein , the local disorder and secondary structure of individual residue types was also found to be important . We used the 6 confidence score of the AlphaFold model prediction , the pLDDT score , that was shown to correlate with sequence disorder ( 34 ) . We represented the occurrence of an amino acid ( AA ) in a given secondary structure element ( SSE ) with a given model confidence as a triad ( aa - SSE - pLDDT ) . As amino acid composition bias and patterning of charges were shown to impact the ability of proteins to form condensates ( 35 – 37 ) , we developed features that represent short and long range co - occurrences of amino acids in the protein sequence . We represent co - occurrence of amino - acids in the protein sequence within a distance ( number of amino acids in linear sequence ) by a pair of triads ( AA 1 , distance , AA 2 ) . After feature selection , the long - range distance between charged amino acids , e . g . Lysine and Arginine ( K , 60 , R ) and Aspartic acid and Lysine ( D , 20 , K ) , and short range distance of Leucine and hydrophobic amino acids ( e . g . L , 0 , W ; F , 2 , L ; L , 2 , L ) , and the distance between Cysteine and hydrophobic amino acids were shown to be the most important features . Overall Lysine and Leucine amino acids contribute the most to the model ( Figure 1C ) . RNA - related functions are enriched in condensate proteins In order to further increase to performance of our model , we integrated functional information that is already known about each protein and described as Gene Ontology ( GO ) terms . We developed a second classifier , called PICNIC GO that combines GO terms and the previously used PICNIC features ( Figure 1B ) . After feature selection only 18 features were included in the final model , 10 new GO features and 8 features of PICNIC described in the previous section . We found , that the most significant GO term is RNA binding , which is superseding the importance of other terms and features by several orders of magnitude ( Figure 1D ) . While the GO annotation feature is biased by existing knowledge , it nevertheless validates the design of the negative dataset : it highlights RNA binding molecular function as one of the of the most important features in PICNIC GO model , which is known to play crucial role in biomolecular condensate formation , as RNA molecules are significant constituents of condensates ( 33 , 38 ) . This feature is efficient in discriminating the two classes of proteins because the positive and negative datasets show different distributions of RNA binding annotation . In PICNIC GO the following 7 functions were marked as the most important : transferase activity , transferring phosphorus containing groups , enzyme binding , phosphoric ester hydrolase activity , organic cyclic compound binding , and heterocyclic compound binding ( Figure 1D ) . The success of including functional annotation demonstrates , that for proteins with unknown cellular compartmentalization , specific set of functional descriptions can provide additional evidence for their tendency to form biomolecular condensates . PICNIC accurately identifies proteins involved in biomolecular condensate formation Several data - driven predictors were developed in the last few years , that aim to predict proteins involved in LLPS from protein sequence alone or from sequence and experimental data , such as microscopy images ( 39 ) . Here , we compared the performance of PICNIC to sequence based predictors , PSAP ( 21 ) , FuzDrop ( 20 ) , DeePhase ( 40 ) and PhaSePred ( 41 ) that has four versions , one general model ( PdPS - 8fea based on 8 features ) and one developed for human proteins only that uses existing experimental data , such as fluorescent microscopy images of the proteins as well as experimental data on phosphorylation sites ( PdPS - 10fea based on 10 features ) . We compared the performance of tools on three different datasets : 1 ) test dataset from the recently published PhaSePred methods ( 41 ) ; 2 ) proteins forming nuclear punctae defined by the OpenCell project ( 42 ) ; 3 ) test dataset generated from CD - CODE ( 28 ) ( see Supplementary Methods , Dataset S1 ) . Although the CD - CODE test data is not independent and was partially used by existing predictors during their training process , PICNIC has superior performance with a maximum F1 - score of 0 . 81 ( Figure 2C ) . Not surprisingly , the models that use existing experimental information outperform the sequence - based predictors . Specifically , PICNIC GO has the best performance ( ROC - AUC = 0 . 91 , F1 - score = 0 . 84 ) followed by PdPS - 10fea ( ROC - AUC = 0 . 89 , F1 - score = 0 . 83 ) . To further validate our model , we used microscopy images from Human Protein Atlas ( HPA ) where fluorescently labeled proteins were imaged and their cellular localization was determined ( 43 ) . Specifically , three types of cellular localizations were screened : nucleolus , centrosome and nuclear speckle . We filtered the list of proteins from HPA that were already in our training set that resulted 8 in 484 proteins with known localization . Overall , PICNIC scores were higher for the proteins from HPA than for proteins without known localization ( Figure S2 ) . 69 % of proteins mapped from HPA ( with exclusion of the proteins from the training dataset ) have a PICNIC score greater than 0 . 5 , meaning that PICNIC correctly identified them as members of biomolecular condensates . It should be noted that HPA doesn’t report if a protein does not belong to given condensate ( negative examples ) . Therefore , this dataset can be used only to check model sensitivity ( recall , what fraction of true condensate forming proteins were predicted correctly ) , but not model precision ( positive predive value , what fraction of positive predictions are actually true positives ) . PICNIC is robust in identifying small sequence perturbations that impact condensate formation A real challenge of computational predictors is to be sensitive to small sequence perturbations that impact condensate formation . To test if PICNIC can distinguish similar sequences with altered condensate forming properties , we considered the synuclein family , that comprises of three paralogs in human . Although they have similar sequences ( Figure 1E , 60 - 70 % identity ) , only α - and g - synuclein can phase separate in vitro and in vivo . FITC - labeled β - synuclein , which lacks the characteristic NAC region found in α - synuclein , does not phase separate at high concentrations ( 200 μM ) and under crowding conditions ( 10 % [ weight / volume ] PEG ) , whereas FITC - labeled α - synuclein readily forms droplets under the same conditions ( 20 ) . Moreover , α - and g - synuclein are part of biomolecular condensates : α - synuclein is reported to be the member of Synaptic vesicle pool condensate ( 44 ) , g - synuclein is a member of the Centrosome ( 45 ) , but β - synuclein has not been found in any biomolecular condensates yet . PICNIC accurately predicts the condensate - forming ability of the synuclein family ( Figure 1E ) . We surmise that PICNIC is sensitive to structural 9 rearrangements of proteins , and hypothesize that the bending of alpha - helix in β - synuclein potentially hinders the protein’s ability to form condensate . Proteome - wide prediction of proteins involved in condensates across organisms In order to see if our model is generalizable , we tested its performance on identifying known condensate forming proteins of other organisms . The CD - CODE database ( 28 ) was screened to evaluate the fraction of proteins that were correctly identified as members of condensates by the developed model . Although PICNIC was trained on human data , it successfully predicted 72 % of such proteins in mouse and 86 % in Caenorhabditis elegans for example ( Figure 3A ) . Thus , PICNIC model is species - independent and can be used in different organisms to assess the ability of proteins to be involved in biomolecular condensates . To estimate the overall fraction of condensate - proteins , we calculated PICNIC scores for 14 different organisms across the tree of life including bacteria , plants and fungi ( Figure 3C ) . We chose organisms that have already known condensate protein members that were experimentally verified in CD - CODE . We excluded organisms from further analysis where the number of known proteins is too small to compute statistics on performance : Danio rerio ( N = 14 ) , Dictyostelium discoideum ( N = 2 ) , Escherichia coli ( N = 6 ) , Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( N = 1 ) , Oryza sativa ( N = 1 ) , Candida albicans ( N = 6 ) . We found that the proportion of the predicted condensate - forming proteome is 40 - 60 % , and is similar across related organisms , e . g . , 42 % and 39 % in human and mouse , respectively ( Figure 3C ) . Overall , we found no correlation between fraction of predicted condensate proteins in a proteome and organismal complexity or disordered protein content ( Figure 3B ) . Interpretation of our machine learning models To explore the generalisability of our models , we compared the most important features learnt by PICNIC vs . PICNIC GO . First , we calculated the most divergent gene ontology features between the dataset of known condensate - forming proteins ( CD - CODE ) and the dataset of whole proteomes of 10 corresponding organisms ( Figure S3 ) . Further , we compared these distributions to the distributions of potential condensate proteins predicted by PICNIC . This analysis demonstrated that PICNIC can recognize the protein properties deduced as most important by PICNIC GO model , as well as terms describing cellular localization which were excluded from PICNIC GO features ( Figure S4 ) . We also compared the two models in the opposite direction to see whether PICNIC GO model can identify the sequence - and structure - based features considered as important by the PICNIC model . Interestingly , for different species different subsets of features were highlighted , but in concordance with features selected as most significant by PICNIC ( Figure S5 ) . Thus , PICNIC that was trained without Gene Ontology annotation can detect properties of proteins in biomolecular condensates captured by Gene Ontology terms for different species and vice versa : PICNIC GO detects properties of proteins in biomolecular condensates captured by distance - based and AlphaFold - based features for different species , further validating the generalizability of the model . Overall , the propensity of a protein to be a member of biomolecular condensate seems encoded in the sequence , and machine learning models , such as PICNIC can recognize these encoded properties . Experimental validation of predicted condensate - forming proteins In order to experimentally validate our model , we decided to predict the condensate localization of poorly characterized human proteins and sought to validate their condensate - forming behavior inside living cells . To do so , we chose 24 proteins ( Dataset S2 ) which : i ) cover diverse molecular functions spanning the entire central dogma of molecular biology and regulation of all the major cellular bio - polymers for instance , nucleic acids , proteins and chromatin ( Figure S6A ) , ii ) represent the average sequence length of human proteins ( i . e . , around 350 amino acids ) by having a range of 125 to 684 amino acids ( Figure S6B ) , iii ) represent diverse 3D structures from alpha helical , beta stranded to highly disordered ( Figure 4C ) iv ) are involved in genetic diseases ( AIMP1 , CWC27 ) as well as host - virus interaction ( IF2GL ) . Overall , the proteins , we chose for experimentally verifying and benchmarking PICNIC , are representing global cellular functions and 11 therefore can demonstrate the robustness of our model in predicting condensate - forming proteins across the proteome . We cloned 24 transgenes and transfected them in U2OS cells expressing fluorescently labelled proteins ( see Supplementary Methods ) . Using fluorescent imaging , we found , that 21 out of the 24 tested proteins ( 87 . 5 % ) localized to mesoscale foci without any stressors , while 3 proteins ( C1ORF52 , SPAG7 and CWC27 , encircled in red ) localized to the nucleoplasm without forming any discernible mesoscale foci ( Figure 4A ) . Foci were defined based on enrichment in fluorescent intensity , i . e . , the intensity ratio inside relative to outside the foci is greater than one ( Figure S7A ) . Only three proteins tested have no detectable foci , and 21 form foci ( Figure 4A ) . In order to classify the observed foci as biomolecular condensates , we aimed to define quantitative characteristics and thresholds . We measured four simple characteristics from fluorescent microscopy images ( Figure S7 ) : area and perimeter , informing on the size and the typical number of proteins in a foci ) ; shape ( roundness ) ; number of foci per cell . Next , we decided on a threshold for these characteristics to aid a quantitative definition of condensates . We consider foci as condensates above the diameter of 350 nm ( distance between two furthest pixels in one condensate ) , that is well above the diffraction limit . This would correspond to ~ 1 µ m perimeter assuming a round shape ( Figure S7C ) . Using back - of - the - envelope calculations , we can consider an average protein size as 10 nm 3 , then a 1 µ m 3 compartment can contain ca . 1 million protein molecules and a 500 nm 3 compartment can contain 100 , 000 protein molecules . We note , that other super resolution techniques are required to characterize the size of clusters of proteins below the diffraction limit . Experiments confirm 87 . 5 % of PICNIC predictions By applying the above definition , in our dataset , 75 % , i . e . 18 proteins ( encircled in green ) form high confidence condensates , 12 . 5 % i . e . 3 proteins ( encircled in orange ) form low confidence 12 condensates ( foci with perimeter < 1 µ m ) while other 3 are not forming any condensates ( fluorescent intensity ratio ~ 1 ) . We observe most condensates to be round ( Figure S7D ) . The number of condensates per cells vary between 1 to 100s depending on the protein of interest . Using co - localization experiments with known nucleolus and P - body markers , we found that 5 proteins ( R51A1 , H2A1H , H1T , CWC27 , MRPL1 ) can localize to the nucleolus , a well - known liquid like nuclear condensate ( Figure 5A ) . Further , 2 proteins ( PHP14 and HBS1L ) localize to processing bodies ( P - bodies ) , another well - characterized cytoplasmic condensate . In addition , 8 other proteins ( RS10L , TYW5 , SPA24 , AIMP1 , ZC3H15 , IF2GL , LMOD1 , RPS4Y2 ) localized to cytoplasmic bodies and rest ( KHDC4 , CWC25 , PolD3 , RAMAC , DRC4 , RP9 ) localized to nuclear bodies ( Figure 5A ) . FRAP recovery profiles for the Nuclear body forming proteins revealed , that 6 out of 7 tested proteins show very fast dynamics while one ( RBMY1D ) shows no recovery the indicated time ( Figure 5C ) . Other popular tools to predict condensate proteins would fail to identify most of these proteins as shown by the high misclassification rates ( Figure 4D ) . Overall , 87 . 5 % of PICNIC predictions were found to be correct ( misclassification rate is 12 . 5 % ) in our experimental assays validating the model . Discussion We developed two models for the prediction of proteins involved in condensates in vivo , that reach precision of 77 % ( 81 % for recall ) and 87 % ( 82 % for recall ) for PICNIC and PICNIC GO , respectively at the suggested score threshold of 0 . 5 ( Figure 2 ) . The success of PICNIC models relies on several innovations : 1 ) novel amino acid co - occurrence features combined with protein structure based features , that became only possible on a proteome scale since the Alphafold2 revolution ( 46 , 47 ) ; 2 ) gradient boosting classifier that has an appropriate model complexity that fits the size of the training dataset ; 3 ) improved curation and definition of the positive and negative datasets . Specifically , PICNIC models benefit from high quality positive data , that is the manually curated database of biomolecular condensates CD - CODE ( 28 ) . Additionally , we designed the negative 13 dataset based on no a priori assumptions about protein disorder / structure . Previous predictors used either a i ) exclusion of positive dataset from all known proteins ( ( 40 , 41 ) ) or ii ) proteins with 3D structures ( retrieved from PDB ) since phase separation is common in disordered proteins that do not have well defined 3D structures . The simple exclusion does not provide reliable negative dataset , as it may contain many potentially phase separating proteins that have not been discovered yet . The second approach generates a biased negative dataset and is problematic because of two reasons : 1 ) phase separating proteins can have well - defined structure ( Figure S1 ) , Figure 4C ) , 2 ) such dataset is biased towards set of properties inherited by experimentally solved proteins . E . g . , disorder predictors would also use 3D structures as negative dataset . To resolve this issue , here we used a protein - protein interaction network - based approach and excluded proteins that have a connection in the network with known condensate proteins ( Figure 1A ) . Gradient boosting methods ( GBM ) allow optimization on different loss functions which provides necessary flexibility , but more prone to overfitting . Here , the latter was compensated by choice of tree depth and providing of an evaluation dataset . GBM generally outperforms simpler models such as Random Forest or Support Vector Machine , but at the same time it doesn’t require as much data as models based on Neural Networks . Because there is not enough well annotated data for positive and negative datasets , we chose GBM to mitigate the tradeoff between model complexity and its performance . With the incorporation of biological knowledge about genes and proteins , PICNIC GO reaches even higher performance ( Figure 2C ) . Not surprisingly , it identified , along with the known impact of disordered and low complexity regions , that RNA binding seems to play crucial roles in the ability of proteins to be involved in biomolecular condensates ( Figure 1C ) . Although gene ontology terms are valuable resource of information , they could introduce bias due to their nature of annotation . We would like to emphasize that some of the other tools we benchmarked against were designed to solve a different task , namely to predict the ability of a protein to undergo phase separation or drive phase separation and in vitro condensate formation ( 20 , 40 ) . In contrast , PICNIC was adapted to recognize the proteins that are present in biomolecular condensates ( serving a role of a driver 14 or client ) regardless of the mechanism of condensate formation . Therefore , our model does not evaluate if a protein is part of synthetic condensates , i . e . , in vitro experiments , but rather focuses on if a protein is part of condensates in biologically relevant conditions . While PICNIC is superior in identifying protein membership in biomolecular condensates , it has several limitations . It cannot predict which sequence features or motifs are responsible for the condensate function in a given protein . FuzDrop is the only method that can recognize specific motives in protein sequences that promote phase separation behavior ( 20 , 48 – 50 ) . The algorithms in this paper are designed to understand whether a protein has the potential to localize to a condensate , based on previous data . We tested 24 predicted proteins and found that 87 . 5 % form foci in cellulo , and 75 % form high confidence condensates based on a quantitative definition of condensates . In making this analysis , we set a cut off above the diffraction limit . This does not mean that clusters of proteins under this limit do not form condensates , but that super resolution techniques would be required to analyze this . It is important to state that this localization makes no claim to biological function in cells . These condensates were observed in cell lines , using GFP - tagged proteins that had varied expression levels . It is possible that some proteins will only form condensates under stress or in certain cell types at certain concentrations . In some cases , a protein for instance might not localize to a condensate under physiological conditions , but might when over expressed in cancer . Therefore , although each protein can localize to a condensate , it remains to be sorted out by detailed experiments whether any individual protein localizes to a condensate in a specific cell type at a certain concentration and using different tags or antibodies . Proteins can have two major roles in a condensate : drivers ( scaffolds ) or clients ( 51 ) . Drivers can induce the formation of condensates and are essential members of condensates . For example , knock - out of the driver protein can lead to disassembly of a condensate . While a client is recruited to a condensate often via an interaction with a driver protein , and it is not necessary nor sufficient in driving the condensate formation . PICNIC scores for clients and drivers show similar distribution 15 ( Figure S8 ) . Since the same protein can behave as a driver or a client depending on the condensate identity and environment , we surmise that the ability of driving condensate formation is not solely encoded in the sequence and structure of individual proteins . This suggests , that additional input data are needed to be taken into account by the model . Studying the protein in the context of its interacting partners within a condensate may shed light on the properties of driver proteins . The generalizability of our model shows that the predictor learned general features ( based solely on sequence information and structures that were also deduced from the sequence ) across the tree of life . The provided results can shed light on evolution of biomolecular condensates across different species and help to identify potential protein targets to modulate biomolecular condensate behaviour and aid drug design ( 52 , 53 ) . Conclusions PICNIC accurately predicts proteins involved in biomolecular condensates and provides proteome - wide perspective on the proteins involved in condensate formation in different species . The developed algorithms will be a valuable resource for modeling and investigation of condensate proteomes . Materials and Methods Description of the methods can be found in the Supplementary Information . Data and Software Availability The training , validation and test datasets are available as Dataset S1 . The list and properties of the 24 proteins selected for experimental validation is provided as Dataset S2 , and plasmid vector maps and representative images are available as Dataset S3 and S4 , respectively . The PICNIC code , documentation and examples as jupyter notebooks can be found at https : / / git . mpi - 16 cbg . de / tothpetroczylab / picnic . Prediction across proteomes of 14 organisms are provided as a web application https : / / picnic . cd - code . org . Acknowledgements A . H . was funded by the ELBE postdoctoral fellowship . H . R . S thanks the Nomis foundation for financial support . A . T . - P . was funded by the MPG RGL funds . N . R . were founded by Dewpoint Therapeutics . We would like to thank the Computer Services and Scientific Computing Facilities of the MPI - CBG for their support , especially to Oscar Gonzales for supporting our HPC and HongKee Moon for developing the PICNIC web application . We thank Andrej Pozniakovski for molecular biology support . Author Contributions : AH , HRS , AAH and ATP designed research ; AH and HRS performed research ; SG and NR contributed new reagents or analytic tools ; AH , HRS , SG and ATP analyzed data ; AH , HRS , AAH and ATP wrote the paper . Conflict of Interest statement A . A . H . is a founder and shareholder of Dewpoint Therapeutics . The remaining authors declare no competing interests . 17 Main Figures Figure 1 . Development of PICNIC ( Proteins Involved in CoNdensates In Cells ) algorithm . A ) In order to construct a training dataset , we annotated the known condensate - forming proteins from CD - CODE ( positive dataset , members of biomolecular condensates ) on the protein - protein interaction ( PPI ) network , and we excluded their first connections ( proteins having interactions with condensate proteins ) . The remaining proteins comprised the negative dataset . Gradient boosting machine was used to distinguish two classes of proteins : members of biomolecular condensates and proteins that are not involved in any type of biomolecular condensate . B ) Sequence , structure and function - based features of PICNIC . We developed two types of models : with ( PICNIC GO ) and without the use of gene ontology annotation features ( PICNIC ) . Sequence - based features included sequence complexity , disorder score ( IUPred ) , and features based on amino acid co - occurrences . A E C D B F PICNIC PICNIC - GO 18 Structure - based features based on Alphafold2 models included the pLDDT score , a per - residue measure of local confidence on a scale from 0 – 100 ( colored on the structure ) . We annotated the secondary structure ( SSE ) based on 3D protein structures using STRIDE and all possible triads in the form ( AA , SSE , pLDDT ) were calculated . C ) Amino acid occurrences in the features of PICNIC model shows that Leucine and Lysine contribute the most to the model predictions . D ) The model including GO terms ( PICNIC GO ) used three types of features , based on gene ontology ( in green ) , disorder ( orange ) , distance - based ( violet ) . The most important features included RNA - binding , disorder and co - occurrences of charged and hydrophobic residues . The feature importance is consistent across different folds of cross - validation ( mean values across 10 folds are shown , black lines with upper and lower border show standard deviation for each feature within cross - validation ) . E ) PICNIC captures the different phase separation behaviour within one protein family . A . Structural models for Alpha - synuclein ( yellow ) , Beta - synuclein ( cyan ) and Gamma - synuclein ( green ) , produced by AlplhaFold2 . F ) Feature importance of PICNIC is consistent across different folds . Mean values across 10 folds are shown , black lines with upper and lower border show standard deviation for each feature within cross - validation . Features constitute three groups : based on AlphaFold2 models ( in light blue ) , disorder ( pink ) , complexity ( dark red ) and distance - based ( blue ) . 19 Figure 2 . PICNIC models have the best performance in predicting condensate forming proteins . Comparison of sequence - based predictors ( lines , PICNIC , PdPS - 8fea , PSAP , FuzDrop and DeePhase ) and predictors using experimental data ( dotted lines ) as features to predict protein condensates . Specifically , PdPS - 10 - fea uses phosphorylation sites and immunofluorescent microscopy images of the proteins , PICNIC GO uses GO - terms as features . A ) Test dataset from ( 41 ) , B ) test dataset from OpenCell ( 42 ) , C ) test dataset from the current study based on CD - CODE ( 28 ) . PICNIC outperforms sequence - based predictors even on the test set that includes training data of previously published predictors , that may inflate their performance . A B C 20 Figure 3 . Inferring condensate proteins across the tree of life . A ) PICNIC model is species - independent . We validated the PICNIC model on known condensate proteins from different species ( defined by CD - CODE ) . PICNIC correctly identified 70 - 100 % of known condensate proteins for all species tested . B ) Disorder content and fraction of condensate - forming proteins of a proteome are not correlated . Proteome - wide prediction of proteins in biomolecular condensates by PICNIC predictor compared with the fraction of disordered proteins ( proteins with at least one disordered region of > = 40 residues ) in proteomes shows no correlation across many organisms . A B Animals Amoeba Prokaryotes Fungi Plants C 21 22 Figure 4 . Most ( 18 out of 24 ) tested proteins form high confidence condensates in vivo . A ) Representative images of the U2OS cells expressing the tested proteins tagged with a fluorescent protein ( GFP ) . Formation of mesoscale cellular condensates are highlighted in the inset . All images are scaled to the scale bar 10 micron ( shown on upper left image ) . We found 21 out of the 24 tested proteins ( 87 . 5 % ) formed mesoscale foci without any stressors , while 3 proteins ( C1ORF52 , SPAG7 and CWC27 , encircled in red ) localized to the nucleoplasm without forming any detectable foci ( foci were defined by exhibiting a fluorescent intensity ratio > 1 ) . Notice the presence of rim like structures in case of H1T and H2A1H . Using size , shape and the fraction of cells forming mesoscale foci as a deciding characteristic , ~ 75 % i . e . , 18 proteins ( encircled in green ) form high confidence condensates , and 3 proteins ( encircled in orange ) form low confidence condensates ( foci with longest diameter < 350nm . Figure S7 ) . B ) Wide range of structural motifs covered in the test proteins ; AlphaFold2 structural models of the proteins are colored according to secondary structures . Notice the wide range of structural motifs , alpha - helical ( red ) , beta stranded ( yellow ) to largely disordered ( green ) proteins . C ) Disorder content ( computed as mean IUPred score or pLDDT score ) of the tested protein does not correlate with the ability to form condensates . D ) Comparison of the predictions provided by sequence - based predictors ( bars , PICNIC , PdPS - 8fea , PSAP , FuzDrop and DeePhase ) and predictors using experimental data ( hatched bars ) as features to predict protein condensates . Both PICNIC and PICNIC GO exhibit the lowest misclassification rate for the tested 24 proteins . 23 Figure 5 . A subset of the tested proteins localizes to known condensates . Fibrillarin ( DFC ) Scale Bar 10 um 0 2 4 6 8 500150025003500 600010000 18000 Rim aroud DFC 10 0 2 4 6 8 5000 10000 15000 PHP14 H2A1H P - bodies Colocalisation with P - bodies Overlay Time ( Sec ) 0 30 60 90 120 150 Post - recovery Recovery Pre - bleach D C P 1 a Scale Bar 10 um F i b r i ll a r i n Pre - bleach Post - recovery Time ( Sec ) 0 20 40 60 100 Scale Bar 10 um Recovery Bleach Recovery Pre - Bleach 0 Sec 10 Sec 20 Sec CWC25 Pre - Bleach Bleach Recovery 0 Sec 9 Sec 18 Sec DRC4 KHDC4 9 Sec 18 Sec 0 Sec Pre - Bleach Bleach Recovery Recovery Bleach Pre - Bleach 20 Sec 10 Sec 0 Sec RAD51AP1 RAMAC 18 Sec 9 Sec 0 Sec Recovery Bleach Pre - Bleach Recovery 0 Sec 10 Sec 20 Sec RP9 Pre - Bleach Bleach Scale Bar 10 um RBMY1D Pre - Bleach Bleach Recovery 0 Sec 10 Sec 20 Sec Weak colocalisation with Nucleolus 0 2 4 6 8 4000 8000 12000 16000 Rim aroud DFC Nuclear bodies and weak colocalization with nucleolus Nuclear bodies and weak colocalization with nucleolus Rad51AP1 Fibrillarin ( DFC ) Fibrillarin ( DFC ) Fibrillarin ( DFC ) Fibrillarin ( DFC ) Overlay 6 0 2 4 2000 4000 6000 8000 Distance ( m ) 0 2 4 6 8 2000 4000 6000 8000 Distance ( m ) 0 2 4 6 8 4000 8000 12000 16000 Distance ( m ) Rad51AP1 Rad51AP1 Rad51AP1 Dense fi brillar center ( DFC ) Granular center ( GC ) Fibrillar center ( FC ) Nucleolus A B C Distance ( m ) Distance ( m ) Distance ( m ) 24 A ) Colocalization of the cellular condensate - forming proteins with well - characterized liquid like cellular condensates as can be concluded from the florescence intensity profiles correlation with the marker protein fluorescence profiles . While Rad51AP1 ( in purple ) localizes strongly around the Dense fibrillar center ( DFC , in green ) forming a rim like structure , H2A1H ( in purple ) show rather weak localization as a rim around the DFC ( in green ) showing sub - nucleolar localization specific to the outer Granular center ( GC ) . See the cartoon representation of the nucleolar architecture . Further , PHP14 ( purple ) strongly co - localize with the DCP1a ( green ) labelled processing bodies . Rad51AP1 protein shows multi - condensate localization that varies from exclusive nuclear bodies , to nuclear bodies abutting the nucleolus , to sub - nucleolar localization ( GC ) as well as complete nucleolar localization suggesting an interesting regulated role for this protein’s involvement on multiple nuclear - condensates possibly in a cell - cycle stage regulated manner . All images are scaled to the scale bar 10 micron , upper right . B ) FRAP assays showing the fast recovery dynamics consistent with the liquid like nature of the P - bodies ( upper panel ) and the Nucleolus ( lower panel ) . Fibrillarin and the DCP1a FRAP recovery profile , inset highlighting the fast recovery dynamics of targeted P - body and the nucleolus . The scale bar is 10 micron each for each . C ) FRAP recovery profiles for the Nuclear body forming proteins . 6 out of 7 tested proteins show very fast dynamics while one ( RBMY1D ) shows no recovery the indicated time . All the images with indicated whole nuclei ( lower panel for each protein ) are scaled to the 10 - micron scale bar shown in the bottom right . References 1 . B . Tsang , I . Pritišanac , S . W . Scherer , A . M . Moses , J . D . Forman - Kay , Phase Separation as a Missing Mechanism for Interpretation of Disease Mutations . Cell 183 , 1742 – 1756 ( 2020 ) . 2 . S . Alberti , D . Dormann , Liquid - liquid phase separation in disease . Annu . Rev . Genet . 53 , 171 – 194 ( 2019 ) . 3 . Y . Shin , C . P . Brangwynne , Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease . Science 357 ( 2017 ) . 4 . A . Cerase , J . M . Calabrese , G . G . Tartaglia , Phase separation drives X - chromosome inactivation . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 29 , 183 – 185 ( 2022 ) . 5 . C . Iserman , et al . , Condensation of Ded1p Promotes a Translational Switch from Housekeeping to Stress Protein Production . Cell 181 , 818 - 831 . e19 ( 2020 ) . 25 6 . A . Klosin , et al . , Phase separation provides a mechanism to reduce noise in cells . Science 367 , 464 – 468 ( 2020 ) . 7 . A . von Appen , et al . , LEM2 phase separation promotes ESCRT - mediated nuclear envelope reformation . Nature 582 , 115 – 118 ( 2020 ) . 8 . S . Alberti , et al . , A User’s Guide for Phase Separation Assays with Purified Proteins . J . Mol . Biol . 430 , 4806 – 4820 ( 2018 ) . 9 . S . Alberti , A . Gladfelter , T . Mittag , Considerations and Challenges in Studying Liquid - Liquid Phase Separation and Biomolecular Condensates . Cell 176 , 419 – 434 ( 2019 ) . 10 . C . E . Lyon , et al . , Nucleolar proteome dynamics . Nature 433 , 77 – 83 ( 2005 ) . 11 . Y . Ahmad , F . - M . Boisvert , P . Gregor , A . Cobley , A . I . Lamond , NOPdb : Nucleolar Proteome Database - - 2008 update . Nucleic Acids Res . 37 , D181 - 4 ( 2009 ) . 12 . A . Hubstenberger , et al . , P - Body Purification Reveals the Condensation of Repressed mRNA Regulons . Mol . Cell 68 , 144 - 157 . e5 ( 2017 ) . 13 . S . Jain , et al . , ATPase - Modulated Stress Granules Contain a Diverse Proteome and Substructure . Cell 164 , 487 – 498 ( 2016 ) . 14 . S . Markmiller , et al . , Context - Dependent and Disease - Specific Diversity in Protein Interactions within Stress Granules . Cell 172 , 590 - 604 . e13 ( 2018 ) . 15 . B . Bolognesi , et al . , A Concentration - Dependent Liquid Phase Separation Can Cause Toxicity upon Increased Protein Expression . Cell Rep . 16 , 222 – 231 ( 2016 ) . 16 . R . M . Vernon , J . D . Forman - Kay , First - generation predictors of biological protein phase separation . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 58 , 88 – 96 ( 2019 ) . 17 . R . M . Vernon , et al . , Pi - Pi contacts are an overlooked protein feature relevant to phase separation . Elife 7 ( 2018 ) . 18 . J . Wang , et al . , A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation of Prion - like RNA Binding Proteins . Cell 174 , 688 - 699 . e16 ( 2018 ) . 19 . T . Sun , et al . , Prediction of Liquid - Liquid Phase Separation Proteins Using Machine Learning . SSRN Electronic Journal ( 2020 ) https : / doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 3515387 . 20 . M . Hardenberg , A . Horvath , V . Ambrus , M . Fuxreiter , M . Vendruscolo , Widespread occurrence of the droplet state of proteins in the human proteome . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 117 , 33254 – 33262 ( 2021 ) . 21 . G . van Mierlo , et al . , Predicting protein condensate formation using machine learning . Cell Rep . 34 , 108705 ( 2021 ) . 22 . X . Chu , et al . , Prediction of liquid - liquid phase separating proteins using machine learning . BMC Bioinformatics 23 , 72 ( 2022 ) . 23 . W . Ning , et al . , DrLLPS : A data resource of liquid - liquid phase separation in eukaryotes . Nucleic Acids Res . 48 , D288 – D295 ( 2020 ) . 24 . K . You , et al . , PhaSepDB : A database of liquid - liquid phase separation related proteins . Nucleic Acids Res . 48 , D354 – D359 ( 2020 ) . 26 25 . B . Mészáros , et al . , PhaSePro : The database of proteins driving liquid - liquid phase separation . Nucleic Acids Res . 48 , D360 – D367 ( 2020 ) . 26 . Q . Li , et al . , LLPSDB : a database of proteins undergoing liquid - liquid phase separation in vitro . Nucleic Acids Res . 48 , D320 – D327 ( 2020 ) . 27 . B . Mészáros , G . Erdos , Z . Dosztányi , IUPred2A : context - dependent prediction of protein disorder as a function of redox state and protein binding . Nucleic Acids Res . 46 , W329 – W337 ( 2018 ) . 28 . N . Rostam , et al . , CD - CODE : crowdsourcing condensate database and encyclopedia . Nat . Methods ( 2023 ) https : / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 023 - 01831 - 0 . 29 . P . Yang , et al . , G3BP1 Is a Tunable Switch that Triggers Phase Separation to Assemble Stress Granules . Cell 181 , 325 - 345 . e28 ( 2020 ) . 30 . T . Li , et al . , A scored human protein - protein interaction network to catalyze genomic interpretation . Nat . Methods 14 , 61 – 64 ( 2017 ) . 31 . R . van der Lee , et al . , Classification of intrinsically disordered regions and proteins . Chem . Rev . 114 , 6589 – 6631 ( 2014 ) . 32 . M . Fuxreiter , et al . , Disordered proteinaceous machines . Chem . Rev . 114 ( 2014 ) . 33 . J . A . Ditlev , L . B . Case , M . K . Rosen , Who’s In and Who’s Out—Compositional Control of Biomolecular Condensates . J . Mol . Biol . 430 , 4666 – 4684 ( 2018 ) . 34 . M . Akdel , et al . , A structural biology community assessment of AlphaFold2 applications . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 29 , 1056 – 1067 ( 2022 ) . 35 . E . W . Martin , T . Mittag , Relationship of Sequence and Phase Separation in Protein Low - Complexity Regions . Biochemistry 57 , 2478 – 2487 ( 2018 ) . 36 . E . W . Martin , et al . , Valence and patterning of aromatic residues determine the phase behavior of prion - like domains . Science 367 , 694 – 699 ( 2020 ) . 37 . S . Das , Y . - H . Lin , R . M . Vernon , J . D . Forman - Kay , H . S . Chan , Comparative roles of charge , π , and hydrophobic interactions in sequence - dependent phase separation of intrinsically disordered proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 117 , 28795 – 28805 ( 2020 ) . 38 . C . Roden , A . S . Gladfelter , RNA contributions to the form and function of biomolecular condensates . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 22 , 183 – 195 ( 2021 ) . 39 . C . Yu , et al . , Proteome - scale analysis of phase - separated proteins in immunofluorescence images . Brief . Bioinform . 22 ( 2021 ) . 40 . K . L . Saar , et al . , Learning the molecular grammar of protein condensates from sequence determinants and embeddings . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 118 ( 2021 ) . 41 . Z . Chen , et al . , Screening membraneless organelle participants with machine - learning models that integrate multimodal features . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 119 , e2115369119 ( 2022 ) . 42 . N . H . Cho , et al . , OpenCell : Endogenous tagging for the cartography of human cellular organization . Science 375 , eabi6983 ( 2022 ) . 43 . M . Karlsson , et al . , A single - cell type transcriptomics map of human tissues . Sci Adv 7 ( 2021 ) . 27 44 . C . Hoffmann , et al . , Synapsin Condensates Recruit alpha - Synuclein . J . Mol . Biol . 433 , 166961 ( 2021 ) . 45 . I . Surgucheva , B . McMahon , A . Surguchov , gamma - synuclein has a dynamic intracellular localization . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 , 447 – 458 ( 2006 ) . 46 . J . Jumper , et al . , Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold . Nature 596 , 583 – 589 ( 2021 ) . 47 . M . Varadi , et al . , AlphaFold Protein Structure Database : massively expanding the structural coverage of protein - sequence space with high - accuracy models . Nucleic Acids Res . 50 , D439 – D444 ( 2022 ) . 48 . A . Hatos , S . C . E . Tosatto , M . Vendruscolo , M . Fuxreiter , FuzDrop on AlphaFold : visualizing the sequence - dependent propensity of liquid - liquid phase separation and aggregation of proteins . Nucleic Acids Res . 50 , W337 - 44 ( 2022 ) . 49 . M . Vendruscolo , M . Fuxreiter , Sequence Determinants of the Aggregation of Proteins Within Condensates Generated by Liquid - liquid Phase Separation . J . Mol . Biol . 434 , 167201 ( 2022 ) . 50 . M . Miskei , A . Horvath , M . Vendruscolo , M . Fuxreiter , Sequence - Based Prediction of Fuzzy Protein Interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 432 , 2289 – 2303 ( 2020 ) . 51 . A . S . Lyon , W . B . Peeples , M . K . Rosen , A framework for understanding the functions of biomolecular condensates across scales . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 22 , 215 – 235 ( 2021 ) . 52 . D . M . Mitrea , M . Mittasch , B . F . Gomes , I . A . Klein , M . A . Murcko , Modulating biomolecular condensates : a novel approach to drug discovery . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . , 1 – 22 ( 2022 ) . 53 . B . A . Conti , M . Oppikofer , Biomolecular condensates : new opportunities for drug discovery and RNA therapeutics . Trends Pharmacol . Sci . ( 2022 ) https : / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tips . 2022 . 07 . 001 .