April 30 , 2000 11 : 22 Proceedings of DETC’00 2000 ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences September 10 - 13 , 2000 , Baltimore , Maryland , USA DETC00 / DTM - 14562 QUANTITATIVE MEASURES FOR DESIGN BY ANALOGY Daniel A . McAdams (cid:0) Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics University of Missouri - Rolla Rolla , Missouri 65409 - 0050 Email : dmcadams @ umr . edu Kristin L . Wood Manufacturing and Design Research Laboratory Department of Mechanical Engineering University of Texas Austin , Texas 78712 - 1063 Email : wood @ mail . utexas . edu ABSTRACT In this paper a quantitative measure for design - by - analogy is developed . This measure is based on the functional similarity of products . By using this product similarity measure , designers are able to formalize and quantify design - by - analogy techniques during concept and layout design . The similarity measure and its application is clariﬁed and validated through a case study . The case study is the original design of a pickup winder . KEYWORDS : Design - by - Analogy , Product Similarity , Functional Analysis , Customer Needs , Novel Product Design 1 Introduction During the design and development of new products , design engineers use many techniques to generate and deﬁne new and “good” concepts . Inherent in this search of solutions is the con - scious and unconscious reliance on prior experience and knowl - edge . Numerous attempts have been made to organize , qualify , and make accessible the critical design experience and knowl - edge needed to solve particular problems . Some of these tech - niques take the form of knowledge based design , expert design systems , and design rules or design guidelines . In this paper , quantitative measures are developed that allow designers to iden - tify products which are similar in a manner critical to the suc - cess of a design . This focused identiﬁcation allows these similar products to be reviewed in context of the design problem at hand for conﬁguration , concept , and embodiment information . These measures allow formalized design - by - analogy efforts by identi - fying products that have design - critical similarity . The paper is organized in the following way . First , the no - tion of similarity as used here is clariﬁed . Toward the goal of ﬁnding the important product similarities , ground work is devel - oped to make comparisons between products . In the remainder (cid:1) Address all correspondence to this author ( 573 - 341 - 4494 ) . of this paper , these notions of product similarity in the search for analogies are explored . Also , a procedure for applying these techniques to a design problem is presented . Lastly , an exam - ple application of the design - by - analogy techniques is applied to an original design case study . The paper concludes with a brief discussion of the contributions of the work presented here . 2 Relevant Analogies The notions of similarity , and analogies based on similarity , are broad . From Moody charts to the Periodic Table , organizing schemes based on similarities and differences is a critical tool in engineering and science . In the ﬁeld of ﬂuid mechanics , the com - parison of different objects based on similarities in the Reynolds number , the Biot number , or other meaningful metrics for com - parison , is not only common place , but critical to the fundamen - tal understanding of the relevant physics that affect the systems . Before developing a design tool based on analogy , the basis for making the comparison is necessary . For example , based on a color comparison , a car and a watch may be similar . In fact , they also may share the similarity of manufacturing country of ori - gin . Reviewing a watch as an exercise to ﬁnd alternative ways to mix fuel and air in the car is likely a fruitless exercise . Before searching for design information in existing and similar designs , the notion of similarity needs to be understood in the context of design . A fundamental philosophy of this paper is that customer needs drive the product function . In turn , the resulting required functions have a key impact on the resulting form . Design philosophies such as this have been proven valid and effective in the literature ( Pahl and Beitz , 1996 ; Ullman , 1997 ; Ulrich and Eppinger , 1995 ; Hubka and Eder , 1988 ) . Based on this philos - ophy , the similarity notion of interest here is at a customer in - ﬂuenced level . In other words , if two products have a function in common , such as store energy , and this function is related to 1 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME important customer needs , these two products have a design rel - evant similarity . When comparing between more than two prod - ucts , the notion of more or less similar becomes relevant . Thus , the wish is to extend beyond a binary notion of similar to a quan - titative numerical measure of product similarity . 2 . 1 Design - by - Analogy in Engineering Design The material presented in this paper makes novel and sig - niﬁcant contributions to design - by - analogy techniques . The ma - jority of successful design - by - analogy efforts in engineering de - sign have been the the area of circuit design ( Huhns and Acosta , 1988 ) . This is largely do to the lack of of quantitative similarity measures available in mechanical design as compared to those available in circuit design . As pointed out by Huhns ( Huhns and Acosta , 1988 ) , to develop design - by - analogy systems , an ana - lytical similarity measure is needed . Such measures require a domain metric which is not typically available during conceptual design . In this paper , such a metric and measure are developed . The approach to design - by - analogy techniques presented here is to develop tools that assist the designer during the design process . This approach is distinct from many design - by - analogy efforts where the goal is to reproduce the actions or tasks gen - erally the responsibility of the designer ( Doheny and Monaghan , 1987 ) . There are some signiﬁcant successes for mechanical design - by - analogy ( Howe et al . , 1986 ) . Often , these expert systems or knowledge based design tools are focused on problems that can be solved by a ﬁxed and ﬁnite set of design variables ( Howe et al . , 1986 ) . Other successes have come when developing ex - pert systems for speciﬁc problem domains ( Mittal et al . , 1985 ) . The effort in this paper is a toward a more general tool for design - by - analogy methods . 3 Measures of Similarity : Process and Details The goal here is the provision of a measure that reveals analogies at a level that is useful for concept , conﬁguration , and embodiment design . As discussed above , there are two key comparison criteria . The ﬁrst criteria is functional similarity . Do other products “do” the same thing as the one being de - signed ? The second is the signiﬁcance of this functional simi - larity . Rather than search for all potential analogies , the search needs to be focused on those that are most likely to affect the quality of the design . In this case , those analogies are the func - tional similarities of importance to customers . To ﬁnd this simi - larity , there are three key needs . The ﬁrst is to express products in a similar and accurate functional language . The second need is to associate the product functionality with customer relevance . The third is to construct quantitative measures of product similar - ity . This measure then provides a powerful indicator for products which contain relevant design information . 3 . 1 Product Functional Models In this subsection , the steps required to organize the product - function data are detailed . To begin , customer need data and functional models are needed for each product in the group ( Pahl Class Basic Sub - basic Complement solid hand , foot , head , etc material liquidhumangashuman motion , force biological pressure , volumetric ﬂow rotational torque , angular velocity mechanical translational force , velocity vibrational amplitude , frequency electrical electromotive force , current hydraulic pressure , volumetric ﬂow thermal temperature , heat ﬂow energy pneumatic pressure , mass ﬂow chemical afﬁnity , reaction rate radioactive intensity , decay rate acoustic pressure , particle velocity magnetic magnetomotive force , ﬂux rate electromagnetic optical intensity , velocity solar intensity , velocity auditory tone , verbal olfactory signal status tactile temperature , roughness , pressure tastevisual position , displacement control Table 2 . Basic ﬂows . and Beitz , 1996 ; Ullman , 1997 ; Ulrich and Eppinger , 1995 ; Hubka and Eder , 1988 ) . The ﬁrst step is to construct the func - tional models using a common terminology of basic functions and ﬂows . These basic functions and ﬂows need to be a basis set ; functional models for a large class of products can be gener - ated from this ﬁnite set of functions and ﬂows . Shown in Table 1 is a set of these basic functions . Similarly , shown in Table 2 is a corresponding set of basic ﬂows . These functions and ﬂows were originally presented by Little in ( Little et al . , 1997 ) . The com - plete formal deﬁnitions for these functions and ﬂows is presented in ( Stone and Wood , 1999 ) . These functions are used here as the best available set of basis functions . 3 . 2 Customer Functional Importance The goal in this section is to develop a procedure that relates functions to customer needs . By extension , the method is used to determine the importance of a function . For example , a customer has the requirement that a hand sander “remove wood quickly and easily . ” What product functions are related to this customer need ? And , what other customer needs are related to that func - tion ? Products with common important functions are those that have the desired function similarity . Thus a tool to identify the critically important functions is crucial to the similarity measures sought for design - by - analogy . In addition , identifying important functions early in the design phase is an important contribution to engineering design in general . Though not presented in it’s entirety , the procedure for re - lating customer needs to functions is presented here in sufﬁcient detail so that it may be repeated . Customer need weights are used to determine the functional importance . Before relating customer needs to functions , customer need ratings for each product are translated to a scale of 1 ( “optional” ) to 5 ( “must have” ) , using an appropriate method ( Otto , 1996 ) . Doing this provides that functional models are represented using a common terminology and all the customer need weights are ranked on a common scale . Next , functions are related to customer needs and assigned a nu - 2 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME Function Class Basic Function Flow Restricted Synonyms channel import input , receive , allow , form entrance , capture export discharge , eject , dispose , remove transfer transport lift , move , channel transmit conduct , transfer , convey guide direct , straighten , steer translaterotate turn , spin allow DOF constrain , unlock support stop insulate , protect , prevent , shield , inhibit stabilize steady secure attach , mount , lock , fasten , hold position orient , align , locate connect couple join , assemble , attach mix combine , blend , add , pack , coalesce branch separate switch , divide , release , detach , disconnect , disassemble , subtract , valve remove cut , polish , sand , drill , lathe reﬁne purify , strain , ﬁlter , percolate , clear distribute diverge , scatter , disperse , diffuse , empty dissipate absorb , dampen , dispel , diffuse , resist provision store contain , collect , reserve , capture supply ﬁll , provide , replenish , expose extract control magnitude actuate start , initiate regulate control , allow , prevent , enable / disable , limit , interrupt change increase , decrease , amplify , reduce , magnify normalize , multiply , scale , rectify , adjust form compact , crush , shape , compress , pierce convert convert transform , liquefy , solidify evaporate , condense , integrate , differentiate , process signal sense perceive , recognize , discern , check , locate , verify indicate mark displaymeasure calculate Table 1 . Function classes , basic functions , and synonyms . Italics indicate a repeated synonym . merical importance . To determine the importance of a function , the impact of a function on a customer need is evaluated . If a function affects a speciﬁc customer need , then the weight of that customer need is assigned to the importance value of that function . Proceeding through each customer need , the assigned customer need weights are summed to determine function’s importance . It is important that the designer accurately assess the rela - tionship between customer needs and functions so that functions are appropriately weighted . To assure that the function impor - tance value is accurate and repeatable , a two stage process is used . First , the material , energy , and signal ﬂows from the func - tional model are assigned to the appropriate customer needs . For example , a customer need for “quiet operation” is related to the ﬂow of acoustic energy . After the customer need ﬂow assign - ment , ﬂows are related to functions by following the path of the ﬂow through the functional model . In this manner , functions are related to ﬂows , and in turn to customer needs . Customer needs are not always obvious constraints on mate - rial , energy , and signal ﬂows through functional models . Never - theless , simple , repeatable , physical reasoning provides a clear relationship to be determined between customer needs , ﬂows , and sub - functions . A customer need for an electromechanical hand sander is “light weight . ” The forces input to , and transmit - ted through , the sander govern the volume , geometry , material makeup , and consequently mass , of components throughout the sander . Thus , the ﬂow human force is assigned to “light weight” . In the functional model of the sander , the ﬂow is operated on failure mode cause relevant flow stress loads forces fatigue cyclicloads vibrations wear relativemotion interfaces rotation , debris flow , gas flow corrosion corrosive fluids minor Figure 1 . The process of relating the customer need of “low mainte - nance” to functions for a hand sander . by the functions import human force and transmit human force Thus , these functions are assigned to “light weight . ” This assign - ment may require some thought , but is based on the type of ex - perience pervasive through much of the engineering discipline . The motor coil windings and magnetic structure of the electric motor are large contributors to the mass of the sander . Thus , any attempt to reduce weight during design or redesign must address the mass added by energy conversion solutions . Following the electricity ﬂow , the sub - function convert electricity to rotation is assigned to the customer need “light weight . ” In an electromechanical hand sander , another customer need the does not relate directly to a ﬂow is “low maintenance . ” Fig - ure 1 shows common causes of failure in electro - mechanical de - vices and their relationship to the product ﬂows . These ﬂows are then used to relate the sub - functions to the customer needs . At this point in the procedure , each product is represented in 3 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME terms of a set of functions , and importances for those functions , based on customer needs . The entire set of products is easily represented as a group by recognizing the similarity of the cur - rent product - function representation with a vector space . Each product is representable in a simple manner as a vector . Each element of this function vector is the importance measure of that function . Similarly , the function vectors naturally assemble into a product - function matrix . This matrix representation provides a clear and compact way of reviewing the data . Also , this approach to data organization facilitates computations on the importance measures . With this representation , the methods of matrix alge - bra can be applied to the space of products . Numerical computa - tions can now be performed with great ease and elegance . Before assembling the vectors into a product - function ma - trix , the value of one ( 1 ) is added to each of the function impor - tance values . This shift is performed so that the product vectors may be assembled into a matrix . In the product - function matrix , the functions that a product does not have are represented by a zero . The function importance scale is now a 1 to 6 point scale . Functions with an importance of 1 - those not directly related to a customer need - are supporting functions . A function importance value of 6 or higher indicates an essential , or highly important , function . Often values greater than 6 can occur when one func - tion relates to several customer needs . This product - function ma - trix , F , is a mxn ( m total different functions , n products ) matrix . Each element f ij is the cumulative customer - need importance of the i th function for the j th product . Different product complexity and customer enthusiasm ( dur - ing the customer need acquisition process ) affect the magnitude of the f ij ’s for each product . To compensate for these differ - ences , F is normalized to validate comparisons between prod - ucts . The philosophy used to normalize the function - product ma - trix consists of two complimentary aspects : 1 . all products are of equal importance ( to compare products ) , and 2 . products with more functions are more complex ; thus the customer - need rankings must be normalized to compensate for varying complexity . First , to equalize products , the customer - need value of each func - tion is scaled so that the sum of a given product’s importance level is equal to the average sum of the customer need impor - tance for all products . Second , to represent varying levels of product complexity , each product function is scaled by the ratio of the number of functions in a product to the average number of functions per product . Implementing these steps precisely , the elements of N , the normalized version of F , are n ij (cid:2) f ij (cid:3) h h j (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3) µ j µ (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6) ( 1 ) The average customer rating is h (cid:2) 1 n m (cid:229) i (cid:7) 1 n (cid:229) j (cid:7) 1 f ij (cid:6) ( 2 ) The total customer rating for the j th product is h j (cid:2) m (cid:229) i (cid:7) 1 f ij (cid:6) ( 3 ) The number of functions in the j th product is µ j (cid:2) m (cid:229) i (cid:7) 1 H (cid:3) f ij (cid:4)(cid:8)(cid:6) ( 4 ) And the average number of functions is µ (cid:2) 1 n m (cid:229) i (cid:7) 1 n (cid:229) j (cid:7) 1 H (cid:3) f ij (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6) ( 5 ) H is a Heaviside function deﬁned as H (cid:3) x (cid:4) (cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:9) 1 when x (cid:11) (cid:2) 0 0 when x (cid:2) 0 ( 6 ) In the above equations , n is the number of products , and m is the total number of different functions for all products . Figure 2 shows the complete normalization process for some hypothetical set of products . The top left matrix in the ﬁgure ( A ) is the original matrix F , moving from left to right and then down in the ﬁgure , ﬁrst the matrix is adjusted to equalize product importance ( B ) . Then , using the average number of function per product ( in C ) , the ﬁnal matrix N is calculated ( D ) . The functions in the N matrix are comparable for importance from product to product . 3 . 3 Computing Similarity The elegance and power for the vector product representa - tion is made clear here in the development of a quantiﬁed mea - sure of product similarity . Using the matrix representation , N , the entire domain of products can be reviewed for functional similarity . The product vectors generated from Equation 1 are renormalized so that their norm is 1 . After scaling , the inner product of the normalized product vectors for each combination of products is calculated . Forming the inner product between a product a and a product b , a (cid:12) b , gives the projection of product a on product b . Forming the inner product of a product with it - self ( the completely similar product ) gives a value of 1 . Forming the inner product of a product with one that shares no common functions yields a result of zero . If the product vectors had not been renormalized to unity , it would be possible to have a prod - uct more similar to another product than itself . This potential result is removed by the renormalization . Once calculated , this projection is a measure of product sim - ilarity . It is based on the number of functions occurring in both products . The result is weighted by the customer importance . In other words , this projection provides the desired measure of product similarity . It is a simultaneous measure of functional 4 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME ( B ) ( D ) ( A ) ( C ) fn D fn C fn B fn A p r 1 p r 2 p r 3 p r 4 a v e . c n sum F 16 50038 120937 6133 04509 13 17 equalizingproduct importance fn D fn C fn B fn A p r 1 p r 2 p r 3 p r 4 sum 4057 60010 1717174418170970 h j h fn D fn C fn B fn A p r 1 p r 2 p r 3 p r 4 N 4068 5008 66211 0750 m m j fn D fn C fn B fn A p r 1 p r 2 p r 3 p r 4 a v e . f n . sum 3 31011 21001 41111 20110 s ca li ng f o r p r odu c t c o m p l e x it y Figure 2 . Normalization process : ( A ) original function - product matrix F , ( B ) equalizing product importance , ( C ) determine average number of functions per product , and ( D ) scaling for product complexity to get the ﬁnal matrix N . similarity and customer importance . This projection for func - tional similarity is made clear by referring to Figure 3 . In this ﬁgure a portion of the function space is shown for the functions secure solid , convert electricity to rotation , and position solid . Product vectors for Product A and Product B and the projection of Product B on Product A are shown . This represents the simi - larity measure l BA for these two products . A matrix of these projections is L (cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:13) T (cid:13) (cid:6) ( 7 ) (cid:13) is the matrix of unity normalized product vectors , similar to N . Each element , l ij , is the projection of the i th product on the j th product . L is the product similarity matrix . Using matrix multiplication to form the product similarity matrix L is similar to a technique Taylor ( Taylor , 1996 ) used to determine topics and frequencies of discussion on internet newsgoup communication in student design teams . The product projections with high l values are candidates for ﬁnding meaningful design by analogy information at the functional level . 4 Steps for Using these Metrics for Design - By - Analogy Brieﬂy reviewing the procedure , it can be succinctly reduced to the following steps . (cid:15) Gather customer needs . (cid:15) Construct a functional model using a common functional language for all products modeled . (cid:15) Determine functional importances . (cid:15) Scale functional importances for comparison . (cid:15) Compute similarity index l . positionsolid convert electricty to rotation secure solid Product A Product B Similarity Projection functional importances Figure 3 . A graphical interpretation of the product functional similarity projection . (cid:15) Using high values of l , select a similar subset (cid:15) Review these similar products for analogous solutions , in - sights , success and failures . (cid:15) Review coupled functions for potential adaptations of mod - ules and other adaptable design solutions . A key strength of this procedure is that it can be implemented during the conceptual design stage immediately after the col - lection of customer needs and the development of a functional model . In other words , the design - by - analogy method can be ap - plied during the traditional concept generation stage before any commitment to a particular solution variant has been made . The next section shows the usage of this process by application to an example product design . 5 Application to an Original Design Problem As a usability and validity check for the measures and meth - ods developed here , a design case study is presented . The prob - lem in question is the design of an electric guitar pickup winder . Not only does the design serve as an epitome of the material developed , the problem requires insightful design to meet all the customer and manufacturing requirements . Thus the winder serves as an excellent vehicle for testing the design tools . For brevity , the decisions and speciﬁcs of the design are not presented completely : the focus is on the presentation of the techniques de - veloped in this paper . First , the design problem is brieﬂy intro - duced . Then , the similarity measures are applied and reviewed . 5 . 1 A Brief Introduction to the Design Example A guitar “pickup” is an electromechanical transducer that transforms the motion of the guitar string into an electric current . The current is then ampliﬁed and transformed into sound . The coil winding consists of 6000 to 12 , 000 turns of insulated copper wire . This wire is generally 41 , 42 , or 43 gage . The target customers for this winder are guitar repair techni - cians , custom luthiers , and guitar tinkering hobbyists . In general , 5 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME this winder will be used to repair broken pickups , wind custom designed “one - off” pickups for custom guitars , and wind proto - type pickups to test new pickup designs . A brief visualization of a machine or process that winds this wire neatly ( the wire diame - ter is 58 µm to 83 µm ) without breaking it ( the maximum working strength is varies from roughly 0 (cid:6) 5 N to 1 N ) indicates a need for thoughtful design . 5 . 2 Application of the Design - By - Analogy Process Proceeding with the design - by - analogy process for the pickup winder , customer need data is acquired and a functional model is generated . The functional model for the winder is shown in Figure 4 . Brieﬂy reviewing some of the important ﬂows across the system boundary , the material ﬂows into the pickup winder are the human hand , the bobbin , the spool of magnet wire , and winding adhesive . The winding adhesive is usually a shellac or similar bonding agent that creates a “solid” coil . The material that ﬂows out of the winder are the human hand and the com - pleted pickup . The rest of the functional operation of the winder should be clear by review of this model . The next step in the design by analogy process is to deter - mine the function importances . This is done using the approach presented in a prior section . Table 3 summarizes this procedure for the pickup winder . The resulting function importances for the winder are listed in Table 4 . A review of Table 4 reveals that the critical functions are secure solid , allow a DOF solid , im - port solid , position solid , guide solid , regulate solid , and convert electricity to rotation . Now , the winder is added to an existing F matrix . The N matrix is formed using Equation 1 so that the products may be properly compared . Although the two most similar products in the entire data set could be determined by reviewing each l ij in L , the goal is to ﬁnd products similar to the pickup winder . Thus , only the projections of products with the pickup winder , or l i (cid:16) pickupwinder , are computed . The resulting products which have the highest values following this computation are shown in Table 5 . These are the ﬁve products most similar to the pickup winder when compared to the entire set of 68 products reviewed here . The products ranked and shown in Table 5 are now reviewed for solution concept , embodiment , module , and layout architec - ture possibilities for the winder . To assist in the review of the common functions , Table 6 shows the importance of functions in each of the similar products that have been included for review . The review begins with the winder’s most important func - tion . The most important winder function is secure solid . This function’s importance is a result of its relation to customer needs combined with its recurrence several times in the functional model . The other product with the highest importance for se - cure solid is the Dazey fruit and vegetable peeler . The solid of interest for the peeler is various food objects such as potatoes , apples , etc . The peeler uses a forked prong to penetrate the veg - etable thus holding it ﬁrmly in place . The question here is , can this solution be adapted to the pickup winder ? Using a pin or prong to secure the bobbin is a viable solution . Most bobbins have a number of voids in the interior between the pole pieces . A CustomerNeed Weight Assigned Function Flow preventwirebreakage 5 wire securesolid , removesolid guidesolid tension regulateforce inwirerotation changerotation evendistribution 5 bobbin securesolid , positionsolid ofwire allowDOFsolid wire guidesolid graduateddistribution 5 bobbin securesolid , positionsolid ofwire allowDOFsolid wire guidesolid variousbobbinsizes 5 bobbin exportsolid , separatesolid securesolid , positionsolid importsolid , allowDOFsolid variouswiresizes 5 wire securesolid , removesolid regulateforceguidesolid allowapplication 5 adhesive importliquid ofwindingadhesivecountcoils 4 # turns sensestatus , indicatestatus storesignal , sensecontrolsignal windpickupin 4 rotation regulaterotation bothdirections direction sensecontrolsignal unwindpickup 4 direction sensecontrolsignal rotation convertelectricitytorotation bobbin allowDOFsolid interruptprocess 4 wiretension regulateforce stopbobbin sensecontrolsignaltransmitcontrolsignal on - off importsignal electricity regulateelectricity bobbin allowDOFsolid easytooperate 4 bobbin exportsolid , separatesolid securesolid , importsolid wire securesolid hand importhumanhand adhesive importliquid spool importsolidpositionsolid regulatetension 3 wiretension regulateforce wire guidesolid producerandomlywoundbobbin 3 bobbin securesolid , positionsolid allowDOFsolid wire guidesolid variouswire 3 spool importsolid spoolsizes securesolidpositionsolid reliable 3 wiretension regulateforce rotation convertelectricitytorotationchangerotation wire guidesolid bobbin allowDOFsolid stable 3 humanhand importhumanhand electricity - rotation convertelectricitytorotation simplesetup 3 bobbin securesolidsecuresolidimportsolid adhesive importliquid humanhand importhumanhand wire securesolid spool importsolidpositionsolid safeoperation 3 humanhand importhumanhand smallstoragesize 3 bobbin importbobbin spool importsolidallowDOFsolid rotation convertelectricitytorotation adjustable 2 humanhand importhumanhand wiretension wiretension regulateforce rotation convertelectricitytorotation easytoclean 2 humanhand importhumanhand adhesive importliquid desktopsize 2 bobbin importsolid humanhand importhumanhand adhesive importliquid spool importsolid electricity - rotation convertelectricitytorotation wire guidewire bobbin allowDOFsolid weight (cid:17) 15lbs . 2 bobbin securesolid spool securesolid wiretension regulateforce electricity - rotation convertelectricitytorotation bobbin allowDOFsolid Table 3 . Relating customer needs to sub - functions for the pickup winder . material ( generally vulcanized ﬁber ) that holds the pole pieces in place can be pierced thus providing for a securing of the bobbin . The implementation of this concept as adapted for the winder is shown in Table 7 . The basic concept of piercing the pickup has been modiﬁed to include small nuts on the end of the piercing bolts instead of using a piercing axis ( at the “top” of the fruit ) as implemented in the vegetable peeler . In the example pictured , the 6 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME securesolid importsolid positionsolid securesolid allow DOF for solid changerotation convert elect . to rotation regulaterotation releasesolid import human hand exportsolid importliquid importsolid positionsolid securesolid removesolid regulateforce guidesolid transmit control signal regulateelectricity importsignal sensestatus indicatestatus storesignal sense control signal sense control signal maximum # of turns electricityimport human hand stop bobbin signal windingadhesive direction of bobbin rotation direction of rotation materials signals energy bobbin bobbin bobbin bobbin rotation rotation bobbin bobbin spool spool spool wire wire wire h a nd bobbin human hand completedpickup control signal sense # of turns # of turns on / off electricty force to ground wire spool # of turns Figure 4 . The functional model of the pickup winder . Function Customer Weights Sum allow DOF solid ( bobbin ) 5 , 5 , 5 , 4 , 4 , 3 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 2 1 , 37 change rotation ( adjust speed ) 5 , 3 , 1 9 convert electricity to rotation 4 , 3 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 2 , 2 20 export solid ( bobbin ) 5 , 4 , 1 10 guide solid ( wire ) 5 , 5 , 5 , 3 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 1 32 import electricity 1 1 import human hand 4 , 3 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 2 , 2 , 1 20 import liquid ( adhesive ) 5 , 4 , 2 , 2 , 1 14 import control signal ( on - off ) 4 , 1 5 import solid ( bobbin ) 5 , 4 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 1 18 import solid ( spool ) 4 , 3 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 1 16 indicate status ( # turns ) 4 , 1 5 position solid ( bobbin ) 5 , 5 , 3 , 3 , 1 22 position solid ( spool ) 4 , 3 , 3 , 1 11 regulate electricity 4 , 1 5 regulate force ( wire tension ) 5 , 5 , 4 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 2 , 1 25 regulate rotation 4 , 1 5 separate solid ( bobbin ) 5 , 4 , 1 10 remove solid ( wire ) 5 , 5 , 1 11 secure solid ( bobbin ) 5 , 5 , 5 , 4 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 1 28 secure solid ( spool ) 3 , 2 , 1 6 secure solid ( wire ) 5 , 4 , 3 , 1 18 sense control signal ( # turns ) 4 , 1 5 sense control signal ( direction ) 4 , 4 , 1 9 sense control signal ( stop bobbin ) 4 , 1 5 sense status ( # turns ) 4 , 1 5 store signal ( # turns ) 4 , 1 5 transmit control signal ( stop bobbin ) 4 , 1 5 Table 4 . Determining the function importance for the pickup winder . Product l pickup winder 1 . 0 Dazey fruit & vegetable peeler 0 . 78 electric can opener 0 . 74 De Walt sander 0 . 73 ﬁshing reel 0 . 72 Krups cheese grater 0 . 69 Table 5 . Results of the similarity calculation for the pickup winder . function p i c kup w i nd e r fr u it & v e g e t a b l e p ee l e r e l ec t r i c ca n op e n e r p a l m s a nd e r ﬁ s h i ng r ee l c h ee s e g r a t e r secure solid 22 . 43 24 . 31 19 . 82 17 . 56 1 . 83 8 . 55 allow DOF of solid 15 . 96 0 0 0 0 0 import solid 14 . 67 8 . 11 12 . 20 1 . 35 25 . 67 1 . 43 position solid 14 . 23 8 . 11 0 10 . 81 11 8 . 55 guide solid 13 . 80 2 . 03 6 . 10 0 11 14 . 30 regulate force 10 . 78 0 0 0 11 0 convert elect . to rot 8 . 62 8 . 11 13 . 72 12 . 16 0 19 . 96 import human hand 8 . 62 12 . 16 7 . 62 20 . 26 9 . 16 8 . 55 sense control 8 . 19 0 0 0 0 0 import liquid 6 . 04 0 0 0 0 0 remove solid 4 . 74 22 . 30 21 . 34 8 . 10 0 19 . 96 export solid 4 . 31 2 . 03 1 . 52 1 . 35 9 . 17 9 . 98 separate solid 4 . 31 0 0 8 . 10 0 0 change rotation 3 . 88 8 . 1 18 . 29 0 6 . 41 5 . 70 import signal 2 . 16 0 0 0 0 0 indicate status 2 . 16 0 0 1 . 35 0 0 regulate electricity 2 . 16 2 . 02 0 1 . 35 0 0 sense status 2 . 16 8 . 10 0 0 0 0 store signal 2 . 16 0 0 0 0 0 transmit control signal 2 . 16 0 0 0 0 0 import electricity 0 . 43 8 . 1 1 . 5 1 . 35 0 0 Table 6 . The normalized function importances for each of the similar products . bobbin is a semi - transparent plastic instead of vulcanized ﬁber . The import solid function refers to two ﬂows : the solid ﬂows are the bobbin and the the magnet wire supply spool . Though these function are critical to the success of the winder , they are 7 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME secure solid vegetable peeler pickup winder prongs prongs Table 7 . Solution concept for secure solid as adapted from the veg - etable peeler . simply solved . As in the case of the vegetable peeler , the solids are imported by providing access space for the importation of the solid . The comparison of this embodied solution for the veg - etable peeler and the winder is shown in Table 8 . import solid vegetable peeler pickup winder access for import solid access for import solid Table 8 . Solution concept for import solid as adapted from the veg - etable peeler . Similar to the import solid function , the ﬂows related to the position solid function are the magnet wire supply spool and the bobbin . In the case of the magnet wire supply spool , a simple stand is determined sufﬁcient for positioning the spool . No anal - ogous solutions from the similar products were adapted for the winder . The wire spool stand is visible in Figure 5 which also shows the general layout of the pickup winder prototype . spool importhuman hand magnet wire path guide wire wheel magnet wire bobbin Figure 5 . An alpha prototype of the pickup winder . In addition to referring to the position of the wire spool , the position solid function involves the position of the bobbin rel - ative to the wire such that the wire coil builds evenly on the bobbin . The required wire position changes in time as the coil builds on the bobbin . As a solution to position solid , the veg - etable peeler provides an insightful and successful concept which is easily adapted to the winder . In the case of peeler , the prob - lem is very much the same . As the blade removes peelings from a vegetable , the relative position of the blade and the vegetable change . The peeler uses a lead screw , or power screw , for its position solid solution . Adapting such a solution to the winder allows the user to have precise control over the location of the wire . This solution is embodied in the winder as shown com - paratively in Table 9 . An input wheel is attached to a threaded rod . On the other end , the rod is attached to the shuttle , or pil - low block , that carries components from the guide solid function discussed next . The function guide solid is a not only important to the tar - get customers , but because of the precision required to meet the customer need metrics , it is a challenging aspect of the winder design . Reviewing Table 6 shows that the the ﬁshing reel has a high importance for guide solid . The ﬁshing reel uses a small circular pin to guide the ﬁshing line as in winds onto the reel . This solution is easily adapted to the pickup winder as shown in Table 10 . On the pickup winder , the circular pin guide has been modiﬁed to allow rotation . The rotating pin guide , or wheel , pre - vents the additional tension added to the wire as a result of the drag friction as the magnet wire as it moves by a non - rotating guide . The next function for comparison is regulate force , referring 8 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME position solid vegetable peeler pickup winder lead screw lead screw Table 9 . Solution concept for position solid as adapted from the veg - etable peeler . guide solid ﬁshing reel pickup winder circular pin for guiding fishing line Table 10 . Solution concept for guide solid as adapted from the ﬁshing reel . here to the tension control required for the magnet wire . The only other reviewed product that shared this function is the ﬁsh - ing reel . Though the adaptation of this solution is not direct , one key feature of the regulate force function in the reel is adapted to the winder . As in the ﬁshing line reel , a continuous adjustment of wire ( or line ) tension is allowed . This continuous adjustment allows for different sizes of wire to be used without dependence on precise settings and small component tolerances . The contin - uous tension adjustments for the winder and the ﬁshing reel are shown in Table 11 For the function of converting electricity to rotational mo - tion the winder adapts a solution from the vegetable peeler . In this case , a DC electric motor . Though this solution would likely have been selected without use of the design - by - analogy efforts , the analogous connection in this case shows that the design - by - analogy methods are consistent with standardized solutions when they exist and are prevalent . This result contributes to the validity of these design - by - analogy methods . A very rich understanding of the power of computing these similarity metrics and using the identiﬁed products is had by viewing the vegetable peeler in its entirety as a similar product with the winder . A side - by - side comparison of the fruit and veg - etable peeler reveals a interesting and powerful result of these similarity measures and the design by analogy procedure . If ro - tated on its side , the vegetable peeler implies a layout structure that can be used by the winder . This layout adaptation can be seen by substituting the pickup bobbin for a piece of fruit and the wire guide wheel for the peel - regulate force vegetable peeler pickup winder tension adjustment reel line wire tension adjustment Table 11 . Solution concept for regulate force as adapted from the ﬁsh - ing reel . ing blade . Using this approach , the peeler architecture is adapted to the winder . The relative location of the controlling lead screw in both these systems is essentially the same . Shown in Figure 6 are photographs and sketches emphasizing the layout of the pri - mary components of the peeler and the winder . As implemented , product layouts are similar . Key layout concepts taken from the peeler and adapted to the winder include the same relative posi - tion of components and assemblies . Also , the concept of moving the blade or wire rather than the potato or bobbin is adapted to the winder . On the pickup winder , the wire position is controlled manu - ally whereas in the fruit and vegetable peeler it is synchronized to the rotation motor . Such an adaptation could easily be made to the winder . Fully automated control , however , was not a cus - tomer need for the pickup winder . Thus , a synchronized position control for the wire was not included in the winder prototype . 6 Conclusions And Future Work In this paper , a measure of product similarity is developed . This measure is combined with a simple process to provide a novel and powerful design - by - analogy procedure . The practical usefulness of these design tools is validated through application to an original and innovative design . The problem is the design of a machine that winds guitar pickups . Through the simple ap - plication of the design - by - analogy techniques , elegant solutions were found for the guide wire , position bobbin , and secure bob - bin functions . These solutions , as integrated into a ﬁnal alpha level prototype , are shown in Figure 5 . To ﬁnd these results without the analysis and methods pre - sented in this paper is practically impossible . There are 68 prod - ucts reviewed in the database with over 1400 functions . Review - ing this many products and functions for similarity is infeasi - ble . The methods , as applied here , allow a designer with lim - ited experience to develop sophisticated solutions that enhance the overall design of the winder . Using these measures , existing products , that may have not been identiﬁed as similar based on unstructured inspection , can be reviewed for important design - 9 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME fixture for moving blade relative to potato fixture for moving guide wheel relative to bobbin (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:18)(cid:19) (cid:19) (cid:19) potato prong fixture DC motor lead screw DC m o t o r lead screw prong fixture b o bb i n Figure 6 . The vegetable peeler layout architecture as adapted to the winder . by - analogy information . Also , a designer’s current design - by - analogy vocabulary can be extended beyond their immediate ex - perience , providing access and contributions to new domains by discovering different products with common functions . A key result of the winder example is the identiﬁcation of the ﬁshing reel as similar to the pickup winder . Though , the ﬁshing reel similarity may be obvious to some , the fact that the method quantiﬁed this similarity validates the accuracy of the design - by - analogy approach . Also , because this similarity comparison is made without any experience required in either ﬁshing or pickup winding , the identiﬁcation shows how the measure extends an engineer’s experience base . In the ﬁnal evaluation of the design , the adaptation of the ﬁshing reel’s wheel to guide the wire is an elegant solution to a difﬁcult portion of the winder design . Also , during design concept review and selection , a review of the ﬁshing reel validates the manufacturing and durability potential of the guide solid solution . The more powerful result of the design by analogy tech - niques is the identiﬁcation of products that do not initially ap - pear similar . The fruit and vegetable peeler has a completely different customer base than the pickup winder - home makers and cooks as opposed to guitar technicians and hobbyist - and produces a completely different end product - peeled fruits and vegetables as opposed to guitar pickups . Yet , they contain a great deal of functional similarity . Using analogous concept solution from the stripper provided solution guidance for speciﬁc func - tions as well as important layout and architecture information used in the winder design . These results are based on customer need focused functional similarity between products contained in the measure l . A com - ponent , manufacturer , or structural comparison is unlikely to identify products as candidates for analogous design information for several signiﬁcant reasons . To make a structural comparison , a solution for the winder must already exist . Thus , such a search would be fruitless in an effort to ﬁnd suitable structural solutions for a given design problem . A component level comparison suf - 10 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME fers the same inadequacy . In addition , the methods presented here make contributions to product redesign and benchmarking efforts . The methods de - veloped here present a quantitative measure of product similar - ity . This measure allows a designer to locate products for bench - marking whose similarity , or comparability , is not initially clear . REFERENCES Doheny , J . G . and Monaghan , P . F . 1987 . IDABES : An ex - pert system for the preliminary stages of conceptual design of building energy systems . Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Engineering , 2 ( 2 ) . Howe , A . E . , Cohen , P . R . , Dixon , J . R . , and Simmons , M . K . 1986 . Dominic : A domain - independent program for mechanical engineering design . Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 1 ( 1 ) . Hubka , V . and Eder , W . E . 1988 . Theory of Technical Sys - tems . Springer - Verlag , Berlin . Huhns , M . N . and Acosta , R . D . 1988 . A system for design by analogy . IEEE Expert , pages 53 – 68 . Little , A . D . , Wood , K . L . , and McAdams , D . A . 1997 . Func - tional analysis : A fundamental empirical study for reverse engi - neering , benchmarking and redesign . In Proceedings of the 1997 ASME DETC , number 97 - DETC / DTM - 3879 , Sacramento , CA . ASME . Mittal , S . , Dym , C . , and Morjoria , M . 1985 . PRIDE an ex - pert system for the design of paper handling systems . In Applica - tions of Knowledge Based Systems to Engineering Analysis and Design , Miami , FL . Winter Annual Meeting of the ASME . Otto , K . 1996 . Forming product design speciﬁcations . In Proceedings of the 1996 ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , number 96 - DETC / DTM - 1517 , Irvine , CA . Pahl , G . and Beitz , W . 1996 . Engineering Design : A Sys - tematic Approach . Springer , New York , 2nd edition . Stone , R . B . and Wood , K . L . 1999 . Development of a func - tional basis for design . In Proceedings of the 1999 ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , number DETC99 / DTM - 8765 , Las Vegas , NV . Taylor , D . 1996 . Process metrics for asynchronous concur - rent engineering . In Proceedings of the 1996 DETC , number 96 - DETC / DTM - 1500 , Irvine , CA . ASME . Ullman , D . 1997 . The Mechanical Design Process . McGraw - Hill , New York , 2nd edition . Ulrich , K . T . and Eppinger , S . 1995 . Product Design and Development . McGraw - Hill , NY . 11 Copyright ª 2000 by ASME