Commentary Looking Beyond Looks Comments on Sloutsky , Kloos , and Fisher ( 2007 ) Susan A . Gelman 1 and Sandra R . Waxman 2 1 University of Michigan – Ann Arbor and 2 Northwestern University How do people acquire knowledge about the world ? Do the sources of information that underlie knowledge acquisition in young children differ from those in adults ? These fundamental questions have permeated scientific inquiry since the time of Socrates and Aristotle . Following in this tradition , a recent article by Sloutsky , Kloos , and Fisher ( SKF ; 2007 ) is ambitious—indeed , classic . Their goal was to uncover the contributions of conceptual and per - ceptual information in children’s categorization and induction about natural kinds . But experimental evidence is only as good as the theory and logic upon which it rests . Unfortunately , SKF’s approach to each of the key constructs—concepts , perceptual information , categorization , and induction—misses its mark . To quickly review : SKF taught children two novel categories of buglike entities , stipulating that the categories could be distinguished by the ratio of buttons to ﬁngers ( members of one category had more buttons than ﬁngers , members of the other had more ﬁngers than buttons ) . SKF introduced novel words ( ziblet and ﬂurp ) for these categories . Children successfully extended these names to new instances . SKF then told children that one particular individual had a certain property ( e . g . , ‘‘thick blood’’ ) . The children extended that property to items of the same overall appearance , ignoring the ziblet / ﬂurp distinction . SKF interpreted this result as showing that ‘‘looks are every - thing’’ in children’s inductive inferences . We illustrate our concerns with an analogy . Suppose we aim to study the role of conceptual versus perceptual similarity in reasoning about natural kinds . We teach children two novel categories , stipulating that they are evensies ( dogs with an even number of whiskers ) and oddsies ( dogs with an odd number of whiskers ) . We ﬁnd that children learn these words without dif - ﬁculty . We then tell the children that one particular dog ( e . g . , a collie evensy ) has a certain kind of blood inside . We ﬁnd that they extend that property on the basis of appearance , general - izing to perceptually similar dogs , disregarding the evensy / oddsy distinction ( e . g . , they extend the property to a collie oddsy , but not a Chihuahua evensy ) . From this evidence , can we conclude that children use per - ceptual similarity rather than natural - kind membership in their inductive inferences ? We think not . The experiment lacks con - struct validity . The novel categories created for this experiment are not natural kinds , and naming them ( evensy or oddsy ) does not make them so . The appearance of the items is a better guide to natural - kind membership than are the labels . Our concerns about this hypothetical example apply equally to SKF’s study . ARE THESE NATURAL KINDS ? Although the individual instances SKF used were patterned after living things ( bugs ) , the novel categories ( ziblets and ﬂurps ) are not natural kinds . Mill ( 1843 ) proposed a continuum , with inductively rich groupings ( described as natural kinds ) at one end and arbitrary groupings that capture just a single property ( e . g . , ‘‘white things’’ ) at the other . We acknowledge that there is little consensus regarding where precisely one might draw the line between natural and arbitrary categories . There is also se - rious debate concerning whether natural kinds exist in the world or are wholly a product of human cognition ( Schwartz , 1977 ) . We do not seek to address this metaphysical concern here . Instead , we assume that natural kinds have a psychological reality : People intuitively attribute more inductive depth to these cat - egories than to arbitrary categories ( Medin & Ortony , 1989 ) . From our perspective , SKF’s ziblets and ﬂurps are arbitrary categories . They differ in appearance by only one property : ﬁngers - to - buttons ratio . We know of no account that deﬁnes a natural kind by a single ratio ( Murphy , 2002 ) , let alone the ratio between the numbers of a body part and a clothing accessory . This seems to us a profoundly arbitrary property . It is important to consider that for children and adults , properties that are arbitrary , accidental , or temporary do not generalize to other instances of a kind and are not predictive of stable , functionally relevant biological properties ( Gelman , 1988 ; Waxman , Lynch , Casey , & Baer , 1997 ) . If the goal is to test children’s reasoning about natural kinds—or any category with strong inductive potential—SKF’s categories fall short . Address correspondence to Susan A . Gelman , Department of Psy - chology , University of Michigan , 530 Church St . , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 - 1043 , e - mail : gelman @ umich . edu . PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE 554 Volume 18—Number 6 Copyright r 2007 Association for Psychological Science ARE THESE BASIC - LEVEL CATEGORIES ? Whether or not SKF’s categories are natural kinds , might they have inductive potential ? Basic - level categories stand out for their inductive potential ( Rosch , Mervis , Gray , Johnson , & Boyes - Braem , 1976 ) . When a novel property is attributed to an individual ( a collie ) , children and adults tend to extend this property broadly within the same basic - level category ( dogs ) . Without explicit evidence to the contrary , they do not restrict their extensions within subordinate - level boundaries ( collies ; Waxman et al . , 1997 ) . Because ziblets and ﬂurps were designed as subordinate - level categories ( i . e . , types of bugs ) , children’s tendency to extend SKF’s novel property beyond the ziblet - ﬂurp boundary is not surprising ; their extension of this property to both kinds of bugs is likely to have been conceptually , as well as perceptually , motivated . DOES NAMING CREATE NATURAL KINDS ? We also dispute SKF’s assumptions about naming . Naming an arbitrarily deﬁned category cannot transform it into the induc - tively rich kind of category that SKF purported to study ( Da - vidson & Gelman , 1990 ) . Even novice word learners appreciate that count nouns refer not only to basic - level natural kinds ( ‘‘dog’’ ) , but also to subordinate - level categories ( ‘‘collie’’ ) , re - lational groupings ( ‘‘pet’’ ) , situation - restricted categories ( ‘‘passenger’’ ) , and so on . Only some of these categories support strong inductive inferences ( Hall , 1993 ; Mandler , 2004 ; Mark - man , 1989 ; Waxman , 1990 ) . What , then , was the basis of children’s inferences in SKF’s experiments ? SKF claimed to have placed perceptual informa - tion in direct conﬂict with kind information , but this alleged conﬂict could have arisen only if the children interpreted the labels as referring to kinds . We have offered several reasons to suspect that ziblet and ﬂurp were unlikely to have been so in - terpreted . Consequently , appearance was likely the best clue to kind membership in this task ( Diesendruck & Bloom , 2003 ; Gelman & Medin , 1993 ; Gopnik & Nazzi , 2003 ) . This does not mean that appearances constitute membership for natural kinds , any more than gray hair and wrinkles constitute membership in the category ‘‘grandmother’’ ( Armstrong , Gleitman , & Gleitman , 1983 ) . Acknowledgments— This research was supported by National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Grants HD - 36043 ( Gelman ) and HD - 030410 ( Waxman ) . We thank Liza Ware and Andrzej Tarlowski for comments , and James Cutting , Rebecca Go´mez , Nora Newcombe , and Vladimir Sloutsky for insightful reviews . REFERENCES Armstrong , S . L . , Gleitman , L . R . , & Gleitman , H . G . ( 1983 ) . On what some concepts might not be . Cognition , 13 , 263 – 308 . Davidson , N . S . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1990 ) . Inductions from novel cate - gories : The role of language and conceptual structure . Cognitive Development , 5 , 151 – 176 . Diesendruck , G . , & Bloom , P . ( 2003 ) . How specific is the shape bias ? Child Development , 74 , 168 – 178 . Gelman , S . A . ( 1988 ) . The development of induction within natural kind and artifact categories . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 65 – 96 . Gelman , S . A . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1993 ) . What’s so essential about essentialism ? A different perspective on the interaction of perception , language , and conceptual knowledge . Cognitive Development , 8 , 157 – 167 . Gopnik , A . , & Nazzi , T . ( 2003 ) . Word , kinds and causal powers : A theory theory perspective on early naming and categorization . In D . H . Rakison & L . M . Oakes ( Eds . ) , Early category and concept development : Making sense of the blooming , buzzing confusion ( pp . 303 – 329 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Hall , D . G . ( 1993 ) . Basic - level individuals . Cognition , 48 , 199 – 221 . Mandler , J . M . ( 2004 ) . The foundations of mind : Origins of conceptual thought . New York : Oxford University Press . Markman , E . M . ( 1989 ) . Categorization and naming in children : Problems in induction . Cambridge , MA : Bradford Book / MIT Press . Medin , D . L . , & Ortony , A . ( 1989 ) . Psychological essentialism . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 179 – 195 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Mill , J . S . ( 1843 ) . A system of logic , ratiocinative and inductive . London : Longmans . Murphy , G . L . ( 2002 ) . The big book of concepts . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Rosch , E . , Mervis , C . B . , Gray , W . D . , Johnson , D . M . , & Boyes - Braem , P . ( 1976 ) . Basic objects in natural categories . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 382 – 439 . Schwartz , S . P . ( Ed . ) . ( 1977 ) . Naming , necessity , and natural kinds . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Sloutsky , V . M . , Kloos , H . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2007 ) . When looks are ev - erything : Appearance similarity versus kind information in early induction . Psychological Science , 18 , 179 – 185 . Waxman , S . R . ( 1990 ) . Linguistic biases and the establishment of conceptual hierarchies : Evidence from preschool children . Cog - nitive Development , 5 , 123 – 150 . Waxman , S . R . , Lynch , E . B . , Casey , K . L . , & Baer , L . ( 1997 ) . Setters and samoyeds : The emergence of subordinate level categories as a basis for inductive inference . Developmental Psychology , 33 , 1074 – 1090 . ( R ECEIVED 9 / 20 / 06 ; R EVISION ACCEPTED 10 / 27 / 06 ; F INAL MATERIALS RECEIVED 11 / 1 / 06 ) Volume 18—Number 6 555 Susan A . Gelman and Sandra R . Waxman