Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 20 , 4531 – 4540 , November 1 , 2009 Filamin A Regulates Caveolae Internalization and Trafﬁcking in Endothelial Cells Maria Sverdlov , * Vasily Shinin , * Aaron T . Place , * Maricela Castellon , * † and Richard D . Minshall * †‡ Departments of * Pharmacology and † Anesthesiology and ‡ Center for Lung and Vascular Biology , University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago , IL 60612 Submitted October 6 , 2008 ; Revised July 31 , 2009 ; Accepted September 9 , 2009 Monitoring Editor : Sean Munro Transcytosis via caveolae is critical for maintaining vascular homeostasis by regulating the tissue delivery of macromol - ecules , hormones , and lipids . In the present study , we test the hypothesis that interactions between F - actin cross - linking protein ﬁlamin A and caveolin - 1 facilitate the internalization and trafﬁcking of caveolae . Small interfering RNA - mediated knockdown of ﬁlamin A , but not ﬁlamin B , reduced the uptake and transcytosis of albumin by (cid:1) 35 and 60 % , respectively , without altering the actin cytoskeletal structure or cell – cell adherens junctions . Mobility of both intracellular caveolin - 1 – green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - labeled vesicles measured by ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching and mem - brane - associated vesicles measured by total internal reﬂection - ﬂuorescence microscopy was decreased in cells with reduced ﬁlamin A expression . In addition , in melanoma cells that lack ﬁlamin A ( M2 cells ) , the majority of caveolin - 1 - GFP was localized on the plasma membrane , whereas in cells in which ﬁlamin A expression was reconstituted ( A7 cells and M2 cells transfected with ﬁlamin A - RFP ) , caveolin - 1 - GFP was concentrated in intracellular vesicles . Filamin A association with caveolin - 1 in endothelial cells was conﬁrmed by cofractionation of these proteins in density gradients , as well as by coimmunoprecipitation . Moreover , this interaction was enhanced by Src activation , associated with increased caveolin - 1 phosphorylation , and blocked by Src inhibition . Taken together , these data suggest that ﬁlamin A association with caveolin - 1 promotes caveolae - mediated transport by regulating vesicle internalization , clustering , and trafﬁcking . INTRODUCTION Transcytosis via caveolae is a primary mechanism of trans - cellular transport and thus microvascular permeability reg - ulation ( Minshall and Malik , 2006 ) . Caveolae , in addition to functioning as signaling hubs , are thought to be important for shuttling plasma albumin , insulin , steroid hormones , and other molecules that bind to albumin from blood to tissues ( Minshall et al . , 2003 ; Hu et al . , 2008a ) . Increased transport through pulmonary microvessel endothelial cells via caveolae was found to play a causal role in inﬂammatory vascular hyperpermeability ( Hu et al . , 2008b ) . However , the underlying molecular mechanisms that regulate caveolae trafﬁcking in endothelial cells are poorly deﬁned ( Parkar et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , a better understanding of the cellular pro - cesses regulating caveolae trafﬁcking should provide novel therapeutic strategies for preventing protein - rich edema for - mation and targeting the delivery of drugs . Although electron micrographs suggest the majority of caveolae are linked to submembranous actin ﬁlaments ( Izumi et al . , 1991 ; Morone et al . , 2006 ; Richter et al . , 2008 ) , the role of the cytoskeleton in caveolae - mediated endocytosis and transcytosis is not clear . Disruption of the actin cytoskel - eton was shown not only to block uptake of cross - linked alkaline phosphatase localized to caveolae ( Parton et al . , 1994 ) but also to promote internalization of green ﬂuores - cent ( GFP ) – caveolin - 1 - labeled vesicles ( Mundy et al . , 2002 ) . Increased lateral migration and clustering of otherwise sta - ble caveolae at the plasma membrane was also observed upon depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments ( Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ; Thomsen et al . , 2002 ) . According to the model devel - oped by Pelkmans et al . for caveolae - mediated internaliza - tion of simian virus 40 , entrapment of viral particles in caveolae induces a tyrosine phosphorylation cascade fol - lowed by local disassembly of the cortical actin cytoskeleton and actin polymerization around loaded caveolae ( Pelkmans and Helenius , 2002 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , the actin cytoskeleton seems to play a dual role in caveolae internal - ization : ﬁrst , it organizes caveolae at the plasma membrane and restricts their lateral movement ; and second , it is nec - essary for efﬁcient vesicle budding and detachment from the membrane . The large GTPase dynamin - 2 , which is recruited to the neck of caveolae upon cargo loading and caveolin - 1 phos - phorylation ( Shajahan et al . , 2004a ) has an ability to organize the actin cytoskeleton and regulate actin tail formation ( Lee and Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ) . One possibility is that dynamin - 2 mediates its effect on actin through cortactin , which was shown to bind dynamin - 2 both in vivo and in vitro ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Schafer et al . , 2002 ; Krueger et al . , This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 – 10 – 0997 ) on September 16 , 2009 . Address correspondence to : Richard D . Minshall ( rminsh @ uic . edu ) . Abbreviations used : BSA , bovine serum albumin ; Cav - 1 , caveolin - 1 ; CTB , cholera toxin subunit B ; DAPI , 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ; FLN , ﬁlamin ; FRAP , ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ; GFP , green ﬂuorescent protein ; HMVEC , human microvascular endothelial cell ( s ) ; Lat B , latrinculin B ; PP2 , 4 - Amino - 5 - ( 4 - chlo - rophenyl ) - 7 - ( t - butyl ) pyrazolo [ 3 , 4 - d ] pyrimidine ; TIR - FM , total in - ternal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ; WT , wild type ; YFP , yel - low ﬂuorescent protein . © 2009 by The American Society for Cell Biology 4531 http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2009 / 09 / 15 / E08 - 10 - 0997 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : 2003 ) . Another dynamin binding partner , intersectin , pro - motes actin polymerization by activating Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein and thereby is thought to regulate caveo - lae ﬁssion from the membrane ( Predescu et al . , 2003 ) . Caveolin - 1 , the primary structural protein of caveolae , was shown to bind actin cross - linking proteins ﬁlamin ( FLN ) A and ﬁlamin B in vitro and in vivo ( Stahlut and van Deurs , 2000 ) . Recent data conﬁrmed that ﬁlamin A forms a complex with caveolin - 1 in different cell systems ( Doucey et al . , 2006 ; Head et al . , 2006 ; Ravid et al . , 2008b ) . Functions assigned to this interaction include activation of the actin - folding and chaperone protein T - complex protein - 1 , which is normally inhibited by caveolin - 1 ( Doucey et al . , 2006 ) , and stimulation of Akt - dependent phosphorylation of ﬁlamin A , which inhibits calpain - mediated cleavage of ﬁlamin A ( Ravid et al . , 2008a ) . In addition to organization of the actin cytoskeleton , ﬁlamin A was shown previously to regulate signal transduction ( Stossel et al . , 2001 ) and control receptor trafﬁcking ( Onoprishvili et al . , 2003 ; Seck et al . , 2003 ; Beekman et al . , 2008 ) . In the present study , we tested the hypothesis that ﬁlamin A regulates caveolae - mediated endocytosis and trafﬁcking by providing a link between caveolin - 1 and the actin cytoskeleton . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture Human lung microvascular endothelial cells ( HLMVECs ) ( Lonza Walkers - ville , Walkersville , MD ) were cultured on dishes coated with 0 . 2 % gelatin in endothelial basal media - 2 - MV ( Lonza Walkerville ) supplemented with 20 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , l - glutamine , 50 U / ml penicillin , and 50 (cid:1) g / ml streptomycin . M2 and A7 melanoma cell lines , kindly provided by Dr . F . Nakamura ( Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Harvard Medical School , Bos - ton , MA ) , were grown in minimal essential medium ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) supplemented with 10 % FBS , 10 mM HEPES , 50 U / ml penicillin , and 50 (cid:1) g / ml streptomycin . A7 media also contained 50 (cid:1) g / ml G418 ( Invitrogen ) . Mouse lung microvascular endothelial cells ( MLMVECs ) from wild - type ( B6 / 129SJ2 ) and caveolin - 1 null mice of the same genetic background ( The Jackson Laboratory , Bar Harbor , ME ) were isolated and maintained in culture by using an original set of methods ( Shinin et al . , unpublished data ) . In brief , isolated perfused lung lobes were partially digested in freshly prepared collagenase type 1 ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) solution in DMEM ( high glucose ; Invitrogen ) and gently dissociated . Peripheral lung fragments devoid of large - diameter vessels , conductive airways , and surrounding connective tissue were collected and observed to be enriched in bronchiolo - alveolar units containing microvasculature networks . These distal lung fragments were washed and further digested in mild trypsin solution ( Invitrogen ) to obtain a single - cell suspension . Cells were plated at the density of 2000 – 10 , 000 cells / cm 2 on Matrigel - coated dishes and kept in endothelial cell growth medium ( DMEM / Ham’s F - 12 base (cid:2) 10 % fetal calf serum ( HyClone Laboratories , Logan , UT ) , 50 (cid:1) g / ml endothelial cell growth supplement ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and 20 ng / ml vascular endothelial growth factor for (cid:1) 3 wk . Endothelial cell colonies ( usually 3 – 5 / dish ) individually grown as secondary cultures were then characterized by immunostaining . These cultures where 100 % positive for platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule - 1 ( CD31 ) , VE - cadherin , Flk - 1 , and von Willebrand factor but did not exhibit prominent (cid:2) - smooth muscle actin – positive stress ﬁbers or cytokeratins and thus judged to be pure endo - thelial cell cultures . Reagents All reagents were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich unless stated otherwise . 4 - Amino - 5 - ( 4 - chlorophenyl ) - 7 - ( t - butyl ) pyrazolo [ 3 , 4 - d ] pyrimidine ( PP2 ) , la - trinculin B ( Lat B ) , and jasplakinolide were obtained from Calbiochem ( San Diego , CA ) . Filamin A monoclonal antibody ( Ab ) and ﬁlamin B polyclonal Ab were obtained from Millipore Bioscience Research Reagents ( Temecula , CA ) . Caveolin - 1 polyclonal Ab , pY14 - caveolin - 1 monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) , caveolin - 2 mAb , dynamin - 2 mAb , ﬂotillin - 1 mAb , and early endosome anti - gen ( EEA ) 1 mAb were from BD Biosciences ( San Jose , CA ) . Monoclonal antibodies for (cid:3) - actin , FLAG - tag , and vimentin were from Sigma - Aldrich . c - Src polyclonal Ab and normal mouse immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) were ob - tained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , ( Santa Cruz , CA ) . 4 , 6 - Diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) , Alexa - 488 bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , Alexa - 546 cholera toxin subunit B ( CTB ) , Alexa - 568 phalloidin , and all ﬂuorescently labeled secondary antibodies were purchased from Invitrogen . Horseradish peroxidase - conjugated goat - anti - mouse and goat - anti - rabbit secondary anti - bodies were from Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories ( Gaithersburg , MD ) . n - Octylglucoside and ATP were purchased from Research Products Interna - tional ( Mt . Prospect , IL ) . cDNA Cloning and Transfection Full - length Homo sapiens ﬁlamin A - red ﬂuorescent protein ( RFP ) was a gift from Dr . F . Nakamura ( Brigham and Women’s Hospital ) . The C - terminal fragments of ﬁlamin A in pQE30 vector pQE30 - FLN A 22 - 24 , pQE30 - FLN A 22 - 23h , and pQE30 - FLN A 22 - 23 were kindly provided by Dr . W . H . Ziegler ( Technical University Carolo - Wilhemina at Brunswick , Brunswick , Ger - many ) . Fragments were recloned into pRK5 vector ( BD Biosciences ) by using BamHI and HindIII restriction sites . Actin - yellow ﬂuorescent protein ( YFP ) was a gift from Dr . D . Mehta ( University of Illinois , Chicago , IL ) . Full - length H . sapiens caveolin - 1 was used as a template to generate C - terminal GFP - tagged caveolin - 1 ( Cav - 1 - GFP ) . The primer pair Cav - 1 - NheI - F : 5 (cid:3) - ACT - AGCTAGCGGCCACCATGTCTGGGGGCAAATAC - 3 (cid:3) and Cav - 1 - KpnI - R : 5 (cid:3) - ACTGGGTACCGTTATTTCTTTCTGCAAGTTGATGCG - 3 (cid:3) was used to generate caveolin - 1 that lacks the stop codon . The resulting polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) fragment was digested with restriction enzymes NheI and KpnI ( Invitrogen ) and subcloned into pEGFP - N1 vector ( Clontech , Mountain View , CA ) . HLMVECs were transfected with ﬁlamin A C - terminal fragments , actin - YFP , or Cav - 1 - GFP alone or in combination with control , FLN A , or FLN B small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) by Nucleofector ( Amaxa Biosystems , Gaithersburg , MD ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Cells were used for experiments 48 h after cDNA transfection or 72 h after cDNA and siRNA cotransfection . M2 and A7 cells were transfected with Cav - 1 - GFP and ﬁlamin A - RFP by Nucleofector . Twenty - four hours after transfection , cells were ﬁxed , stained with ﬁlamin A mAb , and analyzed by confocal microscopy using an LSM 510 META confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Thornwood , NY ) . Fractionation by Density Gradient Centrifugation Fractionation was conducted as described previously ( Macdonald and Pike , 2005 ) with slight modiﬁcations . For stimulation experiments , cells were starved for 3 h and incubated with sodium orthovanadate ( 10 (cid:1) M ) for 15 min followed by stimulation with 30 mg / ml BSA ( fraction V , 99 % pure , endotoxin free ) for 15 min . In brief , two conﬂuent 10 - cm plates were washed and scraped into base buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 8 , and 250 mM sucrose ) supplemented with 1 mM CaCl 2 and 1 mM MgCl 2 . Cells were centrifuged at 1000 (cid:4) g for 10 min , and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of base buffer containing 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Cells were lysed by 40 strokes in Dounce homogenizer followed by passage through a 27 - gauge needle 10 times . Lysates were centrifuged at 10 , 000 (cid:4) g for 10 min to remove unbroken cells and large cell fragments . Supernatants were collected and mixed with an equal volume of 50 % Opti - Prep and overlaid with 20 , 15 , 10 , 5 , and 0 % OptiPrep gradient in base buffer containing 1 mM sodium orthovanadate . Gradients were centrifuged at 52 , 000 (cid:4) g in SW55Ti rotor for 10 h at 4°C . Twelve fractions were collected starting from the top of the gradient and equal volume samples of each fraction were analyzed by SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) . Immunoprecipitation and Western Blot Analysis For stimulation studies , cells were starved for 3 h and then pretreated with sodium orthovanadate ( 10 (cid:1) M for 15 min ) , PP2 ( 10 (cid:1) M for 15 min ) , and / or BSA ( 30 mg / ml for 15 min ) . For Western blotting , cells were lysed on ice for 30 min in lysis buffer containing 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 60 mM n - octylglucoside , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM phenylmethyl - sulfonyl ﬂuoride , 1 mM sodium orthovanadate , and protease inhibitor cock - tail . All insoluble materials were removed by centrifugation ( 100 , 000 (cid:4) g for 45 min ) . For immunoprecipitations , lysates were incubated with M - 280 Dyna - beads coated with sheep anti - mouse IgG ( Invitrogen ) preconjugated with monoclonal anti - ﬁlamin A or anti - FLAG antibodies for 1 h at4°C . Proteins were resolved by SDS - PAGE , processed with an enhanced chemilumines - cence SuperSignal kit ( Pierce Chemical , Rockford , IL ) , and then the relative band intensities ( densitometry ) from scanned blots determined using ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) . siRNA Transfection FLN A , FLN B , and Cav - 1 siRNA ON - TARGETplus Smart pools were pur - chased from Dharmacon RNA Technologies ( Lafayette , CO ) . siGENOME Nontargeting pool # 1 ( Dharmacon RNA Technologies ) was used as a control . HLMVECs grown to 80 – 90 % conﬂuence were transfected with 50 nM pooled siRNA by using DharmaFECT I ( Dharmacon RNA Technologies ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Cells were used for experiments 72 h after transfection . The level of knockdown was quantiﬁed by densitometric anal - ysis of Western blots by using ImageJ software . Fluorescent Albumin Uptake , Immunostaining , and Confocal Microscopy For uptake experiments , conﬂuent HLMVECs grown on collagen - coated glass coverslips or MLMVECs puriﬁed from wild - type ( WT ) or caveolin - 1 null M . Sverdlov et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 4532 ( Cav1 (cid:5) / (cid:5) ) mice grown on Matrigel - coated coverslips were starved fo r 5 h in basal media and incubated with Alexa - 488 - BSA ( 10 (cid:1) g / ml ) in basal media containing 0 . 1 mg / ml unlabeled BSA for 30 min at 37°C . Cells were washed with acid wash buffer , pH 2 . 5 , and Hanks’ balanced salt solution to remove surface - bound BSA ; ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) ; permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ; and stained with FLN A , FLN B , or Cav - 1 antibodies and the nuclear marker DAPI ( 1 (cid:1) g / ml ) . For quantiﬁcation of uptake in siRNA - transfected or Lat B ( 25 nM for 20 min ) - pretreated cells , 10 images of equal area were taken per sample , and each experiment was repeated three times . Alexa - 488 - BSA uptake was estimated from thresholded images by using the ImageJ Particle Analysis module . For immunostaining , conﬂuent serum - grown HLMVECs were ﬁxed with 4 % PFA , permeabilized , and incubated with FLN A or FLN B antibodies ( 1 (cid:1) g / ml ) . Nonconfocal DAPI images were acquired using mercury lamp exci - tation and UV ﬁlter set . Confocal microscopy was performed using an LSM 510 META microscope ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) with 488 - and 543 - excita - tion laser lines and pinhole set to achieve 1 Airy unit . Z - axis orthogonal projections of M2 and A7 cells transfected with Cav - 1 - GFP and FLN A - RFP were obtained by processing confocal slices collected in 0 . 34 - (cid:1) m step incre - ments using the LSM 510 META 2D deconvolution module . 125 I - Albumin Transendothelial Transport Transcellular 125 I - albumin permeability of HLMVEC monolayers transfected with control ( nontargeting ) , FLN A , FLN B , or Cav - 1 siRNA was calculated as described previously ( John et al . , 2003 ; Shajahan et al . , 2004b ) . For permeability studies , cells were grown on 12 - mm - diameter polyester Transwell mem - branes with 0 . 4 - (cid:1) m pore size ( Corning Life Sciences , Lowell , MA ) coated with collagen and starved for 5 h before each experiment . 125 I - Albumin in the presence of 0 . 1 or 100 mg / ml unlabeled albumin was added to the upper chamber , and aliquots were collected from the lower chamber ( which also contained an equal amount of unlabeled albumin ) at 20 , 40 , and 60 min . 125 I - Albumin transport was measured in triplicate and repeated three times . Speciﬁc vesicular 125 I - albumin permeability ( that which was displaced by excess unlabeled albumin ) was calculated for each time point as described previously ( John et al . , 2003 ) . F / G - Actin Fractionation F / G - actin fractionation was performed as described previously ( Searles et al . , 2004 ) . In brief , conﬂuent HLMVECs were lysed in a buffer containing 50 mM piperazine - N , N (cid:3) - bis ( 2 - ethanesulfonic acid ) , pH 6 . 9 , 50 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM EGTA , 5 % glycerol , 0 . 1 % Nonidet P - 40 , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % Tween 20 , 1 mM ATP , and protease inhibitor cocktail , and lysates were centrifuged at 100 , 000 (cid:4) g for 1 h at37°C . The supernatant ( G - actin fraction ) was saved and the cell pellet ( F - actin fraction ) was incubated with 1 (cid:1) M cytochalasin D in ice - cold distilled H 2 O for 1 h . G - actin and F - actin levels were determined from equal volume aliquots from each fractions by Western blot analysis using anti - actin mAb . The ratio of G - actin to F - actin was quan - tiﬁed by scanning densitometry . Lysates from HLMVECs incubated with 100 nM latrinculin B for 30 min or with 100 nM jasplakinolide for 30 min were used as controls . Fluorescence Recovery after Photobleaching ( FRAP ) HLMVECs were cotransfected with Cav - 1 - GFP and siRNA and grown on glass - bottom collagen - coated dishes for 48 h . Live - cell confocal imaging was performed at 37°C with an LSM 510 META system ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) by using a 63 (cid:4) 1 . 45 numerical aperture ( NA ) H 2 O - immersion lens . A small intracellular region was bleached with the 488 - nm laser line set to full power for 30 iterations . Recovery of ﬂuorescence was monitored for 20 cycles with a time lapse of 16 . 6 s with reduced laser power ( 1 % transmission ) . Images were processed with LSM 510 META software . Relative intensity ( RI ) was calcu - lated from the following equation : RI (cid:6) It ( 0 ) / Ib ( 0 ) (cid:4) Ib ( t ) / It ( t ) , where It ( 0 ) is the total intensity of the cell before bleaching , Ib ( 0 ) is the intensity of the bleached area before bleaching , Ib ( t ) is the intensity of the bleached area after bleaching at time t , and It ( t ) is the intensity of the whole cell after bleaching at time t . The rate of ﬂuorescence recovery was calculated from the slope of the linear region of the recovery curve immediately after photobleaching . Total Internal Reﬂection - Fluorescence Microscopy ( TIR - FM ) Imaging and Quantiﬁcation HLMVECs were cotransfected with Cav - 1 - GFP and control or FLN A siRNA and plated onto gelatin - coated glass - bottomed dishes ( MatTek , Ashland , MA ) . Seventy - two hours after transfection , cells were subjected to TIR - FM analysis using an Axio Observer Z1 inverted microscope equipped with Dynamic Laser TIR - FM module ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) and ORCA - II ERG charge - coupled device camera ( Hamamatsu , Bridgewater , NJ ) . Dynamics of Cav - 1 - GFP were acquired with a 100 (cid:4) / 1 . 45 NA alpha Plan Fluar oil immer - sion objective at 37°C . Thirty frame recordings ( 0 . 9 - s exposure per frame ) were collected and processed using the Delta - F - up ImageJ plug - in to subtract each image in the stack from the preceding image , and then Z - projections over time of the subtracted stacks were created . Dynamic events , which included all movement of Cav - 1 - GFP in the total internal reﬂectance ﬂuores - cence ( TIRF ) plane , were quantiﬁed from thresholded Z - projections for con - trol siRNA and FLN A siRNA - transfected cells ( 16 cells / group , 3 – 4 areas / cell ) using the ImageJ Particle Analysis plug - in . For quantiﬁcation , areas free of large ﬂuorescent aggregates of Cav - 1 - GFP were selected . Results are pre - sented as the percentage of the number of events detected in the TIRF plane over 30 frames per unit area . Statistical Analysis Statistical comparisons of albumin uptake and transendothelial transport results were conducted using ANOVA with signiﬁcance level set at p (cid:7) 0 . 05 . Statistical signiﬁcance of FRAP and TIR - FM results were estimated by non - paired Student’s t test . RESULTS FLN A Associates with Caveolin - 1 in Endothelial Cells and Partially Localizes to Buoyant Density Gradient Fractions To determine whether FLN A associates with Cav - 1 in en - dothelial cells , we immunoprecipitated Cav - 1 from whole cell lysates and blotted for FLN A and FLN B . In the absence of a speciﬁc stimulus , a small amount of FLN A , but not its homologue FLN B , coprecipitated with Cav - 1 ( Figure 1A ) . These results suggest that under basal conditions , a fraction of FLN A is associated with Cav - 1 in endothelial cells . In vitro studies previously localized the FLN A Cav - 1 binding site to its C terminus ( Stahlut and van Deurs , 2000 ) . To conﬁrm the association between FLN A and Cav - 1 , HLMVECs were transfected with FLAG - tagged C - terminal fragments of FLN A containing domains 22 - 23 ( FLN 22 - 23 ) , domains 22 - 23 , and the hinge region ( FLN 22 - 23h ) , and domains 22 - 24 ( FLN 22 - 24 ) . FLN A fragments were then immunoprecipitated from whole cell lysates , sep - arated by SDS - PAGE , transferred , and blotted for FLN A and Cav - 1 ( Figure 1B ) . Only the complete C terminus of FLN A , containing domains 22 - 24 , was able to coimmunoprecipi - tate Cav - 1 ( Figure 1B ) . To detect whether FLN A associates with caveolae in endothelial cells , we subjected HLMVEC lysates to centrif - ugation in OptiPrep gradients . Fractions 1 through 4 col - lected from the top of the gradient were shown to be enriched in cholesterol ( Macdonald and Pike , 2005 ) and are representative of lipid rafts ( Figure 1C ) . These frac - tions also contained a large amount of ﬂotillin - 1 , an estab - lished marker of lipid rafts , as well as Cav - 1 , Cav - 2 , and c - Src kinase . A second peak of ﬂotillin - 1 , Cav - 1 , and Cav - 2 occurred in fractions 6 through 8 . These fractions have a moderate amount of cholesterol ; thus , it is possible that they represent a subset of caveolae . Another possibility is that lipid raft markers that occur in these fractions are localized in the Golgi . Finally , the last four fractions ( 9 – 12 ) contained the majority of cytoskeletal and cytosolic proteins not asso - ciated with lipids . We propose fractions 1 – 4 represent caveolae actively par - ticipating in endocytosis because both Src and dynamin - 2 , which are required for ﬁssion of caveolae from the mem - brane , partially localize to these fractions but not to fractions 6 through 8 . We also detected a small amount of actin and FLN A in fractions 2 and 3 in nonstimulated cells . Filamin A – Caveolin - 1 Interaction Is Promoted by the Activation of Caveolae - mediated Endocytosis To assess the role of FLN A – Cav - 1 interactions in caveolae - mediated transport in endothelial cells , we compared the amount of Cav - 1 coimmunoprecipitated with FLN A from lysates of starved cells and cells in which caveolae - mediated endocytosis was activated by addition of BSA ( John et al . , 2003 ; Shajahan et al . , 2004a ) . Cav - 1 association with FLN A Filamin A Regulates Caveolae Trafﬁcking Vol . 20 , November 1 , 2009 4533 was increased after stimulation with BSA compared with starved cells ( Figure 1D ) . Cotreatment with sodium orthovana - date , a general inhibitor of tyrosine phosphatases previously shown to stimulate caveolae internalization ( Shajahan et al . , 2004a ) , induced a further increase in the association of Cav - 1 and FLN A . This effect was signiﬁcantly blocked by PP2 , an inhibitor of Src - family kinases shown previously to block Cav - 1 phosphorylation and caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( Shajahan et al . , 2004a ) . We also compared the distribution of actin and FLN A in gradient fractions from HLMVECs under basal conditions and after activation of caveolae - mediated endocytosis . Ad - dition of BSA and sodium orthovanadate induced an in - crease in Cav - 1 phosphorylation and shift of both FLN A and actin to fractions 2 and 3 ( Figure 1E ) , suggesting that FLN A and actin are recruited to loaded and activated caveolae . Preincubation of cells with PP2 decreased the amount of FLN A and actin in buoyant fractions of the gradient . Taken together , these results imply that upon cargo loading and activation of caveolae internalization , FLN A and actin are recruited to caveolae and interact with Cav - 1 . siRNA - mediated Knockdown of ﬁlamin A , but Not of Filamin B , Reduces Albumin Uptake in HLMVECs The importance of FLN A in caveolae - mediated endocytosis was addressed by knocking down FLN A with siRNA . siRNA for its homologue FLN B and for Cav - 1 itself were used as controls in these experiments . FLN A , FLN B , and Cav - 1 siRNA were speciﬁc and did not affect the expression levels of each other , tubulin , or glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydro - genase as assessed by Western blot analysis ( Figure 2A ) . siRNA transfection reduced protein expression level by 76 % for FLN A , by 82 % for FLN B , and by 67 % for Cav - 1 as quantiﬁed by densitometry of Western blots ( Supplemental Figure S1A ) . To measure the ability of HLMVEC transfected with FLN A and FLN B siRNA to internalize albumin , starved cells were incubated with Alexa - 488 - BSA for 30 min . As shown in Figure 2B , we observed a decrease in albumin endocytosis in cells transfected with siRNA for FLN A , but not in cells transfected with control siRNA or FLN B siRNA . Cells trans - fected with siRNA for the main structural protein of caveo - lae , Cav - 1 , or a mixture of siRNA for FLN A and Cav - 1 , showed a similar decrease in albumin uptake . Finally , pre - treatment with 25 nM latrinculin B for 20 min induced a signiﬁcant reduction in albumin internalization ( Figure 2B ) . Uptake was quantiﬁed from multiple thresholded images of equal area from three separate experiments ( Figure 2C ) . siRNA - mediated knockdown of FLN A and Cav - 1 induced a 35 and 41 % reduction in BSA uptake respectively , whereas reduction in FLN B level did not have a statistically signiﬁcant effect on albumin uptake . Cotransfection of siRNA for FLN A and Cav - 1 did not have an additive effect ( reduced albumin uptake by 47 % ) , suggesting that FLN A and Cav - 1 participate in a common pathway of albumin internalization . Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton by latrinculin B treatment induced cell rounding and decreased BSA uptake by 70 % . To conﬁrm the notion that BSA is internalized primarily via caveolae in endothelial cells and thus can be used as cargo to speciﬁcally label caveolae , we puriﬁed endothelial cells from lung microvessels of wild - type and Cav - 1 (cid:5) / (cid:5) mice and incubated the cells with the Alexa - 488 - BSA . Whereas caveolin - 1 – positive cells from wild - type mice internalized a signiﬁcant amount of albumin , cells puriﬁed from Cav - 1 (cid:5) / (cid:5) mice showed signiﬁcantly reduced BSA uptake ( Figure 2D ) . These data suggest that incomplete inhibition of albumin Figure 1 . Src regulation caveolin - 1 – ﬁlamin A interaction and lipid raft association . ( A ) HLMVECs grown in complete media were lysed , and clariﬁed whole cell lysates were used for caveolin - 1 immunoprecipitation . Western Blot analysis indicates that a small fraction of FLN A but not its homologue FLN B associates with Cav - 1 . ( B ) Fractionation by centrifugation in density gradients . HLMVECs grown in complete medium were mechanically dis - rupted in detergent - free buffer and subjected to fractionation in 0 – 25 % OptiPrep gradients . Twelve fractions were collected starting from the top of the gradient and analyzed by Western blotting . Cav - 1 , Cav - 2 , and lipid raft marker ﬂotillin - 1 showed a similar biphasic distribution with peaks in fractions 2 and 3 and fractions 6 – 8 . c - Src was primarily localized to cholesterol - enriched fractions ( 1 – 3 ) , whereas vimentin and the majority of cytosolic - and cytoskel - etal - associated proteins were concentrated in the heavier fractions ( 9 – 12 ) . A small amount of dynamin - 2 , actin , and FLN A were found in the Cav - 1 – positive cholesterol - enriched fractions ( fractions 2 and 3 ) , suggesting that these proteins might be associated with caveolae . ( C ) FLAG - tagged C - terminal fragments of human FLN A , contain - ing domains 22 - 23 ( FLN 22 - 23 ) , domains 22 - 23 , and the hinge region ( FLN 22 - 23h ) , and domains 22 - 24 ( FLN 22 - 24 ) were expressed in HLMVECs . Cells were lysed and constructs were immunoprecipi - tated from the whole cell lysate . Western blot results suggest that Cav - 1 binds primarily the complete C - terminal fragment containing domains 22 - 24 . ( D ) HLMVECs were starved and incubated with BSA ( 30 mg / ml for 15 min ) , sodium orthovanadate ( 10 (cid:1) M for 15 min ) , and Src kinase inhibitor PP2 ( 10 (cid:1) M for 30 min ) alone or in combination . FLN A was immunoprecipitated from the whole cell lysate , and the amount of Cav - 1 coprecipitated with FLN A was analyzed by Western blot . Incubation with both BSA and sodium orthovanadate increased the coprecipitation of FLN A and Cav - 1 , whereas pretreatment with PP2 prevented this increase in associa - tion . ( E ) Starved HLMVECs were incubated with a mixture of sodium orthovanadate and BSA or PP2 as described in D . Lysates were subjected to fractionation in the density gradient and fractions were analyzed by Western blotting with antibodies against FLN A , actin , Cav - 1 , phospho - caveolin - 1 ( pY14 - Cav - 1 ) , and Cav - 2 . Cells treated with sodium orthovanadate and BSA showed increased amount of pY14 - Cav - 1 as well as a shift of FLN A and actin to cholesterol - enriched fractions , thus leading to the higher degree of cofractionation of Cav - 1 with FLN A and actin . In cells pretreated with PP2 , Cav - 1 phosphorylation induced by BSA and sodium orthovanadate was blocked , and the amount of both FLN A and actin in buoyant fractions was signiﬁcantly reduced . M . Sverdlov et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 4534 uptake in HLMVECs transfected with Cav - 1 siRNA is mainly due to the incomplete knockdown of Cav - 1 . Knockdown of Filamin A Reduces Caveolae - mediated Transcytosis of Albumin Next , we studied the effect of the FLN A knockdown on caveolae - mediated transcytosis . 125 I - Albumin was added to the upper chamber of Transwell ﬁlter insets in the absence and presence of excess unlabeled albumin , and then radio - activity was measured in aliquots collected from the lower chamber over time ( Figure 3A ) . Note inhibition of total 125 I - albumin transport and absence of effect of siRNA on paracellular 125 I - albumin permeability ( Figure 3B ) . Transcel - lular 125 I - albumin permeability was calculated as the speciﬁc displaceable fraction of 125 I - albumin transport per minute per square centimeter ( Figure 3C ) . The rate of transport in cells transfected with control siRNA was 134 . 4 (cid:8) 19 . 7 nl / min / cm 2 . Knockdown of ﬁlamin A reduced albumin per - meability by 55 % , whereas transfection with FLN B siRNA if anything slightly increased the rate of albumin transport via the transcellular route . Knockdown of Cav - 1 alone reduced albumin permeability by 45 % , and knockdown of both Cav - 1 and FLN A at the same time decreased the rate of albumin transport by 55 % , which was not statistically dif - ferent from that achieved by either siRNA alone . This result , as well as the absence of an additive effect of Cav - 1 and FLN A knockdown on albumin uptake , suggests that FLN A speciﬁcally participates in caveolae - mediated transport . As with albumin internalization , transfection of Cav - 1 siRNA only partially blocked the transendothelial transport of 125 I - albumin due to incomplete knockdown of Cav - 1 . The re - maining albumin transport in FLN A or Cav - 1 siRNA - trans - fected cells was not due to leakage through the paracellular pathway because excess unlabeled BSA ( 100 mg / ml ) , which only competes with tracer albumin transport via the vesic - ular pathway ( John et al . , 2003 ) , blocked 125 I - albumin trans - port by (cid:9) 80 % ( Figure 3B ) . Furthermore , immunoﬂuorescent staining of VE - cadherin conﬁrmed that adherens junctions remained intact after knockdown of FLN A or FLN B and in fact it was not different from that in control cells ( Figure 3D ) . Thus , siRNA - mediated knockdown of FLN A , but not FLN B , reduced transcellular transport of albumin without affect - ing paracellular permeability . Reduction in Filamin A Did Not Affect F / G - Actin Ratio or Stress Fiber Formation The main function of FLN A is to cross - link actin ﬁlaments . To test whether the decrease in caveolae - mediated endocy - tosis or transcytosis was due to global changes in the actin cytoskeleton , we examined the F / G - actin ratio and stress ﬁber formation after knockdown of FLN A or FLN B by siRNA . The amount of F - and G - actin detected in Western blots was quantiﬁed by densitometry . Knockdown of FLN A or FLN B did not affect the F / G - actin ratio compared with cells transfected with control siRNA ( Supplemental Figure S2A ) . Jasplakinolide , an actin stress ﬁber - stabilizing drug , predict - ably increased the F / G - actin ratio , whereas latrinculin B , which is known to depolymerize actin ﬁlaments , signiﬁ - cantly decreased the F / G - ratio ( Supplemental Figure S2A ) . To analyze the amount and localization of polymerized actin , HLMVECs were cotransfected with actin - YFP and either control , FLN A , or FLN B siRNA . No signiﬁcant difference in actin - YFP staining was detected in cells with reduced FLN A or FLN B expression in comparison with control cells ( Supplemental Figure S2B ) . Staining of siRNA transfected cells with Alexa 568 - phalloidin also did not re - veal any differences in the structure of the actin cytoskeleton ( Supplemental Figure S2B ) . Thus , we can conclude that the observed reduction in efﬁciency of caveolae - mediated albu - min transport was not due to global changes in the actin cytoskeleton . siRNA - mediated Knockdown of Filamin A Reduced the Rate of Cav - 1 - GFP FRAP HLMVEC were cotransfected with Cav - 1 - GFP and control siRNA or FLN A siRNA . Seventy - two hours after transfec - tion , cells expressing Cav - 1 - GFP were subjected to FRAP Figure 2 . Inhibition of caveolae - mediated endocytosis upon FLN A depletion . ( A ) HLMVECs were transfected with control , FLN A , FLN B , Cav - 1 , or a mixture of Cav - 1 and FLN A siRNA , and the level of knockdown was examined 72 h after transfection . Western blot analysis conﬁrmed that siRNA - mediated knockdown of FLN A , FLN B and Cav - 1 was efﬁcient and selective ( see Supplemental Figure S1 for averaged data ) . ( B ) HLMVECs transfected with con - trol , FLN A , FLN B , or Cav - 1 siRNA alone , a mixture of FLN A and Cav - 1 siRNA , or pretreatment with LatB ( 25 nM for 20 min ) were incubated with Alexa - 488 - BSA ( 10 (cid:1) g / ml ) for 30 min and acid washed to remove cell surface - associated tracer albumin . Nuclei were stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Images and masks of thresholded images are representative of three independent experiments . Bars , 20 (cid:1) m . ( C ) Uptake of Alexa - 488 - BSA was quantiﬁed from thresh - olded images ; the bar graph represents uptake as a percentage of BSA internalized by control siRNA - transfected cells ( mean (cid:8) SEM ; n (cid:6) 3 ) . Cells transfected with FLN A , Cav - 1 and mixture of FLN A and Cav - 1 siRNA showed 35 % , 41 and 47 % reduction in albumin uptake respectively in comparison with cells transfected with con - trol siRNA ( p (cid:7) 0 . 05 ) . Pretreatment with LatB reduced albumin internalization by 70 % , whereas knockdown of FLN B did not induce statistically signiﬁcant changes in BSA - uptake . ( D ) Endothe - lial cells puriﬁed from the lungs of wild type and Cav - 1 (cid:5) / (cid:5) mice were incubated with Alexa - 488 - BSA ( 10 (cid:1) g / ml ) for 30 min ; acid washed ; and then ﬁxed , permeabilized , and stained for Cav - 1 . Cells from Cav - 1 (cid:5) / (cid:5) mice exhibited signiﬁcantly reduced albumin uptake , suggesting caveolae - mediated uptake is the primary route of albu - min internalization in endothelial cells . Filamin A Regulates Caveolae Trafﬁcking Vol . 20 , November 1 , 2009 4535 analysis . Cells with reduced FLN A protein level showed a delayed recovery of ﬂuorescence in comparison with the cells cotransfected with control siRNA ( Figure 4 , A and B ) . The rate of recovery , calculated from the linear portion of the recovery curve immediately after photobleaching , was 1 . 38 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 3 ( relative intensity per second ) for cells trans - fected with control siRNA and 0 . 83 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 3 for the cells transfected with FLN A siRNA , which is a 40 % reduction in Figure 3 . Effect of FLN A , FLN B , and Cav - 1 knockdown on transendothelial 125 I - albumin transport . ( A ) HLMVECs grown on Trans - well ﬁlter inserts were transfected with siRNA . The line graphs show the time course of 125 I - BSA transcellular transport through control siRNA - transfected cell monolayers in the presence of 0 . 1 mg / ml unlabeled BSA ( total transport ) or 100 mg / ml unlabeled BSA ( which measures the nonspeciﬁc paracellular leakage of 125 I - BSA ) . Speciﬁc vesicular trans - port of 125 I - BSA was obtained by subtraction of the paracellular leakage from total 125 I - albumin transport ( mean (cid:8) SEM ; n (cid:6) 3 ) . ( B ) Bar graph depicts the normalized total and paracellular 125 I - BSA permeability values ( mean (cid:8) SEM ; n (cid:6) 3 ) of HLMVEC monolay - ers obtained in the presence of 0 . 1 or 100 mg / ml unlabeled BSA . The permeability of monolayers transfected with FLN A , FLN B , Cav - 1 or a mixture of FLN A and Cav - 1 siRNA is plotted as a % of that observed in cells transfected with control siRNA . Knock - down of FLN A , FLN B or Cav - 1 did not affect paracellular 125 I - BSA permeability sug - gesting that integrity of monolayers was not affected by siRNA transfection . ( C ) Knock - down of FLN A and Cav - 1 decreased trans - cellular albumin permeability by 60 and 50 % , respectively compared with cells transfected with control siRNA ( mean of 3 independent experiments (cid:8) SEM ; * p (cid:7) 0 . 05 ) . Knockdown of both FLN A and Cav - 1 did not induce a further reduction in albumin permeability . Transendothelial albumin permeability of cells transfected with FLN B siRNA was not statistically different from that of control siRNA transfected cells . ( D ) Cells transfected with FLN A or control siRNA were stained with ﬁlamin A and VE - cadherin antibodies . Confocal images show that siRNA - mediated knockdown of FLN A did not affect VE - cadherin localization or relative abundance . Figure 4 . FRAP analysis of Cav - 1 - GFP mobility in FLN A - depleted HLMVECs . ( A ) Analysis of Cav - 1 - GFP confocal images in cells treated with control siRNA ( a1 – a3 ) or FLN A siRNA ( b1 – b3 ) before photobleaching ( a1 and b1 ) , immediately after photobleaching ( a2 and b2 ) , and 1 . 33 min after photobleaching ( a3 and b3 ) suggests that recovery of the Cav - 1 - GFP signal in the bleached area is delayed in cells in which FLN A has been depleted . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . ( B ) Fluorescence recovery time course calculated from six cells from each of three independent transfections with control versus FLN A siRNA ( mean (cid:8) SEM ; n (cid:6) 18 ) shows signiﬁcantly reduced Cav - 1 - GFP FRAP in FLN A siRNA - treated cells . ( C ) The rate of ﬂuorescence recovery was calculated from the linear region of the recovery curve immediately after photobleaching . Cells transfected with FLN A siRNA showed a 40 % decrease in the rate of recovery of Cav - 1 - GFP ﬂuorescence compared with cells transfected with control siRNA ( * p (cid:7) 0 . 05 ) . M . Sverdlov et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 4536 the rate of movement of Cav - 1 – GFP - labeled intracellular structures in cells with reduced FLN A expression ( p (cid:7) 0 . 05 vs . control ; Figure 4C ) . This result suggests that FLN A plays an important role in caveolae trafﬁcking . Mobility of Cav - 1 - GFP at the Membrane Is Reduced in Cells Transfected with Filamin A siRNA To analyze the role of FLN A in Cav - 1 – enriched vesicle mem - brane dynamics , HLMVECs were cotransfected with Cav - 1 - GFP and control or FLN A siRNA and subjected to live - cell TIR - FM . The Cav - 1 - GFP signal in the TIRF plane of HLMVECs was primarily concentrated at the cell borders in large clusters of vesicles , whereas more punctuate and vesicular Cav - 1 - GFP staining was detected in central regions of the cells ( Figure 5A ) . Cav - 1 – GFP - labeled vesicles were heterogeneous in size and showed several different patterns of behavior . The majority of vesicles were stable and did not move throughout the time course of the experiment or showed oscillating low - range movements . We also detected vesicles that appeared and dis - appeared in the TIRF plane due to transient association and dissociation with the plasma membrane ; presumably these objects represent the ﬁssion and fusion of preexisting vesicles . A small number of vesicles , usually one to ﬁve per cell , showed very fast directional movement . Because of the complexities of Cav - 1 - GFP dynamics in or near the plasma membrane , we estimated changes in Cav - 1 - GFP over 30 frames by subtracting subsequent frames to create a projection of the changes in Cav - 1 - GFP over time ( Figure 5 , B and C ) . The number of events observed in cells transfected with FLN A siRNA , thus repre - sentative of the changes in Cav - 1 - GFP localization due to movement within the TIRF plane , was calculated from thresh - olded projections and expressed as a percentage of the number of Cav - 1 - GFP events detected in cells treated with control siRNA ( Figure 5D ) . The mobility of Cav - 1 – GFP - labeled vesi - cles was reduced by 41 % ( p (cid:7) 0 . 05 vs . control siRNA ; Figure 5D ) in cells transfected with FLN A siRNA , further suggesting that FLN A regulates the membrane dynamics of caveolae . Comparative Analysis of Cav - 1 - GFP Distribution in M2 and A7 Cells M2 cells that do not express endogenous FLN A and A7 cells in which FLN A expression was restored have the same level of FLN B and actin as shown by Western blot analysis ( Figure 6A ) . Surprisingly , a very small amount of caveolin - 1 was observed in A7 cells but not observed in M2 cells . However , the level of exogenously expressed GFP - tagged Cav - 1 in M2 and A7 cells was several - fold higher than the level of endogenous Cav - 1 observed in A7 cells ; thus , it was not considered further ( Figure 6A ) . Using this model system , Cav - 1 distribution in the presence and absence of FLN A ( i . e . , M2 and A7 cells transfected with Cav - 1 - GFP ) was ob - served in ﬁxed cells 24 h after transfection . In A7 cells , Cav - 1 - GFP was concentrated in large vesicles located pri - marily in the cytoplasmic compartment ( Figure 6Ba and 6Ca1 ) , whereas in M2 cells , we detected diffuse Cav - 1 - GFP labeling of the plasma membrane and less vesicular staining ( Figure 6Bd and 6Cb1 ) . Cotransfection of M2 cells with Cav - 1 - GFP and FLN A - RFP to acutely rescue FLN A expres - sion showed that the majority of Cav - 1 - GFP was localized to large vesicular structures ( Figure 6Bg and Figure 6Cc1 ) , conﬁrming the phenotype observed in the FLN A - positive A7 cells that FLN A regulates the organization and trafﬁck - ing caveolin - 1 – labeled vesicles . In both cell lines , Cav - 1 - GFP was found associated with large intracellular vesicles and partially colocalized with internalized Alexa - 546 CTB ( Supplemental Figure S3A ) and a marker of early endosomes , EEA1 ( Supplemental Figure S3B ) , but not with lysosomal marker lysosome - associated membrane protein - 1 ( Lamp - 1 ) ( Supplemental Figure S3C ) . Orthogonal projection images showing X - Z proﬁles of M2 and A7 cells expressing Cav - 1 - GFP that were stained for FLN A and M2 cells cotransfected with Cav - 1 - GFP and FLN A - RFP conﬁrmed that in the presence of FLN A , Cav - 1 is organized into large vesicular structures that are located in the cytoplasm ( Figure 6C , a1 and c1 ) . In M2 cells lacking Figure 5 . Analysis of Cav - 1 - GFP mobility by TIR - FM . ( A ) Comparison of epiﬂuorescent ( green ) and TIR - FM ( red ) images of Cav - 1 - GFP in HLMVECs . ( B ) Time - series images obtained by TIR - FM were used to generate projections of the changes in Cav - 1 - GFP lo - calization in or near the membrane over time . Cav - 1 - GFP membrane mobility includes lat - eral migration of vesicles , appearance and disappearance of Cav - 1 - GFP in the TIRF plane due to vesicle ﬁssion from and fusion with the plasma membrane , and separation of preexisting vesicle complexes . A single TIRF image is shown in a . Dynamic changes in the TIRF plane were estimated by subtract - ing each frame from the next using the Delta - F - up ImageJ module . The Z - projection over time of 29 resultant TIRF frames is presented in b . Mask of thresholded Z - projection is shown in c . Z - projection of 115 manually tracked vesicles is presented in d . Tracks ob - served by manual tracking were identical to those obtained with ImageJ software . ( C ) Three examples of Cav - 1 - GFP projection masks in control siRNA and FLN A siRNA - treated cells are shown . ( D ) Bar graph repre - sents the total number of mobile Cav - 1 – GFP - labeled vesicle movements per unit area as a percentage of events registered in cells transfected with control siRNA ( mean (cid:8) SEM ) . The overall mobility of Cav - 1 - GFP was reduced in FLN A siRNA - transfected cells by 41 . 4 (cid:8) 6 . 9 % ( p (cid:6) 0 . 0052 ) . Filamin A Regulates Caveolae Trafﬁcking Vol . 20 , November 1 , 2009 4537 FLN A , Cav - 1 was evenly distributed over the plasma mem - brane ( Figure 6Cb1 ) . DISCUSSION In the present study , we demonstrate that FLN A , but not FLN B , associates with Cav - 1 in endothelial cells . We also observed that the full C terminus of FLN A is sufﬁcient for binding Cav - 1 in vivo , which goes along with in vitro data obtained by others ( Stahlut and van Deurs , 2000 ) . Further - more , we showed that FLN A partially colocalizes with Cav - 1 , Cav - 2 , c - Src , and dynamin - 2 in cholesterol - enriched density gradient fractions . We observed that Src activation via stimulation of albumin - binding protein gp60 ( Tiruppathi et al . , 1997 ; Minshall et al . , 2000 ) and / or phosphatase inhi - bition with sodium orthovanadate ( Shajahan et al . , 2004a , b ) induced a shift of both FLN A and actin to buoyant fractions of the gradient , leading to the enhanced cofractionation of FLN A and Cav - 1 . Under these conditions , we observed greater Cav - 1 coimmunoprecipitation with FLN A com - pared with serum - deprived cells . On the contrary , cells pre - treated with Src - family kinase inhibitor PP2 showed re - duced amounts of FLN A and actin in buoyant fractions of the gradient , as well as the amount of Cav - 1 that coprecipi - tated with FLN A . Thus , we propose that FLN A associates with caveolin - 1 in endothelial cells and is actively recruited to albumin - loaded and activated caveolae . We ( Tiruppathi et al . , 1997 ; Minshall et al . , 2000 ; Shajahan et al . , 2004a , b ; Hu et al . , 2006 ; Hu et al . , 2008b ) and others ( Sharma et al . , 2004 ) have previously shown that activation of Src family kinases is a critical step in the process of caveolae - mediated endo - cytosis ( for review , see Sverdlov et al . , 2007 ) . The data pro - vided in the present study suggest that Src facilitates inter - actions between caveolae and the actin cytoskeleton by enhancing the association between Cav - 1 and FLN A . A recent study suggested that FLN A and Cav - 1 interact not at the plasma membrane but rather in the cytoplasm ( Ravid et al . , 2008a ) . However , Stahlut and van Deurs ( 2000 ) demonstrated by both ﬂuorescence and electron micros - copy that ﬁlamin colocalizes with Cav - 1 at the plasma membrane in proximity to caveolae . Our data indicate that this interaction takes place in the membrane in en - dothelial cells as well . Both Cav - 1 and FLN A are highly expressed in endothelial cells . However , only a small fraction of each of these pro - teins can be found in association . There may be several explanations for this . First , Cav - 1 – FLN A interactions prob - ably are phosphorylation - dependent and thus transient . Sec - ond , regulation of caveolae - mediated endocytosis and traf - ﬁcking is only one of the functions of FLN A . Finally , FLN A probably interacts only with the subset of caveolae that are actively engaged in caveolae - mediated endocytosis and transcytosis . To assess the function of FLN A in caveolae - mediated trans - port , we knocked down FLN A in HLMVECs and analyzed the extent and dynamics of caveolae - mediated albumin endocyto - sis and transcytosis . Albumin uptake and transendothelial per - meability via caveolae were reduced by (cid:1) 35 and 60 % , respec - tively , in cells transfected with FLN A siRNA , suggesting that FLN A is necessary for efﬁcient caveolae internalization and trafﬁcking . Furthermore , siRNA - mediated double knockdown of FLN A and Cav - 1 did not further reduce albumin uptake or permeability , implying that FLN A and Cav - 1 participate in a common endocytic mechanism . siRNA - mediated knockdown of the FLN A homologue FLN B did not signiﬁcantly affect caveolae - mediated uptake or transport . FLN A knockout mice are embryonically lethal , which may be due in part to vascular defects including VE - cad - herin mislocalization resulting in vascular leakage ( Feng et al . , 2006 ) . Our studies revealed that in cells transfected with either FLN A or FLN B siRNA , VE - cadherin localization was not different from that of control cells ( Figure 3D ) , implying that the residual amount of FLN A was sufﬁcient for proper VE - cadherin localization . Furthermore , our data support the contention that knockdown of FLN A or FLN B did not disrupt endothelial cell monolayer integrity in that excess unlabeled albumin ( 100 mg / ml ) was still able to block 125 I - BSA transport in HLMVEC monolayers , which would only be possible if the monolayer was not leaky , i . e . , if caveolae mediated the bulk of the transcellular transport . From these studies , we can conclude that siRNA - mediated reduction in FLN A expression decreased transcellular albumin transport without affecting the junctional permeability pathway . It is believed that the main function of FLN A in cells is to organize the actin cytoskeleton . Because it was shown pre - viously that the actin cytoskeleton is crucial for caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( Parton et al . , 1994 ; Mundy et al . , 2002 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ) , we tested whether the decrease in caveolae - mediated endocytosis and transcytosis in FLN A Figure 6 . Cav - 1 - GFP distribution in M2 and A7 cells . ( A ) Western Blot analysis of M2 and A7 cell lysates conﬁrmed expression of FLN A in A7 cells and the lack of FLN A in M2 cells . The level of expression of FLN B and actin was similar in both cell lines . In A7 cells , endogenous Cav - 1 expression was also observed , albeit (cid:1) 10 - times lower than the level of Cav - 1 - GFP . ( B ) M2 ( a , b , c , g , h , and i ) and A7 cells ( d – f ) were transfected with Cav - 1 - GFP alone ( a and d ) or cotransfected with FLN A - RFP ( g – i ) , ﬁxed 24 h after transfection , and stained with FLN A mAb ( b , e , and h ) . Merged images also show DAPI nuclear staining ( c , f , and i ) . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . Cav - 1 - GFP distribution was more punctate and internalized in A7 cells and M2 cells cotransfected with FLN A - RFP and diffusely membrane - asso - ciated in M2 cells . ( C ) Z - axis deconvolved orthogonal projection images of A7 ( a1 and a2 ) and M2 ( b1 , b2 , c1 , and c2 ) cells transfected with Cav - 1 - GFP ( b1 and b2 ) or cotransfected with Cav - 1 - GFP and FLN A - RFP ( c1 and c2 ) . Merged images show Cav - 1 - GFP and FLN A staining ( a2 , b2 , and c2 ) . A7 cells and M2 cells expressing FLN A - RFP showed clustered and internalized Cav - 1 - GFP , whereas in M2 cells Cav - 1 was localized to the plasma membrane . M . Sverdlov et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 4538 siRNA - transfected cells was due to global changes in actin cytoskeletal networks . We demonstrated that there were no signiﬁcant differences in the F / G - actin ratio or localization pattern in cells transfected with control , FLN A or FLN B siRNA . Consistent with our observation , a previous report indicated that ﬁbroblasts , neurons , and endothelial cells de - rived from FLN A knockout mouse embryos had stress ﬁbers , a cortical actin band , and focal adhesions that were indistinguishable from that of cells from wild - type embryos ( Feng et al . , 2006 ) . Thus , the reduction in caveolae - mediated albumin uptake and transcytosis is unlikely to be due to alterations in the general framework of the actin cytoskele - ton . However , this does not exclude the possibility that cells transfected with FLN A siRNA may be defective with re - spect to the regulation of local transient actin remodeling induced upon stimulation of caveolae formation and / or activation of endocytosis and transcytosis . Because our data indicate that siRNA - mediated knock - down of FLN A is associated with a modest reduction ( 30 % ) in albumin endocytosis but a nearly 60 % decrease in trans - endothelial albumin permeability , we measured the mobil - ity of caveolae by FRAP after FLN A knockdown . Thomsen et al . ( 2002 ) showed by FRAP analysis that plasma mem - brane - associated Cav - 1 - GFP was relatively immobile in comparison with the fast - moving intracellular pool of GFP - labeled Cav - 1 . Based on these data , we monitored the recov - ery of Cav - 1 - GFP ﬂuorescence from a small area within cells transfected with either control or FLN A siRNA . Knock - down of FLN A induced a 40 % reduction in the ﬂuorescence recovery rate of Cav - 1 - GFP compared with cells transfected with control siRNA , implying a signiﬁcantly slower migra - tion of GFP - labeled vesicles in the cells with reduced FLN A expression . We also measured the dynamics of Cav - 1 – GFP - labeled vesicles at the membrane by TIR - FM in which ﬂuorophore excitation is limited to (cid:1) 100 nm beyond the coverslip . TIR - FM showed that the majority of vesicles were stable throughout the experiment , which is in agreement with previous TIR - FM studies of caveolae ( Pelkmans and Zerial , 2005 ; Tagawa et al . , 2005 ) . However , we also observed ves - icles undergoing ﬁssion and fusion events at the plasma membrane and with Cav - 1 – GFP - labeled membranes . Fi - nally , a very small number of vesicles were actively engaged in very fast directional movement . In FLN A siRNA - treated cells , the mobility of Cav - 1 - GFP at the membrane was sig - niﬁcantly reduced compared with control siRNA - treated cells . To better understand the functional role of FLN A in caveolae - mediated transport , we also studied the distribu - tion of Cav - 1 - GFP in M2 cells that lack endogenous FLN A and in A7 cells in which FLN A expression had been re - stored . In the absence of FLN A , Cav - 1 - GFP was evenly distributed over the plasma membrane and to a much lesser extent , associated with intracellular vesicular structures . In A7 cells , however , the majority of Cav - 1 - GFP was organized into large vesicles localized primarily in the cytosolic com - partment . Importantly , cotransfection of Cav - 1 - GFP and FLN A - RFP to acutely rescue both Cav - 1 and FLN A in M2 cells was associated with enhanced formation of large cyto - plasmically localized vesicles . In both the M2 and A7 cell lines , intracellular Cav - 1 - GFP labeling was mobile and par - tially colocalized with early endosomal marker EEA1 but not with lysosomal marker Lamp - 1 . Neither M2 nor A7 cells transfected with Cav - 1 - GFP were able to internalize albu - min , perhaps due to the lack of speciﬁc albumin - binding protein gp60 in caveolae but did in fact take up cholera toxin subunit B , which colocalized with Cav - 1 - GFP in both M2 and A7 cells . However , because CTB uptake was not speciﬁc to Cav - 1 – GFP - labeled vesicles , the extent and localization of CTB uptake was not different between the two cell lines . FLN A participates in the organization and internalization of caveolae , although the mechanism is not clear . One pos - sibility is that FLN A , through an association with the actin cytoskeleton , spatially organizes caveolae and also facilitates caveolae clustering . It may also be that FLN A facilitates caveolae - mediated transport by regulating localized cy - toskeletal actin dynamics . FLN A was previously shown to bind several small GTPases , however , only RalA was shown to bind to FLN A in its active GTP - bound form ( Yasutaka et al . , 1999 ) . Moreover , Cav - 1 and RalA bind adjacent C - temi - nal domains of FLN A ( Yasutaka et al . , 1999 ; Stahlut and van Deurs , 2000 ) . Because RalA was previously shown to partic - ipate in Src activation and regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , membrane trafﬁcking , and formation of exocyst complexes ( Feig , 2003 ) , it is interesting to speculate that RalA may participate in FLN A - dependent regulation of caveolae - mediated endocytosis and transcytosis . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Mei - ling Chen in Research Resources Center Imaging facility for assistance with TIR - FM experiments and Drs . Oleg Chaga and Tiffany Sharma in the Department of Pharmacology Imaging Facility and Molecular Re - sources Core , respectively , for excellent support . We gratefully acknowledge Drs . F . Nakamura , W . H . Ziegler , and D . Mehta for providing valuable reagents as speciﬁed in Methods . We also thank Dr . Randal A . Skidgel and Dr . Dolly Mehta ( University of Illinois at Chicago ) and Dr . Geerten van Nieuw Amerongen ( Vrije University Medical Center , Amsterdam , The Neth - erlands ) for their thoughtful discussions . This work was supported by Na - tional Institutes of Health , National Heart , Lung and Blood Institute grants P01 HL60678 , R01 HL71626 , T32 HL072742 , and S10 RR022547 - 01A1 from the National Center for Research Resources which funded the TIR - FM system . This manuscript is based upon a thesis in partial fulﬁllment of the require - ments for the doctoral degree at the Graduate College of the University of Illinois at Chicago . REFERENCES Beekman , J . M . , van der Poel , C . E . , van der Linden , J . A . , van den Berg , D . L . C . , van den Berghe , P . V . E . , van de Winkel , J . G . J . , and Leusen , J . H . W . ( 2008 ) . Filamin A stabilizes Fc (cid:4) RI surface expression and prevents its lysoso - mal routing . J . Immunol . 180 , 3938 – 3945 . Doucey , M . - A . , Bender , F . C . , Hess , D . , Hofsteenge , J . , and Bron , C . ( 2006 ) . Caveolin - 1 interacts with the chaperone complex TCP - 1 and modulates its protein folding activity . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 1 – 10 . Feig , L . A . ( 2003 ) . Ral - GTPases : approaching their 15 minutes of fame . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 419 – 425 . Feng , Y . , Chen , M . H . , Moskowitz , I . P . , Mendonza , A . M . , Vidali , L . , Nakamura , F . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , and Walsh , C . A . ( 2006 ) . Filamin A ( FLNA ) is required for cell - cell contact in vascular development and cardiac morphogenesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 19836 – 19841 . Head , B . P . , Patel , H . H . , Roth , D . M . , Murray , F . , Swaney , J . S . , Niesman , I . R . , Farquhar , M . G . , and Insel , P . A . ( 2006 ) . Microtubules and actin microﬁla - ments regulate lipid raft / caveolae localization of adenylyl cyclase signaling components . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 26391 – 26399 . Hu , G . , Schwartz , D . E . , Shajahan , A . N . , Visintine , D . J . , Salem , M . R . , Crystal , G . J . , Albrecht , R . F . , Vogel , S . M . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2006 ) . Isoﬂurane , but not sevoﬂurane , increases transendothelial albumin permeability in the iso - lated rat lung . Anesthesiology 104 , 777 – 785 . Hu , G . , Place , A . T . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2008a ) . Regulation of endothelial permeability by Src kinase signaling : vascular leakage versus transcellular transport of drugs and macromolecules . Chem . Biol . Interact . 171 , 177 – 189 . Hu , G . , Vogel , S . M . , Schwartz , D . E . , Malik , A . B . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2008b ) . Intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 - dependent neutrophil adhesion to endothe - lial cells induces caveolae - mediated pulmonary vascular hyperpermeability . Circ . Res . 102 , 120 – 131 . Izumi , T . , Shibata , Y . , and Yamamoto , T . ( 1991 ) . Quick - freeze , deep - etch studies of endothelial components , with special reference to cytoskeletons and vesicle structures . J . Electron Microsc . 19 , 316 – 326 . Filamin A Regulates Caveolae Trafﬁcking Vol . 20 , November 1 , 2009 4539 John , T . A . , Vogel , S . M . , Tiruppathi , C . , Malik , A . B . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Quantitative analysis of albumin uptake and transport in the rat microvessel endothelial monolayer . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell Mol . Physiol . 284 , L187 – L196 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 – 1096 . Lee , E . , and Camilli , P . D . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin at actin tails . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 161 – 166 . Macdonald , J . L . , and Pike , L . J . ( 2005 ) . A simpliﬁed method for the prepara - tion of detergent - free lipid rafts . J . Lipid Res . 46 , 1061 – 1067 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and Wong , T . W . ( 2000 ) . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding pro - tein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 187 – 198 . Minshall , R . D . , and Malik , A . B . ( 2006 ) . Transport across the endothelium : regulation of endothelial permeability . In : Handbook of Experimental Phar - macology , Vol . 176 , ed . S . Moncada and A . Higgs , Heidelberg , Germany : Springer - Verlag , 107 – 144 . Minshall , R . D . , Sessa , W . C . , Stan , R . V . , Anderson , R . G . W . , and Malik , A . B . ( 2003 ) . Caveolin regulation of endothelial function . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell Mol . Physiol . 285 , L1179 – L1183 . Minshall , R . D . , Tiruppathi , C . , Vogel , S . M . , Niles , W . D . , Gilchrist , A . , Hamm , H . E . , and Malik , A . B . ( 2000 ) . Endothelial cell - surface gp60 activates vesicle formation and trafﬁcking via Gi - coupled Src kinase signaling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1057 – 1069 . Morone , N . , Fujiwara , T . , Murase , K . , Kasai , R . S . , Ike , H . , Yuasa , S . , Usukura , J . , and Kusumi , A . ( 2006 ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction of the membrane skeleton at the plasma membrane interface by electron tomography . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 851 – 862 . Mundy , D . I . , Machleidt , T . , Ying , Y . - S . , Anderson , R . G . W . , and Bloom , G . S . ( 2002 ) . Dual control of caveolar membrane trafﬁc by microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4327 – 4339 . Onoprishvili , I . , Andria , M . L . , Kramer , H . K . , Ancevska - Taneva , N . , Hiller , J . M . , and Simon , E . J . ( 2003 ) . Interaction between the (cid:1) opioid receptor and ﬁlamin A is involved in receptor regulation and trafﬁcking . Mol . Pharmacol . 64 , 1092 – 1100 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2002 ) . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 167 – 172 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . , and Simons , K . ( 1994 ) . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 – 1215 . Parkar , N . S . , Akba , B . S . , Nitsche , L . C . , Wedgewood , L . E . , Sverdlov , M . S . , Place , A . T . , Chaga , O . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2009 ) . Vesicle formation and endocytosis : function , machinery , mechanisms , and modeling . Antioxid . Re - dox Signal . 11 , 1301 – 1312 . Pelkmans , L . , and Helenius , A . ( 2002 ) . Endocytosis via caveolae . Trafﬁc 3 , 311 – 320 . Pelkmans , L . , Pu¨ntener , D . , and Helenius , A . ( 2002 ) . Local actin polymeriza - tion and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 , 535 – 539 . Pelkmans , L . , and Zerial , M . ( 2005 ) . Kinase - regulated quantal assemblies and kiss - and - run recycling of caveolae . Nature 436 , 128 – 133 . Predescu , S . A . , Predescu , D . N . , Timblin , B . K . , Radu Stan , V . , and Malik , A . B . ( 2003 ) . Intersectin regulates ﬁssion and internalization of caveolae in endothelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 4997 – 5010 . Ravid , D . , Chuderland , D . , Landsman , L . , Lavie , Y . , Reich , R . , and Liscovitch , M . ( 2008a ) . Filamin A is a novel caveolin - 1 - dependent target in IGF - I - stimu - lated cancer cell migration . Exp . Cell Res . 314 , 2762 – 2773 . Ravid , D . , Chuderland , D . , Landsman , L . , Lavie , Y . , Reich , R . , and Liscovitch , M . ( 2008b ) . Filamin A is a novel caveolin - 1 - dependent target in IGF - I - stimu - lated cancer cell migration . Exp . Cell Res . 314 , 2762 – 2773 . Richter , T . , Floetenmeyer , M . , Ferguson , C . , Galea , J . , Goh , J . , Lindsay , M . R . , Morgan , G . P . , Marsh , B . J . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2008 ) . High - resolution 3D quantitative analysis of caveolar ultrastructure and caveolae - cytoskeleton interactions . Trafﬁc 9 , 893 – 909 . Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin 2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁlament organization . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1852 – 1857 . Searles , C . D . , Ide , L . , Davis , M . E . , Cai , H . , and Weber , M . ( 2004 ) . Actin cytoskeleton organization and posttranscriptional regulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase during cell growth . Circ . Res . 95 , 488 – 495 . Seck , T . , Baron , R . , and Horne , W . C . ( 2003 ) . Binding of ﬁlamin to the C - terminal tail of the calcitonin receptor controls recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 10408 – 10416 . Shajahan , A . N . , Timblin , B . K . , Sandoval , R . , Tiruppathi , C . , Malik , A . B . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2004a ) . Role of Src - induced dynamin - 2 phosphorylation in caveolae - mediated endocytosis in endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 20392 – 20400 . Shajahan , A . N . , Tiruppathi , C . , Smrcka , A . V . , Malik , A . B . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2004b ) . G (cid:3)(cid:4) activation of Src induces caveolae - mediated endocytosis in endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 48055 – 48062 . Sharma , D . K . , Brown , J . C . , Choudhury , A . , Peterson , T . E . , Holicky , E . , Marks , D . L . , Simari , R . , Parton , R . G . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2004 ) . Selective stimulation of caveloar endocytosis by glycosphingolipids and cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3114 – 3122 . Stahlut , M . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2000 ) . Identiﬁcation of ﬁlamin as a novel ligand for caveolin - 1 , evidence for the organization of caveolin - 1 - associated membrane domains by the actin cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 325 – 337 . Stossel , T . P . , Condeelis , J . , Cooley , L . , Hartwig , J . H . , Noegel , A . , Schleicher , M . , and Shapiro , S . S . ( 2001 ) . Filamins as integrators of cell mechanics and signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Bio . 2 , 138 – 145 . Sverdlov , M . , Shajahan , A . N . , and Minshall , R . D . ( 2007 ) . Tyrosine phospho - rylation - dependence of caveolae - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Mol . Med . 11 , 1239 – 1250 . Tagawa , A . , Mezzacasa , A . , Hayer , A . , Longatti , A . , Pelkmans , L . , and Helenius , A . ( 2005 ) . ) . Assembly and trafﬁcking of caveolae domains in the cell : caveolae as stable , cargo - triggered vesicular transporters . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 769 – 779 . Thomsen , P . , Roepstorff , K . , Stahlut , M . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2002 ) . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane microdomains , which are not in - volved in constitutive endocytic trafﬁcking . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 238 – 250 . Tiruppathi , C . , Song , W . , Bergenfeldt , M . , Sass , P . , and Malik , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Gp60 activation mediates albumin transcytosis in endothelial cells by tyrosine kinase - dependent pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 25968 – 25975 . Ohta , Y . , Suzuki , N . , Nakamura , S . , Hartwig , J . H . , and Stossel , T . P . ( 1999 ) . The small GTPase RalA targets ﬁlamin to induce ﬁlopodia . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 2122 – 2128 . M . Sverdlov et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 4540