UC Merced Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society Title Overreliance on conceptually far sources decreases the creativity of ideas Permalink https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 2bm91572 Journal Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , 36 ( 36 ) ISSN 1069 - 7977 Authors Chan , Joel Schunn , Christian Dow , Steven Publication Date 2014 Peer reviewed eScholarship . org Powered by the California Digital Library University of California Overreliance on conceptually far sources decreases the creativity of ideas Joel Chan ( joc59 @ pitt . edu ) , Christian Schunn ( schunn @ pitt . edu ) Learning Research and Development Center , University of Pittsburgh 3939 O’Hara St , Pittsburgh , PA 15260 , USA Steven Dow ( spdow @ cs . cmu . edu ) Human Computer - Interaction Institute , Carnegie - Mellon University 5000 Forbes Ave , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 , USA Abstract Ideas are often generated from inspiration sources ( e . g . , prior experiences with the world , solutions to analogous problems ) . These sources may have benefits but also pitfalls ( e . g . , diffi - culty thinking of alternative approaches ) . In this paper , we in - vestigate whether and how features of inspiration sources predict their impact on creative outcomes . In particular , we examine the popular but unevenly supported hypothesis that conceptually distant sources of inspiration provide the best in - sights for creative production . We test this hypothesis in the context of a Web - based real - world creativity platform , while addressing key methodological issues in prior empirical stud - ies ( e . g . , truncated time scale , low statistical power , problem variation ) . Through a text analysis of many hundreds of con - cepts , we test whether greater conceptual distance between a concept’s cited sources and the problem domain increases its probability of creative success ( in this case , being shortlisted by an expert panel as a promising creative concept ) . We found that concepts that cite sources had greater success than those that did not cite sources of inspiration . However , in - creases in mean conceptual distance of sources actually de - creased the probability of success , suggesting that far sources do not uniquely boost creativity and that an overreliance on far sources may even harm creativity . This negative effect of distance was robust across authors and different design prob - lems on the platform . In light of these findings , we revisit theories of creative inspiration and general creative cognition . Keywords : Creativity ; analogy ; problem - solving ; in - vivo Introduction In the creative process , people inevitably build new ideas from sources of inspiration , most often from their prior knowledge and experiences ( Ward , 1994 ) . These sources of inspiration can lead one astray — e . g . , incorporating unde - sirable features from existing solutions ( Jansson & Smith , 1991 ) , difficulty thinking of alternative approaches ( Wiley , 1998 ) — but sometimes drive creative breakthroughs ( Eck - ert & Stacey , 1998 ; Hargadon & Sutton , 1997 ) . Are there features of inspirations that can predict when they will harm or hurt creativity ? One potential feature of interest is the conceptual distance of those sources from one’s working domain . For instance , consider the problem of e - waste ac - cumulation : the world generates 20 - 50 million metric tons of e - waste every year , yielding environmentally hazardous additions to landfills . An innovator might approach this problem by building on near sources like smaller - scale elec - tronics reuse / recycle efforts , or by drawing inspiration from a far source like edible food packaging technology ( e . g . , to design re - usable electronics parts ) . The central question we consider here is : what are the relative benefits of different levels of source conceptual distance for creative outcomes ? Many authors , principally those studying the role of anal - ogy in the creative process , have proposed that conceptually far sources — structurally similar ideas with many surface ( or object ) dissimilarities ( e . g . , the atom / solar system analo - gy ) — have more potential to yield more creative ideas ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1996 ; Ward , 1998 ) . Empirically , the literature provides a mixed picture . A number of studies have shown an advantage of far over near sources for quality and flexibility of ideation , in addition to novelty of ideas ( Chan et al . , 2011 ; Chiu & Shu , 2012 ; Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ; Gonçalves et al . , 2013 ; Hende et al . , 2002 ) . However , some in vivo studies of crea - tive discovery have failed to find strong connections be - tween far sources and creative mental leaps ( Chan & Schunn , accepted ) , and other experiments have demonstrat - ed equivalent benefits of both far and near sources for crea - tive outcomes ( Enkel & Gassmann , 2010 ; Malaga , 2000 ; Tseng et al . , 2008 ) , and even harmful effects of distance on creative outcomes ( Fu et al . , 2013 ) What does this imply for theories of creative inspiration ? Perhaps it is necessary to abandon or revise the theory that far sources uniquely support creativity , in line with theorists like Perkins ( 1983 ) , who argues that conceptual distance does not matter , or Weisberg ( 2009 ) , who argues that with - in - domain expertise is a primary driver of creativity . How - ever , this assumes that opposing findings have a strong em - pirical foundation . Here , we argue that this is not the case : there are key methodological shortcomings in prior work that should be addressed before considering theory revision . One potential methodological shortcoming is that the length of prior studies ( typically 30 minutes to 1 hour prob - lem - solving time ) may be too short to observe the potential long - term payoffs of cross - domain inspiration . Scarce cog - nitive resources are required to ignore irrelevant surface details and attend to potentially insightful structural simi - larities . This might partially explain losses in fluency some - times observed with the use of far sources ( Chan et al . , 2011 ; Hender et al . , 2002 ) . Problem solvers may be unwill - ing or unable to pay these higher relative costs of processing far sources in the context of a short task , whereas the pro - cessing cost would be reasonable on a more realistic design time scale . For example , 20 minutes is a substantial cost when the ideation phase is 1 hour long , but a negligible cost 313 in a time span of weeks / months ( a more realistic time scale for ideation phases in typical design projects ) . Relatedly , there may be low expected returns with few samples of low probability / high gain choices . At shorter time scales , crea - tors might not have enough samples to consistently find these “hidden gems” for maximal inspirational payoff . An additional issue in prior studies is a lack of statistical power . Among existing experimental studies , most have an N of 12 or less per treatment cell ( Chiu & Shu , 2012 ; Hen - der et al . , 2002 ; Malaga , 2000 ) ; only 4 studies had an N of 18 or better per cell ( Chan et al . , 2011 ; Fu et al . , 2013 ; Gon - çalves et al . , 2013 ; Tseng et al . , 2008 ) , and they are evenly split in support / opposition for the benefits of far sources . Among the few correlational studies , only Dahl and Moreau ( 2002 ) had an acceptable study design in this regard , with 119 participants and a reasonable range of conceptual dis - tance . Enkel and Gassmann ( 2010 ) only sampled 25 cases , and suffered from range restriction because they only sam - pled cases of cross - industry transfer . Thus , the mixed empirical evidence base may reflect the proliferation of false negatives due to insufficient statistical power ( potentially exacerbated by small or potentially zero effects at short time scales ) ; on the other hand , the under - powered designs may have also yielded severe overestima - tion of effect sizes ( i . e . , false positives ; Button et al . , 2013 ) . A final methodological problem has to do with problem variation . Many of the experimental studies focus on a sin - gle design problem . It could be that some of the incon - sistency of outcomes is the result of some design problems having unique characteristics . The current work addresses all of these methodological issues ( time scale , statistical power , problem variation ) to yield stronger evidence to guide theorizing about the impact of conceptual distance on creative outcomes . Methods Research Context The current work is conducted in the context of OpenIDEO ( www . openideo . com ) , a large - scale Web - based crowd - sourced open innovation platform that addresses various social problems ( e . g . , managing e - waste , increasing accessi - bility in elections ) . Problems are sponsored by an external company / organization , and instantiated as OpenIDEO chal - lenges . Challenges begin with presentation of the challenge brief , crafted collaboratively with OpenIDEO designers , which gives a broad overview of the problem to be solved . Over the subsequent ~ 10 weeks , contributors to the plat - form first post inspirations ( e . g . , descriptions of solutions to analogous problems , case studies of stakeholders ) for a giv - en problem , which help to define the problem space and identify promising solution approaches , and then concepts , i . e . , specific solutions to the problem . Concepts are typically ~ 150 words long , providing more detail than one or two words / sentences / sketches , but less detail than a full - fledged design report ( see Fig . 1 for an example concept ) . When posting concepts , contributors are prompted to cite inspira - tions that serve as sources of inspiration . These cited sources are stored and displayed as metadata for the con - cept . Throughout each challenge , contributors give feedback on each other’s inspirations and concepts , primarily in the form of comments that are displayed on each inspiration / concept . A subset of concepts is shortlisted by an expert panel ( com - posed of challenge sponsors , who are domain experts , and expert designers from OpenIDEO ) for further refinement , taking both the novelty and feasibility / quality of each con - cept into consideration . A subset of the refined shortlisted concepts is then selected for real - world implementation . Data Collection and Sample The full dataset consists of 2 , 341 concepts posted for 12 completed challenges by 1 , 190 unique contributors ( majori - ty designers , domain experts ) , citing 4 , 557 unique inspira - tions ; 110 of the concepts are shortlisted . These concepts and inspirations exist as public webpages on the OpenIDEO site , and were downloaded with OpenIDEO administrators’ permission . Using a simple HTML parser , we extracted the full - text description of each concept / inspiration ( for measurement of conceptual distance ) , and for all concepts , 1 ) information on what sources were cited , 2 ) number of comments received , and 3 ) an indicator for whether the concept was shortlisted for development . Not all concepts cited inspirations as sources . Of the 2 , 341 concepts , 707 ( posted by 357 authors ) cited at least Figure 1 : Raw text from example concept 314 one inspiration , collectively citing 2 , 245 unique inspira - tions . 110 of these concepts ( ~ 16 % ) were shortlisted . This set of 707 concepts is the primary sample for this study ; the others serve as a contrast to examine the value of explicit building at all on prior sources . Measures Conceptual Distance The unique nature of our dataset pre - sented some methodological challenges to measuring dis - tance . The complex and multifaceted nature of the various design problems made it difficult to distinguish between “within” and “between” domain sources in a consistent and principled manner . Continuous distance measures were an attractive alternative , but were too costly to obtain from human raters due to the large number of sources . Even with sufficient time , we were concerned about rater fatigue , pos - sibly leading to poor reliability or drift in rating standards . To address these challenges , we employed a computational approach to measuring distance . We used Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ; Blei et al . 2003 ) to learn a high - dimensional topic space from the full - text descriptions of the challenge briefs and con - cepts / inspirations . This approach is similar to Latent Seman - tic Analysis ( Landauer et al . , 1998 ) , but for some purposes can produce stronger results ( Griffiths et al . , 2007 ) . Briefly , LDA uses Bayesian probabilistic modeling to infer latent topics that produce the words in a given text based on statis - tical patterns of word use across texts in the corpus ; simi - larity between texts is the degree of overlap in the texts’ topics . To reduce potential noise , we first removed stop - words ( e . g . , “the” , “which” ) from the texts . 400 topics were inferred from the entire collection of 6 , 910 documents . We then computed cosine similarity between each inspiration and its challenge brief when projected into this topic space . For validation , five judges all coded continuous similarity ( on a 1 to 6 scale ) for 199 inspirations from one challenge . Although the task was difficult , the mean ratings across raters had an acceptable aggregate consistency intra - class correlation coefficient of . 74 . The LDA - based cosines corre - lated well with the human similarity ratings , r = . 51 , p < . 01 . This level of match was actually better than the highest pairwise agreement between the judges , reinforcing the val - ue of automatic coding methods for this difficult task . Fig . 2 shows examples of a near and far inspiration , along with the top 3 LDA topics ( represented by the top 5 words associated with that latent topic ) , computed cosine vs . its challenge brief , and human similarity rating . Both inspira - tions are from the e - waste challenge , addressing the problem illustrated in the introduction above . For reference , the top 3 topics for the challenge brief are { waste , e , recycling , elec - tronics , electronic } , { waste , materials , recycling , recycled , material } , and { devices , electronics , electronic , device , products } ( distinguishing e - waste , general recycling , and electronics products ) The challenge briefs varied in length and specificity across challenges , as did mean raw cosines . To test if mean differences between challenges were meaningful , we com - pared cosines for 80 concepts from 4 challenges ( whose mean raw cosines were very different from each other : 2 high and 2 low ) with human judgments ( coded separately but in the same way as above ) . The difference in mean co - sine for the high vs low challenges was much smaller for the human judgments , d = 0 . 18 , 95 % CI = [ – 0 . 05 to 0 . 43 ] , than the cosines , d = 1 . 90 , 95 % CI = [ 1 . 85 to 1 . 92 ] , suggesting that between - challenge differences might be more an artifact of variance in challenge brief length / specificity . Thus , to ensure meaningful comparability across challenges , we normalized the cosines by computing the z - score for each inspiration’s cosine relative to other inspirations from the same challenge . Similar results were obtained with raw co - sines , but with more uncertainty in the estimates . To convert the cosines into a distance measure , we sub - tracted the cosine z - score from zero ( so that higher = more distant ) . Then , each concept’s conceptual distance measure was the mean distance of its cited inspirations . Creative Outcomes Each concept’s creative outcome measure was the binary status of whether or not it was shortlisted for further refinement . We note that this measure arises from the deliberations of an expert panel , a gold standard for measurement of creativity ( Amabile , 1982 ) , and combines consideration of both novelty and quality , the standard definition of creativity ( Sawyer , 2009 ) : the chal - lenges are novel and unsolved , so by definition solving them would involve concepts that are different from ( and , perhaps more importantly , significantly better than ) existing unsatis - factory solutions . Control measures Feedback ( particularly raising ques - tions / issues , suggestions for improvement ) has the potential to significantly enhance the quality of the concept . Further , Figure 2 : Topics found by LDA within examples of near and far inspirations for the e - waste challenge 315 feedback may be an alternate pathway to success via source distance : building on far sources may attract more attention and therefore higher levels of feedback , thereby improving the concept ; failing to account for feedback may lead to inflated estimates of the effects of source distance . Thus , we include the number of comments as a control measure . Concepts could also cite other concepts as sources . Build - ing on other highly creative concepts ( measured by their shortlist status ) could also significantly enhance the creativi - ty of the concept . Thus , we also include the number of cited shortlisted concepts as an additional control measure . Results Descriptive Statistics Because of our normalization procedure , the mean distance of cited inspiration sources was very close to 0 , but ranged considerably . Feedback and number of shortlisted sources also varied considerably , particularly feedback . Table 1 : Descriptive statistics for predictor variables . Variable M SD Min Max Mean norm . distance – 0 . 10 0 . 85 – 3 . 85 1 . 67 Feedback 8 . 43 9 . 45 0 67 Shortlisted sources 0 . 51 0 . 96 0 11 Statistical Models Single - level Model We first fitted a logistic regression model with shortlist as the binary outcome , and mean dis - tance , feedback , and shortlisted sources as predictors . The model estimates a negative effect of mean distance on shortlist probability – hereafter termed Pr ( shortlist ) — with a 1 - unit increase in mean distance predicting a decrease of . 38 in the log odds of being shortlisted ( see Table 2 ) . As an example , a concept with mean feedback and shortlisted sources , and mean distance = 0 would have predicted Pr ( shortlist ) = 0 . 13 ; increasing its mean distance to 1 would give predicted Pr ( shortlist ) = 0 . 09 . The model had a superior fit to a null model with no pre - dictors , likelihood ratio = 73 . 50 , p < . 001 ( for χ 2 with df = 3 ) . Removing mean distance significantly increased model deviance by 7 . 78 , p < . 01 ( for χ 2 with df = 1 ) . Table 2 : Coefficient estimates for logistic regression of shortlist on mean distance , feedback , and shortlisted sources β SE exp ( β ) Intercept – 2 . 66 0 . 18 0 . 07 Mean norm . distance – 0 . 38 0 . 14 0 . 68 Feedback 0 . 08 0 . 01 1 . 08 Shortlisted sources 0 . 16 0 . 10 1 . 17 Multilevel Models Given the multilevel structure of the data ( concepts nested within authors , and also cross - classified within challenges ) , we also explored multilevel versions of the same model . Due to sample size restrictions ( many missing cases and low n ij for the crossed cells ) , we fitted 2 separate multilevel models : 1 ) a fixed - effects 2 - level model with the same predictor specifications at level 1 ( the concept level ) , and modeling author - level variation in mean Pr ( shortlist ) , and 2 ) a random - effects 2 - level model with the same predictor specifications at level - 1 , and modeling chal - lenge - level variation in both mean Pr ( shortlist ) , and the slope for the effect of mean distance . The structure of these models is very similar , with the fol - lowing structure at level 1 : (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:6) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:7) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2) where (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) is the mean Pr ( shortlist ) for the j th level - 2 unit , (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:1) is the estimated effect of mean normalized dis - tance , (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:7) (cid:1) is the estimated effect of feedback , and (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:8)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2) (cid:1) is the estimated effect of number of shortlisted sources . The level - 2 structure is : (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) where (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:1) is the grand mean Pr ( shortlist ) for all concepts ; and (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) is the level - 2 variance in (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) . For modeling the challenge - level variation , we add the following structure at level - 2 : (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) where (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:1) is the estimated effect of mean distance across challenges , and (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) is the challenge - level variance in (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) . The author - multilevel model addresses potential concerns that estimates of the effect of mean distance may be un - trustworthy due to failure to account for within - author simi - larity of concepts . The challenge - multilevel model addresses our key methodological interest in investigating robustness of effects across different problems . Table 3 summarizes the estimates and fits of these models in comparison to the sim - pler model discussed above . Table 3 : Coefficient estimates for the effect of mean nor - malized distance and model fit statistics with no nesting , author - nesting , and challenge - nesting Mean norm . distance Deviance AIC No nesting – 0 . 37 537 . 74 545 . 74 Author - nesting – 0 . 40 536 . 14 546 . 14 Challenge - nesting – 0 . 36 507 . 02 517 . 02 Modeling author - level nesting improved fit by a small amount . Modeling challenge - level nesting considerably im - proved fit relative to the no - nesting model , with the lowered Akaike information criterion ( AIC ) suggesting that this was not due to overfitting . Importantly , the coefficients for mean distance remained substantially similar across all models , 316 and modeling challenge - variation for mean distance gives an essentially zero estimate ( (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) = 0 . 04 ) and no improve - ment in model fit from a fixed slope model , χ 2 ( 2 ) = 0 . 15 , p = . 46 , indicating that the negative effect of inspiration dis - tance was robust across challenges . Since the challenge - nesting model gives the lowest deviance and AIC , we select it as our “best - fitting” model : the 95 % CI for the effect of mean distance for this model was – . 67 to – . 08 . Fig . 3 highlights qualitative interpretations of this effect . Since our distance measure is normalized to have a mean of zero , we can interpret the marked decrease in Pr ( shortlist ) from the 2 nd to 3 rd bins as the effect of a shift in the balance of near vs far sources ( i . e . , relying on more far vs . near sources ) . Further , the horizontal gray bar highlights that there is an overall benefit of building on any inspirations : concepts with approximately equivalent amounts of feed - back ( i . e . , mean of 8 . 43 ) , have a predicted Pr ( shortlist = . 09 , 95 % CI = [ . 07 to . 11 ] ; using a logistic model , the coefficient for “any citation” ( controlling for feedback ) is 0 . 31 , 95 % CI = [ 0 . 01 to 0 . 62 ] ) . However , the convergence of the fitted and observed lines towards the gray bar as mean distance increases suggests that the benefits of building on sources mainly accrue when building mostly on near inspirations . Discussion Summary and Interpretation of Findings To summarize , we found that — contrary to prior theoretical predictions — relying more on far sources was associated with worse creative outcomes , measured by Pr ( shortlist ) , controlling for important control variables , such as the amount of feedback received , and the quality of concepts being built upon . Qualitatively , relying mostly on far sources ( indicated by a very high mean distance ) appears to almost negate the benefits of building on inspirations . Importantly , this effect was robust across challenges , ad - dressing the concerns raised about potential problem varia - tion . It is also noteworthy that modeling author - nesting did not yield information gain that justified the extra parameters ( as suggested by the higher AIC relative to the no - nesting model ) , suggesting that knowing how an idea was devel - oped ( e . g . , amount of feedback , nature of sources ) could yield at least as much insight ( if not more , as in our context ) into the likely creative outcome of the idea than knowing other characteristics about its author ( e . g . , intelligence ) . Caveats Some caveats should be discussed before addressing the implications of this study . First , the statistical patterns ob - served here are conditional : i . e . , given that a concept has cited inspirations as sources , mean distance of those inspira - tions has a negative relationship with Pr ( shortlist ) . Our data are silent on the effects of mean distance for concepts that did not cite sources . However , these concepts were overall of lower quality ; thus , it is unlikely that the negative effect of mean distance can be attributed to attrition ( e . g . , benefi - cial far inspirations not being observed ) . Nevertheless , we should be cautious about making inferences about the im - pact of sources of inspiration that remain unconscious ( since sources in this data are explicitly cited and therefore con - sciously built upon ) . Second , some may be concerned that we have not meas - ured novelty here . Conceivably , the benefits of distance may only be best observed for the novelty of ideas , and not nec - essarily quality , consistent with some recent work ( Franke et al . , 2013 ) . However , novelty per se is not creativity ; thus , we contend that to fully understand the effects of distance on creativity , we must consider its impacts on both novelty and quality together ( as our shortlist measure does ) . Implications These caveats notwithstanding , our results provide strong opposition to the theory that creative ideas are most likely to come from far sources . In light of this opposition ( which helps strengthen existing opposing findings ) , we suggest that the theoretical emphasis on associating creative leaps with far sources may be misguided and require revision . We should be clear that our findings do not imply that no creative ideas come from far sources . Creative ideas can come from both near and far sources ; indeed , as our data suggest , some highly creative ideas can come from relying almost not at all on far sources . However , our data do sug - gest that overreliance on far sources may have a negative impact on creative production ( perhaps due to cognitive costs , as mentioned in our introduction ) . From a broader perspective , the suggestions of beneficial effects of staying relatively close to the problem domain point to the value of iterative , deep search , a mechanism for creative breakthroughs that may be often overlooked but potentially at least as important as singular creative leaps ( Chan & Schunn , in press ; Dow et al . , 2009 ; Rietzschel et al . , 2007 ; Sawyer , 2009 ) . Overall , cognitive theories of crea - Figure 3 : Pr ( shortlist ) as a function of mean normalized distance . Observed points are mean values from 4 equal N bins . Vertical error bars are 95 % CI for Pr ( shortlist ) ; hori - zontal error bars are 95 % CI for mean distance of the bin . Curve is fitted with mean values for feedback and shortlist - ed sources , with coefficient of mean distance from the chal - lenge - nesting model . Horizontal gray bar width indicates 95 % CI for Pr ( shortlist ) for concepts with no sources . 317 tivity may benefit from recognizing that there may be multi - ple parallel paths to creative breakthroughs . Acknowledgments This research was supported in part by a Mellon Fellowship to the first author . We are grateful to OpenIDEO for giving us access to this data . References Amabile , T . M . ( 1982 ) . Social psychology of creativity : A consensual assessment technique . Journal of Personal - ity and Social Psychology , 43 ( 5 ) , 997 - 1013 . Blei , D . M . , Ng , A . Y . , Jordan , M . I . , & Lafferty , J . ( 2003 ) . Latent Dirichlet allocation . Journal of Machine Learning Research , 993 - 1022 . Button , K . S . , Ioannidis , J . P . A . , Mokrysz , C . , Nosek , B . A . , Flint , J . , Robinson , E . S . J . , & Munafò , M . R . ( 2013 ) . Power failure : Why small sample size undermines the re - liability of neuroscience . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 14 ( 5 ) , 365 - 376 . Chan , J . , Fu , K . , Schunn , C . D . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . L . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2011 ) . On the benefits and pitfalls of anal - ogies for innovative design : Ideation performance based on analogical distance , commonness , and modality of ex - amples . Journal of Mechanical Design , 133 , 081004 . Chan , J . , & Schunn , C . ( in press ) . The Impact of analogies on creative concept generation : Lessons from an in vivo study in engineering design . Cognitive Science . Chiu , I . , & Shu , H . ( 2012 ) . Investigating effects of opposite - ly related semantic stimuli on design concept creativity . Journal of Engineering Design , 23 ( 4 ) , 271 - 296 . Dahl , D . W . , & Moreau , P . ( 2002 ) . The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Jour - nal of Marketing Research , 39 ( 1 ) , 47 – 60 . Dow , S . P . , Heddleston , K . , & Klemmer , S . R . ( 2009 ) . The efficacy of prototyping under time constraints . In Pro - ceedings of the 7th ACM conference on creativity and cognition . Eckert , C . , & Stacey , M . ( 1998 ) . Fortune favours only the prepared mind : Why sources of inspiration are essential for continuing creativity . Creativity and Innovation Man - agement , 7 ( 1 ) , 1 - 12 . Enkel , E . , & Gassmann , O . ( 2010 ) . Creative imitation : Ex - ploring the case of cross - industry innovation . R & D Management , 40 ( 3 ) , 256 - 270 . Franke , N . , Poetz , M . K . , & Schreier , M . ( 2013 ) . Integrating problem solvers from analogous markets in new product ideation . Management Science ( ahead - of - print ) . Fu , K . , Chan , J . , Cagan , J . , Kotovsky , K . , Schunn , C . , & Wood , K . ( 2013 ) . The meaning of “near” and “far” : The impact of structuring design databases and the effect of distance of analogy on design output . Journal of Mechan - ical Design , 135 ( 2 ) , 021007 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 ( 1 ) , 45 - 56 . Gonçalves , M . , Cardoso , C . , & Badke - Schaub , P . ( 2013 ) . Inspiration peak : Exploring the semantic distance between design problem and textual inspirational stimuli . Interna - tional Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation , ( ahead - of - print ) , 1 - 18 . Griffiths , T . L . , Steyvers , M . , & Tenenbaum , J . B . ( 2007 ) . Topics in semantic representation . Psychological re - view , 114 ( 2 ) , 211 . Hargadon , A . , & Sutton , R . I . ( 1997 ) . Technology brokering and innovation in a product development firm . Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 42 ( 4 ) , 716 . Hender , J . M . , Dean , D . L . , Rodgers , T . L . , & Jay , F . F . ( 2002 ) . An examination of the impact of stimuli type and GSS structure on creativity : Brainstorming versus non - brainstorming techniques in a GSS environment . Journal of Management Information Systems , 18 ( 4 ) , 59 - 85 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1996 ) . Mental leaps : Analo - gy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA . Jansson , D . G . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Design fixation . Design Studies , 12 ( 1 ) , 3 - 11 . Landauer , T . K . , Foltz , P . W . , & Laham , D . ( 1998 ) . An in - troduction to latent semantic analysis . Discourse process - es , 25 ( 2 - 3 ) , 259 - 284 . Malaga , R . A . ( 2000 ) . The effect of stimulus modes and associative distance in individual creativity support sys - tems . Decision Support Systems , 29 ( 2 ) , 125 - 141 . Perkins , D . N . ( 1983 ) . Novel remote analogies seldom con - tribute to discovery . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 17 ( 4 ) , 223 - 239 . Rietzschel , E . F . , Nijstad , B . A . , & Stroebe , W . ( 2007 ) . Rel - ative accessibility of domain knowledge and creativity : The effects of knowledge activation on the quantity and originality of generated ideas . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 43 ( 6 ) , 933 - 946 . Sawyer , R . K . ( 2012 ) . Explaining creativity : The science of human innovation ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Oxford Universi - ty Press . Tseng , I . , Moss , J . , Cagan , J . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2008 ) . The role of timing and analogical similarity in the stimulation of idea generation in design . Design Studies , 29 ( 3 ) , 203 - 221 . Ward , T . B . ( 1994 ) . Structured imagination : The role of category structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psy - chology , 27 ( 1 ) , 1 - 40 . Ward , T . B . ( 1998 ) . Analogical distance and purpose in cre - ative thought : Mental leaps versus mental hops . In K . J . Holyoak , D . Gentner , & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advances in analogy research : Integration of theory and data from the cognitive , computational , and neural sciences ( pp . 221 – 230 ) . Sofia , Bulgaria . Weisberg , R . W . ( 2009 ) . On " out - of - the - box " thinking in creativity . In A . B . Markman & K . L . Wood ( Eds . ) , Tools for innovation ( pp . 23 - 47 ) . New York , NY . Wiley , J . ( 1998 ) . Expertise as mental set : The effects of domain knowledge in creative problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 26 ( 4 ) , 716 - 730 . 318