25 APRIL 2006 the dean decreed elimination of the school’s three departments , creating a faculty of the school as a whole , and reducing turf bat - tles . Now , faculty members voluntarily af - ﬁliate with four concentrations . Because the school and its doctoral pro - grams were restructured simultaneously , the Ed . D . and the Ph . D . are developing as equally valuable , but distinct , degrees . It took tremendous faculty time and energy to make these curricular changes , and the new curriculum continues to ask a lot of faculty , who keep revising with programs under way . But the change seems worth the effort : Applications to both programs have increased dramatically , and faculty members now have a commitment to shared intellectual enterprise . USC under - went tremendous change to address signif - icant problems . 1 . . . . . The problems of the education doctor - ate are not acute . To call them such would suggest that they are new and of potentially short duration . In fact , the problems are chronic and crippling . Unless we face these issues squarely and with purposeful action , schools of education risk becoming in - creasingly impotent in carrying out their primary missions—the advancement of knowledge and the preparation of quality practitioners . Some problems are endemic to all doc - toral programs . For the last century— starting with William James’ wonderful skewering of the “Ph . D . octopus” ( 1903 ) — many have questioned whether the experi - ence of earning the degree prepares recipi - ents for the professional and scholarly roles they will pursue . Some problems are the special province of education . We struggle with the wide - spread perception that education doctorates The problems of the education doctorates are chronic and crippling . The purposes of preparing scholars and practitioners are con - fused ; as a result , neither is done well . We must move forward on two fronts simultane - ously : rethinking and reclaiming the research doctorate ( the Ph . D . ) , with its strong links to practice , and developing a robust and distinct practice doctorate ( the P . P . D . ) with a dis - tinctive scholarly base . Unlike most current education Ph . D . s and Ed . D . s , the two degrees would serve distinct purposes , and like their medical analogs—the biomedical Ph . D . and the M . D . —would have different curricula and assessments . Building on lessons learned in the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate and in the Carnegie Foundation’s studies of preparation for the professions , we argue that this reform is necessary and possible . W hen Karen Gallagher became dean at the University of Southern California ( USC ) Rossier School of Education in 2000 , she as - sumed leadership of a school whose gradu - ate programs looked like most others : More than two hundred students were enrolled in four distinct Ed . D . programs , more than a hundred in two Ph . D . programs . Distinc - tions between the programs were unclear , student progress was often slow , and the quality of student work was highly variable . A recent academic program review had been negative , and the school was suffering from budget problems . Moreover , the university president had recently announced that doc - toral programs needed to show evidence of high quality or risk closure . This threat forced the faculty to answer questions of purpose that challenged exist - ing structures , including implicit biases that treated the Ed . D . as a “low - end Ph . D . ” After much deliberation , the faculty over - hauled their Ed . D . and Ph . D . programs . The decision - making and implementa - tion processes , though sometimes rocky , resulted in two programs with clearly dif - ferent goals , requirements , and student populations . Several programs , including a highly rated counseling psychology Ph . D . , were dropped . Now , Ed . D . students are in a 3 - year , part - time program with a practice emphasis . Admitted students are expected to have signiﬁcant experience ; talented candidates who do not appear to be a good ﬁt for the program’s emphases are not ad - mitted . The Ph . D . program limits entering cohorts to a handful of students in a full - time , research - intensive program . The implementation process had its set - backs . Although the entire faculty voted to let the Ph . D . Steering Committee set the program requirements , faculty did not sup - port the committee’s proposal to double the research requirement—to the equivalent of two solo - authored articles in 3 years—for faculty who would chair dissertations in the new Ph . D . program . Dean Gallagher responded to these objections by keeping the requirement as it had been . However , by student choice , only highly research - active faculty who can fund students on grants are advising Ph . D . students , thereby meeting the goal of the proposed research requirement . Concurrent changes in organization and governance aided implementation . In 2001 , Research Newsand Comment The Research News and Comment section publishes commentary and analyses on trends , policies , utilization , and contro - versies in educational research . Like the articles and reviews in the Features and Book Review sections of ER , this material does not necessarily reﬂect the views of AERA nor is it endorsed by the organization . Reclaiming Education’s Doctorates : A Critique and a Proposal by Lee S . Shulman , Chris M . Golde , Andrea Conklin Bueschel , and Kristen J . Garabedian EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 26 lack rigor and substance , and are often seen as second - rate degrees . Unlike other ﬁelds , ours uses the doctorate both to prepare scholars and to prepare the highest level of leading practitioners ( McClintock , 2005 ) . Often , through confusion of purpose , we end by doing neither very well . Each year in the United States , about 6 , 500 doctorates are awarded in education—more than in engineering ( 5 , 700 ) or the physical sciences ( 6 , 000 ) , and fewer only than in the life sciences ( 8 , 800 ) ( Hoffer , Welch , Williams , Hess , Webber , Lisek , et al . , 2005 ) . Education stu - dents differ from those in the arts and sci - ences or engineering in that most education students have had careers before pursuing the doctorate . This sequencing of doctoral work and work in the profession is the in - verse of other ﬁelds , with doctoral work coming at a mid - career stage for education students rather than at the beginning . On average , doctoral students in schools of ed - ucation are older ; the median age when they receive their doctorate is over 43 . While arts and sciences students typically wait 2 years after receiving the bachelor’s before starting the Ph . D . , education students have an aver - age “gap” of almost a decade . 2 In contrast to other doctoral students , the majority of ed - ucation doctoral students attend school part - time while continuing to work . To meet student needs , many education doctoral programs teach the majority of classes in intensive evening or weekend for - mats . This leads to little socialization into communities of inquiry or practice . Al - though we can make only gross estimates , 3 a relatively small proportion—a quarter to a third—enters the professoriate upon re - ceipt of the doctorate . This is much lower than in most ﬁelds in the arts and sciences 4 and indicates a mismatch between prepa - ration and actual career paths , an issue that also challenges the arts and sciences ( Golde & Dore , 2001 ) . Although most schools of education value diversity and depth of ex - perience in their students , serving such a wide range of students presents signiﬁcant challenges . Each discipline has its own is - sues to contend with , but education schools must solve some serious problems to achieve excellence . We noticed many contrasts between ed - ucation doctoral programs and those in the arts and sciences through our work in the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate ( CID ) , and arguing for the elimination of one , or for an increased distinction between the two ( Anderson , 1983 ; Brown , 1966 , 1990 ; Brown & Slater , 1960 ; Clifford & Guthrie , 1988 ; Deering , 1998 ; Dill & Morrison , 1985 ; Levine , 2005 ; Osguthorpe & Wong , 1993 ) . In theory , these two degrees are expected to occupy overlapping yet distinct cate - gories . The Ed . D . , intended as preparation for managerial and administrative leader - ship in education , focuses on preparing practitioners—from principals to curricu - lum specialists , to teacher – educators , to evaluators—who can use existing knowl - edge to solve educational problems . A Ph . D . in education , on the other hand , is assumed to be a traditional academic degree that prepares researchers , university faculty , and scholars in education , often from the per - spective of a particular discipline . Research questions , techniques , and thesis require - ments for the Ph . D . are expected to be more theoretical than for the Ed . D . and are sim - ilar to those in other academic disciplines ( Anderson , 1983 ; Dill & Morrison , 1985 ) . In reality , the distinctions between the programs are minimal , and the required ex - periences ( curriculum ) and performances ( dissertation ) strikingly similar ( Anderson , 1983 ; Dill & Morrison , 1985 ; Murphy & Vriesenga , 2005 ) . Instead of having two separate entities that effectively accomplish distinct functions , we have confounding and compromise , a blurring of boundaries , resulting in the danger that we achieve rig - orous preparation neither for practice nor for research . One of the greatest challenges for edu - cation Ph . D . programs is ensuring that stu - dents develop into effective researchers . This was the issue most often raised by depart - ments applying to participate in the CID ( Golde & Bueschel , 2004 ) , not surpris - ingly , given the well - documented national debates about what counts as quality edu - cational research ( see Eisenhart & Towne , 2003 ; Olson , 2004 ; Shavelson & Towne , 2002 ) . To people outside the ﬁeld of edu - cation , however , this is astonishing . The Ph . D . is a research degree ; research is gen - erally the one thing that Ph . D . programs are conﬁdent that they do well ( Golde & Dore , 2001 ) . For the Ph . D . in most arts and sciences ﬁelds , a small cohort of students is admit - ted every fall for full - time study . The ﬁrst a 5 - year project launched in 2001 that challenged graduate departments to think critically about their purposes and how to redesign their Ph . D . programs . We chose to include only six disciplines—chemistry , education , English , history , mathematics , and neuroscience—to sample broadly across the academy . We explored the particular challenges and contexts of each ﬁeld and aimed to achieve discipline - wide impact and to foster cross - disciplinary insights and learning . We selected about a dozen par - ticipating departments in each of the six disciplines . In education , we worked with 15 schools and departments ( see complete list at www . carnegiefoundation . org / cid ) . The process of reﬂection , implementation of program changes , and assessment that these departments and programs engaged in is leading to stronger doctoral programs and changed habits of mind in participating faculty and students . Like USC , a number of participating institutions are clarifying their research training missions ( examples are discussed later in this article ) . By observ - ing their deliberations , we can better un - derstood the issues and challenges involved in training practitioners and researchers ; we have also crystallized our thinking about the need for an alternative to how most schools of education prepare educational leaders for the world of practice . For years , the ﬁeld of education has strug - gled to strike a balance between the practice of education and research in education , in crafting doctoral programs to meet the needs of a diverse student population . Partly as a reﬂection of this research – practice tension , education ( like medicine and the biomedical sciences ) has accommodated two terminal degrees—the Ph . D . and the Ed . D . Teachers College , Columbia University , granted the ﬁrst Ph . D . in education in 1893 . In 1920 , Harvard University awarded the ﬁrst Ed . D . In 1931 , the ﬁeld produced its ﬁrst study on the wisdom of granting the Ed . D . as op - posed to the Ph . D . ( Freeman , 1931 ) . Ninety - two universities had granted one or both education doctorates by the late 1950s ( Moore , 1960 ) ; that number in - creased to 167 by 1983 ( Anderson , 1983 ) and now exceeds 250 ( Levine , 2005 ) . After decades of steady growth , the Ed . D . ’s popularity began declining in the 1960s . Today , Ph . D . s probably outnumber Ed . D . s ( Brown , 1990 ) . The literature is rife with studies comparing the Ph . D . and the Ed . D . 1 to 3 years emphasize course taking , but most students are also immersed in an ap - prenticeship to scholarly life : conducting research and teaching undergraduate classes . Students quickly transition from consum - ing to producing research , whether they are incorporated into a faculty member’s on - going research program ( typical in the lab - or ﬁeld - based physical , biological , and so - cial sciences ) or are producing smaller pieces of scholarship under the tutelage of faculty in courses ( usual in the humanities and other social sciences ) . Once they advance to candidacy , students spend most of their time on their own research and scholarship under the regular mentoring supervision of faculty . Typical strategies for doctoral education in the CID’s six disciplines are described in a collection of essays commis - sioned for the project ( Envisioning the Future of Doctoral Education , Golde & Walker , 2006 ) . Education alone struggles with whether and how to keep research at the center of the Ph . D . Explanations range from students’ lack of interest in research ( or even , dare we say , mistrust ) to the lim - ited number of funded research projects that can support full - time study at schools of education . Even more apparent is the Ed . D . ’s fail - ure to do its job . Although most students in Ed . D . programs do not aim to be re - searchers , their doctoral programs often treat them as such by offering experiences more similar to Ph . D . programs than to the high - level preparation for practice or leadership found in other learned profes - sions . Too often , the Ed . D . is deﬁned by subtraction , with fewer requirements than the Ph . D . and much less emphasis on full - time study and residency . Nevertheless , the capstone requirement is some form of dis - sertation , although practitioners are un - likely ever to be asked to produce research like it again . Instead of being valued for ac - complishing the discrete ends it was origi - nally designed for , the Ed . D . is widely regarded as a “Ph . D . - Lite . ” Not surprisingly , education programs in the CID struggled with questions of pur - pose and mission in training their doctoral students . Although participating depart - ments were not prepared to scrap their pro - grams and start de novo —in any of the six ﬁelds—all tried to ensure that their pro - grams reﬂected the goals of the students , department , university , and discipline . pare and initiate the next generations of leaders . We believe that these ideas are par - ticularly compatible with education’s long - standing commitment to social justice , equity , and professional responsibility . We also provided CID departments with discipline - speciﬁc ideas for fruitful practices and recommended reforms . The essayists for Envisioning the Future of Doctoral Edu - cation ( Golde & Walker , 2006 ) addressed the question , “If you could start de novo , what would be the best way to structure doctoral education in your field to pre - pare stewards of the discipline ? ” The essays were intended to spark faculty and student thinking rather than to offer deﬁnitive pre - scriptions to the participating departments . In “Stewards of a Field , Stewards of an Enterprise : The Ph . D . in Education , ” es - sayist Virginia Richardson ( 2006 ) discusses the importance and challenge of teaching students the practice of research . She lists seven outcomes of learning to conduct re - search and the associated knowledge , skills , and habits of mind that students need to develop . She asserts that this kind of prepa - ration will require “goal - setting , analysis , assessment , and constant vigilance on the part of a Ph . D . faculty if we are to develop Ph . D . graduates who are able both to con - duct important , high - quality , useful re - search on educational practice and issues and provide guidance in improving the ed - ucation enterprise” ( p . 267 ) . Richardson’s detailed prescription for a research - intensive Ph . D . provides a useful blueprint for those questioning what their programs should look like . The education departments that partic - ipated in the CID are now on a path of re - ﬂection and change . USC took the most dramatic path , distinguishing explicitly be - tween the Ph . D . and the Ed . D . On the Ph . D . side , several departments have en - gaged in clear movement toward enrolling students full time , creating full - immersion and unequivocally research - focused pro - grams . The following three examples illus - trate these efforts . The School of Education at the Univer - sity of Colorado at Boulder designed a new doctoral curriculum around its more tightly focused research - oriented Ph . D . program , intending each change to strengthen re - search training . Inaugurated in fall 2005 , the new program features the following : The ﬁrst year is devoted to core courses , The Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate The CID’s open - ended , locally determined change strategy provided a window into doctoral education in education , especially in contrast with the other ﬁve arts and sci - ences disciplines included in the project . Departments received no money for par - ticipation ; rather , the Foundation offered a process for engaging deeply in questions of purpose , and encouragement to experiment with our offerings and to document the out - comes . We provided framing ideas ; annual convenings at the Foundation ; a network of colleagues ; and feedback , support , and encouragement . All of these were in service of departments engaging in critical reﬂec - tion and deliberation leading to action . We structured great ﬂexibility into the project and left it to individual departments to de - cide how they should proceed locally , which aspects of their doctoral program to focus on , which particular practices to imple - ment , and what kinds of evidence to collect . We asked participating departments to identify a leadership team that included fac - ulty and doctoral students . The leadership teams were expected to deliberate seriously , suggest and implement appropriate pro - gram changes , and assess their efforts . We wanted departments to feel accountable to the project from a spirit of shared inquiry , not out of a fear of losing money . Partici - pating departments shared the vision of de - veloping students into “stewards of their disciplines . ” We proposed that the purpose of doctoral education is , taken broadly , to educate and prepare those to whom we can entrust the vigor , quality , and integrity of the ﬁeld . We believe these people are schol - ars ﬁrst , in the fullest sense of the word— future leaders who will creatively generate new knowledge , critically conserve valuable and useful ideas , and responsibly trans - form those understandings through writ - ing , teaching , and application . We call such people “stewards of the discipline . ” ( See Golde , 2006 , for an extended discussion . ) We use the term “steward” deliberately , intending to convey a role that includes , but also transcends , accomplishments and skills . A steward is entrusted with the care of the discipline , and thinks about the dis - cipline’s continuing health and how to pre - serve the best of the past for those who will follow . Stewards direct a critical eye toward the future . They must consider how to pre - 27 APRIL 2006 taken by the entire student cohort , which include two qualitative research methods courses , two quantitative methods courses , and two courses on the big ideas in the ﬁeld of education research . Students also take a specialty seminar in each semester for their particular program area . In the second year , students move into specialized area courses and take one multicultural education course as a cohort . The third year emphasizes ad - vanced courses and comprehensive exams ; the fourth and ﬁfth years focus on disserta - tion work . These changes were a response to strong indicators that the original pro - gram was not preparing all students well : Courses were taken in ad hoc sequences , few advanced courses ( which depend on some shared knowledge ) could be offered , and students graduated with uneven knowledge of shared issues and research norms and standards . The School of Education at the Univer - sity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill un - dertook a reorganization of the Ph . D . and Ed . D . degrees in 1996 similar to that at USC . The CID committee , formed in fall 2002 , which focused solely on the PhD . program , realized that Ph . D . students needed new opportunities to create com - munity , engage with intellectual work , produce scholarly work , and learn about inquiry and research in their Ph . D . train - ing . In response , the committee created “inquiry groups” to bring together faculty and students interested in a particular topic and research problem . The expectation is that their work will lead to scholarly pub - lication by participants . The groups started in 2004 , after CID began . There has been some initial success ; however , the structure and role of inquiry groups continue to evolve . Participating students ( the inquiry groups are voluntary ) are enthusiastic but worry that courses must take priority . Other students feel they do not have time to join an inquiry group . Faculty members receive no teaching credit for creating inquiry groups but nevertheless send a message about the necessity that all PhD . students have equal access to early and sustained participation in inquiry and scholarship . As described earlier , USC made dramatic changes in its doctoral programs . The fac - ulty convened in a two - and - a - half - day strategic planning meeting , in which they conﬁrmed their focus on urban education and developed an outline for radically re - ing these changes . Such ongoing habits of thinking about a doctoral program are a central goal of the CID . These three examples show how educa - tion schools can restructure the Ph . D . to infuse learning of the techniques , habits of mind , and abilities of good researchers throughout the Ph . D . program . In this conception , the Ph . D . in education would be like the Ph . D . in other ﬁelds—full time , a true research apprenticeship in a multi - generational research lab / ﬁeld setting , with a dissertation - like capstone . Visions of the Possible : A Professional Practice Doctorate for Education Standing in the way of any effort to strengthen the doctorate preparing schol - ars of education ( the Ph . D . ) is the critical need to revive and restore the doctorate preparing practitioners at the highest levels . We propose a new doctorate for the pro - fessional practice of education , which we might call the Professional Practice Doc - torate ( P . P . D . ) , though the name should be the least of our concerns . Despite the many challenges involved in creating a new de - gree , we believe the greatest danger lies in doing nothing . A new degree can help re - store respect for the excellent work of edu - cation practitioners and leaders . Arthur Levine ( 2005 ) has argued that the current Ed . D . should be re - tooled into a new professional master’s degree , parallel in many ways to the MBA . We believe that , properly understood and designed , the highest professional degree in education deserves to be a doctorate—but not one so readily confounded with the doctorate needed to prepare education scholars . Do we need to begin afresh rather than simply repair the Ed . D . ? Why propose a wholly new professional practice doctorate for education and not a totally reinvented Ph . D . ? In our judgment , the extent to which the professional practice doctorate requires a new vision demands a “zero - base” approach to design , without any of the as - sumptions that characterize the status quo . Tinkering toward the ideal is much less likely to succeed than starting with a clean slate . As the new degree approaches the ideal , we will be able to restore the Ph . D . as a bona ﬁde preparation for research , in - stead of an omnibus degree that signals all things to all educators . vising the Ph . D . and Ed . D . programs . The Ph . D . program shrank , from 70 new stu - dents per year to a half - dozen in 2004 . The students now receive 4 years of full fund - ing , and the Ph . D . curriculum now explic - itly aims to develop future faculty for major research universities . A “program profes - sional core , ” which includes an introduction to the professoriate course , now supple - ments traditional courses . Students must develop teaching and research portfolios throughout their careers . USC’s new Ed . D . program , a 3 - year cohort - based program , is clearly distin - guished from the Ph . D . program in its em - phasis on practice . Students participate in “thematic dissertation groups , ” working collaboratively with faculty and practition - ers to study a contemporary problem in educational leadership . The group’s work culminates in a set of complementary dis - sertations around thematically similar top - ics . Students write individual dissertations but rely on faculty group leaders and group members for support , literature and re - search design recommendations , and feed - back on drafts . In the ﬁrst year , all students take four thematic core courses . In addition to the core courses , Ed . D . students take ﬁve courses in their area of concentration . Originally , these courses were selected from existing offerings . Now they are being mod - iﬁed , and sometimes newly invented , to align with the core courses . Few expected faculty members to invest so much time in curricular revision , but the faculty felt that their investment in the core would be com - promised if they did not subsequently tackle the specialty courses . ( The University of Colorado reports a similar “ripple effect , ” where one change inevitably leads to more . ) Today , the USC education faculty mem - bers see their doctoral programs as works in progress and subjects of ongoing reﬂection . Each change leads to new questions . For example , is the dissertation the appropriate capstone for the Ed . D . program ? Dean Gallagher believes success is possible only because the two programs were restructured simultaneously . “Change of this magni - tude can almost kill you , ” she said , “but it causes you to think , ‘How can we do things differently ? ’ You are forced to think innova - tively if you want to do something impor - tant” ( personal communication , January 23 , 2006 ) . We are encouraged by how purpose - ful and reﬂective USC was in implement - EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 28 The P . P . D . that we propose would be an extremely demanding , rigorous , respectable , high - level academic experience that pre - pares students for service as leading practi - tioners in the field of education , whether as educational leaders—principals , super - intendents , policy coordinators , curriculum coordinators , and so forth—or as educators of teachers and other school personnel . We argue that preparation as a scholar in the traditional sense , culminating in a doctoral dissertation , is not the best way to prepare the superintendent of schools for a Cali - fornia community or a teacher – educator who will be preparing teachers of mathe - matics for that same community . We need a degree that is positively and intentionally designed to serve the needs of professional practice—as the Ed . D . was originally in - tended to do , but no longer does . By analogy , there are two degrees in the medical sciences : the M . D . and the Ph . D . in a biomedical ﬁeld . 5 The recipients pos - sess different but overlapping bodies of knowledge , see their professional practice in different ways , and have been trained and assessed in radically different ways . Most important , they are engaged in very different ﬁelds of practice . The M . D . spends years in the supervised practice of medicine , surgery , psychiatry , and the like . The Ph . D . spends years learning the practices of bio - medical research and theory development . Similarly , the Ph . D . and P . P . D . would be different—one the research degree and the other the practice degree . Like the M . D . , the P . P . D . as we envision it would be highly rigorous , easily identiﬁable post - baccalaureate degrees that are prestigious , sans dissertation , but with substantive pro - fessional assessments at the end . And , like the M . D . , the P . P . D . would have identiﬁ - able signature pedagogies ( Shulman , 2005 ) . Many P . P . D . faculty would be highly skilled practitioners , perhaps also with the title of “clinical” faculty . ( We note that USC has defined criteria for “practice - active” fac - ulty members in their Ed . D . program . ) Unlike the M . D . , which is typically pur - sued before practitioners enter independent practice , the P . P . D . probably would be earned by teachers , educational leaders , and teacher – educators who are already engaged in forms of practice and would pursue this degree concurrently or in serial periods of study , practice , and study - embedded practice . of medical education ( nor is the teaching hospital a helpful analogy to possible pro - fessional development schools for educa - tional practice ) , we expect that a P . P . D . candidate could use his or her own practice situations as the equivalent of some com - bination of a residency clinical setting and an experimental laboratory or ﬁeld site . Undoubtedly , some research - related skills that we identify with the Ph . D . would be required for a P . P . D . , as well . We would expect , for example , an accomplished P . P . D . to be able to read , very critically and analytically , research reports claiming to offer evidence that people should teach in certain ways , organize schools in certain ways , or redo the economics of school dis - tricts and states in certain ways . We would expect a P . P . D . to have the skills and expe - rience necessary to evaluate such reports or to know when he or she needs more spe - cialized knowledge to be able to evaluate them . Just as reviewing and critically ana - lyzing literature is a requirement for a Ph . D . , we believe it must be a requirement for the P . P . D . , to enable practitioners to make practice and policy decisions—not to add new knowledge per se to the ﬁeld . We also believe that the P . P . D . - holder should be skilled in carrying out local research and evaluations to guide practice . Those who teach should develop skills and experience in carrying out the scholarship of teaching and learning in their own programs . Our CID research revealed a troubling contrast between the doctoral study of ed - ucation and that of other ﬁelds : The ma - jority of education students pursue their degrees in a part - time , almost haphazard , manner . If we turn this fact on its head , however , we can make a virtue of necessity . We propose fashioning a program that treats the “practice” part of students’ lives as the wellspring of inspiration that makes their doctoral study richer and more pow - erful . In the best of all possible worlds , P . P . D . candidates would be required to have a certain amount of prior and ongoing practice experience . The initial part of the program would merge practice and part - time doctoral study ; at the end would be a year - long residency , during which students would prepare in a more self - conscious way for the assessments and integration . People would be asked to give up only one year of work for full - time study—a cap - stone year with a deﬁnitive end . Assessments Motivate Program Design : How to Begin One possible way to develop the P . P . D . is to design the ﬁnal set of assessments ﬁrst , then embark on the creative design of pro - grams . This “wisdom of practice” strategy begins with studying and thinking about the most able exemplars of accomplished practice that can be identiﬁed . We can then ask what they do , and do well , that leads us to consider them exemplary , and what tasks or settings enable such accomplishments to be demonstrated . How would one know if practitioners have reached that level of ac - complishment , short of shadowing them for a year ? What kinds of exercises , simu - lations , investigations , writings , and ap - proaches to the systematic observation and documentation of practice is needed to make a grounded judgment of practition - ers’ competence ? This is similar to the pro - cess that some of us engaged in 20 years ago , in laying the groundwork for the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards ( NBPTS ; Shulman 2004a , 2004b ) . We asked , “What are the challenging situations that separate the sterling practitioners from those who are merely average ? Can we de - velop a set of assessments that put people in situations like that ? Can we then set stan - dards for performance in those situations ? ” The point is to use practice as the template and ask what the standards are for the wis - est practice . The assessments and standards of the NBPTS have been so inﬂuential that a growing number of institutions have de - signed M . A . programs in education around them . It is possible to imagine a similar process whereby a highly public , well - justiﬁed , rigorous set of assessments for the highest levels of professional practice might also stimulate the development of new P . P . D . programs . Approaches to assessment in ﬁelds such as medicine are much more varied than in Ph . D . programs . In medicine , one engages in assessments of knowledge , assessments of practical skills , and assessments in a va - riety of ﬁelds . One does not converge on a single monograph . We anticipate some - thing similar in the case of the P . P . D . ; we might call this an “assessment decathlon . ” In medicine , assessments are also deeply embedded within programs of residency training . Since education does not have the kinds of supervised residency characteristic 29 APRIL 2006 The Name Is Not the Thing Let us not argue about the name of the de - gree . Our view is that if education had made the right turn 50 years ago , the Ed . D . would be precisely the degree that we are propos - ing . Indeed , if our critique is taken seri - ously and acted on , the resulting degree is more likely to be called an Ed . D . ( new and improved ! ) than a P . P . D . . We hold no par - ticular brief for the letters P . P . D . . We pro - pose a new degree only to escape all the accumulated layers of expectation , tradi - tion , and association with which the Ed . D . is currently burdened . There is real danger in taking to extremes the distinction between a professional prac - tice degree and a research degree . Both will include an abundance of cross - over ex - periences and training . All university - based doctoral degrees must be grounded in scholarship as both substance and process . P . P . D . s will learn how to conduct applied research and critically read research reports , and will have serious grounding in scholar - ship . Ph . D . s will have to understand policy and practice deeply if they are to be schol - ars of educational practice and not garden - variety social scientists . Nevertheless , the emphases of the two degrees will be quite different , as is the case with the M . D . and the biomedical Ph . D . We are sensitive to the concern that we may be misclassifying teacher – educators by placing them in the practice group . In - deed , how non - Ph . D . scholars can ﬂourish and gain tenure if they focus primarily on practice is a question faced by professional schools in every ﬁeld from law to nursing . That said , most teacher – educators must be highly accomplished practitioners who can analyze , evaluate , and—most important— model and teach practice to future ( and cur - rently active ) teachers . That set of qualities is very difficult to attain . Add to them the ex - pectation that P . P . D . s in teacher education be capable of competent applied research on teacher education , and we have the ele - ments of a seriously demanding , albeit reasonable , doctorate of practice . Mean - while , a smaller number of doctoral candi - dates could pursue the Ph . D . in teacher education ( the same is true of educational leadership , we suspect ) and prepare for dif - ferent roles that are engaged primarily with research and the preparation of future re - search scholars . from the bottom up , institution by institu - tion , program by program . No institution can be expected to pull it off in isolation . Therefore , even as change occurs locally and experimentally , it must be supported by the progressive networking of individ - ual sites prepared to form consortia that ex - periment with such efforts in collaboration . For the past 2 years , the Carnegie Founda - tion has been working with the Council of Academic Deans from Research Education Institutions ( the association of education school deans ) . Many in this organization ﬁnd our vision of the P . P . D . compelling . One strategy is to create a design team , akin to the NBPTS’s planning committee , and charge it with developing P . P . D . as - sessments . Students could participate in a high - proﬁle but low - stakes assessment en - vironment , an “assessment decathlon . ” This would be a viable model for gaining national acceptance of a set of assessments . Over time , we imagine that P . P . D . programs would emerge , more purposefully prepar - ing students to document and demonstrate their competence in these areas . Meanwhile , a group of doctoral educators has begun to meet at the Carnegie Foundation to de - velop a plan for action . However the leadership for P . P . D . devel - opment emerges , nurtured by the Carnegie Foundation and located in a coalition of leading schools of education , we believe this is the boldest and surest way to confront the serious problems that plague both of our doctorates in education . John Gardner , for - mer president of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching , once said that “what we have before us are some breathtaking opportunities disguised as in - soluble problems” ( Gardner , 1965 ) . If we can bring the education doctorates for practice and scholarship in better align - ment with their professional and discipli - nary analogs , we will make a powerful contribution to American education . NOTES We thank the other members of the CID team—Project Director George Walker , Senior Scholar Laura Jones , and Research Assistants Kim Rapp and Amita Chudgar—for their con - tribution to the Carnegie Initiative on the Doc - torate . The ideas and work of the CID team are infused throughout this article . 1 An additional description of the USC case can be found later in this article and in other Issuing the Challenge These challenges can be met only by coura - geous new designs , experimentation , and evaluation . We are painfully aware of how difficult it is to introduce a new degree into the sturdy pantheon of graduate education , even when the argument supporting the ef - fort is strong . As a cautionary tale , we review the frustrating attempt to create the Doctor of Arts ( D . A . ) degree , ﬁrst proposed in 1932 but not attempted until much later . Beginning in the 1960s , with strong sup - port from the Carnegie Corporation of New York under the leadership of Alden Dun - ham , some institutions developed D . A . pro - grams . In 1967 , Carnegie Mellon University adopted the ﬁrst D . A . degree in the ﬁelds of English , ﬁne arts , history , and mathematics . Here was a degree envisioned as a prepara - tion for college teaching in each of the disci - plines , rather than for a career in research . Then , as now , the vast majority of those who earned Ph . D . s devoted their careers to teach - ing rather than to conducting research . With the support of several powerful ad - vocacy groups , 31 institutions adopted the D . A . However , the degree never spread or found the success that its proponents imag - ined . By 1991 , only 21 universities were still granting the D . A . ; the number has dropped to 12 today , and at those schools the D . A . usually is granted in only one or two ﬁelds . Glazer ( 1993 ) attributes this to a combina - tion of factors : competitive pressures em - phasizing research over teaching for faculty and students ; the collapse of the academic job market ; and the proliferation of other specialized doctorates in music , business , ﬁne arts , and many of the professions . The P . P . D . idea may well share the D . A . ’s fate . For those who believe that the status quo is perfectly satisfactory , that would be ﬁne . But those who share a sense that there is a serious problem must at - tempt to learn from the failure of the D . A . ( and the more recent success of the Psy . D . and other new degrees ) to map our strate - gies for reform . Next Steps We believe that the Ph . D . and the Ed . D . in education are now so closely intertwined that the improvement of one will neces - sarily entail the improvement of both . Practical steps can be taken concurrently . Ultimately , this kind of change will occur EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 30 publications of the Carnegie Foundation , as well as on the USC Rossier School of Education website ( http : / / www . usc . edu / dept / education / ) . 2 The estimate of the average time spent be - tween receipt of the baccalaureate and start of the doctorate is derived from the Survey of Earned Doctorates reports . We subtracted the reported disciplinary average for registered time to degree from the total time between receipt of baccalau - reate and receipt of doctorate . From “Summary Report 1999” ( Sanderson , Dugoni , Hoffer , & Meyers , 2000 ) through “Summary Report 2003” ( Hoffer , Dugoni , Sanderson , Sederstrom , Ghadialy , & Rocque , 2001 ; Hoffer , Dugoni , Sanderson , Sederstrom , Welch , Guzman - Barron , et al . , 2002 ; Hoffer , Sederstrom , Selfa , Welch , Hess , Brown , et al . , 2003 ; Hoffer , Selfa , Welch , Hess , Friedman , Reyes , et al . , 2004 ) , the data reported for education are consistent : Reg - istered time to degree is 8 – 9 years , and time from baccalaureate to doctorate is about 19 years . There is a dramatic change in the most recent set of data , “Summary Report 2004” ( Hoffer et al . , 2005 ) : Registered time to degree zooms to 12 . 6 years , and time since the bac - calaureate drops to 17 . 2 years . We do not have a ready explanation for these changes and do not know if this is a data anomaly or a new trend . 3 Of the disciplines that were part of the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate , education is the only one in which no disciplinary society has conducted a study of doctoral programs and doctorate recipients in the last decade . The American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education conducted an extensive survey in 1960 , published in two volumes ( Brown & Slater , 1960 ; Moore , 1960 ) , with a 1964 follow - up study ( Ludlow , 1964 ) . To our knowledge , this is the last time a comprehensive effort was undertaken in the ﬁeld . At that time , the ma - jority of doctoral recipients reported seeking employment in colleges or universities . The estimate of the current situation is derived by dividing the estimated number of assistant pro - fessors in education from NSOPF - 04 ( U . S . De - partment of Education , National Center for Education Statistics , 2004 ) —13 , 500—by the number of education doctorates granted in the 6 - year period between 1999 and 2004 from the Survey of Earned Doctorates—39 , 000 . The result is 34 . 6 % . 4 Career outcome data are more easily found in some ﬁelds than in others , reﬂecting the pri - orities both of the disciplines themselves and of the federal government in data collection ef - forts . Selecting from the ﬁelds studied by the CID , the humanities have the highest rate of employment in postsecondary teaching posi - tions : 73 % of those within 5 years of receiving the doctorate ( Ingram & Brown , 1997 ) . This ﬁnding parallels more recent data of 75 % in his - tory ( Bender , Katz , Palmer , & Committee on Freeman , F . N . ( 1931 ) . Practices of American universities in granting higher degrees in ed - ucation . In 19th Year Book of the National So - ciety of College Teachers of Education . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Gardner , J . ( 1965 ) . Speech presented in Wash - ington , DC . Available at http : / / www . pbs . org / johngardner / sections / writings . html # speeches Glazer , J . S . ( 1993 ) . A teaching doctorate ? The Doctor of Arts degree , then and now . Wash - ington , DC : American Association for Higher Education . Golde , C . M . ( 2006 ) . Preparing stewards of the discipline . In C . M . Golde & G . E . Walker ( Eds . ) , Envisioning the future of doctoral edu - cation : Preparing stewards of the discipline ( pp . 3 – 20 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Golde , C . M . , & Bueschel , A . C . ( 2004 , April ) . Knowledge practices and disciplinary repro - duction in doctoral education . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , San Diego , CA . Golde , C . M . , & Dore , T . M . ( 2001 ) . At cross purposes : What the experiences of doctoral stu - dents reveal about doctoral education ( A Report for the Pew Charitable Trusts ) . Philadelphia : Pew Charitable Trusts . Available at www . phd - survey . org . Golde , C . M . , & Walker , G . E . ( Eds . ) . ( 2006 ) . Envisioning the future of doctoral education : Preparing stewards of the discipline . San Fran - cisco : Jossey - Bass . Heylin , M . ( 2004 ) . Employment and salary sur - vey . Chemical and Engineering News , 82 ( 33 ) , 26 – 34 . Hoffer , T . B . , Dugoni , B . L . , Sanderson , A . R . , Sederstrom , S . , Ghadialy , R . , & Rocque , P . ( 2001 ) . Doctorate recipients from United States universities : Summary report 2000 . Chicago : National Opinion Research Center . Hoffer , T . B . , Dugoni , B . L . , Sanderson , A . R . , Sederstrom , S . , Welch , V . , Guzman - Barron , I . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Doctorate recipients from United States universities : Summary re - port 2001 . Chicago : National Opinion Re - search Center . Hoffer , T . B . , Sederstrom , S . , Selfa , L . , Welch , V . , Hess , M . , Brown , S . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Doc - torate recipients from United States universities : Summary report 2002 . Chicago : National Opinion Research Center . Hoffer , T . B . , Selfa , L . , Welch , V . , Hess , M . , Friedman , J . , Reyes , S . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Doc - torate recipients from United States universi - ties : Summary report 2003 . Chicago : National Opinion Research Center . Hoffer , T . B . , Welch , V . , Williams , K . , Hess , M . , Webber , K . , Lisek , B . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Doc - torate recipients from United States universi - ties : Summary report 2004 . Chicago : National Opinion Research Center . Graduate Education of the American Historical Society , 2004 ) and 73 % in English ( Nerad & Cerny , 1999 ) . In neuroscience , at least half take faculty positions , although data tracking is ham - pered by the fact that most students take sev - eral postdoctoral positions . The 2003 survey of neuroscience programs showed that 3 % of grad - uates took faculty positions immediately upon receipt of the Ph . D . , 38 % of postdocs took fac - ulty positions , and another 37 % of the postdocs moved to another postdoc position ( Stricker , 2003 ) . In the life sciences , overall about 40 % of those who are 10 years past receipt of the Ph . D . are in faculty positions ( National Research Council , 1998 , p . 35 ) . Mathematics is more like the humanities : 60 % of Ph . D . s take faculty po - sitions ( Kirkman , Maxwell , & Rose , 2005 ) . Chemistry has historically strong ties to industry ; ultimately , two thirds of Ph . D . chemists work in industry or government labs and about one third work in academia ( Heylin , 2004 ) . 5 We recognize that historically the Psy . D . has been more analogous to the Ed . D . than the M . D . , but the sprouting of freestanding Psy . D . programs has become worrisome . REFERENCES Anderson , D . G . ( 1983 ) . Differentiation of the Ed . D . and Ph . D . in education . Journal of Teacher Education , 34 ( 3 ) , 55 – 58 . Bender , T . , Katz , P . M . , Palmer , C . , & Com - mittee on Graduate Education of the Amer - ican Historical Society . ( 2004 ) . The education of historians for the twenty - ﬁrst century . Ur - bana : University of Illinois Press . Brown , L . D . ( 1966 ) . Doctoral graduates in edu - cation : An inquiry into their motives , aspirations , and perceptions of the program . Bloomington : Indiana University Foundation . Brown , L . D . ( 1990 ) . A perspective on the Ph . D . – Ed . D . discussion in schools of educa - tion . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Asso - ciation , Boston . Brown , L . D . , & Slater , J . M . ( 1960 ) . The doc - torate in education : Volume 1 . The graduates . Washington , DC : American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education . Clifford , G . J . , & Guthrie , J . W . ( 1988 ) . Ed school : A brief for professional education . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Deering , T . E . ( 1998 ) . Eliminating the doctor of education degree : It’s the right thing to do . Educational Forum , 62 ( 3 ) , 243 – 248 . Dill , D . D . , & Morrison , J . L . ( 1985 ) . Ed . D . and Ph . D . research training in the ﬁeld of higher education : A survey and a proposal . Review of Higher Education , 8 ( 2 ) , 169 – 186 . Eisenhart , M . , & Towne , L . ( 2003 ) . Contestation and change in national policy on “scientiﬁcally based” education research . Educational Re - searcher , 32 ( 7 ) , 31 – 38 . 31 APRIL 2006 Ingram , L . , & Brown , P . ( 1997 ) . Humanities doctorates in the United States : 1995 proﬁle . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . James , W . ( 1903 , March ) . The Ph . D . Octopus . Harvard Monthly , 149 – 157 . Kirkman , E . E . , Maxwell , J . W . , & Rose , C . A . ( 2005 ) . 2004 Annual Survey of the Mathe - matical Sciences ( 2nd Report ) : Updated report on the 2003 – 2004 U . S . doctoral re - cipients , starting salary of the 2003 – 2004 U . S . doctoral recipients . Notices of the AMS , 52 ( 7 ) , 747 – 760 . Levine , A . ( 2005 ) . Educating school leaders . New York : Education Schools Project . Ludlow , H . G . ( 1964 ) . The doctorate in educa - tion : Volume 4 . Follow - up study . Washington , DC : American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education . McClintock , R . ( 2005 ) . Homeless in the house of intellect : Formative justice and education as an academic study . New York : Laboratory for Liberal Learning . Moore , H . E . ( 1960 ) . The doctorate in educa - tion : Volume 2 . The institutions . Washington , DC : American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education . Murphy , J . , & Vriesenga , M . ( 2005 ) . Devel - oping professionally anchored dissertations : Lessons from innovative programs . School Leadership Review , 1 ( 1 ) , 33 – 57 . National Research Council . ( 1998 ) . Trends in the early careers of life scientists . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Nerad , M . , & Cerny , J . ( 1999 ) . From rumors to facts : Career outcomes of English Ph . D . s : Results from the Ph . D . ’s ten years later study . Communicator , 32 ( 7 ) , 1 – 11 . Olson , D . ( 2004 ) . The triumph of hope over experience in the search for “what works” : A response to Slavin . Educational Researcher , 33 ( 1 ) , 24 – 26 . Osguthorpe , R . T . , & Wong , M . J . ( 1993 ) . The Ph . D . versus the Ed . D . : Time for a de - cision . Innovative Higher Education , 18 ( 1 ) , 47 – 63 . pres @ carnegiefoundation . org . He is also the Charles E . Ducommun Professor of Education Emeritus at Stanford University . His research interests include teaching and teacher educa - tion ; the assessment of content knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge among those learning to teach ; education in the professions ; the quality of teaching in higher education ; and the central role of a “scholarship of teach - ing” in supporting needed changes in the cul - tures of higher education . CHRIS M . GOLDE is a Senior Scholar and Re - search Director for the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate at the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching , 51 Vista Lane , Stan - ford , CA 94305 ; golde @ carnegiefoundation . org . Her research interests include doctoral student attrition , the experiences of graduate students , and interdisciplinary graduate education . ANDREA CONKLIN BUESCHEL is a Re - search Scholar for the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate and the California Community Col - leges project at the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching , 51 Vista Lane , Stan - ford , CA 94305 ; bueschel @ carnegiefoundation . org . Her research interests include graduate education , students’ high - school - to - college tran - sitions , community colleges , and policy links and disjunctures between K – 12 and higher education . KRISTEN J . GARABEDIAN is a Program Asso - ciate at the Carnegie Foundation for the Ad - vancement of Teaching , 51 Vista Lane , Stanford , CA 94305 ; garabedian @ carnegiefoundation . org . Her research interests include literature , history , psychology , and the impact of creative arts in education . Manuscript received January 28 , 2006 Accepted February 18 , 2006 Richardson , V . ( 2006 ) . Stewards of a ﬁeld , stewards of an enterprise : The doctorate in education . In C . Golde & G . Walker ( Eds . ) , Envisioning the future of doctoral edu - cation : Preparing stewards of the discipline ( pp . 251 – 267 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Sanderson , A . , Dugoni , B . , Hoffer , T . , & Meyers , S . ( 2000 ) . Doctorate recipients from United States universities : Summary report 1999 . Chicago : National Opinion Research Center . Shavelson , R . J . , & Towne , L . ( 2002 ) . Scien - tiﬁc research in education . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Shulman , L . S . ( 2004a ) . The paradox of teacher assessment . In L . S . Shulman , The wisdom of practice : Essays on teaching , learning , and learning to teach ( pp . 336 – 349 ) . San Fran - cisco : Jossey - Bass . Shulman , L . S . ( 2004b ) . A union of insufficien - cies : Strategies for teacher assessment in a pe - riod of educational reform . In L . S . Shulman , The wisdom of practice : Essays on teaching , learning , and learning to teach ( pp . 352 – 361 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Shulman , L . S . ( 2005 ) . Signature pedagogies in the professions . Daedelus , 134 ( 3 ) , 52 – 59 . Stricker , E . M . ( 2003 ) . The 2003 ANDP survey of neuroscience graduate , postdoctoral , and undergraduate programs . Association of Neu - roscience Departments and Programs . Avail - able at http : / / andp . org / surveys / reports / 2003 / Survey03Report . PDF U . S . Department of Education , National Cen - ter for Education Statistics . ( 2004 ) . National Study of Postsecondary Faculty ( NSOPF : 04 ) . Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Education . AUTHORS LEE S . SHULMAN is President of the Car - negie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching , 51 Vista Lane , Stanford , CA 94305 ; EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 32