Using Biology Education Research and Qualitative Inquiry to Inform Genomic Nursing Education Linda D . Ward , PhD , RN , FNP - C Decades of research in biology education show that learning genetics is difficult and reveals specific sources of learning difficulty . Little is known about how nursing students learn in this domain , although they likely encounter similar difficulties as nonnursing students . Using qualitative approaches , this study investigated challenges to learning genetics among nursing students . Findings indicate that nursing students face learning difficulties already identified among biology students , suggesting that nurse educators might benefit from biology education research . Keywords : biology education ; genetic / genomic knowledge ; genetics education ; genomic nursing education ; nursing students C ompletion of the Human Genome Project in 2003 triggered predictions that genome - based health care would soon transform practice across the health care continuum . 1 Nurses bear particular responsibility to include genomic aspects of health in their assessments and to deliver genome - based care , explain that care to patients , and provide anticipatory guidance around poten - tial ethical , legal , and social consequences . Nurse educators in academia and practice are challenged to develop , imple - ment , and evaluate promising strategies to teach genomics . Because genomic nursing education is a new endeavor , little research specific to nursing informs the development of evidence - based educational approaches . In contrast , research in science education has generated an extensive body of literature focused on genetics education . There is little reason to think that nursing students learn differently than other college students ; therefore , nurse educators may benefit by crossing disciplinary borders to take advantage of biology education’s existing evidence base . Understanding how students learn in the domain of genetics and anticipating particular difficulties students are likely to face will facilitate the development of efficient , effective , evidence - based approaches to genomic nursing education . The purpose of this study was to apply a qualitative approach to explore sources of difficulty experienced by nursing students in understanding genetics . Findings were then compared with the primary sources of learning difficulty identified among biology students , as reported in biology education literature . Exemplars are presented , demonstrating that nursing students face similar challenges as biology students . The study provides evidence that nursing education might benefit from lessons learned from biology education research . A substantial body of research since the 1980s has consistently indicated that learning genetics is particularly difficult . 2 - 7 Importantly , research also provides insights into specific sources of difficulty that impede learning in genetics . Three particular challenges have been described : the need to ( 1 ) acquire a complex vocabulary , ( 2 ) integrate concepts across multiple levels of organization , and ( 3 ) reconcile preinstructional misconceptions of genetic concepts . Un - derstanding these challenges is critical to the design and implementation of effective educational approaches . Complex Language Students must acquire basic genetic literacy to learn genetic mechanisms . 7 , 8 The language of genetics , however , is intrinsically complex with multiple semantic and linguistic issues . Many genetic terms ( eg , allele , phenotype , locus ) lack common use outside the domain . 9 Other genetic terms have conversational meanings that do not carry over to a genetics context . The term dominant , for example , has a specific meaning in genetics , referring to the relationship between 2 versions of a gene . 10 In general or conversational language , however , dominant connotes additional mean - ings . Students are prone to carrying those common , nuanced meanings of dominant , like semantic baggage , to their thinking about genetics . Such thinking engenders false beliefs , for example , that ‘‘a dominant trait is ‘stronger’ and ‘overpowers’ the recessive trait’’ or ‘‘a dominant trait is more Nurse Educator Volume 42 & Number 6 & November / December 2017 303 Nurse Educator Nurse Educator Nurse Educator Vol . 42 , No . 6 , pp . 303 - 307 Copyright * 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . Author Affiliation : Assistant Professor , Washington State University College of Nursing , Spokane . The author declares no conflicts of interest . Correspondence : Dr Ward , PhD , RN , FNP - C , Washington State University College of Nursing , PO Box 1495 , Spokane , WA 99210 - 1495 ( linward @ wsu . edu ) . Accepted for publication : February 20 , 2017 Published ahead of print : April 5 , 2017 DOI : 10 . 1097 / NNE . 0000000000000378 prevalent in the population’’ or even ‘‘male or masculine traits are dominant . ’’ 11 ( p429 ) Such metaphors can shape students’ conceptual understanding in a powerful way that is resistant to remediation . Learning the language of genetics is further complicated when terms are defined in opposition to similar - sounding terms with distinct meanings , for example , genotype / phenotype , mitosis / meiosis , and transcription / translation . A student who does not understand 1 term has little chance of understanding the other . 9 Look - alike , sound - alike terms with unconnected meanings ( eg , homologous and homozygous ) must also be distinguished . Confounding language can also stem from a sort of linguistic shorthand , in which risk alleles ( ie , gene variants associated with disease ) are referred to as ‘‘the gene for’’ the disease . As a result , people tend to associate a gene per se , rather than a gene mutation , with disease . This shorthand likely contributes to the common belief that people with a genetic disease have a particular gene not found in other individuals . 12 Conceptual Complexity Science education research indicates that learning is more easily achieved at the macroscopic level , where objects and processes can be directly observed . 6 Genetics educa - tion might therefore be challenging simply because ge - netic mechanisms occur at a cellular or molecular level . Learning is more complicated because foundational genetic concepts cross molecular , microscopic , and macroscopic levels of organization . 6 To understand how genes influence health , students must integrate concepts across all 3 levels , linking molecular - level processes to observable phenomena at the tissue , organism , and population levels . 13 This complex level of learning requires students to apply hypothetico - deductive reasoning , which is difficult for novices . Students tend to focus on 1 level at a time and struggle to incorporate all levels in their reasoning . 6 , 7 , 13 Furthermore , a number of foundational genetic concepts ( eg , allele , phenotype ) are theoretical or symbolic in nature , adding yet another layer of knowledge to further complicate understanding . 14 Misconceptions Science educational research has applied cognitive learning theory to amass an extensive body of knowledge about how students’ conceptual understanding of the world affects their learning . During years of formal education and personal experiences , students develop ideas about how the world works . 15 Misconceptions are preconceptions that are incon - gruent with prevailing scientific explanations ; they are com - mon across science domains . Representing ‘‘reasonable hypotheses grounded in everyday experience , ’’ 16 ( p142 ) mis - conceptions are ingrained in students’ cognitive frame - works . Students tend to believe that they understand content but subscribe to wrong but firmly held beliefs constructed during years of primary and secondary educa - tion . Misconceptions are not easily corrected by traditional educational approaches . 8 , 16 They impede learning because students cannot easily integrate new knowledge that does not fit their preexisting conceptual frameworks . Often , misconceptions are not apparent to students or educators . Students may perform well academically despite persistent flaws in conceptual understanding by resorting to rote or ‘‘recipe’’ learning of factual information . 15 , 17 Research in genetics education has uncovered a number of misconceptions sufficiently pervasive to be found in multiple studies . 2 , 8 , 9 , 18 Understanding student misconcep - tions fosters effective teaching by providing targets for instructional remediation and anchors for instructional strategies . 15 , 19 Methods This study represents a retrospective analysis of qualitative data collected to probe nursing students’ understanding of foundational genetic and genomic concepts . Data were collected from BSN students at a single large university in the northwestern United States . The initial study purpose was to develop the Genomic Nursing Concept Inventory ( GNCI 2011 ) , a research - based tool to measure genomic literacy among nurses . 20 Two steps in inventory develop - ment generated qualitative data . For the current study , those data were reexamined to identify specific difficulties nursing students exhibited in understanding genomic concepts . Sources of learning difficulty were then compared with findings previously reported in biology education research . Study Design Early in inventory development , student understanding of foundational genetic - genomic concepts was explored using student - supplied response ( SSR ) surveys . 21 Fifty open - ended questions were developed to probe student under - standing of 21 key concepts . For example , 1 SSR question was , ‘‘To the best of your knowledge , what is the function of a gene ? What does a gene do ? ’’ During the course of a semester , first - year prelicensure BSN students in an upper division program wrote textual responses to each question on individual index cards . Using an iterative card - sorting procedure , 22 content analysis was applied to each set of responses , applying emergent coding in the method of Krippendorf . 23 The goal was to identify errors in student responses that might impair learning . A fairly coarse degree of coding identified the most common difficulties . A second investigator independently coded 10 % of data with concur - rent findings . The analysis produced exemplars of shared knowledge gaps , points of confusion , sources of misunder - standing , and misconceptions . In a later stage of inventory development , individual and group interviews of BSN students yielded additional qualitative data . Using a concurrent , think - aloud approach , students verbalized their thoughts as they completed the draft GNCI as a paper - and - pencil test . The investigator made written notes and used a respondent problem matrix to systematically code sources of difficulty in student under - standing . 24 Interviews were audio or video recorded . The interviews were initially conducted to pretest inventory items , but as students articulated their reasoning about various inventory questions , they disclosed unique insights into their thinking about genetic - genomic concepts . The current study therefore applied secondary analysis of the recordings and investigator notes , which were reviewed to identify shared knowledge gaps , points of confusion , sources of misunderstanding , and misconceptions . Together , these analyses generated a set of exemplars illustrating difficulties displayed by nursing students in understanding genetics . These exemplars were reviewed in 304 Volume 42 & Number 6 & November / December 2017 Nurse Educator the context of the major sources of learning difficulty identified in biology education research , namely , complex language , conceptual complexity , and misconceptions . Results Between 96 and 134 students in the first year of the upper division prelicensure BSN program participated in each SSR session . Overall , cohorts of students enrolled in the surveyed courses were 84 % female ages 18 to 58 years ( mean [ SD ] , 25 . 2 [ 6 . 80 ] ) . Seven percent of students had previously taken a genetics course . Fifteen students completing the first year of the upper division prelicensure BSN program completed individual interviews ; 3 were male , and 2 spoke English as a second language . Nine students participated in group interviews : 3 were approaching graduation from the postlicensure BSN completion program , and 6 had recently graduated from the prelicensure BSN program . One prelicensure graduate was male . No other demographic data were collected . Discussion The study was able to probe student understanding and generate rich qualitative data that reflected general confu - sion , widespread lack of knowledge , and shared miscon - ceptions about foundational genetic - genomic concepts . Key findings are described in the context of sources of learning difficulty described in biology education research literature . Complex Language Textual responses from SSR surveys indicated low levels of genomic literacy overall . Only 26 % of students could distinguish genetics and genomics , 12 % knew the meaning of autosome , and 7 % could explain the term allele . Mastering the language of genetics is critical to understanding geno - mics and health . For example , the concept of an allele is so foundational to genetic literacy that it is specifically called out in the current US national science education standards . 25 College biology students have also demonstrated poor understanding of the concept of an allele , with reports that ‘‘once students had resolved any difficulty with the relation - ship between a gene and an allele , their performance in genetics showed a significant improvement . ’’ 26 ( p1 ) Students used genetic terminology liberally but often incorrectly in their responses . Even basic genetic structures were misconstrued . For example , 27 % of students described genes as being composed of chromosomes . Other responses contained specific terminology but muddled information , for example , ‘‘A chromosome is made up of DNA that when 23 pairs are combined becomes a single gene . ’’ These findings are consistent with multiple studies among high school and undergraduate biology students that also iden - tified widespread , poor understanding of genetic composi - tion , structure , and function . 5 , 6 , 27 , 28 This study also provided examples of semantic baggage , that is , the carryover of meanings of words used in general conversation that have more specific meaning in the genomics domain . For example , some of Allchin’s 11 findings about the concept of dominance were replicated : 19 % of nursing students equated dominant traits with prevalent traits , and 16 % described dominant alleles as being stronger than or overpowering recessive alleles . An unexpected example of semantic baggage con - cerned the word protein . In a genetics context , proteins are critically important molecules , the product of DNA transcription / translation that mediate virtually all physiologic functions and link genotype to phenotype . One SSR question , however , revealed that 43 % of nursing students conceptualize proteins in a very different way , describing them in terms of dietary protein as a source of energy or as building blocks ( reported by 26 % of students ) . That so many students de - scribed proteins as building blocks was surprising . Although some proteins ( eg , hemoglobin ) come together to form complexes , most proteins function as discrete molecules . Even new BSN graduates demonstrated uncertainty about the role of proteins . During a group interview with 6 recent graduates , none were able to identify insulin as the protein product of the insulin gene . Rather , the group discussed the nature of insulin for several minutes without agreeing on any description other than ‘‘a clear liquid . ’’ Reports of semantic issues with the term protein are not reported in the biology education literature . Student - supplied response data and interview tran - scripts revealed other linguistic metaphors , for example , a strong but unsurprising association between the words genetic and inherited . The SSR surveys revealed 67 % of students to equate the terms , identifying a genetic condition as an inherited one . Although that idea was fitting in the time of traditional Mendelian or inheritance genetics , it is incompatible with the current model of genetic diseases as conditions caused by gene dysfunction . Cancer provides an apt example : all cancers are known to be genetic ( ie , related to changes in gene structure , number or function ) , but only a small subset of cancers are inherited . This study also provided evidence that linguistic shorthand may shape students’ beliefs , in particular , the wrong assumption that people with a genetic condition have a gene that is not found in people without the disease . An SSR question about BRCA mutations revealed that 42 % of students believe a woman with a positive BRCA mutation test has a gene not found in women whose BRCA test was negative . A similar question revealed that 21 % of students believe that only people with Huntington disease have the huntingtin gene . Conceptual Complexity Perhaps , the most fundamental concept of genetics is the central dogma—that a segment of DNA is transcribed to form messenger RNA , which is then translated to form a protein . The process is depicted as DNA Y RNA Y protein . The central dogma is a particularly useful model for nursing education because it depicts the process by which genes influence health and provides a framework for describing genome - based interventions . Unfortunately , nursing stu - dents demonstrated widespread confusion about the pro - cesses of the central dogma . Only 25 % of students identified proteins as the product of transcription - translation , and almost half ( 45 % ) mistakenly identified transcription - translation as steps in cell division . Students’ narratives were often detailed and included high - level jargon , even naming specific enzymes yet revealing widespread wrong ideas . Other excerpts provide compelling evidence that many students conflate 3 basic but distinct genetic processes : DNA Nurse Educator Volume 42 & Number 6 & November / December 2017 305 transcription , translation , and replication . Difficulty under - standing and differentiating these processes may arise from vocabulary issues such as difficulty in distinguishing terms that sound alike , from conceptual complexity because the processes are unobservable , or both . Many responses in - cluded partial truths , information or language that students may have memorized without full understanding . The phenomenon of rote learning has been described in detail in educational psychology and science education literature : students who experience difficulty assimilating new concepts may resort to memorizing unconnected ideas . 17 , 19 For nurses , this is particularly troubling . Nurses have little need to name enzymes involved in DNA transcription . They should , how - ever , have an understanding of the way DNA influences health—a process embodied in the central dogma . Misconceptions This study revealed nursing students to hold a number of misconceptions previously identified among biology stu - dents . A thorough analysis of those shared misconcep - tions is beyond the scope of this article , but some general observations are illuminating . Some genetic misconceptions reflect knowledge that was once believed to be true but is incongruent with current understanding . Examples are that genes are composed of proteins ( thought to be true until the 1950s ) or that 1 gene encodes 1 protein ( considered a second central dogma until the 1970s ) . Misconceptions about the nature of a gene should not be surprising ; our rapidly unfolding understand - ing of genes has led to robust discussion and ongoing recasting of the concept of a gene . 29 Many misconceptions have a firm basis in Mendelian genetics , which is also not surprising . Most genetics curricula and textbooks begin with and emphasize Mendelian genetics , leading students to develop the false impression that most health conditions are inherited in the simple , predictable manner of rare single - gene disorders . 30 , 31 This linear , monogenic model is thought to lead to misconceptions such as a dichotomy of dominance ( ie , the idea that alleles occur in 2 forms : dominant and recessive ) and the 1 gene – 1 trait metaphor ( the idea that each gene determines a trait ) . These particular misconceptions have been found to be pervasive across studies . 5 , 11 , 18 In our study , 63 % of students identified the purpose of a gene as to determine a particular trait , and more than half of the students endorsed the dominant / recessive dichotomy . However , only a small subset of human conditions fit this simple dichotomous model . Traditional Mendelian ( ‘‘inheritance’’ ) genetics is al - together inadequate to explain our current understanding of the complex and dynamic role of genes in health and health . Efforts to revise genetics curriculum and present monogenic inheritance as a special case , rather than the norm , have recently gained traction in biology education . 32 , 33 Another misconception emerged regarding the process of DNA transcription . In SSR surveys , 15 % of nursing students specifically described DNA as becoming or being changed into RNA during transcription . A student who ascribes to this wrong idea may have difficulty understanding that the central dogma describes a process for information flow . This confusion is not limited to nursing students ; open - ended assessments and interviews revealed that 36 % of undergraduate biology students believe that DNA is chemically converted to RNA during transcription , perhaps because the central dogma is depicted using arrows in the same way chemical reactions are drawn . 34 The qualitative methods used in this study provided unique access to students’ thinking about genomic concepts . For example , 1 item depicted a pedigree and asked students to predict transmission risk for an autosomal dominant ( AD ) disease . In individual interviews , 13 of 15 students answered this question quickly and correctly , predicting the risk to be 50 % . As they articulated their thinking , however , only 5 students described a correct rationale . Two students ad - mitted they guessed , and the other 6 students ( representing 40 % of the students interviewed ) drew , or tried to draw , a Punnett square to show their logic . Either their Punnett squares revealed a different answer , or they were unable to draw the father’s genotype for the Punnett square . None of the students recognized that most people with an AD disease are heterozygous for the mutated gene ( because homozygosity is often lethal ) . Importantly , none of the students changed their answer , even in the face of their own conflicting logic . This example illustrates students’ strong association of a 50 % recurrent risk with AD conditions . The students relied on their memory , with confidence , even when reasoning led them to a different outcome . Implications for Nursing Education This study provides evidence that nursing students face similar challenges as biology students in learning genetics . Nurse educators might benefit from lessons learned and strategies already developed by our counterparts in biology education . The study also provided insights into student thinking that educators can anticipate and address in their teaching . Faculty should recognize that many students find learning genetics to be difficult and target known sources of difficulty in their instruction and assess - ment . Administering standardized tests of genetic knowledge preinstruction is useful to identify knowledge gaps . Learning activities can be designed to help students master the language of genetics , highlighting particular terms shown to be problematic . Faculty can encourage conceptual under - standing ( rather than memorization of details ) by using graphics , animations , analogies , and testing student under - standing with open - ended questions . Faculty who recognize wrong ideas shared by the class can illuminate misconcep - tions and offer evidence to lead students to remodel their thinking as they develop conceptual clarity . Specific teaching strategies are available in biology education literature , although a review is beyond the scope of this article . Study Limitations Generalizability of study findings may be limited by the use of a convenience sample of students from a single col - lege of nursing . The rigor of data analysis was also limited by relying on a single investigator , rather than a team , for most content analyses . That approach was thought to be suffi - cient , however , for this study’s purpose , that is , to identify sources of learning difficulty . Conclusions Qualitative inquiry provides insights into how students learn—and where they get stuck—that cannot be captured 306 Volume 42 & Number 6 & November / December 2017 Nurse Educator using traditional educational assessment methods . It should be no surprise that learning how genomes impact health is difficult . The domain features a complex language and even more complex conceptual structures , and the discipline is fraught with commonsense misconceptions that are well engrained in students’ beliefs . Because advances in genome science are occurring at a rapid and accelerating rate , it is difficult to predict how future discovery and genomic ap - plications will unfold . Therefore , biology students and nurs - ing students alike require deep , transferable knowledge about foundational genetic and genomic mechanisms , so they can add new knowledge as the science advances . Nurse educators faced with integrating genetic - genomic content can and should benefit from the extensive literature about teaching and learning genetics that represents decades of biology education research . References 1 . Collins FS , Green E , Guttmacher A , Guyer M . A vision for the future of genomics research . Nature . 2003 ; 422 ( 6934 ) : 835 - 847 . 2 . Lewis J , Kattman U . Traits , genes , particles and information : re - visiting students’ understandings of genetics . Int J Sci Educ . 2004 ; 26 ( 2 ) : 195 - 206 . 3 . Mbajiorgu NM , Ezechi NG , Idoko EC . Addressing nonscientific presuppositions in genetics using a conceptual change strategy . Sci Educ . 2007 ; 91 ( 3 ) : 419 - 438 . 4 . Tsui CY , Treagust DF . Understanding genetics : analysis of sec - ondary students’ conceptual status . J Res Sci Teach . 2006 ; 44 ( 2 ) : 205 - 235 . 5 . Mills Shaw KR , Van Horne K , Zhang H , Boughman J . Essay contest reveals misconceptions of high school students in genetics content . Genetics . 2008 ; 178 ( 3 ) : 1157 - 1168 . 6 . Marbach - AdG , StavyR . Students’cellularandmolecularexplanation of genetic phenomena . J Biol Educ . 2000 ; 34 ( 4 ) : 200 - 205 . 7 . Bahar M , Johnstone AH , Hansell MH . Revisiting learning difficulties in biology . J Biol Educ . 1999 ; 33 ( 2 ) : 84 - 86 . 8 . Fisher KM . A misconception in biology : amino acids and translation . J Res Sci Teach . 1985 ; 22 ( 1 ) : 52 - 62 . 9 . Woody S , Himelblau E . Understanding & teaching genetics using analogies . Am Biol Teach . 2013 ; 75 ( 9 ) : 664 - 669 . 10 . National Human Genome Research Institute . Talking Glossary of Genetic Terms . National Human Genome Research Institute Web site . Available at https : / / www . genome . gov / glossary / . Accessed September 4 , 2016 . 11 . Allchin D . The dilemma of dominance . Biol Philos . 2005 ; 20 ( 2 - 3 ) : 427 - 451 . 12 . Burian RM , Kampourkis K . Against ‘‘genes for’’ : could an inclusive concept of genetic material effectively replace gene concepts ? In : Kampurakis K , ed . The Philosophy of Biology : A Companion for Educators . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Springer Science + Business Media BV ; 2013 . 13 . Dauer JT , Momsen JL , Speth EB , Makohon - Moore SC , Long TM . Analyzing change in students’ gene - to - evolution models in college - level introductory biology . J Res Sci Teach . 2013 ; 50 ( 6 ) : 639 - 659 . 14 . Baker WP , Lawson AE . Complex instructional analogies and theoretical concept acquisition in college genetics . Sci Educ . 2001 ; 85 ( 6 ) : 665 - 683 . 15 . Ausubel DP , Novak JD , Hanesian H . Educational Psychology : A Cognitive View . 2nd ed . New York , NY : Holt , Rinehart and Winston ; 1978 . 16 . Hestenes D , Wells M , Swackhamer G . Force concept inventory . Phys Teach . 1992 ; 30 : 141 - 151 . 17 . Mazur E . Peer Instruction : A User’s Manual . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Pearson Hall ; 1997 . 18 . Smith MK , Knight JK . Using the genetics concept assessment to document persistent conceptual difficulties in undergrad - uate genetics courses . Genetics . 2012 ; 191 ( 1 ) : 21 - 32 . 19 . Clement J , Brown DE , Zietsman A . Not all preconceptions are misconceptions : finding ‘‘anchoring conceptions’’ for grounding instruction on students’ intuitions . Int J Sci Educ . 1989 ; 11 ( 5 ) : 554 - 565 . 20 . Ward LD , Haberman M , Barbosa - Leiker C . Development and psychometric evaluation of the genomic nursing concept in - ventory . J Nurs Educ . 2014 ; 53 ( 9 ) : 511 - 518 . 21 . Bailey JM . Development of a concept inventory to assess students’ understanding and reasoning difficulties about the proper - ties and formation of stars . Astron Educ Rev . 2008 ; 6 ( 2 ) : 133 - 139 . 22 . Garvin - Doxas K , Klymkowsky M , Elrod S . Building , using , and maximizing the impact of concept inventories in the biological sciences : report on a National Science Foundation sponsored conference on the construction of concept inven - tories in the biological sciences . CBE Life Sci Educ . 2007 ; 6 ( 4 ) : 277 - 282 . 23 . Krippendorff K . Content Analysis : An Introduction to Its Methodology . Newbury Park , CA : Sage ; 1980 . 24 . Conrad F , Blair J . From impressions to data : increasing the objectivity of cognitive interviews . In : Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods , Annual Meeting of the American Statistical Association . Alexandria , VA : American Statistical Association ; 1996 . 25 . Next Generation Science Standards ( NGGS ) Lead States . Next Generation Science Standards : For States , by States . Washington , DC : The National Academies Press ; 2013 . 26 . Pashley M . A - level students : their problems with gene and allele . J Biol Educ . 1994 ; 28 ( 2 ) : 120 - 126 . 27 . Lewis J , Leach J , Wood - Robinson C . What’s in a cell ? —young people’s understanding of the genetic relationship between cells , within an individual . J Biol Educ . 2000 ; 34 ( 3 ) : 129 - 133 . 28 . Marbach - Ad G . Attempting to break the code in student comprehension of genetic concepts . J Biol Educ . 2001 ; 35 ( 4 ) : 183 - 189 . 29 . Keller EF , Harel D . Beyond the gene . PLoS One . 2007 ; 2 ( 11 ) : e1231 . 30 . Burian RM . On gene concepts and teaching genetics : episodes from classical genetics . Sci & Educ . 2013 ; 22 ( 2 ) : 325 - 344 . 31 . Dougherty MJ . Closing the gap : inverting the genetics curriculum to ensure an informed public . Am J Hum Genet . 2009 ; 85 ( 1 ) : 6 - 12 . 32 . Lontok KS , Zhang H , Dougherty MJ . Assessing the genetics content in the next generation science standards . PLoS One . 2015 ; 10 ( 7 ) : e0132742 . 33 . McElhinny TL , Dougherty MJ , Bowling BV , Libarkin JC . The status of genetics curriculum in higher education in the United States : goals and assessment . Sci & Educ . 2014 ; 23 ( 2 ) : 445 - 464 . 34 . WrightLK , Fisk JN , NewmanDL . DNA Y RNA : whatdostudents think the arrow means ? CBE Life Sci Educ . 2014 ; 13 ( 2 ) : 338 - 348 . Nurse Educator Volume 42 & Number 6 & November / December 2017 307