VIKI : Spatial Hypertext Supporting Emergent Structure Catherine C . Marshall , Frank M . Shipman III , James H . Coombs Xerox Palo Alto Research Center 3333 Coyote Hill Road Palo Alto , CA 94304 Fax : ( 415 ) 812 - 4777 E - mail : { marshall , shipman } @ parc . xerox . com ABSTRACT The emergent nature of structure is a crucial , but often ignored , constraint on authoring hypertexts . VIKI is a spatial hypertext system that supports the emergent qualities of structure and the abstractions that guide its creation . We have found that a visual / spatial metaphor for hypertext allows people to express the nuances of structure , especially ambiguous , partial , or emerging structure , more easily . VIKI supports interpretation of a collected body of materials , a task that becomes increasingly important with the availability of on - line information sources . The tool’s data model includes semi - structured objects , collections that provide the basis for spatial navigation , and object composites , all of which may evolve into types . A spatial parser supports this evolution and enhances user interaction with changing , visually apparent organizations . KEYWORDS : Spatial hypertext , emergent structure , interpretation , visual structure recognition , composites . 1 INTRODUCTION When we examine hypertext structures from a systems perspective , we often focus on the finished product - - how the expressive qualities of a particular system’s data model are reflected in the structures , how readers navigate through the structures , and how the structures may be interchanged between diverse systems [ 4 ] . Less frequently do we question how the structures emerge and how systems support the structuring process . Yet developing hypertext structures and the abstractions that guide their creation is a crucial part of authoring . Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission . (cid:211) 1994 ACM 0 - 89791 - xxx - x / xx / xxxx . . . We have developed a spatial hypertext system , VIKI , that supports the emergent qualities of hypertext structures , acknowledging many of the difficulties we have observed when people define and use the types of abstractions that are prevalent in many hypertext systems [ 25 ] . Spatial or browser - based hypertext has unique expressive qualities that take advantage of the human perceptual system , spatial and geographic memory , and more generally , spatial intelligence . VIKI’s visual / spatial methods of constructing hypertext structures facilitate exploration and the gradual development of a visual language through informal interaction . Instead of requiring authors to construct explicit structures , the prototype tool incorporates structure - finding algorithms based on spatial layout and other visually salient properties of objects ; this approach is complementary to other text - or document - based approaches such as those described in [ 26 ] . Because people are able to leave structure implicit to be recognized and formalized on demand , VIKI overcomes many of the authoring problems associated with hypertext construction , including the need to articulate tacit knowledge or commit to structure prematurely . VIKI is intended for exploratory interpretation , making sense of a body of electronic information collected in the service of a specific task such as analysis , design , or evaluation . This kind of information - intensive intellectual task has become increasingly important in the light of recent efforts to provide extensive digital resources like libraries , databases , and on - line information services . In essence , spatial hypertext provides an information workspace , the critical vehicle for making public or institutional information resources useful to individuals , work groups , or larger communities of practice . VIKI uses a simplified hypertext data model that is derived from our experiences with Aquanet [ 15 ] and additional empirical studies of spatial information structures [ 16 ] . Like Aquanet , VIKI uses semi - structured objects as the atomic entity . But diverging from Aquanet , complex entity - valued relations have been broken down into collections , a system - supported hierarchy of navigable information spaces , and composites , higher - level structures composed of regular spatial patterns of objects and collections . The tool’s user interface provides users with ways of manipulating the visual and spatial characteristics of individual references to underlying objects , collections , and composites . In this paper , we first explore the niche for spatial hypertext and look at its role in interpretive tasks . We then describe VIKI’s data model and show how it is realized in the user interface . We discuss how spatial parsing is integrated into the tool and how it is used to assist users in their tasks . Finally , we discuss use of the tool in a group setting and future directions for the work . 2 SPATIAL HYPERTEXT AND ITS NICHE We have argued previously that spatial hypertext fills an important niche in our collective conception of hypertext [ 16 ] . If we take a representational stance on structures ( as opposed to a purely navigational one ) , and focus on active creation rather than reading and traversal , we can examine the constraints systems put on authors and the support the systems provide toward meeting these constraints . This perspective highlights the niche for spatial hypertext and the role it may play in supporting structure creation . We have identified a spectrum of approaches to constraining authoring in browser - based and document - based hypertext systems and will contrast four points along this spectrum : ( 1 ) permissive , ( 2 ) emergent , ( 3 ) descriptive or meta - schematic , and ( 4 ) prescriptive structuring . Permissive linking ( or more broadly structure - building ) lies at one end of the authoring spectrum . Most early hypertext efforts relied on explicit , permissive links to express structure . Connections were unconstrained and intimately tied to the authors’ and readers’ perceptions of idiosyncratic relationships between nodes , documents , or unitary pieces of information . Permissive linking generally allows people to express these relationships , but does not provide any way of expressing the regularities , abstractions , or assumptions underlying the structure - building process . At the other end of the spectrum , prescriptive structure - building imposes constraints that embody a particular methodology or a cognitive model of process ( e . g . Issue - Based design methodology underlies gIBIS [ 5 ] ; Sepia is grounded in a model of the writing process [ 27 ] ) . The types of connections that authors may make using these systems are the results of careful analysis and are embedded in the systems themselves ( although most prescriptive system designers have found it necessary to make their base set of types user - extensible ) . In turn , the system provides various kinds of support for readers and authors based on these types . Recent efforts have brought us descriptive or meta - schematic systems in which authors characterize their domains of interest , and use ( or , more ideally , re - use ) these abstractions to constrain and structure their own authoring . Aquanet [ 17 ] and MacWeb [ 20 ] are examples of this approach . Meta - schematic systems provide mechanisms for expressing and manipulating abstractions , in addition to providing the means of creating and manipulating instances of abstract types . They appropriate the power of knowledge representation languages or constructs like frames to help constrain and describe hypertextual structures . Emergent spatial hypertext arises from the authoring paradox first introduced by more prescriptive systems and underscored by meta - schematic systems : as a system’s representational capabilities and data model become increasingly rich ( e . g . MacWeb’s experiment with typed anchors [ 21 ] ) , they become more difficult to use . Similarly , as facilitative models of activity are fleshed out , users find themselves devoting more and more attention to meta - decisions - - identifying what they are doing and why . A pressing need arises to support more free - form expression and the gradual emergence of structure , possibly through recognition of the implicit forms that arise through use and performance of the task at hand . Authoring Representation of Structure Constraints Browser - based Document - based Permissive Storyspace WWW Emergent VIKI HOS Descriptive ( meta - schematic ) Aquanet , MacWeb OVAL Prescriptive Sepia , gIBIS PHIDIAS Table 1 - Prototypical examples of hypertext systems intended to fill different niches Table 1 sets out the spectrum of approaches to support authoring hypertext structures in current browser - based and document - based systems . Note that our examples thusfar have come primarily from browser - based hypertext systems - - systems that allow their users to work against a spatial backdrop . Comparable approaches exist in hypertext systems that take a document - based approach . The World - Wide Web model [ 1 ] and Storyspace [ 12 ] support simple , unconstrained linking ; PHIDIAS uses an IBIS - derived methodology to constrain the structuring of issue bases [ 18 ] ; OVAL provides a sophisticated rule - based knowledge representation facility for structuring nodes according to their textual content [ 13 ] . HOS uses textual analysis methods to support emergent structuring [ 26 ] . Naturally , system developers at either end of the permissive / prescriptive spectrum have found that hybrid approaches are the most effective ; to insist on a single authoring paradigm is to render a hypertext tool less usable than it might otherwise be . Permissive hypertext systems often include link - finding mechanisms to support simple kinds of emergent structure implicit in content , such as Storyspace’s link apprentice [ 2 ] . We have seen proposals afoot to introduce prescriptive authoring constraints into the global community of World - Wide Web contributors . Authors can create Sepia hyperdocuments starting in the informal Dolphin system [ 9 ] ; gIBIS has an " Other " node type that acts as an escape mechanism ; and PHIDIAS allows users to enter untyped material for future structuring . In VIKI , we focus on visual / spatial hypertext because we feel it has unique characteristics in its ability to support emergent structure . It allows people to make more complete use of their perceptual abilities by providing expressive flexibility , a basis for spatial memory , and navigational control of global context . We direct our attention to a task that can most benefit from techniques to support emergent structure , the interpretation of large collections of digital material . 3 THE TASK : INTERPRETATION We have focused our efforts on supporting the interpretive process . Interpretation is that part of writing , collaborating , or thinking in which people collect the materials of interest and make sense of them in the light of their task and the background they bring to it . Of course , groups and individuals are neither monolithic nor consistent in their beliefs ; to support interpretation , we consider ways of allowing people to record varying interpretations of a body of materials , using a multiplicity of frameworks or structuring schemas which make very different use of the same content . Why is interpretive hypertext an important avenue of research to pursue ? With increasing availability of on - line information sources ( including other people , in addition to databases and corpora ) , people have access to vast quantities of materials relevant to their work . Yet there are relatively few tools that allow people to collect diverse materials and actively explore the various ways the materials may be interpreted - - to pioneer new ways of looking at the material . For example , a successful product development organization will often collect business intelligence material relevant to the positioning and viability of a new product . This business intelligence material may include electronic announcements and reviews of related products ; competitors’ home pages from World - Wide Web ; relevant patent documents retrieved from an information provider’s extensive database ; internal , project - related materials ( like engineering documents ) created during the course of product development ; electronic mail exchanges held within the organization ; and , perhaps , information mined from Usenet newsgroup discussions . Once these materials have been gathered , members of the organization must make sense of them - - they need to decide which material is important , extract the salient information , evaluate its veracity , and organize it for their purposes . So it is the understanding that a group develops and shares over time that makes a collection of materials valuable ; the materials themselves are of limited utility without this shared understanding . The difficulty lies in expressing and recording this mutually - defined , ever - evolving interpretive structure . Thus , interpretive structure is not inherent in document content , but evolves opportunistically through work . In practice , interpretive structure may arise through filing , in conversation , in juxtapositions of documents on one’s desktop , in notes and annotations , in markings and marginalia . All of these methods of expressing interpretations are necessarily partial ( they are not fully articulated ) ; they readily tolerate ambiguity and fuzziness . Relationships among documents , assessments of their contents , and interpretive abstractions can remain tacit through the entire duration of the sense - making process . Indeed , much of human knowledge and skill will always remain tacit [ 24 ] . But externalizing these relationships , assessments , and interpretive abstractions is a crucial part of reflecting on one’s own understanding of a problem and communicating one’s understanding to others during the course of collaborative work . Our experiences demonstrate that structure is difficult to express , even in hypertext , a medium designed to do just that . We find then that a tension arises between the tacit knowledge of the expert practitioner ( the reader / author ) , and the representational affordances the hypertext tool provides to coax out interpretations as partial , emerging forms . 1 Interpretive structure is often difficult to articulate within the bounds of language , no matter how informal ; visual and kinesthetic modes of expression may be far more appropriate for coding pre - articulate ideas [ 19 ] . One of Aquanet’s unexpected strengths was the ability it gave people to express interpretations - - interpretations that were less than fully formed - - in terms of visual appearance or spatial positioning . Users could create categories or sets without names and note relationships by relative spatial position ; they could use the kinesthetic process of " trying things out " ( as one might do wiggling molecular models in space or moving a jigsaw puzzle piece into different orientations ) . In other words , they could use affordances normally provided by manipulable material objects ( for example , paper documents ) . Analysis of Aquanet’s expressive strengths and shortfalls points out three pivotal requirements we used to drive the development of VIKI : ( 1 ) interaction must be informal ; ( 2 ) 1 We borrow this notion of affordances from Norman and Gaver [ 22 ] [ 7 ] ; for people to use a technology effectively , its affordances must be made apparent . So in our design of a visual / spatial hypertext tool , the resources for coding interpretations visually and spatially must be apparent and accessible . users must have access to a variety of representational modes ; ( 3 ) additional structure must be available on demand , either through the development of types from examples and prototypes , or through recognition of implicit structure . First , informal interaction is crucial to coaxing out emerging interpretations . We have found that if people can’t just " point and type " their text into a tool , their trains of thought will be derailed by the tool’s interface . Furthermore , if they are required to categorize their input ( say , by choosing a type before an instance can be created ) , they will be unable to use the tool to express partially formed ideas . When we observed Aquanet in use , we saw that people were frustrated by the need to specify what type of instance they were creating before they entered any text . Second , different representational modes - - e . g . the ability to exploit spatial positioning and visual appearance - - allow people to capture nuances of meaning . We wanted to give people access to retinal and planar variables [ 3 ] and allow them to create visually apparent codings [ 29 ] to express and remember partial , ambiguous , or inarticulable interpretations . Finally , emergent structure includes both the particular ( relationships among instances ) and the general ( abstraction of node - internal structure or among - node relationships ) . To be effective , an interpretive tool must allow both kinds of structure to emerge and become schematic on demand . 4 DATA MODEL FOR SPATIAL HYPERTEXT To support emergent spatial structures , VIKI’s data model has three fundamental kinds of elements , objects , collections , and composites . Objects are semi - structured nodes ; collections and composites , as we discuss below , are specialized kinds of hypertext structure derived from observations of practice , not only in Aquanet , but in other hypertext systems and other media [ 16 ] . Objects , collections , and composites may all be abstracted into semi - structured types in accordance with the requirement we have noted for abstraction on demand . Objects . Objects are the content - holding entities of the data model . Each object is referred to by one or more visual symbols . Visual symbols each have a graphical appearance , determined either by direct manipulation or through the types mechanism described below . Users can manipulate the size , shape , color , line thickness , and font characteristics of individual visual symbols . A new object ( and the visual symbol referring to it ) is created by a mouse - click . In contrast to Aquanet’s tight correspondence between instances of object types and their graphical appearance , VIKI’s visual symbols decouple objects and particular references to them in the display space . This decoupling , along with the ability to manipulate the appearance of individual symbols provides users with a far more nuanced means of expression . In one context , a visual symbol may be a red lozenge with a thick border , signaling , for example , that it’s an important source of information ; from another spatial context , the same object might appear as a yellow rectangle , indicating that it’s a newswire story about a new teleconferencing product . Figure 2a shows two visual symbols ( a light gray lozenge and a darker gray rectangle ) that refer to the same underlying object . Note that the content displayed is the same . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 2 - Objects and collections in VIKI . Objects are semi - structured ; they may have no internal structure , or they may have an unlimited number of text - valued slots . Users create slots by name ; these slots can be added when users encounter or invent content that doesn’t fit within the object’s existing slots . In other words , slots can be idiosyncratic reflections of the content of an individual object . Thus instances of a type may have structure in addition to that prescribed by the type’s abstract description ; untyped objects may have any desired internal structure to highlight or extract specific portions of content . The object in Figure 2a has two slots that are visible on its visual symbols , Title and Text . Visual symbols are small , manipulable references to an object’s content . Indeed users have much control over what is visible on a visual symbol at a given time . They can use the symbol’s size to limit the amount of text revealed ; they can specify which slots’ contents are shown ; and they can scroll through content to focus attention on a desired segment of text . The whole of an object’s content may be viewed ( and edited ) in a separate text - editing window ( maximized ) , as is the case in many document - based hypertext systems . Such a maximized object is shown in Figure 3 . Because people frequently need access to the content of more than one object at a time ( for example , to compare conflicting information ) , multiple objects may be maximized at a time . Figure 3 - A maximized object . Collections . Collections contain an arbitrary spatial arrangement of any number of objects or other collections , allowing them to form a system - supported hierarchy . They too are manipulable visual symbols that refer to large , scrollable 2 1 / 2 D spaces ( spaces in which objects may overlap , but no explicit representation of a third dimension is saved across sessions ) . Like objects , collections may also be instances of a type , although collection types just preserve a limited number of visual attributes ( color , title font characteristics , and border thickness , but not shape ) . Figure 2a shows a single collection titled " Collection 1 . " Figure 2b shows the movement of a visual symbol into the collection . The edges of the collection act as a clipping region - - a portal into a subspace . Users may resize or zoom collections to reveal more or less of their contents . We discuss how collections act as subspaces to localize context and how they support user navigation in a later section . Composites . Composites are lightweight structures that consist of combinations of two or more objects or collections in particular visual / spatial configurations . Composite constituents may be typed and have additional visual / spatial properties that are independent of the composite type definition , once again due to the object / symbol distinction . For example , one constituent of an instance of a composite type may have a thicker border than in the composite’s canonical form to encode a specific property of the instance . Composite types may be defined directly , but they can also be suggested to authors based on the results of the recognition algorithms discussed in the next section . Figure 4d shows an example of two composites which are instances of a composite type . One instance overrides a specific property - - border thickness - - on one of its component objects . We see composites ( especially automatically perceived and maintained composites ) as a viable way of building up relational structures in VIKI ; they closely reflect the structuring process people went through in Aquanet [ 15 ] . Composites provide a simplified mechanism for including entity - valued slots in VIKI’s data model . VIKI’s composites follow Groenbaek and Trigg’s composites , which were derived in part from NoteCards tabletops ( where a lightweight structure specified graphical layout of existing nodes ) [ 8 ] [ 28 ] . Types . Although tools like Aquanet or OVAL provide their users with powerful inheritance mechanisms for creating types and type hierarchies , in practice these mechanisms can prove to be very difficult to use in an informally structured task ; we saw little use of Aquanet’s CLOS - inspired mechanism that supported multiple inheritance . Strongly typed hypertext and author - defined type hierarchies are not entirely compatible with the notion of emergent structures , since they presuppose that a user has a clear ( and continuous ) idea about how the domain he or she is working in is structured and is willing to work hard to articulate it within the expressed framework . We discuss other problems arising from the emergent quality of interpretive structures in [ 25 ] . Yet types have some useful characteristics : they encapsulate a particular appearance , set of authoring conventions , or internal structure . Thus we have tried to strike a middle ground in VIKI’s type mechanism : it allows users to specify significant aspects of an instance’s visual symbol ( like color , font properties , and shape ) and the internal structure of an object , along with how this internal structure is manifested on the visual symbols that refer to it . We have also anticipated that types will emerge ( be designed and defined ) gradually through examples and prototypical cases rather than through a separate process . To introduce flexibility into the types mechanism , VIKI allows any particular visual symbol’s graphical appearance to be manipulated independently of its object’s type and ad hoc slots to be added to its internal structure . Because some of the visual properties of the object are not specified by the type definition ( for example , border thickness ) , an author can express a partial interpretation by using these independent properties . VIKI also helps users recognize instances of types - - if the internal structure of an object matches that of an existing type , the tool asks the user if she intends the object to be an instance of that type . 2 Other more sophisticated heuristics are used to suggest possible collections and composites based on spatial and visual properties of objects . These mechanisms are described in the next section . Working within VIKI’s data model , authors can use objects , collections , composites , and the visual symbols that refer to them to gradually build up visualizations of the contents of a corpus of collected relevant material , eventually forming types , abstractions , and a sophisticated visual language for performing an analysis of this material . Noting relationships . To provide users with particular kinds of representational affordances , VIKI focuses on relationships that can be noted visually and spatially . These relationships may either remain implicit , or be recognized by the perceptual heuristics described in the following section . Figure 4 summarizes the kinds of relationships VIKI’s data model supports . First , relationships between objects may be noted very simply , through spatial juxtaposition and placement , as shown in Figure 4a . The visual symbol / object distinction allows users to refer to the same content from many spatial contexts and modify a particular symbol’s appearance to suit its use . Graphically noted relationships like drawn arrows are a way this type of relationship can be further formalized . We have opted to let these relationships be indicated very informally , at the possible cost of accidental loss of information , since our observations of practice indicate a preference for easy manipulation of this permissive level of structuring . A second way of noting relationships ( especially categorical relationships and sets ) is through visual properties , and - - more explicitly - - through VIKI’s simplified object types mechanism . In Figure 4b , the presence of two different visual types is used to express category membership that cross - cuts spatial positioning . In this case , we mean to portray categorization that has taken place after the objects were moved into this spatial configuration . As we see in Figure 4c , categorical or activity - related connections among objects may also be noted through collections . VIKI’s collection mechanism supports two different practices we have observed in Aquanet and NoteCards - - the creation of hierarchical category structures ( by means of NoteCards FileBox cards and system - 2 Of course , if two semantically distinct types have identical internal structures , a user has the option of turning off this suggestion mechanism , and may then resolve the ambiguity by hand . supported filing links ) [ 10 ] and the manipulation of objects over time into activity - oriented subspaces [ 15 ] . a ) relationships b ) relationships d ) relationships c ) relationships noted by object type noted by spatial arrangement noted by collection noted by composite Figure 4 - Noting relationships within VIKI’s data model . Visual and typed composites provide users with the ability to abstract relationships among types of objects . These abstract relationships may either remain implicit ( as we observed in practice with Aquanet ) or users may take advantage of the system’s ability to recognize these relationships and form explicit composite types to maintain spatial relationships as we saw in Tabletop templates [ 14 ] . This level of abstraction helps bring back some of the expressiveness of Aquanet’s data model and its entity - valued slots without placing unwarranted constraints on users who prefer to leave the composite structure implicit . Figure 4d shows an example of two instances a visual / spatial composite which VIKI can recognize and , if desired , formalize into a composite type . 5 SPATIAL NAVIGATION , LOCAL CONTEXT Collections are a way of localizing meaning - - they give people the ability to immerse themselves in local meaning without losing global context . Context may be defined by representational strategy ( to localize a particular visual / spatial structuring schema as we see in the use described in [ 15 ] ) , specific subtask ( these items have been brought together because they pertain to an activity , much as was the intent of Rooms [ 11 ] ) , or semantic cohesion ( these items all belong to the same category or set , in line with the original motivation for relations in Aquanet ) . Since collections are acyclic , visually - nested hierarchical structures , we have provided a navigational mechanism that allows people to move between focal collections . Like Boxer [ 6 ] and Pad [ 23 ] , VIKI takes advantage of spatial metaphor for navigation . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 5 - Navigation between VIKI collections . Figure 5 shows an example of spatial navigation in VIKI . Figure 5a shows the top level of a VIKI document ; two collections are visible , one titled " Collection 1 , " and a second titled " Collection 2 , " which is inside Collection 1 . A single lozenge - shaped object is also shown at the top level . Traversing into Collection 1 ( by double - clicking on its border ) causes the selected collection to become the focus - - it takes up the tool’s entire available display area . Figure 5b shows the result of this traversal . Now more of the contents of Collection 1 are visible ( although remote regions of the collections are always accessible through scrolling , even when they are not the focus ) . Two more objects have been revealed in Collection 1 and the three clipped objects in Collection 2 have come more fully into view . To traverse among levels in the hierarchy , a user need only click on the desired collection’s border . Multiple levels may be traversed in a single step - - a contrast to the " single level at a time " style of a NoteCards hierarchy ( although navigation is necessarily limited by the depth of the hierarchical structure that a user can see ) . Because hierarchies of spaces soon grow complex and difficult to traverse , VIKI also includes a Zoom function that - - at its most compressed level - - allows users to grasp the entirety of the space . 6 RECOGNITION We have integrated a spatial parser ( described in [ 16 ] ) into VIKI to assist authors in a variety of ways . The results of the spatial parser allow VIKI to ( 1 ) use implicit structure as a basis for interaction ; ( 2 ) help people use the object - collection - composite data model ; and ( 3 ) provide inter - object abstraction on demand . Structure use or abstraction in VIKI is always done at the user’s initiative , following our " structure and abstraction on demand " requirement . The spatial parser performs a bottom - up hierarchical parse using empirically - determined heuristics to decide parse order . The recognition algorithms use three primary attributes of a visual symbol : its x , y location , its width and height , and its object type , which may be thought of in terms of a confluence of visual attributes like shape , color , or font . The parser produces a forest where each branch is assigned a type based on the types of its constituents . If the constituents are of the same type , the branch assumes its type from its constituents ; if they are of differing types , the parser creates a new type for the branch . 6 . 1 Click Selection The recognition algorithms allow users to interact with implicit structure without requiring the structure to be formally defined or even anticipated . VIKI’s click - selection facility is a good example of this strategy . Click - selection in VIKI works much the same way as it does in a text editor . In a text editor , a single click puts the cursor at a particular point ; the next click selects the word ; the next , the paragraph ; the next the entire document ; and the next returns to the single point of selection . VIKI uses a similar technique : each successive click selects the next level of hierarchical structure . Figure 6 shows click selection in action . With the first click , the user has selected a single object , the middle item in a three - item list . The user’s second click enlarges the selection to include all three similar objects in the list . The third click adds the heading of the list to the selection , and the fourth click extends the selection to include the entirety of a similarly - structured list . first click second click third click fourth click Figure 6 - Four steps in VIKI’s recognition - based hierarchic click - selection . Users realize two immediate advantages from hierarchic click - selection . First , users may select objects that are part of partially hidden structures without having to scroll or traverse from the current view . Second , users may select partial structures in areas where objects are too densely packed for sweep - selection . 6 . 2 Collection Suggestion The spatial parser also helps users bridge the gap between their activities and the system’s data model . For example , at a user’s initiative , VIKI will suggest collections - - apparent subdivisions of materials for starting new subspaces . Collection suggestion is an accelerator : it greatly reduces author effort in creating new collections and moving existing , visually structured materials into them . Figure 7 - VIKI suggests a new collection at user’s request . VIKI suggests collections based on the highest level structures found by the spatial parser . Collection suggestion uses a standard spelling checker as a model of interaction . Figure 7 shows the collection suggestion mechanism in action . In the figure , the recognizers have identified an entire region of similarly - arranged materials ; a dialog box ( in the lower right corner of the screen image ) allows the user to define the found region as a new collection . Using this interface , the user can iterate through the list of suggestions and accept only those that are appropriate . VIKI displays these suggestions to the user by selecting all objects and collections that will become part of the new collection and outlining its extent with a dark band . Suggestions can be modified by interactively changing which objects are selected . 6 . 3 Composite Suggestion Composite suggestion is an example of how VIKI can use recognition results to provide abstraction on demand . Recurrent spatial patterns of object types are identified by the parser and may become the basis for user - accessible composite types . Figure 8 - Composite definition dialog with suggestion . VIKI suggests potential composites based on the parse results whenever a user brings up the composite definition dialog . Users may either use the suggestions as is , modify them , or start from scratch to develop new composite types . Figure 8 shows the composite definition dialog ( in the lower right corner of the figure ) with a suggested composite based on a recurrent pattern in the user’s work . In this case , the pattern is a list with a heading . In the editable workspace area of the dialog box , a set of abstract objects represents this pattern ( a light gray rectangle over a small number of darker gray rectangles ) . The list of composites that have already been defined appears below the workspace with iconic representations of their graphical appearances . 7 USE IN A WORK GROUP SETTING We have used VIKI in a work group setting to perform an analysis task : we have gathered and structured materials that are pertinent to our group’s research 3 . In particular , we have focused on three kinds of materials : ( 1 ) project descriptions to help develop and maintain an overview of our group’s research activities ; ( 2 ) materials related to intellectual property management ; and ( 3 ) materials that help us maintain a shared awareness of related products that are being introduced to the marketplace . Although individuals have used VIKI to maintain personal databases of materials , we will focus on its use in a group setting . 7 . 1 Connection with World - Wide Web We have found that this kind of information - intensive application requires strong connections with external sources of materials ; VIKI users want to refer to various outside resources . Initially , VIKI supported a standard kind of information import - - materials in a fixed format could be brought into the tool and stored in VIKI’s database . However , it was quite clear from the start that this would be insufficient to meet the needs of interpretive activities . Constraining people to use VIKI - internal information caused needless replication of materials stored elsewhere , did not take into account the mutability of these materials , and did not take advantage of other tools that people are using to work with networked information . To address these issues , we have developed a connection with World - Wide Web that allows VIKI objects to refer ( through automatic processing of user - supplied URLs ) to Web pages . Thus users can start existing WWW viewers ( such as Mosaic ) by interacting with VIKI objects . This facility allows people to take advantage of the Web as an information resource , enabling them to interpret and situate Web materials in the context of their work . Many viewers suggest this sort of facility is necessary by including the notion of a " Hotlist ; " VIKI provides a more expressive medium for customizing views of the World - Wide Web . In our analysis task , this connection has become quite useful since members of the group have developed Web pages and HTML documents to describe their research ; objects in our " project descriptions " collection now refer directly to these pages . 7 . 2 Meta Communication Meta communication ( communication about content ) became increasingly important for several reasons . First , many conventions that people use to structure materials remain implicit . Some notes in our application explain 3 Our work group includes a diverse set of activities that center around technologies to support collaboration . VIKI is one of a dozen small projects that take place in our work group . The figures that have been used in the later portions of this paper are drawn from this application . these conventions . For example , a participant wrote a note to the other contributors : " The thicker borders mean that I think these are the best articles about InConcert . They’re arranged in order of usefulness ( most to least ) . " Second , any individual’s structuring process is invisible to her collaborators . Some notes in our application tend to document process : " moved all history notes into the history collection " or " I changed the types Xerox and commercial to display only titles . " Third , even when a collaborator defines explicit types , some explanation of their intended use is often necessary - - " I created a type called ’Post - It’ that’s for leaving notes around . " Finally , the notes are used for straightforward communication among collaborators ; for example , one note says , " There are several places that need ’cleanup’ . I’d like to do this together . " 7 . 3 Utility Naturally , such collaborative efforts are only successful if they are somehow useful to the various contributors . How has the amassed content been used so far ? Our project descriptions have become the basis for our group’s semi - annual report , a descriptive summary that every work group must produce . When we have conducted meetings with possible business collaborators , we have been able to gather materials over which this discussion may be held . A shared collection of news stories has become a resource that has enabled us to answer provocative management questions like , " How is what you’re developing different from this product I saw at Fry’s . 4 " 8 ISSUES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS This use of VIKI , along with our previous experience with Aquanet use , suggests three fundamental questions : ( 1 ) Are the emergent forms supported by visual / spatial hypertext compatible with other important hypertextual forms as specified in data models such as the Dexter reference model [ 8 ] ? ( 2 ) How may other modes of automated analysis be combined with spatial parsing to yield a richer sense of emergent structure ? and finally ( 3 ) How does this notion of emergent spatial hypertext and shared partial interpretations scale up to larger collaborative settings ( beyond the small work group ) and larger document collections ? We have demonstrated the ad hoc expressive capacity of visual and spatial hypertext , but it is also important to examine its compatibility with other hypertextual paradigms . In particular , while VIKI allows people to compose internodal structures easily from visually portrayed objects , it does not support the internal anchoring that we 4 Fry’s is a local chain of electronics and software supermarkets . have come to expect from fully - formed hypertext structures . It is readily apparent that in explorations of information objects , people will discover relationships among segments of different materials . We can evade this issue by claiming that users may chunk material into smaller objects so the relationships may be expressed between whole objects , but it is more realistic to extend our model to include conventional modes of linking and anchoring . Expressing hypertextual span - to - span relationships will be challenging within our visual / spatial paradigm . Spatial parsing reveals much perceptual structure in VIKI layouts , but we also anticipate a need for other modes of structure recognition based on analysis of content or analysis of the temporal properties of objects . Once we have developed other modes of recognition , it will be necessary to merge these text - based or temporally - based assessments of internode relationships with spatial parsing ; experimentation will allow us to understand how the various analysis methods interact . Finally , we must examine the utility of spatial hypertext in a larger collaborative setting . Making meaning in shared spaces is comfortable and not overly daunting within a small work group ; as we described in the last section , we have already engaged in such collaborations to produce a usable community memory , a shared , gathered , partially interpreted corpus of materials . But how will systems like VIKI scale up to institutional settings or to more casual kinds of collaborations ( the kind we observe taking place in some Usenet discussions ) ? In a tight collaboration , VIKI spaces act as a means of passing around a collection of relevant documents and a partial interpretation of these documents ; as the task duration increases , coordination decreases , and the number of contributors , sub - communities , objects , and types increases , will it be possible to maintain the mutual intelligibility of these spaces ? Will one person’s use of the color red be understood and used the same way as another’s ? Will collections’ ability to localize visual meaning make the entire hierarchical structure understandable , or will inconsistencies between collections render them incomprehensible ? All these questions require use in an extended setting . It is with these issues in mind that we continue development and search for potential user communities . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Sara Bly for many productive discussions about VIKI and its use and Tom Moran for his input to the tool’s design . Our ECHT ’94 reviewers supplied helpful comments on the paper’s content . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Berners - Lee , T . J . , Cailliau , R . , Groff , J - F . , and Pollermann , B . World - Wide Web : The Information Universe . Electronic Networking : Research , Applications and Policy , Vol . 2 , No . 1 ( Spring 1992 ) pp . 52 - 58 . [ 2 ] Bernstein , M . An Apprentice That Discovers Hypertext Links . In Proceedings of ECHT ’90 , Paris , France , ( Nov . 1990 ) , pp . 212 - 223 . [ 3 ] Bertin , J . Semiology of Graphics . Madison , Wisconsin : University of Wisconsin Press , ( 1983 ) . [ 4 ] Communications of the ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 2 , ( Feb . 1994 ) . [ 5 ] Conklin , J . , and Begeman , M . gIBIS : A Hypertext Tool for Exploratory Policy Discussion . In Proceedings of the CSCW ’88 , Portland , Oregon , ( Sept . 26 - 28 , 1988 ) , pp . 140 - 152 . [ 6 ] diSessa , A . , and Abelson , H . , Boxer : A Reconstructible Computational Medium . Communications of the ACM , Vol . 29 , No . 9 , ( 1986 ) , pp . 859 - 868 . [ 7 ] Gaver , W . Technology affordances . In Proceedings of CHI ’91 , New Orleans , LA ( Apr . 27 - May 2 , 1991 ) pp . 79 - 84 . [ 8 ] Groenbaek , K . and Trigg , R . H . Design Issues for a Dexter - Based Hypermedia System . Communications of the ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 2 , ( Feb . 1994 ) , pp . 40 - 49 . [ 9 ] Haake , J . M . , Neuwirth , C . M . , and Streitz , N . A . Coexistance and Transformation of Informal and Formal Structures : Requirements for More Flexible Hypermedia Systems . In Proceedings of the ECHT ’94 , Edinburgh , Scotland , ( Sept . 1994 ) . [ 10 ] Halasz , F . G . , Moran , T . P . , and Trigg , R . H . NoteCards in a Nutshell . In Proceedings of the ACM CHI + GI Conference , Toronto , Ontario ( Apr . 5 - 9 , 1987 ) , 45 - 52 . [ 11 ] Henderson , D . A . , Jr . and Card , S . K . , Rooms : The use of multiple virtual workspaces to reduce space contention in a window - based graphical user interface . ACM Transactions on Graphics , Vol . 5 , No . 3 ( July , 1986 ) , 211 - 243 . [ 12 ] Joyce , M . Storyspace as a hypertext system for writers and readers of varying ability . In Proceedings of Hypertext ‘91 , San Antonio , TX , ( Dec . 16 - 18 , 1991 ) , pp . 381 - 387 . [ 13 ] Malone , T . W . , Lai , K . Y . , and Fry , C . Experiments with Oval : A Radically Tailorable Tool for Cooperative Work . In Proceedings of CSCW ‘92 , Toronto , Canada , ( Oct . 31 - Nov . 4 , 1992 ) , pp . 289 - 297 . [ 14 ] Marshall C . and Irish P . , Guided Tours and On - Line Presentations : How Authors Make Existing Hypertext Intelligible for Readers . In Proceedings of Hypertext ‘89 , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , ( Nov . 5 - 8 , 1989 ) . [ 15 ] Marshall , C . C . and Rogers , R . A . Two Years before the Mist : Experiences with Aquanet . In Proceedings of ECHT ‘92 , Milan , Italy , ( Dec . 1 - 4 , 1992 ) , pp . 53 - 62 . [ 16 ] Marshall , C . C . and Shipman , F . M . Searching for the Missing Link : Discovering Implicit Structure in Spatial Hypertext . In Proceedings of Hypertext ‘93 , Seattle , Washington , ( Nov . 14 - 18 , 1993 ) , pp . 217 - 230 . [ 17 ] Marshall , C . C . , Halasz , F . G . , Rogers , R . A . , and Janssen , W . C . , Jr . Aquanet : a hypertext tool to hold your knowledge in place . In Proceedings of Hypertext ‘91 , San Antonio , Texas , ( Dec . 16 - 18 , 1991 ) , pp . 261 - 275 . [ 18 ] McCall , R . , Bennett , P . , d’Oronzio , P . , Ostwald , J . , Shipman , F . , and Wallace , N . PHIDIAS : Integrating CAD Graphics into Dynamic Hypertext . In Proceedings of ECHT ‘90 , Paris , France ( Nov . 1990 ) , pp . 152 - 165 . [ 19 ] McKim , R . H . Experiences in Visual Thinking . Monterey , California : Brooks / Cole Publishing Company , ( 1972 ) . [ 20 ] Nanard J . and Nanard M . Using Structured Types to Incorporate Knowledge in Hypertext . In Proceedings of Hypertext ‘91 , San Antonio , TX ( Dec . 16 - 18 , 1991 ) , pp . 329 - 342 . [ 21 ] Nanard , J . and Nanard , M . Should Anchors Be Typed Too ? An Experiment with MacWeb . In Proceedings of Hypertext ‘93 , Seattle , Washington , ( Nov . 14 - 18 , 1993 ) pp . 51 - 62 . [ 22 ] Norman , D . A . The Psychology of Everyday Things . New York : Basic Books , ( 1988 ) . [ 23 ] Perlin , K . and Fox D . An Alternative Approach to the Computer Interface . In Proceedings of Multimedia ‘93 , Anaheim , California , ( Aug . 1 - 6 , 1993 ) , pp . 57 - 64 . [ 24 ] Polanyi , M . The Tacit Dimension . Doubleday , Garden City , NY , 1966 . [ 25 ] Shipman , F . M . and Marshall , C . C . Formality Considered Harmful : Experiences , Emerging Themes , and Directions . Technical report CU - CS - 948 - 93 , Department of Computer Science , University of Colorado , Boulder , 1993 . [ 26 ] Shipman , F . M . , and McCall , R . Supporting Knowledge - Base Evolution with Incremental Formalization . In Proceedings of CHI ’94 , Boston , Mass . , ( Apr . 24 - 28 1994 ) pp . 285 - 291 . [ 27 ] Streitz , N . , Haake , J . , Hannemann , J , Lemke , A . , Schuler , W . , Scheutt , H . , and Thuring , M . SEPIA : a Cooperative Hypermedia Authoring Environment . In Proceedings of ECHT ‘92 , Milano , Italy , ( Dec . 1 - 4 , 1992 ) , pp 11 - 22 . [ 28 ] Trigg , R . Guided Tours and Tabletops : Tools for Communicating in a Hypertext Environment . In Proceedings of CSCW ‘88 , Portland , Oregon , ( Sept . 26 - 28 , 1988 ) , pp . 216 - 226 . [ 29 ] Tufte , E . The Visual Display of Quantitative Information . Cheshire , Connecticut : Graphics Press , ( 1983 ) .