CHI 2001 • 31 MARCH - 5 APRIL Student Posters Expanding an advanced , interface : Modifying and reapplying design guidelines Anne Vinter Ratzer Computer Science Department University of Aarhus Aabogade 34 , 8200 Aarhus N . , Denmark + 45 89 42 56 46 avratzer @ daimi . au . dk ABSTRACT I describe an ongoing design process for expanding a user interface involving advanced interaction techniques ( marking menus and toolglasses ) . My goal is to investigate evaluation and reuse of design guidelines for untraditional interfaces in a participatory design process . Keywords Design process , design principles , advanced interaction techniques , participatory design INTRODUCTION Interfaces are changing rapidly with the integration of new interaction techniques ( e . g . two - handed input and gestures ) and new devices with unusual displays ( e . g . mobile phones and hand - held computers ) . Many projects deal with inventing and implementing entirely new standards for these new interface elements . There is , however , also a need for translating well known , but " old fashioned " interface concepts into the new standards , so tools like text editors and spreadsheets also benefit from the advancements in interface technology . In the CPN2000 project , we have redesigned Design / CPN , a tool for editing and simulating Coloured Petri Nets ( CPnets ) 1 . The Design / CPN interface contains a number of traditional interaction techniques like menu bars and dialog boxes , whereas the new tool , CPNTools , integrates advanced interaction techniques and old functionalities in a powerful , yet lightweight user inter - face . Currently , we are planning the integration of surveillance facilities into the new tool . These facilities are based on performance facilities in Design / CPN , with interactions similar to the ones we have already redesigned . I will describe our design process , focusing on the correspondence between central interface elements from the old and the new tool , and the design guidelines we plan to use to integrate the new facilities . FROM DESIGN / CPN TO CPNTOOLS Design Framework We designed CPNTools from scratch . We did not set out with a particular design , or even a fixed set of interaction techniques in mind , but we tried out a number of possibilities in a flexible design process . We did maintain the CPnet formalism behind Design / CPN , and we aimed for supporting the well - functioning work styles people have built up during their use of the old tool . Formalism and work styles are part of a concept we call Petxi - Nets - In - Use , a summary of people ' s ways of working with Design / CPN . See 2 for more details about Petri - Nets - in - Use , and how it has influenced the design process . Three major design principles , reification , polymorphism and reuse 3 , have also been central in building a consistent interface from untraditional elements . The design process for CPNTools has been highly participatory . We ' ve conducted a large number of use study , brainstorming , and design exercises , using video techniques 4 . As a result , the participants have heavily influenced practically everything in the new interface . The CPNTooIs Interface : . Fig . 1 shows a screen dump from the new CPNTools interface . Fig . 1 : Screenshot from CPNTools It has no menu bars , dialog boxes , scrollbars , or other traditional interface elements . There is no traditional concept of selection , since operations and specification of the elements involved take place in one and the same © Copyright on this material is held by the Author ( s ) . anyone , anywhere . 4o1 Student Posters CHI 2001 • 31 MARCH - 5 APRIL interaction , e . g . by clicking through a toolglass cell onto an element to change the color . Translating Interface Elements Examples of corresponding elements from the old and new tool : The dialog boxes and menu bar entries in Design / CPN correspond to toolglasses and marking menus in CPNTools . At the same time , we have left out options that where used very rarely in Design / CPN , thus simplifying the new elements . Windows in the old tool are now binders , located in one large window . The modules of the nets that previously occupied one window each are now placed together as sheets in a binder , with tabs to flip between the sheets . Overviews of nets and tools , previously in menus or separate windows , are now in the left side index . Users can draw out objects from the index to the workspace or manipulate them directly in the index . Fig . 2 and 3 show a couple of these examples . ; • - - O - O ~ O ~ O = • " - - 0 - ~ o - ( a ) Dialog box , Design / CPN ( b ) Toolglass , CPNTools Fig . 2 : Tools for setting graphical attributes i ~ Declarations Telel0hones . xml 7 " " ' : eT " tw = , , i • Phone - - . - . ~ ' ~ ' ~ . i ' . - : " ' : ~ . . . . . ~ . * - ~ _ _ I I | • EstabCon BreakEng ! BraakSen - • IBlll I i BreakRec ( a ) Hierarchy page , Design / CPN ( h ) Index , CPNTools Fig . 3 : Visualizations of the hierarchy of net modules INTEGRATING NEW FACILITIES Design Process The new design process is similar to the one described in 2 and 4 , i . e . a highly participatory , scenario - driven process , using video techniques to invent and capture new interaction ideas . Our goal is to have a full horizontal prototype finished by the beginning of March . First , we will summarize examples of corresponding elements , like the ones above , in a set of translation guidelines . We will also identify how we have applied the design principles from the initial design process . An example is alignment commands in the old tool : these are now alignment guidelines in the new tool , inspired by the principle of reification 3 . A collected summary of the translation guideline . , ; and design principle applications will function as our guidelines in the new design process . We will visualize these guidelines in a number of ways , e . g . : • Tables of corresponding interface elements ; , like fig . 2 and 3 • Video clips with comparisons of old and new use scenarios • Clear , uniform summaries of previous design ideas and decisions In the initial design process , the design principles served as an inspiration for new solutions , and a guide for maintaining a consistent appearance and interaction , of the interface elements . Our hope is that the new set of design principles and translation guidelines will do this even better . We hope that our visualizations of the guidelines will improve the design team ' s common understanding of the interface framework , thus facilitating the brainstorming sessions , and making design decisions easier . The next months will show us how we succeed in summarizing and applying the set of modified design principles and translation guidelines . Hopefully , our design process will show ways to transforming old tools into new , based on an understanding of how to transform separate interface elements and integrate them into a larger context . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to Lisa Wells , Susanne BCdker , Lars Kroll , and Michel Beaudouin - Lafon for comments and discussions . REFERENCES 1 . Jensen , K . Coloured Petri Nets : Basic Concepts , Analysis Methods and Practical Use . Volume 1 , Basic Concepts . EATCS Monographs on Theoretical Computer Science , Springer - Verlag , 1992 . 2 . Janecek , P , Ratzer , A . V . , and Mackay , W . E . Redesigning Design / CPN : Integrating Interaction and Petri Nets In Use . Proceedings of Second Workshop on Practical Use of Coloured Petri Nets and Design / CPN , ( Aarhus , Denmark , October 1999 ) , 119 - 131 . 3 . Beaudouin - Lafon , M . , and Mackay , W . E . Reification , Polymorphism and Reuse : Three Principles for Designing Visual Interfaces . Proceedings of Advanced Visual Interfaces , AVI 2000 , ( Palermo , Italy , May 2000 ) , p . 102 - 109 . 4 . Mackay , W . E , Ratzer , A . V , and Janecek , P . Video Artifacts for Design : Bridging the Gap Between Abstraction and Detail . Proceedings of DIS 2000 , ( New York , August 2000 ) . 4o2 CH12001