281 Innovation in participatory design Peter Dalsgaard and Kim Halskov CAVI & Center for Digital Urban Living Institute of Information and Media Studies University of Aarhus Helsingforsgade 14 , DK 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark { Dalsgaard , Halskov } @ CAVI . dk THEME The theme of the workshop is the real life nature of processes of innovation as part of participatory design of interactive systems . Innovation and creativity can occur throughout an interaction design process , from the initial ideation phase through creative mock - up sessions to iterative refinements based on evaluation of prototypes . In order to clarify the terminology , creativity broadly refers to the generation of novel approaches or ideas ; innovation refers to the application of ideas in a specific context , often in the development of a specific product or service , and as such creativity is a pre - requisite for innovation , although it is not in itself a sufficient condition for it ( Amabile et al . , 1996 ) . In this workshop , we are interested in exploring the question of how creative insights can inform the design process and shape the product of participatory design projects , thus becoming innovation . The development of new ideas is an essential concern for many design projects . In the area of information systems design , Madsen ( 1994 ) has explored how metaphors may shed new light on the way in which information technology might be used by seeing a domain of applications in a different light . In a later study based on three cases in which digital artists and designers worked together , Lervig and Madsen ( 2003 ) addressed the way in which design materials serve both as examples that pinpoint specific attributes , and as sources of inspiration that function as jumping - off points for work in a design project . Consciously looking for inspiration is part of the innovation strategy discussed by Kelly ( 2001 p . 280 ) . Foster ( 1996 ) takes an even more radical stance , recommending , in his book on generating ideas , the deliberate pursuit of unaccustomed experiences . The majority of literature within the Participatory Design field has been concerned about how to set up design processes which build on the current work practice of the users , i . e . the tradition aspect , for instance ethnographic field studies ( Blomberg et al . , 1993 ) , interview ( Patton 1990 ) , and use of video ( Brun - Cottan and Wall , 1995 ) . But a number of techniques and methods have also been focusing on stimulation of innovation and creativity , i . e . transcendence , for instance Future workshops ( Kensing & Madsen , 1991 ) , Metaphorical design ( Madsen , 1994 ) , Inspiration Card Workshops ( Halskov & Dalsgård , 2006 ) , and Fictional Inquiry ( Dindler & Iversen , 2007 ) . On the one hand , when designing computer system we strive for systems resembling the previous work environment , but , on the other hand , we would also like to benefit from the power of the technology and provide opportunities not available in the current work environment . Pelle Ehn ( 1988 ) has labeled this important aspect of design the dilemma of tradition and transcendence and made the claim that to handle this dilemma is one of the biggest challenges in design , see also Halskov ( 2009 ) . GOAL The goal of the workshop is to advance the practical and theoretical understanding of innovation in participatory design . The workshop seeks to explore how to describe , talk about , and understand in which ways and under which circumstances users and designers are innovative and creative actors in design activities . ACTIVITIES For the first part of the workshop we will share presentations of specific methods to scaffold innovation in participatory design or short case stories which focus on how stakeholders can contribute to innovation in participatory design processes . In addition , theoretical foundations for understanding innovation / creativity will be discussed and applied in the analysis of the methods and case stories . The main part of the workshop will be devoted short cycles of practical trials of specific methods or techniques followed by reflections on the techniques in order to get hands - on experience and establish a common ground for discussion . TOPICS AND CONTRIBUTIONS To address various perspectives on and approaches to creative user participation , and to promote cross - pollination of ideas across these varying perspectives in the workshop , we invite contributions in two categories : 1 ) Design Methods and Techniques Specific methods or techniques , preferably well tested in practice , which are intended to facilitate creativity and innovation in design processes . These may address ways of involving users throughout all or stretches of a design process whole process , or they focus on specific events such as workshops , mock - up sessions etc . Contributions may also present methods or techniques that facilitate Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . PDC’10 , 29 - NOV - 2010 , Sydney , Australia . Copyright 2010 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0131 - 2 / 10 / 0011… $ 10 . 00 . 282 turning creative and innovative user input into viable design solutions . Contributions of this type may also include case studies , e . g . micro - analytic studies of design sessions that present examples of processes leading to innovative design solutions . Such case studies should focus on the methods and processes by which the innovative solutions came forth rather than on the resulting products or prototypes . 2 ) Theoretical Perspectives We also invite contributions that address ways of understanding , analyzing and discussing creativity and innovation in the design process . These may address e . g . the nature of creativity , theories on collaborative innovation , transformation of ideas into design solutions , artefact - mediated innovation etc . WORKSHOP FORMAT The format of the workshop will be short presentations of contributions from the participants and group work sessions . We intend to use the workshop as a platform for editing a special issues on innovation in participatory design in an international journal . TO PARTICIPATE To participate , please submit either presentation and discussion of specific methods to scaffold innovation in participatory design , or a theoretical contribution addressing the topic of innovation in participatory design processes , directly to Kim Halskov : halskov @ cavi . dk before September 1 . Notification September 13 . Your 2 - 4 pages position statement must be formatted using the ACM SIGCHI template . Through the selection of participants for the workshop we will strive to cover a broad range of domains form urban settings , the workplace , the home as well as digital art . Maximum number of participants : 15 . Duration : One day . Background of the Organizers Kim Halskov , professor at Aarhus University , has been active in the area of participatory design for the past 20 years and been part of the DIS community since its start . Peter Dalsgaard is assistant professor at Aarhus University and has for the past 5 years been exploring issues related to the interaction design process , particularly within the domain of experience - oriented interaction design . Workshop Website Further information about the workshop will be available at : www . cavi . dk / pdc - workshop REFERENCES Amabile , T . M . , R . Conti , H . Coon , et al . ( 1996 ) Assessing the work environment for creativity . Academy of Management Review , 39 ( 5 ) , 1154 – 1184 Blomberg , J . , Giacomi , J . , Mosher , A . & Swenton - Wall , P . ( 1993 ) . Ethnographic Field Methods and Their Relation to Design . In D . Schuler & A . Namioka ( Eds . ) , Participatory Design : Principles and Practices ( pp . 123 - 155 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Earlbaum Associates . Brun - Cottan , F . , Wall , P . ( 1995 ) . Using Video to Re - Present the User . The Communications of the ACM , 38 ( 5 ) , 61 - 71 . Ehn , P . ( 1988 ) : Work - oriented Design of Computer Artifacts . Stockholm Sverige : Arbeitslivscentrum . Dindler , C . & Iversen , O . S . ( 2007 ) Fictional Inquiry – design collaboration in a shared narrative space . Journal of Co - Design , 3 , 4 December 2007 , 213 – 234 Foster , J . ( 1996 ) How to Get Ideas . San Francisco : Berrett - Koehler Publishers Kensing , F . & Madsen , K . H . ( 1991 ) : Generating Visions : Future Workshops and Metaphors , i Greenbaum , J . & Kyng , M . : Design at Work , Lawrence Earlbaum 1991 ( 155 - 168 ) . Halskov , K . ( 2009 ) Traditions and Trancendence . In T . Binder , J . Löwgren and L . Malmborg : ( Re ) - Searching The Digital Bauhaus . Springer Verlag ( 79 - 98 ) . Halskov , K . & Dalsgård , P . ( 2006 ) Inspiration Card Workshops . Proceedings of DIS 2006 , 2 - 11 . Kensing , F . & Madsen , K . H . ( 1991 ) Generating Visions : Future Workshops and Metaphors . In Greenbaum , J . & Kyng , M . : Design at Work , Lawrence Earlbaum , 155 - 168 Kelley , T . ( 2001 ) : The Art of Innovation . New York : Random House Inc . Lervig , M . & Madsen , KH . ( 2003 ) : Artists in the Virtual Studio . In Madsen , K . H . ( ed ) : Production Methods : Behind the Scenes of Virtual Inhabited 3D Worlds . London : Springer - Verlag , . Patton , Q . M . ( 1990 ) . Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . Madsen , K . H . ( 1994 ) : A guide to Metaphorical Design . The Communications of the ACM ( 57 - 62 )