Toxins 2015 , 7 , 974 - 996 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / toxins7030974 toxins ISSN 2072 - 6651 www . mdpi . com / journal / toxins Review Cholera Toxin B : One Subunit with Many Pharmaceutical Applications Keegan J . Baldauf 1 , Joshua M . Royal 2 , Krystal Teasley Hamorsky 2 , 3 and Nobuyuki Matoba 1 , 2 , * 1 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology , University of Louisville School of Medicine , Louisville , KY 40202 , USA ; E - Mail : keegan . baldauf @ louisville . edu 2 Owensboro Cancer Research Program of James Graham Brown Cancer Center at University of Louisville School of Medicine , Owensboro , KY 42303 , USA ; E - Mails : joshua . royal @ ocrp . org ( J . M . R . ) ; krystal . hamorsky @ ocrp . org ( K . T . H . ) 3 Department of Medicine , University of Louisville School of Medicine , Louisville , KY 40202 , USA * Author to whom correspondence should be addressed ; E - Mail : n . matoba @ louisville . edu ; Tel . : + 1 - 270 - 691 - 5955 ; Fax : + 1 - 270 - 685 - 5684 . Academic Editor : Teresa Krakauer Received : 5 February 2015 / Accepted : 16 March 2015 / Published : 20 March 2015 Abstract : Cholera , a waterborne acute diarrheal disease caused by Vibrio cholerae , remains prevalent in underdeveloped countries and is a serious health threat to those living in unsanitary conditions . The major virulence factor is cholera toxin ( CT ) , which consists of two subunits : the A subunit ( CTA ) and the B subunit ( CTB ) . CTB is a 55 kD homopentameric , non - toxic protein binding to the GM1 ganglioside on mammalian cells with high affinity . Currently , recombinantly produced CTB is used as a component of an internationally licensed oral cholera vaccine , as the protein induces potent humoral immunity that can neutralize CT in the gut . Additionally , recent studies have revealed that CTB administration leads to the induction of anti - inflammatory mechanisms in vivo . This review will cover the potential of CTB as an immunomodulatory and anti - inflammatory agent . We will also summarize various recombinant expression systems available for recombinant CTB bioproduction . Keywords : Vibrio cholerae ; cholera toxin B subunit ; vaccine adjuvant ; anti - inflammatory OPEN ACCESS Toxins 2015 , 7 975 1 . Introduction 1 . 1 . Cholera Cholera is a highly contagious acute dehydrating diarrheal disease caused by Vibrio cholerae . There are over 200 serogroups of V . cholerae known to date ; however , only two ( O1 and 139 serotypes ) are responsible for the vast majority of outbreaks [ 1 , 2 ] . The pathology of cholera results from V . cholerae colonization in the small intestine and subsequent production of the cholera toxin ( CT ) . V . cholerae are found in coastal waters and deltas due to their preference for salinity in water ; however under proper conditions ( warm and sufficient nutrients ) , V . cholerae can grow in low salinity environments [ 3 ] . Natural disasters ( e . g . , floods , monsoons , and earthquakes ) and poor sanitation are major players in the spread of cholera epidemics . Symptomatic individuals can shed the organism from 2 days to 2 weeks after infection and recently shed organisms ( 5 – 24 h after shedding ) have hyperinfectivity ; in this state the infectious dose is 10 to 100 times lower than non - shed organisms ( ~ 10 6 bacteria ) [ 4 , 5 ] . This can lead to the rapid spread of cholera in densely populated areas without proper management of patients and their waste . The most common symptom of cholera is a life - threatening amount of watery diarrhea , causing an extreme loss of water , up to 1 L per hour , which can lead to death within hours of the first onset of symptoms if left untreated [ 3 ] . The diarrhea is usually painless and not accompanied by the urge to evacuate the bowels . Early in the illness , vomiting can be a common symptom as well . Cholera is considered endemic in over 50 countries , but it can manifest as an epidemic , as has recently been the case in Haiti ( 2010 – present ) , a country previously not exposed to cholera [ 6 – 8 ] . Reported world incidences of cholera increased from 2007 until a peak of approximately 600 , 000 cases in 2011 [ 9 ] . In 2012 , the number of reported cases decreased to approximately 245 , 000 with 49 % of the cases resulting from the ongoing outbreak in Haiti and the Dominican Republic . However , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) estimates the actual global burden of the disease to be between 3 and 5 million cases per year and 100 , 000 to 130 , 000 deaths per year [ 10 ] . Additionally , a more virulent strain of V . cholerae O1 is making inroads in Africa and Asia [ 11 ] . The WHO suggests there should also be concern for the spread of antibiotic - resistant strains of V . cholerae . This has already been shown with V . cholerae O139 and some isolates from V . cholerae O1 El Tor , which have acquired resistance traits for co - trimoxazole and streptomycin [ 3 ] . It is clear that cholera , despite its long history , is still an emerging disease that is necessary to combat . 1 . 2 . CT CT produced by V . cholerae , is the main virulence factor in the development of cholera . The molecular characteristics of CT and its toxic effects in humans have been well characterized [ 12 – 14 ] . CT is an 84 kD protein made up of two major subunits , CTA and CTB [ 15 , 16 ] ( Figure 1 ) . The CTA subunit is responsible for the disease phenotype while CTB provides a vehicle to deliver CTA to target cells . CTA is a 28 kD subunit consisting of two primary domains , CTA1 and CTA2 , with the toxin activity residing in the former and the latter acting as an anchor into the CTB subunit [ 17 ] . The CTB subunit consists of a homopentameric structure that is approximately 55 kD ( 11 . 6 kD monomers ) and binds to the GM1 - ganglioside ; found in lipid rafts , on the surface of intestinal epithelial cells [ 13 ] . The exact mechanism Toxins 2015 , 7 976 of delivering CTA1 into the intracellular space is still not fully resolved ; however , the current understanding is that CT is endocytosed and travels through a retrograde transport pathway from the Golgi apparatus to the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) [ 12 – 14 , 17 , 18 ] . Recently , it has been shown that CT can also move from the apical to basolateral surface of epithelial cells via transcytosis , enabling transport of whole CT through the intestinal barrier [ 19 ] . CTA is dissociated from CTB after the toxin reaches the ER and translocated to the cytosol via the ER - associated degradation pathway [ 15 ] . Intoxication occurs when CTA1 enters the cell cytosol and catalyzes the ADP ribosylation of adenylate cyclase , which leads to increased intracellular cAMP . This increase in intracellular cAMP results in impaired sodium uptake and increased chloride outflow , causing water secretion and diarrhea [ 12 , 17 ] . Figure 1 . Cholera toxin ( CT ) crystal structure . ( A ) CT ( side view ; Protein Data Bank [ PDB ] ID : 1XTC ) . The CTA subunit is shown in red ( CTA1 in dark red and CTA2 in light red ) and the CTB subunit is shown in blue ; ( B ) CTB ( top view ; PDB ID : 1XTC with CTA subunit removed ) . Each monomer of the B subunit is show in a different color . Images were created in Accelrys Discovery Studio Visualizer 2 . 5 . 1 . 3 . Current Vaccines The emergence of a more virulent strain of V . cholerae , coupled with the increasing number of endemic and newly exposed countries suggests a growing need for a consistent vaccination strategy . Currently , there are two WHO pre - qualified vaccines for cholera : Dukoral ® ( SBL Vaccin AB , Stockholm , Sweden ) and Shanchol ® ( Shantha Biotechnics Limited , Basheerbagh , India ) . Dukoral ® contains killed V . cholerae ( Inaba and Ogawa serotypes of V . cholerae O1 ) and recombinant ( r ) CTB , while Shanchol ® contains the killed V . cholerae ( serogroups O1 and O139 ) [ 20 ] . Due to the cross - reactivity of anti - CTB antibodies to heat labile enterotoxin ( LTB ) , Dukoral ® is also effective against enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli ( ETEC ) , an advantage not offered by Shanchol ® . On the other hand , Shanchol ® is a less expensive cholera vaccine than Dukoral ® because the latter includes costs related to rCTB , i . e . , recombinant production , a buffer to neutralize stomach acid to prevent rCTB degradation and additional storage space and logistics . In a vaccination cost analysis study performed in 2012 , it was found to cost approximately US $ 10 to purchase two doses of Dukoral ® and approximately US $ 3 to deliver those doses [ 21 ] . However , these costs could be reduced by developing cost - effective rCTB production methods ( see below ) and formulating the vaccine in a solid oral dosage form able to pass through the stomach and dissolve in the small intestine [ 22 ] . Toxins 2015 , 7 977 Interestingly , a field trial performed in 1985 suggests that a whole cell - killed vaccine with CTB ( WCB ) may be more efficacious than a whole cell - killed vaccine without CTB ( WC ) [ 23 ] . Children 2 to 10 years old were almost completely and significantly protected ( 92 % ) from cholera after 3 vaccinations with WCB compared to a non - significant 53 % protection for WC for the first six months after vaccination . Hence , children were far better protected with the CTB - containing vaccine . In older populations ( > 10 years old ) both vaccines showed similar protective efficacy over 6 months ; the WCB vaccine protected 77 % of the adults compared to 62 % with the WC vaccine . Additionally , perhaps most importantly , the WCB vaccine significantly protected against severe cholera episodes ( 89 % protective ) versus no significant protection by the WC vaccine ( 44 % protective ) . Lastly , within approximately the first 6 months following vaccination , the WCB vaccine significantly protected the recipients while WC vaccine recipients lost protective efficacy approximately 3 months after vaccination . This short - term enhanced protection could provide a significant implication for a reactive vaccination strategy to contain outbreaks . The same population was also tracked for three years following vaccination and differences between WCB and WC vaccination were further elucidated [ 24 ] . Again , it was found that 2 – 5 year old children , who received all three vaccine doses , were significantly protected when receiving the WCB vaccine for up to 2 years following vaccination when compared to the placebo group . At no point was WC vaccine significantly protective of the 2 – 5 year old cohort in this study . For up to 3 years following vaccination both WCB and WC protected study participants over the age of 5 . Additionally , the number of doses needed to see strong protection against cholera was another point of differentiation . WCB vaccination required two doses to provide significant protection while the same level of protection was not achieved with the WC vaccine until a third dose was administered . It should be noted that WCB contains non - recombinant CTB ( purified from CT ) and thus should not be confused with the currently available Dukoral ® , which contains rCTB . In this regard , a more recent work has been performed to evaluate the protective efficacy of Dukoral ® in adults and children [ 25 ] . The study by Alam et al . , divided children into 2 groups : young ( median age 5 ) and older ( median age 10 ) and had an adult group with a median age of 32 . Significant antibody responses in all groups were seen 3 days following the first dose in all study groups and continued to day 42 in all groups . However at day 90 , the next time point in the study , both groups of children lost the antibody response while the adult antibody response persisted until at least 270 days following the second vaccination . Additionally , a 2005 study in Mozambique showed that an rCTB whole cell - killed vaccine was able to protect at similar levels of the WCB vaccine used in Bangladesh [ 26 ] . The results from this study also confirmed that the vaccine containing rCTB may have improved protection in severe cases of cholera . Confounding these results , a field trial performed in Peru in 1994 is often reported as having negative results ( increased cholera infection ) in rCTB vaccine recipients [ 27 ] . However , the study did report positive protection after a booster third dose was given just prior to the start of the next cholera outbreak season in Peru . Additionally , this study evaluated only two time points , 1 year and 2 year protection , which could have overlooked the early protection ( < 6 months after vaccination ) observed previously with WCB [ 28 ] . Lastly , the fact that a single booster provided protection during the second year of the study suggests that an rCTB containing vaccine does in fact protect against cholera outbreaks . Shanchol ® has been studied in both Bangladesh and Haiti ; participants in both studies showed strong immune responses to the two dose vaccine regimen [ 20 , 29 ] . In 2012 , Shanchol ® was used in an outbreak in Guinea and found to be effective in protecting adults from cholera infection [ 30 ] . These findings were Toxins 2015 , 7 978 thought to be in line with results seen with Dukoral ® , but there was no rCTB vaccine group in this study to compare to . An advantage to Shanchol ® is that it has been tested in children as young as 1 year old and protection has been noted in this young population [ 29 ] . The lack of a large scale study comparing Shanchol ® and Dukoral ® makes any comparison difficult . A recent paper may help elucidate the potential benefit of including rCTB in any cholera vaccine . Although mice do not develop cholera , a model of pulmonary V . cholerae infection has recently been established [ 31 ] . In this model , severe pneumonia was induced in mice and was found to be fatal within several days of inoculation with V . cholerae . Interestingly , mice vaccinated intranasally , twice with Dukoral ® prior to V . cholerae challenge , were significantly protected compared to controls . Unvaccinated animals died within 24 h of the challenge while none of the mice vaccinated died for up to 7 days following challenge . Notably , Dukoral ® without rCTB showed no protection in this model , while protection was restored upon inclusion of rCTB . These results provide unequivocal evidence that rCTB is essential in protecting mice from the lethal pneumonia induced by V . cholerae infection . Coupled with the earlier findings with WCB vaccines in the field trial , it is suggested that , in the case of cholera outbreaks , vaccines containing rCTB may provide immediate benefit to vaccine recipients that would not be seen in rCTB - free vaccines . 2 . CTB as a Vaccine Adjuvant In addition to its toxic properties , CT is also known to have strong mucosal immunogenic properties that have been investigated for beneficial use as well as inducing an allergic response in animal models [ 32 – 37 ] . CT has also been shown previously to have adjuvant potential when incorporated into mucosal vaccines [ 38 – 40 ] . However , the toxicity of CT made its use in humans undesirable and work now focuses on removing the toxicity from the molecule while maintaining the adjuvant effect . The CTB subunit was previously shown to induce an immune response without the toxicity associated with the CTA subunit [ 41 ] . CTB has proven to be a strong adjuvant to uncoupled antigens when administered via the nasal route but less so when administered orally [ 15 , 42 , 43 ] . However , the nasal route of administration is not preferred due to the potential risk for developing Bell’s palsy [ 44 – 46 ] . Fortunately , it was found that by coupling the antigen to CTB , a much stronger response is achieved via the oral administration route [ 47 ] . We should also point out that the adjuvant potential of CTB has also been shown in large animal models , indicating that the adjuvant potential is scalable to higher species [ 48 – 50 ] . The utility of CTB becomes apparent when looking at the various disease states in which it has been used as an adjuvant : bacterial and viral infections , allergy , and diabetes have been targeted [ 51 – 53 ] . Also , an interesting approach to resolving cocaine addiction has been attempted by binding rCTB to succinylnorcocaine , which has been tested in a Phase IIb randomized double - blind placebo - controlled trial [ 54 , 55 ] . The hypothesis behind the vaccine was that the anti - cocaine antibodies may block the uptake of cocaine in the brain from the blood . While the results were inconclusive , with only ~ 40 % of participants achieving inhibitory antibody concentrations in the blood , this study shows potential utility of CTB - based vaccines in addiction therapy . For a general overview of the work on CTB as a vaccine adjuvant , readers are referred to thorough reviews published previously [ 41 , 56 , 57 ] . For this review we will focus on some findings not addressed in these previous reviews . Toxins 2015 , 7 979 2 . 1 . CTB - Based Immunogens against Bacterial Pathogens Development of vaccines against several bacterial pathogens has been attempted recently by conjugating antigens to CTB to induce immune responses against the bacteria . Helicobacter pylori is a bacterium that infects greater than 50 % of the world population and can cause a variety of gastrointestinal diseases [ 58 ] . Specifically , H . pylori urease , a two subunit enzyme , has been targeted by linking both subunits ( UreA and UreB ) of the enzyme to CTB . Guo et al . described a fusion protein of rCTB with the B cell epitope of UreA ( denoted rCTB - UA ) that was expressed in E . coli [ 58 ] . In a mouse immunization experiment they found that rCTB - UA could induce antibodies to UreA and UreB proteins , which inhibited the activity of H . pylori urease . In a follow up paper , the group showed prophylactic and therapeutic dosing with rCTB - UA could protect mice from H . pylori infection [ 47 ] . This work has resulted in a second generation epitope vaccine ( rCTB - UE ) which not only consists of the original B cell epitope but a T helper cell epitope from both UreA and UreB [ 51 , 59 ] . In a Mongolian gerbil model of H . pylori infection , rCTB - UE protected against infection and decreased inflammation in the gastric tissue ( inflammatory cytokines and histology ) [ 59 ] . Additionally , the paper showed that the immune - protective mechanism of rCTB - UE was related to the upregulation of microRNA - 155 , which led to the activation of T helper ( Th ) 1 and B cell immune responses against H . pylori infection . Meanwhile , Kono et al . showed protection from a fatal systemic infection of Streptococcus pneumonia in 10 day old mouse pups immunized via breast milk from mothers [ 60 ] . The mothers were intranasally immunized with Pneumococcal surface protein A ( PSPA ) and CTB and the anti - PSPA antibodies were present in serum and breast milk of the mothers . Through breast feeding , the offspring were protected from S . pneumonia infection . This study provided an important finding that mucosal immunization of a female population with vaccines containing CTB may be able to protect their offspring during early stages of life , when they are most vulnerable to respiratory diseases . 2 . 2 . CTB - Based Immunogens against HIV Viral pathogens have also been targeted by CTB - based vaccine development research . Given that CTB has the ability to induce potent mucosal humoral immune responses , perhaps the best opportunity to exploit CTB may be found in vaccines against mucosally transmitting viruses , such as human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV - 1 ) . Indeed , a number of studies have used CTB as a mucosal adjuvant component of experimental HIV - 1 vaccines [ 61 – 67 ] . Over the past decade , we reported a series of studies demonstrating that rCTB - MPR 649 – 684 , a rCTB fusion protein displaying a peptide spanning the HIV - 1 gp41 membrane proximal region , is capable of inducing gp41 - binding antibodies in mice and rabbits [ 61 , 68 – 71 ] . These antibodies efficiently blocked transcytosis of primary HIV - 1 isolates in a human tight epithelial model , suggesting that rCTB - MPR 649 – 684 protein may provide an effective prophylactic vaccine preventing HIV - 1 mucosal transmission [ 61 , 69 , 70 ] . In a separate study , CTB was co - administered with a plasmid generated from an envelope protein ( gp145 5m ) of HIV - 1 intramuscularly to mice [ 64 ] . The immune response by intramuscular dosing with gp145 5m and CTB was significantly enhanced when compared to gp145 5m alone . This study confirms that CTB , while an effective adjuvant via the nasal or oral administration routes , can also be considered for intramuscular dosing vaccine regimens to enhance the immune response . Meanwhile , Maeto et al . Toxins 2015 , 7 980 evaluated if supplementing a DNA plasmid expressing an HIV - 1 Env and Interleukin - 12 ( IL - 12 ) with CTB could enhance the immune response after intranasal immunization in mice [ 63 ] . IL - 12 had previously been reported to enhance an antigen - specific immune response by the intranasal vaccination route [ 72 ] . In this study , not only did the combination enhance the immune response to the HIV - 1 Env antigen but also significantly decreased the concentration needed to trigger Interferon ( IFN ) - γ , a Th1 cytokine , production by 3 times . HIV - specific CD8 responses in spleen and genital tract and genito - rectal draining lymph nodes were effectively improved , showing cytotoxic T cell responses with higher avidity , polyfunctionality and cytolytic activity . Hence , the results indicate that a greater adjuvant effect can be achieved when CTB is co - administered with another adjuvant . 2 . 3 . Novel CTB - Based Vaccine Delivery and Antigen Conjugation Methods In the majority of previous studies , CTB has been administered directly to mucosal surfaces via the intranasal or oral routes . In contrast , Hu et al . recently reported a novel approach of delivering CTB to the mucosa . In this study , they orally administered genetically engineered Bacillus subtilis to mice and guinea pigs , which expressed multiple epitopes of the foot - and - mouth disease virus and rCTB [ 73 ] . This method induced a significantly stronger immune response compared to the commercially available vaccine in the gut and lung , although upon viral challenge , the commercial vaccine provided slightly better protection in immunized animals . In addition to mucosal routes of administration , CTB has been used as a component of a skin patch to vaccinate against hepatitis B virus in mice . The study was aimed at showing that transcutaneous immunization , involving microneedles which penetrate the stratum corneum without contacting nerves followed by applying a medicated patch to the area , could effectively produce antibodies against the hepatitis B surface antigen ( HBsAg ) . CTB showed the ability to not only enhance the immune response against HBsAg but also extend the duration of protection through the transcutaneous immunization route [ 74 ] . Combined with results of other studies using a similar strategy [ 75 – 78 ] , there is now a compelling reason to explore the development of transcutaneous vaccines including CTB as an adjuvant . While antigen - CTB coupling has been most commonly achieved by chemical crosslinking to specific functional groups of amino acid residues or genetic fusion to the N - or C - terminus of CTB , an alternative approach has been seen in the literature that uses the CTA2 domain to link antigens to CTB [ 52 , 79 , 80 ] . For example , this approach was used for a vaccine against West Nile virus , in which the domain III ( DIII ) region of the virus was used as the antigen genetically fused to the CTA2 domain ( see Figure 1 ) . The DIII - CTA2 protein was co - expressed with rCTB to form a chimeric CT - like molecule , DIII - CTA2 / B [ 52 ] . Intranasal delivery of DIII - CTA2 / B in mice produced DIII - specific antibodies that could trigger complement - mediated killing . Although not as heavily studied as conventional CTB C / N - terminal fusion methods , the CTA2 / B strategy may provide a useful means to develop a vaccine comprising a relatively large antigen . Lastly , CTB has been incorporated into other alternative drug delivery systems such as liposomes , microspheres and nanoparticles . Harokopakis and colleagues found that coating liposomes with rCTB enhanced the immune response against the saliva - binding region of S . mutans AgI / II adhesin [ 81 ] . O’Hagan et al . , encapsulated rCTB in poly ( lactide - co - glycolide ) microparticles , which showed comparable humoral immunogenicity with CTB admixed with CT upon oral administration in mice [ 82 ] . Toxins 2015 , 7 981 In a more recent example , a DNA vaccine for cholera ( pVAX - ctxB ) encapsulated in microspheres , allowing the vaccine to pass through the acidic environment of the stomach , has shown the ability to generate an immune response in mice [ 83 ] . 3 . CTB in Inflammation Besides the mucosal vaccine adjuvant activity summarized above , recent studies have revealed that CTB can also induce anti - inflammatory and regulatory T cell responses . Indeed , the protein was shown to suppress immunopathological reactions in allergy and autoimmune diseases ( reviewed in : [ 57 ] ) . In a mouse model , the airway administration of CTB ameliorated experimental asthma [ 84 ] . Furthermore , the anti - inflammatory and immunoregulatory effects of CTB are effectively conferred on bystander protein antigens that are chemically or genetically linked to CTB ; oral administration of rCTB chemically cross - linked to a peptide from the human 60 kD heat shock protein was shown to mitigate uveitis of Behcet’s disease in a Phase I / II clinical trial [ 85 ] . Meanwhile , rCTB was also shown to mitigate the intestinal inflammation of Crohn’s disease in mice and humans [ 57 ] . Below , we will highlight some of these and a few other recent findings regarding CTB as an anti - inflammatory agent . 3 . 1 . CTB’s Anti - Inflammatory Activity in Various Inflammatory Diseases Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus induces cellular oxidative stress which leads to chronic inflammation and secondary effects such as : atherosclerosis , blindness , and stroke [ 86 ] . CTB has been used to target multiple anti - inflammatory agents that alone were either short lived or could not effectively induce an immune response . An example of this comes from Odumosu et al . , who fused glutamic acid decarboxylase ( GAD ) to rCTB ( GAD - rCTB ) and showed suppression of dendritic cell activation in human umbilical cord blood isolated dendritic cells [ 87 ] . Dendritic cells are often implicated in islet β - cell loss in Type 1 Diabetes so this presents an attractive therapeutic option . Additionally , the group showed that pro - inflammatory cytokines , IL - 12 and IL - 6 , were down - regulated while IL - 10 was significantly increased in vitro using dendritic cells . Another study was performed incorporating GAD with rCTB and a recombinant vaccinia virus ( rVV ) by Denes et al . , which co - administered the rVV - rCTB - GAD generated in their lab with Complete Freund’s adjuvant ( CFA ) to see if multiple adjuvants could further enhance the immune response to the vaccine [ 88 ] . Vaccination with both rVV - rCTB - GAD alone and CFA alone showed some measureable protection in the NOD mouse model of diabetes compared to control animals given PBS at approximately 39 weeks of age . However , when rVV - rCTB - GAD and CFA were combined , hyperglycemia was delayed further to 43 weeks of age . Overall , the study showed by combining the vaccines , NOD mice could be protected from hyperglycemia and pancreatic islet inflammation better than either vaccine alone . CTB had previously been shown to protect against uveitis resulting from Behcet’s disease in a clinical trial performed in 2004 [ 85 ] . This work linked a T cell proliferative peptide ( p336 – 351 ) to rCTB , which conferred protection on 5 of 8 patients following withdrawal of all immunosuppressive drugs . Other CTB conjugates have also been evaluated in a mouse model of uveitis and shown promise more recently [ 89 ] . Shil and colleagues delivered two components of the Renin - angiotensin system ( RAS ) to the retina , ACE2 and Ang - ( 1 – 7 ) by fusing them to rCTB and administering them orally to mice . Protection was noted by decreased inflammatory cytokines ( e . g . , IL - 6 , IL - 1β , and TNF - α ) and inflammation Toxins 2015 , 7 982 scoring . Additionally , these components were significantly elevated in the retina of the mice . This study showed that CTB can also be used as a delivery system to inflamed tissue and not just to enhance an immune response . Atherosclerosis , an inflammatory condition , has recently become a target for rCTB fusion proteins [ 90 – 92 ] . In 2010 , a mouse model of atherosclerosis showed protection by nasal administration of an rCTB fusion protein ( p210 - CTB ) [ 91 ] . The p210 portion is derived from the apolipoprotein B - 100 ( ApoB100 ) peptide sequence as an alternative to a low density lipoprotein . Indeed this vaccination strategy reduced atherosclerotic lesion formation and provided some clues to mechanism . IL - 10 was significantly upregulated by p210 - CTB , while transforming growth factor - β ( TGF - β ) was not , which led the authors to hypothesize that T regulatory 1 ( T R 1 ) cells may be responsible for the protection . However , FoxP3 was upregulated thus the authors could not rule out some level of protection from the FoxP3 + T regulatory cell population as well . Interestingly , T R 1 cells are believed to play a more important role when immunity is conferred through nasal administration [ 93 ] . A second rCTB - linked protein targeting both ApoB100 and cholesteryl ester transfer protein ( implicated in atherosclerosis pathogenesis ) was explored more recently , in a proof of concept study , in which antibodies were detected in mouse serum to the target proteins [ 92 ] . In this study , the route of administration was by foot pad injection , so it will be interesting to see if altering the route of administration will have impacts on the efficacy and / or mechanism of protection from atherosclerosis . Liver inflammation and fibrosis were also significantly blunted by an intranasal administration of a rCTB - Sm - p40 egg antigen immunodominant peptide fusion in mice following infection with Schistosoma mansoni , which results in schistosomiasis [ 94 ] . This protection was associated with a significant increase in TGF - β in the mesenteric lymph node ( MLN ) CD4 T cells and granuloma cells . The studies on atherosclerosis and this study suggest that CTB may have a compartmentalized effect on TGF - β production in tissues , since both conjugates were administered intranasally , yet only the MLN CD4 T cells and liver granuloma cells showed elevated TGF - β . Organ transplantation can lead to rejection through inflammation . In a rat model of kidney transplantation , an anti - inflammatory D - amino acid decapeptide , RDP58 , chemically conjugated to CTB was shown to enhance the survival time compared to the therapeutic compound alone [ 95 ] . Allergic inflammation in mouse airways has also been shown to be reduced by CTB administration , not only in a preventative sense but also in mice that have already been sensitized to airway inflammation [ 84 ] . Lastly , CTB has shown in animal models as well as clinical trials to be effective in decreasing inflammation in Inflammatory Bowel Disease ( IBD ) . IBD is subcategorized into Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis . In 2001 , Boirivant et al . showed that oral administration of rCTB protected against Trinitrobenzene Sulfonic Acid ( TNBS ) induced intestinal inflammation , which is a mouse model resembling Crohn’s disease [ 96 ] . This finding was further explored to reveal that IL - 12 and IFN - γ were significantly downregulated by rCTB administration in TNBS induced colitis [ 97 ] . In addition , rCTB inhibited both STAT - 4 and STAT - 1 activation and downregulated T - bet expression . These results showed a possible mechanism for protecting against inflammation by inhibiting Th1 cell signaling . The protection seen in the TNBS colitis model was confirmed in a human clinical trial , in which rCTB significantly decreased inflammation in mild to moderately active Crohn’s disease [ 98 ] . However , IFN - γ did not correlate with the reductions in Crohn’s disease activity index in the patients . This might suggest that CTB reduced inflammation in humans through more than inhibition of Th1 cell signaling . On the other Toxins 2015 , 7 983 hand CTB’s effect in ulcerative colitis , which is another form of IBD involving inflammatory signaling and pathogenesis that is different from that of Crohn’s disease , is currently not known . As noted earlier in the atherosclerosis and liver fibrosis studies , CTB’s anti - inflammatory potential seems to be mediated by different pathways despite having the same route of administration . In this regard , it is of particular interest to investigate whether oral administration of CTB may have therapeutic potential in both Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis . 3 . 2 . Recombinant or Non - Recombinant CTB : Conflicting Results of CTB’s Anti - Inflammatory Activity in in Vitro Experiments While a number of studies have reported the anti - inflammatory activity of CTB in vitro and in vivo , the quality of the CTB used in those studies has not been consistent , which may have had a significant impact on the results of some of those studies . Hence , before concluding this section , we would like to point out the potential influence that the quality of the CTB may have on the outcome of anti - inflammatory studies , particularly those using cell culture experiments . Many of the early studies have used non - recombinant CTB obtained from a commercial source , which is prepared from the CT holotoxin by chemical dissociation of CTA and CTB subunits . As a result , there is a trace amount of CT and CTA subunit remaining in the CTB product [ 99 ] . In a conventional in vitro assay using the murine macrophage cell line RAW264 . 7 , we found that a commercial CTB product ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO , USA ; C9903 ) , which contains ≤0 . 5 % of CT according to the datasheet provided , significantly inhibited the production of TNFα induced by lipopolysaccharides ( LPS ) , while rCTB produced in E . coli ( purified to > 95 % homogeneous pentamer , with < 0 . 003 endotoxin unit / µg ) failed to show such an effect ( Figure 2A ) [ 100 ] . Notably , in this assay picomolar concentrations ( < 10 ng / mL ) of CT exerted strong anti - inflammatory activity ( Figure 2B ) . These results indicate that the trace amount of CT contamination in non - recombinant CTB products could have a major impact on results generated in similar assay systems . Hence , care should be taken when choosing the source of CTB for anti - inflammatory studies . It should be noted that some of the groundbreaking studies showing CTB’s anti - inflammatory activity outlined above , including human clinical studies , have used rCTB . Consequently , there is compelling evidence for the immunotherapeutic potential of rCTB in various inflammatory disorders . 4 . rCTB Production Methods Given that CTB exerts strong mucosal immunomodulatory effects and rCTB is currently used in the WHO - prequalified oral cholera vaccine Dukoral ® ( see above ) , the protein has provided an attractive target for various recombinant production platforms . These include prokaryotic cells such as genetically modified V . cholerae , E . coli , Bacillus and Lactobacillus , as well as eukaryotes ranging from yeast cells to multicellular organisms such as silkworms and plants ( Table 1 ) [ 100 – 126 ] . In cell culture systems rCTB is produced in fermenters and bioreactors [ 102 – 108 ] . Alternatively , in plant expression systems , rCTB is expressed in whole plants grown in controlled growth rooms or greenhouses [ 100 , 101 , 112 – 126 ] . Toxins 2015 , 7 984 Figure 2 . CT , not rCTB , inhibits the release of TNF - α by Raw 264 . 7 cells stimulated with LPS . ( A ) Commercial non - recombinant CTB containing a trace amount of CT ( CTB + CT ) significantly reduces the production of TNF - α due to LPS stimulation . Raw 264 . 7 cells were pretreated with 10 μg / mL rCTB ( produced in E . coli [ 100 ] ) , CTB + CT ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO , USA ; catalog no . C9903 ) , or PBS , and a final concentration of 1 μg / mL LPS was added and incubated for 24 h . TNF - α levels in cell supernatants were determined using a commercial ELISA kit ( eBioscience , San Diego , CA , USA ) . Data represent the mean ± SEM ( n = 4 ) . a : p < 0 . 001 , compared to PBS ; b : p < 0 . 05 , compared to PBS + LPS and rCTB + LPS ( one - way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison tests ) ; ( B ) Picomolar levels of CT inhibit the production of TNF - α . Raw 264 . 7 cells were pretreated for 2 h with varying concentration of CT , and a final concentration of 0 . 1 μg / mL LPS was added and incubated for 6 h . The 50 % inhibitory concentration ( IC 50 ) of CT was determined by non - linear regression analysis ( GraphPad Prism 5 . 0 , GraphPad Software , Inc . , La Jolla , CA , USA ) to be 0 . 49 pM . Data represent the mean ± SEM ( n = 2 ) . The TNF - α level of PBS + LPS was 4516 . 8 ± 791 . 1 pg / mL ( mean ± SEM ; n = 2 ) . Plant - based production of rCTB has been approached from two different angles . One approach is to vaccinate individuals with raw or minimally processed edible tissues of transgenic plants expressing rCTB ( edible vaccines ) . For example , carrots , rice , tomatoes , potatoes and maize have been engineered to produce rCTB using transgenic technologies [ 101 , 112 – 119 , 121 – 125 ] . Among these , rice has provided the most advanced platform thus far towards an edible cholera vaccine . Yuki and colleagues have developed a transgenic rice expressing rCTB in the seed endosperm and showed that oral administration of the rice seeds induced CT holotoxin - neutralizing antibodies in mice and non - human primates [ 126 ] . No major side effects , including an IgE response to rice endogenous proteins , were observed . Interestingly , however , rCTB was shown to be N - glycosylated upon expression in plant cells . To avoid this unique post - translational modification , the same group created a mutant of CTB by replacing the corresponding Asn residue to Gln , and showed that the mutant expressed in transgenic rice endosperm was similarly effective to the original rice - based vaccine in mice and macaques [ 115 ] . These studies suggest that the rice - based experimental vaccine may provide a cost - effective oral cholera vaccine . It remains to be seen whether the approach of using edible plant tissue to deliver vaccines could be feasible from regulatory and public acceptance standpoints . Toxins 2015 , 7 985 Table 1 . rCTB Production Systems . System Expression Host Functional Evaluation Mode of Expression CTB Yield Purification Reference Bacterial fermentation V . cholerae Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) and immunogenic in mice Expression plasmid : ( pML - LCTB tac 2 ) transformation 1g / L culture Affinity chromatography ( lyso - GM1 ganglioside Spherosil column ) [ 102 ] E . coli Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Expression plasmid : pQE30 transformation 9 mg / L culture IMAC * Purification and membrane - filtration [ 103 ] Detected by anti - CT antibody ( Western Blot ) Expression plasmid : pAE _ ctx B transformation 1 . 2g / L culture Centrifugation [ 104 ] Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Expression plasmid : pTG8148 transformation 1 g / L culture Cation exchange Chromatography ( S - Sepharose FF column ) [ 105 ] Detected by anti - CT antibody ( Western Blot ) Expression plasmid : pGEM - T - ctx B transformation 80 mg / L culture Centrifugation [ 106 ] Lactobacilli Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) and immunogenic in mice Expression plasmid : ( pLDH - CTB - His - Term ) transformation 1 mg / L culture IMAC Purification [ 107 ] Bacillus brevis Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Expression plasmid : ( pNU212 - CTB ) transformation N / A Affinity chromatography ( D - galactose - agarose column ) [ 108 ] Yeast culture Pichia pastoris Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) and immunogenic in mice Expression plasmid : ( pB ) transformation 50 mg / L culture IMAC Purification [ 109 ] Insect cell culture B . mori ( silkworm larvae ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) and immunogenic in mice Baculovirus expression system 54 . 4 mg / L larval hemolymph Centrifugation [ 110 ] Plants Solanum tubersosum ( potato ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation . 0 . 5 % of total soluble protein Centrifugation [ 112 ] Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 0 . 3 % of total soluble protein Non - purified ( edible plant vaccine ) [ 124 ] Daucus carota ( carrot ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 0 . 48 % of total soluble protein Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 113 ] Toxins 2015 , 7 986 Table 1 . Cont . System Expression Host Functional Evaluation Mode of Expression CTB Yield Purification Reference Plants Oryza sativa ( rice seed ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 2 . 1 % of total soluble protein Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 101 ] Detected by anti - CTB antibody ( Western Blot ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 3 . 37 mg / g rice seeds IMAC Purification [ 114 ] Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 2 . 35 mg / g of seed Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 115 ] Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed Transgenic ( Expression plasmid biolistic - mediated transformation ) 2 . 1 % of total seed Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 116 ] Latuca sativa ( lettuce ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 0 . 24 % of total soluble protein Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 117 ] Lycopersicon esculentum ( tomato ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 0 . 04 % of total soluble protein Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 118 ] Detected by anti - CTB antibody and immunogenic in mice Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 0 . 081 % of total soluble protein Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 125 ] Nicotiana benthamiana ( a tobacco relative ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) and immunogenic in mice Transient ( plant viral vectors ) 1 . 5 mg / g leaf material or 49 . 9 % of total soluble protein IMAC Purification , Hydroxyapatite Chromatography ( CHT column ) [ 100 ] Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 0 . 56 % of total soluble protein Centrifugation [ 112 ] Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 0 . 095 % of total soluble leaf protein Immunoaffinity column chromatography ( anti - CT IgG resin ) [ 119 ] Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transient ( plant viral vectors ) 0 . 14 % of total soluble leaf protein Centrifugation [ 120 ] Nicotiana tabacum ( tobacco ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed ( GM1 - ELISA ) Transplastomic ( Expression plasmid [ pLD - LH - CTB ] microprojectile bombardment ) 4 . 1 % of total soluble protein Non - purified crude leaf extract [ 121 ] Robusta sp . ( banana callus ) Detected by anti - CT antibody ( Western Blot ) Transgenic ( Agrobacterium - mediated transformation ) 125 µg / g callus tissue Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 122 ] Zea mays ( maize seed ) Affinity for GM1 - ganglioside confirmed and immunogenic in mice Transgenic ( Plasmid microprojectile bombardment ) 1 . 56 µg / g dry seed weight Non - purified ( edible vaccine ) [ 123 ] * Immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography ( IMAC ) . Toxins 2015 , 7 987 A second approach is to produce rCTB in non - food or feed plants and isolate the immunogen from the tissue for vaccination . This has been undertaken in several tobacco family plants ( Nicotiana tabacum and N . benthamiana ) [ 100 , 112 , 119 – 121 ] . Daniell et al expressed rCTB in chloroplasts of transplastomic tobacco plants which enabled a high - level accumulation of glycosylation - free rCTB in leaf tissue . Alternatively , we have recently developed a transient mass production platform for a non - glycosylated variant ( Asn4→Ser ) of rCTB in N . benthamiana using a plant virus vector system [ 100 ] . Over 1 g of the rCTB variant was produced in 1 kg of tobacco leaf ( corresponding to 1000 doses of Dukoral ® vaccine ) in 5 days post vector inoculation . The protein was efficiently purified via conventional chromatographical processes and shown to be virtually identical to original CTB in terms of physicochemical stability , GM1 - ganglioside binding affinity and oral immunogenicity in mice . A major advantage to this method of production is that it is rapidly scalable based on the need for rCTB production , which could obviate the need for large vaccine stockpiling . Although the requirement of protein purification may reduce a previously conceived advantage offered by plant - based systems , it would in turn provide superior controls to the quality and dosage of vaccines and eliminate potential side effects associated with impurities . 5 . Concluding Remarks While first being recognized for its role in the delivery of the virulence factor of V . cholerae , the works highlighted in this paper show CTB’s broad utility as a cholera vaccine immunogen , vaccine adjuvant ( through co - administration or conjugation ) , immune modulator and / or anti - inflammatory agent . This has led to the development of various rCTB expression systems in an effort to make the protein more efficient and widely available . Given that CTB appears to provide additional efficacy to killed bacteria - based cholera vaccines , development of alternative rCTB production and delivery methods may significantly contribute to cholera prevention and control . Because of the capacity to induce potent mucosal humoral immune responses , antigen - CTB fusion provides a promising strategy for vaccines against enteric pathogens and mucosally transmitted diseases . On the other hand , the immunotherapeutic potential of CTB in inflammatory diseases warrants further investigations ; despite a number of studies demonstrating CTB’s anti - inflammatory effects , the underlying mechanism remains to be fully disclosed . This could be partly due to the inconsistent quality of CTB used in those studies and also attributed to different pathways altered by CTB , depending on the route / mode of administration and inflammatory conditions . Since many inflammatory diseases involve chronic and recurring inflammation , long - term immunological and toxicological impacts of repeated CTB administration need to be investigated . Nevertheless , several early - stage clinical trials have paved the way for the development of CTB - based anti - inflammatory agents . In summary , CTB has shown utility in many disease states and may ultimately be a compound with many diverse applications . The works highlighted in this paper show great promise for a single protein having multiple applications and perhaps allowing for an evolution in vaccine development . Acknowledgments We thank Adam Husk for critical reading of the manuscript . This manuscript is based on work supported by DoD / USMRAA / TATRC / W81XWH - 10 - 2 - 0082 - CLIN1 ; W81XWH - 10 - 2 - 0082 - CLIN2 and the Helmsley Charitable Trust Fund . KJB was supported by a T32 Environmental Health Sciences Grant ( 3 T32 ES 11564 - 10 S1 ) . Toxins 2015 , 7 988 Author Contributions K . J . B . and N . M . conceived and designed the review idea and contents . J . M . R . and K . T . H . contributed to table and figure generation and revising the paper . Conflicts of Interest The author declares no conflict of interest . References 1 . Lutz , C . ; Erken , M . ; Noorian , P . ; Sun , S . ; McDougald , D . Environmental reservoirs and mechanisms of persistence of Vibrio cholerae . Front . Microbiol . 2013 , 4 , 375 . 2 . Chatterjee , S . ; Ghosh , K . ; Raychoudhuri , A . ; Pan , A . ; Bhattacharya , M . K . ; Mukhopadhyay , A . K . ; Ramamurthy , T . ; Bhattacharya , S . K . ; Nandy , R . K . Phenotypic and genotypic traits and epidemiological implication of Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139 strains in India during 2003 . J . Med . Microbiol . 2007 , 56 , 824 – 832 . 3 . Harris , J . B . ; LaRocque , R . C . ; Qadri , F . ; Ryan , E . T . ; Calderwood , S . B . Cholera . Lancet 2012 , 379 , 2466 – 2476 . 4 . Merrell , D . S . ; Butler , S . M . ; Qadri , F . ; Dolganov , N . A . ; Alam , A . ; Cohen , M . B . ; Calderwood , S . B . ; Schoolnik , G . K . ; Camilli , A . Host - induced epidemic spread of the cholera bacterium . Nature 2002 , 417 , 642 – 645 . 5 . Stine , O . C . ; Morris , J . G . , Jr . Circulation and transmission of clones of Vibrio cholerae during cholera outbreaks . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 2014 , 379 , 181 – 193 . 6 . Leung , D . T . ; Chowdhury , F . ; Calderwood , S . B . ; Qadri , F . ; Ryan , E . T . Immune responses to cholera in children . Expert Rev . Anti Infect . Ther . 2012 , 10 , 435 – 444 . 7 . Piarroux , R . ; Faucher , B . Cholera epidemics in 2010 : Respective roles of environment , strain changes , and human - driven dissemination . Clin . Microbiol . Infect . 2012 , 18 , 231 – 238 . 8 . Orata , F . D . ; Keim , P . S . ; Boucher , Y . The 2010 cholera outbreak in Haiti : How science solved a controversy . PLoS Pathog . 2014 , 10 , e1003967 . 9 . WHO . Cholera 2012 . Wkly . Epidemiol . Rec . 2013 , 88 , 321 – 336 . 10 . WHO . Cholera vaccines : WHO position paper . Wkly . Epidemiol . Rec . 2010 , 85 , 117 – 128 . 11 . Siddique , A . K . ; Nair , G . B . ; Alam , M . ; Sack , D . A . ; Huq , A . ; Nizam , A . ; Longini , I . M . , Jr . ; Qadri , F . ; Faruque , S . M . ; Colwell , R . R . ; et al . El Tor cholera with severe disease : A new threat to Asia and beyond . Epidemiol . Infect . 2010 , 138 , 347 – 352 . 12 . Wernick , N . L . ; Chinnapen , D . J . ; Cho , J . A . ; Lencer , W . I . Cholera toxin : An intracellular journey into the cytosol by way of the endoplasmic reticulum . Toxins 2010 , 2 , 310 – 325 . 13 . Lencer , W . I . ; Tsai , B . The intracellular voyage of cholera toxin : Going retro . Trends Biochem . Sci . 2003 , 28 , 639 – 645 . 14 . Chinnapen , D . J . ; Chinnapen , H . ; Saslowsky , D . ; Lencer , W . I . Rafting with cholera toxin : Endocytosis and trafficking from plasma membrane to ER . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 2007 , 266 , 129 – 137 . 15 . Sanchez , J . ; Holmgren , J . Cholera toxin structure , gene regulation and pathophysiological and immunological aspects . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 2008 , 65 , 1347 – 1360 . Toxins 2015 , 7 989 16 . Zhang , R . G . ; Scott , D . L . ; Westbrook , M . L . ; Nance , S . ; Spangler , B . D . ; Shipley , G . G . ; Westbrook , E . M . The three - dimensional crystal structure of cholera toxin . J . Mol . Biol . 1995 , 251 , 563 – 573 . 17 . Sanchez , J . ; Holmgren , J . Cholera toxin—A foe & A friend . Indian J . Med . Res . 2011 , 133 , 153 – 163 . 18 . Basu , I . ; Mukhopadhyay , C . Insights into Binding of Cholera Toxin to GM1 Containing Membrane . Langmuir 2014 , 30 , 15244 – 15252 . 19 . Saslowsky , D . E . ; te Welscher , Y . M . ; Chinnapen , D . J . ; Wagner , J . S . ; Wan , J . ; Kern , E . ; Lencer , W . I . Ganglioside GM1 - mediated transcytosis of cholera toxin bypasses the retrograde pathway and depends on the structure of the ceramide domain . J . Biol . Chem . 2013 , 288 , 25804 – 25809 . 20 . Charles , R . C . ; Hilaire , I . J . ; Mayo - Smith , L . M . ; Teng , J . E . ; Jerome , J . G . ; Franke , M . F . ; Saha , A . ; Yu , Y . ; Kovac , P . ; Calderwood , S . B . ; et al . Immunogenicity of a killed bivalent ( O1 and O139 ) whole cell oral cholera vaccine , Shanchol , in Haiti . PLoS Negl . Trop . Dis . 2014 , 8 , e2828 . 21 . Schaetti , C . ; Weiss , M . G . ; Ali , S . M . ; Chaignat , C . L . ; Khatib , A . M . ; Reyburn , R . ; Duintjer Tebbens , R . J . ; Hutubessy , R . Costs of illness due to cholera , costs of immunization and cost - effectiveness of an oral cholera mass vaccination campaign in Zanzibar . PLoS Negl . Trop . Dis . 2012 , 6 , e1844 . 22 . Lajoinie , A . ; Henin , E . ; Kassai , B . ; Terry , D . Solid oral forms availability in children : A cost saving investigation . Br . J . Clin . Pharmacol . 2014 , 78 , 1080 – 1089 . 23 . Clemens , J . D . ; Sack , D . A . ; Harris , J . R . ; Chakraborty , J . ; Khan , M . R . ; Stanton , B . F . ; Kay , B . A . ; Khan , M . U . ; Yunus , M . ; Atkinson , W . ; et al . Field trial of oral cholera vaccines in Bangladesh . Lancet 1986 , 2 , 124 – 127 . 24 . Clemens , J . D . ; Sack , D . A . ; Harris , J . R . ; van Loon , F . ; Chakraborty , J . ; Ahmed , F . ; Rao , M . R . ; Khan , M . R . ; Yunus , M . ; Huda , N . ; et al . Field trial of oral cholera vaccines in Bangladesh : Results from three - year follow - up . Lancet 1990 , 335 , 270 – 273 . 25 . Alam , M . M . ; Leung , D . T . ; Akhtar , M . ; Nazim , M . ; Akter , S . ; Uddin , T . ; Khanam , F . ; Mahbuba , D . A . ; Ahmad , S . M . ; Bhuiyan , T . R . ; et al . Antibody avidity in humoral immune responses in Bangladeshi children and adults following administration of an oral killed cholera vaccine . Clin . Vaccine Immunol . 2013 , 20 , 1541 – 1548 . 26 . Lucas , M . E . ; Deen , J . L . ; von Seidlein , L . ; Wang , X . Y . ; Ampuero , J . ; Puri , M . ; Ali , M . ; Ansaruzzaman , M . ; Amos , J . ; Macuamule , A . ; et al . Effectiveness of mass oral cholera vaccination in Beira , Mozambique . N . Engl . J . Med . 2005 , 352 , 757 – 767 . 27 . Taylor , D . N . ; Cardenas , V . ; Sanchez , J . L . ; Begue , R . E . ; Gilman , R . ; Bautista , C . ; Perez , J . ; Puga , R . ; Gaillour , A . ; Meza , R . ; et al . Two - year study of the protective efficacy of the oral whole cell plus recombinant B subunit cholera vaccine in Peru . J . Infect . Dis . 2000 , 181 , 1667 – 1673 . 28 . Clemens , J . D . ; Jertborn , M . ; Sack , D . ; Stanton , B . ; Holmgren , J . ; Khan , M . R . ; Huda , S . Effect of neutralization of gastric acid on immune responses to an oral B subunit , killed whole - cell cholera vaccine . J . Infect . Dis . 1986 , 154 , 175 – 178 . 29 . Saha , A . ; Chowdhury , M . I . ; Khanam , F . ; Bhuiyan , M . S . ; Chowdhury , F . ; Khan , A . I . ; Khan , I . A . ; Clemens , J . ; Ali , M . ; Cravioto , A . ; et al . Safety and immunogenicity study of a killed bivalent ( O1 and O139 ) whole - cell oral cholera vaccine Shanchol , in Bangladeshi adults and children as young as 1 year of age . Vaccine 2011 , 29 , 8285 – 8292 . Toxins 2015 , 7 990 30 . Luquero , F . J . ; Grout , L . ; Ciglenecki , I . ; Sakoba , K . ; Traore , B . ; Heile , M . ; Diallo , A . A . ; Itama , C . ; Page , A . L . ; Quilici , M . L . ; et al . Use of Vibrio cholerae vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea . N . Engl . J . Med . 2014 , 370 , 2111 – 2120 . 31 . Kang , S . S . ; Yang , J . S . ; Kim , K . W . ; Yun , C . H . ; Holmgren , J . ; Czerkinsky , C . ; Han , S . H . Anti - bacterial and anti - toxic immunity induced by a killed whole - cell - cholera toxin B subunit cholera vaccine is essential for protection against lethal bacterial infection in mouse pulmonary cholera model . Mucosal . Immunol . 2013 , 6 , 826 – 837 . 32 . Holmgren , J . ; Adamsson , J . ; Anjuere , F . ; Clemens , J . ; Czerkinsky , C . ; Eriksson , K . ; Flach , C . F . ; George - Chandy , A . ; Harandi , A . M . ; Lebens , M . ; et al . Mucosal adjuvants and anti - infection and anti - immunopathology vaccines based on cholera toxin , cholera toxin B subunit and CpG DNA . Immunol . Lett . 2005 , 97 , 181 – 188 . 33 . Williams , N . A . ; Hirst , T . R . ; Nashar , T . O . Immune modulation by the cholera - like enterotoxins : From adjuvant to therapeutic . Immunol . Today 1999 , 20 , 95 – 101 . 34 . Bharati , K . ; Ganguly , N . K . Cholera toxin : A paradigm of a multifunctional protein . Indian J . Med . Res . 2011 , 133 , 179 – 187 . 35 . Holmgren , J . ; Lycke , N . ; Czerkinsky , C . Cholera toxin and cholera B subunit as oral - mucosal adjuvant and antigen vector systems . Vaccine 1993 , 11 , 1179 – 1184 . 36 . Bowman , C . C . ; Selgrade , M . K . Utility of rodent models for evaluating protein allergenicity . Regul . Toxicol . Pharmacol . 2009 , 54 , S58 – S61 . 37 . Oyoshi , M . K . ; Oettgen , H . C . ; Chatila , T . A . ; Geha , R . S . ; Bryce , P . J . Food allergy : Insights into etiology , prevention , and treatment provided by murine models . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 2014 , 133 , 309 – 317 . 38 . Elson , C . O . ; Ealding , W . Generalized systemic and mucosal immunity in mice after mucosal stimulation with cholera toxin . J . Immunol . 1984 , 132 , 2736 – 2741 . 39 . Jackson , R . J . ; Fujihashi , K . ; Xu - Amano , J . ; Kiyono , H . ; Elson , C . O . ; McGhee , J . R . Optimizing oral vaccines : Induction of systemic and mucosal B - cell and antibody responses to tetanus toxoid by use of cholera toxin as an adjuvant . Infect . Immun . 1993 , 61 , 4272 – 4279 . 40 . Bourguin , I . ; Chardes , T . ; Bout , D . Oral immunization with Toxoplasma gondii antigens in association with cholera toxin induces enhanced protective and cell - mediated immunity in C57BL / 6 mice . Infect . Immun . 1993 , 61 , 2082 – 2088 . 41 . Holmgren , J . ; Czerkinsky , C . ; Lycke , N . ; Svennerholm , A . M . Strategies for the induction of immune responses at mucosal surfaces making use of cholera toxin B subunit as immunogen , carrier , and adjuvant . Am . J . Trop . Med . Hyg . 1994 , 50 , 42 – 54 . 42 . Blanchard , T . G . ; Lycke , N . ; Czinn , S . J . ; Nedrud , J . G . Recombinant cholera toxin B subunit is not an effective mucosal adjuvant for oral immunization of mice against Helicobacter felis . Immunology 1998 , 94 , 22 – 27 . 43 . Kubota , E . ; Joh , T . ; Tanida , S . ; Sasaki , M . ; Kataoka , H . ; Watanabe , K . ; Itoh , K . ; Oshima , T . ; Ogasawara , N . ; Togawa , S . ; et al . Oral vaccination against Helicobacter pylori with recombinant cholera toxin B - subunit . Helicobacter 2005 , 10 , 345 – 352 . 44 . Mutsch , M . ; Zhou , W . ; Rhodes , P . ; Bopp , M . ; Chen , R . T . ; Linder , T . ; Spyr , C . ; Steffen , R . Use of the inactivated intranasal influenza vaccine and the risk of Bell’s palsy in Switzerland . N . Engl . J . Med . 2004 , 350 , 896 – 903 . Toxins 2015 , 7 991 45 . Couch , R . B . Nasal vaccination , Escherichia coli enterotoxin , and Bell’s palsy . N . Engl . J . Med . 2004 , 350 , 860 – 861 . 46 . Rath , B . ; Linder , T . ; Cornblath , D . ; Hudson , M . ; Fernandopulle , R . ; Hartmann , K . ; Heininger , U . ; Izurieta , H . ; Killion , L . ; Kokotis , P . ; et al . All that palsies is not Bell’s - the need to define Bell’s palsy as an adverse event following immunization . Vaccine 2007 , 26 , 1 – 14 . 47 . Guo , L . ; Liu , K . ; Xu , G . ; Li , X . ; Tu , J . ; Tang , F . ; Xing , Y . ; Xi , T . Prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy of the epitope vaccine CTB - UA against Helicobacter pylori infection in a BALB / c mice model . Appl . Microbiol . Biotechnol . 2012 , 95 , 1437 – 1444 . 48 . De Geus , E . D . ; van Haarlem , D . A . ; Poetri , O . N . ; de Wit , J . J . ; Vervelde , L . A lack of antibody formation against inactivated influenza virus after aerosol vaccination in presence or absence of adjuvantia . Vet . Immunol . Immunopathol . 2011 , 143 , 143 – 147 . 49 . Boustanshenas , M . ; Bakhshi , B . ; Ghorbani , M . Investigation into immunological responses against a native recombinant CTB whole - cell Vibrio cholerae vaccine in a rabbit model . J . Appl . Microbiol . 2013 , 114 , 509 – 515 . 50 . Baptista , A . A . ; Donato , T . C . ; Garcia , K . C . ; Goncalves , G . A . ; Coppola , M . P . ; Okamoto , A . S . ; Sequeira , J . L . ; Andreatti Filho , R . L . Immune response of broiler chickens immunized orally with the recombinant proteins flagellin and the subunit B of cholera toxin associated with Lactobacillus spp . Poult . Sci . 2014 , 93 , 39 – 45 . 51 . Guo , L . ; Yin , R . ; Liu , K . ; Lv , X . ; Li , Y . ; Duan , X . ; Chu , Y . ; Xi , T . ; Xing , Y . Immunological features and efficacy of a multi - epitope vaccine CTB - UE against H . pylori in BALB / c mice model . Appl . Microbiol . Biotechnol . 2014 , 98 , 3495 – 3507 . 52 . Tinker , J . K . ; Yan , J . ; Knippel , R . J . ; Panayiotou , P . ; Cornell , K . A . Immunogenicity of a West Nile virus DIII - cholera toxin A2 / B chimera after intranasal delivery . Toxins 2014 , 6 , 1397 – 1418 . 53 . Czerkinsky , C . ; Sun , J . B . ; Lebens , M . ; Li , B . L . ; Rask , C . ; Lindblad , M . ; Holmgren , J . Cholera toxin B subunit as transmucosal carrier - delivery and immunomodulating system for induction of antiinfectious and antipathological immunity . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1996 , 778 , 185 – 193 . 54 . Martell , B . A . ; Orson , F . M . ; Poling , J . ; Mitchell , E . ; Rossen , R . D . ; Gardner , T . ; Kosten , T . R . Cocaine vaccine for the treatment of cocaine dependence in methadone - maintained patients : A randomized , double - blind , placebo - controlled efficacy trial . Arch . Gen . Psychiatry 2009 , 66 , 1116 – 1123 . 55 . Orson , F . M . ; Rossen , R . D . ; Shen , X . ; Lopez , A . Y . ; Wu , Y . ; Kosten , T . R . Spontaneous development of IgM anti - cocaine antibodies in habitual cocaine users : Effect on IgG antibody responses to a cocaine cholera toxin B conjugate vaccine . Am . J . Addict . 2013 , 22 , 169 – 174 . 56 . Lebens , M . ; Holmgren , J . Mucosal vaccines based on the use of cholera toxin B subunit as immunogen and antigen carrier . Dev . Biol . Stand . 1994 , 82 , 215 – 227 . 57 . Sun , J . B . ; Czerkinsky , C . ; Holmgren , J . Mucosally induced immunological tolerance , regulatory T cells and the adjuvant effect by cholera toxin B subunit . Scand . J . Immunol . 2010 , 71 , 1 – 11 . 58 . Guo , L . ; Li , X . ; Tang , F . ; He , Y . ; Xing , Y . ; Deng , X . ; Xi , T . Immunological features and the ability of inhibitory effects on enzymatic activity of an epitope vaccine composed of cholera toxin B subunit and B cell epitope from Helicobacter pylori urease A subunit . Appl . Microbiol . Biotechnol . 2012 , 93 , 1937 – 1945 . Toxins 2015 , 7 992 59 . Lv , X . ; Yang , J . ; Song , H . ; Li , T . ; Guo , L . ; Xing , Y . ; Xi , T . Therapeutic efficacy of the multi - epitope vaccine CTB - UE against Helicobacter pylori infection in a Mongolian gerbil model and its microRNA - 155 - associated immuno - protective mechanism . Vaccine 2014 , 32 , 5343 – 5352 . 60 . Kono , M . ; Hotomi , M . ; Hollingshead , S . K . ; Briles , D . E . ; Yamanaka , N . Maternal immunization with pneumococcal surface protein A protects against pneumococcal infections among derived offspring . PLoS One 2011 , 6 , e27102 . 61 . Matoba , N . ; Magerus , A . ; Geyer , B . C . ; Zhang , Y . ; Muralidharan , M . ; Alfsen , A . ; Arntzen , C . J . ; Bomsel , M . ; Mor , T . S . A mucosally targeted subunit vaccine candidate eliciting HIV - 1 transcytosis - blocking Abs . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2004 , 101 , 13584 – 13589 . 62 . Nowroozalizadeh , S . ; Jansson , M . ; Adamsson , J . ; Lindblad , M . ; Fenyo , E . M . ; Holmgren , J . ; Harandi , A . M . Suppression of HIV replication in vitro by CpG and CpG conjugated to the non toxic B subunit of cholera toxin . Curr . HIV Res . 2008 , 6 , 230 – 238 . 63 . Maeto , C . ; Rodriguez , A . M . ; Holgado , M . P . ; Falivene , J . ; Gherardi , M . M . Novel mucosal DNA - MVA HIV vaccination in which DNA - IL - 12 plus cholera toxin B subunit ( CTB ) cooperates to enhance cellular systemic and mucosal genital tract immunity . PLoS One 2014 , 9 , e107524 . 64 . Hou , J . ; Liu , Y . ; Hsi , J . ; Wang , H . ; Tao , R . ; Shao , Y . Cholera toxin B subunit acts as a potent systemic adjuvant for HIV - 1 DNA vaccination intramuscularly in mice . Hum . Vaccin Immunother . 2014 , 10 , 1274 – 1283 . 65 . Hervouet , C . ; Luci , C . ; Cuburu , N . ; Cremel , M . ; Bekri , S . ; Vimeux , L . ; Maranon , C . ; Czerkinsky , C . ; Hosmalin , A . ; Anjuere , F . Sublingual immunization with an HIV subunit vaccine induces antibodies and cytotoxic T cells in the mouse female genital tract . Vaccine 2010 , 28 , 5582 – 5590 . 66 . Boberg , A . ; Gaunitz , S . ; Brave , A . ; Wahren , B . ; Carlin , N . Enhancement of epitope - specific cellular immune responses by immunization with HIV - 1 peptides genetically conjugated to the B - subunit of recombinant cholera toxin . Vaccine 2008 , 26 , 5079 – 5082 . 67 . Zolla - Pazner , S . ; Kong , X . P . ; Jiang , X . ; Cardozo , T . ; Nadas , A . ; Cohen , S . ; Totrov , M . ; Seaman , M . S . ; Wang , S . ; Lu , S . Cross - clade HIV - 1 neutralizing antibodies induced with V3 - scaffold protein immunogens following priming with gp120 DNA . J . Virol . 2011 , 85 , 9887 – 9898 . 68 . Matoba , N . ; Kajiura , H . ; Cherni , I . ; Doran , J . D . ; Bomsel , M . ; Fujiyama , K . ; Mor , T . S . Biochemical and immunological characterization of the plant - derived candidate human immunodeficiency virus type 1 mucosal vaccine CTB - MPR ( 649 – 684 ) . Plant Biotechnol . J . 2009 , 7 , 129 – 145 . 69 . Matoba , N . ; Griffin , T . A . ; Mittman , M . ; Doran , J . D . ; Hanson , C . V . ; Montefiori , D . ; Alfsen , A . ; Bomsel , M . ; Mor , T . S . Transcytosis - blocking Abs elicited by an oligomeric immunogen based on the membrane proximal region of HIV - 1 gp41 target non - neutralizing epitopes . Curr . HIV Res . 2008 , 6 , 218 – 229 . 70 . Matoba , N . ; Geyer , B . C . ; Kilbourne , J . ; Alfsen , A . ; Bomsel , M . ; Mor , T . S . Humoral immune responses by prime - boost heterologous route immunizations with CTB - MPR ( 649 – 684 ) , a mucosal subunit HIV / AIDS vaccine candidate . Vaccine 2006 , 24 , 5047 – 5055 . 71 . Matoba , N . ; Shah , N . R . ; Mor , T . S . Humoral immunogenicity of an HIV - 1 envelope residue 649 – 684 membrane - proximal region peptide fused to the plague antigen F1 - V . Vaccine 2011 , 29 , 5584 – 5590 . 72 . Arulanandam , B . P . ; Metzger , D . W . Modulation of mucosal and systemic immunity by intranasal interleukin 12 delivery . Vaccine 1999 , 17 , 252 – 260 . Toxins 2015 , 7 993 73 . Hu , B . ; Li , C . ; Lu , H . ; Zhu , Z . ; Du , S . ; Ye , M . ; Tan , L . ; Ren , D . ; Han , J . ; Kan , S . ; et al . Immune responses to the oral administration of recombinant Bacillus subtilis expressing multi - epitopes of foot - and - mouth disease virus and a cholera toxin B subunit . J . Virol . Methods 2011 , 171 , 272 – 279 . 74 . Guo , L . ; Qiu , Y . ; Chen , J . ; Zhang , S . ; Xu , B . ; Gao , Y . Effective transcutaneous immunization against hepatitis B virus by a combined approach of hydrogel patch formulation and microneedle arrays . Biomed . Microdevices 2013 , 15 , 1077 – 1085 . 75 . Anjuere , F . ; George - Chandy , A . ; Audant , F . ; Rousseau , D . ; Holmgren , J . ; Czerkinsky , C . Transcutaneous immunization with cholera toxin B subunit adjuvant suppresses IgE antibody responses via selective induction of Th1 immune responses . J . Immunol . 2003 , 170 , 1586 – 1592 . 76 . Glenn , G . M . ; Scharton - Kersten , T . ; Vassell , R . ; Matyas , G . R . ; Alving , C . R . Transcutaneous immunization with bacterial ADP - ribosylating exotoxins as antigens and adjuvants . Infect . Immun . 1999 , 67 , 1100 – 1106 . 77 . Maheshwari , C . ; Pandey , R . S . ; Chaurasiya , A . ; Kumar , A . ; Selvam , D . T . ; Prasad , G . B . ; Dixit , V . K . Non - ionic surfactant vesicles mediated transcutaneous immunization against hepatitis B . Int . Immunopharmacol . 2011 , 11 , 1516 – 1522 . 78 . Harakuni , T . ; Kohama , H . ; Tadano , M . ; Uechi , G . ; Tsuji , N . ; Matsumoto , Y . ; Miyata , T . ; Tsuboi , T . ; Oku , H . ; Arakawa , T . Mucosal vaccination approach against mosquito - borne Japanese encephalitis virus . Jpn . J . Infect . Dis . 2009 , 62 , 37 – 45 . 79 . Harokopakis , E . ; Hajishengallis , G . ; Greenway , T . E . ; Russell , M . W . ; Michalek , S . M . Mucosal immunogenicity of a recombinant Salmonella typhimurium - cloned heterologous antigen in the absence or presence of coexpressed cholera toxin A2 and B subunits . Infect . Immun . 1997 , 65 , 1445 – 1454 . 80 . Martin , M . ; Hajishengallis , G . ; Metzger , D . J . ; Michalek , S . M . ; Connell , T . D . ; Russell , M . W . Recombinant antigen - enterotoxin A2 / B chimeric mucosal immunogens differentially enhance antibody responses and B7 - dependent costimulation of CD4 ( + ) T cells . Infect . Immun . 2001 , 69 , 252 – 261 . 81 . Harokopakis , E . ; Childers , N . K . ; Michalek , S . M . ; Zhang , S . S . ; Tomasi , M . Conjugation of cholera toxin or its B subunit to liposomes for targeted delivery of antigens . J . Immunol . Methods 1995 , 185 , 31 – 42 . 82 . O’Hagan , D . T . ; McGee , J . P . ; Lindblad , M . ; Holmgren , J . Cholera toxin B Subunit ( CTB ) entrapped in microparticles shows comparable immunogenicity to CTB mixed with whole cholera toxin following oral immunization . Int . J . Pharm . 1995 , 119 , 251 – 255 . 83 . Rosli , R . ; Nograles , N . ; Hanafi , A . ; Nor Shamsudin , M . ; Abdullah , S . Mucosal genetic immunization through microsphere - based oral carriers . Hum . Vaccin Immunother . 2013 , 9 , 2222 – 2227 . 84 . Smits , H . H . ; Gloudemans , A . K . ; van Nimwegen , M . ; Willart , M . A . ; Soullie , T . ; Muskens , F . ; de Jong , E . C . ; Boon , L . ; Pilette , C . ; Johansen , F . E . ; et al . Cholera toxin B suppresses allergic inflammation through induction of secretory IgA . Mucosal . Immunol . 2009 , 2 , 331 – 339 . 85 . Stanford , M . ; Whittall , T . ; Bergmeier , L . A . ; Lindblad , M . ; Lundin , S . ; Shinnick , T . ; Mizushima , Y . ; Holmgren , J . ; Lehner , T . Oral tolerization with peptide 336 – 351 linked to cholera toxin B subunit in preventing relapses of uveitis in Behcet’s disease . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 2004 , 137 , 201 – 208 . Toxins 2015 , 7 994 86 . Libby , P . ; Nathan , D . M . ; Abraham , K . ; Brunzell , J . D . ; Fradkin , J . E . ; Haffner , S . M . ; Hsueh , W . ; Rewers , M . ; Roberts , B . T . ; Savage , P . J . ; et al . Report of the National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute - National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Working Group on Cardiovascular Complications of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus . Circulation 2005 , 111 , 3489 – 3493 . 87 . Odumosu , O . ; Nicholas , D . ; Payne , K . ; Langridge , W . Cholera toxin B subunit linked to glutamic acid decarboxylase suppresses dendritic cell maturation and function . Vaccine 2011 , 29 , 8451 – 8458 . 88 . Denes , B . ; Fodor , I . ; Langridge , W . H . Persistent suppression of type 1 diabetes by a multicomponent vaccine containing a cholera toxin B subunit - autoantigen fusion protein and complete Freund’s adjuvant . Clin . Dev . Immunol . 2013 , 2013 , 578786 . 89 . Shil , P . K . ; Kwon , K . C . ; Zhu , P . ; Verma , A . ; Daniell , H . ; Li , Q . Oral delivery of ACE2 / Ang - ( 1 – 7 ) bioencapsulated in plant cells protects against experimental uveitis and autoimmune uveoretinitis . Mol . Ther . 2014 , 22 , 2069 – 2082 . 90 . Xiong , Q . ; Li , J . ; Jin , L . ; Liu , J . ; Li , T . Nasal immunization with heat shock protein 65 attenuates atherosclerosis and reduces serum lipids in cholesterol - fed wild - type rabbits probably through different mechanisms . Immunol . Lett . 2009 , 125 , 40 – 45 . 91 . Klingenberg , R . ; Lebens , M . ; Hermansson , A . ; Fredrikson , G . N . ; Strodthoff , D . ; Rudling , M . ; Ketelhuth , D . F . ; Gerdes , N . ; Holmgren , J . ; Nilsson , J . ; et al . Intranasal immunization with an apolipoprotein B - 100 fusion protein induces antigen - specific regulatory T cells and reduces atherosclerosis . Arterioscler Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 2010 , 30 , 946 – 952 . 92 . Salazar - Gonzalez , J . A . ; Rosales - Mendoza , S . ; Romero - Maldonado , A . ; Monreal - Escalante , E . ; Uresti - Rivera , E . E . ; Banuelos - Hernandez , B . Production of a Plant - Derived Immunogenic Protein Targeting ApoB100 and CETP : Toward a Plant - Based Atherosclerosis Vaccine . Mol . Biotechnol . 2014 , 56 , 1133 – 1142 . 93 . Weiner , H . L . The mucosal milieu creates tolerogenic dendritic cells and T ( R ) 1 and T ( H ) 3 regulatory cells . Nat . Immunol . 2001 , 2 , 671 – 672 . 94 . Hernandez , H . J . ; Rutitzky , L . I . ; Lebens , M . ; Holmgren , J . ; Stadecker , M . J . Diminished immunopathology in Schistosoma mansoni infection following intranasal administration of cholera toxin B - immunodominant peptide conjugate correlates with enhanced transforming growth factor - beta production by CD4 T cells . Parasite Immunol . 2002 , 24 , 423 – 427 . 95 . Yu , X . ; Song , B . ; Huang , C . ; Xiao , Y . ; Fang , M . ; Feng , J . ; Wang , P . ; Zhang , G . Prolonged survival time of allografts by the oral administration of RDP58 linked to the cholera toxin B subunit . Transpl . Immunol . 2012 , 27 , 122 – 127 . 96 . Boirivant , M . ; Fuss , I . J . ; Ferroni , L . ; de Pascale , M . ; Strober , W . Oral administration of recombinant cholera toxin subunit B inhibits IL - 12 - mediated murine experimental ( trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid ) colitis . J . Immunol . 2001 , 166 , 3522 – 3532 . 97 . Coccia , E . M . ; Remoli , M . E . ; Di Giacinto , C . ; Del Zotto , B . ; Giacomini , E . ; Monteleone , G . ; Boirivant , M . Cholera toxin subunit B inhibits IL - 12 and IFN - γ production and signaling in experimental colitis and Crohn’s disease . Gut 2005 , 54 , 1558 – 1564 . 98 . Stal , P . ; Befrits , R . ; Ronnblom , A . ; Danielsson , A . ; Suhr , O . ; Stahlberg , D . ; Brinkberg Lapidus , A . ; Lofberg , R . Clinical trial : The safety and short - term efficacy of recombinant cholera toxin B subunit in the treatment of active Crohn’s disease . Aliment . Pharmacol . Ther . 2010 , 31 , 387 – 395 . Toxins 2015 , 7 995 99 . Tamura , S . ; Yamanaka , A . ; Shimohara , M . ; Tomita , T . ; Komase , K . ; Tsuda , Y . ; Suzuki , Y . ; Nagamine , T . ; Kawahara , K . ; Danbara , H . ; et al . Synergistic action of cholera toxin B subunit ( and Escherichia coli heat - labile toxin B subunit ) and a trace amount of cholera whole toxin as an adjuvant for nasal influenza vaccine . Vaccine 1994 , 12 , 419 – 426 . 100 . Hamorsky , K . T . ; Kouokam , J . C . ; Bennett , L . J . ; Baldauf , K . J . ; Kajiura , H . ; Fujiyama , K . ; Matoba , N . Rapid and scalable plant - based production of a cholera toxin B subunit variant to aid in mass vaccination against cholera outbreaks . PLoS Negl . Trop . Dis . 2013 , 7 , e2046 . 101 . Nochi , T . ; Takagi , H . ; Yuki , Y . ; Yang , L . ; Masumura , T . ; Mejima , M . ; Nakanishi , U . ; Matsumura , A . ; Uozumi , A . ; Hiroi , T . ; et al . Rice - based mucosal vaccine as a global strategy for cold - chain - and needle - free vaccination . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2007 , 104 , 10986 – 10991 . 102 . Lebens , M . ; Johansson , S . ; Osek , J . ; Lindblad , M . ; Holmgren , J . Large - scale production of Vibrio cholerae toxin B subunit for use in oral vaccines . Biotechnology 1993 , 11 , 1574 – 1578 . 103 . Dakterzada , F . ; Mobarez , A . M . ; Roudkenar , M . H . ; Forouzandeh , M . Production of Pentameric Cholera Toxin B Subunit in Escherichia coli . Avicenna J . Med . Biotechnol . 2012 , 4 , 89 – 94 . 104 . Boustanshenas , M . ; Bakhshi , B . ; Ghorbani , M . ; Norouzian , D . Comparison of two recombinant systems for expression of cholera toxin B subunit from Vibrio cholerae . Indian J . Med . Microbiol . 2013 , 31 , 10 – 14 . 105 . Slos , P . ; Speck , D . ; Accart , N . ; Kolbe , H . V . ; Schubnel , D . ; Bouchon , B . ; Bischoff , R . ; Kieny , M . P . Recombinant cholera toxin B subunit in Escherichia coli : High - level secretion , purification , and characterization . Protein Exp . Purif . 1994 , 5 , 518 – 526 . 106 . Bakhshi , B . ; Boustanshenas , M . ; Ghorbani , M . A single point mutation within the coding sequence of cholera toxin B subunit will increase its expression yield . Iran Biomed . J . 2014 , 18 , 130 – 135 . 107 . Okuno , T . ; Kashige , N . ; Satho , T . ; Irie , K . ; Hiramatsu , Y . ; Sharmin , T . ; Fukumitsu , Y . ; Uyeda , S . ; Yamada , S . ; Harakuni , T . ; et al . Expression and secretion of cholera toxin B subunit in Lactobacilli . Biol . Pharm . Bull . 2013 , 36 , 952 – 958 . 108 . Yasuda , Y . ; Matano , K . ; Asai , T . ; Tochikubo , K . Affinity purification of recombinant cholera toxin B subunit oligomer expressed in Bacillus brevis for potential human use as a mucosal adjuvant . FEMS Immunol . Med . Microbiol . 1998 , 20 , 311 – 318 . 109 . Miyata , T . ; Harakuni , T . ; Taira , T . ; Matsuzaki , G . ; Arakawa , T . Merozoite surface protein - 1 of Plasmodium yoelii fused via an oligosaccharide moiety of cholera toxin B subunit glycoprotein expressed in yeast induced protective immunity against lethal malaria infection in mice . Vaccine 2012 , 30 , 948 – 958 . 110 . Gong , Z . H . ; Jin , H . Q . ; Jin , Y . F . ; Zhang , Y . Z . Expression of cholera toxin B subunit and assembly as functional oligomers in silkworm . J . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 2005 , 38 , 717 – 724 . 111 . Arakawa , T . ; Chong , D . K . ; Langridge , W . H . Efficacy of a food plant - based oral cholera toxin B subunit vaccine . Nat . Biotechnol . 1998 , 16 , 292 – 297 . 112 . Mikschofsky , H . ; König , P . ; Keil , G . M . ; Hammer , M . ; Schirrmeier , H . ; Broer , I . Cholera toxin B ( CTB ) is functional as an adjuvant for cytoplasmatic proteins if directed to the endoplasmatic reticulum ( ER ) , but not to the cytoplasm of plants . Plant Sci . 2009 , 177 , 35 – 42 . 113 . Kim , Y . S . ; Kim , M . Y . ; Kim , T . G . ; Yang , M . S . Expression and assembly of cholera toxin B subunit ( CTB ) in transgenic carrot ( Daucus carota L . ) . Mol . Biotechnol . 2009 , 41 , 8 – 14 . Toxins 2015 , 7 996 114 . Kajiura , H . ; Wasai , M . ; Kasahara , S . ; Takaiwa , F . ; Fujiyama , K . N - glycosylation and N - glycan moieties of CTB expressed in rice seeds . Mol . Biotechnol . 2013 , 54 , 784 – 794 . 115 . Yuki , Y . ; Mejima , M . ; Kurokawa , S . ; Hiroiwa , T . ; Takahashi , Y . ; Tokuhara , D . ; Nochi , T . ; Katakai , Y . ; Kuroda , M . ; Takeyama , N . ; et al . Induction of toxin - specific neutralizing immunity by molecularly uniform rice - based oral cholera toxin B subunit vaccine without plant - associated sugar modification . Plant Biotechnol . J . 2013 , 11 , 799 – 808 . 116 . Oszvald , M . ; Kang , T . J . ; Tomoskozi , S . ; Jenes , B . ; Kim , T . G . ; Cha , Y . S . ; Tamas , L . ; Yang , M . S . Expression of cholera toxin B subunit in transgenic rice endosperm . Mol . Biotechnol . 2008 , 40 , 261 – 268 . 117 . Kim , Y . S . ; Kim , B . G . ; Kim , T . G . ; Kang , T . J . ; Yang , M . S . Expression of a cholera toxin B subunit in transgenic lettuce ( Lactuca sativa L . ) using Agrobacterium - mediated transformation system . Plant Cell Tiss . Organ . Cult . 2006 , 87 , 203 – 210 . 118 . Jani , D . ; Meena , L . S . ; Rizwan - ul - Haq , Q . M . ; Singh , Y . ; Sharma , A . K . ; Tyagi , A . K . Expression of cholera toxin B subunit in transgenic tomato plants . Transgenic Res . 2002 , 11 , 447 – 454 . 119 . Wang , X . G . ; Zhang , G . H . ; Liu , C . X . ; Zhang , Y . H . ; Xiao , C . Z . ; Fang , R . X . Purified cholera toxin B subunit from transgenic tobacco plants possesses authentic antigenicity . Biotechnol . Bioeng . 2001 , 72 , 490 – 494 . 120 . Rattanapisit , K . ; Bhoo , S . H . ; Hahn , T . R . ; Mason , H . S . ; Phoolcharoen , W . Rapid transient expression of cholera toxin B subunit ( CTB ) in Nicotiana benthamiana . In Vitro Cell Dev . Biol . Plant 2013 , 49 , 107 – 113 . 121 . Daniell , H . ; Lee , S . B . ; Panchal , T . ; Wiebe , P . O . Expression of the native cholera toxin B subunit gene and assembly as functional oligomers in transgenic tobacco chloroplasts . J . Mol . Biol . 2001 , 311 , 1001 – 1009 . 122 . Renuga , R . S . ; Babu Thandapani , A . ; Arumugam , K . R . Expression of Cholera toxin B subunit in Banana callus culture . J . Pharm . Sci . Res . 2010 , 2 , 26 – 33 . 123 . Karaman , S . ; Cunnick , J . ; Wang , K . Expression of the cholera toxin B subunit ( CT - B ) in maize seeds and a combined mucosal treatment against cholera and traveler’s diarrhea . Plant Cell Rep . 2012 , 31 , 527 – 537 . 124 . Arakawa , T . ; Chong , D . K . ; Merritt , J . L . ; Langridge , W . H . Expression of cholera toxin B subunit oligomers in transgenic potato plants . Transgenic Res . 1997 , 6 , 403 – 413 . 125 . Jiang , X . L . ; He , Z . M . ; Peng , Z . Q . ; Qi , Y . ; Chen , Q . ; Yu , S . Y . Cholera toxin B protein in transgenic tomato fruit induces systemic immune response in mice . Transgenic Res . 2007 , 16 , 169 – 175 . 126 . Nochi , T . ; Yuki , Y . ; Katakai , Y . ; Shibata , H . ; Tokuhara , D . ; Mejima , M . ; Kurokawa , S . ; Takahashi , Y . ; Nakanishi , U . ; Ono , F . ; et al . A rice - based oral cholera vaccine induces macaque - specific systemic neutralizing antibodies but does not influence pre - existing intestinal immunity . J . Immunol . 2009 , 183 , 6538 – 6544 . © 2015 by the authors ; licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .