e 3 service - A structured methodology for generating needs - driven IT - service bundles in a networked enterprise Sybren de Kinderen VU University Amsterdam de Boelelaan 1081 1081HV Amsterdam , The Netherlands sdkinde @ few . vu . nl Jaap Gordijn VU University Amsterdam de Boelelaan 1081 1081HV Amsterdam , The Netherlands gordijn @ few . vu . nl ABSTRACT IT - services should not only be considered from a technical perspective , but should also be seen as commercial services that satisfy a consumer need . Examples include well - known services such as Internet access or an email box . Typically , to satisfy a complex consumer need , a bundle of elementary services is required . In such a bundle , each elementary ser - vice can be oﬀered by a diﬀerent supplier . A key problem is then how to actually ﬁnd service - bundles that satify cus - tomer needs as close as possible . Because IT - service bundles can be automatically provisioned online immediately after ordering , ﬁnding a service bundle satisfying a need should preferably also happen automatically . To this end , we pro - pose the e 3 service ontology , which oﬀers constructs from service marketing , but in a computational way , such that automated reasoning support can be developed to match consumer needs with IT - services . This paper presents the e 3 service ontology and explains it by a case study in the postal industry Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 4 [ Information Systems Applications ] : Miscellaneous General Terms IT service bundling , ontology , value - based requirements en - gineering Keywords IT service bundling , ontology , value - based requirements en - gineering 1 . INTRODUCTION In recent years , the notion of customizable bundles of IT - services to satisfy complex needs from speciﬁc consumers has gained interest . Consider a daily - life example of obtain - ing internet services from Internet Service Providers ( ISPs ) . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . SAC’08 March 16 - 20 , 2008 , Fortaleza , Cear´a , Brazil Copyright 2008 ACM 978 - 1 - 59593 - 753 - 7 / 08 / 0003 . . . $ 5 . 00 . Often , the proposition of an ISP is actually a bundle consist - ing of more elementary services such as IP - based access , an email box , space to host a website , telephony , and access to newsgroups . However , the consumer may prefer a diﬀerent , perhaps a smaller , bundle ; for instance only IP - based ac - cess plus email plus IP - telephony . Such a bundle then more closely matches the consumer need compared to the original - ﬁts for all - full - service bundle . Additionally , IT - services are increasingly oﬀered by a net - worked value constellation , rather than just a single enter - prise [ 17 ] . By doing so , suppliers can utilize their core com - petencies , while still satisfying a consumer need . In the ISP - example , the oﬀered bundle can be a multi - supplier bundle : IP - access is then provided by a telecom operator , an email box is oﬀered by a commercial enterprise utilizing economies of scale , as can hold for website hosting , which may be of - fered by yet another enterprise . We perceive automatically composing and provisioning such a needs - driven , multi - supplier IT - service bundle as a key problem . In a future scenario we foresee , a consumer would ideally state to the web his IT - needs , and the web ( or some intermediate party ) responds with a list of candidate multi - supplier IT - service bundles . After selection of a spe - ciﬁc bundle by the consumer , the IT - services in the bundle should be provisioned automatically . Guidelines on creating customized service bundles have already been studied in business literature , most notably by [ 10 ] , [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] . Yet , these guidelines are aimed at services in general and not speciﬁcally at IT - services . More impor - tantly , they lack conceptualization and formalization which means that it is diﬃcult to systematically and ( semi - ) au - tomatically reason about service bundles . Such reasoning is important , because IT - services , as illustrated by the ISP example , are bought and provisioned online , enabled by in - formation technology . To adequately facilitate this buying and provisioning process , the elicitation of IT - needs , as well as the selection of commercial IT - services that can be pro - visioned to satisfy such needs , should by supported by in - formation technology as much as possible . The contribution of this paper is an ontology about con - sumer needs , called e 3 service . The ontology relates a need to available IT services , which are in a service catalog . More - over , we propose a gradual process from need elicitation and statement ( essentially the ‘problem statement’ ) to a bundle of IT - services ( the ‘solution’ ) , recognizing that consumers often have already parts of a service bundle in mind , if they articulate their needs . In other words : need ( and problem ) statement does usually not happen context - free , but already includes knowledge about the kind of available services ( so - lutions ) in the market . This phenonema is also known in design and problem solving theory ( see e . g . [ 9 ] ) . It is important to know that we understand IT - services re - ally as commercial services : economic activities , deeds and performances of a mostly intangible nature [ 15 ] , with a fo - cus on those services that can be ordered and provisioned ( nearly ) online . This is in contrast with web services and related standards such as BPSS [ 1 ] , BPEL4WS [ 4 ] , WSCI [ 5 ] , and WS - Coordination [ 8 ] , to name only a few : these ser - vices are mainly intended to arrive at a cross - organizational computing platform to facilitate interoperability on a more technical level . This paper is structured as follows . In section 2 , we present a comprehensive overview of the bundling reasoning process . As this paper focuses only on a part of the reasoning process , namely consumer - oriented reasoning , we present in section 3 an ontology to represent consumer needs , wants , demand and beneﬁts . In section 4 we apply this ontology to a real - life case study performed in the postal industry , to reason about potential service bundles . In section 5 , we dis - cuss related work on IT - service bundling . Finally , in section 6 we present our conclusions . 2 . E 3 SERVICE ; A STRUCTURED APPROACH TOWARDS CREATING SERVICE BUN - DLES BASED UPON COMPLEX CON - SUMER NEEDS The high - level steps of e 3 service are presented in ﬁgure 1 . We make an explicit distinction between two processes needed for the bundling reasoning : the creation of service catalogs ( that should happen on beforehand ) , and reasoning with these catalogs about feasible bundles on a per consumer - need basis . 1 . Create a service catalog . This has to be done before we can actually reason about service bundles themselves . The aim is to build per - supplier catalogs that describe the services and the needs which can be satisiﬁed by these services . Obviously , the catalogs will be used by the service bundling reasoning itself ( see step 2 ) . Building this catalog requires three steps : 1 . 1 Eliciting suppliers , and for each supplier , elicit - ing the IT - services they oﬀer . The outcome of this task is a - per supplier - list of commercial IT - services . These IT - services should as ﬁne - grained as possible , nevertheless it should still be com - mercially feasible to provision each service in its own right . 1 . 2 Formalizing each IT - service from a consumer per - spective . As we will see later on , this comprises an understanding of the consumer need that is satis - ﬁed by the IT - service , ultimately in terms of bene - ﬁts ( being features of an IT - service , such as a mail box size in case of an e - mail service ) . Also , this step explores consumer - side constraints : these con - straints represent which supplementary beneﬁts can ( not ) be provided given a stated consumer need , by oﬀering to the consumer additional ser - vices . 1 . 3 Formalizing each IT - service from a supplier per - spective . In this step we reason about bundles of services by reviewing supplier oriented motiva - tions and constraints for bundling . For instance , a VoIP service puts certain constraints on the QoS - attributes of an internet access service ( a techni - cal constraint but important for the allowed bun - dles ) . As an example of a commercial constraint , Apple only allows downloaded songs to be played within their own I - tunes environment . The im - portant reason to distinguish supplier - driver con - straints from consumer - driven constraints is that supplier - driven constraints exist independently from the needs of an end - consumer . 2 . Generate bundles of services , using the service cata - logs . As can be seen in ﬁgure 1 , we create service - bundles in two steps : 2 . 1 Deriving an initial set of service bundles that cov - ers a consumer need . This step is enabled by step 1 . 2 . The e 3 service ontology we propose in section 3 has been designed such that reasoning about this set of bundles becomes possible . 2 . 2 Narrowing down the set of service bundles to those that are feasible and desirable from a supply side perspective . This step is enabled by step 1 . 3 . In the remainder of this paper , we will walk through each of the steps depicted in ﬁgure 1 to show how we arrive from a set of individual IT - services and a customer need , to a bundle of IT - services that together satisﬁes the customer need . Figure 1 : steps taken to arrive at a bundle of IT - services 3 . CONCEPTS FOR DEVELOPING THE CON - SUMER PERSPECTIVE In this section , we discuss the concepts necessary for rea - soning about service bundling from a customer perspective . A more elaborate version of this discussion can be found in [ 2 ] . 3 . 1 Elementary service An elementary service is the entity which is of economic value to the end - consumer , and which is provisioned by a Figure 2 : needs ontology supplier . It is the smallest unit that , from a commercial point of view , can be meaningfully obtained from a sup - plier . Typically , elementary services are listed in a service catalog of a supplier . The notion of ‘elementary service’ allows for connecting the consumer - oriented e3service ontol - ogy to supplier - oriented ontologies ( see e . g . [ 3 ] ) . EXAMPLE : ‘e - mail hosting’ . Note that a speciﬁc prop - erty of e - mail hosting , ‘mailbox size’ , is not an elementary service , since it cannot be provisioned in its own right , but is always connected to the e - mail service it belongs to . 3 . 2 The need / want / demand - hierarchy The need / want / demand - hierarchy is a view on market - ing as proposed by [ 6 ] and later by [ 13 ] , that emphasizes a gradual transition from a need - a high level problem state - ment - to a set of elementary services that together provide a solution for that need . 3 . 2 . 1 Functional need A functional need represents a problem statement or goal , independently of considering a solution direction . We stress a separation of problem and solution here , since a need can usually be covered by multiple solutions [ 6 ] . So , to avoid overlooking other promising solutions , we need to avoid a bias towards one of these solutions when deﬁning a need . EXAMPLE : ‘communicating with family abroad’ . This need statement does not include a notion of a solution yet ; in other words , nothing is said about how the communication will be done . 3 . 2 . 2 Want In the e 3 service ontology , a want is something that can be oﬀered by a single supplier , with the constraint that this is commercially feasible . We emphasize this notion of a single supplier because ideally , we want to enable each or - ganization in the networked enterprise to focus on his / her core competencies . Bundling is then about meaningfully combining these single - supplier elementary services into one multi - supplier service bundle , to satisfy a consumer need . RELATIONS : Concretizes : a want concretizes a functional need by specifying an initial solution direction for a problem statement . A need can be concretized into multiple alterna - tive wants since a certain problem can be resolved though multiple solutions . EXAMPLE : A want satisfying the func - tional need of ‘communicating with family abroad’ is ‘e - mail hosting’ . An alternative want is ‘instant messaging’ . 3 . 2 . 3 Demand A demand represents a want as provisioned by a speciﬁc supplier . As such , a demand diﬀers from a want because a demand provides supplier - speciﬁc values to the properties of a want ( see example ) . We use a strict distinction between wants and demands , because they actually refer to two dif - ferent steps in the reasoning process about bundles . Since a want is deﬁned independently from a speciﬁc sup - plier , it enables us to reason about the means we employ to satisfy the need , without having a speciﬁc supplier in mind already . In a second step , we reason about which supplier is satisfying a want by taking the demands into account . With - out explicitly separating these steps , a consumer would be forced to choose directly between suppliers , with the dan - ger that the consumer loses sight of what the commonalities and diﬀerences between their oﬀered solutions are . Now , the consumer ﬁrst focuses on choosing certain features ( e . g . web - based access in the case of an e - mailing service ) that he is interested in , independently of who actually provisions these features . So , in sum , the seperation between wants and demands allows us to match a customer preference - in - dicated on a want level - to a speciﬁc IT - service - the demand - satisfying this preference . RELATIONS : Concretizes : A demand concretizes a want if it speciﬁes the generic want , for instance e - mail hosting , for a speciﬁc supplier . A want has generally one or more demands , meaning that one or more suppliers can satisfy a want . EXAMPLE : ‘Gmail’ ( from Google ) is a demand that spec - iﬁes the want ‘e - mail hosting’ . For example , ‘Gmail’ may have a distinguishing property ‘mail - box size’ that would be diﬀerent from the ‘mail - box size’ oﬀered by ‘Hotmail’ . 3 . 3 Beneﬁts , consequences and value deriva - tions 3 . 3 . 1 Beneﬁt Beneﬁts describe properties that are of economic value to the consumer in the sense of value in use [ 16 ] . In other words , beneﬁts provide an increase of economic utility to the consumer , through something functional , social ( e . g . status ) or otherwise . This is in contrast to the notion of value in exchange [ 16 ] , which indicates the amount of revenue gen - erated by selling such a property . To understand the value of a elementary service for a particular entity , the notion of value in exchange is convenient for the supplier , whereas value in use is more appropriate for the consumer . RELATIONS : A want ( and a demand also ) has one or more beneﬁts . • A single want has one or more beneﬁts . Beneﬁts of a want do however not have speciﬁc values , as beneﬁts exist independently of a speciﬁc supplier . For instance , the speciﬁc size ( e . g . 1 GB ) of a mailbox is not speci - ﬁed , it is only speciﬁed that a mailbox has a size . • A single demand has one or more beneﬁts . Since a demand is speciﬁc for a supplier , beneﬁts of a demand do have speciﬁc values . For instance , in the case of the size of a mailbox , the size ( e . g . 1 GB ) would be speciﬁed for the speciﬁc supplier . EXAMPLE : In case of an e - mailing service , a speciﬁc beneﬁt could be ‘customized domain’ . A customized do - main allows for customizing an e - mail address , so instead of art . vandelay @ someunchangebledomain . com a customized e - mail address would be art @ vandelay . com . A customized do - main is a beneﬁt because an e - mail service with a customized domain gives the consumer more status , heightented stature being a measure of more value in use . 3 . 3 . 2 Consequence This concept represents the subjective added value for the end - consumer that is gained directly through obtaining a beneﬁt provided by a service . Deriving consequences from beneﬁts is based upon the laddering - technique from means - end chaining [ 12 ] . Deriving a consequence from a beneﬁt is done by asking the question ‘what happens when we con - sume a elementary service in which beneﬁt X is contained ? ’ . RELATIONS : has • A beneﬁt has one or more consequences . Multiple beneﬁts can point to the same consequence . A con - sequence contributes to a functional need . • A want has zero or more consequences . Sometimes , a want - being something that can viably be delivered by a single supplier from a commercial point of view - possesses added value independently from the beneﬁts contained within it . So , when deriving a consequence from a want X , one asks the following question : ’what happens when want X is consumed’ ? EXAMPLE : The beneﬁt ‘web - based e - mailing access’ al - lows for the consequence of ‘cost - eﬀective communication’ . ’cost - eﬀective communication’ ultimately contributes to sat - isfying the need of ’communicating with family abroad’ . 3 . 4 Incorporating dependencies between wants The notion of dependencies , as discussed in [ 7 ] , indicates that two services are related to one another . This relation can exist from a supplier perspective ; for instance a paid e - mail service cannot be delivered without some basic ad - ministrative services such as billing . Yet , such a dependency can also exist from a consumer perspective ; for instance a spam ﬁlter adds value for the consumer when bundled with an e - mail hosting service . In this section , we discuss such consumer - oriented dependencies . 3 . 4 . 1 Adds value As beneﬁts have consequences ( in terms of economic value for the consumer ) , the wants , that actually aggregate bene - ﬁts from several demands , implicitly also have consequences . We will illustrate this aggregation of beneﬁts on a want - level further when we discuss the case study in section 4 . For the discussion of this concept , it is suﬃcient to know that wants have beneﬁts and as such , also consequences . In our ontology , an adds - value relationship exists between pairs of wants / consequences . This relationship connects want A to the consequence of want B , to show that want A and B are related . The consequence from want B then indicates why this relationship is present , by showing what subjective added value is gained through consuming want B . ( see example for a concrete explanation ) . In our ontology , we incorporated two such relationships ( adapted from [ 7 ] ) : • Core / Enhancing ( C / E ) . This relationship indicates that a service B is able to provide added value when bun - dled with a certain core service A . A constraint in this dependency is that service B cannot be acquired inde - pendently from service A . • Optional Bundling ( OB ) - similarly to C / E , this rela - tionship indicates that service B possibly adds value to A . Yet , in case of an OB relation , services A and B can also be acquired seperately . RELATIONS : An Adds value relationship contains a sin - gle want and a single consequence . This pair represents a commercially feasible oﬀering , plus part of the subjective value gained from consuming a beneﬁt contained within this oﬀering . has Adds value has a relationship with one or more other adds value relationships . By this , we mean that a relation - ship exist between two or more pairs of wants and conse - quences . With this relationship , we inidicate that when want A is acquired , the consequence from want B might also be of interest to the customer . EXAMPLE : The pair ’e - mail ’ ( want ) / ’local access to mail’ ( consequence ) is in a Core / Enhancing relationship with pair ’spam - ﬁlter’ ( want ) / ’reduction in number of unwanted e - mails’ ( consequence ) . By means of this relationship , we indicate that the want ’e - mail’ is related to the consequence ’reduction in number of unwanted e - mails’ from the want ’spam ﬁlter’ , where the consequence from latter want indi - cates why this relationship exists . Note that a Core / Enhancing relationship is present , because an acquisition of a spam - ﬁlter only makes sense in combination with an e - mail ser - vice . 4 . E 3 SERVICE IN PRACTICE ; A REAL - LIFE CASE STUDY IN BUNDLING DIRECT MAIL SERVICES In this section we show how the e 3 service - ontology is ap - plied to a real - life case study in the postal industry , to gen - erate bundles of IT - services that are tailored to a customer need . First , we brieﬂy introduce our case study and discuss why service bundling is of interest for the case at hand . Af - ter this , we will walk through steps 1 . 1 and 1 . 2 to illustrate the development of service catalog from a customer perspec - tive . Finally , we will show how this catalog can be used to generate bundles of IT - services based upon a customer need . 4 . 1 The Direct Mail case ; enhancing mailings by service bundling Due to deregulation of the European postal industry , in - cumbent postal companies operating on the European mar - ket have to diﬀerentiate themselves in order remain prof - itable . The dutch subsidiary of TNT , the industry partner with whom we carried out this case study , traditionally is one such incumbent postal company . In an attempt to diﬀerentiate themselves from other postal companies , TNT developed a set of online mailing services that ranges from the ability to design customized stamps online to an online support service that can aid you in cre - ating designs . Amongst these online mailing services , there is a service that allows a Small to Medium sized Enterprise ( SME ) to set up a Direct Mail initiative online . This Direct Mail service allows an SME to specify the design a mail - ing online and to upload an address list for the recipients of the mailing . Following this , TNT prints the design and physically delivers it to the speciﬁed recipients . The Direct Mail service is somewhat straighforward how - ever . Currently the Direct Mail service only allows SME’s to send around customized A - 5 sized cards while additional services that could enhance the mailing , such as the op - tion of designing a customized stamp , are never explicitly oﬀered to SME’s in combination with the Direct Mail ser - vice . Instead these additional services exist independently of the Direct Mail service , with each service having its own seperate location on the website of TNT . This straightforwardness of the Direct Mail service is some - what in conﬂict with the mailing needs of some SME’s . They feel that in order to generate suﬃcient response , their mail - ing should stand out from others and that a single A5 - sized card hardly accomplishes this . In order to capture these SME’s , TNT has decided that it should provide an option to enhance mailings . TNT would like to accomplish this by bundling the basic Direct Mail service with its other online mailing services , such as the customized stamp mentioned before . Ideally it envisions that an SME goes to TNT’s website , states its mailing needs in an online wizard and that , based upon these needs , a bundle of mailing services is presented that matches the mailing needs of the SME . In the following sections , we will apply e 3 service to the mail - ing services of TNT with the purpose of ( 1 ) facilitating the creation of such a wizard and ( 2 ) to show how the discussed needs ontology works in practice . 4 . 2 Step 1 . 1 . Elicit IT - services By means of this ﬁrst step in e 3 service , the individual services on which the bundling analysis will be performed are made explicit . When explicating the individual services , the key point in our approach is to consider services from a value viewpoint . This means that we abstract away from the inner workings of a service , such as detailed process descriptions , and instead focus upon the beneﬁts a service provides for the customer . The main reason for considering services from a value viewpoint is that e 3 service is mainly used for an exploration of what customers value about services . As such we leave out detailed descriptions of the inner workings of a service because they typically become important in a later phase of the bundling analysis . Through value modeling , we elicit the following services from TNT : ( 1 ) the customized Direct Mail card ( 2 ) cus - tomized stamp and ( 3 ) DM - advice . In this case , we per - formed this elicitation by creating an initial value model based upon documentation from TNT . This value model was then validated with a domain expert from TNT , who was actively involved in the improvement of TNT’s online direct mail service . Additionally , we modelled mailing ser - vices from another supplier : ( 1 ) an alternative customized card service and ( 2 ) printing additional material such as brochures or vouchers . We chose to take these third party mailing services into consideration , because they provide for a broader coverage of mailing needs . As such , this inclusion increases the like - lihood that an SME will actually set up a mailing intiative through the website of TNT . For TNT , this inclusion of third party mailing services can further be advantageous because ( 1 ) it can oﬀer its own services in combination with third party services , thus providing an opportunity for sales in - crease and ( 2 ) it can enter into a proﬁt - sharing agreement , where TNT receives a certain percentage of the income re - ceived from each customer it refers . For the third party supplier of mailing services , the proﬁt - sharing agreement is adventaguous because it would receive additional customers through TNT . Please note that due to space restrictions , we cannot show the value model in this paper ; instead , we directly incorpo - rated mentioned services in the service catalog depicted in ﬁgure 3 . 4 . 3 Step 1 . 2 . Create a service catalog : Develop customer perspective 4 . 3 . 1 Populate the service catalog with demands and ﬁnd the beneﬁts contained within them The ﬁrst step is to populate the service catalog with the services modeled in step 1 . 1 . These services are actually similar to demands , since they are the services as provi - sioned by the speciﬁc suppliers . Next , we add the beneﬁts as contained in the demands . Beneﬁts are elicited by re - viewing the speciﬁc properties of a service that provide the customer with more value in use . For instance , the property design template is a beneﬁt because it saves an SME time when it sets up a mailing initiative . However we did not yet model these beneﬁts in the ﬁrst step . So , we should now make the beneﬁts in the popu - lated catalog explicit for each of the demands modeled in step 1 . 1 . The beneﬁts ’format option’ , ’paper ﬁnish’ , ’online design lettertype’ and ’design template’ from the demand customized card ( TNT ) are an an example of this explica - tion . This again illustrates that a demand is not the same as a beneﬁt , since ”‘format options”’ cannot be viably de - livered on its own . The resulting explication of beneﬁts and the demands that contain them , can be found in ﬁgure 3 . 4 . 3 . 2 Derive wants On the basis of the demands , we elicit wants . We ﬁrst ab - stract away from the speciﬁc values that the suppliers give to their beneﬁts . So , for instance , in the case of a ’format option’ we abstract away from the supplier - speciﬁc prop - erty of providing you with the A3 , A4 , or A5 formatting options . We create such a supplier - independent properties to enable the customer to ﬁll in its preferences , indepen - dently of having to consider supplier - speciﬁc services that can satisfy these preferences . We will illustrate this further in section 4 . 4 . After having made this abstraction , the services that con - tain these beneﬁts become the wants . If there are multiple similar services available from multiple suppliers , there will be a merge of these multiple services into a single want . For instance , a demand ’customized card’ as provisioned by the speciﬁc suppliers TNT and Logiprint becomes a want ‘cus - tomized card’ , independently of these suppliers . This single want will then also inherit the beneﬁts from these diﬀerent demands . To illustrate this , consider the want ‘customized card’ in ﬁgure 3 . This want contains not only the beneﬁts from TNT’s customized card service , but also the beneﬁts from a diﬀerent supplier , namely Logiprint . 4 . 3 . 3 Using consequences to show how beneﬁts con - tribute to satisfying a functional need Next , we derive the consequences from the beneﬁts by ask - ing the question : ‘What happens when we consume a service in which this beneﬁt is contained ? ’ . To illustrate , take the beneﬁt ’target audience’ from our ’mailing addresses busi - ness’ service modeled in ﬁgure 3 . By specifying the target audience during the consumption of this service , an SME would be able to send their mailing to a speciﬁc set of prospects . As such , the consequence of this beneﬁt would be that it enables an SME to send around a mailing more eﬀectively when compared to choosing prospect addresses at random . By using the consequences we can now derive a set of needs . We do this in three steps . First , we consider which goal each consequence achieves individually ; these goals then become needs . In this case , an example would be that through the consequence ’create a mailing’ , the need ’make an an - nouncement to existing clients’ can be can be satisﬁed . However , we cannot always deﬁne a need based upon a single consequence . Therefore , we also need to review which groupings of consequences - from diﬀerent wants - enable us to deﬁne needs . An example in this case study would be the grouping of the consequences ’create mailing’ and ’reach business prospects’ for satisfaction of the need ’attract business prospects’ . Finally , there could be cases in which we are not able to deﬁne a new need on basis of a consequence . In the service catalog from this case study ( ﬁgure 3 ) , examples of such consequences are ‘specifying size of cards’ and an ’specify - ing lettertype’ neither of which achieve new goals on their own terms . However , we can usually show that these con - sequences positively contribute to satisfying a need . For in - stance , the consequence ’specifying lettertype’ allows SME’s to choose a font that existing customers associate with their housestyle , which might have a positive inﬂuence on the mailing actually being read . Note that this last step is dif - ferent from the second step of grouping consequences to - gether . This is because grouping implicates that the wants to which these consequences belong must all be acquired for satisfaction of a certain need , whereas this last step only in - dicates that certain consequences could positively inﬂuence a need . Of course , this positively - contributes - to relation is only valid in case the want in which the beneﬁt is contained is actually acquired . 4 . 3 . 4 Deﬁne relationships between wants Now that we have deﬁned both the wants and the con - sequences , we can deﬁne the ‘adds value’ - relationships from our ontology . As explained , this relationship actually exists between two pairs of concepts ; A pair want / consequence from service A , and a pair want / consequence from service B . An example from the case of such an adds - value relation - ship is the Core / Enhancing ( C / E ) - relationship that exists between the want ’customized card’ and the consequence ’design support’ from the want ’Direct mail advice’ . Here , the C / E - relationship indicates that when a ’customized card’ is acquired , ’design support’ might be something that could also be valuable to the customer . When the customer then indicates that ( s ) he is interested in ’design support’ , the additional want ’direct mail advice’ can be oﬀered in com - bination with a ’customized card’ . Note that in this example , a C / E relationship is present because the want ’Direct Mail advice’ is only useful when a SME actually creates a set of customized cards . This is diﬀerent from the Optional Bundling ( OB ) relationship , since Optional Bundling indicates that two services can be sold together but can also be acquired individually . For example , consider the OB - relationship that exists between the customized card and customized stamp . This relation - ship indicates that a customized stamp might add value to the customized card , where the consequence from the cus - tomized stamp - more personalized mailing - explains why a relationship exists . Yet , for acquisition of a customized stamp it is not necessary to ﬁrst acquire a customized card . This is why an OB - relationship exists between a customized card and a customized stamp , and not an C / E - relationship . 4 . 4 Step 2 . 1 : Generate needs - driven service bundles In this section , we will illustrate how the service catalog from ﬁgure 3 can be used to generate bundles of services that are tailored to a customer need . To this end , we will walk through a scenario in which there are two SME’s that consider setting up a mailing initiative : ( 1 ) A pianotuner , who is moving and wants to make his new address known to his existing clientele , and ( 2 ) A start - up store who wants to create awareness . Now , the pianotuner would start at the need ’make an - nouncement to existing clients’ to create an announcement that he is moving , while the start - up store would start at the need ’attract consumer prospects’ to create awareness amongst prospect customers . The next step is to review the consequences belonging to these needs . Considering the pianotuner , we yield the conse - quence ’create mailing’ . The exclusive start - up will , besides the consequence ’create mailing’ , also yield another conse - quence : ’reach consumer prospects’ . In the service catalog ( ﬁgure 3 ) , this combination of consequences satisfying the need ’attract consumer prospects’ is indicated by the AND annotation . By considering the wants that these consequences belong to , we can now ﬁnd two initial bundles of wants . Respec - tively for the pianotuner and the start - up store , we arrive at the bundles [ customized card ] and [ customized card , mailing addresses consumer ] The next step is to expand these initial bundles with addi - tional wants by reviewing the adds - value relationships from the service catalog . The notion of a consequence is then used to evaluate whether an additional want should be included in this expansion . To illustrate consider the want ’customized card’ . When reviewing the adds value relationships that this want pos - sesses ( see ﬁgure 3 ) , we can make an initial expansion of the want ’customized card’ to the set [ customized card , cus - tomized stamp , additional material , direct mail advice ] . Con - sequently , our SME’s can use the consequences from the ser - vices other than ’customized card’ to decide upon the exact subset of this initial expansion . The exclusive store will probably have an interest in en - hancing his mailing , since it should stand out from other mailings to achieve his main purpose : attracting consumers . In this case , we assume that that the exclusive store is inter - ested in ’design support’ and a ’more personalized mailing’ . Since these are the consequences that belong to the wants ’direct mail advice’ and ’customized stamp’ respectively , we now arrive at the bundle [ customized card , customized stamp , design support , mailing addresses consumer ] for the exclusive store . The pianotuner would not have much use for additional services to enhance his mailing since it mainly serves a practical purpose ; informing his existing customers . Figure 3 : customer - driven dependencies between services He will therefore remain at the bundle [ customized card ] . Next , we review the speciﬁc beneﬁts from these wants in more detail . We need to do this because we have not yet reviewed all beneﬁts from the wants and as such , also not how these beneﬁts contribute to satisfying a need . In our example , we assume that the pianotuner is interested in a customized card where he can select a design template , since he mainly interested in getting a message across . Addition - ally , we assume that the exclusive shoe store is interested in sending around an A4 - sized mailing , so that a coupon can be printed on the mailing for a one - time discount . Also , the shoe store would like to have their mailing folded . Now that we have inventoried the wants from the SME’s and the speciﬁc beneﬁts desired , the last step is to review which actual service oﬀerings from speciﬁc suppliers pro - vision services conforming to these wants and desired bene - ﬁts . For the pianotuner , we arrive at the bundle [ customized card ( TNT ) ] , since TNT can provide him with a design tem - plate . Concerning the shoe store , we arrive at the bundle [ customized card ( logiprint ) , customzied stamp ( TNT ) , de - sign support ( TNT ) , mailing addresses consumer ( TNT ) ] 5 . RELATED WORK The Business Motivation Model ( BMM ) [ 11 ] is a model representing ends ( goals , objectives ) that are to be achieved by means . It abstracts away from implementation issues such as the business processes necessary to provide for the means . In comparison to our work , BMM does not explicitly assist in deriving consumer needs from a set of IT - services . Also , it does not take a multi - supplier perspective . Serviguration [ 7 ] ( service conﬁguration ) provides computer supported reasoning about general service bundles . Case studies in the realm of electricity supply and healthcare have shown that by using this methodology , meaningful bundles of services can generated semi - automatically [ 7 ] . Moreover , given the - per case study - supplier - oriented service catalogue started with , in principle a signiﬁcant amount of diﬀerent bundles are possible ( millions ) , which serviguration reduced by its reasoning process to a few relevant bundles ( tenths ) , based on stated consumer needs , and supplier - oriented rela - tionships ( and constraints ) between elementary services . So , serviguration is a good ﬁrst attempt to arrive at automated conﬁguration of a networked value constellation , in which a series of suppliers satisfy an need by bundling services . However , serviguration concentrates on conceptualizing ser - vices mainly from a supplier perspective and while it does have a ontology for taking consumer needs into account , this needs ontology is rudimentary . Most importantly , the needs ontology from serviguration does not include the concept of a beneﬁt , while this inclusion is important to diﬀerentiate between two apparently similar service oﬀerings . 6 . CONCLUSIONS In this paper , we have shown how a catalog of IT - services can be created in a structured manner by applying a formal ontology . Also , we have presented how we can reason about creating IT - service bundles on the basis of such a catalog . Additionally , this paper clariﬁed that there is a diﬀerence between what is oﬀered to the consumer , being the the ser - vices , and the features the consumer is interested in , being the demands . Usually , there is a mismatch between the set of beneﬁts contained by a service , and the beneﬁts contained by a demand . Currently , we are working on software support for the e 3 service ontology . 6 . 1 Acknowledgements . We are grateful for the input of Pieter van der Ploeg from MalieNet , and Hans Burg and Frank Verlaan from Boer & Croon . This research has been partly funded by NWO / STW / Jacquard as the project VITAL . 7 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] ebXML business process speciﬁcation schema version 1 . 01 , http : / / www . ebxml . org / specs / ebBPSS . pdf , 2001 . [ 2 ] e 3 service - an ontological approach for deriving multi - supplier it - service bundles from consumer needs . In Proceedings of the Forty - ﬁrst Hawai’i International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS - 41 ) ( CD - ROM ) . Computer Society Press , jan 7 - 10 2007 . [ 3 ] H . Akkermans , Z . Baida , and J . Gordijn . Value webs : Ontology - based bundling of real - world services . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 19 ( 44 ) : 2332 , July 2004 . [ 4 ] T . Andrews et al . Business process execution language for web services version 1 . 1 , http : / / www . ebxml . org / specs / ebBPSS . pdf . Technical report , 2003 . [ 5 ] A . Arkin et al . Web service choreography interface ( WSCI ) 1 . 0 , http : / / www . w3 . org / TR / wsci / . Technical report , 2002 . [ 6 ] J . Arndt . How broad should the marketing concept be ? Journal of Marketing , 42 ( 1 ) : 101 – 103 , January 1978 . [ 7 ] Z . Baida . Software - aided service bundling . PhD thesis , Free University Amsterdam , May 2006 . [ 8 ] L . Cabrera et al . Web services coordination ( WS - Coordination ) , ftp : / / www6 . software . ibm . com / software / developer / library / ws - coordination . pdf . Technical report , 2003 . [ 9 ] N . Cross . Creative cognition in design : processes of exceptional designers . In C & C ’02 : Proceedings of the 4th conference on Creativity & cognition , pages 14 – 19 , New York , NY , USA , 2002 . ACM Press . [ 10 ] C . Gr¨onroos . Service Management and Marketing . Lexington Books , 1990 . [ 11 ] B . R . Group . The business motivation model - business governance in a volatile world . Technical report , 2005 . [ 12 ] J . Gutman and T . Reynolds . Laddering theory - analysis and interpretation . Journal of Advertising Research , 28 ( 1 ) : 11 , Febraury / March 1988 . [ 13 ] P . Kotler . Marketing Management . Prentice Hall , 2000 . [ 14 ] C . Lovelock . Service Marketing - People , Technology , Strategy . Prentice Hall , 2001 . Fourth edition . [ 15 ] R . Normann . Service Management - strategy and leadership in service business . Wiley , 2000 . third edition . [ 16 ] J . Ramsay . The real maening of value in trading relationships . International Journal of Operations and Production Management , 25 ( 6 ) : 549 – 565 , 2005 . [ 17 ] D . Tapscott , D . Ticoll , and A . Lowy . Digital Capital - Harnessing the Power of Business Webs . Nicholas Brealy Publishing , 2000 .