The Role of Digital Technologies in Promoting Contemporary and Collaborative Design Processes Paola Zardo 1 , Andréa Quadrado Mussi 2 , Juliano Lima da Silva 3 1 , 2 , 3 Faculdade Meridional ( IMED ) 1 pazardo @ gmail . com 2 andrea . mussi @ imed . edu . br 3 juliano _ lima _ silva @ hotmail . com Digital technologies and contemporary CAAD systems are increasingly being adopted in architectural practice . Thus , their impacts on buildings design process need to be addressed and explored , as there are signs of a potential revolution in AEC industry . This paper presents a methodology and preliminary results of a work - in - progress for a Master of Science dissertation . The main purpose of the study is to find similarities in practice in order to determine main characteristics and fundamentals of contemporary design process . It consists of a design praxiology approach according to Cross ' taxonomy of design research . Three project cases developed by digital processes and explored by secondary data from literature reviews , complemented by documentary research , are presented as preliminary results , as well as their main similarities . Through the analysis of the cases , it was verified that the presence of BIM , parametric modeling and digital fabrication overlaps and promotes holistic and largely collaborative design processes . The role of collaboration is highlighted , which was presented as a key factor for the success of the projects . Future results from the described methodology should allow a more detailed and in - depth characterization of the contemporary design process . Keywords : digital technologies , contemporary design process , design praxiology INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND The adoption of Computer - Aided Design ( CAD ) sys - tems in Architecture , Engineering and Construction ( AEC ) industry , startingin the1980s , occurredmerely as an analogy to the manual design representation , which had minimal inﬂuence on the design process itself . On the other hand , unlike CAD systems , the emergenceofdigitaltechnologiesinthelastdecadesbringsupgreatopportunitiestorevolutionizethe constructionsector , modifyingthewholedesignpro - cess and emphasizing integration , communication and collaboration ( Willis and Woodward 2010 ) . Signs ofthesechangeshavebeenobservedsincetheriseof Building Information Modeling ( BIM ) , later comple - mented by the implementation of parametric mod - eling systems and the parallel development of digi - tal fabrication technologies and their application in architecture . The computational shift of design processes , driven by digital technologies , originated the de - COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 - eCAADe 36 | 469 sign of much more complex projects , derived from higher levels of integration between multiple disci - plines and stakeholders , in order to solve design and constructability challenges . With computation , the design paradigm before understood as “possible to real” has expressively changed to “virtual to actual” ( Garber 2014 ) . Traditional “possible to real” design processes , based entirely on 2D documentation and coordina - tion , occur in a hierarchical and sequential way as it segregates design , understood as a description , and production , the construction according to such de - scription . This process segregation isolated design - ersfromotherpartiesinvolvedandendedupturningthemintoindividualisticandeccentricindividuals . It also placed the central role of design in drawings , the main type of communication until then ( Lawson 2005 ) . However , uncoordinated drawings and individ - ual design intentions end up isolating the intellec - tual contribution of designers from manufacturers and builders and consequently protecting design - ers from responsibility regarding project coordina - tion and other issues ( Eastman et al . 2011 ) . Accord - ing to the authors ( Eastman et al . 2011 ) , design is not though this way but it is a team eﬀort , involving the owner or client , the architect and other experts , as wellasfabricatorsandothersinvolvedintheproject’sexecution . The authors ( Eastman et al . 2011 ) also point out that design development involves prodi - gious levels of coordination and collaboration that hardly occur in traditional design processes . Thus , the contemporary architect has to give up the role of an author or exclusive creator ( Marble 2012 ) to become a multidisciplinary strategist or co - ordinator , whodeﬁnesaspectsandmethodsthatwill be considered , how to use them and judges their contribution to the design process ( Ottchen 2009 ) . The architect as a strategist may also bring nontradi - tional ideas into the concept design stage . This con - temporary approach makes reference to the master buildersofthetwentiethcentury . However , multidis - ciplinary , interactive and participatory environments emerge as essential elements of the new paradigm . It is also important to point out that the devel - opment and implementation of digital technologies are industrializing the construction sector , as it hap - pened earlier to the automotive , aerospaceand ship - building industries , both when it comes to the de - signed geometries and production processes . At the same time , digital technologies provide resources to designmoresustainablebuildingsastheyenabletheanalysisofmultipleperformancecriteriainparamet - ric environments . Therefore , as pointed out by Keough and Hauck ( 2017 , p . 76 ) , “under these new conditions , compu - tation can support the actual design and construc - tion process by providing a more complete under - standing of a choice’s consequences in the context of many possible alternatives . The inclusion of fabri - cation methods and construction logic in design de - cisions will become routine and repeatable” . Also , it is relevant to highlight the impor - tance of disseminating digital technologies holisti - cally throughout the entire design process , including the initial stages of concept design and design de - velopment , which are essential to and highly inﬂu - ence the later stages , so that their real beneﬁts are achieved . As creative as the concept design stage may be , it also has to consider multiple constraints and aspects of the future building , as well as the expertise of the entire design team ( Eastman et al . 2011 ) . Because of the new roles and processes re - quired , resistances to change can be observed on part of some AEC professionals , especially when talk - ing about developing countries where there are rare examples , despite some exceptions , of buildings de - signed through this new approach of architecture . This potentially generates some diﬃculties for dis - seminating digital technologies and contemporary design processes worldwide , even though they are increasingly showing up as a global tendency . When getting to know further about cases of projects con - solidated by the new paradigm of contemporary de - sign practice and its characteristics , it is possible that 470 | eCAADe 36 - COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 these professionals will be interested in migrating to digital technologies and contemporary processes , which in time will be inevitable . Interactive and collaborative models are inher - ent in current design tools and a new generation of buildings , in which proactive relationships fos - tersynergiesbetweenarchitecture , engineering , and construction ( Garber 2014 ) . According to Kalay ( 2006 ) , one can understand the relation between technology and architecture as the “horseless car - riageparadigm” , wheretechnologyemergesasaway of changing the perception of the practice about it - self , transforming and inﬂuencing it . From this con - text , the author points out that recurring practices will deﬁnitely be replaced by new design practices and that the question is how this will occur and at what proportion . Thus , a scientiﬁc approach to design becomes necessary , as a reﬂection of the reality of contempo - rary design practice , derived from the high scientiﬁc and technological developments ( Cross 2007 ) . This paperpresentsamethodologythatiscurrentlybeingappliedinaMasterofSciencedissertation , as well as itspreliminaryresults . Themainpurposeofthestudy is to ﬁnd patterns and similarities in practice in order to determine main characteristics and fundamentals of contemporary design process . It is expected that the development of this research may help encour - aging the adoption of digital technologies and col - laborative work environments in places where con - temporary practice is still a distant and unusual real - ity . METHODOLOGY DESCRIPTION Due to the increasing technological development of design methods and complexity of buildings , inves - tigations focusing on design issues become increas - inglynecessaryforpromotingaconnectionbetweenthesubdisciplinesinvolvedinbuildingsdesignand for achieving contemporary design knowledge and perceptions ( Cross 2007 ) . Thus , the importance of designresearch , deﬁnedbyCross ( 2007 , p . 47 ) as“the development , articulationandcommunicationofde - sign knowledge” , is highlighted . Cross’s taxonomy of design research ﬁeld has three main categories : people ( design epistemol - ogy ) , processes ( design praxiology ) and products ( design phenomenology ) . In this study , the second case will be approached : the study of practices and processes of design , including tactics and strategies resulting from the application of new design tech - nologies , such as computational design , that stimu - lates design process inquiries ( Cross 2007 ) , like the present paper . The author also discusses the importance of studying outstanding designers , who work from in - novative manners , because they are “a rich source of new ideas and alternative perspectives” that can enable the diﬀusion and transfer of “best practice” across design professions ( Cross 2007 , p . 50 ) . Law - son ( 1994 ) has developed a study with such charac - teristics by interviewing several architectural design - ersinhisbookentitledDesigninMind . Anothersimi - lar work was developed by Cross ( 2002 ) , in which the author analyzes and compares three case studies of designers to verify similarities . It turns out that , in AEC sector , design research is becomingincreasinglyspeciﬁc , focusedonpartialas - pectsofdesigndevelopmentandconstruction . Thus , there is a lack of studies such as those developed around the design science decade , but updated to nowadays , that enable us to identify the impacts of scientiﬁc and technological development in design process from a holistic point of view . That said , these factors were considered in the planning of this study , which is based on the def - inition of design praxiology category of design re - search , considering the design process from compa - nies that work innovatively in the ﬁeld of architec - ture , inspiredbyCrossandLawson’sstudieswithout - standing designers . It is intended , therefore , to pro - vide a panoramic view , a characterization of contem - porary design processes , considering the modiﬁca - tions that the practice suﬀered from the insertion of digital technologies and computational design . To this end , the impacts of digital technologies COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 - eCAADe 36 | 471 will be veriﬁed on design process’ stages . In this study , the single term ”digital technologies” refers to BIM , parametric design and digital fabrication to - gether since their inﬂuence in AEC industry appears in an overlapping way , with no clear limits deﬁned between them ( Aish 2014 ) . First stage of the study consists in the explo - rationofprojectexamplesthathavealreadybeende - veloped from the intensive use of digital technolo - gies . Thedataabouttheexamplesaresecondaryand were identiﬁed and explored through literature re - views , mainly found in books ( Garber 2014 ) and ar - ticles from Architectural Design [ 1 ] , which constantly publishes innovative project cases , and through doc - umentary research . The cases were chosen consid - ering the companies that work with digital processes andusuallypublishworkontheirprojects . Inthesec - ond stage , the cases were analyzed from systemati - zation ﬁles developed by the authors in order to ex - tract similarities from their design process . The ﬁles contain the main functions of digital technologies in theprojects , mainsoftwareusedandissuesrelatedto the way agents communicated with each other ( see Figure 1 ) . The identiﬁed case similarities allowed the elab - oration of a questionnaire , which should be applied with professionals who work or have worked in inno - vative architectural ﬁrms , also identiﬁed by the liter - ature review , to seek further data in relation to how digital technologies inﬂuence and modify the design process . The questionnaire seeks to gather informa - tion about the stages of design process in compa - nies , stakeholders involved and main software used for each stage , as well as their respective functions . When the necessary data is obtained , it is in - tended to develop an overall design model , contain - ingstagesandﬂowsofdesignprocess , softwareused and communication means , to serve as an instru - ment that can characterize and guide the use of dig - ital technologies , especially for companies still tied to traditional processes and taking initial steps in the use of computational design . PRELIMINARY RESULTS In this section , a brief description of each explored project case will be presented . Then , the similarities between their design processes will be highlighted . Project 1 : The Barclays Center by SHoP Ar - chitects According to Gregg Pasquarelli from SHoP Architects [ 3 ] , the essence of the contemporary architect is to take risks in order to achieve rewards [ 2 ] . The archi - tectasdrafterandproducerofimageshasalowintel - lectual contribution and ends up seen as replaceable ( Gauchat 2009 ) . When other relevant aspects related to construction are brought into design stages , the architect’s intellectual contribution increases , reach - ing greater value and reward ( Gauchat 2009 ) . The challenging Barclays Center is one of the SHoP’s projects that exempliﬁes this issue . When SHoP took over the project , they had only 72 hours to come up with a solution and six weeks for de - signdevelopment , consideringmultiplebudgetcon - straints and a structural project already developed , besides the fact that the structural steel was already ordered ( [ 2 ] ; Garber 2014 ) . Thus , ShoP Construction Services ( SC ) , anentitythatdealswithinternalproject budgeting processes and the relationship between project and constructive solutions or techniques , fo - cusing on the use of digital technologies , played a fundamental role . SC promoted the ﬂow of commu - nication between architects , structural engineer and façade contractor , as well as the coordination of dig - ital models ( Garber 2014 ) . TheuseofBIMandotherdigitaltechnologiesbe - came essential to control the multiple constraints re - lated to the project . While planning CNC cutting of the facade panels ( 12 , 000 pre - weathered steel pan - els ) , SC transformed the surface Rhinoceros model intoasolidmodelthroughCATIAsoftware , maintain - ing the parametric curves , and then used SigmaNEST and AutoNest to group the panel format eﬃciently for waterjet - cutting ( Garber 2014 ) . Through the use of nesting software , it was possible to reduce the di - mensions of the panels and save around $ 250 , 000 in 472 | eCAADe 36 - COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 Figure 1 File for examples’ analysis COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 - eCAADe 36 | 473 buildingmaterials . Thisprocessincreasedtrustlevels between facade contractors and SC , and proved that standardizationisnolongerarequirementforfacadepanels , which can now be mass customized , becom - ing unique and yet eﬃcient ( [ 2 ] ; Garber 2014 ) . Communicationbetweenstakeholderswasakey factor for the success of the project and its atten - dancetoconstraintsandowner’spreferences . Thein - tegrated process of the Barclays Center allowed the development of more complex interior systems to match the exterior of the building . Finally , detailed as built models were developed in Autodesk Revit software , integrating the data from interior design with the constructive scope , the façade and struc - tural models , to facilitate operation management of the building ( Garber 2014 ) . Digital technologies were also key factors for the collaborative model of the Barclays Center . Pasquarelli [ 2 ] points out that this project was a constant feedback loop and consequent learning throughout the development process , and empha - sizes that we should take advantage of this moment in architecture where it is good to be a new profes - sional because , for the ﬁrst time the tools of new professionals are superior than those of more expe - rienced ones . Project 2 : Perot Museum of Nature and Sci - ence by MORPHOSIS ThePerotMuseumofNatureandScience , a16 , 723m² building , built between 2010 and 2012 , in the city of Dallas , isoneofMORPHOSIS’projectsthathaditssuc - cess widely dependent on a collaborative project en - vironment , aiming at high standards of sustainability [ 4 ] . The sustainable strategies include concrete mix - tures with speciﬁc materials to meet LEED require - ments , aswellassystemsforrainwaterharvesting [ 5 ] . A BIM model was developed , containing infor - mation to coordinate the ﬁve main components of the building : the core , made of cast - in - situ concrete ; the cube , the outer precast envelope ; the atrium , the more complex geometry of the building , made of precast concrete ; the glazed facade for vertical circu - lation ; and the plinth , also made of precast concrete ( [ 5 ] ; Garber 2014 ) . PhysicalprototypesextractedfromtheBIMmod - els have been 3D printed several times through the process , which greatly inﬂuenced the project devel - opment . So , building components were analyzed digitally and through physical models , which were alsousedtodiscussdesignaspectswithstakeholders ( Garber2014 ) . Digitalfabricationmethodswereused to create prototypes and to enable the production of full - scaleprecastconcretepanels , asolutionadopted for a large part of the building ( Garber 2014 ) . The building facade consists of multiple precast concrete panels , conﬁgured to produce shape varia - tions and create geometric continuity [ 5 ] . A library of components has been developed through para - metric modelling , which could be arranged in diﬀer - ent ways to produce such variations . Atrium panels are more curved than those on the plinth to express transition from natural to synthetic ( Garber 2014 ) . It should be noted that costs are always kept un - der control in the geometric studies of the company , eventhoughtheymaysimplifytheinitialdesigncon - cepts ( Garber 2014 ) . The team discussed with the precast manufac - turerthebestwaytomakethemolds , whichwascriti - calforthepanelsproduction . Inaddition , thedesign - ers conducted meetings with the contractor and the subcontractors to ensure that everyone understood how to control and build the facade under accept - able cost . In these meetings , models were used as a form of communication and coordination , as well as to test possible project solutions ( Garber 2014 ) . The engineering team working on the project developed the model of the primary steel structure . MORPHOSIS developed the model of the secondary structure and then coordinated the work of engi - neers with the precast manufacturer’s . In addition , AutodeskNavisworkssoftwarewasusedforclashde - tection ( Garber 2014 ) . The construction process was planned as eﬃ - ciently as possible . The panels needed to be dis - tributed in a continuous spiral around the building , 474 | eCAADe 36 - COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 so the hoist was placed inside the elevator shaft . Co - ordination of the model prior to manufacturing pro - cess allowed for all connections between panels to be established without any requests for information . The execution of the internal environments was also improvedby the use of digital fabrication techniques [ 5 ] . Meetings and interviews were constantly pro - moted by design team to deal with all building com - ponent systems , this real - time communication was essential for the success of the project . Thereby , the eﬃciency of all stages of the design , fabrication and construction processes was optimized , reducing costs and increasing the quality of the ﬁnal product [ 5 ] . The transparent and collaborative approach be - tween stakeholders has created an environment that hasfostereddialoguethroughouttheprocessanddi - minished chances of poor communication . The in - tegrated and collaborative process allowed the team tocompleteconstructionsixmonthsaheadofsched - ule , providing the ﬁnancial beneﬁt of an early open - ing to the owner . In addition , project execution oc - curred at a total cost about 6 % lower than estimated [ 6 ] . Project 3 : Fondation Louis Vuitton by Gehry Partners Designed by Gehry Partners [ 7 ] , the 11 , 700 m² Fon - dation Louis Vuitton building is located in Paris and was built between 2011 and 2014 [ 9 ] . The project is a benchmark in the use of technology and has had intensive use of BIM , parametric modeling and digi - tal fabrication , with more than 15 teams distributed around the world , over 400 employees , almost 100 gigabytes of computational data , more than 100 , 000 iterations of the BIM model , 19 , 000 concrete panels and 3 , 500 customized glass panels [ 8 ] . Collaboration and communication were crucial in the development of the project . Gehry Technolo - gies developed a custom , cloud - based system for models data exchange , which allowed versioning , si - multaneous data distribution and tracking [ 9 ] . The central model had been developed in Digital Project , however , many other tools were used and the in - teroperability occurred through through customized tools or online platforms [ 8 ] . For the central model , a server that allowed the simultaneous and transparent work among all those involved in the project was used , maintaining the consistency between disciplines , which signiﬁcantly boosted the communication of project data [ 8 ] . The company had a dedicated consulting team work - ing to accelerate the adoption of digital processes , including training activities , tutorials , and tool de - velopments . The server was used as a single basis for construction analysis and scheduling , reducing time wastage and errors originated from low levels of communication and integration [ 8 ] . In addition , the use of computational tools for data integration allowed to achieve design innovations that would rarely be achieved before in such a short time [ 9 ] . Three main models of the project were used , de - nominated : PRO , model of design team ; INT , for the simultaneous work with the contractor ; and the EXE , a model of synthesis , true to the ﬁrst two , used for construction . In addition , construction quality was monitored by laser scanning for simultaneous veriﬁ - cations in digital models [ 8 ] . The building components were extensively pa - rameterized [ 8 ] . Thecentralstructureconsistsofsolid volumes made of steel and concrete , called icebergs , that hold glass coverings supported by steel and glu - lam beams [ 9 ] . The facades were covered with ceramic tiles , ra - tionalized via computational tools and supported by aluminum panels connected to the structure by means of speciﬁcally designed spacers [ 9 ] . Most el - ements of the building , including curved glass pan - els , were optimized by computational mathematical methods and produced by digital fabrication tech - niques , resulting in highly customized components [ 8 ] . Building prototypes were developed for many simulations , includingstructuralanalysisinwindtun - nel , allowing the insertion of stress data in the struc - COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 - eCAADe 36 | 475 tural model . In addition , a wide range of other anal - ysis and simulations have been developed , such as crowd ﬂows , light analysis , landscaping modeling , ﬁre analysis , security scenarios and ageing analysis [ 8 ] . In this context , models have essential data for fu - ture maintenance . Using the integrated and collaborative real - time data - sharing approach allowed the design team to control complexity , cost , and quality . The extensive use of BIM , parametric modeling and digital fabrica - tion has resulted in streamlined scheduling and the achievement of innovative and high quality results [ 9 ] . According to the AIA report ( [ 8 ] , p . 53 ) , the Fon - dation Louis Vuitton project marked the “beginning of a new stage of large - scale concurrent design , en - gineering and optimization” . DISCUSSION Basedonthedescribedcases , itisfoundthatconcept design stage becomes largely inﬂuenced by commu - nication resulting from the use of digital technolo - gies , which promotes the incorporation of informa - tion related to post - project stages , such as construc - tion and operation . Thus , there is a constant feed - back loop to verify the adequacy of the design intent and its conformity with other decisions inﬂuencing the process , such as cost analysis , quantity of mate - rials , aspects of the surroundings , means of produc - tion , as well as sustainability issues ( see Figure 2 ) . Information models become fundamental for controlling issues regarding cost , quantities and co - ordination . Parametric modeling , as well , becomes necessary to enable the analysis of what - if scenarios . In addition , digital fabrication allows the develop - ment of prototypes , that serve as a discussion instru - ment for project decisions , and for the production of full - scale components to be assembled on site , opti - mizing the execution of the building . Byanalyzingthethreeprojectexamplesthrough the identiﬁcation of these aspects , the complemen - tary nature of the digital technologies in the design process becomes clear . BIM , parametric modeling and digital fabrication’s roles overlap in the midst of ever more complex design processes . Collaboration plays a predominant and critical roleinachieving optimizeddesignresults , increasing constructionproductivity , andreducingﬁnancialand time wastes . In the projects described , the presence of the contractor , the engineers , the facade consul - tant and the manufacturer during design decisions Figure 2 Examples’ synthesis 476 | eCAADe 36 - COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 stands out . Thus , it is veriﬁed that , nowadays , the great highlights in architecture are no longer indi - viduals , but teams , emphasizing the role of collabo - ration in current processes . Constant meetings and the use of central models and platforms for sharing project data stand out to enable the ﬂow of commu - nication between stakeholders . Also , the presence of diﬀerent types of software requires consistency in collaboration and data exchange processes . By understanding these issues , it becomes pos - sible to determine the potential big reasons why cer - tain companies and professionals resist to the adop - tion of digital technologies on a global scale . It em - phasizes the lack of understanding and openness to the characteristics of new conﬁgurations for design processes , which require changes ranging from con - tractsandprocessorganizationtoculturalissues . The last refers to the individual design development and authorshipissuesbeingarealitythatisstillpresentinAECindustry . Collaboration is the key for harnessing the potential of AEC professionals and for driving the AEC industry forward . CONCLUSIONS In this study , a methodology that is currently being developed was presented , as well as its preliminary results . Three project cases based on digital pro - cesses and the wide use of BIM , parametric model - ing and digital manufacturing were analyzed . At this stage , itwaspossibletoidentifythatdigitaltechnolo - gies overlap to make design processes increasingly holisticandcollaborative . Itisimportanttohighlight , as a limitation of the research , the restrict use of sec - ondary data from literature reviews and documen - tary research so far and the need for further develop - ment of the study , which is currently being done by interviews and questionnaires with AEC profession - als , inordertogathermorein - depthinformationthat enables the authors to characterize with greater clar - ity the contemporary design process . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors would like to thank Postgraduate Pro - gram in Architecture and Urbanism ( PPGARQ ) of the Polytechnic School at Faculdade Meridional ( IMED ) , Programa de Suporte à Pós - Graduação de Institu - içõesdeEnsinoParticulares ( PROSUP ) andCAPES ( Co - ordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior ) , for the scholarships that enabled the de - velopment of this study . REFERENCES Aish , R 2014 , ’First Build Your Tools’ , in Peters , B and Pe - ters , T ( eds ) 2014 , Inside Smartgeometry , John Wiley & Sons Ltd Cross , N 2002 , ’Creative Cognition in Design : Processes of Exceptional Designers’ , in Hewett , T and Ka - vanagh , T ( eds ) 2002 , Creativity and Cognition , ACM Press , New York Cross , N 2007 , ’From a Design Science to a Design Dis - cipline : Understanding Designerly Ways of Know - ing and Thinking’ , in Michel , R ( eds ) 2007 , DesignRe - searchNow , Birkhäuser Verlag AG Eastman , C , Teicholz , P , Sacks , R and Liston , K 2011 , BIM Handbook : AGuidetoBuildingInformationModeling forOwners , Managers , Designers , Engineers , andCon - tractors , John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Hoboken Garber , R 2014 , BIM Design : Realising the Creative Poten - tial of Building Information Modelling , John Wiley & Sons Ltd Gauchat , U 2009 , ’The $ 300 , 000 / Year Architect’ , in Gar - ber , R ( eds ) 2009 , Closing the Gap : Information Mod - els in Contemporary Design Practice , John Wiley & Sons Ltd Kalay , YE 2006 , ’The impact of information technology on design methods , products and practices’ , Design Studies , 27 , pp . 357 - 380 Keough , I and Hauck , A 2017 , ’From Pencils to Partners : The Next Role of Computation in Building Design’ , ArchitecturalDesign , 81 , pp . 74 - 81 Lawson , B 1994 , Design in mind , Butterworth - Heinemann Ltd . , Oxford Lawson , B 2005 , HowDesignersThink : TheDesignProcess Demystiﬁed , Architectural Press , Oxford Marble , S 2012 , Digital Workﬂows in Architecture : Design AssemblyIndustry , Birkhauser Verlag AG Ottchen , C 2009 , ’The Future of Information Modelling and the End of Theory : Less is Limited , More is Dif - ferent’ , inGarber , R ( eds ) 2009 , ClosingtheGap : Infor - COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1 - eCAADe 36 | 477 mationModelsinContemporaryDesignPractice , John Wiley & Sons Ltd Willis , D and Woodward , T 2010 , ’Diminishing Diﬃculty : Masscustomizationandthedigitalproductionofar - chitecture’ , in Corser , R ( eds ) 2010 , Fabricating archi - tecture , Princeton Architectural Press , New York [ 1 ] https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / journal / 15542769 [ 2 ] https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = 3 _ hcTZ2es20 & t = 3394s [ 3 ] http : / / www . shoparc . com / [ 4 ] https : / / www . morphosis . com / [ 5 ] https : / / network . aia . org / technologyinarchitecturalpr actice / buildinginformationmodelingawardsprogram / 2 014recipients [ 6 ] https : / / www . bentley . com / pt / project - profiles / morp hosis - architects _ perot - museum - of - nature - and - science [ 7 ] https : / / www . foga . com / [ 8 ] https : / / network . aia . org / technologyinarchitecturalpr actice / buildinginformationmodelingawardsprogram / 2 012recipients [ 9 ] https : / / www . tekla . com / uk / references / fondation - lo uis - vuitton - dream - come - constructable 478 | eCAADe 36 - COLLABORATIVE & PARTICIPATIVE DESIGN - Volume 1