J . Child Psychol . Psychiat . , Vol . 17 , 1976 , pp . 89 to 100 . Pergamon Press . Printed in Great Britain . THE ROLE OF TUTORING IN PROBLEM SOLVING * DAVID WOOD , JEROME S . BRUNER and GAIL ROSS Nottingham , Oxford and Harvard Universities THIS PAPER is concerned with the nature of the tutorial process ; the means whereby an adult or " expert " helps somebody who is less adult or less expert . Though its aim is general , it is expressed in terms of a particular task : a tutor seeks to teach children aged 3 , 4 and 5 yr to build a particular three - dimensional structure that requires a degree of skill that is initially beyond them . It is the usual type of tutoring situation in which one member " knows the answer " and the other does not , rather like a " practical " in which only the instructor " knows how " . The changing inter - action of tutor and children provide our data . A great deal of early problem solving by the developing child is of this order . Although from the earliest months of life he is a " natural " problem solver in his own right ( e . g . Bruner , 1973 ) it is often the ease that his efforts are assisted and fostered by others who are more skilful than he is ( Kaye , 1970 ) . Whether he is learn - ing the procedures that constitute the skills of attending , communicating , manipulat - ing objects , locomoting , or , indeed , a more effective problem solving procedure itself , there are usually others in attendance who help him on his way . Tutorial interactions are , in short , a crucial feature of infancy and childhood . Our species , moreover , appears to be the only one in which any " intentional " tutoring goes on ( Bruner , 1972 ; Hinde , 1971 ) . For although it is true that many of the higher primate species learn by observation of their elders ( Hamburg , 1968 ; van Lawick - Goodall , 1968 ) , there is no evidence that those elders do anything to instruct their charges in the performance of the skill in question . What distinguishes man as a species is not only his capacity for learning , but for teaching as well . It is the main aim of this paper to examine some of the major implications of this interactive , instructional relationship between the developing child and his elders for the study of skill acquisition and problem solving . The acquisition of skill in the human child can be fruitfully conceived as a hierarchical program in which component skills are combined into " higher skills " by appropriate orchestration to meet new , more complex task requirements ( Bruner , 1973 ) . The process is analogous to problem solving in which mastery of " lower order " or constituent problems in a sine qua non for success with a larger jjroblcm , each level influencing the other—as with reading where the deciphering of words makes possible the deciphering of sentences , and sentences then aid in the decipher - ing of particular words ( F . Smith , 1971 ) . Given persistent intention in the young learner , given a " lexicon " of constituent skills , the crucial task is often one of com - * This research was conducted at the Center for Cognitive Studies at Harvard University under Grant MH - I2623 of the U . S . National Institutes of Health . Accepted manuscript received 1 September 1974 89 90 DAVID Vi ' OOD , JEROME S . BRUNER AND GAIL ROSS bining ( usually in an appropriate serial order ) the set of component acts necessary to achieve a particular end . The child , faced with new challenges , must match means to ends , and it is this matching ( and the correction of mismatching ) that is at the heart of problem solving ( e . g . Saugstad and Raaheim , 1960 ; Newell et al . , 1960 ; Miller ? / a / . , 1960 ) . Discussions of problem solving or skill acquisition are usually premised on the assumption that the learner is alone and unassisted . If the social context is taken into account , it is usually treated as an instance of modelling and imitation . But the intervention of a tutor may involve much more than this . More often than not , it involves a kind of " scaffolding " process that enables a child or novice to solve a problem , carry out a task or achieve a goal which would be beyond his unassisted efforts . This scaffolding consists essentially of the adult " controlhng " those elements of the task that are initially beyond the learner ' s capacity , thus permitting him to concentrate upon and complete only those elements that are within his range of competence . The task thus proceeds to a successful conclusion . We assume , however , that the process can potentially achieve much more for the learner than an assisted completion of the task . It may result , eventually , in development of task competence by the learner at a pace that would far outstrip his unassisted efforts . But , we would contend the learner cannot benefit from such assistance unless one paramount condition is fulfilled . In the terminology of linguistics , comprehension of ike solution must precede production . That is to say , the learner must be able to recognize a solution to a particular class of problems before he is himself able to produce the steps leading to it without assistance . There is ample evidence from developmental psychohnguistics that for language acquisition such is almost universally the case ( McNeill , 1970 ) . Olson ( 1966 , 1970 ) has similarly indicated that a child is capable of recognizing a diagonal design before he is able to construct one on a checker board , since the constituent acts of placement require more degrees of freedom ( i . e . taking into account both horizontal and vertical axes ) than he can handle simul - taneously . Clinchy ( 1974 ) , using the classic game of Twenty Qiiestions , has likewise shown that her young subjects were able to discriminate between good strategy and bad , good questions and less good ones , if they were asked to choose between them , even though unaided they could not produce good strategies or even good questions . It is quite obvious why comprehension must precede production and why in most instances it does . It must because without it there can be no effective feedback . One must recognize the relation between means and ends in order to benefit from " knowledge of results " . There may be a marginal exception to this rule in the specialized area of learning without awareness , but it is probably a narrowly defined exception , since even bio - feedback procedures with human subjects are dependent upon the subject being able to realize when and by what means he has achieved an objective . Nevertheless , we should not overlook the role of serendipity , " the faculty of making happy and unexpected discoveries by accident " . Plainly—and this will be very plain when we treat the observations of the children and their tutor— children do in fact gain a sense of possible outcomes as well as of means for achieving outcomes by a process of what on the surface looks like rather " blind " ( though hardly random ) trying - out behaviour . Such preliminary " blind " action may in fact be a necessary condition for the children to discover not only the nature of the THE ROLE OF TUTORING IN PROBLEM SOLVING 91 final objective , but also some of the means for achieving it . Yet , such preliminary behaviour in search of the structure of the problem often requires the support of the tutor , and may indeed be directly attributable to the tutor ' s role as an activator —one of the features of scaffolding to which we return in the discussion of our results . Our concern is to examine a " natural " tutorial in the hope of gaining knowledge about natural as well as automated teaching tasks . Our observations are not to be regarded as a test of an hypothesis about the tutoring process . Rather , they are attempts at systematic descriptions of how children respond to different forms of aid . We are , as it were , involved in problem - finding rather than in problem - solving ( Mackworth , 1965 ) . THE TASK Thirty children , seen in indi \ ' idual sessions lasting from 20 min to 1 hr , formed the sample used in the study . They were equally divided into 3 - , 4 - , and 5 - yr - olds , each age - group in turn being equally divided between girls and boys . All 30 children were accompanied by their parents who lived within a five mile radius of Cam - bridge , Mass , and had replied to advertisements for subject volunteers . They were predominantly middle - class or lower middle - class . The task set the children was designed with several objectives in mind . First and foremost , it had to be both entertaining and challenging to the child while also proving sufficiently complex to ensure that his behaviour over time could develop and change . It had to be " feature rich " in the sense of possessing a variety of relevant components . We tried to make its underlying structure repetitive so that experience at one point in task mastery could potentially be applied to later activity , and the child could benefit from after - the - fact knowledge or hindsight . But the task had not to be so diflficult as to he completely beyond the capability of any of the children . And finally , we did not want to make too great demands upon the child ' s manipu - latory skills and sheer physical strength . Note at the outset , then , that we have already constrained our results by the choice of a particular task ; one that is " fun " , one that is multifaccted and therefore " interesting " , one that is within easy reach of a child ' s skills , and one that is con - tinuous in its yield of knowledge . We shall revert to these matters in interpreting our results . With the . se constraints in mind , the first author designed the toy illustrated in Fig . 1 . The material is wood . The toy consists of 21 blocks that combine to form a pyramid standing about 9 in . high with a 9 in . square base . There are six levels in the pyramid . The top block is a solid square with a circular depression in its bottom . Each remaining layer is composed of 4 equal sized blocks made up of two locking pairs . Each pair fits together by a hole and peg arrangement . When one pair is fitted in the correct orientation , two other half pegs are brought together ; the other pair brings together two half - holes . These form the means for connecting the two pairs to form the four piece layer . The blocks were designed so that all pegs would fit into all holes . In addition to pegs and holes , each four - block layer has a shallow round depression in its base and a matched elevation on top . These can only be 92 DAVID WOOD , JEROME S . BRUNER AND GAIL ROSS formed by putting the appropriate pairs together in the correct orientation , since each block possesses one - quarter of each of these larger connectives . THE TUTORING PROCEDURE The tutor ' s " program " , which we now describe , was agreed upon in advance . By following a set of simple prescriptions the tutor endeavoured to gear her be - haviour to the needs of the individual child while keeping reasonable comparability of procedure from child to child and age group to age group . Above all , her aim with every child was to allow him to do as much as possible for himself She would always try to instruct verbally , for example , before intervening more directly , only doing the latter when the child failed to follow a verbal instruction . The child ' s success or failure at any point in time thus determined the tutor ' s next level of instruction . When the child first came to the experimental room , he or she was seated at a small table , with the 21 blocks of various shapes and sizes spread out in a jumble . He was invited to play with the blocks . The child could have no idea what the blocks might look hkc when put together . He was left to his own devices for about 5 min so that he might become familiar with the blocks and the situation . The blocks were simply there , to play with if he wished . The tutor would then usually take up two of the smallest blocks and show the child how these could be joined together to form a connected pair . If the child made up a correct pair on his own in free play , the tutor would use it as an example . She would then ask the child to " make . some more like that one " . The tutor would then recognize and respond systematically to three types of response from her charge . Either the child ignored her and continued with his play ; or he took up the blocks which she had just assembled and manipulated them ; or he tried to make something with other blocks in a way more or less similar to the tutor ' s own method , by putting pegs into holes , for example . If the child had ignored her , the tutor would again present suitable and constrained material already assembled , perhaps simply joining and positioning two blocks to form a correct pair . If the child had tried to assemble pieces for himself but had overlooked a feature , then the tutor would verbally draw his attention to the fact that the con - struction was not completed . For example , if he had selected pieces himself and put them together wrongly , the tutor would ask him to compare his construction with hers and to make his similar . If , however , she herself had presented the material for construction to the child , she would herself correct any error that resulted . Where possible , finally , she left the child to his own devices . It was only if he stopped constructing or got into difficulty that the tutor intervened . Her aim was to let the child pace the task for himself as far as possible . There is one remaining issue that will not concern us formally in this study but which is of some importance . The tutor , the third author of this paper but not of this paragraph , brought to the task a gentle , appreciative approach to the children . She did not so much praise tliem directly for their constructions or for their attention to the task , but rather created such an atmosphere of approval that the children seemed eager to complete their constructions—often , seemingly , to show her as f . p . V2 THE ROLE OF TUTORING IN PROBLEM SOLVING Sf3 well as to reach the goal per se . A testing procedure and a tutor create an atmosphere of encouragement or discouragement : in the present case it was the former , and the results certainly reflect it . The matter does not stop there . The blocks are of good solid wood and the children , during the initial free period of five minutes , enjoyed playing with them freely , often constructing in the service of highly imaginative themes . They did not always enjoy giving up imaginative play for the more constrained task of building a pyramid witli due regard for geometric constraints . Imaginative work during free play was often followed by a rather uuiuspired performance of the presented task . The tutor was a spokesman , so to speak , for the geometry of the task . As such , she may have had a dampening , if helpful , function in terms of getting the children to do this task . But , doubtless , the behaviour we shall be describing in the following section reflects the nature of the task for which the tutor was an adherent . Yet , the same limitation may beset any tutor dedicated to a particular outcome . System of scoring At any point in time , the child could either be manipulating separate pieces which he was seeking to assemble , or assemblies of pieces previously made up . The assembly operations were further subdivided into two categories : assisted , in which the tutor either presented or specifically indicated the materials for assembly , and unassisted , where the child himself selected material . In both cases , the constructions created might or might not meet all task constraints . Where they did not—a mis - match—we noted whether the child rejected them , or simply laid them down as assembled . Similarly , when the child picked up and disassembled previous con - structions , he might or might not go on to rea . ssemble them . This loo was noted . We noted every intervention by the tutor . These were classified into one of three categories : ( a ) direct assistance , already defined above , ( b ) a verbal error prompt , which characteristically took the form , " Does this ( a mismatched con - struction ) look like this ( a matched one ) ? " , and ( c ) a straightforward verbal attempt to get the child to make more constructions , " Can you make any more like this ? " In each case , we scored the child ' s subsequent behaviour into the above categories . Interscorer reliability Two scorers , working independently , achieved 94 % agreement on a pool of 594 events scored directly from video - tape . Observations on tutorials Whenever a child picked up blocks and put them together or when he selected previous constructions and took them apart , the act was scored . Total number of acts were roughly similar for all ages . The fours performed a median 41 , the threes 39 , and the fives 32 . The difference between fours and fives approaches , but does not achieve , significance [ U = 26 , p < 0 - 1 ) . In terms of overall task activity , then , there were no significant differences between groups . However , the composition of these activities differed markedly from age group to age group . It will come as no surprise that older children did better in the tasks . The older children produced a larger number of correct constructions in which they actually 94 DAVID WOOD , JEROME S . BRUNER AND GAIL ROSS put self - made pieces of the puzzle together correctly themselves . The ratio of in - correct to correct solutions progressing from 9 : 0 to 2 : 8 to 1 : 2 for the three age groups . Or note that it takes 15 acts of pair construction to make a correct pyramid , and that more than 75 % of these acts were unassisted among the 5 - yr - oIds , in contrast to 50 % and 10 % among the fours and threes respectively . None of the 3 - yr - o ! ds could put four blocks together correctly , while all the 4 - and 5 - yr - olds did so at least once . Older children frequently picked up matching pieces for construction with no prior " trial and error " , a median of seven such " quick " constructions being made by each of them , in contrast to three per child at four years and less tlian one per child for the youngest group { 5 yr vs 4 yr , U = 12 , P < 0 - 02 ; 4 yr vs 3 yr , f / = 10 , / » < 0 - 002 ) . Increasing age , then , is marked not only by success but by the emergence of more complex , interlocking sequences of operations and by the development of more accurate , intuitive techniques of fitting blocks together . Consider now the issue of recognition and production . The youngest children took apart almost as many constructions as they had put together ( a median of 13 - 0 ) while the older children were much less likely to " deconstruct " their assemblies ( the 4 - yr - olds taking apart a median 5 - 0 , and the 5 - yr - olds a median 4 - 0 ) . But note that when a 3 - yr - old took up and disassembled a correct construction he put it back together again two - thirds of the time on average { without any inter \ ' ^ ention by the tutor ) , the performance suggesting an appreciation of the fitness of the original . In contrast , having picked up an incorrect construction he would restore it only 14 % of the time . In fact , not one 3 - yr - old reassembled his incorrect constructions more frequently than his correct ones . More important still was the finding that the 3 - yr - old5 were just as sensitive as the 4 - yr - olds to the difference between acceptable and unacceptable constructions . The two were equally likely to reassemble appro - priate constructions and to leave scattered those that had been inappropriately constructed . Thus , although the youngest children were far inferior to the middle group when it came to constructing appropriate assembhes , they were just as adept at recognizing an appropriate one when they encountered it . The oldest children had , of course , become more sophisticated still , reconstructing some nine out of ten correct constructions they had disassembled and only two in ten of the incorrect ones that they had disassembled ^ —but the difference is not very great between them and the younger groups . This result surely suggests that , as noted , comprehension precedes production . The 3 - yr - old recognizes what is appropriate before he can readily produce a sequence of operations to achieve it by his own actions . It is easier for him to recognize what " looks right " than to carry out a program of action to produce it . The tutorial relationship Obviously , the yoiuiger children need help more . For 3 - yr - olds the proportion of totally unassisted constructions is 64 - 5 % , for the 4 - yr - olds 79 - 3 % , and for the 5 - yr - olds , 87 - 5 % . The median instances per child of constructions carried out with pieces proffered by the tutor , as compared to self - selected pieces is 9 - 0 for the 3 - yr - olds , 6 - 5 for the 4 - yr - olds , and 3 - 0 for the 5 - yr - olds . But it is not so much in THE ROLE OF TUTORING IN PROBLEM SOLVING 95 amount as in the kind of dependence that one finds a difference in the tutorial interaction at the three ages . For 3 - yr - olds usually ignore the tutor ' s suggestions , paying little heed , particu - larly to her verbal overtures . This is illustrated by the sharp disparity between the median figure of eleven tutor rejections by the 3 - yr - olds , in contrast to virtually none by the older children who were plainly ready to accept tutoring . This means that vis ' d ' vis the 3 - yr - old the tutor has the initial task of enlisting the child as a tutoring partner . With the youngest ones , the tutor is principally concerned with luring them into the task either by demonstrating it or providing tempting material . Consequent - ly , the tutor intervenes directly twice as often with the 3 - yr - olds than with the 4 - yr - olds , and four times more often than with the eldest group ( see Tables 1 and 2 ) . The tutor , then , is both intervening more and being ignored more when working with 3 - yr - olds than with older children . TABLE 1 . MEDIAN INSTANCES OF DIRECT INTERVENTIONS , VERBAL CORRECTIONS AND GENERAL VERBAL DIRECTIONS ( REMINDING SUBJECTS OF TASK REQUIREMENTS ) Direct intervention ( Showing ) Verbal correction ( Telling ) Verbal direction and reniinder ( Telling ) Total verbal intervention Total help received show Rauo . ^ ^ j ^ 3 12 - 0 3 - 0 5 - 0 8 - 0 200 12 - 0 80 Age4 60 50 80 13 - 0 190 60 5 30 3 * 5 3 - 0 7 - 5 10 - 5 46 ' ^ ' ^ 0 4C 7 . 5 Total help received The 5 - yr - olds received significantly less help than both the 4 - yr - oIds ( U = 22 , / ; < 0 05 ) and the 3 - yr - olds { U = 23 , p < 0 - 05 ) . The 3 - and 4 - yr - oIds did not differ significantly . Ratio of " showing " to " telling " Both the 5 - yr - olds { U = 5 , p < 0 002 ) and the 4 - yr - olds { U = 6 , p < 0 - 002 ) re - ceived a significantly higher proportion of verbal assistance than the 3 - yr - oIds ; 4 - and 5 - yr - olds did not differ in this respect . TABLE 2 . RELATIVE SUCCESSES OF " SHOWING " AND " Showing succeeds Telling succeeds 3 40 % 18 % EACH ACE TELLINO " Age4 63 % 40 % GROUP WITH 5 80 % 57 % The predominant mode of interaction between tutor and the 4 - yr - old tutee has become verbal , and the principal form of that verbal interaction is a combination of reminding the child of the task requirements and correcting his efforts as he seeks to carry on . So while we can say that the tutor acts principally as a lure to the young - est children , she acts more as a verbal prodder and corrector for the 4 - yr - olds . The % DAVID WOOD , JEROME S . BRUNER AND GAIL ROSS number of direct interventions drops by half from the 3 - to the 4 - yr - olds . Note , however , that the sum of demonstrations , corrections , and directions is about equal for the 3 - and 4 - yr - olds , though the balance has shifted ( Tables 1 and 2 ) . When we come to the 5 - yr - olds , the median number of tutorial interventions per pupil drops again by half . Qualitatively speaking the best way of characterizing the tutor of the 5 - yr - olds is principally as a confirmer or checker of constructions , the children now having firmly in mind the nature of the task . In a word , the youngest children , although capable of recognizing the properties of a correct solution , had to be induced to try the task to learn through recognition of correct solutions . The tutor ' s role was to stimulate and to keep the goal before the child ' s eyes—not easy since the children had other notions of what could be done with the blocks . With the 4 - yr - oids , already activated to construct , the tutor ' s task was more to help them recognize , usually by verbal marking , the nature of the discrepancy that existed between their attempted constructions and what was required by the task . It is this that shifts the balance from showing to telling as one goes from 3 to 4 yr . The 5 - yr - old has recourse to the tutor only when he is ex - periencing difficulty or checking out a construction . The tutorial function , thus , withers away . Indeed , a tutor would be superfluous for a 6 - yr - old . It is in this sense that we may speak of a scaffolding function . Well executed scaffolding begins by luring the child into actions that produce recognizable - for - him solutions . Once that is achieved , the tutor can interpret discrepancies to the child . Finally , the tutor stands in a confirmatory role until the tutee is checked out to fly on his own . It is summed up in Table 3 , where we see the number of acts the child can sustain between tutorial interventions rising steadily with age and experience . • TABLE 3 . RELATIVE FREQUENCY OF INTERVENTIONS BY THE TUTOR EXPRESSED AS INTERVENTIONS PER NUMBER OF CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS ( BOTH ASSISTED AND UNASSISTED ; Total construction operations Total interventions Operations per intervention P ^ : RFORMANCE 3 2622011 - 3 BY EACH CHILD Age 4 3521981 - 8 5 2801122 - 5 The 5 - yr - olds pprformed significantly more operations per intervention than the 4 - yr - oIds { U = \ 6 , p < 0 - 02 ) who performed more than the 3 - yr - olds [ U = lO , p < 0 - 002 ) . ANALYSIS OF TUTORING Did the tutor manage to follow the pre - set rules ? In 478 opportunities she conformed 86 % of the time . She did so most frequently with the youngest children ( 92 % ) and less frequently with the 4 - yr - olds { 81 % ; x ' = 9 - 1 , p < 0 - 01 ) . With the 5 - yr - olds , her behaviour fell mid - way ( 86 % ) though the difference between this group and the others was not statistically significant . The majority of her " errors " with the 4 - yr - olds was due to a tendency to offer more help than allowed by the rules ( 27 out of 36 cases ) . A closer inspection of the THE ROLE OF TUTORING IN PROBLEM SOLVING 97 contexts in which she " transgressed " reveal . s an interesting consistency . When , for example , she ofTered a block rather than asking the child to find one , she would invariably transgress in this way when the particular child had recently failed several times to fbllow or understand a more difficult type of instruction . She appeared to be changing the rules to take account of larger segments of behaviour than written into the " rules " . The fact that she committed most violations with the middle group suggests an interesting observation regarding the tutorial process . As we have already seen , the tutor ' s role with the youngest children was largely one of task induction . The diild seldom mo \ ed more than one " step " away from the tutor in terms of constructive activity . She might provide him with material for construction which he would probably then assemble , but having done so , the odds were that he would not attempt anything more . In short , though she might have difficulty getting the 3 - yr - old started and keeping bis attention on the task she was seldom left in doubt as to wliat the child had done in response to her instructions . With the 5 - yr - olds too , her task was relatively straightforward . The child soon learned the task constraints and conducted his efforts in an appropriate serial order . But , the " try it and see " behaviour of the middle group was much harder to interpret . With the 4 - yr - oIds , then , the tutor is faced with a great deal of relatively unstructured behaviour from a cbild who initiates most of the task activity himself . These are the ones most difficult to accommodate witliin a fixed set of tutorial rules . This result leads on to the conjecture as to whether formal programmes of " individualized " teaching may be most difficult to realize at the most critical point— the mid - phase of learning . Given the " disordered " structure of this mid - phase one cannot always know that a child is in fact simply ignoring a suggestion , whether he is systematically misunderstanding it or what . To tbe extent that the learner is at sea , so too is the tutor , who faces difficulties in interpreting responses appropriately . Problem - solving activity often has a deep structure that may not be apparent , until a long sequence in process is near completion . The tutor often cannot recognize hypotheses underlying long sequences and in the " middle phase " there are often too many complexities for either man or machine programmes to take into account . Where the human tutor excels or errs , of course , is in being able to generate hyj > otheses about the learner ' s hypotheses and often to converge on the learner ' s interpretation . It is in this sense that the tutor ' s theory of the learner is so crucial to the transactional nature of tutoring . If a machine programme is to be effective , it too would have to be capable of generating hypotheses in a comparable way . In tutoring , moreover , effectiveness depends not only upon the tutor and tutee modifying their behaviour over time to fit the perceived requirements and / or suggestions of the other . The effective tutor must have at least two theoretical models to which he must attend . One is a theory of the task or problem and how it may be completed . The other is a theory of the performance characteristics of his tutee . Without both of these , he can neither generate feedback nor devise situations in which his feedback will be more appropriate for this tutee in this task at this point in task mastery . The actual pattern of effective instruction , then , will be both task and tutee dependent , the requirements of the tutorial being generated by the interaction of the tutor ' s two theories . 98 DAVID WOOD , JEROME S . BRUNER AND GAIL ROSS The " scaffolding " process We may now return to the beginning of the discussion . Several functions of tutoring— " scaffolding functions " —were hinted at in the introduction . We can now elaborate more generally upon their relation to a theory of instruction . What can be said about the function of the tutor as observed in this study ? 1 . Recruitment . The tutor ' s first and obvious task is to enlist the problem solver ' s interest in and adherence to the requirements of the task . In the present case , this often involved getting the children not only interested , but weaned from initial imaginative play with the blocks . 2 . Reduction in degrees of freedom . This involves simplifying the task by reducing the number of constituent acts required to reach solution . It was N . Bernstein ( 1967 ) who first pointed to the importance of reducing tbe alternative movements during skill acquisition as an essential to regulating feedback so that it could be used for correction . In the present instances it involved reducing the size of the task to the level where the learner could recognize whether or not he had achieved a " fit " with task requirements . In effect , the " scaffolding " tutor fills in the rest and lets the learner perfect the component sub - routines that he can manage . 3 . Direction maintenance . Learners lag and regress to other aims , given limits in their interests and capacities . The tutor has the role of keeping them in pursuit of a particular objective . Partly it involves keeping the child " in the field " and partly a deployment of zest and sympathy to keep him motivated . The children often made their constructions in order to show them to the tutor . In time , the activity itself became the goal—but even then , the older children often checked back . One other aspect of direction maintenance is worth mention . Action , of course , tends to follow the line of previous success . There were instances , for example when subjects would work successfully ( and apparently endlessly ) on constructing pairs , rather than moving on from this success at a simpler level to trying out a more complex task—like the construction of a flat quadruple . Past success served to distract from the ultimate goal . The effective tutor also maintains direction by making it worthwhile for the learner to risk a next step . 4 . Marking critical features . A tutor by a variety of means marks or accentuates certain features of the task that are relevant . His marking provides information about the discrepancy between what the child has produced and what he would recognize as a correct production . His task is to interpret discrepancies . 5 . Frustration control . There should be some such maxim as " Problem solving should be less dangerous or stressful with a tutor than without " . Whether this is accomphshed by " face saving " for errors or by exploiting the learner ' s " wish to please " or by other means , is of only minor importance . The maior risk is in creating too much dependency on the tutor . 6 . Demonstration . Demonstrating or " modeUing " solutions to a task , when closely obsen . ' ed , involves considerably more than simply performing in the presence of the tutee . It often involves an " idealization " of the act to be performed and it may involve completion or even explication of a solution already partially executed by the tutee himself . In this sense , the tutor is " imitating " in idealized form an attempted solution tried ( or assumed to be tried ) by the tutee in the expectation that the learner will then " imitate " it back in a more appropriate form . THE ROLE OF TUTORING IN PROBLEM SOLVING 99 In the introduction we said a few words about the subtlety of " modelling " an act that is to be " imitated " . In fact , observed instances of " imitation " were all of a kind as to suggest that the only acts that children imitate are those they can already do fairly well . Typical was the following incident , involving a 4 - yr - old . Tutor , noting that subject is constructing pairs quite easily , now takes two pairs and fits them together as a quadruple . Subject then takes the quadruple , ( lisassembles it into two pairs , and hands these back to tutor . This in turn leads the tutor to a highly idealized version of constructing the quadruple : she now does it slowly and carefully , in contrast to a swift and casual construction of the constituent pairs . The child does not follow suit . In fact , the study taught us little about imitation save that its occurrence depends upon the child ' s prior comprehension of the place of the act in the task . In all instances observed with these 30 children , there was not a single instance of what might be called " blind matching behaviour " . SUMMARY 3 - , 4 - , and 5 - yr - olds were tutored in the task of constructing a pyramid from complex , interlocking constituent blocks . The re . stilts indicate some of the properties of an interactive system of exchange in which the tutor operates with an implicit theory of the learner ' s acts in order to recruit his attention , reduces degrees of freedom in the task to manageable limits , maintains " direction " in the problem solving , marks criticial features , controls frustration and demonstrates solutions when the learner can recognize them . The significance of the findings for instruction in general is considered . REFERENCES BERNSTEIN , N . ( 1967 ) Tfie Coordination and Regulation of Movement . Pergamon Press , Oxford . BRUNER , J . S . ( 1972 ) Nature and uses of immaturity . Am . Psychol . 27 , 1 - 22 . BRUNER , J . S . ( 1973 ) Organization of early skilled action . Child Developm . 44 , 92 - 96 . CLINCHY , B . ( 1974 ) Recogrtition and Production of Information — Processing Strategies in Children . Unpublished doctoral thesis , Department of Psychology , Harvard University . HAMBURG , D . ( 1968 ) Evolution of emotional responses : evidence from recent research on non - human primates . Sci . Psychoan . 12 , 39—54 . HiNDE , R . A . ( 1971 ) Development of social behaviour . \ n Behavior of Non - Human Primates { Edhtd hy ScHRiER , A . M . and STOLLNITZ , F . ) , Vol . 3 . Academic Press , New York . KAYE , K . ( 1970 ) Mother - Child Instructional Interaction . Unpublished doctoral thesis , Department of Psychology , Harvard University . LAWTCK - GOODALL , J . VAN ( 1968 ) The behavior of free - living chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream Reserve . Animal Behaviour Monographs 1 ( 3 ) , 161 - 311 . MCNEILL , D . ( 1970 ) The development of language . In Carmichael ' s Manual of Child Psychology ( Edited by MussEN , P . H . ) . Wiley , New York . MACKWORTH , N . H . ( 1965 ) Originality . Am . Psychol . 20 ( 1 ) , 51 - 66 . MILLER , G . A . , GALANTER , E . and PRIBRAM , K . H . ( 1960 ) Plans and the Structure of Behavior . Holt , New York . NEWELL , A . , SHAW , J . C . and SIMON , H . A . ( 1960 ) Report on a general problem - solving program . In Information Processing . UNESCO , Paris , pp . 256 - 264 . OLSON , D . R . ( 1966 ) On eonceptual strategies . In Studies in Cognitive Growth ( Edited by BRUNER , J . S . , OLVER , R . R . and GREENFIELD , P . M . ) . Wiley , New York , pp . 135 - 153 . 100 DAVID WOOD , JEROME S . BRUNER AND GAIL ROSS OLSON , D . R . ( 1970 ) Cognitive Development : The Child ' s Acquisition of Diagonality . Academic Press , New York . SAUGSTAD , P . and RAAHEIM , K . ( 1960 ) Problem - solving , past experience and availability of functions , BT . J . Psychol . 5 \ , % l - \ { i ^ . SMITH , F . ( 1971 ) Understanding Reading . Holt , Rinehart & Winston , New York .