How and Why Criteria Defining Moderators and Mediators Differ Between the Baron & Kenny and MacArthur Approaches Helena Chmura Kraemer and Michaela Kiernan Stanford University Marilyn Essex University of Wisconsin David J . Kupfer University of Pittsburgh Objective : In recognition of the increasingly important role of moderators and mediators in clinical research , clear definitions are sought of the two terms to avoid inconsistent , ambiguous , and possibly misleading results across clinical research studies . Design : The criteria used to define moderators and mediators proposed by the Baron & Kenny approach , which have been long used in social / behavioral research , are directly compared to the criteria proposed by the recent MacArthur approach , which modified the Baron & Kenny criteria . Results : After clarifying the differences in criteria between approaches , the rationale for the modifications is clarified and the implications for the design and interpretation of future studies considered . Conclusions : Researchers may find modifications introduced in the MacArthur approach more appropriate to their research objectives , particularly if their research might have a direct influence on decision making . Keywords : moderators , mediators , risk factors , randomized clinical trials , effect size In recent years , the importance of moderators and mediators has become increasingly apparent both in testing the efficacy of clin - ical interventions in randomized clinical trials ( RCTs ) ( Kraemer , Frank , & Kupfer , 2006 ; Kraemer & Kupfer , 2006 ; Kraemer , Wilson , Fairburn , & Agras , 2002 ; Thompson & Higgins , 2005 ) and in observational research examining risk factors for disease ( Kraemer , Stice , Kazdin , & Kupfer , 2001 ) . In RCTs , because an effective intervention is not equally effective for all in any popu - lation , establishing moderators of intervention response—who re - sponds and who does not—can prompt researchers to optimally target the intervention , and to seek better interventions for nonre - sponders . Establishing mediators of intervention response—how an intervention works—can prompt researchers either to strengthen , add , or remove certain intervention components to make the intervention either more efficacious or more cost - effective ( Kraemer et al . , 2002 ) . In risk research studies , it is evident that diseases of current scientific interest such as heart disease , cancer , depression , schizophrenia , and autism are not caused by a single risk factor such as a gene , organism , or envi - ronmental exposure , but by complex chains of risk factors . Iden - tifying such chains , which may differ in different subgroups , requires more than compiling a list of risk factors for a particular disease ; it requires determining how chains of risk factors might “work together” ( Kraemer et al . , 2001 ) . Establishing moderators of risk factors—who is susceptible to exposure and who is not— improves our understanding of disease etiology and early diagno - sis . Establishing mediators of risk factors can lead to the design of interventions to break the chains , i . e . , for prevention or early detection of diseases . Given the increasingly important role of moderators and medi - ators in clinical research , clear definitions of the two terms are essential to avoid inconsistent , ambiguous , and possibly mislead - ing results . In social / behavioral research , the criteria for those definitions have long been those originally introduced by Baron & Helena Chmura Kraemer , Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences , Stanford University , CA ; Michaela Kiernan , Department of Medicine , Stanford University , CA ; Marilyn Essex , Department of Psy - chiatry , University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI ; David J . Kupfer , Depart - ment of Psychiatry , University of Pittsburgh , PA . The work underlying this paper was supported by the MacArthur Net - work on Development and Psychopathology . Dr . Kraemer’s work is sup - ported in part by the National Institute of Aging grant AG17824 and Department of Veterans Affairs Sierra - Pacific MIRECC . Dr . Kiernan’s work was supported by the National Heart , Lung and Blood Institute FIRST Award R29 HL60154 and by a Grant - in - Aid Award from the American Heart Association . Dr . Essex’s work is supported by the Na - tional Institute of Mental Health grant P50 MH069315 and the Health Emotions Research Institute , Department of Psychiatry , University of Wisconsin - Madison . Dr . Kupfer’s work is supported in part by the Na - tional Institute of Mental Health grant MH030915 . We would like to acknowledge the major impact on this work of discussions among all the members of the MacArthur Network on Devel - opmental Psychopathology , especially Dr . Tom Boyce , the late Dr . David Offord , Dr . Alan Kazdin , Dr . Peter Jensen , and Dr . Ron Kessler . Many participants in several conferences on moderators and mediators have contributed their insights . We would particularly acknowledge Dr . David MacKinnon , Dr . David Kenny , and Dr . Eric Stice whose expertise in the Baron & Kenny approach and patience with those of us who critiqued it were invaluable in helping crystallize our ideas . (cid:1) (cid:2) Greek beta ; (cid:3) (cid:2) Greek sigma ; (cid:4) (cid:2) Greek delta ; ε (cid:2) Greek epsilon ; (cid:5) (cid:2) Greek mu . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Helena Chmura Kraemer , 1116 Forest Avenue , Palo Alto , CA 94301 . E - mail : hckhome @ pacbell . net Health Psychology Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 2008 , Vol . 27 , No . 2 ( Suppl . ) , S101 – S108 0278 - 6133 / 08 / $ 12 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 6133 . 27 . 2 ( Suppl . ) . S101 S101 Kenny in 1986 ( Baron & Kenny , 1986 ) . Although there has been a proliferation of methods to implement these definitions ( Collins , Graham , & Flaherty , 1998 ; James & Brett , 1984 ; Kenny , Kashy , & Bolger , 1998 ; MacKinnon , Lockwood , Hoffman , West , & Sheets , 2002 ; Shrout & Bolger , 2002 ) , the definitions themselves have hardly changed . Recently , modifications to those definitions have been introduced by a MacArthur Foundation Network subgroup ( Kraemer et al . , 2001 , 2002 ) , concerned with its clinical applica - tions . In this paper , after clarifying the differences in criteria between approaches , the rationale for the modifications is ex - plained and the implications for the design and interpretation of future studies are considered . Finally , changes made to the MacArthur approach since its introduction 5 years ago and future directions are discussed . Terminology Until about 20 years ago , the terms moderators and mediators were used more or less colloquially , not as scientific terms . How - ever , in their landmark 1986 paper , Baron & Kenny proposed conceptual , strategic , and statistical definitions to specify and differentiate between the two scientific terms ( Baron & Kenny , 1986 ) . These conceptual definitions specified that a variable M is a moderator of the relationship between a target variable T and an outcome O in a particular population , if M explains under what conditions T is related to O . A variable M is a mediator of the relationship between T and O if M helps explains how or why T is related to O . Although these conceptual definitions are succinct and clear , a systematic approach for applying these definitions in empirical research is necessary to determine whether the relationship be - tween two variables X1 and X2 and an outcome O is one of moderation , mediation or neither , and whether X1 moderates ( me - diates ) X2 or whether X2 moderates ( mediates ) X1 . Two sets of criteria are used to establish whether any variable functions as a moderator or mediator : eligibility and analytic criteria . Eligibility criteria identify whether a variable is a candi - date for consideration as a potential moderator ( or mediator ) based on temporal precedence and association . The ultimate goal of moderation / mediation analyses is to detect possible causal chains among variables leading to the outcome . The criteria required to claim causality have been a topic of more than two millennia of philosophical argument and continues today ( Kenny , 1979 ; Pearl , 2000 ; Rothman & Greenland , 1998 ; Rubin , 2004 ) . However , there is agreement that to establish that variable X causes the outcome O , it is necessary ( not sufficient ) to show ( 1 ) temporal precedence , i . e . , that X precedes O in time , and ( 2 ) association , i . e . , that X is correlated with O . Consequently , these particular criteria are used to determine whether particular variable is eligible as a moderator or mediator . Analytical criteria are statistical criteria used to em - pirically demonstrate whether an eligible variable actually func - tions as a moderator ( or mediator ) . For convenience here and to use the mathematical model that underlies the Baron & Kenny approach , the target ( T ) variable is binary ( e . g . , intervention versus control in a RCT , presence / absence of a risk factor in an observational study ) , the moderator or mediator ( M ) is either ordinal ( e . g . , age ) or binary ( e . g . , gender ) , and the outcome variable ( O ) is ordinal . Criteria for Establishing Moderators and Mediators The Baron & Kenny approach for establishing moderators and mediators is based on a linear model ( Shrout & Bolger , 2002 ) : O (cid:2) (cid:1) 0 (cid:6) (cid:1) 1 T (cid:6) (cid:1) 2 M (cid:6) (cid:1) 3 TM (cid:6) ε , ( 1 ) where the variance of the error term ε is independent of both T and M . Although the MacArthur approach is not limited to linear models ( Kraemer et al . , 2001 ) , this linear model is here used for the MacArthur approach as well , so that the two approaches can be directly compared . Although both approaches rely on the conceptual definitions described earlier , the approaches differ in their eligibility criteria for moderation and in their analytical criteria for mediation ( sum - marized in Table 1 ) . To establish that M moderates T in its relationship with O , the Baron & Kenny approach does not specify an eligibility criterion regarding the temporal precedence of M and T . The Baron & Kenny approach also does not specify an eligi - bility criterion regarding whether M and T are associated or not . Rather , it only suggests that “it is desirable” that M be independent of T ( Baron & Kenney , 1986 , p . 1174 ) . In contrast , the MacArthur approach stipulates that M must precede T and that M and T must be independent . Both approaches specify the same analytic criterion : that an interaction between M and T be demonstrated . To establish that M mediates T in its relationship with O , the Baron & Kenny approach originally did not impose an eligibility criterion of temporal precedence ( Baron & Kenny , 1986 ) , but there Table 1 Eligibility and Analytic Criteria Used to Establish Variables as Moderators and Mediators for the Baron & Kenny Approach and the MacArthur Approach Baron & Kenny approach MacArthur approach M moderates T M mediates T M moderates T M mediates T Eligibility criteria Temporal precedence of either T or M [ Not specified ] T before M M before T T before M Association between T and M [ Not specified ] (cid:7) 1 (cid:8) 0 (cid:7) 1 (cid:2) 0 (cid:7) 1 (cid:8) 0 Analytical criteria (cid:1) 3 (cid:8) 0 Assume (cid:1) 3 (cid:2) 0 ; (cid:7) 1 (cid:1) 2 (cid:8) 0 (cid:1) 3 (cid:8) 0 Either (cid:1) 2 (cid:8) 0 or (cid:1) 3 (cid:8) 0 Note . Both use the linear models ; O (cid:2) (cid:1) 0 (cid:6) (cid:1) 1 T (cid:6) (cid:1) 2 M (cid:6) (cid:1) 3 MT (cid:6) ε ; and M (cid:2) (cid:7) 0 (cid:6) (cid:7) 1 T (cid:6) ε * , where ε and ε * are independent of T and M . S102 KRAEMER , KIERNAN , ESSEX , AND KUPFER is growing consensus that such a criterion be imposed : T precedes M . The original Baron & Kenny approach did , however , stipulate the necessity of demonstrating an association between T and M . The MacArthur approach imposes the same eligibility criteria for mediation . However , the approaches differ in the analytic criterion used in the linear models . The Baron & Kenny approach assumes that there is no interaction between T and M ( and , thus , sets the interaction term to zero ) . The Baron & Kenny approach establishes mediation by demonstrating that the relationship of T w ith O , when both M and T are considered , differs from that when M is not considered . In contrast , the MacArthur approach includes the interaction between T and M in the model , and establishes medi - ation by the demonstrated presence of either a main effect of M or an interaction between T and M . Rationale for the MacArthur Modifications To understand why the approaches differ in eligibility criteria for moderation and analytical criteria for mediation , the rationale for the modifications made by the MacArthur approach is pre - sented , and then each of the differences in criteria are considered separately . Including the Interaction Between M and T in the Model for Mediation The Baron & Kenny approach assumes that the interaction between M and T is zero in the population for mediation and , thus , does not include the interaction in the linear model . However , assuming the interaction is zero does not make it so . If there is a nonzero interaction effect in the population , omitting it from the model results in a remapping of that effect . Part of the effect may be remapped into the main effects , thus biasing them and perturb - ing the probabilities of Type I error . The remainder is remapped into the error , increasing the probability of Type II error . For these reasons , the MacArthur approach stipulates a modification to the Baron & Kenny approach : that the interaction between M and T always be included in the linear model . To do so , however , raises the problem of how to center the independent variables for clear interpretability of the results . Centering in Linear Models It has long been recognized in the statistical literature that the coding of variables in a linear model with an interaction term affects the estimation of the main effects ( Aiken & West , 1991 ; Cohen , Cohen , West , & Aiken , 2003 ; Kraemer & Blasey , 2004 ) . Thus , in contrast to the Baron & Kenny approach which did not need to explicitly address coding , the MacArthur approach stipu - lates that a binary T be coded (cid:6) 1 / 2 and (cid:9) 1 / 2 and that ordinal M be coded as deviations from a meaningful central value ( Kraemer et al . , 2002 ) . Here M is centered at a value dictated by what is known at the time T is determined . If M temporally precedes T , M is centered at its mean . If T precedes M ( i . e . , M is an event coded 1 or 0 , or M is a change occurring between T and O ) , M is centered at zero . The reason for this modification lies in the current focus on effect sizes , rather than on null hypothesis significance testing . Focus on Effect Size Rather Than Null Hypothesis Significance Testing The Baron & Kenny approach focuses on testing a null hypoth - esis of random association in a linear model , consistent with approaches developed in an era when the primary emphasis of statistical analysis was significance testing of null hypotheses . Consistent with the growing recognition of the limitations of such testing and the current emphasis on meaningful effect sizes ( Altman et al . , 2001 ; Shrout , 1997 ; Thompson , 1999 ; Wilkinson & The Task Force on Statistical Inference , 1999 ) , the MacArthur approach is based on the effect size of T on O . The effect size usually associated with the linear model is Cohen’s (cid:4) , the stan - dardized mean difference between the two groups defined by T ( Cohen , 1988 ; Rosenthal , 1994 ) , not the mean difference empha - sized in the Baron & Kenny approach . If one has two groups ( determined by T ) , where the means of the two groups differ , say , by 10 units , and the within group standard deviation is 100 , there is virtually total overlap of the distributions of O in the two groups . However , if the within group standard deviation is 1 , there is virtually no overlap . Thus the difference in means , ignoring vari - ance , will mislead consideration of the size of effects , a fact long acknowledged in meta - analysis . The effect size for this linear model is the standardized differ - ence in means with centering , namely here : (cid:4) (cid:1) (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) (cid:1) 2 ( (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) (cid:5) 2 ) (cid:6)(cid:1) 3 ( (cid:5) 0 (cid:3) C ) (cid:1) V (cid:6) . 5 (cid:10) ( (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) (cid:1) 3 / 2 ) 2 (cid:9) ( (cid:1) 2 (cid:3) (cid:1) 3 / 2 ) 2 (cid:3) 22 (cid:11) ( 2 ) where (cid:5) 1 and (cid:5) 2 are the means of centered M in the two groups defined by T , (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) ( (cid:5) 1 (cid:6)(cid:5) 2 ) / 2 , c is the centering value of M , (cid:3) 1 2 , and (cid:3) 2 2 are the variances of centered M in those two groups and V is the variance of the error term assumed in the model to be the same in both groups defined by T . Temporal Precedence of M Before T as an Eligibility Criterion for Moderation Because the Baron & Kenny approach does not specify a crite - rion of temporal precedence for moderation , it is unclear which of two variables is the moderator and which one is being moderated . Consider an example : Suppose depressed participants in a RCT are randomized to one of two interventions as part of a study exam - ining moderators and mediators of intervention . During the inter - vention period , some participants in each intervention experience a traumatic event ( loss of job , death of loved one , etc . ) that is not associated with random assignment of intervention . If participants in one intervention cope better with the traumatic event than participants in the other intervention , that might be reflected in an interaction effect between the intervention and the traumatic event on the outcome . The Baron & Kenny approach could conclude either that intervention moderates the event or that the event moderates intervention , given the absence of a temporal prece - dence criterion for intervention and the event . To avoid such situations , the MacArthur approach imposes the eligibility crite - rion of temporal precedence for moderation : a moderator M must precede T . Based on this criterion , the MacArthur approach would unambiguously conclude that here intervention moderates the event , since intervention here precedes the traumatic event , the S103 BARON & KENNY AND MACARTHUR APPROACHES intervention was not associated with the traumatic event , and the intervention predicts the way participants respond to a subsequent traumatic event . In applying the Baron & Kenny approach , social / behavioral researchers often resolve such ambiguities by referring to their theoretical or conceptual model , specifically their ‘a priori’ as - sumptions . Thus , what one assumes about the position of M and T in a chain leading to O , determines whether a variable is labeled a moderator or as being moderated . Once a variable is potentially labeled as a moderator , this ‘a priori’ assumption also determines which variable is labeled as the moderator and which variable is labeled as being moderated . Consequently , multiple researchers analyzing the exact same data could draw contradictory conclu - sions about the roles of M and T simply because they made different assumptions about what the causal chains might be . This leads to nonreplicable results , a serious problem in all scientific research . Even more importantly , it may provoke confusion about the target of intervention in the context of prevention or treatment . Absence of Association Between M and T as an Eligibility Criterion for Moderation As can be seen in Equation ( 2 ) of the MacArthur approach , when M and T are not associated and M precedes T , then (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) (cid:5) 2 , (cid:5) 0 (cid:2) c , (cid:3) 1 2 (cid:2) (cid:3) 2 2 , and the effect of T on O in the total population does not depend on M ( hence not a mediator ) . However , the effect of T on O in the subpopulation with M (cid:2) m depends on m when the interaction effect ( (cid:1) 3 ) is nonzero and is : (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) (cid:1) 3 ( m (cid:3) (cid:5) 0 ) (cid:1) V where V is the common within group standard deviation . Thus , with the MacArthur approach , M plays a role in identifying sub - populations of the general population that have different relation - ships of T with O , consistent with the conceptual definition of a moderator . Interpretation of the Interaction Between M and T as an Analytical Criterion for Mediation As seen in Equation ( 2 ) of the MacArthur approach , when T precedes M and when M and T are associated , then (cid:5) 1 (cid:8) (cid:5) 2 and possibly (cid:5) 0 (cid:8) c and (cid:3) 12 (cid:8) (cid:3) 22 . Then the effect of T on O may be explained at least partially by the differences between the means and variances of M in the two groups defined by T ( each possibly the effect of T on M ) . This is the case if either the main effect of M ( (cid:1) 2 ) or the interaction effect of M and T on O ( (cid:1) 3 ) is nonzero . Thus , when M and T are associated , the interaction between M and T is indicative of mediation , not moderation . M plays a specific role in determining the effect size (cid:4) and thus fulfills the conceptual definition of a mediator of T . For instance , in a RCT , a mediator may itself be an outcome of the intervention ( associated with T ) . The intervention may change the level of the mediator ( inducing changes in the mean ) , perhaps changing some participants in the population more than others ( inducing changes in the variance ) , and changing the impact a given level of M has on the outcome ( inducing an interaction effect ) . In summary , an interaction between an independent M and T indicates moderation whereas an interaction between an associ - ated M and T indicates mediation . Not Drawing Causal Inferences From Observational Data The role of causal assumptions and inferences in medical re - search is a major conceptual distinction between the two ap - proaches . Using specific eligibility and analytic criteria to establish whether variables are moderators or mediators is an important step toward demonstrating a potential casual role of moderators and mediators in explanatory chains of variables , but never sufficient to establish causality . In applying the Baron & Kenny approach , it is often assumed that the causal pathways are known and this assumption is then used to identify whether variables are moderators or mediators . For example , a moderator has been defined as “a third variable exhib - iting statistical interaction by virtue of its being antecedent or intermediate in the causal process under study” ( Last , 1995 , p . 107 ) . A mediator is defined as “a variable that occurs in a causal pathway from an independent to a dependent variable . It causes variation in the dependent variable , and itself is caused to vary by the independent variable” ( Last , 1995 , p . 87 ; emphasis added ) . In the social / behavioral contexts where the Baron & Kenny approach arose , a causal relationship between a target variable T and outcome O is often assumed as part of a theoretical or conceptual model which in turn determines an analytic model ( Baron & Kenny , 1986 ) . Then , if the data do not contradict that assumption , causal inferences are drawn about T . As a result , causal inferences are often drawn from observational studies or from cross - sectional studies , and from nonsignificant goodness - of - fit tests in structural equation modeling . Because the fundamental reason for seeking moderators and mediators is to gain insight into detecting the unknown causal processes involved , any approaches that assume that the causal process is already known prejudices the search . Indeed , if the causal process were known , there would be no need for the detection of moderators or mediators . In clinical research , there has always been greater reluctance to accept causal inferences than in social / behavioral theoretical re - search . There is strong reason for this . For example , from the 1970s and early 1980s , it was known that premature ventricular contractions ( PVCs ) were a risk factor for sudden cardiac death , and it was widely believed that any prophylactic program against sudden cardiac death must involve the use of antiarrhythmic drugs to subdue PVCs ( i . e . , reduction in PVCs would causally mediate the effect of any intervention on cardiac death ) . This was so widely accepted that the Federal Drug Administration accepted PVC frequency as a surrogate outcome instead of mortality in RCTs testing the efficacy of certain drugs . On this basis , several drugs were approved . Only later , in 1987 , was a RCT conducted to actually test whether these PVC suppressors were effective in reducing mortality . The trial was terminated early when the results clearly indicated that the drugs increased the risk of death . Before the final RCT was begun , it was estimated that there were 57 , 000 prescriptions per month being filled in the United States , that some 200 , 000 patients in the United States were taking the drugs , and that ultimately the number of excess drug - related fatalities in the United States were thought to be numbered in the tens of thou - sands ( Moore , 1995 ; Silverman , 1998 ) . For reasons such as these , S104 KRAEMER , KIERNAN , ESSEX , AND KUPFER premature claims of causality must be carefully avoided in clinical research . In the MacArthur approach , the criteria used to define moder - ators and mediators do not assume the causal pathways are known nor assume any necessarily causal role for moderators or mediators once identified . Instead , the criteria for establishing whether vari - ables are moderators or mediators are based solely on temporal precedence , association , and the nature of the joint association of T and M with O . Establishing that variables are moderators or mediators indicates the existence of relationships between T , M , and O that may or may not be causal . Establishing that variables are moderators or mediators in initial studies does not lead to conclusions about causality ; rather , it leads to hypotheses about the possible causal role for identified moderators or mediators to be tested in future studies specifically designed for that purpose . During discussions comparing the two approaches among de - velopers and users of both approaches 1 , the Baron & Kenny approach was often described as being “theory driven , ” and the MacArthur approach as “data driven . ” In fact , both are theory - driven and both are data - driven . Choices are made in sampling , measurement , design , and analysis that reflect a theory comprising scientific knowledge , mathematical assumptions appropriate to the present study such as linearity or equal variances , and specification of any hypotheses to be tested for which there is sufficient ratio - nale and justification . In both approaches , a study is designed and measures are collected based on the theory and the assumptions to test the hypotheses—hence “theory - driven . ” The data obtained in the study then “drive” inferences drawn to expand scientific knowledge—hence “data driven” . The validity of conclusions is always conditional on the assumptions made . Thus , a major dif - ference between the two approaches is the unwillingness by the MacArthur approach to assume that M is in the causal chain leading from T to O as a way to prove that M is a mediator of T in its relationship with O and thus might be in the causal chain leading from T to O . Implications for the Design and Interpretation of Future Studies The modifications made by the MacArthur approach to the eligibility and analytical criteria for defining moderators and me - diators have important implications for the design and interpreta - tion of future research studies . To see the potential source of the differences , let us consider a hypothetical example , in which it is possible to systematically compare which terms ( moderator , me - diator , or neither ) the two approaches would apply for all possible empirical situations . Suppose participants in a RCT are randomized to either inter - vention A , with probability (cid:12) 1 , or to intervention B ( variable X 1 (cid:2) 1 if A , 0 if B ) . After a month of initial intervention , participants either remain on the same intervention with probability (cid:12) 2 or switch to the other intervention ( variable X 2 (cid:2) 1 if A , 0 if B ) . Participants are assessed on the outcome O a year after random - ization . This example considers all possible empirical situations because all combinations of probabilities of (cid:12) 1 and (cid:12) 2 —that vary from 0 to 1 and can differ from one another—can be systemati - cally considered for the two time points . The variables are initially labeled X 1 and X 2 because the criteria for each approach will be used to establish which variable is labeled T and which variable is labeled M in each of the possible empirical situations . Suppose that the population means in the four groups were AA , AB , BA , and BB . In this situation , X 1 and X 2 are not associated if and only if (cid:12) 2 (cid:2) . 5 . If one followed the Baron & Kenny approach for mediation and fit the linear model without the interaction ( thus assuming (cid:1) 3 (cid:2) 0 ) , any interaction in the population would be remapped in part to the main effects of X 1 ( (cid:1) 1 ) and X 2 ( (cid:1) 2 ) to a degree that would be determined by (cid:12) 1 and (cid:12) 2 , and the rest of the missing interaction effect would serve to exaggerate the error variance . In contrast , if one followed the MacArthur approach for mediation and fit the linear model in Table 1 with an interaction term , the model would always fit the four means exactly . Here , where X 1 is known to temporally precede X 2 , what con - clusions about the relationship between X 1 and X 2 with O are warranted using the two approaches , given a large enough sample size ? Is the relationship between X 1 and X 2 with O one of mod - eration , mediation both or neither ? In general , when there is no association between X 1 and X 2 ( (cid:12) 2 (cid:2) . 5 ) , neither approach would conclude the relationship is mediation . Similarly , when there is no interaction effect , neither approach would conclude the relation - ship is moderation . In the first three situations in Table 2 , the conclusions are the same for both approaches : neither moderation nor mediation could be established . In the fourth situation , when there is an association between X 1 and X 2 ( (cid:12) 2 (cid:8) . 5 ) , no interaction effect ( and hence no moderation in either approach ) , and a main effect of X 2 , both approaches will conclude that X 2 mediates X 1 . However , there are other situations where the conclusions about the relationship between X 1 and X 2 for the Baron & Kenny ap - proach and the MacArthur approach would differ ( Table 2 ) . In the fifth and sixth situations , when there is no association between X 1 and X 2 ( (cid:12) 2 (cid:2) . 5 ) and there is an interaction effect ( regardless of the main effect of X 2 ) , the Baron & Kenny approach could conclude either that X 1 moderates X 2 or that X 2 moderates X 1 , given the absence of a temporal precedence criterion . In contrast , the MacArthur approach would conclude only that X 1 moderates X 2 . Finally , in the last two situations , when there is an association between X 1 and X 2 ( (cid:12) 2 (cid:8) . 5 ) , and there is interaction effect , the Baron & Kenny approach could conclude that X 2 mediates X 1 and / or that X 1 moderates X 2 and / or that X 2 moderates X 1 , given the absence of a criterion regarding association . In contrast , the MacArthur approach would conclude only that X 2 mediates X 1 . Thus , although the two approaches will sometimes agree , the Baron & Kenny approach could apply the same term to quite different empirical situations and apply different terms to the same empirical situation whereas the MacArthur approach produces a unique and consistent conclusion about which term to apply for each empirical situation . Because there are no eligibility criteria for moderation in the Baron & Kenny approach , the distinction between showing that M moderates T or that M mediates T in many cases , is whether the analyst chooses to include the interaction term or not . Different 1 Mediators and Moderators of Treatment in Randomized Clinical Trials workshop , cosponsored by the National Institute of Mental Health Grant MH030915 and the MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Psycho - pathology and Development , held November 17 - 18 , 2003 , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . S105 BARON & KENNY AND MACARTHUR APPROACHES analysts , once again , may choose differently and reach different conclusions from the same data . In the MacArthur approach , there is an unambiguous distinction between a moderator and a media - tor , and an unambiguous determination of which variable is the moderator and which variable is being moderated . The MacArthur approach clarifies that the same general con - struct may underlie both a moderator and mediator of T and the same instrument may be used to measure that construct but the same variable cannot be both a moderator and a mediator of T . For example , suppose two variables are measured in a RCT : preran - domization level of social support and postrandomization change in social support . Here the general construct of social support per se is the same and the measurement instruments used at pre - and postrandomization may also be the same . However , the preran - domization level of social support and the postrandomization change in social support are not the same variables and may not even be highly correlated . The prerandomization level of social support may or may not moderate the relationship between the intervention and the outcome . The postrandomization change in social support that may result during intervention may or may not mediate the relationship between the intervention and the outcome , but these are separate research questions . The temporal precedence criterion imposed by the MacArthur approach to establish whether the variables are potential moderators or mediators prevents con - fusing what are two distinct variables . Perhaps the most important implication of the MacArthur ap - proach is the necessity of using longitudinal studies with at least two and usually three time points to establish moderators and mediators . The MacArthur approach cannot be applied in cross - sectional or retrospective studies as the Baron & Kenny approach often has . For the MacArthur approach , two time points can only be used when considering constructs that are fixed markers . Fixed markers do not change over time , e . g . , gender , ethnicity , year of birth , or genotype ( Kraemer et al . , 1997 ) . It does not matter when such variables are measured , because they precede any event during the lifetime of the study participant . However , because fixed markers cannot change , only two questions can be asked about such variables : Do they moderate subsequent variables in their relationship with O ? Are they mediated by subsequent variables in their relationship with O ? For example , a genotype moderating the relationship of subsequently mea - sured environmental variables with an outcome have been re - ported ( Jaffee et al . , 2005 ; Smeraldi et al . , 1998 ) . However , in absence of a fixed marker , three time points are needed to establish moderation ( M moderates T with respect to O ) or mediation ( T is mediated by M with respect to O ) . Because of this emphasis on timing , the MacArthur approach also helps to resolve problems such as “backward” or “recip - rocal” causation . It may well be that X 1 measured at time 1 is mediated by Y 2 , a change in Y between times 1 and 2 , which in turn is mediated by X 3 , a change in X between times 2 and 3 , which in turn is mediated by Y 4 , a change in Y between times 3 and 4 etc . , forming a mediational chain ( Collins et al . , 1998 ) . However , the criteria used in the MacArthur approach acknowl - edge that X 1 and X 3 are different variables , as are Y 2 and Y 4 , even if the same instruments are used to measure X 1 and X 3 or to measure Y 2 and Y 4 . If such a mediational chain were subse - quently shown to be a causal chain , each cause would precede its effect . There is thus no “backward” or “reciprocal” causation in the MacArthur approach . Finally , because of this emphasis on timing , no variable can be described as a moderator - mediator or a mediator - moderator with the MacArthur approach , a relationship sometimes claimed when applying the Baron & Kenny approach ( see situations 7 and 8 in Table 2 ) . In the MacArthur approach , a moderator must always precede and not be associated with that which it mod - erates , and a mediator must always follow and be associated with that which it mediates . Table 2 Conclusions About the Relationship Between X 1 and X 2 for the Baron & Kenny Approach and MacArthur Approach in a Hypothetical Example Eligibility criteria Analytic criteria Conclusions X 1 precedes X 2 Association between X 1 and X 2 Interaction between X 1 and X 2 Main effect of X 2 Baron & Kenny approach MacArthurapproach 1 [ Yes ] No No No Neither Neither 2 [ Yes ] No No Yes Neither Neither 3 [ Yes ] Yes No No Neither Neither 4 Yes Yes No Yes X 2 mediates X 1 X 2 mediates X 1 5 [ Yes ] No Yes No X 1 moderates X 2 X 1 moderates X 2 X 2 moderates X 1 6 [ Yes ] No Yes Yes X 1 moderates X 2 X 1 moderates X 2 X 2 moderates X 1 7 [ Yes ] Yes Yes No X 2 mediates X 1 X 2 mediates X 1 X 1 moderates X 2 X 2 moderates X 1 8 [ Yes ] Yes Yes Yes X 2 mediates X 1 X 2 mediates X 1 X 1 moderates X 2 X 2 moderates X 1 Note . [ Yes ] Is an issue only for the MacArthur approach for moderation . Here subjects are randomized to intervention A and B ( X 1 (cid:2) 1 if A , 0 if B ) , and after a month either remain on the same intervention or are switched to the other intervention ( X 2 (cid:2) 1 if A , 0 if B ) . S106 KRAEMER , KIERNAN , ESSEX , AND KUPFER Role of Exploratory and Hypothesis - Testing Studies In applications , both the Baron & Kenny and the MacArthur approaches can be used as a basis of hypothesis - testing using standard methods . To date , their primary value been in exploratory studies ( Essex et al . , 2006 ; Jaffee et al . , 2005 ; Smeraldi et al . , 1998 ) . These exploratory studies are not designed to formally test hypotheses about the existence of particular moderators and / or mediators . Rather , they seek to generate strong hypotheses for future studies , either for experimental studies ( e . g . , RCTs ) that test a priori hypotheses about causal roles for moderators and / or mediators on an outcome ( Kraemer , Frank , & Kupfer , 2006 ) or observational studies that test a priori hypotheses about the role ( not necessarily causal ) of particular moderators and / or mediators in predicting outcomes . Evolution of the Macarthur Approach and Future Directions Emphasis here has been on the rationale for the modifications by the MacArthur approach to the Baron & Kenny approach . Un - doubtedly , the MacArthur approach has limitations that will emerge as it is applied , as has happened with the Baron & Kenny approach over the last 20 years . Some have already been identi - fied . When introducing the MacArthur approach ( Kraemer et al . , 2001 ) , the criteria were defined , but without specification of meth - ods to apply those criteria . It was rapidly found that in absence of specific methods , researchers found it difficult to apply the defi - nitions consistently . Consequently , in considering the specific ap - plication to RCTs ( Kraemer et al . , 2002 ) , the same linear model was used as used by the Baron & Kenny approach . What then proved problematic was the issue of centering of the independent variables . Because centering did not affect the interaction term , the problem was not in the definition of moderator , but in the defini - tion of the mediator . The suggestion first presented in this paper of centering M at what is know about M at the time of T is one way to resolve that question to ensure the clear interpretability of the coefficients in the regression model . An unsolved problem common to both approaches but more salient to the MacArthur approach is that of “proving” that two variables are not associated . For mediation , the Baron & Kenny approach has focused on whether the association is statistically significant ( p (cid:13) . 05 or whatever significance level is set ) . How - ever , this means that whether or not an association is claimed to exist depends largely on sample size , for the larger the sample size , the more likely one will see statistical significance . To date , in applying the MacArthur approach , a double criterion has been used : Association is shown to exist if p (cid:13) . 05 and the magnitude of an appropriate correlation coefficient exceed a threshold value , say . 2 . Both the selected significance level ( . 05 ) and the threshold value ( . 2 ) would best be based on consensus . Alternatively , a better tactic must be identified . Finally , another problem common to both approaches but more salient to the Baron & Kenny approach is the dependence on linear models which often do not fit the research situation very well . There is nothing in the MacArthur approach that is specifically dependent on the linear model , but the linear model is both the most familiar to researchers and easiest to use . However , moving to a nonparametric approach is well underway . In such an ap - proach , no assumptions would be made about the distribution of the outcome measures , linearity , or equal variances . However , such developments are yet in their infancy . Conclusion The catalyst for the MacArthur approach was concern about the ambiguities inherent in the Baron & Kenny approach , which are of great concern in research that underlies clinical decision - making . Such clinical decisions may include whether or not to recommend the use of an intervention ( e . g . , use hormone replacement therapy ? get breast implants ? prescribe a specific drug ? ) , to recommend a reduction in risk factors ( e . g . , reduce fats ? carbohydrates ? pro - teins ? ) , or to recommend the adoption of a protective factor ( e . g . , drink red wine to prevent heart disease ? ) . Often there are serious consequences when such recommendations are wrong . Such rec - ommendations , if inaccurate , can influence clinical decision - making before their inaccuracies can be detected and corrected by later research studies . As was apparent with PVC reducing drugs , the negative effects of incorrect inferences may not even be correctable for many to whom those clinical decisions were ap - plied . In emphasizing the concerns about the ramifications of errone - ous inferences in clinical research , we do not suggest that those working in the social / behavioral sciences are protected against the consequences of inference errors associated with ambiguities . To - day , many working in the social / behavioral sciences are working in areas with direct influence on policy decision making with consequences every bit as serious and immediate as those in clinical research . Such researchers may find the modifications designed to protect such decision - making introduced in the MacArthur approach more appropriate to their research objectives . Such a decision would require understanding what the similarities and differences between the two approaches are , the issue of focus in this discussion . References Aiken , L . S . , & West , S . G . ( 1991 ) . Multiple regression : Testing and interpreting interactions . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . Altman , D . G . , Schulz , K . F . , Hoher , D . , Egger , M . , Davidoff , F . , Elbourne , D . , et al . ( 2001 ) . The revised CONSORT statement for reporting ran - domized trials : Explanation and elaboration . Annals of Internal Medi - cine , 134 , 663 – 694 . Baron , R . M . , & Kenny , D . A . ( 1986 ) . The Moderator - Mediator variable distinction in social psychological research : Conceptual , strategic , and statistical considerations . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 1173 – 1182 . Cohen , J . ( 1988 ) . Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Cohen , J . , Cohen , P . , West , S . , & Aiken , L . ( 2003 ) . Applied multiple regression / correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Collins , L . M . , Graham , J . W . , & Flaherty , B . P . ( 1998 ) . An alternative framework for defining mediation . Multivariate Behavaioral Research , 33 , 295 – 312 . Essex , M . J . , Kraemer , H . C . , Armstong , J . M . , Boyce , W . T . , Goldsmith , H . H . , Klein , M . H . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Exploring risk factors for the emergence of children’s mental health problems . Archives of General Psychiatry , 63 , 1246 – 1256 . S107 BARON & KENNY AND MACARTHUR APPROACHES Jaffee , S . R . , Caspi , A . , Moffitt , T . E . , Dodge , K . A . , Rutter , M . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Nature X nurture : Genetic vulnerabilities interact with physical maltreatment to promote conduct problems . Development and Psycho - pathology , 17 , 67 – 84 . James , L . R . , & Brett , J . M . ( 1984 ) . Mediators , moderators , and tests for mediation . Journal of Applied Psychology , 69 , 307 – 321 . Kenny , D . A . ( 1979 ) . Correlation and causality . New York : Wiley . Kenny , D . A . , Kashy , D . A . , & Bolger , N . ( 1998 ) . Data analysis in social psychology . In D . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , & G . Lindzey ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social psychology ( Vol . 1 , pp . 233 – 265 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Kraemer , H . C . , & Blasey , C . ( 2004 ) . Centring in regression analysis : A strategy to prevent errors in statistical inference . International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research , 13 , 141 – 151 . Kraemer , H . C . , Frank , E . , & Kupfer , D . J . ( 2006 ) . Moderators of treatment outcomes : clinical , research , and policy importance . Journal of the American Medical Association , 296 , 1 – 4 . Kraemer , H . C . , Kazdin , A . E . , Offord , D . R . , Kessler , R . C . , Jensen , P . S . , & Kupfer , D . J . ( 1997 ) . Coming to terms with the terms of risk . Archives of General Psychiatry , 54 , 337 – 343 . Kraemer , H . C . , & Kupfer , D . J . ( 2006 ) . Size of treatment effects and their importance to clinical research and practice . Biological Psychiatry , 59 , 990 – 996 . Kraemer , H . C . , Stice , E . , Kazdin , A . , & Kupfer , D . ( 2001 ) . How do risk factors work together to produce an outcome ? Mediators , moderators , independent , overlapping and proxy risk factors . The American Journal of Psychiatry , 158 , 848 – 856 . Kraemer , H . C . , Wilson , G . T . , Fairburn , C . G . , & Agras , W . S . ( 2002 ) . Mediators and moderators of treatment effects in randomized clinical trials . Archives of General Psychiatry , 59 , 877 – 883 . Last , J . M . ( 1995 ) . A dictionary of epidemiology . New York : Oxford University Press . MacKinnon , D . P . , Lockwood , C . M . , Hoffman , J . M . , West , S . G . , & Sheets , V . ( 2002 ) . A comparison of methods to test mediation and other intervening variable effects . Psychological Methods , 7 , 83 – 104 . Moore , T . J . ( 1995 ) . Deadly medicine : Why tens of thousands of heart patients died in America’s worst drug disaster . New York : Simon & Schuster . Pearl , J . ( 2000 ) . Causality : Models , reasoning , and inference . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Rosenthal , R . ( 1994 ) . Parametric measures of effect size . In H . Cooper & L . V . Hedges ( Eds . ) , The handbook of research synthesis ( pp . 231 – 244 ) . New York : Russell Sage Foundation . Rothman , K . J . , & Greenland , S . ( 1998 ) . Modern epidemiology . Philadel - phia : Lippincott Williams & Wilkins . Rubin , D . B . ( 2004 ) . Teaching statistical inference for causal effects in experiments and observational studies . Journal of Educational and Be - havioral Statistics , 29 , 343 – 367 . Shrout , P . E . ( 1997 ) . Should significance tests be banned ? Introduction to a special section exploring the pros and cons . Psychological Science , 8 , 1 – 2 . Shrout , P . E . , & Bolger , N . ( 2002 ) . Mediation in experimental and non - experimental studies : New procedures and recommendations . Psycho - logical Methods , 7 , 422 – 445 . Silverman , W . A . ( 1998 ) . Where’s the evidence ? Debates in modern medicine . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Smeraldi , E . , Zanardi , R . , Benedetti , F . , DiBella , D . , Perez , J . , & Catalano , M . ( 1998 ) . Polymorphism within the promoter of the serotonin trans - porter gene and antidepressant efficacy of fluvoxamine . Molecular Psy - chiatry , 3 , 508 – 511 . Thompson , B . ( 1999 ) . Journal editorial policies regarding statistical sig - nificance tests : Heat is to fire as p is to importance . Educational Psychology Review , 11 , 157 – 169 . Thompson , S . G . , & Higgins , J . P . ( 2005 ) . Can meta - analysis help target interventions at individuals most likely to benefit ? Lancet , 365 , 341 – 346 . Wilkinson , L . , & The Task Force on Statistical Inference . ( 1999 ) . Statis - tical methods in psychology journals : Guidelines and explanations . American Psychologist , 54 , 594 – 604 . S108 KRAEMER , KIERNAN , ESSEX , AND KUPFER