From the SelectedWorks of Daniel F Spulber February 28 , 2015 Prices versus Prizes : Patents , Public Policy and the Market for Inventions Daniel F Spulber , Northwestern University Available at : https : / / works . bepress . com / daniel _ spulber / 3 / 1 © Daniel F . Spulber 2015 Prices versus Prizes : Patents , Public Policy , and the Market for Inventions Daniel F . Spulber Northwestern University February 20 , 2015 ABSTRACT The article argues that market prices provide far better incentives for invention and innovation than do government prizes . The question of prices versus prizes is important because the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 has established a framework for government prizes . The article finds fundamental flaws in the deadweight welfare loss arguments for replacing market prices with government prizes . The article examines public prizes in comparison to the market for inventions in terms of efficiency in the allocation of inventions . The discussion shows how , in contrast to public prizes , prices in the market for inventions provide guidance for investment in invention , commercialization , innovation , and complementary inventions . The article demonstrates that replacing market prices with public prizes would substantially harm invention and innovation . JEL Codes : D40 , O31 , L10 Keywords : Invention , innovation , R & D , competition , prices , prizes _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ * Elinor Hobbs Distinguished Professor of International Business , Department of Strategy , Kellogg School of Management , Northwestern University , 2001 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL , 60208 , and Professor of Law ( Courtesy ) , Northwestern University Law School . E - mail : jems @ kellogg . northwestern . edu . The opinions expressed in this paper are solely those of the author and not necessarily those of any other individual or organization . This paper is a sequel to an earlier paper on markets for invention . I thank Alexei Alexandrov , Justus Baron , Richard Epstein , Kirti Gupta , Steve Haber , John Howells , Ron Katznelson , Scott Kieff , Zorina Khan , Adam Mossoff , Ben Roin , Ralph Siebert , Henry Smith , Mark Snyder , and Richard Taffet for helpful comments on the earlier paper . I am grateful to Qualcomm and the Kellogg School of Management for research support . 2 I . INTRODUCTION Should government prizes replace market prices for inventions ? Under the government prize system , central planners would design the contests , choose the awards , select the winning inventions , and allocate technologies to producers . This contrasts with the current patent system in which the market for inventions guides invention and innovation . To address this critical policy question , I show that arguments demonstrating advantages of government prizes over market prices are fundamentally flawed . I further demonstrate that market prices dominate government prizes in terms of both allocative and dynamic economic efficiency . I argue that replacing market prices with government prizes would damage invention , innovation , social welfare , and economic growth . The America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 ( the Act ) establishes a legal framework for replacing some types of patents with government prizes and public control of technology . 1 The Act specifies the elements of prize contests : “the subject of the competition ; ” “the rules for being eligible to participate in the competition ; ” “the process for participants to register for the competition ; ” “the amount of the prize ; ” and “the basis on which a winner will be selected . ” 2 The Act also allows the government to license intellectual property ( IP ) from inventors : “The Federal Government may negotiate a license for the use of intellectual property developed by a participant for a competition . ” 3 The Act specifies that transfers of technology and licensing of IP to the government are voluntary . 4 However , the government can apply various mechanisms , such as antitrust , regulation , subsidies , or procurement , to induce participation in contests . The Act empowers the heads of all federal agencies in the Executive branch to create prize competitions . 5 The Act authorizes the use of both tax revenues and private funds to pay cash prizes . 6 1 The full name of the Act is The America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technology , Education , and Science Act P . L . 111 - 358 . The Act was signed into law by the President on January 4 , 2011 . 2 P . L . 111 - 358 , Section 105 . 3 P . L . 111 - 358 , Section 105 . 4 The Act states that “The Federal Government may not gain an interest in intellectual property developed by a participant in a competition without the written consent of the participant . ” ( P . L . 111 - 358 , Section 105 ) . 5 Practically any federal agency in the executive branch can offer prizes including for example the Department of Energy , the Department of Education , the National Aeronautics and Space Administration , and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 6 “Support for a prize competition under this section , including financial support for the design and administration of a prize or funds for a monetary prize purse , may consist of Federal appropriated funds and funds provided by the private sector for such cash prizes . ” ( P . L . 111 - 358 , Section 105 ) . 3 Some provisions of the Act are being put into practice : “The Administration will continue to focus on using prizes to encourage new ways to speed commercialization . ” 7 For example , the U . S . government is applying prizes such as “Challenge Grants” competitions to promote commercialization of new technologies . 8 In addition , prizes are part of various public - private partnerships , including partnerships with universities . 9 According to the Department of Commerce “To support these communities [ of innovators ] , the Administration has partnered with organizations to inspire participation in innovative activities through the use of challenges and prizes . ” 10 Many academics advocate replacing market prices with a system of government prizes . Benjamin Roin points out that “the past two decades have seen a virtual explosion of scholarship on prize systems . ” 11 Evaluating this literature , Roin states “The consensus view is that if the government can set prizes that offer equivalent incentives for innovation as intellectual property , it should grant prizes instead of intellectual property because the public would receive the same benefits of innovation without the deadweight loss from higher consumer prices . ” 12 The law literature advocating replacing patents with prizes is extensive and advances a variety of arguments including equitable allocation of resources . 13 The economics literature advocating prizes over prices is also extensive . 14 7 U . S . Department of Commerce , The Competitiveness and Innovative Capacity of the United States , January , 2012 , Washington , D . C . , http : / / www . commerce . gov / sites / default / files / documents / 2012 / january / competes _ 010511 _ 0 . pdf , Accessed February 21 , 2015 , at 3 - 7 ) . 8 “The Office of Innovation and Entrepreneurship at the Department of Commerce , in conjunction with its National Advisory Council on Innovation and Entrepreneurship ( NACIE ) is working to improve commercialization through its i6 Challenge Grants , a competition that funds the best ideas for technology commercialization , ” id . at 3 - 7 . 9 “Additional initiatives in this area include a joint effort by the Administration , the Association of American Universities , and the Association of Public and Land ‐ grant Universities to encourage university leaders to work more closely with industry , investors , and agencies to increase entrepreneurship , encourage more collaboration between universities and industry , and increase economic development , ” U . S . Department of Commerce , id . at 3 - 7 . 10 U . S . Department of Commerce , id . at 5 - 14 . 11 Benjamin N . Roin , 2014 , “Intellectual Property versus Prizes : Reframing the Debate , ” University of Chicago Law Review , 81 ( 3 ) , Summer , pp . 999 - 1078 , at 1078 . Roin adds that “Among scholars and policymakers , there is a broad consensus that without government intervention , private industry would significantly underinvest in the R & D of new ideas and expressions , ” at 1003 . 12 Roin , id . at 1017 . 13 A . Kapczynski , 2012 , “The Cost of Price : Why and How to Get Beyond Intellectual Property Internalism , ” UCLA Law Review , 59 , pp . 970 - 1027 , argues for prizes based on the view that the government should redistribute resources including information ( “IP rations access via the price mechanism , and so it distributes resources in a way that is sensitive to the background allocation of resources . Yet the background allocation of 4 Michael Polanvyi states : “In order that inventions may be used freely by all , we must relieve inventors of the necessity of earning their rewards commercially and must grant them instead the right to be rewarded from the Public purse . ” 15 Two winners of the Nobel resources may be unjust” at 996 ) . M . Abramowicz , 2003 , “Perfecting Patent Prizes , ” Vanderbilt Law Review , 56 , pp . 115 - 236 , at 126 , ( “With a carefully designed prize system , even if an individual decisionmaker makes an error or is influenced by political considerations in calculating a prize , these flaws will not affect the decisions that matter , those made in anticipation of the eventual governmental awards . ” ) ; A . Kapczynski and T . Syed , 2013 , “The Continuum of Excludability and the Limits of Patents , Yale Law Journal , 122 , pp . 1900 - 1963 , also advocate prizes due to deadweight welfare loss but suggest that “prizes can help promote important but highly nonexcludable innovations that would be neglected by the patent system , ” at 1907 . See also D . G . Lichtman , 1997 , “Pricing Prozac : Why the Government Should Subsidize the Purchase of Patented Pharmaceuticals , Harvard Journal on Law & Technology , 11 , pp . 123 - 140 ; S . P . Calandrillo , 1998 , “An Economic Analysis of Intellectual Property Rights : Justifications and Problems of Exclusive Rights , Incentives to Generate Information , and the Alternative of a Government - Run Reward System , Fordham Intellectual Property , Media and & Entertainment Law Journal , 9 , pp . 301 - 360 ; J . Barry , 2007 , “When Second Comes First : Correcting Patent’s Poor Secondary Incentives Through an Optional Patent Purchase System , ” Wisconsin Law Review , 2007 , pp . 585 - 648 ; and S . Levmore , 2013 , “The Impending iPrize Revolution in Intellectual Property Law , ” Boston University Law Review , 93 , pp . 139 - 162 . 14 On replacing patents with government prizes , see B . D . Wright , 1983 , “The Economics of Invention Incentives : Patents , Prizes , and Research Contracts , ” American Economic Review , 73 , 4 , September , pp . 691 - 707 ; Michael Kremer , 1998 , “Patent Buyouts : A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 113 , pp . 1137 - 1167 , Suzanne Scotchmer , 2004 , Ideas and Incentives , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ; Nancy Gallini and Suzanne Scotchmer , 2002 , “Intellectual Property : When Is It the Best Incentive System ? ” Adam B . Jaffe , Josh Lerner , and Scott Stern , eds . , Innovation Policy and the Economy , v . 2 , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 51 - 77 , http : / / www . nber . org / chapters / c10785 , accessed August 3 , 2014 ; Hugo Hopenhayn , George Llobet , and M . Mitchell , 2006 , “Rewarding Sequential Innovators : Prizes , Patents , and Buyouts , ” Journal of Political Economy , 114 , pp . 1041 – 1068 ; and Chari , V . V . , M . Golosov , and A . Tsyvinski , 2012 , “Prizes and Patents : Using Market Signals to Provide Incentives for Innovations , ” Journal of Economic Theory , 147 , pp . 781 – 801 . For some economists , the patent system is a “major wound” that should be abolished , see Michele Boldrin and David K . Levine , 2013 , “The Case against Patents , ” Journal of Economic Perspectives , 27 , 1 , Winter , pp . 3 - 22 , at 18 . Michele Boldrin and David K . Levine , 2008 , Against Intellectual Monopoly , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , would leave in place some government subsidies . 15 Michael Polanvyi , 1944 , “Patent Reform , ” Review of Economic Studies , 11 , 2 , Summer , pp . 61 - 76 , at 65 , emphasis removed . 5 Prize in Economic Sciences argue for government prizes replacing market prices . 16 Kenneth Arrow states “In an ideal socialist economy , the reward for invention would be completely separated from any charge to the users of the information . In a free enterprise economy , inventive activity is supported by using the invention to create property rights ; precisely to the extent that it is successful , there is an underutilization of the information . The property rights may be in the information itself , through patents and similar legal devices , or in the intangible assets of the firm if the information is retained by the firm and used only to increase its profits . ” 17 Joseph Stiglitz argues that “Patents are not the only way of stimulating innovation . … The alternative of awarding prizes would be more efficient and more equitable . ” 18 For Stiglitz , “The innovation incentives are strong in the patent system , but they are distorted , whereas the prize system can provide equivalently strong incentives that are less distorted . ” 19 The standard argument for government prizes replacing market prices is simple enough . 20 Prize advocates maintain that because inventions are public goods they should be priced at $ 0 , so that any positive price is inefficient . The market price of an invention equals say $ 1 . 00 , which is necessarily greater than the marginal cost of $ 0 . Patents create economic monopolies the argument goes , so that market prices create a necessarily creates a monopoly deadweight welfare loss . To correct this problem , the government should hold a contest , pay the winning inventor a prize of $ 1 . 00 or less , take the invention , and make it available to producers at a cost of $ 0 – problem solved ! Or is this simple solution just too good to be true ? 16 The full name of the prize is the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel , http : / / www . nobelprize . org / nobel _ prizes / economic - sciences / laureates / , Accessed June 10 , 2014 . 17 Arrow suggests that the Soviet Union offers an example of such a system of prizes ; see Kenneth J . Arrow , 1962 , “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention , ” in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity , Cambridge , MA : National Bureau of Economic Research , pp . 609 - 626 , at 615 . 18 Joseph E . Stiglitz , 2006 , “A Better Way to Crack It , ” New Scientist , 191 , 2569 , September , p . 20 . 19 Joseph E . Stiglitz , 2008 , “Economic Foundations of Intellectual Property Rights , ” Duke Law Journal , 57 ( 6 ) , April , pp . 1693 - 1724 , at 1724 . See also Joseph E . Stiglitz Stiglitz , J . E . , 2014 , “Intellectual Property Rights , the Pool of Knowledge , and Innovation , ” NBER working paper 20014 , March 2014 , available at http : / / www . nber . org / papers / w20014 . pdf ? new _ window = 1 , Accessed June 21 , 2014 . 20 In his overview of the literature , Roin , 2014 , supra note 11 , observes : “the primary benefit of a prize system has typically been viewed as its ability to avoid the deadweight loss associated with patents , ” at 1017 - 1018 . 6 In this article , I explain why arguments for replacing market prices with public prizes are incorrect . First , I show that the standard deadweight welfare loss argument is a fallacy because it assumes government prizes create no economic distortions – a classic case of a “free lunch . ” Yet , the government must collect taxes to pay for the prizes and such taxes create substantial deadweight welfare losses . 21 The bureaucratic and compliance costs of the taxation system are substantial as well . Extensive competition in the market for inventions reduces prices and mitigates deadweight welfare loss from market prices . The standard argument for public prizes assumes that the government would incur no costs of administering the prize system or managing subsequent technology diffusion and commercialization – another free lunch . Yet , the administrative costs of operating a government prize system and commercializing technologies are significant . The standard argument for public prizes further assumes that market prices create monopoly deadweight welfare losses . This assumption is inaccurate because competition in the market for inventions and in product markets mitigates such economic distortions . Also , market competition promotes efficiency because firms have incentives to reduce the transaction costs of commercialization and innovation . I conclude that the deadweight welfare losses resulting from a government prize system are likely to substantially exceed any such losses from competitive markets – replacing prices with prizes would lower social welfare . Second , I emphasize that government prizes , in contrast to the market for inventions , cannot achieve an efficient allocation of technology . A government prize system with government diffusion of technology can do little to promote efficient commercialization and innovation . Government prizes require planners to choose the best technology in advance , and government diffusion of technology eliminates many of the benefits of competition . Government contests and the selection of winners reflect the specific priorities of public policy makers rather than economic benefits of invention and innovation . In contrast , prices in the market for inventions are generated by competition and coordination that selects the best inventions and innovations . Patents , along with copyrights , trademarks , trade secrets and other IP , support invention , commercialization , and innovation by providing the foundation of the market for inventions . 22 Competitive 21 On estimates of deadweight welfare losses from taxes , see Kenneth L . Judd , 1987 , “The Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Perfect - Foresight Model , ” Journal of Political Economy , 95 ( 4 ) , pp . 675 - 709 . Martin Feldstein , 1999 , “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax , ” Review of Economics and Statistics , 81 ( 4 ) , November , pp . 674 - 680 . 22 See Harold Demsetz , 1969 , “Information and Efficiency : Another Viewpoint , ” Journal of Law & Economics , 12 , pp . 1 – 22 ; F . Scott Kieff , 2001 , “Property Rights and Property Rules for Commercializing Inventions , ” Minnesota Law Review , 85 , pp . 697 - 754 ; B . Zorina Khan , 2005 , The Democratization of Invention : Patents and Copyrights in American Economic Development , 1790 - 1920 , Cambridge , MA : NBER ; Richard A . Epstein , 2010 , “The Disintegration of Intellectual Property - A Classical Liberal Response to a Premature Obituary , ” Stanford University Law Review , 62 , January , pp . 7 pressures among inventors and among producers increase incentives to invent . 23 Inventions and innovations are not exogenous forces but instead are the results of economic decisions and transactions among participants in the market for inventions . As Friedrich Hayek points out , competition is a discovery procedure because it helps inventors and producers discover the best inventions and innovations . 24 Third , I explain that government prizes cannot achieve dynamic economic efficiency because they do not provide guidance for investment in commercialization and innovation . Public ownership and distribution of the winning technology at a zero price does not provide incentives for innovation . In contrast , investment in developing patented inventions occurs both before and after the patent is granted because a patent often covers the initial invention , development of the invention , and innovative applications , as Edmund Kitch recognized . 25 Prices in the market for inventions guide economic decisions of inventors , innovators , producers , investors , and consumers . Market prices for inventions convey signals about seller cost and buyer willingness to pay . Market prices for inventions thus promote innovation and competition and increase both static and dynamic efficiencies . Prices are state - contingent because they reflect technological change and the features of complementary and substitute inventions . Prices are state - contingent because market forces change prices without the transaction costs of establishing contingent contracts . Prices for inventions therefore guide decision making under uncertainty . The market for inventions is a market for innovative control because ownership of patented inventions not only generates residual returns but allows owners to exercise residual control over the development and application of inventions . 26 I do not argue against either public or private prizes generally – I only address the question of whether prizes should replace prices . 27 Both public and private prizes can provide incentives and information that are complements to – but not close substitutes for – the market for inventions . Gary Becker , winner of the Nobel Prize in Economic 455 - 522 ; and Daniel F . Spulber , 2015 , How Patents Provide the Foundation of the Market for Inventions , Journal of Competition Law & Economics , 11 , forthcoming . 23 Daniel F . Spulber , 2013 , “Competing Inventors and the Incentive to Invent , ” Industrial and Corporate Change , 22 , 1 , February , pp . 33 - 72 and Daniel F . Spulber , 2013 , “How Do Competitive Pressures Affect Incentives to Innovate when there is a Market for Inventions ? , ” Journal of Political Economy , 121 ( 6 ) , December , pp . 1007 - 1054 . 24 Friedrich A . Hayek , translation by Marcellus S . Snow , “Competition as a Discovery Procedure , ” Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics , 5 . 3 , 2002 , pp . 9 - 23 . This is a translation from German of Friedrich A . Hayek ' s “Der Wenbewerb als Entdeckungsverfahren , ” a 1968 lecture sponsored by the Institut für Weltwirtschaft at the University of Kiel . 25 Edmund W . Kitch , 1977 , “The Nature and Function of the Patent System , ” Journal of Law & Economics , 20 , pp . 265 - 267 . 26 See Spulber , 2015 , supra note 21 . 27 The idea of government prizes is not new , as can be seen from patent debates in the nineteenth century examined by Fritz Machlup and Edith Penrose , 1950 , “The Patent Controversy in the Nineteenth Century , ” Journal of Economic History , 10 , pp . 1 - 29 . 8 Sciences , observes that prizes may be useful because of the limited patentability of basic discoveries : “To offset the effect of this exclusion from patent protection on the incentive to discover , individuals and governments have created prizes and awards , like the Fields Medal and Nobel Prizes , for mathematical and scientific discoveries . ” 28 Public and private prizes can achieve various complementary objectives against the backdrop of IP rights , as long as policy makers do not seek to replace IP rights and the market for inventions . 29 Petra Moser and Tom Nicholas find historical evidence that prizes provide publicity that encourages patenting and innovation . 30 Fiona S . Murray et al . find that Grand Innovation Prizes are not substitutes for patents but instead serve such goals as awareness , education , and demonstrating the viability of alternatives . 31 Prizes can serve as an inducement to innovation when winners can patent their inventions and indeed find that winning a prize increases patenting . 32 Glen Weyl and Jean Tirole provide a general model of market incentives in which public subsidies supplement market prices . 33 The paper is organized as follows . Section II shows why the deadweight welfare loss argument for replacing market prices with public prizes is fundamentally flawed . Section III shows why market prices promote greater allocative efficiency than public prizes . Section IV discusses how market prices promote greater dynamic efficiency than public prizes because they help to guide individual technological decisions and serve as condensed indicators of technological change . Section V concludes the discussion . 28 See Gary Becker , “On Reforming the Patent System - Becker , ” http : / / www . becker - posner - blog . com / 2013 / 07 / , ( “Narrowing the type of innovations that can be patented is a more challenging task than reducing patent length . The first step is to recognize that many innovations presently cannot be patented . A major example is the inability to patent scientific theories and concepts , such as Einstein’s theory of relativity , Darwin’s theory of evolution , or Keynes’ model of the macro economy . The presumption in excluding basic scientific knowledge from the patent system is that the cost of restricting open access to such discoveries far exceeds any gains in encouraging the development of scientific concepts through granting temporary monopolies to the creators . ” ) 29 M . Wei , 2007 , “Should Prizes Replace Patents ? A Critique of the Medical Innovation Prize Act of 2005 , Boston University Journal of Science and Technology , 13 , pp . 25 - 45 , suggests that a “prize system could be used to supplement and close the gaps of both the patent regime and current NIH funding , ” at 45 . 30 Petra Moser and Tom Nicholas , 2013 , “Prizes , Publicity , and Patents : Non - Monetary Awards as a Mechanism to Encourage Innovation , ” Journal of Industrial Economics 61 ( 3 ) , pp . 763 - 788 . 31 Fiona S . Murray , Scott Stern , Giorgina Campbell , and Alan MacCormack , 2012 , “Grand Innovation Prizes : A Theoretical , Normative , and Empirical Evaluation , ” Research Policy 41 ( 10 ) : 1779 - 1792 , at 1791 . 32 Liam Brunt , Joshua Lerner , and Tom Nicholas , 2012 , “Inducement Prizes and Innovation , ” Journal of Industrial Economics 45 ( 4 ) , pp . 657 - 696 . 33 E . Glen Weyl and Jean Tirole , 2013 , “Market Power Screens Willingness - to - Pay , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 127 ( 4 ) , pp . 1971 - 2003 . 9 II . THE DEADWEIGHT WELFARE LOSS ARGUMENT REVISITED : TAXES AND ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS Prize advocates writing in the economics and law literatures generally make a set of inconsistent assumptions about market prices and central planning . First , prize advocates either understate or ignore the deadweight welfare losses from taxes that would be needed to pay prizes . 34 Prize advocates then assume incorrectly that IP creates economic monopolies , so that any IP owner prices at a monopoly price , which creates monopoly deadweight welfare losses . Second , prize advocates assume that the government would expend no resources in managing contests , selecting winners , and allocating inventions , thus assuming that there are zero administrative costs of prize systems . Prize advocates further ignore the private resource costs of developing inventions , commercializing IP and creating innovations , which is implicit in the assumption that the optimal price of inventions should be zero . The deadweight welfare loss argument for public prizes is rigged ; it incorrectly assumes the result that government prizes would eliminate the monopoly deadweight welfare loss resulting from market prices . A . Deadweight Welfare Losses : Prices versus Prizes Advocates of public prizes replacing market prizes assume that government taxes used to finance a prize system do not create any economic distortions so that prizes involve zero deadweight welfare losses . Prize advocates further assume that prices in markets for inventions create the maximum possible economic distortions and so that they generate monopoly deadweight welfare losses . 35 These assumptions are not only inconsistent with each other but generally unrealistic . 34 For an exception in which government taxes have social costs and price distortions can be less than monopoly levels , see Eric A . A . de Laat , 1996 , “Patents or Prizes : Monopolistic R & D and Asymmetric Information , ” International Journal of Industrial Organization 15 , pp . 369 - 390 . de Laat points out that government taxes have social costs and that market price distortions can be less than monopoly levels . de Latt considers the choice of prizes and patent duration as a problem of mechanism design under asymmetric information , although such a policy would be very costly because it would require incentive mechanisms to vary with different demand and cost conditions . 35 The assumptions that patent holders have an economic monopoly and charge a per - unit royalty however unrealistic are standard in the economic theory of patent policy , see Willam D . Nordhaus , 1969 , I nvention , Growth , and Welfare : A Theoretical Treatment of Technological Change , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ; Willam D . Nordhaus , 1972 , “The Optimum Life of a Patent : Reply , ” American Economic Review , 62 , pp . 428 - 431 ; and Scherer , F . M . , 1972 , “Nordhaus ' Theory of Optimal Patent Life : A Geometric Reinterpretation , ” American Economic Review , 62 , pp . 422 - 427 . 10 For example , Chari et al . assume that there is no deadweight welfare loss associated with taxation to pay for prizes : “Since a prize is a lump sum transfer financed by lump sum taxes on consumers , it does not affect the social surplus . ” 36 At the same time , Chari et al . assume that patent ownership causes a monopoly deadweight welfare loss . 37 This difference in assumptions generates an advantage of public prizes over market prices . In their setting , market prices may still be preferable to public prizes , but only because patent owners have private information not available to government planners . 38 Steven Shavell and Tanguy van Ypersele do not mention where the government obtains the money to pay for the reward given to the winning inventor . The government simply pays a reward to the inventor . They implicitly assume that the reward is a pure transfer from individual taxpayers to the inventor that occurs without any social costs , and therefore does not generate any deadweight welfare loss from taxation . At the same time , Shavell and van Ypersele assume that all patent owners make monopoly profits and thus the patent system generates monopoly deadweight welfare losses . 39 Michael Kremer asserts that because of deadweight welfare losses , “competitive markets do not provide appropriate incentives for the production of ideas . ” 40 Kremer recommends that the government purchase patented inventions using auctions and make them commonly available . Kremer assumes that inventors are monopolists making huge profits while government taxes are chosen optimally by a welfare - maximizing central planner . 41 In practice , taxes differ from optimal taxes but even optimal taxes can generate deadweight welfare losses . 42 The standard assumption that prices for inventions generate monopoly deadweight welfare losses is unrealistic because ownership of IP does not in itself generate economic monopolies . There is extensive competition in the market for inventions , involving both rivalries from substitute and complementary technologies . 36 Chari et al . , supra note 14 , at 787 . 37 Chari et al . , supra note 14 . 38 Chari et al . , supra note 14 . Shavell and van Ypersele concede that governments may lack the necessary information but argue that government prizes will dominate market prices if there is not too much uncertainty , supra note 38 . 39 Steven Shavell and Tanguy van Ypersele , 2001 , “Rewards versus Intellectual Property Rights , Journal of Law & Economics , 44 , 2 , pp . 525 - 547 . 40 Michael Kremer , 1998 , supra note 14 , at 1137 . 41 Michael Kremer , 1998 , supra note 14 . 42 Kremer states “To see that financing research with monopoly profits not only is not first best , but is generically less efficient than financing research through tax revenue , consider the problem of a social planner choosing a tax to finance research . The principles of Ramsey taxation should clearly guide the planner’s decision , and it is highly unlikely that the optimal tax will be a several thousand percent tax on the patented good . Yet financing research by giving monopoly rights to inventors is equivalent to such a tax , ” Michael Kremer , 1998 , supra note 14 , at 1140 . 11 There are over two million active patents , with more than a quarter million new patents granted every year . Most of these patents have little or no market value . Patent owners face competition from past inventions and entry of new inventions . There is also competition in innovations that use patented inventions and other technologies in products , production processes and transaction methods . These competitive forces substantially diminish the returns to patent owners . In addition , the economic returns to invention and innovation provide incentives for entry of new inventions and innovations . This leads to technological change that erodes the returns to past inventions . These market forces further constrain the returns to inventors and innovators thus limiting deadweight welfare losses over time . The assumption that there are no social costs of taxation also is unrealistic . In practice , taxes generate deadweight welfare losses whether applied to goods and services or labor income . Cecil E . Bohanon , John B . Horowitz , and James E . McClure point out that in the field of public economics “Textbooks say too little , too late , about the excess burdens of taxation . ” 43 They argue that “When textbook authors don’t explicitly discuss these costs when discussing the optimal provision of a public good , it leads students to forget that taxes are distortionary and ignore these welfare costs when doing their analyses . ” 44 The same may well be said about the economics and law literature that advocates public prizes when it fails to mention the costs of taxation . The deadweight welfare losses of taxation must be estimated because they take the form of economic distortions and compliance costs . Bohanon et al . survey nine studies of the economic costs of raising a dollar from a labor income tax and find the average to be between $ 1 . 43 and $ 1 . 50 . 45 In addition , Slemrod , Joel , and Jon Bakija find that there is a $ 0 . 10 compliance cost per dollar of revenue raised . 46 Using the average of economic studies of taxation , this means that the deadweight welfare losses from taxation equal $ 0 . 53 and $ 0 . 60 for every dollar of revenue . Martin Feldstein estimates “that the deadweight loss per dollar of revenue of using a labor income tax rather than a lump - sum tax is more than twelve times as large as Harberger’s classic estimate . If the existing Social Security tax and benefit structure is taken into account , the deadweight loss per dollar of personal income tax revenue is even greater . ” 47 Feldstein observes “The analysis implies that a marginal increase in tax revenue achieved by a proportional rise in all personal income tax rates involves a deadweight loss of two dollars per incremental dollar of revenue . ” 48 43 Cecil E . Bohanon , John B . Horowitz , and James E . McClure , 2014 , “Saying Too Little , Too Late : Public Finance Textbooks and the Excess Burdens of Taxation , ” ECON JOURNAL WATCH 11 ( 3 ) , September , pp . 277 - 296 , at 278 . 44 Id . at 279 . 45 Id . 46 Joel Slemrod and Jon Bakija , 2008 , Taxing Ourselves : A Citizen’s Guide to the Debate Over Taxes , 4th ed . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press . This is cited in Bohanon et al . supra note 42 . 47 Feldstein , 1999 , supra note 21 , at 679 . 48 Feldstein , 1999 , supra note 21 , at 679 . 12 Feldstein’s estimate is useful because it takes into account the effect of various institutions on labor income . Applying Feldstein’s estimate of the costs of taxation implies that a prize of $ 1 . 00 would generate economic costs of $ 3 . 00 , which includes the $ 1 . 00 cost of the prize and another $ 2 . 00 of deadweight welfare loss . Advocates of prizes who assume that taxes do not involve a distortion evaluate market prices based only on the direct cost of the prize of $ 1 . 00 . All other things equal , the proper standard of comparison for a public prize system would be whether or not market prices generated deadweight welfare losses greater than or less than $ 3 . 00 . The costs of public prize system that replaces patents would be prohibitive . The private returns to IP in the economy exceed hundreds of billions of dollars . The high cost of rewarding inventors and innovators would be a prohibitive amount in comparison to the existing budget of the US federal government . Monetary prizes for inventors would be financed from general taxation , which would face considerable resistance by taxpayers . There would also be administrative costs of additional tax collection to finance hundreds of billions of dollars in tax increases . In addition , such high taxes would generate considerable deadweight welfare losses . This again suggests that the government would only be able to offer a few prizes . An example gives some idea of potential cost of public prizes . Love and Hubbard propose a fixed prize fund that would be divided equally among innovators who would be compelled to surrender their IP rights . 49 Then - Congressman Bernard Sanders of Vermont , a self - described “democratic socialist” , introduced a bill based on their proposal : The Medical Innovation Prize Fund Act , H . R . 417 , 109th Congress , 2005 . The prize system would be mandatory , difficult to enforce , and subject to political pressures and industry rent - seeking . 50 In the proposed legislation , The Medical Innovation Prize Fund would total 0 . 5 % of GDP . Using an estimated GDP of $ 17 , 710 . 7 , the prize fund would have equaled approximately $ 88 . 5 billion . This large amount would cover prizes only for the relatively narrow area of medical innovation . As a standard of comparison , consider that federal funding of R & D equals about $ 126 billion about 30 % of total R & D . 51 In contrast , business provided $ 294 billion , about 69 % of total R & D . 52 B . What is the Marginal Cost of an Invention ? : Transaction Costs versus Administrative Costs 49 J . Love and T . Hubbard , 2007 , “The Big Idea : Prizes to Stimulate R & D for New Medicines , ” Chicago - Kent Law Review , 82 , pp . 1519 - 1554 . 50 See Abramowitz , 2003 , supra note 13 , and Wei , 2007 , supra note 29 . 51 This figure is for 2011 , see National Science Board , 2014 , Science and Engineering Indicators 2014 , Washington , D . C . : National Science Foundation , at 4 . 4 , http : / / www . nsf . gov / statistics / seind14 / content / etc / nsb1401 . pdf , accessed June 15 , 2014 . 52 Id . 13 The policy of replacing private ownership with public ownership is an attempt to achieve a “marginal cost price” for technology . Prize advocates argue that the “marginal cost price” of technology is zero . Both the costs of developing the technology and the cost of diffusing the technology are assumed to equal zero . Despite these standard assumptions , technology generally does not fit the textbook definition of a pure public good . Commercialization and innovation are not free ; there are positive marginal costs of developing inventions , diffusing technology , and creating innovations . There are transaction costs in markets for technology . If government agencies replace markets for technology , they would incur administrative costs . Under proposed prize systems , the government would be a “common carrier” in charge of obtaining and diffusing technology . The government would not be in charge of producing technology , which would be outsourced to participants in government prize contests . However , the government would be a public utility charged with procuring and allocating technology . This policy recommendation recalls the marginal cost controversies of public utility regulation , going back at least to Harold Hotelling . 53 As Arthur Pigou points out , the provision of public goods entails both direct costs and indirect costs caused by taxation . 54 Ronald Coase observes that government subsidies to attain marginal cost pricing would result in tax - induced distortions , inefficient resource allocation , income redistribution , and rent seeking . 55 Such objections were important in the deregulation of electric power generation , telecommunication and other public utilities . Coase’s objections to subsidized marginal cost pricing apply directly to IP , as John Duffy points out . 56 Prize advocates generally assume that the government prize system operates without costs . However , in addition to the economic distortions resulting from taxes , a system of government prizes would incur administrative costs . The government would expend considerable resources designing and managing contests , selecting winners , and diffusing inventions . 53 Harold Hotelling recommends government subsidies to achieve marginal cost pricing for industries with economies of scale such as public utilities . See Hotelling , 1938 , “The General Welfare in Relation to the Problems of Taxation and of Railway and Utility Rates , ” Econometrica , 6 , July , pp . 242 - 269 . 54 Arthur C . Pigou , 1947 , A Study of Public Finance , 3 rd ed . , London : Macmillan . 55 See Ronald Coase , 1946 , “The Marginal Cost Controversy , ” Economica , New Series , 13 ( 51 ) , August , pp . 169 - 182 and Ronald Coase , 1947 , “The Marginal Cost Controversy : Some Further Comments , ” Economica , New Series , 14 ( 54 ) , May , pp . 150 - 153 . See also Edgar K . Browning , 1976 , “The Marginal Cost of Public Funds , ” Journal of Political Economy , 84 ( 2 ) , pp . 283 - 298 and David E . Wildasin , 1984 , “On Public Good Provision with Distortionary Taxation , ” Economic Inquiry , 22 ( 2 ) , April , pp . 227 - 243 . 56 John F . Duffy , 2004 , “The Marginal Cost Controversy in Intellectual Property , ” University of Chicago Law Review , 71 ( 1 ) , Winter , pp . 37 - 56 . 14 The administrative costs of a prize system would be many times the administrative costs of the current patent system . The costs of administering the U . S . Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) are approximately $ 3 . 5 billion per year . 57 There are over a quarter of a million patents granted per year for highly diverse inventions . The USPTO covers a very wide range of scientific and technological subjects . No government agency could replace the entire patent system with contests and awards in every area of science and technology covered by the patent system without incurring astronomical administrative costs . Because of the complexities and broad range of the market for inventions , prizes could only replace a few market prices . The administrative costs of operating a public prize system suggest that the government would only offer a handful of prizes . One indication of administrative costs of a public prize system is that private contests offer relatively few awards in only a small number of topic areas . 58 For example , the X Prize imposes very restrictive criteria : “Pushes the boundaries of human potential by focusing on problems currently believed to be unsolvable , or that have no clear path toward a solution . ” 59 An X Prize “Targets a range of market failures : ( 1 ) no capital is being spent , ( 2 ) capital is being spent , but without the desired result , ( 3 ) no capital is being spent because nobody knows it’s a problem , ( 4 ) the problem is known , but no one can imagine that it’s not already being addressed , ( 5 ) No one is addressing because a solution is thought to be impossible . ” 60 Even with a limited number of government contests , the administrative costs would be significant . Government officials would need to determine what types of inventions should receive “prizes” before discoveries are made . This would require government officials to have foresight exceeding the combination of all scientists , engineers and other researchers . Government officials also would need to determine what types of inventions were needed by consumers and firms . As Hayek emphasizes , this would depend on the impossible requirement that government officials’ knowledge of the needs of individuals would equal individual’s own knowledge of their needs . Hayek observes that “competition … means decentralized planning by many separate persons . ” 61 The government would also need to know how much to reward inventors , again requiring knowledge of inventions before the fact , knowledge of inventors’ costs and scientific opportunities , and knowledge of private benefits from inventions . 57 This is an expenditure request for fiscal year 2016 , see http : / / www . uspto . gov / about - us / performance - and - planning / budget - and - financial - information , accessed February 23 , 2015 . 58 Private groups such as the X Prize Foundation also offer prizes for inventors , see http : / / www . xprize . org / , accessed February 23 , 2015 . These prizes generate tournaments in which inventors compete to offer the best invention that satisfies the rules of the competition . 59 http : / / www . xprize . org / about / what - is - an - xprize , accessed February 23 , 2015 . 60 Id . 61 Friedrich A . Hayek , 1975 , “The Pretence of Knowledge , ” Swedish Journal of Economics , 77 , 4 , December , pp . 433 - 442 , at 520 . 15 Advocates of government prizes replacing market prices also assume that the marginal cost of commercializing and distributing inventions are zero . Inventions are characterized as public goods that should have a zero price . For prize advocates , positive prices for inventions are thus evidence of market failure . The government remedies this market failure by distributing technologies at a zero price . Inventions should not be viewed as ideal public goods with zero costs of distribution . Inventions may be non - rivalrous because they can be used by multiple producers . However , there are economic costs of developing , commercializing , and applying inventions . Market prices for invention should not equal zero because the marginal costs of invention and innovation are positive . Because the efficient price of an invention can be positive , observation of positive prices in the market for inventions does not indicate economic inefficiency . It is necessary to ration access to inventions because of the resource costs of providing inventions to potential adopters . This means that market prices for inventions are positive because they necessarily include the marginal costs of providing inventions . The benefits of patents and other protections for IP rights are precisely that they reduce transaction costs . 62 Patents provide a variety of mechanisms that reduce the costs of licensing or transferring IP . 63 Because patents are a means of protecting IP , they offer an alternative that can lower transaction costs in comparison to trade secrets and other means of protecting IP . Patents allow market transactions in technology that can increase economic efficiency when transaction costs are less than the governance costs of firms that vertically integrate R & D and production . Markets for all types of goods and services are subject to such standard transaction costs as search , communication , negotiation , contracting , moral hazard and adverse selection . 64 Markets for inventions are subject to additional transaction costs . 65 62 Harold Demsetz , Information and Efficiency : Another Viewpoint , 12 J . L . & Econ 1 , 14 ( 1969 ) ; Smith , H . E . , 2002 , “Exclusion versus Governance : Two Strategies for Delineating Property Rights , ” Journal of Legal Studies , 31 , pp . S453 - S487 , Smith , H . E . , 2007 , “Intellectual Property as Property : Delineating Entitlements in Information , ” Yale Law Journal , 116 , 8 , June , pp . 1742 – 1822 , Smith , H . E . , 2009 , “Institutions and Indirectness in Intellectual Property , ” University of Pennsylvania Law Review , 157 , 6 , June , Symposium : The Foundations of Intellectual Property Reform , pp . 2083 - 2133 ; Robert P . Merges , A Transactional View of Property Rights , 20 Berkeley Technology L . J . 1477 ( 2005 ) ; F . Scott Kieff , Property Rights and Property Rules for Commercializing Inventions , supra note _ _ ; Daniel F . Spulber , 2015 , How Patents Provide the Foundation of the Market for Inventions , Journal of Competition Law and Economics , 11 , forthcoming . 63 Daniel F . Spulber , 2015 , id . 64 See Spulber , D . F . , 1996 , “Market Microstructure and Intermediation , ” Journal of Economic Perspectives , 10 , 3 , Summer , pp . 135 - 152 ; and Daniel F . Spulber , 1999 , Market Microstructure : Intermediaries and the Theory of the Firm , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 16 Patent owners who commercialize their inventions expend resources searching for potential licensees and negotiating licensing agreements . Inventors also expend resources in developing and demonstrating their inventions . Inventors may need to invest in codifying and transmitting tacit knowledge that is essential for producers to apply their inventions . 66 IP owners also devote effort to developing industry standards by participating in standards organizations and industry consortia , which further promotes the diffusion and application of new technologies . 67 Marketing and sales activities are important because they serve to diffuse inventions and innovations in the economy . Marketing and sales of inventions communicate information to potential buyers and coordinate adoption decisions . The scientific and technological complexities of many inventions suggest that inventions might not diffuse without marketing and sales efforts . Inventions are by their very nature novel and unknown to potential adopters , which can require additional services that are bundled technology transfers . Constraining prices for inventions would result in reduction of marketing and sales activities , which could then reduce diffusion of those technologies , thus generating welfare losses . The argument for positive prices for inventions is closely related to the arguments for resale price maintenance . 68 Resale price maintenance by manufacturers may be needed to make sure that retailers that provide customer services are not undercut by retailers that do not provide customer services . In some markets customer services may be needed to maintain customer demand for products , particularly for new products or technically complex products whose features are not well understood by customers . The Supreme Court in Leegin made resale price maintenance subject to the “rule of reason . ” 69 Even if usage of inventions is non - rivalrous , the application of inventions to create economic innovations is rivalrous . Users of inventions dissipate economic rents to innovation when they compete in product markets . Innovation is a costly activity , so that 65 See Richard Zeckhauser , 1996 , “The Challenge of Contracting for Technological Information , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 93 , November , pp . 12743 - 12748 and Daniel F . Spulber , 2014 , The Innovative Entrepreneur , New York : Cambridge University Press . 66 See Daniel F . Spulber , 2012 , “Tacit Knowledge with Innovative Entrepreneurship , ” International Journal of Industrial Organization , 30 , 6 , November , pp . 641 - 653 . See also Ashish Arora , 1996 , “Contracting for Tacit Knowledge : The Provision of Technical Services In Technology Licensing Contracts , ” Journal of Development Economics , 50 , pp . 233 – 256 . 67 Daniel F . Spulber , 2013 , “Innovation Economics : The Interplay among Technology Standards , Competitive Conduct , and Economic Performance , ” Journal of Competition Law & Economics , 9 , 4 , pp . 777 - 825 . 68 Lester G . Telser , 1960 , “Why Should Manufacturers Want Fair Trade ? ” , Journal of Law and Economics , Vol . 3 ( Oct . , 1960 ) , pp . 86 - 105 . 69 Leegin Creative Leather Products , Inc . v . PSKS , Inc . , 551 U . S . 877 ( 2007 ) . This decision reversed per se illegality in Dr . Miles Medical Co . v . John D . Park & Sons Co . , 220 U . S . 373 ( 1911 ) . 17 users of inventions invest costly resources in applying inventions in new products , production processes and transaction methods . Price rationing and allocation of inventions is useful in providing incentives for the development of invents , investment in innovation , and investment in complementary assets . F . Scott Kieff emphasizes that common ownership of technology leads to the “tragedy of the commons , ” overuse that dissipates the value of the invention just as overuse dissipates other types of resources . 70 C . Lump - Sum versus Per - Unit Royalties The literature on public prizes generates an advantage for prizes over prices because it treats taxes and market prices inconsistently . Prize advocates typically assume that taxes involve no deadweight welfare losses because they are lump - sum transfers . They further assume that market prices involve deadweight welfare losses because they are per - unit royalties . The comparison between prices and prizes changes if we treat the two alternatives consistently . If both patent owners and governments can use lump - sum transfers , prices are efficient and there is no need for prizes to replace prices . Patent licensing often features two - part tariffs with an up - front lump - sum royalty and a royalty per - unit of output produced using the invention . Royalties can be based on the number of units sold ( the apportionment rule ) and ad - valorem royalty rates on revenues from sales ( the entire market value rule ) . If both patent owners and governments rely on per - unit prices or taxes , there is no a priori advantage of prizes over prices . Suppose for example that the government finances the prize by taxing the good that depends on innovation , so that the cost to consumers is either a price p with market pricing or the sum of the per - unit tax g and the unit cost c under the new technology with government prizes . Consider the tax rate that would provide a prize that is equivalent to market returns , whether or not the market price is a monopoly price . To provide the equivalent prize , the per - unit tax would need to equal the market price minus the unit cost under the new technology , g = p − c . Either approach would generate the same welfare loss as measured by Arnold Harberger’s welfare triangle . 71 The theoretical welfare distortions are equivalent and prizes would have no advantage over prices . 70 Kieff , F . S . , 2001 , “Property Rights and Property Rules for Commercializing Inventions , ” Minnesota Law Review , 85 , pp . 697 - 754 . 71 See Arnold C . Harberger , 1964 , “The Measurement of Waste , ” American Economic Review , 54 , pp . 58 - 76 and Arnold C . Harberger , 1971 , “Three Basic Postulates For Applied Welfare Economics : An Interpretive Essay , ” Journal of Economic Literature , 9 , pp . 785 - 797 . On the extensive literature on measurement of deadweight welfare loss , including deadweight welfare loss from government taxation , see W . E . Diewert , The Measurement of Deadweight Loss Revisited , Econometrica , Vol . 49 , No . 5 , September , 1981 , pp . 1225 - 1244 . 18 The argument that government prizes eliminate the deadweight welfare losses from market prices is thus an artifact of asymmetric assumptions . These are assumptions are not only inconsistent but inaccurate . Government taxes involve all kinds of mechanisms that are highly distortionary . The cost of funding government prizes would be significant and would require extensive tax increases . This would create substantial deadweight welfare losses from tax distortions . In addition , the administrative costs of allocating inventions under a public prize system would likely be far greater than the transaction costs of the market for inventions , further increasing deadweight welfare losses from taxation to fund administrative costs . Conversely , prices for inventions include licensing through combinations of per - unit royalties and lump - sum royalties . Also , many inventions are owned by the companies that produce them and firms have incentives for efficient internal pricing . In addition , many patented inventions are assigned through the market for inventions , so that the prices of inventions would not involve distortionary prices per unit of output . Competition in the market for inventions reduces all types of prices including licensing royalties , transfer prices , and the returns to own - use of inventions by vertically - integrated producers . This implies that prices in the market for inventions do not generate monopoly deadweight welfare losses , contrary to the assumptions of prize advocates . In practice , the deadweight welfare losses from a public prize system would far exceed any deadweight welfare losses from market prices for inventions . III . ALLOCATIVE EFFICIENCY IN TECHNOLOGY : PRICES VERSUS PRIZES The proposed government prize system would replace the market for inventions with central planning of innovation . Yet , prize advocates do not address directly the question of allocative efficiency , only making the deadweight welfare loss comparison discussed in the previously . An economically meaningful comparison of prices and prizes requires a consistent evaluation of allocative efficiency under these two alternatives . In this section , I explain that central planning of innovation will not lead to allocative efficiency . Governments are not capable of efficiently allocating goods and services , let alone technology . I further observe that markets have a proven track record of efficiently allocating inventions and stimulating innovation based on those inventions . A . Public Prizes and Allocation of Technology The government prize system is intended to replace market allocation of inventions with public allocation . Government agencies would design contests to induce favored types of inventions and then those agencies would choose winning technologies . Having chosen particular technologies , the government agencies would take possession of the IP and allocate those technologies to producers . Free distribution of technology should not be confused with an economically efficient allocation . 19 The public prize system itself would not be intended to provide a public good or to subsidize the provision of a public good . Governments already offer significant subsidies for R & D through grants , procurement , tax credits , and other types of subsidies , so the prize system is not meant as a subsidy to invention . A prize system would result in an inefficient allocation of technology . Hayek points out that the price system provides coordination because it takes advantage of dispersed information . 72 Central planners cannot hope to make efficient economic decisions because they lack the staggering amount of subjective knowledge that is dispersed among individuals . In contrast , decentralized coordination by the price system offers other advantages over central planning . The allocative efficiency of markets is much greater than central planning for goods and services . The complexities of technology and specialized knowledge required by inventors and producers only serve to increase the informational advantages of markets over central planning . A government operated market for inventions would generate even more allocative inefficiencies that government allocation of more standard goods and services . There already is a government system for transferring technology in government labs to the private sector . 73 This system would need to be expanded to accommodate technology generated by prize competitions . Such an expansion would require additional administrative costs , which would require additional tax revenues and economic distortions . Another concern with such large - scale administrative systems for government prizes and public technology transfers is that they are costly to dismantle , often taking on a life of their own . The effects on markets for inventions could be very difficult to reverse , causing long - term damage to markets for invention . 74 Prize systems generally involve either public ownership or common ownership of inventions . With public ownership , the government would presumably make the inventions available to producers without cost , so that the outcome would be the same as with common ownership . With public ownership of inventions , government officials would need to invest in commercializing inventions or developing innovations that apply 72 Hayek , The Use of Knowledge in Society , American Economic Review , 35 ( 4 ) , September 1945 , observes : “Fundamentally , in a system where the knowledge of the relevant facts is dispersed among many people , prices can act to coordinate the separate actions of different people in the same way as subjective values help the individual to coordinate the parts of his plan , ” at 526 . 73 Technology transfers under the Stevenson - Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 ( P . L . 96 – 480 ) are carried out by the Office of Research and Technology Applications ( ORTA ) . The Stevenson - Wydler Act was amended by the United States Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986 ( P . L . 99 - 502 ) and the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 . 74 Kremer , M . and H . Williams . 2010 . “Incentivizing Innovation : Adding to the Toolkit . ” Innovation Policy and the Economy , 1 , pp . 1 - 17 , ( “Mandatory mechanisms for encouraging innovation cannot be costlessly turned on and off because of the dynamic element inherent in any market in which firms make long ‐ term R & D investments , ” at 11 ) . 20 the prize - winning inventions . This would involve public expenditures for the costs of commercialization and innovation , effectively putting public agencies in the innovation business . Involving public agencies in commercialization and innovation would require public agencies to develop business expertise that is already available in the private sector . Public commercialization and innovation would generate insurmountable problems of economic planning . Exercising command and control over economic activity has led to significant problems in socialist economies . The collapse of socialist economies such as the Soviet Union provides sufficient evidence that even the operation of traditional technologies by governments is not feasible . The diffusion of new technologies and management of innovation generally are beyond the scope of government administration . Governments are not very good at commercializing and diffusing inventions . The failure of government diffusion of technology is illustrated by the major benefits that resulted from the Bayh - Dole Act . The Bayh - Dole Act illustrates how markets diffuse innovations and governments do not . The U . S . government provides research grants to universities , non - profit organizations , and small businesses . However , the incentives for invention provided by such grants are accompanied by markets for invention , which provide additional incentives for commercialization and innovation . This was recognized by the Bayh - Dole Act , which permits organizations that receive federal government funding to own inventions rather than transferring ownership to the government . 75 Prior to the Bayh - Dole Act , government ownership of inventions resulted in minimal commercialization or diffusion of innovations . About 5 % of the 28 , 000 patents owned by the government were commercialized , and private ownership in contrast generated significant commercializing of inventions though patent licensing by universities . 76 In the first 25 years following the Act , university patent licensing generated 4 , 350 new products and 6 , 000 new firms . 77 The Bayh - Dole Act resulted in high levels of entrepreneurship by scientists and spurred the rise of university technology transfer offices ( TTOs ) . 78 According to the Association of University Technology 75 University and Small Business Patent Procedures Act , 1980 , 35 U . S . C . § 200 - 212 , 37 C . F . R . 401 . 76 Council On Governmental Relations , The Bayh - Dole Act : A Guide to the Law and Implementing Regulations 1 – 2 ( 1999 ) , http : / / www . cogr . edu / docs / Bayh _ Dole . pdf , cited by J . F . McDonough , 2006 , “The Myth of the Patent Troll : An Alternative View of the Function of Patent Dealers in an Idea Economy , ” Emory Law Journal , 56 , pp . 189 - 228 , at 199 . 77 Bayh , B . , J . P . Allen , and H . W . Bremer , 2009 , “Universities , Inventors , and the Bayh - Dole Act , ” Life Sciences Law & Industry Report , 3 , 24 , December 18 , pp . 1 - 5 , at 3 . 78 See Aldridge , T . T . and D . Audretsch , 2011 , “The Bayh - Dole Act and Scientist Entrepreneurship , ” Research Policy , 40 ( 8 ) , October , pp . 1058 - 1067 , and the references therein . See also Siegel , D . S . , Veugelers , R . , and M . Wright , 2007 , “Technology Transfer Offices and Commercialization of University Intellectual Property : Performance and Policy Implications , ” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 23 , 4 , pp . 640 – 660 ; and 21 Managers reports that there were about 40 , 000 active technology licenses and options in 2012 . 79 Government subsidies are not close substitutes for market incentives for innovation . The National Science Board ( 2014 ) estimates that federal agencies provided over $ 132 billion for R & D . Wright et al . find that even though corporations provide just over 5 % of US university research funding , “corporate - sponsored research is surprisingly valuable for further innovation . 80 Data collected over 20 years at nine campuses and three national laboratories administered by the University of California show that corporate - sponsored inventions are licensed and cited more often than federally sponsored ones . ” 81 Government agencies would replace decentralized markets with centralized allocation . Government agencies are not well equipped to run market places . Health insurance exchanges are an example of government market place design . 82 Government allocation of goods and services often entails high administrative costs , significant transaction costs , and allocative inefficiencies . 83 Historical evidence suggests that state Grimaldi , R . , M . Kenney , D . S . Siegel and M . Wright , eds . , 2011 , Special Issue : 30 Years After Bayh - Dole : Reassessing Academic Entrepreneurship , Research Policy , 40 ( 8 ) , October , pp . 1045 - 1057 . 79 AUTM , U . S . Licensing Activity Survey , FY2012 , Association of University Technology Managers , http : / / www . autm . net / AM / Template . cfm ? Section = FY2012 _ Licensing _ Activity _ Survey & Template = / CM / ContentDisplay . cfm & ContentID = 11435 , Accessed April 4 , 2014 . 80 Wright , B . D . , K . Drivas , Z . Lei , and S . A . Merrill , 2014 , “Technology Transfer : Industry - funded Academic Inventions Boost Innovation , ” Nature , 507 , no . 7492 , pp . 297 - 299 , at 298 . 81 Wright et al . id . 82 According to the US Government Accountability Office , the HEALTHCARE . GOV website was established at an initial cost of $ 840 million and was subject to significant cost overruns and performance failures . See Statement of William T . Woods , Healthcare . gov Contract Planning and Oversight Practices were Ineffective Given the Challenges and Risks , US Government Accountability Office , July 21 , 2014 , http : / / docs . house . gov / meetings / IF / IF02 / 20140731 / 102587 / HHRG - 113 - IF02 - Wstate - WoodsW - 20140731 . pdf . See also “HEALTHCARE . GOV : Ineffective Planning and Oversight Practices Underscore the Need for Improved Contract Management , ” GAO - 14 - 694 , July 30 , 2014 , http : / / www . gao . gov / assets / 670 / 665179 . pdf . 83 For example , the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act involves high transaction costs . See U . S . House of Representatives U . S . House of Representatives , 2013 , Committee on Ways and Means , Committee on Education and the Workforce , and Committee on Energy and Commerce , “Obamacare Burden Tracker , ” http : / / waysandmeans . house . gov / uploadedfiles / aca _ burden _ tracker _ final _ 5 _ 6 _ 13 . pdf , Accessed August 9 , 2014 and Anderson , A . , 2014 , “The Impact of the Affordable Care Act on the Health Care Workforce , ” Backgrounder No . 2887 , March 18 , Washington , D . C . : The Heritage Foundation , http : / / thf _ media . s3 . amazonaws . com / 2014 / pdf / BG2887 . pdf , Accessed August 9 , 2014 . 22 and federal regulation led to considerable allocative and dynamic inefficiencies in markets for electric power , natural gas , telecommunications , railroads , trucking , and airlines . 84 Increased regulation in health care can be expected to generate similar allocative and dynamic inefficiencies . 85 Historical evidence casts doubt on prizes systems as sources of invention and innovation . The advantages of prices over prizes is confirmed by extensive and careful historical analysis by Zorina Khan demonstrating that patents outperform prizes in the dissemination of new technologies . 86 According to Khan “the historical record shows that administered prize systems tend to be associated with the potential for bias or corruption , unpredictable methods of allocation and outcomes , as well as other deficiencies attendant on a nonmarket orientation . ” 87 Khan ( 2011 ) studies inventors in Britain and the U . S . during the transition from the First to the Second Industrial Revolutions and finds that because prizes are less systematic than patents , they offer lower expected benefits for inventors . 88 Khan considers a sample of exhibits and premiums at U . S . industrial fairs between 1837 and 1874 and finds that prize winners tended to belong to privileged social at 10 ( “The ACA has thus far added 109 distinct regulations . The time and effort to comply with these rules and regulations will equal an estimated 190 million hours of paperwork per year imposed on business and the health care industry . Most of the estimated 13 , 000 pages of regulations are focused on health care institutions , and compliance with these rules will also reduce the time spent on direct patient care . ” ) 84 See Daniel F . Spulber , 1989 , Regulation and Markets , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 85 Anderson ( 2014 , p . 2 ) ( “With the new demand for medical services for the millions who are expected to enroll in Medicaid and the federal and state insurance exchanges , the workforce shortages could become catastrophic . ” ) 86 B . Zorina Khan , 2011 , “Premium Inventions : Patents and Prizes as Incentive Mechanisms in Britain and the United States , 1750 - 1930” in Dora L . Costa and Naomi R . Lamoreaux ( eds ) , Understanding Long - Run Economic Growth : Geography , Institutions , and the Knowledge Economy , NBER and University of Chicago , pp . 205 - 234 ; B . Zorina Khan , 2013 , “Going for Gold : Industrial Fairs and Innovation in the Nineteenth - Century United States , ” Revue Economique , Special Issue on Innovation without Patents , 64 ( 1 ) , pp . 89 - 114 , B . Zorina Khan , 2013 , “Selling Ideas : An International Perspective on Patenting and Markets for Technological Innovations , 1790 – 1930 , ” Business History Review , 87 , Spring , pp . 39 – 68 ; B . Zorina Khan , 2014 , “The Social Consequences of Patent Institutions and Prizes in Technology Markets , ” in D . Halbert and W . Gallagher ( eds ) Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Intellectual Property Law ( forthcoming ) . See also Khan , B . Z . and K . L . Sokoloff , 2001 , “History Lessons : The Early Development of Intellectual Property Institutions in the United States , ” Journal of Economic Perspectives , Summer , 15 ( 3 ) , pp . 233 - 246 . 87 Khan , B . Z . , 2014a , “Trolls and Other Patent Inventions : Economic History and the Patent Controversy in the Twenty - First Century , ” Working Paper , Department of Economics , Bowdoin College and NBER . 88 Khan , B . Z . , 2011 , supra note 86 . 23 groups , with prizes awarded less systematically than patents and unrelated to various proxies for the productivity of the innovation . 89 Khan provides a critically important historical comparison of the effects of patents and prizes on technology diffusion . 90 She compares patented inventions with inventions that were submitted for prizes at annual industrial fairs of the American Institute of New York in the 19 th century . Khan finds that patents promote much greater spatial diffusion of innovations than prizes . Additionally , Khan’s research shows that patents had large and significant effects on unpatented innovations in contiguous and adjacent counties , in contrast to limited geographic effects of prize - winning inventions . 91 Historical experience with a national prize system is instructive . The U . S . offers the National Medal of Science since 1959 and the National Medal of Technology and Innovation since 1980 . 92 Congress extended the coverage of the National Medal of Science in 1980 to include the social and behavioral sciences . 93 The limited scope of such awards in comparison to the patent system is indicated by only 487 awards of the National Medal of Science up to 2015 . 94 In contrast to the broad scope of the market for inventions , the awarding of such prizes depends on the opinions of very few decision makers . A committee of 12 scientists and engineers appointed by the President evaluates nominees for the National Medal of Science . 95 Beginning in the late 1950s , the Soviet Union instituted a system of “inventors’ certificates” that involved transfer of the invention to state ownership and some limited monetary and non - monetary rewards for the inventor based on usage . 96 Compared to patent systems in market economies during the same time period , it is apparent that this 89 See Khan , B . Z . , 2013 , “Going for Gold : Industrial Fairs and Innovation in the Nineteenth - Century United States , ” Revue Economique , Special Issue on Innovation without Patents , 64 ( 1 ) , pp . 89 - 114 . See also Khan , B . Z . , 2014 , “The Social Consequences of Patent Institutions and Prizes in Technology Markets , ” in D . Halbert and W . Gallagher ( eds ) Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Intellectual Property Law ( forthcoming ) . 90 Khan , B . Z . , 2014 , “Of Time and Space : Technological Spillovers among Patents and Unpatented Innovations in Early U . S . Industrialization” Department of Economics , Bowdoin College and NBER . 91 Id . 92 http : / / www . uspto . gov / about / nmti / NMTI _ Announcement . jsp , accessed February 28 , 2015 . 93 http : / / www . nsf . gov / od / nms / medal . jsp , accessed February 28 , 2015 . 94 http : / / www . nsf . gov / od / nms / medal . jsp , accessed February 28 , 2015 . See also the recipients data base from 1962 at http : / / www . nsf . gov / od / nms / results . jsp , Accessed February 28 , 2015 . 95 http : / / www . nsf . gov / od / nms / medal . jsp , accessed February 28 , 2015 . 96 See Homer O . Blair , Inventions in the Soviet Union , The International Lawyer , Vol . 7 , No . 2 ( April 1973 ) , pp . 485 - 491 ; Maggs , P . B . , 1990 , “Restructuring of the Soviet Law in Inventions , ” Columbia Journal of Transnational Law , 28 , pp . 277 - 289 . 24 approach was not successful in generative innovation . 97 In addition , the Soviet Union offered a limited honorary “prize” system . During its entire existence , the Soviet Union awarded its “Honoured Inventor of the USSR” medal only sixteen times . 98 Problems with central planning extend beyond asymmetry of knowledge . Even if they could somehow be fully informed , central planners need not act in the public interest . Prize advocates assume that governments maximize social welfare and are fully informed about inventions , market demand , and producer costs . . Central planners can be expected to suffer from corruption , abuse of power , discrimination , bureaucratic inefficiency , and other forms of government failure . The dramatic differences in the historical performance of market economies and centrally - planned economies are even more pronounced in innovative industries . The complexities of invention and innovation create information challenges for market participants that are insurmountable for central planners . Governments are likely to provide rewards to cronies of politicians , lobbying organizations , incumbent firms , political donors , voting blocs , or ideological allies . A government prize system would encourage rent seeking to obtain prizes , diverting resources away from invention and innovation and toward political influence . Government agencies also are likely to pursue objectives other than allocative efficiency , such as subsidies for groups of voters , increases in employment , income redistribution , regional economic growth , industrial policy , and support for political causes . Although necessarily imperfect , the patent system is less subject to corruption than a public prize system . With patents , the government establishes general rules of the game through a system of private property rights . The system of IP rights is government by legislation , the courts , and patent grants by the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) , which is part of the executive branch . The market for inventions determines prices for inventions and the selection of the best inventions and innovation . In contrast , with a system of prizes , the government micromanages innovation : it designs the contests , chooses prizes , selects inventions , and allocates technology . A government prize system would diminish private incentives for commercialization of inventions . Kieff emphasizes the importance of markets in stimulating commercialization of inventions . 99 Public ownership or common ownership of inventions would eliminate private incentives for the commercialization of inventions , as Kieff explains . 100 Common ownership of inventions also would diminish incentives for innovation to develop products , manufacturing processes , and transaction techniques 97 Maggs , 1990 , id . 98 The medal was awarded from 1983 to 1991 ; “The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR was the main conferring authority of the award based on recommendations from the State Committee for Inventions and Discoveries of the USSR and the Central Council of the All - Union Society of Inventors and Innovators , ” http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Honoured _ Inventor _ of _ the _ USSR , Accessed March 29 , 2014 ) . 99 Kieff , 2001 , supra note _ _ _ . 100 Kieff , 2001 , supra note _ _ _ . see also Abramowicz , 2003 , supra note _ _ _ . 25 based on those inventions . Additionally , common ownership would diminish marketing of products that embody inventions . Some prize advocates of prizes view the discouragement of commercialization as an advantage of a prize system . For example , Love and Hubbard ( 2007 , p . 1554 ) assert that marketing products is a “waste , ” The elimination of marketing monopolies , the de - coupling of R & D incentives from prices , and the creation of an evidence - based reward system linked to changes in health outcomes will lead to significant reductions in expenditures to market products , the area of the largest waste in the current system . Contrary to this assertion , marketing and sales are important coordination mechanisms in a market economy . Government prizes for inventors would fail to fulfill the functions of IP in product markets . Markets determine the value of goods and services through interaction of supply and demand , and the same applies to inventions . John Stuart Mill ( 1848 , p . 932 ) explains this clearly : “the reward conferred by it depends upon the invention’s being found useful , and the greater the usefulness , the greater the reward ; and because it is paid by the very persons to whom the service is rendered , the consumers of the commodity . ” 101 A prize system without property rights for inventors would eliminate the allocative and dynamic efficiencies of the market for inventions . Inventors would lose innovative control over their inventions , thus eliminating incentives to allocate inventions to the highest - value uses . Lack of innovative control would eliminate incentives to continually develop inventions , to commercialize inventions , to introduce innovations based on inventions and to invest in complementary assets . The prize system lacks all of the key features of the patent system – exclusion , transferability , disclosure , certification , standardization , and divisibility . Without these fundamental elements a market for inventions would be highly constrained and less efficient . Demsetz ( 1969 ) identifies IP rights as critical for reducing transaction costs in markets for invention . Epstein ( 2010 ) emphasizes the importance of IP property rights in disseminating protected information . Replacing patents with prizes would be analogous to replacing corporate securities with prizes for investors . Such investment prizes would not finance corporations because they would provide neither return of principle nor return on principle . Invention prizes would not stimulate invention and innovation because they would not provide economic returns for inventors , innovators or investors in complementary assets . Just as investment prizes could not replace financial markets , so invention prizes cannot replace the market for inventions . 101 This is quoted in Machlup and Penrose ( 1950 ) . See Mill , J . S . , 1848 , Principles of Political Economy : With Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy , 1st ed . , ed . William James Ashley ( London : Longmans , Green and Co . , 1909 , 7th ed . ) . 5 / 27 / 2014 , http : / / oll . libertyfund . org / titles / 101 , Accessed May 27 , 2014 . 26 B . Allocative Efficiency in the Market for Inventions The pro - prize argument maintains that a prize will perform the same functions as a market price because it will provide incentives for invention . This argument is flawed because it views market prices as rewards for inventors and penalties for producers . This view reflects a fundamental misunderstanding of markets . Prices are essential to the allocative efficiencies from market transactions . More than just a choice of policy instruments , the question of public prizes replacing market prizes revives the debate between competitive markets and central planning . Markets offer significant economic advantages over central planning . The efficient performance of markets is fundamental to the history and development of economic thought . The informational attributes of the price system figure prominently in the renewed interest in price theory . 102 As Friedrich Hayek ( 1945 , p . 523 ) explains , the price system is a “condensed index of relative change . ” 103 The price system provides communication and coordination : “In abbreviated form , by a kind of symbol , only the most essential information is passed on , and passed on only to those concerned . ” 104 Prices result from market transactions and serve to guide decentralized decision making by individuals in the market place who have the best knowledge of their own situations . Markets generally promote efficiency in resource allocation and in contrast , government agencies are not able to achieve efficient resource allocation . Although invention and innovation may exhibit economies of scale , they are not natural monopolies because there are economic benefits from applying a variety of inventions and from continual technological change . Both parties benefit from economic transactions – both parties receive gains from trade – because transactions are voluntary . Market transactions provide rewards to both buyers and sellers because they are the terms of exchange . In markets for consumer goods , buyers receive surplus from transactions equal to the benefits of consuming goods and services net of payments to sellers . Sellers receive benefits from transactions equal to payments from buyers net of the sellers’ costs of providing goods and services . Replacing the price system would cause harm to both buyers and sellers of IP by removing the transactions that generate gains from trade . Market prices of inventions provide rewards to both IP owners and IP users . In the market for inventions , exchange of IP through licensing , cross - licensing , transfers , and contracts benefits both IP owners and IP users . By exchanging IP market participants achieve gains from trade , which increases 102 For a contemporary overview of price theory , see E . Glen Weyl , 2014 , “A Short Summary of Price Theory , ” under preparation for the Journal of Economic Literature , Working Paper , May , Department of Economics , University of Chicago . 103 Friedrich A . Hayek , 1945 , “The Use of Knowledge in Society , ” American Economic Review , 35 ( 4 ) , September , pp . 519 - 530 , at 523 . 104 Id . at 526 . 27 the quality of innovation . 105 The greater is the extent of the market for IP , the greater will be the quality of innovation . 106 Public ownership and distribution of technology at a zero price may benefit some producers but these benefits are only short - term . Producers will suffer harm in the long term because the quality of technology will be diminished by the government prize system . The government prize system diminishes incentives to produce new technology because improvements by inventors end when the prize is awarded . This contrasts with incentives to improve inventions for patent owners who develop their inventions after patents are granted . If investment is needed to commercialize and develop the new technology , publicly - provided access to technology will eliminate incentives to make that investment . Also , public distribution of technology will eliminate the economic returns to complementary investments . As a consequence , a prize system with publicly provide access to technology will likely reduce innovation and decrease social welfare in comparison to the market for inventions . Another problem with the view that prices are rewards for sellers is that prices are mechanisms of competition . Eliminating the price mechanism for IP would harm buyers and sellers by reducing price competition : buyers bid competitively to attract sellers and sellers bid competitively to attract buyers . This applies generally and also to markets for inventions and to innovative competition in markets for goods and services . Prices for inventions and innovations are essential to competition throughout the economy . Prices of inventions can be explicit , as is the case with patent licensing and patent transfers . Prices of inventions can be implicit , as is the case with cross - licensing , contract R & D , inventions embodied in goods and services , and securities of corporations that own inventions . Replacing market prices for inventions with government prizes would eliminate the benefits of market competition . Competition stimulates invention and innovation when there is a market for inventions . 107 Entry of competing inventors improves the expected quality of inventions and also increases competition in royalties and the prices of patent transfers . Better inventions and lower royalties increase the returns to entry of producers in product markets , leading to increased competition downstream and more innovation . Conversely , competition in product markets by producers that obtain technology in the market for inventions increases industry output in the product market , which in turn stimulates demand for technological inventions . This increases economic rents for inventors , which 105 See Daniel F . Spulber , 2008 , “Innovation and International Trade in Technology , ” Journal of Economic Theory , 138 , January , pp . 1 - 20 ; and Daniel F . Spulber , 2010 , “The Quality of Innovation and the Extent of the Market , ” Journal of International Economics , 80 , pp . 260 - 270 . 106 Daniel F . Spulber , 2008 , id . and Daniel F . Spulber , 2010 , id . 107 Daniel F . Spulber , 2013 , “Competing Inventors and the Incentive to Invent , ” and Daniel F . Spulber , 2013 , “How Do Competitive Pressures Affect Incentives to Innovate when there is a Market for Inventions ? , ” supra note 23 . 28 encourages entry of inventors and investment in R & D , thus increasing inventive effort and improving the expected quality of inventions . Prices in the market for inventions also are instruments of cooperation . Prices reflect the terms of trade between buyers and sellers . Negotiation of royalties depends not only on the features of the invention but also on the application of the invention . Patented inventions are a form of technology capital that can be used by multiple firms , in multiple locations , and in multiple productive activities . 108 Patented inventions can be applied to generate returns through licensing , cross licensing , and sales . Patented inventions also can be applied by firms to develop innovations , including new products , production processes , and transaction methods . Patented inventions also can be applied to create new inventions . Economic efficiency suggests that the price of an invention can vary depending on applications of the invention . Prices in the market for inventions depend on many critical factors . Various factors such as the characteristics of trading partners affect gains from trade in the market for patents . 109 Epstein and Malherbe ( 2011 ) find that a careful economic analysis is required in calculating damages from infringement and urge caution in considering comparable royalties from other patents . Epstein and Malherbe ( 2011 , p . 8 ) point out that “For example , one patent may be economically ‘strong’ ( in the sense that the specific technology has no close and inexpensive substitute ) while another may be economically ‘weak’ because commercially acceptable alternatives or design - arounds are readily available . ” 110 Negotiated royalties depend on features of the transaction : “When a patent ' s value is derived from reducing manufacturing costs , the cost savings for different patents or even different applications of the same patent may not be the same . Differing degrees of licensing exclusivity , duration , field of use , and potential overlap and competition with the patent holder ' s own sales could influence the royalty . ” 111 Epstein and Malherbe 108 For a discussion of technology capital , see Ellen R . McGrattan and Edward C . Prescott , 2009 , Openness , Technology Capital , and Development , Journal of Economic Theory , 144 , 2454 – 2476 . I employ the term technology capital because it suggests that it can be applied productively by firms . The term “knowledge capital” seems too broad for the purposes of the present discussion . On the production and distribution of knowledge , see Fritz Machlup , 1962 , The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States , Vol . 278 , Princeton : Princeton University Press and Zvi Griliches , 1979 , “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to Productivity Growth , ” Bell Journal of Economics , 10 , 1 , Spring , pp . 92 - 116 . Technology capital also is distinct from human capital . Gary Becker defines investment in human capital as those “activities that influence future real income through the imbedding of resources in people , ” Gary S . Becker , 1962 , “Investment in Human Capital : A Theoretical Analysis , ” Journal of Political Economy , 70 , 5 , Part 2 : Investment in Human Beings , October , pp . 9 - 49 , at 9 . 109 Carlos J . Serrano , 2010 , “The Dynamics of the Transfer and Renewal of Patents , ” Rand Journal of Economics , 41 , 4 , Winter , pp . 686 - 708 . 110 Epstein , R . J . and P . Malherbe , 2011 , “Reasonable Royalty Patent Infringement Damages after UNILOC , ” AIPLA Quarterly Journal , 39 , pp . 3 - 34 , at 8 . 111 Epstein and Malherbe , 2011 , id . at 8 . 29 ( 2011 , p . 8 ) also find that negotiated royalties depend on commercialization and innovation : “Patents may also differ in the amount of additional investment required to achieve commercialization , including research and development , production facilities , product testing and regulatory approvals , marketing , and acquisition of additional intellectual property rights . ” Finally , they observe “royalties in other licenses may be part of a complex transaction that includes joint licensing of other patents ( i . e . , patent pooling ) , cross - licenses , know - how , and / or product support , as noncash features of the deal . ” 112 C . Marginal Cost Prices and Central Planning Inventions are costly to produce and distribute , their market returns are rivalrous , and they generally are provided in abundance by competitive markets . Prize advocates tend to assume that transaction costs are zero in markets for invention and innovation . Prize advocates then suggest that because usage of inventions is non - rivalrous , there is no need for price rationing so that the efficient “marginal cost” price equals zero . This would suggest that central planners face no problems of calculating “shadow prices” because they already know that the efficient price is zero . However , because the efficient price of an invention need not equal zero , central planners would encounter problems of information gathering and processing in determining “shadow prices” . The proposed prize mechanism requires the government to subsidize the production and distribution of inventions . The government would obtain inventions through contests and make them available at a zero price to attain the desired marginal cost price . The prize mechanism proposals are a revival of the natural monopoly argument for government regulation of public utilities . This flawed argument goes back to the old marginal cost controversy discussed by Harold Hotelling . 113 Whenever a firm operates at an output where there are economies of scale in production , marginal cost pricing will not generate sufficient revenues to cover costs . Hotelling and others recommend government subsidies to make up the difference between marginal and average costs . 112 Epstein and Malherbe , 2011 , id . at 8 ) . 113 Contrary to what is commonly believed , Jules Dupuit did not recommend either public subsidies or marginal cost pricing . See A . Jules É . J . Dupuit , 1844 , “De la mesure de l’utilité des travaux publics , ” Annales des ponts et chaussées , Second series , 8 . Translated by R . H . Barback as On the Measurement of the Utility of Public Works , International Economic Papers , 1952 , 2 , 83 - 110 , reprinted in K . J . Arrow and T . Scitovsky , eds . , 1969 , Readings in Welfare Economics , Homewood , IL : Irwin , pp . 255 - 283 , R . B . Ekelund , 1968 , “Jules Dupuit and the Early Theory of Marginal Cost Pricing , ” Journal of Political Economy , 76 ( 3 ) , May - June , pp . 462 - 471 , and Robert Ekelund and Robert F . Hébert , Secret Origins of Modern Microeconomics : Dupuit and the Engineers , University of Chicago Press , 1999 . 30 Public policies such as government regulation should not be based on the existence of economies of scale . This is because practically any economic activity involves economies of scale . Insisting on government ownership or subsidies whenever economies of scale exist would require abandonment of a market economy entirely because economies of scale are pervasive in manufacturing , services , or distribution . Markets routinely allocate goods and services whose production and distribution features economies of scale . When there are economies of scale , market returns necessarily cover the average costs of production so that firms are able to break even . In competitive markets , prices tend toward average costs so that the revenues are sufficient to cover costs . Even in markets with few firms , entry and potential competition for the market drive prices toward average costs . 114 The notion that prices of goods and services should equal marginal costs of production is itself questionable . The optimality of marginal cost pricing depends on various assumptions including a partial equilibrium optimum for a single market and an absence of economies of scale . With economies of scale , the theoretical ideal of a marginal cost pricing equilibrium that is Pareto optimal is likely to be a vacuous concept . This means that a market equilibrium solution may not exist for a general equilibrium model with economies of scale and marginal cost pricing . 115 In practice however , markets routinely address economies of scale with various pricing mechanisms . Prices can approach marginal pricing when necessary with two - part tariffs and other pricing mechanisms . 116 A two - part tariff involves a fixed fee that helps to cover fixed costs while allowing firms to lower per - unit fees . Markets also distribute some products such as broadcast television and Internet search using advertising revenues . Products such as cable television rely on combinations of access fees and advertising revenues . Markets for patents and other IP thus have pricing mechanisms that address efficiency without the need for government ownership or price regulation . Even if the optimal price is close to marginal cost that does not imply that such a price can be chosen by regulatory authorities . Market forces including competition among buyers and among sellers may drive prices closer to marginal costs evaluated at market equilibrium outputs . This is very different to having regulatory agencies or courts engage in “marginal cost pricing . ” This would require regulatory agencies or courts to estimate the marginal cost schedule of a firm , to estimate market demand schedule at 114 See Demsetz , H . , 1968 , “Why Regulate Utilities ? , ” Journal of Law & Economics , 11 , pp . 55 - ; Baumol , W . J . and R . D . Willig , 1981 , “Fixed Costs , Sunk Costs , Entry Barriers , and Sustainability of Monopoly , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 96 ( 3 ) , August , pp . 405 - 431 ; Baumol , W . J . , J . C . Panzar , and R . D . Willig , 1988 , Contestable Markets and the Theory of Industry Structure , New York : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich ; and Daniel F . Spulber , 1989 , Regulation and Markets , supra note 77 . 115 This is explained in Spulber , 1989 , ch . 8 , supra note 77 . 116 See Spulber , 1989 , ch . 8 , supra note 77 . See also Kieff ( 2001 ) on market pricing of inventions . Roin ( 2014 ) also points out that two - part tariffs for inventions remove some of the theoretical advantages of “prizes . ” 31 various prices for the product in question , and then to determine the appropriate output level at which to evaluate both marginal costs and market demand . Then , the regulatory agencies or courts would need to calculate the marginal cost price at this critical output level and then to adjust such a price as costs and demand change over time . Such calculations are difficult , subject to error , and would need to be repeated across many goods and services . The calculation of regulated prices created prohibitive administrative costs in natural gas production , railroad rates , and other regulated industries . The regulatory agencies had to calculate so many prices that the time needed to complete the task was nearly limitless . The costs to regulatory agencies of calculating prices of various types of IP also would pose significant administrative challenges , made all the more difficult by the complexities and uncertainties of technological change . Centrally planned economies faced an even greater challenge . Some economists believed that if only central planners could perform the necessary economic calculations they could derive market prices . The prices would be obtained by maximizing social welfare subject to various resource and production constraints , thus yielding estimates of “shadow prices . ” For example , Janos Kornai and Th . Lipták applied mathematical programming to suggest methods of central planning in Hungary and other socialist economies . 117 Lange and Taylor suggested that by using “shadow prices” central planners would not need to solve millions of equations . 118 Economists in centrally - planned economies recognized the additional complications that would result for technological change . 119 Abba Lerner also advocated marginal cost pricing as optimal in planned socialist economies . 120 Prize advocates begin with a faulty premise : if only central planners could find the right “shadow prices” , they could replace the market . “Shadow prices” set by central planners cannot replicate the decisions of millions of decision makers in competitive markets . Central planners cannot replace transactions with mathematical programming . They lack the detailed information that market participants have about their own 117 Kornai , J . and Th . Lipták , 1965 , “Two - Level Planning , ” Econometrica , 33 , 1 , January , pp . 141 - 169 , at 168 . ( “The National Planning Bureau wishes to make use of this method too , to obtain sounder foundations for long - term macroeconomic plans . ” ) 118 See Lange , O . , 1943 , “A Note on Innovations , ” Review of Economics and Statistics , 25 , 1 , February , pp . 19 - 25 ; Lange , O . , 1936 - 1937 , . ”On the Economic Theory of Socialism , ” Review of Economic Studies , IV , Nos . 1 and 2 , pp . ; Lange , O . , 1945 - 1946 , “The Scope and Method of Economics , ” Review of Economic Studies , 13 , ( 1 ) , pp . 19 - 32 ; Taylor , F . M . , 1929 , “The Guidance of Production in the Socialist State , ” American Economic Review , Vol . 19 , No . i , pp . 1 - 8 . This is discussed by Dore , M . H . I . and M . C . Kaser , 1984 , “The Millions of Equations Debate : Seventy Years After Barone , ” Atlantic Economic Journal , 12 ( 3 ) , September , pp 30 - 44 . 119 Lange , 1943 , supra note _ _ _ . 120 Lerner , A . P . , 1977 , “Marginal Cost Pricing in the 1930’s , ” American Economic Review , 67 ( 1 ) , Papers and Proceedings of the Eighty - ninth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Assocation , February , pp . 235 - 243 . 32 situation , as Hayek emphasized . The advantages of markets over central planning can be readily observed by comparing economic growth in the market economies in the United States , Europe , and Asia with the economic collapse of centrally - planned economies in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union . The beneficial effects of introducing market institutions in centrally planned economics are exemplified by the economic transformation of the People’s Republic of China . Prize advocates believe that “shadow pricing” of inventions is feasible because the marginal cost is zero and therefore already known . This relieves central planners of the problem of gathering information about supply and demand and the burden of calculating “shadow prices” . However , as will be seen shortly , the marginal cost of inventions is not zero and just as difficult to estimate by central planners as the costs of other goods and services . Calculating government prizes for inventions face at least the same difficulties as calculating “shadow prices” for other types of goods and services , and perhaps even greater problems as a result of scientific and technological uncertainties . A government prize system requires central planners to design contests for inventors . Even if central planners could accurately identify a particular category of invention , central planners would need to determine what inventions should be rewarded before discoveries are made , requiring the ability to predict scientific and technological inventions before they occur . Not only would central planners lack the scientific and technological expertise , the problem is impracticable because inventors generally do not know the outcome of R & D in advance . R & D not only involves risky outcomes , it involves situations in which the inventor does not know the relative likelihood of possible outcomes and may not be able to describe fully the set of possible outcomes . 121 In contrast , market prices for patented inventions are established after inventors make the initial discoveries . C . Public Goods and Natural Monopoly The theory of public goods suggests that there are cost advantages to providing the same public good to all consumers . Usage of public goods is non - rivalrous and distribution costs are equal to zero . Providing the same public good to all consumers is efficient because production costs are not duplicated by multiple providers . If inventions are pure public goods , prize advocates suggest that it would be efficient for the market to be served by a single invention . Based on this argument , prize advocates recommend that the government should identify a “best invention” through prize contests and make this invention available to all producers at a zero price . The economic theory of public goods is very similar to the theory of natural monopoly . As William Baumol and Robert Willig observe “the resource allocation problems that stem from fixed costs are formally identical with those that accompany 121 On uncertainty , see Frank Knight , 1921 , Risk , Uncertainty and Profit , University of Chicago Press . 33 public goods – both their sources and their character are the same . Thus , the rationale for public supply of public goods may be no different from that pertaining to nationalization of natural monopolies . ” If inventions are public goods , this argument would suggest that there is an economic rationale for either public supply of inventions or government taking of inventions through nationalization . The natural monopoly argument for public utility regulation or nationalization is that it is more efficient for the market to be served by a single firm rather than two or more firms . The formal definition of natural monopoly refers to a static cost function . 122 The cost function exhibits the natural monopoly property if the costs of producing a particular output level by a single firm are less than the costs of producing that output by two separate firms . This definition extends readily to the costs of producing multiple products . The cost function exhibits the natural monopoly property if the costs to a single firm of producing multiple products are less than the costs of producing those products by two separate firms . The economic analysis of public goods or natural monopoly framework does not transfer readily to invention . The standard public good or natural monopoly arguments apply to production of a homogeneous good . Suppose that the cost of producing street lighting involves a fixed cost of $ 100 . Many consumers benefit from the same street lighting , so that it is not necessary to incur the fixed cost more than once . Such an argument would not apply to the production of inventions . Suppose that the cost of producing an invention involves a fixed cost of $ 100 . Unlike the production of street lighting , invention is not a deterministic activity and the outcome of invention is not a homogeneous good . Invention is not a natural monopoly . The outcome of invention is subject to considerable uncertainty that generally requires multiple inventive efforts . Far from being a generic activity , R & D involves creative effort . Invention requires not only inspiration but also many different approaches . There are many different types of R & D in technology , science , the social sciences , and other areas . Even within narrow areas of inquiry , there is significant trial and error and disagreements about how to address various research problems and what are the problem being addressed . There is considerable specialization and division of labor in R & D . These diverse activities cannot be readily agglomerated into a single enterprise for the economy as whole . There may well be fixed costs and other sources of economies of scale in R & D . However , a central government laboratory would not be sufficient to produce all inventions for an economy . There would still be a need for many research facilities in the economy . Thus , invention should not be viewed as a natural monopoly that should be regulated or nationalized to attain zero marginal cost prices . 122 See William J . Baumol and Robert D . Willig , 1981 , “Fixed Costs , Sunk Costs , Entry Barriers , and Sustainability of Monopoly , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 96 ( 3 ) , August , pp . 405 - 431 , at 405 . See also Baumol , W . J . , J . C . Panzar , and R . D . Willig , 1988 , Contestable Markets and the Theory of Industry Structure , New York : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich ; and Spulber , 1989 , supra note 77 . 34 What about the usage of inventions after they are produced by R & D ? Non - rivalrous consumption implies that the same invention can be used by multiple producers . The fixed costs of invention have already been incurred and are sunk , so that these costs need not be considered in the allocation of inventions . If there are fixed costs in the procurement of inventions from inventors or in the distribution of inventions , economic efficiency would suggest that only one invention should be used by all . That is , public good or natural monopoly arguments would suggest that only one invention should be used . The variety of ideas is central to invention and innovation – inventions are not homogeneous goods . The features of inventions can differ in complicated ways so that there need not be a “best” invention in a set of substitute inventions . There is often a need for multiple inventions that address the same problem . Variety is essential to the creative process . There is a need for a variety of innovative applications , just as there is a need for many types of novels , movies , songs , or other creative works . It may be cost efficient to have only one movie that is seen by everyone , but that misses the point of arts and entertainment . Each consumer derives benefits from consuming a variety of artistic works or different sources of entertainment . Also , consumers have different preferences so that they will favor different types of artistic works and entertainment . In the same way , any consumer may prefer to use multiple inventions that are substitutes in demand . Also , consumers may have different needs so that there cannot be just one headache remedy or just one medicine for high blood pressure . Producers differ as well so that different producers may prefer to apply different inventions in product designs , production processes , and transaction methods . The notion that there is a best invention that should serve the entire market is a static efficiency concept . The public good and natural monopoly concepts provide static views of economic efficiency . 123 However , technological change is an inherently dynamic process . Different efficiency concepts apply because of technological change . It may no longer be efficient for a particular invention to serve the entire market . To illustrate the problems that can arise from applying static efficiency concepts to invention and innovation , consider how dynamic consideration affect the efficient outcome . Consider first a static setting without technological change . Suppose that there is a set of inventions that have the same features and suppose that producers make technology decisions at the same time . Suppose also that there are fixed costs associated with distributing those inventions . It may then be efficient by standard public good or natural monopoly arguments for all producers to adopt one invention . The notion that inventions are public goods or natural monopolies suggests that only one technology should be in use . Now consider a two - period setting with technological change such that better inventions appear in the second period . It may be efficient for some producers to adopt an invention in the first period and to continue using that invention in the second period . It 123 Daniel F . Spulber , 1995 , “Deregulating Telecommunications , ” Yale Journal on Regulation , 12 ( 1 ) , pp . 25 - 67 . 35 may be efficient for other producers to wait until the second period to adopt the better technology . This implies that even though there are fixed costs of distributing inventions , it may be more efficient for there to be two inventions in use in the second period . This implies that an invention need not be a natural monopoly . Even if inventions have public good properties , it may be more efficient for multiple inventions to be in use at the same time . In addition to technology change , consumer preferences and needs change over time . In addition , changes in market demand and other market conditions will change the needs of producers . Different inventions will be required over time to produce new products , production processes and transaction methods . Again , it may be more efficient for multiple inventions to be in use at the same time as adoption decisions may occur in different periods . IV . DYNAMIC EFFICIENCY IN INNOVATION : PRICES VERSUS PRIZES Prices in the market for inventions provide important economic signals that guide the decisions of inventors , producers , and investors . An important feature of prices in the market for inventions is that they are state - contingent . Market prices for inventions are contingent on the features of inventions and the features of substitute and complementary inventions . Because prices for inventions adjust to technological changes , which are necessarily unexpected , they provide valuable guidance for decision making under uncertainty . This is particularly important because prices in the market for inventions are likely to change continually over the twenty year life of a patent . A . What is Competition ? : Markets versus Tournaments Competition in markets differs substantially from stylized models of R & D tournaments and patent races . Prize advocates compare the reward from a prize with the reward from a market price as mechanisms for inducing R & D effort . This comparison is misleading because it fails to take into account the complexity of market competition . In contrast to prize contests , inventions do not just compete for the market , they compete within the market . In contrast to prize contests , market competition is a dynamic process that responds to new discoveries and new information about consumer preferences and producer costs . In economic models of tournaments , a principal designs the R & D tournament by offering a contract to multiple agents . 124 The agents compete by investing in R & D . The 124 See Lazear , E . P . and S . Rosen , 1981 , “Rank - order tournaments as optimum labor contracts , ” Journal of Political Economy , 89 ( 5 ) , pp . 841 – 864 ; Nalebuff , B . J . and J . E . Stiglitz , 1983 , “Prizes and Incentives : Towards a General Theory of Compensation and Competition , ” Bell Journal of Economics , Spring , 14 ( 1 ) , pp . 21 - 43 ; Schleifer ( 1985 ) , Taylor , C . R . , 1995 , “Digging for Golden Carrots : An Analysis of Research 36 principal offers a prize that is contingent on winning the R & D tournament based on a specific measure of quality . An inventor wins the prize by beating other inventors according to the quality criterion . Economic models of contests consider the problem of inducing inventors to devote effort to R & D . Even with an optimally designed contest , agents may choose inefficient effort levels . Michael Baye and Heidrun Hoppe show that R & D efforts in R & D tournaments are excessive relative to socially optimal effort levels . 125 In models of R & D racing , inventors compete by investing in R & D with the winner being the inventor who makes the discovery first . 126 The outcome of R & D is the same for all R & D projects , with the only difference being the time it takes to make the invention . Baye and Hoppe ( 2003 ) show that models of R & D tournaments and patent races are formally equivalent . 127 Competition in the market for inventions differs from government contests in many different ways . First , competition in the market for inventions is dynamic . Inventors that engage in R & D take into account existing inventions developed from past R & D . Inventors also recognize that after their inventions are introduced , they will face competition from future inventions . This continual interaction and competition among inventions over time is very different from a one - shot tournament . Second , because competition in the market for inventions is dynamic , there is no simple ranking of inventions based on fixed quality criteria as might occur in a single tournament . There may be some quality rankings among specific groups of inventions at any date , but the quality criteria keep changing as new discoveries are made and as the features of inventions change over time . The prices of inventions change continually in Tournaments , ” American Economic Review , Vol . 85 , No . 4 , September , pp . 872 - 890 ; Fullerton , R . L . and R . P . McAfee , 1999 , “Auctioning Entry into Tournaments , ” Journal of Political Economy , 107 , pp . 573 – 605 ; Moldovanu , B . and A . Sela , 2001 , “The Optimal Allocation of Prizes in Contests , ” American Economic Review , 91 ( 3 ) , June , pp . 542 - 558 ; Che , Yeon - Koo , and Ian Gale , 2003 , “Optimal Design of Research Contests . ” American Economic Review 93 ( 3 ) : 646 - 671 ; and Riis , C . , 2010 , “Efficient Contests , ” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy , 19 ( 3 ) , Fall , pp . 643 - 665 . Moldovanu and Sela examine the optimal number of prizes that should be awarded for a single tournament . 125 Baye , M . R . , and H . C . Hoppe , 2003 , “The Strategic Equivalence of Rent - Seeking , Innovation , and Patent - Race Games , ” Games and Economic Behavior , 44 , pp . 217 - 226 . 126 For models of patent racing , see Dasgupta , P . , Stiglitz , J . , 1980 , “Uncertainty , Industrial Structure , and the Speed of R & D , ” Bell Journal of Economics , 11 , pp . 1 – 28 ; Reinganum , J . F . , 1981 , “Dynamic Games of Innovation , ” Journal of Economic Theory , 25 , pp . 1 - 41 ; Reinganum , J . F . , 1982 , “A Dynamic Game of R and D : Patent Protection and Competitive Behavior , ” Econometrica , 50 , pp . 671 - 688 ; and Reinganum , J . F . , 1989 , “The Timing of Innovation : Research , Development , and Diffusion , ” in R . Schmalensee and R . D . Willig , eds . , Handbook of Industrial Organization , v . 1 , New York : Elsevier Science Publishers , pp . 849 - 908 . 127 Baye and Hoppe , 2003 . also show that these models are equivalent to the basic model of rent seeking , supra note _ _ _ . 37 response to the introduction of new inventions , in contrast to the one - time prize in a tournament . Third , in contrast to tournaments , market competition generally involves many different inventions that are imperfect substitutes in demand . Instead of a single winner of a tournament or an R & D race , inventions compete in the market by satisfying different needs of diverse producers and consumers . For example , there may be competition among different inventions that reduce the costs of production , but many of these inventions will be purchased in the market because of the different needs of producers . There may be competition among different types of medicines or medical devices without there being a single winner because of the different needs of patients . Each invention may best satisfy the needs of a segment of the market . Fourth , in contrast to tournaments , market competition involves assembling complementary inventions . Market prices provide coordination devices that help producers to assemble groups of inventions and other complementary resources to create innovations . These innovations may be new production processes , final products , or transaction technologies . This contrasts with government contests that attempt to view inventions in isolation , somehow determining which invention in the winner . What may make a technology useful in the market is how well it interoperates with other inventions and resources . For example , an advance in computer hardware may increase the value of a particular software invention . Without knowing about the computer hardware invention , it is not possible to evaluate the software invention . Such complementarity effects are not confined to inventions but often involve other resources . For example , a decrease in the price of natural gas may increase the demand for production technologies that affect the costs of using natural gas . Without knowing the effects of changes in the price of natural gas , it is not possible to evaluate competing production technologies . Fifth , in contrast to prizes in tournaments , the price of inventions is not an end in itself . The contest ends when the prize is awarded . However , as Kitch ( 1977 ) points out , the “rewards” view of patents is inaccurate because patents provide IP protections for investments in development and commercialization that occur after the patent is granted . The market for inventions provides rewards based on the additional efforts of inventors and adopters of inventions . This includes investments in developing complementary technologies and investments in assets that will be used to apply the invention . In addition , the market for inventions includes the entire process of licensing or transferring the invention , improving the invention , and applying the invention . Sixth , in contrast to government contests , competition in the market for inventions is a learning process . In designing a contest , government agencies must specify what are the rules and objectives of the contest before knowing the technologies that will be discovered . Then , government agencies must determine criteria for choosing the best invention before knowing how the technologies will be applied by producers . Government agencies also must determine the best invention before knowing how consumers will evaluate new products or transaction methods . Government agencies must determine prizes before knowing the value of inventions . In contrast , market competition takes place after inventions are made and decision makers can respond to the characteristics of discoveries . Market competition benefits 38 from extensive information revealed by R & D and additional information revealed by the application of inventions . Also , market competition responds to the choices of adopters as they experiment with the application of different technologies . Market competition benefits from learning about consumer reactions to new products and transaction methods . Most goods and services need market testing ; who knows in advance what is the best car , the best software , or the best ice - cream ? Market competition involves the determination of prices of inventions which provides information about the value of those inventions . As Hayek ( 2002 , p . 9 ) points out , competition is a discovery procedure : “it is useful to recall that wherever we make use of competition , this can only be justified by our not knowing the essential circumstances that determine the behavior of the competitors” ( emphasis in original ) . 128 B . Providing Information : Prices versus Prizes Both buyers and sellers benefit from the information content of prices . Prices of inventions are particularly significant because they provide convenient indicators of technological change . Prices for inventions and innovations provide extensive information to buyers and sellers . Because technology is an input to production , producers’ demand for the technology is a derived demand – it depends on the demand for the producers’ final products . Increases in the prices of inventions can reflect increases in consumer demand for products that are produced using the inventions or whose design is based on the inventions . A price offers highly condensed information because just one number summarizes an enormous amount of information in a way that everyone can understand . A price describes the terms of a transaction by specifying the amount of a given currency that can be exchanged for the provision of a particular good or service . Market actors can observe the information contained in prices without having to know all the details of supply and demand . The information contained in prices is highly useful because decision makers can compare prices of very different goods and services . Decisions makers can compare prices across periods of time , in different locations and in different currencies . Decision makers can use prices to aggregate of disaggregate total expenditures or total revenues corresponding to bundles of goods and services . A key aspect of the patent system is that the market prices of inventions generally are determined after discoveries take place . This contrasts with the fixed nature of government prizes , which are determined by policy makers before discoveries take place . Market prices adjust to information about scientific and technological discoveries and convey information about those discoveries . Prizes are awards that are arbitrarily established by government agencies and do not depend on scientific and technological discoveries nor do they convey information about these discoveries . Roin ( 2014 ) points out that patents allow the rewards to owners to vary over time reflecting changes in the 128 Friedrich A . Hayek , . 39 value of inventions , giving patents an important advantage over static “prizes” with common ownership . After receiving a patent grant , an inventor licenses the invention or transfers the invention to others . Licensing royalties and transfer prices result from transactions among market participants and reflect information about the features of inventions . Because patents cover development of inventions , market prices change continually as additional features of the patented invention emerge . Market prices of patented inventions also change continually as a result of commercialization efforts of patent owners and the emergence of new applications of the patented inventions . In addition , market prices of patented inventions change continually to reflect the development of substitute and complementary technologies . Prices summarize market conditions and change in response to market transactions . Whether for goods and services or inventions , market equilibrium prices result from competition among buyers for scarce products and competition among sellers to provide products . Market prices can be posted by buyers or sellers , they can result from negotiation , they can be chosen by intermediaries , or they can be established though organized auctions and other bidding mechanisms . Market prices are affected by the willingness to pay of the buyers in the market place and the costs of sellers in the market place . Buyers’ willingness to pay depends on their preferences , incomes , and availability of substitutes and complements . Sellers’ costs depend on their technologies , costs of capital , labor , resources , and IP . The resulting market prices summarize this vast amount of information in a way that provides useful information to buyers , sellers , and other market participants . Prices in the market for inventions reflect transactions between many types of market participants , including inventors , innovators , producers , investors , and consumers . These prices are the result of many millions of individuals engaging in search , marketing , negotiation , buying , selling , and contracting . The prices also are affected by underlying efforts in R & D , commercialization of inventions , and innovation in products , production processes , and transaction methods . Market prices also reflect the costs of complementary investments in product design , manufacturing equipment , and wholesale and retail distribution . C . The Effects of Technological Change on Market Prices Prizes are one - shot deals chosen by central planners in advance of relevant scientific discoveries and technological changes . This implies that prizes provide only limited guidance to inventors . After the contest has taken place , prizes have no information content for inventors , producers , and investors . Prices in the market for inventions provide guidance for decision makers because prices vary in response to information about scientific and technological discoveries and economic innovations . Anticipation of these state - contingent incentives helps inventors choose R & D projects and determine the extent of effort to devote to particular R & D 40 projects . State - contingent prices also guide IP owners and producers in developing and commercializing patented inventions . Inventors benefit from state - contingent prices for inventions without the need to specify those contingencies in advance , as would be the case with a state - contingent contract . The state - contingent nature of market prices also implies that prices will continually change in response to inventions and innovations . Prices of patented inventions continue to vary based on discoveries and market forces . The highly complex system of state - contingent prices contrasts with a government prize system that sets a one - time fixed prize for a single winner . Inventors are necessarily engaged in planning under uncertainty . R & D projects are subject to various forms of risk and uncertainty . The inventor is engaged in developing knowledge and so may not be able to formulate even the basic questions . When designing and conducting experiments , the inventor does not know what will be the outcome of basic research and generally does not know the likelihood of alternative outcomes . Although R & D involves extensive study , preparation , and effort , unexpected outcomes may occur that appear serendipitous and even “easy” to outside observers . In the process of conducting R & D , the inventor often acquires tacit knowledge that is difficult to codify and communicate to others . 129 Inventors engage in multiple research tasks that are needed to formulate the problem , conduct experiments , and develop inventions based on discoveries . There can be multiple outcomes for any particular R & D project . Inventors often choose among multiple R & D projects each of which has different sets of outcomes . Inventors make multiple decisions over time , adding and removing activities from their R & D projects . The R & D process often cannot be described in advance by a single outcome with a specific economic value . The state - contingent nature of market prices provides important guidance for decision making under uncertainty . The inventor’s price expectations provide guidance for various types of decisions generally associated with investment projects . The inventor can choose to undertake an R & D project if the project has a positive net present value ( NPV ) , that is , if the expected value of the project exceeds its costs . 7 The inventor can choose among a set of projects by comparing their NPVs and the inventor can choose to allocate resources across a portfolio consisting of multiple R & D projects . If the inventor is risk averse , then the inventor can consider the expected utility of the project given the variation in prices across outcomes of R & D and the likelihood of the various states of the world . These standard aspects of financial decision - making carry over to decisions about invention and innovation . The state - contingent nature of prices also is useful in deciding whether to invest in further development and commercialization of a patented invention . After an invention has been granted a patent , patent owners make investments in commercialization and development of innovations . Patent owners benefit from gathering additional information about the market value of the invention before choosing whether or not to develop the 129 See the discussion in Spulber , 2012 , supra note 66 and the references therein . 41 patented invention . The patented invention then is a “real option” for the patent owner because the owner invests only if the market value of the invention exceeds investment costs . The economic value of the patented invention takes the form of an option because the patent owner invests only if the price exceeds the cost of investment . The patent owner benefits from making decisions after learning about prices because prices convey information . As a result , the project has a greater expected value than it would if the patent owner had to make an investment decision before observing the market price . The inventor’s R & D decision - making anticipates the combination of patent protections for prospective claims and state - contingent market prices . The inventor’s incentives to invent are increased by patent protections for investments that occur after the patent is granted . This is because exercising an option after gathering additional information increases the expected value of the invention in comparison with the expected present value of the project when investment decisions are made before gathering information . Patents protect the inventor’s IP after the patent is granted , including development of the invention and investment in commercialization and innovation . In this way , the inventor’s IP is a state - contingent claim that includes both residual returns and residual control . In this way , patents as prospective claims increase incentives to invent and to innovate . This supports Kitch’s ( 1977 ) observation that patents serve a valuable function by protecting the investment - backed expectations of their owners after the patent is granted . A number of studies have considered the role of patents as real options . Innovation is a real option when the returns to developing an invention are greater than the costs of investment . 130 Ariel Pakes ( 1986 ) and Mark Schankerman and Ariel Pakes ( 1986 ) study patent renewals as options that are exercised when the value of the patent exceeds the costs of renewal . 131 Ziedonis ( 2007 ) studies corporate sponsorship contracts for university research that include an option to purchase . 132 The state - contingent nature of market prices also serves to guide investors that provide financing for invention and innovation . Patented inventions are intangible real assets that are created through investment in research and development ( R & D ) . Market transactions determine prices for patented inventions in a similar manner to other types of assets . Patents owned by corporations are intangible real assets that affect the market value of the firm . Patents are an important form of collateral for secured debt and 130 Erkal , N . and S . Scotchmer , 2009 , Scarcity of Ideas and R & D Options : Use It , Lose It or Bank It , National Bureau of Economic Research , Working Paper 14940 , Cambridge , MA . 131 See Ariel Pakes , 1986 , “Patents as Options : Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European Patent Stocks , ” Econometrica , 54 ( 4 ) , pp . 755 - 784 ; and Mark Schankerman and Ariel Pakes , 1986 , “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European Countries during the Post - 1950 Period , ” Economic Journal , 96 , pp . 1052 – 1076 . 132 Arvids A . Ziedonis , 2007 , “Real Options in Technology Licensing , ” Management Science , 53 ( 10 ) , October , pp . 1618 - 1633 . 42 companies using patents as collateral perform a significant share of R & D . 133 Stuart Graham et al . find that startups that patent benefit in terms of greater venture capital financing and that startups funded by venture capital tend to hold more patents than startups with other types of funding . 134 D . Market Prices as Indicators of Technological Change Market prices for inventions provide highly condensed indicators of complex technological change . Prices for inventions undergo dynamic adjustments that reflect new information , competition from new technologies , and discovery of complementary technologies . After a patent is granted , the prices for the relevant inventions fluctuate over time in response to market forces and efforts to develop , commercialize , and apply the inventions . By comparing prices of inventions over time and across inventions , decision makers learn about the effects of technological change . These important properties of market prices contrast with once - and - for - all government prizes . New production technologies , referred to as process innovation , lower the costs of production , improve the quality of goods that are produced , or allow the production of new types of products . Process innovations can include new types of assembly lines , use of new materials , new applications of robotics , computer - aided design and manufacturing ( CAD / CAM ) techniques , and other improvements in manufacturing techniques . New types of products , referred to as product innovations , may be comparable across technology generations . Quality improvements can include durability , energy efficiency , battery life , screen resolution , microprocessor speed , or digital memory storage capacity . Prices also reflect business method inventions such as e - commerce and mobile Internet transactions . 135 Some improvements in technology can be expected to reduce the quality - adjusted prices of products that embody inventions . To illustrate how prices provide condensed indicators of technological change consider changes in the quality - adjusted prices of microprocessors . Moore’s Law provides a summary of the complex technological changes in microprocessors . Moore’s Law predicts exponential technological change : the number of electronic components that can be put on a chip doubles every 24 months . 136 Electronic components include transistors , resistors , diodes , and capacitors . 137 133 Mann , W . , 2014 , “Creditor Rights and Innovation : Evidence from Patent Collateral , ” Wharton Working Paper , May 1 , http : / / fnce . wharton . upenn . edu / pro _ le / 1033 / . 134 Graham , S . J . H . , R . P . Merges , P . Samuelson , and T . Sichelman , 2009 , “High Technology Entrepreneurs and the Patent System : Results of the 2008 Berkeley Patent Survey , ” Berkeley Technology Law Journal , 24 , 4 , Fall , Article 1 , pp . 1255 - 1327 , http : / / scholarship . law . berkeley . edu / btlj / vol24 / iss4 / 1 , accessed April 5 , 2014 . 135 Spulber , D . F . , 2011 , “Should Business Method Inventions Be Patentable ? , ” Journal of Legal Analysis , 3 ( 1 ) , pp . 265 - 340 . 136 Moore , G . E . , 1965 , “Cramming More Components Onto Integrated Circuits , ” Electronics Magazin e , 38 , 8 , April 19 , pp . 114 - 117 ; Moore , G . E . , 1995 , “Lithography 43 Moore’s Law has accurately described this aspect of technological change in microprocessors for a period of about fifty years . Moore’s Law is a very basic description of some effects of highly complex changes in technology , many of which were discovered long after the prediction . Two significant production processes for microprocessors motivate Moore’s Law . First , the diffusion and oxide - masking process allowed the use of photographic techniques in producing semiconductors . 138 Second , the planar process allowed the use of lithography to make electronic connections on a flat wafer of silicon . 139 The patenting process played a role in these critical developments according to Gordon Moore , “When the patent application for the planar transistor and the process for making it was being prepared for filing , having been made aware of our view of the importance of this invention , the patent attorney asked if we had thought through the implications of the invention to be sure that we were covering it sufficiently . ” 140 Answering the patent attorney’s question led to consideration of further developments of the invention , “To consider this question , Noyce assembled a meeting of the key technical people in the Research and Development Department at Fairchild to discuss how [ Jean A . ] Hoerni’s invention might be extended . … During this session , Noyce described how the planar idea could be extended to make complete circuits rather [ than ] just individual components . ” 141 The result of this discussion was a fundamental invention in microprocessor technology : “At this meeting , Noyce described all the additional features necessary to extend the planar transistor technology to make a practical structure for an integrated circuit . ” 142 Moore observes that Noyce obtained “a patent on the key idea of interconnection [ R . N . Noyce , U . S . Patent 2 981 877 , Apr . 25 , 1961 ] , although his insight and the Future of Moore ' s Law , ” Optical / Laser Microlithography VIII : Proceedings of the SPE , 2440 , February 20 , pp . 2 - 17 . 137 Moore , 1995 , id . 138 Schaller , R . A . , 1997 , “Moore ' s Law : Past , Present , and Future , ” IEEE Spectrum , June , pp . 53 - 59 , at 54 . 139 Schaller , 1997 , id . at 54 ) . 140 Gordon E . Moore , 1998 , “The Role of Fairchild in Silicon Technology in the Early Days of ‘Silicon Valley’ , ” Proceedings of the IEEE , 86 , 1 , January , pp . 53 - 62 , at 59 . 141 Moore , 1998 , id . at 59 ( “I was not at that meeting , since my responsibility at the time was to oversee the engineering effort to get our transistors into production . ” ) . 142 Moore , 1998 , id . at 59 . 44 was much broader . ” 143 Noyce’s patent illustrates the forward - looking nature of patents , with patented claims looking ahead to the development and application of inventions . The diffusion and planar processes not only increased the density of devices on a chip but also lowered production costs . This motivated the original prediction ; Gordon Moore recalled “from where I was in the laboratory , you could see the changes that were coming , make the yields go up , and get the cost per transistors down dramatically . ” 144 However , Moore ( 1995 , p . 14 ) became concerned that the production costs of microprocessors also were growing at an exponential rate . The question to be addressed is whether quality - adjusted prices of computer chips changed systematically . As a rough illustration , I compiled a list of Intel microprocessors using the number of transistors as a measure of quality . I tried to obtain the price for the most basic version of each microprocessor in terms of processing speed . See Ana Aizcorbe and Samuel Kortum provide a detailed empirical analysis that tests a capital vintage model by considering average prices within each generation and examining how prices of each generation decline over time . 145 To adjust for inflation , I list the price of the microprocessor in the year that it was introduced and convert to 2013 dollars . 146 Then , I divide the inflation - adjusted price by the number of microprocessors . This gives only a snapshot of technological change . The quality - adjusted price indicates the effects of improvements in Intel’s fabrication processes ( 45nm in 2008 , 32nm in 2010 , 22nm in 2012 ) . 147 However , there were also other major technical achievements such as the three - dimensional Tri - Gate transistor introduced by Intel in its Ivy Bridge microprocessors . 148 Intel’s microprocessors offered many other improvements in quality that are not reflected in my very basic method of calculating quality - adjusted prices . There is also a slight departure from the trend due to the Pentium III , which appears to be a bargain . With these caveats in mind , the rapidly decreasing quality - adjusted prices shown in Table 1 give a clear indication of the many technological changes that occurred in microprocessors over the period of four decades . This illustrates how prices serve as a condensed indicator of technological change . 143 Moore , 1998 , id . at 59 . 144 Intel Corporation , 2005 , Excerpts from A Conversation with Gordon Moore : Moore’s Law , Video transcript , http : / / web . eng . fiu . edu / npala / eee6397ex / gordon _ moore _ 1965 _ article . pdf , Accessed July 1 , 2014 . 145 Ana Aizcorbe and Samuel Kortum , 2005 , “Moore ' s Law and the Semiconductor Industry : A Vintage Model . ” Scandinavian Journal of Economics , 107 ( 4 ) , Technology and Change , December , pp . 603 - 630 . 146 I used the bureau of labor statistics calculator , http : / / data . bls . gov / cgi - bin / cpicalc . pl ? cost1 = 5 . 25 & year1 = 1980 & year2 = 2013 . 147 http : / / hexus . net / tech / reviews / cpu / 37989 - intel - core - i7 - 3770k - 22nm - ivy - bridge / 148 http : / / hexus . net / tech / reviews / cpu / 37989 - intel - core - i7 - 3770k - 22nm - ivy - bridge / 45 V . CONCLUSION The America COMPETES Reauthorization Act opens the door to replacing market prices with government prizes . The Act gives prize authority to the heads of every government agency . Although transferring patented technology to the government is “voluntary , ” such transfers could be required as a condition for participating in prize contests . Additionally , the government has an array of powerful instruments for inducing participation in prize contests , including research grants , subsidies for research by universities , labs and corporations , tax credits and penalties for individuals and corporations , government procurement rules , and economic regulation of industry . Although seemingly benign , contests combined with transfers of IP to the government would harm invention and innovation . In contrast to market prices for inventions , a system of government prizes with either public or common ownership , would apply command - and - control to innovation . The government would determine the “shadow prices” of inventions , select the winning inventions , pay rewards to inventors , and allocate technologies to potential users . If only central planners could find the right “shadow prices” , they could replace market prices with government prizes , thus avoiding the need to solve “millions of equations” . But the premise is inconsistent with experience in centrally planned economies . Central planners necessarily lack the detailed private information of inventors , innovators , producers , and consumers that generate prices in the market for inventions . Government prizes would fail to reflect the extensive private information contained in market prices and would fail to adjust continually to changes in economic conditions , including technological change . Central planners cannot match the knowledge of Hayek’s “man on the spot” for goods and services . Central planners are even less equipped to match the knowledge of scientists , engineers , entrepreneurs , and managers engaged in invention and innovation . Market systems perform much better than governments in diffusing inventions and innovations . Government prizes would generate deadweight welfare losses greater than any caused by market prices . The administrative costs of government control of invention , innovation , and technology diffusion would be many times market transaction costs . Governments cannot expect to improve static and dynamic efficiency of market allocation of inventions . Replacing market prices with government prizes would create the very problem they are meant to solve . Market prices are instruments of cooperation between inventors and producers . Market prices are also mechanisms of competition among inventors and among producers . Market prices for inventions help coordination the diffusion of technology and the application of technology to innovation . Antitrust and regulations that weaken IP rights and impede the operation of the market for inventions will substantially reduce invention and innovation . Replacing market prices with government prizes would substantially diminish invention and innovation and harm social welfare and economic growth . 46 Microprocessor Year of introduction Number of transistors Price in 2013 dollars ( Nominal price ) Quality - adjusted price in Dollars per transistor 4004 1971 2300 172 . 56 ( 30 ) 0 . 0750 8080 1974 4500 1 , 701 . 11 ( 360 ) 0 . 3780 8086 1978 29 , 000 1 , 286 . 27 ( 360 ) 0 . 0443 Intel286 1982 134 , 000 869 . 06 ( 360 ) 0 . 0065 Intel386 1985 275 , 000 647 . 34 ( 299 ) 0 . 0024 Intel486 1989 1 , 200 , 000 1 , 690 . 82 ( 900 ) 1409 · 10 − 6 Intel Pentium 1993 3 , 100 , 000 1 , 415 . 48 ( 878 ) 456 . 6 · 10 − 6 Intel Pentium II 1997 7 , 500 , 000 724 . 27 ( 499 ) 96 . 57· 10 − 6 Intel Pentium III 1999 28 , 000 , 000 334 . 19 ( 239 ) 11 . 94 · 10 − 6 Intel Pentium 4 2000 42 , 000 , 000 871 . 22 ( 644 ) 20 . 74 · 10 − 6 Intel Itanium 2 2004 220 , 000 , 000 1 , 445 . 34 ( 1172 ) 6 . 570 · 10 − 6 Intel Core 2 Duo 2006 291 , 000 , 000 612 . 44 ( 530 ) 2 . 105 · 10 − 6 Intel Core 2 Quad 2007 582 , 000 , 000 269 . 65 ( 240 ) 0 . 4633 · 10 − 6 Intel Core i3 - 530 2010 382 , 000 , 000 120 . 72 ( 113 ) 0 . 3160 · 10 − 6 Intel Core i7 - 377 2012 1 , 400 , 000 , 000 309 . 47 ( 305 ) 0 . 2210 · 10 − 6 Table 1 Quality - adjusted prices of selected Intel microprocessors 1971 - 2012 . Sources of Data in Table 1 1 . Year of introduction and number of transistors for selected microprocessors ( 4004 , 8080 , 8086 , Intel286 , Intel386 , Intel486 , Intel Pentium , Intel Pentium II , Intel Pentium III , Intel Pentium 4 , Intel Itanium 2 ) , http : / / www . intel . com / pressroom / kits / events / moores _ law _ 40th / ? iid = tech _ mooreslaw + bod y _ presskit , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 2 . Year of introduction and number of transistors for Intel Core 2 Duo , Intel Core 2 Quad , http : / / download . intel . com / pressroom / kits / IntelProcessorHistory . pdf , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 3 . Year of introduction and number of transistors for Intel Core i3 - 530 , Source : http : / / www . cpu - world . com / CPUs / Core _ i3 / Intel - Core % 20i3 - 530 % 20CM80616003180AG % 20 ( BX80616I3530 % 20 - % 20BXC80616I3530 ) . html , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 4 . Year of introduction and number of transistors for Intel Core i7 - 377 , 47 http : / / hexus . net / tech / reviews / cpu / 37989 - intel - core - i7 - 3770k - 22nm - ivy - bridge / , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 5 . Price of the 4004 is $ 30 for 100 to 999 units in 1971 dollars ; EDN Staff , “One - Chip CPU Available for Low - Cost Dedicated Computers , ” January 15 , 1972 , http : / / www . edn . com / electronics - products / other / 4320004 / One - Chip - CPU - available - for - low - cost - dedicated - computers , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 6 . Price of the 8080 is $ 360 . Sources : http : / / www . intel . com / pressroom / kits / quickrefyr . htm , http : / / www . informit . com / articles / article . aspx ? p = 130978 , http : / / www . scaruffi . com / svhistory / sv / chap86 . html , http : / / en . citizendium . org / wiki / Intel _ 8080 , http : / / messui . the - chronicles . org / comp / history _ of _ microcomputers . pdf , http : / / www . chips . 5u . com / idxhst . html , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 7 . Price of the 8086 is $ 360 ; http : / / www . techrepublic . com / blog / classics - rock / intels - 8086 - passes - the - big - 3 - 0 / , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 8 . Price of the Intel286 is $ 360 , price of the Intel386 is $ 299 , price of the Intel486 is $ 900 , Intel Pentium II is $ 499 , price of the Intel Pentium III is $ 239 , and Intel Pentium 4 is $ 644 . “Intel introduces new and updated Pentium III processors based on 0 . 18 - micron technology , code - named Coppermine . The processor incorporates 28 million transistors with 0 . 18 - micron technology . Speeds and prices in 1000 - unit quantities range from 500 MHz ( US $ 239 ) to 733 MHz ( US $ 776 ) for desktop versions . ” “Intel introduces the Pentium 4 processor , at speeds of 1 . 4 and 1 . 5 GHz . …The processor incorporates 42 million transistors in a 0 . 18 - micron process . Code - name during development was Willamette . Prices are US $ 819 ( 1 . 5 GHz ) and US $ 644 ( 1 . 4 GHz ) in 1000 - unit quantities . ” Price of the 1 . 4 GHz Itanium 2 processor is $ 1172 in 1000 - unit quantities , http : / / processortimeline . info / proc1980 . htm , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 9 . The price of the Intel Core 2 Duo in 2006 is $ 530 , http : / / www . pcmag . com / article2 / 0 , 2817 , 1989161 , 00 . asp , accessed July 10 , 2014 . The Intel Core 2 Duo has 291 million transistors , http : / / download . intel . com / pressroom / kits / IntelProcessorHistory . pdf , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 10 . Intel Core 2 Quad was introduced in 2007 and has 820 million transistors . The price of the Intel Core 2 Quad is $ 851 in quantities of 1 , 000 . http : / / www . techspot . com / review / 36 - intel - core2 - quad - q6600 / , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 11 . Price of the Intel Core i3 - 530 Processor in 2010 is $ 113 , http : / / ark . intel . com / products / 46472 / Intel - Core - i3 - 530 - Processor - 4M - Cache - 2 _ 93 - GHz , accessed July 10 , 2014 . The Intel Core i3 - 530 Processor has 382 million transistors ; http : / / www . cpu - world . com / CPUs / Core _ i3 / Intel - Core % 20i3 - 530 % 20CM80616003180AG % 20 ( BX80616I3530 % 20 - % 20BXC80616I3530 ) . html , accessed July 10 , 2014 . 12 . Price of the Intel Core i7 - 3770 in 2012 is $ 305 ; 48 http : / / ark . intel . com / products / family / 65506 / 3rd - Generation - Intel - Core - i7 - Processors # @ Desktop , accessed July 10 , 2014 . The Ivy Bridge microprocessors have 1400 million transistors ; http : / / hexus . net / tech / reviews / cpu / 37989 - intel - core - i7 - 3770k - 22nm - ivy - bridge / , accessed July 10 , 2014 .