Understanding Changes in Mental Workload During Execution of Goal - directed Tasks and Its Application for Interruption Management BRIAN P . BAILEY AND SHAMSI T . IQBAL University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Interruptions can have lower cost if delivered at moments of lower mental workload during task execution , and cognitive theorists have speculated that these moments occur at subtask boundaries . In this article , we empirically test this speculation by examining how workload changes during task execution , focusing on subtask boundaries . In a carefully controlled experiment , users performed several interactive tasks while their pupil dilation , a reliable measure of workload , was continuously measured . The workload data was precisely aligned to the corresponding models of task execution and analyzed . Our principal results include ( i ) workload changes throughout the execution of a goal - directed task ; ( ii ) workload exhibits momentary decreases at subtask boundaries compared to the preceding subtasks ; ( iii ) the amount of decrease is larger at boundaries higher in the task model ; and ( iv ) different types of subtasks induce different amounts of workload . We situate these findings within resource theories of attention and discuss important implications for interruption management systems . Categories and Subject Descriptors : H . 5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : User Interfaces - evaluation / methodology , user - centered design , H . 1 . 2 [ Models and Principles ] : User / Machine Systems - Human Information Processing General Terms : Design , Experimentation , Human Factors , Measurement Additional Key Words and Phrases : Attention , Interruption , Workload , Pupil Size , Task Models , User Studies _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1 . INTRODUCTION A rapidly increasing number of proactive systems are seeking to deliver potentially useful information to end users in many multi - tasking environments ( McFarlane and Latorella 2002 ) , including aviation cockpits ( Latorella 1996 ; Dismukes , Young et al . 1998 ) , control rooms ( Stanton 1994 ) , automobile cockpits ( Lee , Hoffman et al . 2004 ) and office settings ( Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Jackson , Dawson et al . 2001 ; Bailey and Konstan 2006 ) . Though a user may often desire or need the information delivered by these systems , e . g . , to support near instant communication ( Latorella 1996 ; Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Dabbish and Kraut 2004 ) , maintain awareness of peripheral information ( Maglio and Campbell 2003 ) , or be reminded of upcoming activities ( Dey and Abowd 2000 ) , a Left blank for Author addresses and copyright notice 1 notable consequence of proactive delivery is that the user’s ongoing primary task may be interrupted . Studies show that interrupting a user’s primary task can cause decreased performance ( Kreifeldt and McCarthy 1981 ; Latorella 1996 ; Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Rubinstein , Meyer et al . 2001 ; Bailey and Konstan 2006 ) as well as increased frustration and anxiety ( Zijlstra , Roe et al . 1999 ; Adamczyk and Bailey 2004 ; Bailey and Konstan 2006 ) . An emerging body of empirical research is now beginning to probe how manipulating the time at which a notification is delivered during execution of a primary task impacts the cost of interruption , e . g . , see ( Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Monk , Boehm - Davis et al . 2002 ; Bailey and Konstan 2006 ) . The goal of that collection of work is to identify effective strategies that could be implemented within interruption management systems . A common foundation for this direction of empirical research , and subsequent systems , is Miyata and Norman’s influential article arguing that interruptions would have lower cost if delivered at moments of lower mental workload , and that these moments occur at subtask boundaries during task execution ( Miyata and Norman 1986 ) . Though their arguments are certainly reasonable , whether workload is indeed lower at subtask boundaries has never been explicitly tested and assuming the veracity of this argument for interruption management could thus be premature . Furthermore , since tasks can typically be decomposed into recursive patterns of goal formulation and execution , there are many boundaries at many levels within a task’s hierarchical structure ( Card , Moran et al . 1983 ) , which we call the task model . It is thus unclear whether workload would decrease at all , some , or none of the boundaries in a task model , and whether the workload patterns exhibited in one task would hold across others . In this work , we seek to empirically examine how a user’s mental workload changes during the execution of goal - directed tasks , focusing on subtask boundaries and their level ( depth ) within the corresponding model of task execution . In a carefully controlled experiment , users performed several interactive tasks ; route planning , document editing , and email classification . The tasks were necessarily simplified , but still maintained a relatively complex execution structure . While the tasks were performed , users’ pupil dilation was continuously measured using a head - mounted eye tracking system . Research has shown that pupil dilation is a reliable and valid indicator of mental workload ( Beatty 1982 ; Just , Carpenter et al . 2003 ; Pomplun and Sunkara 2003 ; Verney , Granolm et al . 2004 ) . To analyze the workload data , which was processed from the raw pupillary response data , we first developed and validated models describing the execution structure of each task . We then aligned each user’s workload data to the corresponding model of 2 the task , aggregated the aligned the models for each task , and analyzed workload at various regions of the model . Our principal results from this analysis include ( i ) workload changes throughout the execution of goal - directed tasks ; ( ii ) workload exhibits a transitory decrease when a boundary is reached during task execution , relative to the preceding subtask ; ( iii ) that this decrease is larger at boundaries higher in the task model , i . e . , those that correspond to the completion of larger chunks of the task , and is smaller at boundaries lower in the model ; and ( iv ) that different types of subtasks induce different amounts of workload . We discuss these results from the perspective of resource theories of human attention and discuss important implications of these results for interruption management systems . Though parts of this work have been previously reported in ( Iqbal , Adamczyk et al . 2005 ; Iqbal and Bailey 2005 ) , this article provides results from a revised analysis of the data ( explained in Sec . 3 . 6 ) ; results from the analysis of an additional experimental task not previously reported , giving further confidence in our findings ; and a much more thorough discussion of the implications of our findings for interruption management . 2 . RELATED WORK In this section , we discuss effects of interruption , how our work contributes to strategies for mitigating those effects and systems that reason about when to interrupt , and rationale for using pupil size as the indicator of mental workload in this research . 2 . 1 Cost of Interruption Controlled studies have clearly demonstrated that interrupting users engaged in tasks has considerable negative impact on task completion time ( Kreifeldt and McCarthy 1981 ; McFarlane 1999 ; Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Cutrell , Czerwinski et al . 2001 ; Monk , Boehm - Davis et al . 2002 ) , error rate ( Latorella 1998 ) , decision making ( Speier , Valacich et al . 1999 ) , and affective state ( Zijlstra , Roe et al . 1999 ; Adamczyk and Bailey 2004 ; Bailey and Konstan 2006 ) . For example , when peripheral tasks are delivered at random moments during primary tasks , users can take up to 30 % longer to complete the primary tasks , commit up to twice the errors , and experience up to twice the increase in negative affect than when those same peripheral tasks are delivered at scheduled , opportune moments ( Bailey and Konstan 2006 ) . In safety critical domains , a small response delay or error committed due to ill - timed interruption could cause loss of life or catastrophic damage ( McFarlane and Latorella 3 2002 ) . In office settings , unnecessary increases in frustration and anxiety caused by poorly timed interruption can seriously degrade the user experience ( Shneiderman 1997 ) . 2 . 2 Workload as a Means to Reduce Cost of Interruption Researchers have theorized that interruptions would have lower cost if they occurred at moments of lower workload during execution of a primary task , and that these moments occur at ( sub ) task boundaries ( Miyata and Norman 1986 ) . While empirical studies show that scheduling interruptions at certain boundaries or other moments can mitigate interruption cost ( Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Cutrell , Czerwinski et al . 2001 ; Adamczyk and Bailey 2004 ; Bailey and Konstan 2006 ) , researchers can only assume why , as the workload experienced at those moments was never measured . Without a theoretical basis for understanding why certain moments have lower cost , it is difficult to distill these empirical results into more general guidelines that can be used to determine opportune moments for interrupting users engaged in tasks . In addition , interactive tasks can be decomposed into recursive patterns of goal formulation and execution , creating many boundaries at many levels within the task’s hierarchical model ( Card , Moran et al . 1983 ) . It is thus unclear as to which of these boundaries would have the lowest workload ( and thus cost ) for interruption . By analyzing workload during task execution , our work seeks to contribute further understanding of just where moments of lower workload occur within the structure of goal - directed tasks . 2 . 3 Systems that Reason about Interruption Systems are being developed that computationally reason about appropriate moments for interrupting users engaged in tasks , e . g . , see ( Horvitz and Apacible 2003 ; Hudson , Fogarty et al . 2003 ; Fogarty , Ko et al . 2005 ; Bailey and Konstan 2006 ) . The general approach is to weigh the value of delivering information against the cost of interrupting the primary task ( Horvitz , Jacobs et al . 1999 ) , where the focus of current research has been on computing an accurate cost of interruption . Systems typically compute the cost of interruption using non task specific cues such as desktop activity , visual and acoustical analysis of the physical task environment , and scheduled activities of the user . An important source of information that is missing from current systems is knowledge about the current workload of a user , as workload is related to interruption cost ( Kreifeldt and McCarthy 1981 ) . One method for acquiring this information is to connect a physiological measure of workload directly to the reasoning engine ( Chen and Vertegaal 2004 ) . However , in situations where using such a measure is not practical or desirable , 4 which is ostensibly the more common case , it would be valuable to be able to approximate workload directly from the structure of the task . Results from our work provide an initial set of heuristics for assigning costs of interruption to subtask boundaries and other moments within the structure of a task based on knowledge of general patterns of workload changes . Systems can then use this information to help make finer - grained decisions about when to interrupt . 2 . 4 Use of Pupil Size as a Measure of Workload The methodology used in our experiment required the use of a measure of mental workload . Any measure could have been used such that it was continuous , immediate , low latency , and valid . After a review of the literature , combined with local availability of needed equipment , we selected pupil dilation as our measure for this work . Under conditions of controlled illumination , research shows that pupil dilation is a valid and reliable indicator of mental workload ( Hess and Polt 1964 ; Kahneman 1967 ; Juris and Velden 1977 ; Beatty 1982 ; Hoecks and Levelt 1993 ; Takahashi , Nakayama et al . 2000 ; Marshall 2002 ; Nakayama and Takahashi 2002 ) . Though some experiments have not detected a relationship between task difficulty and pupil dilation , e . g . , see ( Lin , Zhang et al . 2003 ) , the relationship does seem to hold in the general case . For example , Beatty reviewed a very large corpus of experimental data and concluded that pupil dilation is a reliable indicator of mental workload , that relative increases in pupil size correlate with increases in workload , and that this holds true across tasks and individuals ( Beatty 1982 ) . Researchers have also pursued many other measures of workload , including event - related brain potential ( Donchin , Kramer et al . 1986 ; Kramer , Schneider et al . 1986 ; Kok 1997 ) , electro - encephalographic activity ( Gevins and Schaffer 1980 ; Gale and Edwards 1983 ; Phelps and Mazziotta 1985 ) , eye movement and blink rate ( Takahashi , Nakayama et al . 2000 ) , heart rate variance ( Rowe , Sibert et al . 1998 ) , performance measures ( O ' Donnell and Eggemeier 1986 ) , and subjective ratings ( Hart and Staveland 1988 ) . Relative to these measures , the use of pupil dilation offers many advantages ( Kramer 1991 ) ; it is continuous , meaning that it provides a steady stream of workload data ; it measures allocation of resources in a holistic manner rather than specific pools ; it has low latency , usually responding to a change in workload in about 500 ms ; and it is immediate , a few recent samples indicates current workload , which simplifies analysis of the data . However , careful experimental control must be maintained with pupil dilation , as it can be considerably affected by factors such as ambient illumination and screen luminance . 5 A caveat of using pupil dilation as an indicator of mental workload is that it has rarely been used in interactive computing environments . We explored this issue in prior work ( Iqbal , Zheng et al . 2004 ) , and our results showed that pupil dilation does correlate with the workload induced by interactive tasks , assuming appropriate environmental controls . Building on this prior work , our current experiment seeks to better understand how workload changes within the structure of a goal - directed task , paying particular attention to subtask boundaries , by aligning the response data to the interaction sequence of the task . Note that we are using pupil dilation as a means for studying how workload changes during task execution , and are not necessarily advocating the use of pupil dilation or any other physiological measure as part of an interruption management system . 3 . UNDERSTANDING WORKLOAD CHANGES DURING TASK EXECUTION The purpose of this experiment is to develop further understanding of the relationship between mental processing effort ( i . e . , workload ) and the structural characteristics of goal - directed tasks . As a starting point , our focus is on examining whether and how much workload changes at boundaries between subtasks within a hierarchical model of a task’s execution , how much this change differs at different levels in the hierarchy , and how much workload changes among different types of subtasks . Answers to these questions provide critical steps towards understanding how to assign accurate costs of interruption to various moments during execution of a task . 3 . 1 Experimental Tasks For the experiment , three interactive tasks were developed : • Route planning . An interactive map was provided that showed two separate routes between two cities marked with start and end symbols ( see Figure 1 ) . For each route , there were three segments from the source to the destination . A distance and fare were associated with each segment , and were available through a tooltip that appeared when the user moved the cursor over a segment . To perform the task , the user moved the cursor over the first segment in the map corresponding to the first route , committed the distance and fare information shown in the tooltip to memory ( the tooltip disappeared when the cursor was moved away ) , and entered the data into the corresponding row in the table . A user completed each row in the table for the first route , mentally added the distance and fare columns , and entered the results into the last row . The user then repeated this process for the second table and route . Distance and fare values were manipulated ( number of digits ) to affect the difficulty of storing and recalling their 6 values from memory as well as computing their sum . After completing both tables , the user selected the shorter and the cheaper of the two routes from drop down lists . • Document editing . A user was given a document with three annotations ( see Figure 2 ) . The content of the document was about the social hierarchy of a common pet ( cats ) , selected because we felt it would be familiar and understandable to most users . A user edited the document according to each annotation , which appeared as a tooltip when the cursor was moved over the corresponding highlight . After reading an annotation , the user located the corresponding text , made the desired edit , and repeated two more times . The document was saved to a specified directory and file , given a priori . The edits were manipulated to have varying difficulty , e . g . , the easiest edit was to correct one misspelled word , the medium edit was to locate and correct two misspelled words , and the most difficult was to rephrase a sentence so that it was grammatically correct . • E - mail classification . For this task ( see Figure 3 ) , a user was asked to classify a set of nine emails into a given set of categories ; e . g . , coursework , vehicles and travel , announcements , and fun and humor . The user would review the subject descriptor of an email , reason about which category it belonged to , and drag it into the corresponding folder . The user then repeated this sequence for the remaining emails . The content of the subject descriptors was manipulated to affect the difficulty of the classification , e . g . , some descriptors had the name of the destination category within it while others were more ambiguous . These tasks were carefully designed to have meaningful subtasks of varying difficulty , well - defined boundaries between subtasks , a representative sample of interaction , and a prescribed execution sequence . A prescribed sequence was necessary to be able to align each user’s workload data to the corresponding model of task execution . The lower - level cognitive subtasks , e . g . , memory store and recall , comprehension , and reasoning are representative of those within many other tasks . Though the tasks are relatively simple , it is important to note that they are more complex and of longer duration than tasks used in many prior experiments involving pupillary response , e . g . , ( Bradshaw 1967 ; Kahneman 1967 ; Juris and Velden 1977 ; Hytintk , Tommola et al . 1995 ; Takahashi , Nakayama et al . 2000 ) . 3 . 2 Users and Equipment A total of 24 users ( 7 female ) participated in the experiment , with ages ranging from 19 to 50 ( M = 25 . 4 ) . All users had normal or corrected - to - normal vision . As users performed 7 tasks , their pupil data was recorded using a head - mounted eye tracking system ( Eyelink II ) . The eye - tracker sampled the pupil at a high temporal frequency of 250 HZ with spatial accuracy to about 1 / 100 th of a millimeter using corneal reflection . Lighting and noise levels of the task environment were well controlled . Twelve users performed both the route planning and document editing tasks while the remaining twelve performed the email classification task . This reduced the time that any one user had to wear the eye tracking equipment , but did not impact the results as each task was analyzed separately . 3 . 3 Procedure Upon arrival at the lab , we went through an informed consent process with the user and provided general instructions for the tasks . After questions were answered , we set up the eye - tracker and calibrated the system . At the start of the session , the user was given specific instructions and performed practice tasks . Just before each experimental task , we collected baseline pupil size by having the user fixate on a blank task screen for a few seconds . The user was asked to perform the tasks as quickly and accurately as possible . Time - stamped samples of pupil data were logged to a file while the user’s screen interaction was recorded with eye gaze overlaid . Because the videos and pupil data received time stamps from the same clock , we could precisely align the two data sets . The entire experimental session lasted about 30 minutes . 3 . 4 Task Models and Validation Figures 4 , 5 , and 6 show the task models for the Route Planning , Document Editing , and Email Classification tasks , respectively , reusing repetitive parts for brevity . The term subtask refers to any node in the model and subtask boundary refers to the period between adjacent subtasks . Level of boundary between two adjacent subtasks is 1 + the depth of their shared ancestor in the model . For example , in Figure 4 , consider the “Locate segment” and “Store data” subtasks at the left of level 4 . When a user completes the “Locate segment” subtask and moves to “Store data” , this defines a level 4 boundary , since the depth of their shared ancestor “Retrieve segment” is ( 1 + ) 3 . When a user completes the “Store data” subtask and moves to “Recall” , this defines a level 3 boundary , since the depth of their shared ancestor “Enter data for segment 1” is ( 1 + ) 2 . Finally , subtask type refers to whether the subtask represents a memory store , memory recall , reasoning , language comprehension , language generation , or motor operator . The task models were developed in an iterative manner . For each task , we developed an initial model through our own analysis of the task’s execution . The initial models were refined based on screen interaction videos of four users performing the tasks prior to and 8 independent from the experiment . The interaction sequences predicted by the leaves in our task models were compared to the sequences observed in the interaction videos , and our models were refined until a high degree of agreement was reached . We measured the accuracy of our final task models by comparing the operators in the models to the observable events ( keyboard , mouse , and eye gaze ) in the interaction videos recorded during the experiment . An error step was defined to be a deviation from the prescribed sequence . If the user committed an error , each action after that step would count as an error until the user again performed a step in the prescribed sequence , from which point the analysis continued , as discussed in ( Card , Moran et al . 1983 ) . The final task model for Route Planning has 4 levels and 81 nodes . The average error rate was 2 . 81 % with no detectable pattern to the errors . Repeating this same process for Document Editing , the resulting model had 4 levels and 38 nodes with an average error rate of 2 . 3 % . The model for Email Classification had 2 levels and 25 nodes and matched users’ execution of the task without error . 3 . 5 Measurements Following prior work ( Hess 1972 ) , workload was calculated as the percent change in pupil size ( PCPS ) for each sample of data relative to the baseline . Eye blinks , which were identified by the eye tracking system , were accounted for by linearly interpolating the missing values ( Verney , Granholm et al . 2001 ) . For each subtask and boundary , we also computed the average PCPS ( APCPS ) for that region of data . The duration of subtasks ranged from about 25ms for the lowest - level subtasks , to about 1 min for the higher level subtasks , to about 5 min for the root node ( the entire task ) . The duration of boundaries ranged from about 8ms to 6 seconds ( M = 487ms , S . D . = 574ms ) , with higher level boundaries generally being of longer duration . A more detailed analysis of the durations of the boundaries included for each task within the Results section . 3 . 6 Alignment and Revised Analysis As the models accurately reflected a user’s execution sequences in the tasks , we were able to precisely align a user’s pupillary response to the models . Since each user performed the tasks at different speeds , our approach was to align the pupil data to the subtasks in the model , not to time , starting from the bottom and working our way up . For each leaf subtask , we identified the beginning and end time stamp from the screen interaction video and used these timestamps to index the pupillary response file , and then the corresponding PCPS data was extracted and associated with that subtask . APCPS for higher - level subtasks was calculated by averaging the PCPS values associated with their 9 child subtasks , and this process was repeated until the root node was reached . For boundaries , we extracted the PCPS data from the end timestamp of the preceding subtask to the begin timestamp of the subsequent subtask and computed APCPS values as before . Overall , analysis of the data was consistent with our prior work ( Iqbal , Adamczyk et al . 2005 ) , but several improvements were included . First , to account for latency in the response of the pupil to the onset of a stimulus , we temporally shifted the pupil data by a small amount ( 500 msecs ) prior to aligning it with the task model ( Kramer 1991 ) . Second , to compute decrease in workload at a boundary , we now compare the APCPS of the boundary to the APCPS of its preceding subtask . Previously , ( Iqbal , Adamczyk et al . 2005 ) , the decrease was computed as the difference between the minimum value within the boundary ( taken as the average of multiple surrounding points ) and the APCPS of the preceding subtask . Our current analysis was revised to ensure that we are providing a fairer comparison between these two regions of data . Finally , when a non - leaf subtask precedes a boundary , we compare the APCPS of the boundary to the APCPS of the last leaf operator of that subtask . For example , in Figure 4 , the decrease at boundary B1 is computed as the difference in APCPS between B1 and the operator Store Data ( the last operator of Retrieve segment ) . This was done to ensure that earlier parts of longer subtasks were not unfairly affecting the calculation . 4 . RESULTS We first check that regions of the tasks that would be expected to induce lower / higher workload do indeed correspond to lower / higher values of PCPS , giving confidence in our measure . Then , for each task , we discuss how different types of subtasks affected workload , how the level within a model affects workload at a subtask boundary , and how much workload differs between a boundary and its preceding subtask . The reader should keep in mind that small changes in pupillary response can represent meaningful changes in workload and there is an upper bound on how much a user’s pupil size will increase due solely to changes in mental processing effort . 4 . 1 Validation of Workload Measure To validate our workload measure , we compared pupillary response between different parts of the tasks that would presumably require different amounts of mental effort . For Route Planning , we performed an ANOVA with Load ( fewest , middle , and most digits ) as the factor on the APCPS of Recall subtasks . Results showed that Load had a main effect on APCPS ( F ( 2 , 46 ) = 6 . 242 , p < 0 . 004 ) , where Recall subtasks that involved more 10 digits had higher APCPS . For Email Classification , an ANOVA with Classification Difficulty ( easier , more difficult ) as the factor showed the more difficult classification ( where some mental processing was required to select the target folder for the email ) had higher APCPS than the easier classification ( F ( 1 , 7 ) = 9 . 812 , p < 0 . 017 ) . For Document Editing , Difficulty ( simple , medium , and difficult edit ) did not have a main effect , although the trends were in the expected direction . We attribute this lack of significance to the three types of edits being closer in terms of mental effort as compared to the subtasks being compared for other two tasks . These results confirm that users’ pupil size was changing in response to the changing difficulty of the subtasks . 4 . 2 Route Planning Figure 7 shows the average ( across users ) APCPS for each leaf ( operator ) subtask and all boundaries within the model for Route Planning . In the graph , note how workload rises quickly at the onset of the task , and then rises and falls throughout execution . Inspection of the graph clearly shows transitory decreases in workload at the two level 1 boundaries . 4 . 2 . 1 Workload during subtasks To test whether performing subtasks induced workload over the baseline , we performed a t - test on the APCPS values of the subtasks . Our analysis included only those subtasks that required cognitive effort such as storing , recalling , or reasoning about distance and fare information , rather than motor subtasks , as the relationship between cognitive effort and pupillary response is the one best established ( Beatty 1982 ) . Results showed that APCPS was greater than 0 across subtasks ( M = 11 . 98 , SD = 7 . 6 , t ( 263 ) = 25 . 75 , p < 0 . 001 ) . This represents about a 12 % increase over the baseline value and shows that the subtasks did impose increased workload on a user . An ANOVA with Subtask ( Store , Recall , and Reasoning ) as the factor showed a main effect on APCPS ( F ( 2 , 261 ) = 4 . 87 , p < 0 . 008 ) . Post hoc tests showed that Reasoning induced more workload than Store ( difference was 4 . 3 percentage points , p < 0 . 008 ) and Recall ( difference was 3 . 2 percentage points , p < 0 . 031 ) , while there was no difference found between Store and Recall subtasks . 4 . 2 . 2 Workload at subtask boundaries A t - test showed that APCPS at boundaries was greater than 0 ( M = 11 . 68 , SD = 7 . 62 , t ( 611 ) = 37 . 91 , p < 0 . 001 ) and that Level had a main effect on the APCPS of boundaries ( F ( 3 , 608 ) = 2 . 61 , p < 0 . 052 ) . Post hoc tests showed that the APCPS of boundaries at Level 3 ( M = 10 . 78 ) was less than the APCPS of boundaries at Level 4 ( M = 12 . 59 , p < 0 . 051 ) . 11 Other pairs were not significant , though the means were in the expected direction ( M = 11 . 64 for Level 1 and M = 12 . 37 for Level 2 ) . Among all boundaries in the model , the Level 2 boundary between Retrieve route 1 total and Retrieve route 2 total had the lowest APCPS ( 9 . 57 ) while the Level 3 boundary between Add distances and Add fares had the highest ( 13 . 99 ) . This indicates that the workload carried through a boundary depends not just on the level in a model , but also on the mental demands of the surrounding subtasks . The overall average duration of the boundaries was 590ms . Level had a main effect on boundary duration ( F ( 3 , 593 ) = 11 . 26 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Post hoc tests showed that level 1 boundaries ( M = 887ms ) were of longer duration than level 3 ( M = 456ms , p < 0 . 001 ) and level 4 ( M = 483ms , p < 0 . 002 ) boundaries , and that level 2 boundaries ( M = 691ms ) were of longer duration than level 3 ( p < 0 . 001 ) and level 4 ( p < 0 . 001 ) boundaries . 4 . 2 . 3 Decrease of workload at subtask boundaries Boundary Decrease is computed as the difference between APCPS at the boundary and the preceding subtask , as discussed in Sec . 3 . 6 . With values for all boundaries included , a t - test showed that Boundary Decrease was slightly greater than 0 , but did not reach a level of significance ( M = 0 . 029 , SD = 3 . 91 , t ( 612 ) = 0 . 18 , p = 0 . 85 ) . This indicates that not all boundaries exhibit a detectable decrease in workload , likely because the numerous lower level boundaries were closely related and had a high degree of mental carryover . However , if the lowest level boundaries ( Level 4 ) are excluded , the same analysis now shows Boundary Decrease to be greater than 0 ( M = 0 . 7905 , SD = 3 . 8 , t ( 397 ) = 4 . 15 , p < 0 . 001 ) , with the effect becoming stronger as further lower - level boundaries are excluded . This indicates that workload decreases as a boundary is reached during an interaction sequence , but only to a certain level of depth in the task model . Exploring this further , we found that Level had a main effect on Boundary Decrease ( F ( 3 , 608 ) = 18 . 42 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Post hoc tests showed that decreases at level 1 were greater than at level 2 ( 1 . 95 percentage points ) , level 3 ( 2 . 38 percentage points , p < 0 . 017 ) and level 4 ( 4 . 3 percentage points , p < 0 . 001 ) . Level 2 decreases were greater than level 3 ( 0 . 43 percentage points ) and level 4 ( 2 . 34 percentage points , p < 0 . 0001 ) , and Level 3 decreases were greater than level 4 ( 1 . 91 percentage points , p < 0 . 001 ) . Overall , this pattern shows that workload tends to decrease more at boundaries higher in the task model than at boundaries lower in the model . However , we also found that workload changed within the same level in a model . For example , APCPS between the two level 1 boundaries were different ( F ( 1 , 22 ) = 5 . 31 , p < 0 . 031 ) , with an absolute difference of 2 . 96 percentage points . 12 4 . 3 Document Editing Figure 8 shows the average APCPS for each leaf subtask and all boundaries within the model for the Document Editing task . As in the Route Planning task , workload rises at the onset of the task , rises and falls throughout task execution , and temporarily decreases at salient boundaries in the task , i . e . , after completing each of the three edits . 4 . 3 . 1 Workload during subtasks Including only cognitive subtasks ( language comprehension and generation , and recall ) , a t - test showed that APCPS for subtasks was greater than 0 ( M = 8 . 62 , SD = 7 . 35 , t ( 111 ) = 12 . 41 , p < 0 . 001 ) . This shows an 8 . 62 % increase over the baseline , meaning that the subtasks did induce increased workload , but not as much as in the route planning task . An ANOVA with Subtask ( Comprehension , Generation , and Recall ) as the factor showed a main effect on APCPS ( F ( 2 , 109 ) = 4 . 19 , p < 0 . 018 ) . Recall induced more workload than Comprehension ( difference was 5 . 9 percentage points , p < 0 . 037 ) and Generation ( difference was 3 . 04 ) , and Generation had higher APCPS than Comprehension ( difference was 2 . 86 ) . These results are consistent with Route Planning , where different types of subtasks also induced different workload . 4 . 3 . 2 Workload at subtask boundaries A t - test showed that the APCPS of boundaries was greater than 0 ( M = 9 . 02 , SD = 8 . 4 , t ( 233 ) = 16 . 433 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Level did not have a main effect , but the trends were in the expected direction ( M = 7 . 82 for Level 1 , M = 8 . 22 for Level 2 , M = 9 . 4 for Level 3 , and M = 9 . 26 for Level 4 ) . Among all boundaries , the Level 2 boundary between Edit second comment and Edit third comment had the lowest APCPS ( 4 . 42 ) , while the highest APCPS was at the Level 3 boundary between Select file menu and Select save ( 14 . 99 ) . The overall average duration of boundaries was 528ms . Level had a main effect on the duration of a boundary ( F ( 3 , 241 ) = 5 . 31 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Post hoc tests showed that boundaries at level 1 ( M = 1 . 1s ) were of longer duration than boundaries at levels 3 ( M = 461ms , p < 0 . 025 ) and 4 ( M = 401ms , p < 0 . 009 ) , and boundaries at level 2 ( M = 746ms ) were of longer duration than those at level 4 ( p < 0 . 04 ) . 4 . 3 . 3 Decrease of workload at subtask boundaries With all boundaries included , a t - test did not show Boundary Decrease to be greater than 0 . As with the Route Planning task , excluding the lowest level boundaries ( Level 4 ) and re - running the t - test now showed Boundary Decrease to be greater than 0 ( M = 1 . 34 , SD = 4 . 01 , t ( 133 ) = 3 . 87 , p < 0 . 001 ) . An ANOVA with Level as the factor showed a main 13 effect on the APCPS of boundaries ( F ( 3 , 234 ) = 16 . 81 , p < 0 . 0001 ) . Boundary Decrease at Level 1 was similar to Level 2 , but larger than level 4 ( 3 . 99 percentage points , p < 0 . 003 ) . Level 1 also had quantitatively higher decrease than level 3 ( 2 . 61 percentage points ) , but not significantly so . Boundaries at level 2 were found to have a larger decrease than at level 3 ( 2 . 94 percentage points , p < 0 . 0001 ) and level 4 ( 4 . 32 percentage points , p < 0 . 0001 ) . Boundaries at level 3 tended to have a larger decrease than at level 4 ( 1 . 39 percentage points ) , but did not reach significance . This pattern of results shows that workload tends to decrease more when a boundary higher in the model is reached during an interaction sequence , consistent with results from Route Planning . 4 . 4 Email Classification Figure 9 shows the average APCPS for subtasks and all boundaries within the model for Email Classification . As with the other tasks , this graph clearly shows a temporary decrease in workload at the top - level boundary after completing the classification of each email . Also , note that the structure of this task is simpler than the previous tasks , as there were only two levels and one type of cognitive subtask – reasoning about the destination folder – in the model . 4 . 4 . 1 Workload during subtasks and at boundaries For the cognitive subtasks ( reasoning ) , a t - test showed that APCPS was greater than 0 ( M = 9 . 48 , SD = 5 . 6 , t ( 71 ) = 14 . 447 , p < 0 . 001 ) . This represents a 9 . 48 % increase over the baseline and shows that the subtasks did induce increased workload , as with the previous tasks . In addition , a t - test showed that the APCPS of boundaries was greater than 0 ( M = 8 . 93 , SD = 6 . 05 , t ( 142 ) = 17 . 654 , p < 0 . 001 ) , with Level 1 boundaries having lower APCPS ( M = 7 . 93 ) than the Level 2 boundaries ( M = 9 . 92 ) . Boundaries at level 1 ( M = 484ms ) were of longer duration than those at level 2 ( M = 320ms ; F ( 1 , 167 ) = 7 . 41 , p < 0 . 007 ) , and the overall average duration for a boundary was 405 ms . 4 . 4 . 2 Decrease of workload at subtask boundaries A t - test showed that Boundary Decrease was greater than 0 ( M = 0 . 6816 , SD = 3 . 73 , t ( 142 ) = 2 . 19 , p < 0 . 03 ) . An ANOVA showed that Level had a main effect on Boundary Decrease ( F ( 1 , 141 ) = 14 . 41 , p < 0 . 0001 ) , with the decrease at Level 1 boundaries ( M = 1 . 82 , S . D . = 2 . 94 ) being larger than at Level 2 boundaries ( M = - 0 . 44 , S . D . = 4 . 08 ) . These results show that workload decreased at boundaries and that it decreased more at boundaries higher in the task model , which is consistent with results from the other two tasks . 14 5 . DISCUSSION The purpose of our experiment was to better understand how workload changes during execution of goal - directed tasks . Here we summarize our primary findings , situate these findings within resource theories of human attention , and discuss implications of these findings for systems that reason about when to interrupt users engaged in tasks . First , our results provide further evidence showing that a user’s mental workload changes throughout execution of goal - directed tasks . From the perspective of resource theories of attention ( Kahneman 1973 ; Wickens 1980 ; Wickens 1991 ; Wickens 2002 ) , this result suggests that attentional resources are not statically allocated at the onset of a task , but are being dynamically allocated and released throughout execution of that task . For interruption management , this implies that the moment at which a notification is delivered during a user’s ongoing interaction should affect interruption cost . Indeed , several studies have shown that the moment that a primary task is interrupted does in fact affect interruption cost , e . g . , see ( Czerwinski , Cutrell et al . 2000 ; Monk , Boehm - Davis et al . 2002 ; Bailey and Konstan 2006 ; Iqbal and Bailey 2006 ) , where cost is typically measured in terms of time to resume the primary task . Our results strongly suggest that the interruptions resulting in lower cost likely occurred at moments of lower workload , when there were more attentional resources available for the interrupting task and fewer resources were needed to resume the suspended task ( Rubinstein , Meyer et al . 2001 ) . Second , we found that transitory decreases in workload are experienced as subtask boundaries are reached during task execution . This result is summarized in Figure 10 across tasks . A plausible explanation is that the executive system releases attentional resources allocated for the just completed subtask , but has not yet acquired resources for the subsequent subtask . An important implication of this result is that it establishes the principle of using defer - to - breakpoint policies for reducing cost of interruption . For example , if interruptions could be deferred until subtask boundaries , the executive system would have more resources available for performing the interrupting task ( Rubinstein , Meyer et al . 2001 ) . Such policies would also be beneficial because boundaries typically represent moments between actions with a system , e . g . , this would prevent interruptions during execution of motor subtasks with lower workload . Third , our results showed that the transitory decrease in workload tended to be larger when boundaries higher in a model were reached during task execution . In addition , higher - level boundaries were found to be of longer duration than lower - level boundaries . These results indicate that more resources are released when more salient breakpoints are reached during a task . Whereas , when lower - level boundaries are reached , the amount of 15 resources released is apparently small , possibly due to cognitive chunking of repetitive or skilled actions ( Newell and Rosenbloom 1981 ) or to large carryover of information being actively maintained in short - term memory . The implication of this finding is that interruption management systems should favor boundaries that represent more salient breakpoints during a user’s ongoing interaction , as these should result in a lower cost of interruption . In addition , systems need not consider boundaries that are low in the task model ( roughly beyond the third level ) as these would provide little benefit over non - boundary moments . Finally , the level of a boundary in a task model cannot always predict whether there would be a larger decrease or lower absolute value of workload at a boundary . For example , in the document editing task , the boundary with the lowest workload was between the second and the third edits , which was not a top level boundary . Similarly , for route planning , the lowest workload boundary was between selecting the shorter and the cheaper of the routes , which also was not a top - level boundary . A plausible explanation is that the executive system may be maintaining information in short - term memory or prospectively allocating resources in anticipation of a subsequent subtask across some boundaries , but not others ( Trafton , Altmann et al . 2003 ) . The implication is that using knowledge related to the goal structure of a task within an interruption management system could offer only a rough approximation of interruption cost at various boundaries . A more precise determination of cost would require aligning a measure of workload to the model of task execution , as demonstrated in this work . 5 . 1 Linking Workload and Interruption Cost Results from our experiment , coupled with resources theories of attention , suggest that interrupting at moments of lower workload should result in lower costs of interruption . As a first step towards testing this claim , we conducted a follow - up experiment where users were interrupted at different moments – better , worse , and random – while performing the tasks presented in this work . As details of that experiment can be found in ( Iqbal and Bailey 2005 ) , here we briefly summarize our methodology and findings . Given the workload - aligned task models ( Figures 4 - 6 ) , better moments were selected as boundaries with lower workload , worse moments were selected as boundaries with higher workload , and random moments were any moments during execution of the tasks . As users performed the primary tasks , they were interrupted with a peripheral task at each of these moments , chosen randomly . Measures included time to resume the primary task , annoyance due to interruption , and level of respect attributed to the interrupting system . 16 Results showed that interrupting at the better moments had lower cost of interruption across tasks . Users resumed primary tasks 69 % faster , experienced 18 % less annoyance , and attributed 63 % more respect to the interrupting system relative to being interrupted at worse moments , with similar differences being found between better and random moments . However , interrupting at worse vs . random moments showed no difference , indicating that not all boundaries result in lower interruption cost relative to non - boundary moments . This may be particularly true for finer - grained boundaries lower in a task model where there is little to no measurable decrease in workload . Overall , our results provided an important first step towards showing that workload can be used to predict which boundaries within a task model would have higher / lower costs of interruption . As only boundaries with larger differences in workload were tested , future work is needed to assess how different the workload at boundaries must be before a meaningful change in interruption cost could be detected . 5 . 2 Enabling Systems to Consider Workload for Reasoning about Interruption Though our follow - up experiment showed that the cost of interruption could be reduced by deferring delivery of peripheral information until lower workload boundaries , methods are needed that would allow systems to consider similar information in practice . Here we discuss three such methods that would allow interruption management systems to directly or indirectly consider workload when reasoning about when to interrupt . One approach directly follows from the methodology used in this paper . For example , workload - aligned task models would be developed by aligning a continuous measure of workload to the corresponding models of task execution . From these aligned models , the boundaries and other moments would be rank ordered based on workload , and then mapped to a cost value . The model of the task and associated cost information would then be formally described using a task specification language , such as that presented in ( Bailey , Adamczyk et al . 2006 ) . As a user performs tasks , a monitoring system would match the ongoing interaction to the specifications of tasks allowing it to identify when a specific boundary or other moment was reached . The associated cost value could then be extracted from the specification and directly used to determine whether to interrupt , or passed along to a broader reasoning framework ( Horvitz , Koch et al . 2004 ) . This approach would be most appropriate for safety critical or other domains where tasks have fairly prescribed sequences and the range of possible tasks is somewhat constrained , but the cost of poorly timed interruption could loss of life or catastrophic damage . Example 17 situations might include working through aviation checklists ( Degani and Wiener 1993 ) or entering target information in a command / control interface ( Guerlain and Willis 2001 ) . In other situations where high precision is not necessary , an alternative would be to utilize a set of workload - based heuristics to map cost values within specifications of the tasks . For example , lower costs could be mapped to higher - level boundaries and successively higher costs could be mapped to lower - level boundaries . Similar heuristics could be developed for different types of subtasks such as memory store and recall , language comprehension and generation , and reasoning . Though applying these heuristics could only offer approximations , they could be expediently applied to many tasks , the resulting costs would still help systems better reason about when to interrupt , and using heuristics would eliminate the need to develop workload - aligned models ( a large effort ) . A third approach would be to leverage cues from a user’s ongoing interaction to detect boundaries in a user’s task sequence , e . g . , using the model presented in ( Nair , Voida et al . 2005 ) , and defer interruptions until those moments . The advantage of this approach is that formal specifications of user tasks would not be needed while the disadvantage is that multiple levels of boundaries can not be differentiated . The last approach would be to link a real - time measure of workload directly into a system’s reasoning framework ( Chen and Vertegaal 2004 ) . Input could be provided , for example , by eye tracking systems embedded within a desktop monitor ( Tobii - Systems ) or by inexpensive heart rate sensors embedded within office chairs ( Anttonen and Surakka 2005 ) . Though immediate knowledge of a user’s changing workload could help systems manage interruption , using such a measure may not be possible or desirable in many situations , e . g . , due to the expense or intrusiveness of the technology , or the lack of necessary controls within the task environment . However , unless knowledge about the structure of a task was available , the system would run the risk of interrupting an ongoing action , e . g . , entering text into a control , as opposed to a moment between such actions . 5 . 3 Limitations One limitation of our work involves the accuracy of the subgoal structure of the models of task execution . When developing the models , the sequential ordering of the leaf ( operator ) subtasks could be objectively compared to the actual execution sequences , and the models could be revised until high agreement was reached . However , there is no known technique for measuring the accuracy of the subgoal structure of a model . Though we followed best practices , it is possible to have models that express the same operator sequence , but that have slightly different subgoal structures . For example , in the model 18 for document editing , if the level 1 subtask “Edit document” was collapsed , then each of the three edit subtasks and their corresponding boundaries would be shifted up to level 1 . As a result , the findings in this paper on how workload changes in relation to the subgoal structure of a model should be considered more as general guidelines than absolute truth . A second limitation is whether the observed changes in workload would remain if our experimental tasks were embedded within broader interactive activities , e . g . , when additional task goals or data must be carried through part or all of the tasks . This would almost certainly have an effect , but we suspect that this effect would be manifested as a shift in absolute workload , whereas the relative changes in workload would remain similar , e . g . , workload would still decrease at boundaries even though the absolute values at those points and surrounding subtasks might be different . However , additional empirical studies are needed to verify these claims . Third , the presence or location of boundaries may change as a user’s knowledge of performing a task transitions from novel to skilled behavior . As a task becomes skilled , mental representations of the task may become coarser ( Newell and Rosenbloom 1981 ) , eliminating some of the perceived boundaries . However , studies of event perception have shown that familiarity with a task seems to have little effect on how users perceive its hierarchical structure ( Zacks , Tversky et al . 2001 ) . This suggests that mental representations of tasks remain fairly stable , but are performed in larger chunks as skill level increases . In these cases , it is plausible that larger transitory decreases in workload would occur at the boundaries separating these larger chunks in a task . 6 . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK A recent thrust in the HCI community has been to understand when to deliver peripheral information such that it would have a lower cost of interruption . Many have argued that interrupting tasks during moments of lower workload would have lower cost , but it has been unclear as to just where these moments occur within task execution . Researchers have speculated that workload should be lower at subtask boundaries , but this speculation has never been empirically tested . Our work has made several contributions towards understanding how workload changes in relation to the structure of a goal - directed task and how this knowledge can be used within systems that manage interruption . First , we showed that a user’s workload changes throughout execution of a task , indicating that the moment at which peripheral information is delivered will likely impact the cost of interruption . Second , we showed that a transitory decrease in workload is experienced when a boundary is reached during task execution , and that larger decreases 19 tend to occur at boundaries higher in the task model . This indicates that interruption management systems should differentiate boundaries and favor those representing a more salient breakpoint in the task . Finally , we situated our results within resource theories of attention and described several methods that would enable systems to consider workload . For future work , we plan to analyze workload patterns within additional tasks in order to develop further theoretical understanding of workload changes and to produce further usable heuristics for assigning costs of interruption . Also , we will be continuing our implementation of a system that reasons about when to deliver peripheral information given an explicit specification of the structure of a task , the cost of interrupting at various boundaries and other moments within it , and the urgency and relevance of a notification . 7 . REFERENCES Adamczyk , P . D . and B . P . Bailey ( 2004 ) . If Not Now When ? The Effects of Interruptions at Different Moments Within Task Execution . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Anttonen , J . and V . Surakka ( 2005 ) . Emotions and heart rate while sitting on a chair . Proceedings of the ACM conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Bailey , B . P . , P . D . Adamczyk , et al . ( 2006 ) . " A Framework for Specifying and Monitoring User Tasks . " Journal of Computers in Human Behavior 22 ( 4 ) : 685 - 708 . Bailey , B . P . and J . A . Konstan ( 2006 ) . " On the Need for Attention Aware Systems : Measuring Effects of Interruption on Task Performance , Error Rate , and Affective State . " Journal of Computers in Human Behavior 22 ( 4 ) : 709 - 732 . Beatty , J . ( 1982 ) . " Task - evoked Pupillary Responses , Processing Load , and the Structure of Processing Resources . " Psychological Bulletin 91 ( 2 ) : 276 - 292 . Bradshaw , J . L . ( 1967 ) . " Pupil Size as a Measure of Arousal during Information Processing . " Nature 216 : 515 - 516 . Card , S . , T . Moran , et al . ( 1983 ) . The Psychology of Human - computer Interaction . Hillsdale , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Chen , D . and R . Vertegaal ( 2004 ) . Using mental load for managing interruptions in a physiologically attentive user interface . Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Cutrell , E . , M . Czerwinski , et al . ( 2001 ) . Notification , Disruption and Memory : Effects of Messaging Interruptions on Memory and Performance . Proceedings of the IFIP TC . 13 International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , Tokyo , Japan . Czerwinski , M . , E . Cutrell , et al . ( 2000 ) . Instant Messaging and Interruption : Influence of Task Type on Performance . Annual Conference of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society of Australia ( OZCHI ) , Sydney , Australia . 20 Czerwinski , M . , E . Cutrell , et al . ( 2000 ) . Instant Messaging : Effects of Relevance and Timing . People and Computers XIV : Proceedings of HCI , British Computer Society . Dabbish , L . and R . E . Kraut ( 2004 ) . Controlling interruptions : awareness displays and social motivation for coordination . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Degani , A . and E . Wiener ( 1993 ) . " Cockpit checklists : Concepts , design , and use . " Human Factors 35 ( 2 ) : 345 - 359 . Dey , A . K . and G . D . Abowd ( 2000 ) . CybreMinder : A Context - Aware System for Supporting Reminders . Proceedings of 2nd International Symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing . Dismukes , K . , G . Young , et al . ( 1998 ) . " Cockpit Interruptions and Distractions . " ASRS Directline 10 . Donchin , E . , A . F . Kramer , et al . ( 1986 ) . Applications of brain event related potentials to problems in engineering psychology . New York , Guildford . Fogarty , J . , A . J . Ko , et al . ( 2005 ) . Examining task engagement in sensor - based statistical models of human interruptibility . Proceeding of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Gale , A . and J . Edwards ( 1983 ) . The EEG and human behavior . New York , Academic Press . Gevins , A . and R . Schaffer ( 1980 ) . " A critical review of electroencephalographic ( eeg ) correlates of higher cortical functions . " CRT Critical Reviews in Bioengineering 4 : 113 - 164 . Guerlain , S . and R . Willis ( 2001 ) . The tactical tomahawk weapons control system : operator interface design project . Human Systems Integration Symposium . Hart , S . G . and L . E . Staveland ( 1988 ) . Development of a Muli - dimensional Workload Rating Scale : Results of Empirical and Theoretical Research . Human Mental Workload . P . A . Hancock and N . Meshkati . Amsterdam , The Netherlands , Elsevier : 138 - 183 . Hess , E . H . ( 1972 ) . Pupillometrics : A method of studying mental , emotional and sensory processes . Handbook of Psychophysiology . N . S . Greenfield and R . A . Sternbach . New York , Holt , Rinehart & Winston : 491 - 531 . Hess , E . H . and J . M . Polt ( 1964 ) . " Pupil Size in Relation to Mental Activity during Simple Problem Solving . " Science 132 : 1190 - 1192 . Hoecks , B . and W . Levelt ( 1993 ) . " Pupillary Dilation as a Measure of Attention : A Quantitative System Analysis . " Behavior Research Methods , Instruments , & Computers 25 : 16 - 26 . Horvitz , E . and J . Apacible ( 2003 ) . Learning and Reasoning about Interruption . Proceedings of the Fifth ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces . 21 Horvitz , E . , A . Jacobs , et al . ( 1999 ) . Attention - Sensitive Alerting . Conference Proceedings on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence . Horvitz , E . , P . Koch , et al . ( 2004 ) . BusyBody : creating and fielding personalized models of the cost of interruption . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Chicago , Illinois , USA , ACM Press . Hudson , S . E . , J . Fogarty , et al . ( 2003 ) . Predicting Human Interruptibility with Sensors : A Wizard of Oz Feasibility Study . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Hytintk , J . , J . Tommola , et al . ( 1995 ) . " Pupil Dilation as a Measure of Processing Load in Simultaneous Interpretation and Other Language Tasks . " The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 48A ( 3 ) : 598 - 612 . Iqbal , S . T . , P . D . Adamczyk , et al . ( 2005 ) . Towards an Index of Opportunity : Understanding Changes in Mental Workload during Task Execution . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Iqbal , S . T . and B . P . Bailey ( 2005 ) . Investigating the Effectiveness of Mental Workload as a Predictor of Opportune Moments for Interruption . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Iqbal , S . T . and B . P . Bailey ( 2006 ) . Leveraging Characteristics of Task Structure to Predict Costs of Interruption . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Iqbal , S . T . , X . S . Zheng , et al . ( 2004 ) . Task Evoked Pupillary Response to Mental Workload in Human - Computer Interaction . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Jackson , T . W . , R . J . Dawson , et al . ( 2001 ) . " The cost of email interruption . " Journal of Systems and Information Technology 5 ( 1 ) : 81 - 92 . Juris , M . and M . Velden ( 1977 ) . " The Pupillary Response to Mental Overload . " Physiological Psychology 5 ( 4 ) : 421 - 424 . Just , M . A . , P . A . Carpenter , et al . ( 2003 ) . " Neuroindices of cognitive workload : Neuroimaging , pupillometric , and event - related potential studies of brain work . " Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics 4 : 56 - 88 . Kahneman , D . ( 1967 ) . " Pupillary Responses in a Pitch - discrimination Task . " Perception & Psychophysics 2 : 101 - 105 . Kahneman , D . ( 1973 ) . Attention and Effort . Englewood Cliffs , N . J , Prentice - Hall . Kok , A . ( 1997 ) . " Event - related - potential ( ERP ) reflections of mental resources : a review and synthesis . " Biological Psychology 45 : 19 - 56 . Kramer , A . F . ( 1991 ) . Physiological Metrics of Mental Workload : A Review of Recent Progress . Multiple - Task Performance . D . L . Damos . London , Taylor and Francis : 279 - 328 . Kramer , A . F . , W . Schneider , et al . ( 1986 ) . " The effects of practice and task structure on components of event related brain potential . " Psychophysiology 23 : 33 - 47 . 22 Kreifeldt , J . G . and M . E . McCarthy ( 1981 ) . Interruption as a Test of the User - computer Interface . Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference on Manual Control , Jet Propulsion Laboratory , California Institute of Technology , JPL Publication 81 - 95 . Latorella , K . A . ( 1996 ) . Investigating Interruptions : An Example From the Flight Deck . Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 40th Annual Meeting . Latorella , K . A . ( 1998 ) . Effects of modality on interrupted flight deck performance : Implications for data link . 42nd Annual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society . Lee , J . D . , J . D . Hoffman , et al . ( 2004 ) . Collision warning design to mitigate driver distraction . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human factors in Computing Systems . Lin , Y . , W . J . Zhang , et al . ( 2003 ) . " Using eye movement parameters for evaluating human – machine interface frameworks under normal control operation and fault detection situations . " International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 59 ( 6 ) : 837 - 873 . Maglio , P . and C . S . Campbell ( 2003 ) . " Attentive agents . " Communications of ACM 46 ( 3 ) : 47 - 51 . Marshall , S . P . ( 2002 ) . The Index of Cognitive Activity : Measuring cognitive workload . Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE 7th Conference on Human Factors and Power Plants . McFarlane , D . C . ( 1999 ) . Coordinating the Interruption of People in Human - computer Interaction . Proceedings of the IFIP TC . 13 International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . McFarlane , D . C . and K . A . Latorella ( 2002 ) . " The Scope and Importance of Human Interruption in HCI Design . " Human - Computer Interaction 17 ( 1 ) : 1 - 61 . Miyata , Y . and D . A . Norman ( 1986 ) . Psychological Issues in Support of Multiple Activities . User Centered System Design : New Perspectives on Human - Computer Interaction . D . A . Norman and S . W . Draper . Hillsdale , NJ , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates : 265 - 284 . Monk , C . A . , D . A . Boehm - Davis , et al . ( 2002 ) . The Attentional Costs of Interrupting Task Performance at Various Stages . Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 46th Annual Meeting . Nair , R . , S . Voida , et al . ( 2005 ) . Frequency - based Detection of Task Switches . 19th British HCI Group Annual Conference , Edinburgh , Scotland . Nakayama , M . and K . Takahashi ( 2002 ) . The Act of Task Difficulty and Eye - movement Frequency for the Ocul - motor Indices . Proceedings of Eye Tracking Research and Applications . 23 Newell , A . and P . S . Rosenbloom ( 1981 ) . Mechanisms of skill acquisition and the law of practice . Cognitive Skills and their Acquisition . J . R . Anderson . Hillsdale , NJ , Erlbaum : 1 - 55 . O ' Donnell , R . D . and F . T . Eggemeier ( 1986 ) . Workload assessment methodology . Handbook of Perception and Human Performance . Volume II , Cognitive Processes and Performance . K . R . Boff , L . Kaufman and J . P . Thomas . New York , Wiley : 42 / 1 - 42 / 9 . Phelps , M . P . and J . Mazziotta ( 1985 ) . " Positron emission tomography : Human brain function and biochemistry . " Science 228 : 799 - 809 . Pomplun , M . and S . Sunkara ( 2003 ) . Pupil dilation as an indicator of cognitive workload in human - computer interaction . Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Rowe , D . W . , J . Sibert , et al . ( 1998 ) . Heart Rate Variability : Indicator of User State as an Aid to Human - computer interaction . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Rubinstein , J . S . , D . E . Meyer , et al . ( 2001 ) . " Executive Control of Cognitive Processes in Task Switching . " Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance 27 ( 4 ) : 763 - 797 . Shneiderman , B . ( 1997 ) . Designing the User Interface , Pearson Addison Wesley , Third Edition . Speier , C . , J . S . Valacich , et al . ( 1999 ) . " The influence of task interruption on individual decision making : An information overload perspective . " Decision Sciences 30 ( 2 ) : 337 - 360 . Stanton , N . , Ed . ( 1994 ) . Human Factors in Alarm Design . London , Taylor and Francis . Takahashi , K . , M . Nakayama , et al . ( 2000 ) . The Response of Eye - movement and Pupil Size to Audio Instruction while Viewing a Moving Target . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Eye Tracking Research & Applications . Tobii - Systems http : / / www . tobii . se / . Trafton , J . G . , E . M . Altmann , et al . ( 2003 ) . " Preparing to resume an interrupted task : effects of prospective goal encoding and retrospective rehearsal . " International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 58 : 583 - 603 . Verney , S . P . , E . Granholm , et al . ( 2001 ) . " Pupillary responses and processing resources on the visual backward masking task . " Psychophysiology 38 ( 1 ) : 76 - 83 . Verney , S . P . , E . Granolm , et al . ( 2004 ) . " Pupillary responses during the visual backward masking task predict cognitive ability . " International Journal of Psychophysiology 52 : 23 - 36 . Wickens , C . D . ( 1980 ) . The structure of attentional resources . Attention and Performance VIII . R . Nickerson . Hillsdale , NJ , Lawrence Erlbaum : 239 - 257 . Wickens , C . D . ( 1991 ) . Processing resources and attention . Multiple - task performance . D . L . Damos . London , Taylor & Francis : 3 - 34 . 24 Wickens , C . D . ( 2002 ) . " Multiple Resources and Performance Prediction . " Theoretical Issues in Ergonomic Science 3 ( 2 ) : 159 - 177 . Zacks , J . , B . Tversky , et al . ( 2001 ) . " Perceiving , remembering , and communicating structure in events . " Journal of Experimental Psychology : General 130 ( 1 ) : 29 - 58 . Zijlstra , F . R . H . , R . A . Roe , et al . ( 1999 ) . " Temporal Factors in Mental Work : Effects of Interrupted Activities . " Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 72 : 163 - 185 . 25 Figure 1 : The interactive route planning task . A user retrieves distance and fare information from the map , enters the data into the tables , adds the distances and fares , and selects the shorter and the cheaper of the two routes . 26 Figure 2 : The document editing task . A user edited the document based on each of three annotations . Once edited , the document was saved to a specified directory and file name . 27 28 Figure 3 : The email classification task . Users reasoned about the classification of each email ( starting from the top ) using its subject descriptor , and then dragged the e - mail into the corresponding folder below . These actions were repeated for each of the emails in the list . 29 Figure 4 : A workload aligned task model for Route Planning . The interior nodes represent goal nodes , the leaf nodes represent operators , and time moves from left to right . Regions A , B and C show parts of the task repeated elsewhere in the model . Within each subtask , we provide the [ APCPS ] for that subtask . Each shaded area indicates a boundary and contains the [ APCPS ] across it . Complete Route Planning task Complete route 1 Complete route 2 Select answers Enter data for seg1 Enter data for seg 2 Enter data for seg 3 Recall [ 10 . 94 ] Retrieve route 1 distance total [ 8 . 9 ] Retrieve route 2 distance total [ 9 . 74 ] Select answer from pulldown [ 10 . 37 ] Select shorter route Select cheaper route Locate seg in map [ 6 . 24 ] Identify segment [ 3 . 42 ] Retrieve segment Store data [ 9 . 97 ] Type [ 13 . 7 ] Enter distance Enter fare Add data Add distances [ 15 . 08 ] Add fares [ 14 . 32 ] Leve Level 2 Leve Level 4 l 1 10 . 39 l 3 12 . 94 13 . 61 13 . 64 9 . 59 4 . 81 9 . 85 13 . 47 13 . 63 8 . 01 11 . 145 8 . 92 13 . 12 Example : level 1 boundary Example : level 3 boundary B A A B B C C 12 . 88 Boundary B1 D D Save document Access save dialogue Specify sav [ 9 Figure 5 : A workload aligned model for Document Editing . The interior nodes represent goal nodes , the leaf nodes represent o from left to right . Regions A shows parts of the task repeated elsewhere in the model . perators , and time moves e directory . 07 ] Move mouse to file menu [ 10 . 17 ] Select file icon [ 14 . 13 ] Enter new name Select Save [ 12 . 99 ] Move mouse to save [ 9 . 67 ] Move mouse to text box [ 11 . 98 ] Edit document Edit 1st comment Read comment Edit Mouse over [ 5 . 43 ] Read [ 8 . 37 ] Read text [ 8 . 01 ] Position mouse [ 10 . 6 ] Type changes [ 10 . 33 ] A Edit 2nd comment Edit 3rd comment A A Complete Document Editing Task Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 7 . 81 12 . 25 5 . 39 4 . 42 Type new name [ 13 . 09 ] Select save [ 9 . 05 ] Save document with new name 9 . 91 11 . 29 12 . 5 9 . 87 11 . 99 7 . 77 14 . 88 7 . 71 10 . 2 9 . 53 30 Figure 6 : A workload aligned task model for Email Classification . The interior nodes represent goal nodes , th from left to right . The level 1 subtask is repeated 9 times . Within each subtask , we provide the [ APCPS and contains the [ APCPS ] across it . e leaf nodes represent operators , and time moves ] for that subtask . Each shaded area indicates a boundary Complete em classification tail ask Place email 1 in appropriate folder Mentally select folder [ 10 . 19 ] Drag and drop into folder [ 11 . 79 ] Level 1 Level 2 Place email 2 in appropriate folder Mentally select folder [ 11 . 81 ] Drag and drop into folder [ 9 . 77 ] Place email 9 in appropriate folder Mentally select folder [ 5 . 84 ] Drag and drop into folder [ 6 . 39 ] Repeat 7 times 12 . 03 11 . 6 10 . 15 Level 1 boundary Level 2 boundary 7 . 43 6 . 318 31 32 Subtasks Level 1 boundary Level 3 boundary Level 2 boundary Level 4 boundary 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 I den t i f y r 1 s 1 Lo c a t e r 1 s 1 i n m ap S t o r e r 1 s 1 R e c a ll r 1 s 1 d i s t T y pe r 1 s 1 d i s t R e c a ll r 1 s 1 f a r e T y pe r 1 s 1 f a r e I den t i f y r 1 s 2 Lo c a t e r 1 s 2 i n m ap S t o r e r 1 s 2 R e c a ll r 1 s 2 d i s t T y pe r 1 s 2 d i s t R e c a ll r 1 s 2 f a r e T y pe r 1 s 2 f a r e I den t i f y r 1 s 3 Lo c a t e r 1 s 3 i n m ap S t o r e r 1 s 3 R e c a ll r 1 s 3 d i s t T y pe r 1 s 3 d i s t R e c a ll r 1 s 3 f a r e T y pe r 1 s 3 f a r e A dd d i s t an c e s A dd f a r e s I den t i f y r 2 s 1 Lo c a t e r 2 s 1 i n m ap S t o r e r 2 s 1 R e c a ll r 2 s 1 d i s t T y pe r 2 s 1 d i s t R e c a ll r 2 s 1 f a r e A P C PS T y pe r 2 s 1 f a r e I den t i f y r 2 s 2 Lo c a t e r 2 s 2 i n m ap S t o r e r 2 s 2 R e c a ll r 2 s 2 d i s t T y pe r 2 s 2 d i s t R e c a ll r 2 s 2 f a r e T y pe r 2 s 2 f a r e I den t i f y r 2 s 3 Lo c a t e r 2 s 3 i n m ap S t o r e r 2 s 3 R e c a ll r 2 s 3 d i s t T y pe r 2 s 3 d i s t R e c a ll r 2 s 3 f a r e T y pe r 2 s 3 f a r e A dd d i s t an c e s r 2 A dd f a r e s r 2 R e t r i e v e r 1 d i s t t o t a l R e t r i e v e r 2 d i s t t o t a l S e l e c t an s w e r f r o m pu ll do w n R e t r i e v e r 1 f a r e t o t a l R e t r i e v e r 2 f a r e t o t a l S e l e c t an s w e r f r o m pu ll do w n Figure 7 . APCPS of the leaf subtasks and all boundari Vertical lines within the subtask labels demarcate Level 1 es within the model for Route Planning . and 2 boundaries . 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 M ou s e o v e r c o mm en t 1 R ead c o mm en t 1 op R ead t e x t 1 P o s i t i on M ou s e 1 T y pe c hange s 1 M ou s e o v e r c o mm en t 2 R ead c o mm en t 2 op R ead t e x t 2 P o s i t i on M ou s e 2 T y pe c hange s 2 M ou s e o v e r c o mm en t 3 R ead c o mm en t 3 op R ead t e x t 3 P o s i t i on M ou s e 3 T y pe c hange s 3 M o v e m ou s e t o f il e m enu i t e m S e l e c t f il e i c on S e l e c t s a v e m enu i t e m S pe c i f y s a v e d i r e c t o r y M o v e m ou s e t o t e x t bo x T y pe ne w na m e M o v e m ou s e t o s a v e bu tt on S e l e c t s a v e bu tt on A P C PS Level 4 boundary Level 3 boundary Level 1 boundary Level 2 boundary Subtasks Figure 8 . APCPS of leaf subtasks and all boundaries within the model for Document Editing . Vertical lines within the subtask labels differentiate Level 1 and 2 boundaries . 33 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 m en t a ll y p r o c e ss p l a c e m en t c r i t e r i a r e v i e w f o l de r s m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a i 1 d r ag e m a il 1 i n t o f o l de r m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a il 2 d r ag e m a il 2 i n t o f o l de r m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a il 3 d r ag e m a il 3 i n t o f o l de r m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a il 4 d r ag e m a il 4 i n t o f o l de r m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a il 5 d r ag e m a il 5 i n t o f o l de r m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a il 6 d r ag e m a il 6 i n t o f o l de r m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a il 7 d r ag e m a il 7 i n t o f o l de r m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a il 8 d r ag e m a il 8 i n t o f o l de r m en t a ll y s e l e c t f o l de r f o r e m a il 9 d r ag e m a il 9 i n t o f o l de r A P C PS Level 1 boundary Level 2 boundary Subtasks Figure 9 . APCPS of leaf subtasks and all boundaries within the model for Email Classification . Vertical lines within the labels demarcate Level 1 and 2 boundaries . 34 Figure 10 : Decrease in the APCPS of boundaries , shown as a function of level and task . Higher level boundaries ( 1 and 2 ) show larger decreases in workload than lower level boundaries ( 3 and 4 ) , which exhibited little or no decrease . - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 Route Planning Document Editing Email Classification Task Cateogries D ec r ease i n A P C PS ( % ) Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 35