10 . 1128 / IAI . 70 . 8 . 4112 - 4123 . 2002 . 2002 , 70 ( 8 ) : 4112 . DOI : Infect . Immun . Robert A . MacDonald and Steven R . Blanke Christopher L . Williams , Eric M . Torres , Kent B . Marty , Hetal K . Patel , David C . Willhite , Rakhi M . Patel , Dan Ye , Vacuolating Cytotoxin Helicobacter pylori Cellular Vacuolation Induced by the Plasma Membrane Cholesterol Modulates http : / / iai . asm . org / content / 70 / 8 / 4112 Updated information and services can be found at : These include : REFERENCES http : / / iai . asm . org / content / 70 / 8 / 4112 # ref - list - 1 at : This article cites 62 articles , 34 of which can be accessed free CONTENT ALERTS more» articles cite this article ) , Receive : RSS Feeds , eTOCs , free email alerts ( when new http : / / journals . asm . org / site / misc / reprints . xhtml Information about commercial reprint orders : http : / / journals . asm . org / site / subscriptions / To subscribe to to another ASM Journal go to : on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m I NFECTION AND I MMUNITY , Aug . 2002 , p . 4112 – 4123 Vol . 70 , No . 8 0019 - 9567 / 02 / $ 04 . 00 (cid:1) 0 DOI : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 70 . 8 . 4112 – 4123 . 2002 Copyright © 2002 , American Society for Microbiology . All Rights Reserved . Plasma Membrane Cholesterol Modulates Cellular Vacuolation Induced by the Helicobacter pylori Vacuolating Cytotoxin Hetal K . Patel , David C . Willhite , Rakhi M . Patel , Dan Ye , Christopher L . Williams , Eric M . Torres , Kent B . Marty , Robert A . MacDonald , and Steven R . Blanke * Department of Biology and Biochemistry , University of Houston , Houston , Texas 77204 - 5001 Received 20 March 2002 / Accepted 29 April 2002 The Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin ( VacA ) induces the degenerative vacuolation of mammalian cells both in vitro and in vivo . Here , we demonstrate that plasma membrane cholesterol is essential for vacuolation of mammalian cells by VacA . Vacuole biogenesis in multiple cell lines was completely blocked when cholesterol was extracted selectively from the plasma membrane by using (cid:1) - cyclodextrins . Moreover , increas - ing plasma membrane cholesterol levels strongly potentiated VacA - induced vacuolation . In contrast , inhibiting de novo biosynthesis of cholesterol with lovastatin or compactin had no detectable effect on vacuolation . While depletion of plasma membrane cholesterol has been shown to interfere with both clathrin - mediated endocytosis and caveola - dependent endocytosis , neither of these two internalization pathways was found to be essential for vacuolation of cells by VacA . Depleting plasma membrane cholesterol attenuated the entry of VacA into HeLa cells . In addition , (cid:1) - cyclodextrin reagents blocked vacuolation of cells that were either preloaded with VacA or had VacA directly expressed within the cytosol . Collectively , our results suggest that plasma membrane cholesterol is important for both the intoxication mechanism of VacA and subsequent vacuole biogenesis . Helicobacter pylori infection of the human stomach is a sig - niﬁcant risk factor for the development of peptic ulcer disease and gastric cancer ( 34 ) . H . pylori secretes a vacuolating cyto - toxin ( VacA ) that induces degenerative vacuolation of mam - malian cells both in vitro and in vivo ( 6 , 24 ) . VacA has been directly implicated in the epithelial erosion preceding the for - mation of both gastric and duodenal ulcers ( 13 ) . Orally admin - istered VacA causes gastric mucosal degeneration and inﬂam - matory cell recruitment in mice , two key events in the development of gastric ulcer disease ( 54 ) . Furthermore , only toxin - producing strains induce a pathology similar to that found in ulcer patients ( 25 ) . Recently , VacA (cid:1) H . pylori strains were shown to outcompete VacA (cid:2) strains in a mouse coloni - zation model , suggesting that VacA may also be important for the establishment of H . pylori infection within a host ( 46 ) . Despite considerable evidence that VacA is an important vir - ulence factor in H . pylori pathogenesis , the mechanism of VacA - mediated cellular intoxication has not been determined . Considerable evidence supports the hypothesis that VacA functions from an intracellular site of action ( 2 , 57 ) . The toxin binds and enters mammalian cells by a slow , temperature - dependent process ( 17 ) . Indirect immunoﬂuorescence studies have localized internalized VacA to both the cytosol ( 17 ) and membrane - bound vesicles ( 51 ) . VacA also induces vacuole biogenesis when it is expressed directly within the cytosol of transiently transfected mammalian cells , further supporting the idea that the toxin acts intracellularly ( 9 , 11 , 62 ) . Yeast two - hybrid analysis revealed interactions between VacA and a protein of unknown function that colocalizes with the interme - diate ﬁlament protein vimentin ( 8 ) . Recently , VacA was re - ported to translocate to the mitochondria and induce the re - lease of cytochrome c ( 16 ) . While these data collectively support an intracellular site of action for VacA , the mechanism of toxin entry into cells has not been elucidated . The ﬁrst step for VacA entry into target cells is the interac - tion of the toxin with the plasma membrane . Mature VacA is organized into amino - and carboxyl - terminal domains ( p37 and p58 , respectively ) ( 7 , 41 , 48 , 54 ) , both of which are essential for toxin activity ( 9 , 27 , 54 , 61 , 62 ) . Residues 480 to 700 of the toxin have been identiﬁed as residues that are especially important for cell line - speciﬁc recognition and binding ( 39 , 55 ) . Alterna - tive methods employed to measure VacA binding to target cells have yielded contrasting results . When ﬂuorescence - acti - vated cell sorting was used , VacA binding to sensitive cell lines was reported to be saturable , suggesting the presence of a speciﬁc toxin receptor ( 26 ) . However , at least three separate proteins have been implicated as the VacA receptor ( 37 , 49 , 58 , 59 ) . In contrast to ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting - based approaches , classical ligand - binding experiments performed with radiolabeled VacA indicated that the toxin may not bind speciﬁcally to a single cell surface component ( 28 , 43 ) . Several previous studies have shown that VacA readily associates with artiﬁcial lipid membranes in the absence of protein receptors ( 30 , 31 , 38 ) . Collectively , these data imply that interactions between VacA and target cells are complex . Identiﬁcation of cellular determinants that are essential for vacuolation will likely yield critical information regarding the mechanism of VacA intoxication . Here , we investigated the importance of cholesterol for VacA - mediated cellular vacuo - lation . Cholesterol not only is a principal structural component of membranes but has also emerged as an important regulator of membrane trafﬁcking within cells ( 21 ) . Moreover , the im - portance of cholesterol for the cellular entry of toxins , as well * Corresponding author . Mailing address : Department of Biology and Biochemistry , University of Houston , 369 Science and Research Bldg . II , Houston , TX 77204 - 5001 . Phone : ( 713 ) 743 - 8392 . Fax : ( 713 ) 743 - 8351 . E - mail : sblanke @ uh . edu . 4112 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m as bacterial , viral , and parasitic pathogens , has been recently documented ( 1 , 18 , 50 ) . Our results support the hypothesis that plasma membrane cholesterol is essential for cellular vacuola - tion induced by VacA . MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials . Cell culture media , fetal bovine calf serum ( FBS ) , neutral red solution , phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , penicillin - streptomycin , cell dissocia - tion buffer , proteinase K solution ( RNA grade ) , and trypsin - EDTA were pur - chased from Life Technologies , Inc . ( Rockville , Md . ) . H . pylori strain 60190 ( (cid:3) ATCC 49503 ) and the HeLa ( (cid:3) ATCC CCL - 2 ) , CHO - K1 ( (cid:3) ATCC CCL - 61 ) , AGS ( (cid:3) ATCC CRL - 1739 ) , and Vero ( (cid:3) ATCC CCL - 81 ) cell lines were re - ceived from the American Type Culture Collection ( Manassas , Va . ) . Bisulﬁte - free brucella broth , vancomycin , methyl - (cid:4) - cyclodextrin ( M (cid:4) CD ) , hydroxypropyl - (cid:4) - cyclodextrin ( HPCD ) , cholesterol ( (cid:4) - cyclodextrin [ (cid:4) - CD ] - complexed soluble form ) , ﬁlipin , nystatin , saponin , digitonin , lovastatin , compactin , chlorpromazine , diphtheria toxin , cholera toxin , transferrin , an Inﬁnity cholesterol reagent kit , bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , ovalbumin , polyvinylpyrrolidone ( PVP ) , Triton X - 100 , anti - mouse immunoglobulin G - alkaline phosphatase conjugate , bromo - phenol blue , dithiothreitol , and most common laboratory chemicals and reagents were obtained from Sigma ( St . Louis , Mo . ) ; 25 - and 75 - cm 2 plastic ﬂasks , eight - well chamber slides , and 96 - well plates were obtained from Corning ( Cambridge , Mass . ) . The TNT T7 coupled reticulocyte lysate system , RNase inhibitor , 5 - bro - mo - 4 - chloro - 3 - indolylphosphate ( BCIP ) , and nitroblue tetrazolium were pur - chased from Promega ( Madison , Wis . ) . [ 35 S ] methionine ( 1 , 175 Ci / mmol ) and [ 3 H ] cholesterol ( 82 Ci / mmol ) were obtained from NEN ( Boston , Mass . ) . Scin - tiverse SX18 - 8 scintillation ﬂuid was purchased from Fisher Scientiﬁc ( Pitts - burgh , Pa . ) . A LIVE / DEAD viability kit was acquired from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , Oreg . ) . Mammalian protein extraction reagent ( M - PER ) , Coomassie Plus protein assay reagent , protein G - Sepharose , IODO - GEN - precoated iodi - nation tubes , a Micro Bio - Spin chromatography column , and the bicinchoninic acid ( BCA ) protein assay were purchased from Pierce ( Rockford , Ill . ) . A Cal - Phos mammalian transfection kit was bought from Clontech Labs Inc . ( Palo Alto , Calif . ) . 125 Iodide ( sodium salt ; 16 Ci / mg ) was purchased from Amersham Life Science ( Arlington Heights , Ill . ) . Protease inhibitor cocktail set III was bought from Calbiochem ( La Jolla , Calif . ) . Thin - layer chromatography ( TLC ) plates ( Poly - gram Sil - G 60 ) were purchased from Whatman Inc . ( Clifton , N . J . ) . Centricon 100 centrifugal microconcentrators were bought from Millipore ( Bed - ford , Mass . ) . Culturing H . pylori and puriﬁcation of VacA . H . pylori 700392 was cultivated as previously described ( 5 ) . H . pylori was grown in culture ﬂasks on a rotary plat - form shaker for 48 h to the stationary phase at 37°C under a 5 % oxygen – 5 % carbon dioxide – 90 % nitrogen atmosphere in bisulﬁte - and sulﬁte - free brucella broth supplemented with 5 % FBS and 5 (cid:5) g of vancomycin / ml . H . pylori cultures were harvested by centrifugation at a relative centrifugal force of 7 , 500 by using a Sorvall RC2 - B centrifuge at 4°C . VacA was initially fractionated and concen - trated by ammonium sulfate ( 50 % ) precipitation . The ammonium sulfate - satu - rated pellet was resuspended and dialyzed into PBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) . Concentrated VacA was further puriﬁed by fast protein liquid chromatography by using a Superose 6 preparative grade resin in a HR16 / 50 column ( Pharmacia , Piscat - away , N . J . ) previously equilibrated at 4°C in PBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) . Fast protein liquid chromatography fractions were analyzed for VacA by immunoblot analysis by using rabbit anti - VacA polyclonal antibodies ( 59 ) . Fractions demonstrating cross - reacting material were further analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) followed by Coomassie brilliant blue staining . The fractions demonstrating the greatest degree of purity were pooled and concentrated by using Centricon 100 centrifugal microconcentrators and stored at 4°C until use . Activation of VacA . VacA was acid activated as previously described by drop - wise addition of 0 . 1 N HCl until the pH of the solution was approximately 3 ( 12 ) . The solution was incubated for 30 min at 37°C and then reneutralized by drop - wise addition of 300 mM NaOH until the solution pH was approximately 7 . Cell culture . All mammalian cells were cultured as monolayers in 25 - cm 2 plastic ﬂasks at 37°C under 5 % CO 2 . HeLa cells were grown in 90 % Dulbecco’s minimal essential medium ( DMEM ) . Vero cells were cultured in 90 % Eagle’s minimal essential medium with 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 2 mM L - glutamine , 0 . 1 mM nonessential amino acids , and 1 . 5 g of sodium bicarbonate / liter . The CHO - K1 and AGS cell lines were cultured in 90 % Ham’s F - 12 medium with 2 mM L - glutamine adjusted to contain 1 . 5 g of sodium bicarbonate / liter . All media were supplemented with 10 % FBS , 100 U of penicillin / ml , and 100 mg of streptomycin / ml . Twenty - four hours prior to each experiment , 100 (cid:5) l of cells was seeded into each well of a 96 - well plate at a density of 1 (cid:6) 10 5 cells / ml . Manipulation of cell lines . Mammalian cell lines were pretreated with differ - ent concentrations of each pharmacological agent for 1 h , unless otherwise noted . The following stock solutions were prepared : 400 mg of M (cid:4) CD per ml in distilled water ; 0 . 5 mg of HPCD per ml in distilled water ; 50 mM (cid:4) - CD - com - plexed cholesterol ( water soluble ) in distilled water ; 5 mg of ﬁlipin per ml in methanol ; 1 mg of saponin per ml in PBS ; 1 mM digitonin in ethanol ; 5 mg of nystatin per ml in dimethyl sulfoxide ; 1 mM lovastatin in 50 % ethanol ; 10 mM compactin in ethanol ; and 1 mg of chlorpromazine per ml in distilled water . Acid - activated VacA diluted in DMEM containing 5 mM NH 4 Cl was added to the cells and incubated at 37°C for 24 h . In some experiments , cells were preincubated with acid - activated VacA fo r 4 h ateither 4 or 37°C and then for an additional 24 h with M (cid:4) CD , HPCD , or (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol . Analysis of cell vacuolation . VacA - induced vacuolation of HeLa cells was assessed visually with an Olympus CK2 phase - contrast inverted microscope . Vacuolation was quantiﬁed based on the uptake of neutral red by mammalian cells as described previously ( 4 ) . At the conclusion of each experiment , the medium was aspirated from the cell monolayers . The monolayers were incubated for 4 min with 100 (cid:5) l of a neutral red solution ( diluted 1 : 6 in DMEM ) per well . After the cells were washed once with 200 (cid:5) l of PBS / well , they were incubated with 100 (cid:5) l of acidiﬁed ethanol ( 0 . 37 % [ vol / vol ] HCl in 70 % [ vol / vol ] ethanol ) . Neutral red uptake was determined by using a Dynatech MR5000 microtiter plate reader to measure the absorbance at 530 nm minus the absorbance at 410 nm . The neutral red uptake readings for each well were normalized for total protein . Cell monolayers were washed once with 200 (cid:5) l of PBS / well and lysed with 50 (cid:5) l of M - PER / well . The total protein concentration was determined with the Coomassie Plus protein assay reagent by using BSA as a standard . The value for each well was normalized by dividing the neutral red uptake data by the total protein concentration . Cholesterol quantiﬁcation . Cell monolayers were washed with PBS , detached with dissociation buffer , lysed in a buffer containing 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 mM Na 2 EDTA , and 0 . 1 M Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) , and homogenized by using a 19 - gauge needle attached to a 1 - ml syringe ( 19 ) . The cholesterol content was determined by using the Inﬁnity cholesterol reagent kit according to the instructions of the manufac - turer . In each well , the total cholesterol content was normalized for total protein concentration by using the Coomassie Plus protein assay reagent . Analysis of mammalian cell viability . The combined LIVE / DEAD assay re - agents were added to monolayers of HeLa cells grown in eight - well chamber slides according to the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations . The cells were incubated for 30 to 45 min at room temperature , washed three times with PBS , and analyzed by visual inspection by using a ﬂuorescence microscope ( Olympus BX60 ) to count the numbers of dead and living cells . In vitro transcription and translation of VacA . 35 S - VacA was generated with the TNT T7 coupled reticulocyte lysate system used according to the manufac - turer’s speciﬁcations ; pET20b - VacA was used as the template in the presence of [ 35 S ] methionine ( speciﬁc activity , 1 , 175 Ci / mmol ) . pET20b - VacA harbors the gene encoding full - length , mature VacA ( residues 1 to 821 ) downstream of the T7 promoter and replacing the Nde I - Bam HI fragment of the parent plasmid , pET20b , as previously described ( 63 ) . Each reaction mixture was analyzed by SDS - PAGE followed by imaging with a Fuji phosphorimager to determine the efﬁciencies of the coupled transcription - translation reactions . In vitro translated radiolabeled VacA was dialyzed three times at 4°C in binding buffer ( 50 mM HEPES [ pH 7 . 2 ] , 100 mM sodium chloride , 1 mM calcium chloride , 1 mM magnesium chloride , 100 mg of BSA / ml ) and stored at (cid:2) 20°C . The VacA con - centration was calculated by using the speciﬁc activity of radiolabeled methio - nine . Known concentrations of radiolabeled VacA and nonradiolabeled , puriﬁed VacA were acid activated and neutralized together ( 12 ) . Cell internalization assays . Ninety - six - well plates were seeded with 100 (cid:5) l of a suspension containing 1 (cid:6) 10 5 HeLa cells / ml and incubated at 37°C for 24 h . HeLa cell monolayers were pretreated with M (cid:4) CD or PBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) for 1 h at 37°C . Acid - activated , radiolabeled VacA ( 50 nM ) , which was able to induce cellular vacuolation , and an equal volume of complete DMEM with 5 mM NH 4 Cl containing M (cid:4) CD or PBS were added to HeLa cell monolayers . After incubation fo r 5 h at 37°C , the cell monolayers were washed three times with ice - cold 0 . 9 % NaCl and treated with a freshly prepared 250 - (cid:5) g / ml proteinase K solution for 30 min at 4°C . Proteolyzed cells were immediately placed in boiling water for 5 min to inactivate the proteinase K . Radioactivity was quantiﬁed by scintillation counting with a LS - 6001C Beckman model 15617C scintillation counter . The total protein in each well was quantiﬁed with the Coomassie Plus protein assay reagent . Samples were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and subsequent visualization with a Fuji phosphorimager . V OL . 70 , 2002 CHOLESTEROL IS IMPORTANT FOR VacA - MEDIATED VACUOLATION 4113 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Cell binding assays . Ninety - six - well plates were seeded with 100 (cid:5) l of a suspension containing 1 (cid:6) 10 5 HeLa cells / ml and incubated at 37°C for 24 h . HeLa cell monolayers were pretreated with either M (cid:4) CD or PBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) for 1 h at 37°C before incubation at 4°C for 1 h . Chilled , acid - activated , radiolabeled VacA and an equal volume of prechilled complete DMEM with 5 mM NH 4 Cl containing M (cid:4) CD or PBS were added to the monolayers . After incubation for 4 h at 4°C , the cells were washed rapidly three times with ice - cold binding buffer and lysed in 100 (cid:5) l of M - PER . Radioactivity was quantiﬁed by scintillation counting of the samples resuspended in 2 ml of scintillation ﬂuid . The recovered radiation was normalized for the total protein concentration in each well . Radioiodination of VacA . Puriﬁed VacA was radiolabeled with 125 I by using IODO - GEN precoated iodination tubes as speciﬁed by the manufacturer . Ra - diolabeled VacA was separated from free iodine by using a Micro Bio - Spin chromatography column . Protein concentrations were determined by the micro - BCA assay , and the speciﬁc activity of labeling was quantiﬁed by using an Apex automatic gamma counter ( model 28023 ; American Biomedical Consultants , Smithville , Mo . ) . Detergent extraction of cultured cells . HeLa cell monolayers ( 1 (cid:6) 10 5 cells / ml ) were prechilled to 4°C and incubated with prechilled 125 I - VacA ( 0 . 05 to 25 (cid:5) M ) at 4°C . After 4 h , HeLa cells were detached by using dissociation buffer and collected by centrifugation at 300 (cid:6) g for 5 min . Cells were resuspended in 0 . 5 ml of cold TNE buffer ( 25 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 7 . 5 ] , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA ) supplemented with 1 % Triton X - 100 and 25 (cid:5) l of protease inhibitor cocktail set III per ml . The cells were incubated for 24 h at 4°C and centrifuged for 10 min at 16 , 000 (cid:6) g at 4°C . The radioactivity in the supernatant ( detergent - soluble fraction ) and the radioactivity in the pellet ( detergent - insoluble fraction ) were quantiﬁed by gamma counting . Sucrose density centrifugation . Conﬂuent monolayers of HeLa cells were incubated with 125 I - VacA ( 1 to 25 (cid:5) M ) in complete DMEM ( pH 7 . 4 ) fo r 4 h at 4°C . The cells were washed three times with ice - cold PBS , detached by using dissociation buffer , and collected by centrifugation at 300 (cid:6) g for 5 min . The cells were resuspended in 0 . 5 ml of ice - cold TNE buffer supplemented with 1 % Triton X - 100 and 25 (cid:5) l of protease inhibitor cocktail set III per ml . The membranes were solubilized by rotary shaking at 4°C overnight . Detergent - resistant mem - branes ( DRMs ) were puriﬁed with a step sucrose gradient . The sucrose concen - tration in the cell lysate was adjusted to 41 % ( in 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 ) , and the lysate was loaded into the bottom of an SW40 Beckman tube and overlaid with 8 ml of 35 % sucrose , which was subsequently overlaid with 15 % sucrose . After centrifugation at 35 , 000 rpm using a Beckman XL - 80 ultracentrifuge with an SW40 rotor for 18 h at 4°C , 12 1 - ml fractions were collected from the top to the bottom of the sucrose gradient . The radioactivity in each fraction was quan - tiﬁed by gamma counting . VacA coimmunoprecipitation with cholesterol . VacA - cholesterol coimmuno - precipitations were performed by using a previously described method ( 20 ) . VacA ( 0 . 1 to 5 (cid:5) M ) or buffer alone was incubated with [ 3 H ] cholesterol ( 25 to 100 nM ) for 2 h atroom temperature with agitation . The samples were centrifuged at 18 , 000 (cid:6) g for 5 min at 4°C . The supernatants were incubated with anti - VacA antibodies ( 59 ) fo r 1 h at 4°C with agitation . Protein G - Sepharose ( 15 (cid:5) l ) was then added , and incubation was continued for an additiona l 1 h at 4°C , again with agitation . The samples were centrifuged at 18 , 000 (cid:6) g for 10 min at 4°C , and the supernatants were discarded . The pellets were washed four times with 1 ml of PBS and then resuspended in 100 (cid:5) l of SDS - PAGE sample buffer ( 0 . 28 M Tris - HCl [ pH 6 . 8 ] , 30 % glycerol , 1 % SDS , 0 . 5 M dithiothreitol , 0 . 012 % bromo - phenol blue ) . The samples were heated for 10 min at 95°C , and the beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 18 , 000 (cid:6) g for 5 min . The radioactivity contained in 90 (cid:5) l of the supernatant was determined by liquid scintillation counting . The remaining 10 (cid:5) l was analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting by using VacA antiserum ( 17 ) to verify that VacA was precipitated . Control experiments were performed in the absence of VacA . Each immunoprecipitation was performed in triplicate , and the entire experiment was repeated four times . TLC overlay assay . We used a TLC overlay assay adapted from a previously described method ( 53 ) . Different concentrations of pure cholesterol ( 0 . 1 to 5 mg / ml ) were spotted onto TLC plates . The plates were dried and blocked with 1 % ovalbumin in 1 % PVP – PBS . After incubation fo r 3 h atroom temperature , the plates were incubated with either activated or unactivated 20 (cid:5) M VacA or with PBS alone . After overnight incubation at 4°C , the plates were washed twice with PBS and incubated with a 1 : 2 , 000 dilution of anti - VacA antibodies in 3 % PVP – PBS for 24 h at 37°C . The plates were washed twice with PBS and then blocked with 1 % ovalbumin for 30 min at room temperature . The plates were washed again and incubated with a 1 : 10 , 000 dilution of anti - mouse immunoglob - ulin G - alkaline phosphatase conjugate fo r 1 h at 37°C . The bound conjugate was detected colorimetrically by incubating the plates in 100 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 8 . 8 ) – 150 mM NaCl – 1 mM MgCl 2 containing nitroblue tetrazolium - BCIP at 37°C . The enzymatic reaction was stopped by lowering the pH of the solution . This experiment was repeated ﬁve times . Cholesterol antagonism of VacA association with HeLa cells . Acid - activated 125 I - VacA ( 0 . 1 to 4 (cid:5) M ) was mixed with pure cholesterol ( 100 (cid:5) g / ml ) or PBS and incubated at 37°C for 1 h with agitation . The cholesterol - VacA mixture was chilled to 4°C and added to prechilled HeLa cells . After incubation for 4 h at 4°C , the cells were washed rapidly three times with ice - cold wash buffer and lysed in 100 (cid:5) l of M - PER . Radioactivity was quantiﬁed by gamma counting . The total protein concentration in each well was quantiﬁed by the BCA method . Each binding reaction was performed in quadruplicate , and the entire experiment was repeated at least four times . Transfection of HeLa cells . HeLa cells were transfected with pET20b plasmids expressing VacA under control of the T7 promoter ( 63 ) . HeLa cells were ﬁrst infected with recombinant vaccinia virus ( vT7 ) bearing the T7 RNA polymerase gene ( 15 ) . Vaccinia virus stock was trypsinized at 37°C for 30 min with vigorous vortexing every 5 to 10 min , and then 100 (cid:5) l was added to HeLa cells ( 11 ) . After infection for 30 min at 37°C , the virus stock was removed , and HeLa cells were transfected with plasmid DNA precipitates diluted in DMEM containing 2 . 5 % FBS at 37°C . The plasmid DNA precipitates were prepared by slowly adding 4 (cid:5) g of plasmid DNA in 100 (cid:5) l of 0 . 25 M CaCl 2 to 100 (cid:5) l of 2 (cid:6) HEPES - buffered saline with frequently vortexing and then incubating the preparation at room temperature for 25 min before use . Each DNA precipitate was diluted 1 : 10 in DMEM with 2 . 5 % FBS , and 100 (cid:5) l was added to each well . The cells were incubated for 2 to 4 h at 37°C , and the transfection reagents were removed . The cells were washed twice with 100 (cid:5) l of PBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) and then incubated at 37°C for 20 h in DMEM containing 2 . 5 % FBS and 5 mM NH 4 Cl . Statistical analysis . Data analyses were conducted by using a Student paired t test . A P value of less that 0 . 05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant . RESULTS Depletion of cellular membrane cholesterol blocks VacA - mediated vacuolation . Monolayers of HeLa cells were incu - bated with puriﬁed VacA at 37°C . As previously reported ( 3 , 24 , 54 ) , VacA induced the formation of small perinuclear vacu - oles that were clearly evident after just 2 h . At the end of 24 h , the vacuoles were fully developed and ﬁlled the cytosol of nearly all the cells in the monolayers ( Fig . 1A , panel a ) . To investigate the importance of plasma membrane cholesterol in VacA - mediated vacuolation , HeLa cell monolayers were pre - treated fo r 1 h at 37°C with either 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml prior to toxin application . Both of these (cid:4) - CDs selectively extract cholesterol from the plasma membrane with - out damaging cellular viability ( 36 ) . In stark contrast to results obtained with VacA alone , M (cid:4) CD or HPCD pretreatment completely blocked VacA - mediated cellular vacuolation , even after exposure of the monolayers to the toxin for 24 h ( Fig . 1A , panels b and c ) . We conﬁrmed that pretreatment of HeLa cells with either M (cid:4) CD or HPCD fo r 1 h at 37°C lowered the overall choles - terol levels in the monolayers ( Table 1 ) . Neither M (cid:4) CD nor HPCD was detectably cytotoxic to HeLa cell monolayers at concentrations that completely blocked VacA - mediated vacu - olation ( Fig . 1A , panels d , e , and f ) . To further conﬁrm this observation , cells were treated for 1 h at 37°C with 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml and then tested for viability based on the uptake of calcein - AM ( green ﬂuorescence ) or for loss of viability based on uptake of ethidium homodimer - 1 ( red ﬂuorescence ) . Neither M (cid:4) CD nor HPCD appreciably altered the relative number of viable cells in monolayers of HeLa cells ( data not shown ) . VacA - mediated vacuolation can be quantiﬁed by measuring the uptake of the acidotropic dye neutral red by intoxicated mammalian cells ( 6 ) . HeLa cells that were pretreated with either M (cid:4) CD or HPCD and then incubated for an additional 4114 PATEL ET AL . I NFECT . I MMUN . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 24 h with acid - activated VacA were assayed for neutral red uptake . HeLa cells pretreated with M (cid:4) CD ( Fig . 1B ) or HPCD ( Fig . 1C ) prior to VacA application took up less neutral red than cells treated with VacA alone , indicating that vacuolation was inhibited . VacA - mediated cellular vacuolation , as quanti - ﬁed by neutral red uptake , was inhibited in a dose - dependent manner . Neutral red uptake was completely blocked when either 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml was used to pretreat HeLa cells . Depleting membrane cholesterol with (cid:4) - CDs has been shown to reduce the number of caveolae and caveola - like structures at the plasma membrane ( 44 ) , which require cho - lesterol to maintain their invaginated structural integrity ( 45 ) . Sterol - binding reagents that do not extract cholesterol from the plasma membrane have also been shown to disrupt caveo - lae and caveola - dependent processes in HeLa cells ( 35 ) . Be - cause pretreatment of cells with (cid:4) - CDs was shown to com - pletely block cellular vacuolation , we next tested whether formation of cholesterol complexes with sterol - binding agents also inhibited the cellular action of VacA . HeLa cells were pretreated for 1 h with ﬁlipin ( 0 . 01 to 2 (cid:5) g / ml ) , digitonin ( 0 . 1 to 5 (cid:5) M ) , saponin ( 0 . 01 to 1 (cid:5) g / ml ) , or nystatin ( 1 to 100 (cid:5) g / ml ) and then incubated for an additional 24 h after appli - cation of acid - activated VacA . In contrast to pretreatment of cells with M (cid:4) CD or HPCD , pretreatment of HeLa cells with ﬁlipin ( Fig . 2A ) , saponin , or digitonin ( data not shown ) had no FIG . 1 . M (cid:4) CD and HPCD block HeLa cell sensitivity to VacA in a dose - dependent manner . HeLa cells were preincubated with either 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml for 1 h at 37°C and then incubated with acid - activated VacA ( 75 (cid:5) g / ml ) . After 24 h , the HeLa cell monolayers were analyzed for vacuolation by phase - contrast microscopy ( A ) or quantiﬁcation of neutral red uptake ( B ) . ( A ) HeLa cells treated with VacA alone ( panel a ) , M (cid:4) CD plus VacA ( panel b ) , HPCD plus VacA ( panel c ) , PBS ( panel d ) , M (cid:4) CD ( panel e ) , or HPCD ( photograph f ) . ( B and C ) HeLa cell monolayers analyzed for vacuolation by determining uptake of neutral red , as described in Materials and Methods . The data are data from a representative experiment performed at least in quadruplicate . The error bars indicate standard deviations . TABLE 1 . Cholesterol contents of HeLa cell monolayers Treatment Cholesterol content ( (cid:5) g / mg ) a P value Untreated cells 29 (cid:7) 7 . 9 ( 100 ) b Cholesterol ( 100 (cid:5) M ) 43 (cid:7) 10 . 4 ( 150 ) 0 . 04 M (cid:4) CD ( 4 mg / ml ) 15 (cid:7) 3 . 1 ( 53 ) 0 . 01 HPCD ( 30 (cid:5) g / ml ) 16 (cid:7) 5 . 1 ( 56 ) 0 . 02 a The cholesterol content is expressed as micrograms of cholesterol per mil - ligram of total cell protein after 1 h of incubation with cholesterol , M (cid:4) CD , or HPCD . The cholesterol content was calculated from the average of the results obtained in four separate experiments , each performed in triplicate . P values were determined for the cholesterol - , M (cid:4) CD - , and HPCD - treated cells com - pared to the untreated cells . b The values in parentheses are percentages . V OL . 70 , 2002 CHOLESTEROL IS IMPORTANT FOR VacA - MEDIATED VACUOLATION 4115 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m apparent effect on VacA - mediated vacuolation at any of the concentrations tested . Moreover , preincubation for 1 h with nystatin strongly potentiated the extent of cellular vacuolation caused by VacA ( Fig . 2B ) . Each of these ﬁndings indicates that the formation of cholesterol complexes at the plasma mem - brane with sterol - binding agents is not sufﬁcient to block VacA - mediated cellular vacuolation . Because (cid:4) - CDs extract cholesterol selectively from the plasma membrane , we next determined whether inhibiting the de novo biosynthesis of cholesterol at the endoplasmic reticu - lum also blocked vacuolation induced by VacA . HeLa cells were grown for 3 days in the presence of lovastatin ( 0 . 01 to 10 (cid:5) M ) and / or compactin ( 1 to 40 (cid:5) M ) . The monolayers were incubated for an additional 24 h with acid - activated VacA and then assayed for neutral red uptake . In contrast to the effects of the (cid:4) - CDs , pretreatment of cells with lovastatin or compac - tin had no detectable effect on VacA - mediated vacuolation ( data not shown ) . Extraction of membrane cholesterol with M (cid:4) CD has re - cently been reported to disrupt clathrin - dependent endocytosis within HeLa cells , as well other mammalian cell lines ( 44 , 52 ) . To investigate whether (cid:4) - CD blockage of VacA - mediated vac - uolation was due to disruption of clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis , we tested whether the reagent chlorpromazine , which in - hibits clathrin - coated pit assembly ( 56 ) , also blocks VacA - mediated vacuolation . HeLa cells were pretreated for 1 h at 37°C with chlorpromazine , and then acid - activated VacA was applied for an additional 24 h . Both microscopic analysis ( data not shown ) and neutral red uptake measurements revealed that chlorpromazine strongly potentiated VacA - mediated vac - uolation in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 3 ) . In control ex - periments , pretreatment of HeLa cells with chlorpromazine inhibited diphtheria toxin - mediated cytotoxicity ( data not shown ) , which requires clathrin - mediated endocytosis for in - toxication ( 33 ) . Increasing the plasma membrane cholesterol level potenti - ates VacA - mediated vacuolation . Because depleting plasma membrane cholesterol by (cid:4) - CD pretreatment blocked vacuo - lation of HeLa cells by VacA , we hypothesized that cholesterol levels in the membrane are important for modulating VacA - mediated vacuolation . To test this hypothesis , we investigated the effects of increasing the plasma membrane cholesterol level on HeLa cells subsequently intoxicated with VacA . Monolay - FIG . 2 . Effects of cholesterol - binding agents on cellular vacuolation caused by VacA . HeLa cells were pretreated with different concentrations of ﬁlipin ( A ) or nystatin ( B ) fo r 1 h at 37°C and then incubated with acid - activated VacA ( 75 (cid:5) g / ml ) . After 24 h , the HeLa cell monolayers were analyzed for vacuolation by determining uptake of neutral red , as described in Materials and Methods . The data are data from a representative experiment performed at least in quadruplicate . The error bars indicate standard deviations . FIG . 3 . Chlorpromazine potentiates VacA - mediated vacuolation of HeLa cells . HeLa cells were pretreated with different concentrations of chlorpromazine fo r 1 h at 37°C and then incubated at 37°C with acid - activated VacA ( 25 (cid:5) g / ml ) . After 24 h , the monolayers were analyzed for vacuolation by determining uptake of neutral red , as described in Materials and Methods . The data are data from a repre - sentative experiment performed at least in quadruplicate . The error bars indicate standard deviations . 4116 PATEL ET AL . I NFECT . I MMUN . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ers of HeLa cells were pretreated with (cid:4) - CD - complexed cho - lesterol for 1 h at 37°C prior to application of acid - activated VacA ( 60 ) . Pretreating HeLa cells with cholesterol complexed to (cid:4) - CD resulted in an increase in cellular cholesterol levels ( Table 1 ) without detectable cytotoxicity or morphological changes in the monolayers ( Fig . 4A , panels c and d ) . However , cholesterol pretreatment clearly potentiated cellular vacuola - tion caused by VacA . At low VacA concentrations that in - duced vacuole biogenesis in only 1 to 5 % of the cells in a monolayer , pretreatment with (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol re - sulted in vacuolation of nearly the entire monolayer ( Fig . 4A , panels a and b ) . Consistent with these observations , HeLa cells pretreated with (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol prior to VacA application exhibited a dose - dependent increase in neutral red uptake relative to the uptake in cells treated with VacA alone ( Fig . 4B ) . Collectively , these results suggest that the plasma membrane cholesterol concentration modulates cellular vacu - olation induced by VacA , with lower levels decreasing vacuo - lation and higher levels increasing vacuolation . Plasma membrane cholesterol modulates the vacuolation of multiple cell lines . We next tested whether the importance of plasma membrane cholesterol levels to VacA - mediated cellu - lar vacuolation observed in HeLa cells could be reproduced in other epithelium - derived cell lines . Notably , differences in cell line sensitivity for VacA have been reported previously ( 10 , 39 ) , presumably because of differences in the plasma mem - brane components required for cell binding and / or internaliza - tion . Monolayers of Vero , CHO - K1 , HeLa , or stomach - de - rived AGS cells were pretreated with M (cid:4) CD , HPCD , or (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol for 1 h at 37°C prior to applica - tion of acid - activated VacA . After 24 h , neutral red uptake was quantiﬁed , and the results revealed that VacA - mediated vac - uolation in each cell line was blocked by M (cid:4) CD ( Fig . 5A ) and HPCD ( Fig . 5B ) in a dose - dependent manner . These results were veriﬁed by phase - contrast microscopy , which revealed that there was complete blockage of vacuolation in each cell line pretreated with 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml ( data not shown ) . Similarly , pretreatment of monolayers with (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol potentiated vacuolation in all the cell lines tested ( Fig . 5C ) . These data indicate that plasma membrane cholesterol levels modulate vacuolation induced by VacA in multiple cell lines . Plasma membrane cholesterol modulates VacA association with target cells . To determine whether plasma membrane cholesterol directly inﬂuences the mechanism of VacA cellular intoxication , we investigated the effects of plasma membrane cholesterol depletion on the uptake of VacA into cells . HeLa cells were preincubated at 37°C with either 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or PBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) and then incubated at 37°C for 4 h with acid - activated 35 S - radiolabeled VacA ( 50 nM ) , prepared as previously described ( 16 ) . The cells were analyzed for VacA that was resistant to proteinase K treatment . As previously reported , VacA readily entered cells , as indicated by an SDS - PAGE analysis that revealed the presence of full - length VacA after proteinase K treatment ( 28 , 43 ) . To test whether deplet - ing cholesterol from the plasma membrane affected internal - ization , the cells were pretreated with M (cid:4) CD at a concentra - tion of 4 mg / ml , a concentration that completely blocks VacA - mediated cellular vacuolation , and then for an additional 4 h with acid - activated VacA . Pretreatment of HeLa cell mono - layers with M (cid:4) CD was found to decrease recovery of radiola - beled VacA to less than 30 % of the levels observed for control monolayers pretreated with VacA alone ( data not shown ) , suggesting that depletion of membrane cholesterol reduced the entry of VacA into target cells . It is possible that attenuation of VacA internalization may be due to a reduction in the association of VacA with M (cid:4) CD - treated cells . Independent reports from two separate groups have indicated that VacA binds to mammalian cells in a non - speciﬁc manner ( 28 , 43 ) . In agreement with these previous studies , we detected dose - dependent binding of radiolabeled VacA ( 0 . 5 to 50 nM ) to HeLa cell monolayers ( data not shown ) . Similar to the earlier reports , we also found that as - sociation of VacA ( 10 nM ) with HeLa cells was not appreciably FIG . 4 . Cholesterol potentiates VacA - mediated vacuolation in a dose - dependent manner . HeLa cells were preincubated with 100 (cid:5) M cholesterol for 1 h and then incubated with acid - activated VacA ( 25 (cid:5) g / ml ) . After 24 h , the HeLa cell monolayers were analyzed for vacuolation by phase - contrast microscopy ( A ) or by quantiﬁcation of neutral red uptake ( B ) . ( A ) HeLa cells treated with VacA ( panel a ) , cholesterol plus VacA ( panel b ) , PBS ( panel c ) , or cholesterol alone ( panel d ) . ( B ) HeLa cells analyzed for neutral red uptake , as described in Materials and Methods . The data are data from a representative experiment performed at least in quadruplicate . The error bars indicate standard deviations . V OL . 70 , 2002 CHOLESTEROL IS IMPORTANT FOR VacA - MEDIATED VACUOLATION 4117 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m inhibited when the cells were coincubated with a 50 - fold molar excess of nonradiolabeled VacA ( data not shown ) . We ex - tracted membrane cholesterol using concentrations of M (cid:4) CD that completely blocked VacA - based vacuolation and tested for association of VacA with cells . Cells were pretreated with 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml fo r 1 h at 37°C and then chilled to 4°C for at least 1 h . Acid - activated radiolabeled VacA ( 50 nM ) was allowed to bind fo r 4 h at 4°C . The cells were then washed extensively and lysed , and the recovered toxin was quantiﬁed by scintillation counting . These experiments indicated that pre - treating cells with M (cid:4) CD lowered the level of recovery of radiolabeled VacA to a level that was approximately 60 % of the level observed for control monolayers pretreated with PBS alone ( data not shown ) . The demonstration that cholesterol - depleting drugs reduce VacA association with cultured mammalian cells suggests that VacA may directly associate with detergent - insoluble mem - brane microdomains that are enriched in cholesterol , called DRMs . To test this hypothesis , we incubated radiolabeled VacA with monolayers of HeLa cells prechilled to 4°C , as described above . After 4 h , the cells were extracted with 1 . 0 % Triton X - 100 , and the radiation in the soluble fractions and the radiation in the insoluble fractions were separated by centrif - ugation and quantiﬁed . In control experiments , we analyzed HeLa cells pretreated with 125 I - transferrin and 125 I - cholera toxin , which have been shown to separate primarily to the detergent - soluble and - insoluble fractions , respectively . These experiments revealed that radiolabeled VacA separated pre - dominantly to the insoluble fraction , like cholera toxin ( Fig . 6A ) . In contrast , transferrin was detected predominantly in the soluble fraction . To further investigate the idea that VacA associates with FIG . 5 . Cholesterol modulates the sensitivity of multiple cell lines to VacA . CHO - K1 , Vero , HeLa , and AGS cells were preincubated with different concentrations of M (cid:4) CD ( A ) , HPCD ( B ) , or cholesterol ( C ) fo r 1 h at 37°C and then incubated with acid - activated VacA . After 24 h , cells were analyzed for vacuolation by quantifying the uptake of neutral red , as described in Materials and Methods . The data are data from a representative experiment performed at least in quadruplicate . The error bars indicate standard deviations . 4118 PATEL ET AL . I NFECT . I MMUN . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m DRMs , we fractionated detergent - extracted cells by density gradient centrifugation . Radiolabeled VacA was incubated with monolayers of HeLa cells at 4°C for 4 h . The cells were detergent extracted with 1 . 0 % Triton X - 100 , as described above , and were fractionated by using sucrose density gradi - ents . Individual fractions were collected , and the radiation in each fraction was quantiﬁed . As demonstrated in Fig . 6B , cell - associated VacA was enriched in the fractions collected from the top of the sucrose density gradient . Control experiments revealed that cholera toxin , but not transferrin , was enriched at the top of the sucrose density gradient . Moreover , VacA alone ( in the absence of cells ) was not enriched in fractions collected from the top of the sucrose gradient ( data not shown ) . Collec - tively , the demonstration that cell - associated VacA is deter - gent insoluble and ﬂoats on the top of sucrose density gradi - ents suggests that VacA may directly associate with DRMs at the surfaces of mammalian cells . Because VacA - mediated vacuolation is dependent on plasma membrane cholesterol levels and because cholesterol is a major component of DRMs , it is possible that VacA associ - ates directly with cholesterol . We attempted to detect VacA - cholesterol interactions by using three distinct approaches , as described in Materials and Methods . First , we determined whether preincubating VacA with cholesterol would antago - nize association of the toxin with target cells . Second , we tried to detect binding of VacA to puriﬁed cholesterol on TLC plates . Finally , we investigated whether radiolabeled choles - terol would coimmunoprecipitate with VacA . Repeated at - tempts in which all three approaches were used failed to dem - onstrate detectable interactions between VacA and cholesterol ( data not shown ) . These results suggest that VacA may asso - ciate with DRM components other than ( or in addition to ) cholesterol . Plasma membrane cholesterol modulates vacuole biogene - sis . To further investigate the relationship of plasma mem - brane cholesterol to vacuolation , HeLa cells were preloaded with VacA and then treated with M (cid:4) CD , HPCD , or (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol . In one experiment , acid - activated VacA was incubated for 4 h with prechilled HeLa cells ( 4°C ) . The cells were then extensively washed and incubated at 37°C for an additional 24 h in the presence of either 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml . Both visual inspection by phase - contrast microscopy ( data not shown ) and neutral red uptake measurements indicated that even after VacA was pre - bound to HeLa cells , M (cid:4) CD and HPCD completely blocked vacuolation ( Fig . 7A ) . In addition , cells treated with 100 (cid:5) M (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol after VacA binding exhibited in - creased neutral red uptake relative to the uptake by cells in - cubated with VacA alone ( Fig . 7B ) . Alternatively , HeLa cells were incubated with VacA for 4 h at 37°C prior to application of either 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml . The monolayers were incubated at 37°C for an additional 24 h and then analyzed for vacuolation . In these experiments M (cid:4) CD and HPCD completely blocked vacuola - tion , as assessed by either phase - contrast microscopy ( data not shown ) or neutral red uptake ( Fig . 7A ) . In addition , when cells were treated with 100 (cid:5) M (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol after incubation at 37°C with VacA for 4 h , both microscopic exam - ination and neutral red uptake data clearly demonstrated po - tentiation of vacuolation ( Fig . 7B ) . These data suggest that modulating plasma membrane cholesterol also affects a step downstream of toxin association and internalization . VacA has been shown to induce cellular vacuolation when it is expressed directly in mammalian cells by using a transient transfection system ( 9 , 11 , 62 ) . We employed this approach , which bypasses the need for the toxin to be internalized from the outside of the cell , to further investigate the importance of plasma membrane cholesterol in vacuolation . HeLa cells that had been previously infected with vT7 vaccinia virus expressing T7 polymerase were transfected with pET20b - VacA harboring the gene encoding full - length VacA under control of the T7 polymerase promoter ( 14 , 62 ) . M (cid:4) CD ( 4 mg / ml ) or HPCD ( 30 (cid:5) g / ml ) was applied to cells 4 h after transfection , and the FIG . 6 . Association of VacA with detergent - insoluble microdo - mains . HeLa cell monolayers were incubated with acid - activated 125 I - radiolabeled VacA ( 50 nM ) ( E ) , cholera toxin ( 10 nM ) ( (cid:1) ) , or trans - ferrin ( 10 (cid:5) g / ml ) ( Œ ) in DMEM containing NH 4 Cl ( 5 mM ) . After incubation fo r 4 h at 4°C , the cells were washed three times with ice - cold PBS , detached , and collected by centrifugation at 300 (cid:6) g for 5 min . The cells were resuspended in 0 . 5 ml of cold TNE buffer supplemented with 1 % Triton X - 100 and 25 (cid:5) g of protease inhibitor cocktail set III per ml . Membranes were solubilized by rotary shaking at 4°C . ( A ) Radioactivity in the supernatant ( detergent - soluble frac - tion ) and in the pellet ( detergent - insoluble fraction ) quantiﬁed as described in Materials and Methods . ( B ) DRMs puriﬁed with a step sucrose gradient , as described in Materials and Methods . The values are the percentages of the total counts . The data are data from a representative experiment performed at least four times . The error bars indicate standard deviations . V OL . 70 , 2002 CHOLESTEROL IS IMPORTANT FOR VacA - MEDIATED VACUOLATION 4119 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m monolayer was incubated at 37°C . After 24 h , neutral red uptake was measured . HeLa cell monolayers transfected with plasmids expressing VacA exhibited vacuolation in 60 to 70 % of the cells and a detectable increase in neutral red uptake . However , both M (cid:4) CD and HPCD completely blocked cellular vacuolation , as visualized by phase - contrast microscopy ( data not shown ) and neutral red uptake ( Fig . 8 ) . In addition , when cells were treated with (cid:4) - CD - complexed cholesterol ( 100 (cid:5) M ) after transfection , an increase in neutral red uptake was ob - served ( Fig . 8 ) . Signiﬁcantly , these data suggest that in addition to affecting the cellular intoxication mechanism of the toxin , plasma membrane cholesterol is important for vacuole biogen - esis . DISCUSSION Cholesterol is essential for regulating the properties of mammalian cell membranes . Over the past few years , the im - portance of cholesterol homeostasis to lipid trafﬁcking and sorting in cells has become evident ( 21 ) . Investigations into the effects of modulating the levels of plasma membrane choles - terol with (cid:4) - CDs have revealed the importance of this sterol to endocytic mechanisms involving vesicular trafﬁcking ( 44 , 52 ) . Because VacA is believed to enter mammalian cells by an endocytic mechanism ( 17 , 28 , 43 ) and subsequently induces vacuole formation by presumably altering vesicle trafﬁcking ( 29 , 40 ) , we wanted to test whether cholesterol - dependent endocytic events are linked to the VacA intoxication mecha - nism and / or vacuole biogenesis . The importance of cholesterol to pathogenesis has been underscored by recent ﬁndings that this sterol is critical for cellular entry of toxins ( 19 , 47 ) , as well as a number of pathogens , including bacteria ( 18 ) , parasites ( 32 ) , and viruses ( 1 ) In this study , we demonstrated that plasma membrane cho - lesterol is essential for vacuolation of mammalian cells by VacA . Collectively , the ﬁnding that vacuolation could be blocked by lowering cholesterol levels and the ﬁnding that vacuolation could be potentiated by increasing cholesterol lev - els suggested that the cholesterol concentration within the FIG . 7 . Effects of altering membrane cholesterol on vacuolation of cells pretreated with VacA . HeLa cells were preincubated with acid - activated ( 100 (cid:5) g / ml ) VacA fo r 4 h ateither 4 or 37°C and then incubated for an additional 24 h with 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml or 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml ( A ) . Alternatively , HeLa cells were preincubated with acid - activated ( 25 (cid:5) g / ml ) VacA for 4 h ateither 4 or 37°C and then incubated for an additional 24 h with 100 (cid:5) M cholesterol ( B ) . The HeLa cell monolayers were analyzed for vacuolation by determining uptake of neutral red , as described in Materials and Methods . The data are data from a representative experiment performed at least in qua - druplicate . The error bars indicate standard deviations . FIG . 8 . M (cid:4) CD and HPCD block vacuolation of transiently trans - fected cells expressing VacA . HeLa cells were transfected with pET20b plasmids expressing VacA , as described in Materials and Methods . After 4 h , 4 mg of M (cid:4) CD / ml , 30 (cid:5) g of HPCD / ml , or 100 (cid:5) M choles - terol was applied to the monolayers , which were then incubated at 37°C under 5 % CO 2 . After 20 h , the cells were assayed for uptake of neutral red . Data are expressed as percentages of neutral red uptake by treated cells relative to the neutral red uptake by HeLa cells trans - fected with a plasmid expressing full - length VacA - green ﬂuorescent protein but not treated following transfection . The data from two separate experiments performed at least in quadruplicate were aver - aged . The error bars indicate standard deviations . 4120 PATEL ET AL . I NFECT . I MMUN . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m membrane is a critical factor for the extent of vacuole biogen - esis induced by VacA . The importance of cholesterol localized speciﬁcally to the plasma membrane is supported by the fact that the (cid:4) - CDs exchange cholesterol selectively at the cell surface ( 42 ) and by our ﬁnding that blocking the de novo synthesis of cholesterol at the endoplasmic reticulum had no detectable effect on VacA - mediated vacuolation . Depleting membrane cholesterol with (cid:4) - CDs has been re - ported to disrupt cholesterol and sphingolipid - rich microdo - mains called lipid rafts or DRMs ( 23 ) . DRMs can be localized within caveolae but have also been reported to be present in cells deﬁcient in caveolae ( 22 ) . Cholesterol is essential for the structure and function of invaginated caveolae , as well as caveola - dependent endocytosis ( 45 ) . (cid:4) - CDs directly disrupt caveola structures at the plasma membrane , presumably by facilitating the disassembly of lipid rafts within the caveolae ( 44 ) . Because cholesterol depletion inhibits VacA - mediated vacuolation , we hypothesized that caveola - dependent endocy - tosis might be important for toxin internalization and / or tar - geting of vesicles required for vacuole biogenesis . However , cholesterol - binding reagents , such as ﬁlipin , which is known to disrupt cholesterol - rich microdomains localized to caveolae and caveola - like structures ( 45 ) and has been shown to block caveola - mediated entry of a number of bacterial pathogens into HeLa cells ( 35 ) , did not exert a detectable effect on VacA - mediated cellular vacuolation . Thus , the inhibitory effects of the (cid:4) - CDs cannot readily be interpreted to be a direct result of the disruption of caveolae , and the role , if any , of caveola - mediated vesicular transport in VacA cellular activity requires further investigation . Depletion of membrane cholesterol with M (cid:4) CD was re - cently demonstrated to strongly attenuate clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( 44 , 52 ) . Moreover , supplementing membrane cholesterol levels resulted in recovery of clathrin - mediated en - docytosis that had previously been blocked with M (cid:4) CD ( 44 ) . Thus , we hypothesized that (cid:4) - CDs may block cellular vacuo - lation by inhibiting clathrin - mediated endocytic processes in - volved in VacA internalization and / or vacuole biogenesis . However , pretreatment of HeLa cell monolayers with chlor - promazine , which disrupts endocytosis involving clathrin - coated vesicles ( 56 ) , did not have an inhibitory effect on vac - uole biogenesis . Our ﬁnding that VacA - induced vacuolation is not dependent on a clathrin - mediated endocytic mechanism is in agreement with earlier work showing that transfection of mammalian cells with dominant - negative proteins that exert an inhibitory effect on clathrin - dependent endocytosis did not al - ter the extent of vacuolation within monolayers intoxicated with VacA ( 43 ) . While our results support the hypothesis that vacuolation of mammalian cells by VacA does not require functional caveola - or clathrin - dependent endocytosis , it is noteworthy that cho - lesterol is also important for alternative endocytic processes , collectively termed clathrin - independent endocytosis ( 47 ) . VacA induction of vacuolation requires that the toxin binds and enters cells by a slow , temperature - dependent process ( 17 , 28 , 43 ) and then functions from an intracellular site of action . Our results indicated that depletion of plasma membrane cho - lesterol with M (cid:4) CD decreased the amount of VacA internal - ized into HeLa cells by more than 70 % and also reduced association of the toxin with cultured cells . Our data indicate that cell - bound VacA is associated with DRMs , suggesting that VacA may directly associate with cholesterol - rich microdo - mains . It is not clear whether VacA directly associates with cholesterol or , alternatively , whether cholesterol is important for the ordering of plasma membrane components needed for productive toxin binding and cell entry . Attempts to demon - strate that VacA directly associates with cholesterol were un - successful , suggesting that VacA may bind to DRM compo - nents other than ( or in addition to ) cholesterol . Treatment of HEp - 2 cells with phosphatidylinositol phospholipase C has been shown to inhibit VacA - mediated vacuolation and inter - nalization of the toxin , suggesting that one or more glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins within DRMs may be important for VacA intoxication ( 43 ) . While our results sup - port the hypothesis that VacA entry into cells requires plasma membrane cholesterol , the inability to block vacuolation by disrupting caveola - or clathrin - dependent entry into the cell suggests that VacA may enter cells by one or more clathrin - independent endocytic pathways . Notably , our results also imply that plasma membrane cho - lesterol is important for vacuole biogenesis . Even after VacA is preloaded and incubated with cells under conditions that have been shown to promote cellular entry of the toxin , depleting the membrane cholesterol blocked vacuolation in a monolayer . Moreover , in transiently transfected cells in which VacA was expressed directly within the cytosol in order to bypass the membrane binding and internalization steps of intoxication , vacuolation was also blocked by cholesterol depletion . Collec - tively , these results indicate that depleting membrane choles - terol disrupts an essential process for vacuole biogenesis , sub - sequent to toxin entry . Whether this is clathrin - independent vesicular transport or an alternative process remains to be elucidated . In summary , we have established that membrane cholesterol is an important host cell component that modulates the extent of cellular vacuolation caused by VacA . Our data suggest that plasma membrane cholesterol may be important for the cellu - lar activity of VacA by regulating entry of toxin into sensitive cells and then modulating cellular processes that are essential for vacuole biogenesis . Identiﬁcation of the exact role of cho - lesterol in the mechanism of VacA - mediated cellular vacuola - tion may provide novel insights into toxin trafﬁcking pathways and mechanisms of vacuole biogenesis . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank P . Hardin for use of the ﬂuorescence microscope and also A . Vailas and D . Martinez , who provided access to their laboratory’s microtiter plate reader . P . Roch is acknowledged for assistance with preparation of the manuscript , and Jessica Feith is acknowledged for initial characterization of cellular cholesterol levels . This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health ( grant AI45928 ) , the Robert A . Welch Foundation ( grant E - 1311 ) , and the American Heart Association ( grant BG472 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Bernardes , C . , A . Antonio , M . C . Pedroso de Lima , and M . L . Valdeira . 1998 . Cholesterol affects African swine fever virus infection . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1393 : 19 – 25 . 2 . Cover , T . L . 1998 . An intracellular target for Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin . Trends Microbiol . 6 : 127 – 128 . 3 . Cover , T . L . , and M . J . Blaser . 1992 . Puriﬁcation and characterization of the vacuolating toxin from Helicobacter pylori . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 10570 – 10575 . 4 . Cover , T . L . , S . A . Halter , and M . J . Blaser . 1992 . Characterization of HeLa V OL . 70 , 2002 CHOLESTEROL IS IMPORTANT FOR VacA - MEDIATED VACUOLATION 4121 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m cell vacuoles induced by Helicobacter pylori broth culture supernatant . Hum . Pathol . 23 : 1004 – 1010 . 5 . Cover , T . L . , P . I . Hanson , and J . E . Heuser . 1997 . Acid - induced dissociation of VacA , the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin , reveals its pattern of assembly . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 759 – 769 . 6 . Cover , T . L . , W . Puryear , G . I . Perez - Perez , and M . J . Blaser . 1991 . Effect of urease on HeLa cell vacuolation induced by Helicobacter pylori cytotoxin . Infect . Immun . 59 : 1264 – 1270 . 7 . Cover , T . L . , M . K . Tummuru , P . Cao , S . A . Thompson , and M . J . Blaser . 1994 . Divergence of genetic sequences for the vacuolating cytotoxin among Helicobacter pylori strains . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 10566 – 10573 . 8 . de Bernard , M . , M . Moschioni , G . Napolitani , R . Rappuoli , and C . Mon - tecucco . 2000 . The VacA toxin of Helicobacter pylori identiﬁes a new inter - mediate ﬁlament - interacting protein . EMBO J . 19 : 48 – 56 . 9 . de Bernard , M . , D . Burroni , E . Papini , R . Rappuoli , J . Telford , and C . Montecucco . 1998 . Identiﬁcation of the Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin do - main active in the cell cytosol . Infect . Immun . 66 : 6014 – 6016 . 10 . de Bernard , M . , M . Moschioni , E . Papini , J . Telford , R . Rappuoli , and C . Montecucco . 1998 . Cell vacuolization induced by Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin : cell line sensitivity and quantitative estimation . Toxicol . Lett . 99 : 109 – 115 . 11 . de Bernard , M . , B . Arico , E . Papini , R . Rizzuto , G . Grandi , R . Rappuoli , and C . Montecucco . 1997 . Helicobacter pylori toxin VacA induces vacuole forma - tion by acting in the cell cytosol . Mol . Microbiol . 26 : 665 – 674 . 12 . de Bernard , M . , E . Papini , V . de Filippis , E . Gottardi , J . Telford , R . Manetti , A . Fontana , R . Rappuoli , and C . Montecucco . 1995 . Low pH activates the vacuolating toxin of Helicobacter pylori , which becomes acid and pepsin resistant . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 23937 – 23940 . 13 . Figura , N . , P . Guglielmetti , A . Rossolini , A . Barberi , G . Cusi , R . A . Musm - anno , M . Russi , and S . Quaranta . 1989 . Cytotoxin production by Campy - lobacter pylori strains isolated from patients with peptic ulcers and from patients with chronic gastritis only . J . Clin . Microbiol . 27 : 225 – 226 . 14 . Fuerst , T . R . , P . L . Earl , and B . Moss . 1987 . Use of a hybrid vaccinia virus - T7 RNA polymerase system for expression of target genes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 7 : 2538 – 2544 . 15 . Fuerst , T . R . , E . G . Niles , F . W . Studier , and B . Moss . 1986 . Eukaryotic transient - expression system based on recombinant vaccinia virus that syn - thesizes bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 83 : 8122 – 8126 . 16 . Galmiche , A . , J . Rassow , A . Doye , S . Cagnol , J . C . Chambard , S . Contamin , V . de Thillot , I . Just , V . Ricci , E . Solcia , E . Van Obberghen , and P . Boquet . 2000 . The N - terminal 34 kDa fragment of Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin targets mitochondria and induces cytochrome c release . EMBO J . 19 : 6361 – 6370 . 17 . Garner , J . A . , and T . L . Cover . 1996 . Binding and internalization of the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin by epithelial cells . Infect . Immun . 64 : 4197 – 4203 . 18 . Gatﬁeld , J . , and J . Pieters . 2000 . Essential role for cholesterol in entry of mycobacteria into macrophages . Science 288 : 1647 – 1650 . 19 . Grimmer , S . , T . G . Iversen , B . van Deurs , and K . Sandvig . 2000 . Endosome to Golgi transport of ricin is regulated by cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 : 4205 – 4216 . 20 . Hodel , A . , S . J . An , N . J . Hansen , J . Lawrence , B . Wasle , M . Schrader , and J . M . Edwardson . 2001 . Cholesterol - dependent interaction of syncollin with the membrane of the pancreatic zymogen granule . Biochem . J . 356 : 843 – 850 . 21 . Hoekstra , D . , and I . S . C . van . 2000 . Lipid trafﬁcking and sorting : how cholesterol is ﬁlling gaps . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 496 – 502 . 22 . Hooper , N . M . 1999 . Detergent - insoluble glycosphingolipid / cholesterol - rich membrane domains , lipid rafts and caveolae . Mol . Membr . Biol . 16 : 145 – 156 . 23 . Ilangumaran , S . , and D . C . Hoessli . 1998 . Effects of cholesterol depletion by cyclodextrin on the sphingolipid microdomains of the plasma membrane . Biochem . J . 335 : 433 – 440 . 24 . Leunk , R . , P . Johnson , B . David , W . Kraft , and D . Morgan . 1988 . Cytotoxin activity in broth culture ﬁltrates of Campylobacter pylori . J . Med . Microbiol . 26 : 93 – 99 . 25 . Marchetti , M . , B . Arico , D . Burroni , N . Figura , R . Rappuoli , and P . Ghiara . 1995 . Development of a mouse model of Helicobacter pylori infection that mimics human disease . Science 267 : 1655 – 1658 . 26 . Massari , P . , R . Manetti , D . Burroni , S . Nuti , N . Norais , R . Rappuoli , and J . L . Telford . 1998 . Binding of the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin to target cells . Infect . Immun . 66 : 3981 – 3984 . 27 . McClain , M . , P . Cao , and T . Cover . 2001 . Amino - terminal hydrophobic region of Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin ( VacA ) mediates trans - membrane protein dimerization . Infect . Immun . 69 : 1181 – 1184 . 28 . McClain , M . , W . Schraw , V . Ricci , P . Boquet , and T . Cover . 2000 . Acid activation of Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin ( VacA ) results in toxin internalization by eukaryotic cells . Mol . Microbiol . 37 : 422 – 442 . 29 . Molinari , M . , C . Galli , N . Norais , J . L . Telford , R . Rappuoli , J . P . Luzio , and C . Montecucco . 1997 . Vacuoles induced by Helicobacter pylori toxin contain both late endosomal and lysosomal markers . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 25339 – 25344 . 30 . Molinari , M . , C . Galli , M . de Bernard , N . Norais , J . M . Ruysschaert , R . Rappuoli , and C . Montecucco . 1998 . The acid activation of Helicobacter pylori toxin VacA : structural and membrane binding studies . Biochem . Bio - phys . Res . Commun . 248 : 334 – 340 . 31 . Moll , G . , E . Papini , R . Colonna , D . Burroni , J . Telford , R . Rappuoli , and C . Montecucco . 1995 . Lipid interaction of the 37 - kDa and 58 - kDa fragments of the Helicobacter pylori cytotoxin . Eur . J . Biochem . 234 : 947 – 952 . 32 . Mordue , D . G . , N . Desai , M . Dustin , and L . D . Sibley . 1999 . Invasion by Toxoplasma gondii establishes a moving junction that selectively excludes host cell plasma membrane proteins on the basis of their membrane anchor - ing . J . Exp . Med . 190 : 1783 – 1792 . 33 . Moya , M . , A . Dautry - Varsat , B . Goud , D . Louvard , and P . Boquet . 1985 . Inhibition of coated pit formation in Hep2 cells blocks the cytotoxicity of diphtheria toxin but not that of ricin toxin . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 548 – 559 . 34 . NIH Consensus Development Panel on Helicobacter pylori in Peptic Ulcer Disease . 1994 . NIH Consensus Conference . Helicobacter pylori in peptic ulcer disease . JAMA 272 : 65 – 69 . 35 . Norkin , L . C . , S . A . Wolfrom , and E . S . Stuart . 2001 . Association of caveolin with Chlamydia trachomatis inclusions at early and late stages of infection . Exp . Cell Res . 266 : 229 – 238 . 36 . Ohtani , Y . , T . Irie , K . Uekama , K . Fukunaga , and J . Pitha . 1989 . Differential effects of alpha - , beta - and gamma - cyclodextrins on human erythrocytes . Eur . J . Biochem . 186 : 17 – 22 . 37 . Padilla , P . I . , A . Wada , K . Yahiro , M . Kimura , T . Niidome , H . Aoyagi , A . Kumatori , M . Anami , T . Hayashi , J . Fujisawa , H . Saito , J . Moss , and T . Hirayama . 2000 . Morphologic differentiation of HL - 60 cells is associated with appearance of RPTP - beta and induction of Helicobacter pylori VacA sensitivity . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 15200 – 15206 . 38 . Pagliaccia , C . , X . M . Wang , F . Tardy , J . L . Telford , J . M . Ruysschaert , and V . Cabiaux . 2000 . Structure and interaction of VacA of Helicobacter pylori with a lipid membrane . Eur . J . Biochem . 267 : 104 – 109 . 39 . Pagliaccia , C . , M . de Bernard , P . Lupetti , X . Ji , D . Burroni , T . L . Cover , E . Papini , R . Rappuoli , J . L . Telford , and J . M . Reyrat . 1998 . The m2 form of the Helicobacter pylori cytotoxin has cell type - speciﬁc vacuolating activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 : 10212 – 10217 . 40 . Papini , E . , M . de Bernard , E . Milia , M . Bugnoli , M . Zerial , R . Rappuoli , and C . Montecucco . 1994 . Cellular vacuoles induced by Helicobacter pylori orig - inate from late endosomal compartments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 : 9720 – 9724 . 41 . Phadnis , S . H . , D . Ilver , L . Janzon , S . Normark , and T . U . Westblom . 1994 . Pathological signiﬁcance and molecular characterization of the vacuolating toxin gene of Helicobacter pylori . Infect . Immun . 62 : 1557 – 1565 . 42 . Pitha , J . , T . Irie , P . Sklar , and J . Nye . 1988 . Drug solubilizers to aid phar - macologists : amorphous cyclodextrin derivatives . Life Sci . 43 : 493 – 502 . 43 . Ricci , V . , A . Galmiche , A . Doye , V . Necchi , E . Solcia , and P . Boquet . 2000 . High cell sensitivity to Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin depends on a GPI - anchored protein and is not blocked by inhibition of the clathrin - mediated pathway of endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 : 3897 – 3909 . 44 . Rodal , S . K . , G . Skretting , O . Garred , F . Vilhardt , B . van Deurs , and K . Sandvig . 1999 . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin per - turbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 : 961 – 974 . 45 . Rothberg , K . G . , Y . S . Ying , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . Anderson . 1990 . Cholesterol controls the clustering of the glycophospholipid - anchored mem - brane receptor for 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2931 – 2938 . 46 . Salama , N . R . , G . Otto , L . Tompkins , and S . Falkow . 2001 . Vacuolating cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori plays a role during colonization in a mouse model of infection . Infect . Immun . 69 : 730 – 736 . 47 . Sandvig , K . , and B . van Deurs . 1999 . Endocytosis and intracellular transport of ricin : recent discoveries . FEBS Lett . 452 : 67 – 70 . 48 . Schmitt , W . , and R . Haas . 1994 . Genetic analysis of the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin : structural similarities with the IgA protease type of exported protein . Mol . Microbiol . 12 : 307 – 319 . 49 . Seto , K . , Y . Hayashi - Kuwabara , T . Yoneta , H . Suda , and H . Tamaki . 1998 . Vacuolation induced by cytotoxin from Helicobacter pylori is mediated by the EGF receptor in HeLa cells . FEBS Lett . 431 : 347 – 350 . 50 . Shin , J . S . , and S . N . Abraham . 2001 . Co - option of endocytic functions of cellular caveolae by pathogens . Immunology 102 : 2 – 7 . 51 . Sommi , P . , V . Ricci , R . Fiocca , V . Necchi , M . Romano , J . L . Telford , E . Solcia , and U . Ventura . 1998 . Persistence of Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin and vacuolating potential in cultured gastric epithelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . 275 : G681 – G688 . 52 . Subtil , A . , I . Gaidarov , K . Kobylarz , M . A . Lampson , J . H . Keen , and T . E . McGraw . 1999 . Acute cholesterol depletion inhibits clathrin - coated pit bud - ding . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 6775 – 6780 . 53 . Suzuki , Y . , T . Nakao , T . Ito , N . Watanabe , Y . Toda , G . Xu , T . Suzuki , T . Kobayashi , Y . Kimura , A . Yamada , K . Sugawara , H . Nishimura , F . Kitame , K . Nakamura , E . Deya , M . Kiso , and A . Hasagawa . 1992 . Structural deter - mination of gangliosides that bind to inﬂuenza a , b , and c viruses by an improved binding assay : strain - speciﬁc receptor epitopes in sialo - sugar chains . Virology 189 : 121 – 131 . 54 . Telford , J . L . , P . Ghiara , M . Dell’Orco , M . Comanducci , D . Burroni , M . Bugnoli , M . F . Tecce , S . Censini , A . Covacci , Z . Xiang , E . Papini , C . Mon - 4122 PATEL ET AL . I NFECT . I MMUN . on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tecucco , L . Parente , and R . Rappuoli . 1994 . Gene structure of the Helico - bacter pylori cytotoxin and evidence of its key role in gastric disease . J . Exp . Med . 179 : 1653 – 1658 . 55 . Wang , H . J . , and W . C . Wang . 2000 . Expression and binding analysis of GST - VacA fusions reveals that the C - terminal approximately 100 - residue segment of exotoxin is crucial for binding in HeLa cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 278 : 449 – 454 . 56 . Wang , L . H . , K . G . Rothberg , and R . G . Anderson . 1993 . Mis - assembly of clathrin lattices on endosomes reveals a regulatory switch for coated pit formation . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 1107 – 1117 . 57 . Willhite , D . C . , A . Gutierrez , D . Ye , C . L . Williams , H . K . Patel , K . B . Marty , and S . R . Blanke . 2000 . Intracellular life and times of the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin . SAAS Bull . Biochem . Biotechnol . 13 : 35 – 53 . 58 . Yahiro , K . , T . Niidome , T . Hatakeyama , H . Aoyagi , H . Kurazono , P . I . Padilla , A . Wada , and T . Hirayama . 1997 . Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin binds to the 140 - kDa protein in human gastric cancer cell lines , AZ - 521 and AGS . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 238 : 629 – 632 . 59 . Yahiro , K . , T . Niidome , M . Kimura , T . Hatakeyama , H . Aoyagi , H . Kura - zono , K . Imagawa , A . Wada , J . Moss , and T . Hirayama . 1999 . Activation of Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin by alkaline or acid conditions increases its binding to a 250 - kDa receptor protein - tyrosine phosphatase beta . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 36693 – 36699 . 60 . Yancey , P . G . , W . V . Rodrigueza , E . P . Kilsdonk , G . W . Stoudt , W . J . Johnson , M . C . Phillips , and G . H . Rothblat . 1996 . Cellular cholesterol efﬂux mediated by cyclodextrins . Demonstration of kinetic pools and mechanism of efﬂux . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 16026 – 16034 . 61 . Ye , D . , and S . R . Blanke . 2000 . Mutational analysis of the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin amino terminus : identiﬁcation of amino acids essential for cellular vacuolation . Infect . Immun . 68 : 4354 – 4357 . 62 . Ye , D . , D . C . Willhite , and S . R . Blanke . 1999 . Identiﬁcation of the minimal intracellular vacuolating domain of the Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 9277 – 9282 . Editor : J . T . Barbieri V OL . 70 , 2002 CHOLESTEROL IS IMPORTANT FOR VacA - MEDIATED VACUOLATION 4123 on F eb r ua r y 21 , 2013 b y PE NN S T A T E UN I V h tt p : / / i a i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m