Bootstrapping the Mind : Analogical Processes and Symbol Systems Dedre Gentner Psychology Department , Northwestern University Received 16 December 2009 ; received in revised form 11 May 2010 ; accepted 11 May 2010 Abstract Human cognition is striking in its brilliance and its adaptability . How do we get that way ? How do we move from the nearly helpless state of infants to the cognitive proﬁciency that characterizes adults ? In this paper I argue , ﬁrst , that analogical ability is the key factor in our prodigious capac - ity , and , second , that possession of a symbol system is crucial to the full expression of analogical ability . Keywords : Analogical learning ; Cognitive development ; Structure - mapping ; Language and cogni - tion ; Bootstrapping 1 . Introduction What makes us so smart as a species , and what makes children such rapid learners ? I argue that the answer to both questions lies in a mutual bootstrapping system com - posed of ( a ) our exceptional capacity for relational cognition and ( b ) symbolic systems that augment this capacity . The ability to carry out structural alignment and processing is inherent in human cognition . It is arguably the key inherent difference between humans and other great apes ( Gentner , 2003 ; Gentner & Christie , 2008 ; Penn , Holyoak , & Povinelli , 2008 ; Thompson & Oden , 1996 ) . But an equally important difference is that humans possess a symbolic language ( Gentner , 2003 ; Gentner & Christie , 2008 ) . Language is a powerful force in cognitive development . As Carey ( 1985b , 2009 ) has emphasized , it provides ‘‘tools of wide application’’ that contribute to children’s cogni - tive abilities . Correspondence should be sent to Dedre Gentner , Psychology Department , Northwestern University , Swift Hall # 213 , 2029 Sheridan Rd . , Evanston , IL 60208 . E - mail : gentner @ northwestern . edu Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 752 – 775 Copyright (cid:2) 2010 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights reserved . ISSN : 0364 - 0213 print / 1551 - 6709 online DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6709 . 2010 . 01114 . x My claim is that structural alignment supports language learning , and that in turn language—especially relational language—supports structural alignment and reasoning . In sum , language forms a positive feedback system with relational cognition ; and this system is the major driver of speciﬁcally human learning . In this paper , I argue for three speciﬁc claims that bear on this larger thesis . 1 . Comparison involves a process of structural alignment and mapping that leads to learning via abstraction , rerepresentation , inference - projection , and difference - detection . 2 . Language interacts with structure - mapping in a mutual bootstrapping process . 3 . The same structure - mapping process operates over close , mundane comparisons as over more distant analogical comparisons . Further , close comparisons potentiate more distant , purely relational comparisons through progressive alignment . I am not saying that this system is the only way in which humans learn . We learn in many other ways too—for example , by association , by reinforcement , by automatization , and by statistical learning of sequences . But these capabilities are shared with other animals . My claim is that the positive feedback system between language and structure - mapping processes is what makes humans uniquely powerful learners . I begin with a brief review of the structure - mapping process and how it promotes learn - ing , with illustrative studies . Then , I describe how language—particularly relational lan - guage—interacts with analogical processing in children’s learning . Finally , I apply these ideas to an analysis of Carey’s account of the acquisition of the natural numbers , in which the interaction between language and analogical mapping plays a central role . 2 . Structure - mapping According to structure - mapping theory ( Gentner , 1983 ) , human comparison 1 involves a process of establishing a structural alignment between two represented situ - ations 2 and then projecting inferences . The commonalities and differences between two situations are found by determining the maximal structurally consistent alignment between the representations of the two situations ( Falkenhainer et al . , 1989 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993a ; Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ) . The mapping process is operationalized in the Structure Mapping Engine ( SME ; Falkenhainer et al . , 1989 ; Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ) . SME operates in a local - to - global fashion ( see Fig . 1 ) . It begins with a local , structurally blind free - for - all : All possible matches between individual elements of the two representations are found ( resulting in many inconsistencies ) . In stage 2 , these matches are combined into several structurally consistent clusters ( kernels ) ; ﬁnally , in stage 3 , some of the kernels ( a structurally consistent set ) are combined into an overall mapping , with the largest and most deeply connected kernels being favored in the merge process ( again , the systematicity principle ) . The resulting alignment consists of an explicit set of D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 753 correspondences between the elements of the two representations . As a natural out - come of the alignment process , candidate inferences are projected from the base to the target . These inferences are propositions connected to the common system in one analog , but not yet present in the other . The alignment process is guided by a set of tacit constraints that lead to structural consis - tency : ( a ) there must be one - to - one correspondence between the mapped elements in the tar - get and base , and ( b ) there must be parallel connectivity ( i . e . , if two predicates correspond , then their arguments must correspond as well ) . A further assumption is the systematicity principle : A bias to prefer interpretations in which the lower - order matches ( such as events ) are connected by higher - order constraining relations ( such as causal relations ) . The systema - ticity principle stems from a tacit preference for coherence and predictive power . Thus , when a given analogy affords more than one consistent interpretation , people prefer the more systematic interpretation , all else being equal . Further , if given two examples to com - pare , people tend to choose the one with deeper causal or explanatory structure as the base domain , and use it to structure the less systematic case ( Bowdle & Gentner , 1997 ) . Achieving a structural alignment sets the stage for four kinds of learning : 3 abstraction , contrast , inference - projection , and rerepresentation . In abstraction , the common system resulting from the alignment becomes more salient and more available for future use ( Fig . 2a ) . In contrast , alignable differences—differences that occupy the same role in the two systems—are highlighted ( Fig . 2a ) . Inference - projection occurs when one member of the pair is more complete in its structure than the other ; in this case , spontaneous candidate inferences will be made that enrich the less - complete item ( Fig . 2b ) . A further way that learning can occur is rerepresentation : If there is good reason to believe two ( nonidentical ) relations should match ( e . g . , a very good overall structural match ) , then one or both of the Fig . 1 . Overview of SME ( the Structure - mapping Engine ) showing how an initially blind , local - to - global process produces structurally consistent inferences . 754 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) nonmatching predicates may be rerepresented to permit the overall match . This paper focuses chieﬂy on the ﬁrst three processes . This basic structure - mapping framework is now widely shared among analogy research - ers ( Doumas , Hummel , & Sandhofer , 2008 ; French , 2002 ; Gentner , Holyoak , & Kokinov , 2001 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ; Kokinov & Petrov , 2001 ; Larkey & Love , 2003 ; Ramscar & Yarlett , 2003 ; see Gentner & Farbus , in press , and Kokinov & French , 2002 , for reviews ) . However , accounts differ as to how the process takes place—an issue crucial to understanding the role of analogical processing in development . There are three aspects of SME that make it particularly apt for modeling cognitive develop - mental bootstrapping . • In SME , the initial process is a symmetric structural alignment between the two repre - sentations . New inferences and alignable differences follow from this alignment . In contrast , many other models of analogical processing begin by choosing a structure in the base and projecting it to the target . This is an appealing intuition , and indeed it was my original proposal in the early 80s ( e . g . , Gentner , 1983 ) ; but it has a big draw - back for development : It requires a well - structured base analog , in which the key structure is clear , in order for experiential learning to take place . Such a process could not account for the speed of learning in young children and infants , who have not yet accumulated a store of clearly structured examples . Moreover , research shows that young children can gain from comparing things even when neither of them is yet well understood ( Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Son , Smith , & Goldstone , 2007 ) . SME’s process of structural alignment can capture the fact that a learner who aligns two partially understood exemplars can still gain insight from A B Fig . 2 . Comparison as structure - mapping . ( A ) Structural alignment highlights common structure ( which may then serve as an abstraction ) and alignable differences . ( B ) Structural alignment supports the projection of candi - date inferences . D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 755 deriving the common relational structure . 4 As Namy and Gentner ( 2002 ) put it , two sow’s ears—if properly aligned—can yield a silk purse . • A related advantage is that SME does not require the learner to know ( or even guess ) what the point of the comparison will be in advance . The process begins blind and local , but the ﬁnal alignment may reveal a new abstraction , highlight a key difference , or prompt a spontaneous new inference . This feature is crucial for its role as a boot - strapping process in cognitive development . Essentially , it allows a young learner to stumble into insight simply by having the natural curiosity to compare two things . • In SME , the same process operates for literal similarity as for analogy . In both cases , the initial local match stage ﬁnds all matches at every level , from object attributes to higher order relations , and further processes arrive at a global match based on structural consistency and systematicity . The difference between literal similarity and analogy is simply in the nature of the winning interpretation : If the ﬁnal common system is purely relational , then the comparison is an analogy ; if the common system is richer , containing many object attributes as well as relations , then it is a literal similarity match . This allows SME to capture the ﬁnding that progressive alignment from close to far matches can allow children to progress rap - idly , as discussed below . To reprise , there are at least four ways in which structural alignment furthers the acquisi - tion of knowledge . 1 . Highlighting and schema abstraction : Structural alignment results in extracting a common system from the two representations , thereby promoting the disembedding of hitherto implicit common structure , especially common relational systems ( Gent - ner , 1983 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993a ; Namy & Gentner , 2002 ) . 2 . Rerepresentation : If there is good reason to believe two ( nonidentical ) relations should match—for example , if an instructor has provided the analogy , or if the rest of the structure aligns well—then one or both of the nonmatching predicates may be rerepresented to permit the overall match ( Forbus et al . , 1995 ; Son et al . , 2007 ; Yan , Forbus , & Gentner , 2003 ) . Typically , this is done by minimal ascension ( Falkenhain - er et al . , 1989 ) : that is , by ﬁnding the most speciﬁc relation that is superordinate to the two nonmatching relations . Rerepresentation promotes uniform relational encod - ing , which ( as discussed later ) is crucial to expertise . 3 . Inference - projection : Structural alignment leads to candidate inferences that enrich one or the other representation ( Bowdle & Gentner , 1997 ; Clement & Gentner , 1991 ; Markman , 1997 ) . 4 . Difference - detection : Structural alignment leads naturally to the highlighting of alig - nable differences , fostering learning by contrast ( Gentner & Markman , 1994 ; Gent - ner & Sagi , 2006 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993b ; Ming , 2009 ) . I next discuss how structural alignment operates in children’s learning , focusing ﬁrst on highlighting and abstraction , and then on difference - detection . Next , I discuss the 756 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) contribution of language to this processing . Finally , I consider the joint operation of lan - guage and structure - mapping in the development of numerical cognition . 3 . Highlighting common relational structure An important implication of the process model outlined above is that the simple act of comparing two things promotes a structural alignment that renders the common structure more salient ( Gentner & Wolff , 1997 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993a ) . For example , adults list more commonalities when comparing pairs of similar concepts than when comparing pairs of dissimilar concepts ( Markman & Gentner , 1993b ; Tversky , 1977 ) , and the same is true for children ( Gelman , Raman , & Gentner , 2009 ) . Comparison favors noticing commonalities and increases the pair’s perceived similarity , and this is especially true for children ( Hammer , Diesendruck , Weinshall , & Hochstein , 2009 ) . Boroditsky ( 2007 ) found that comparison increased subjective similarity even when participants were asked to state differences . Comparison has also been shown to aid young children’s learning of cate - gories and schemas ( Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Hammer et al . , 2009 ; Liu , Golinkoff , & Sak , 2001 ; Namy & Gentner , 2002 ) and of conceptual regularities ( Chen & Klahr , 1999 ; Gentner , Levine , Dhillon , & Poltermann , 2009 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Opfer & Siegler , 2007 ; Thompson & Opfer , in press ) , even in infants ( Oakes & Ribar , 2005 ; Wang & Baillargeon , 2008 ) . Of course , a general highlighting of commonalities would be predicted by many theories of comparison , including Tversky’s ( 1977 ) independent - features theory . The more telling point is that connected relational structure is preferentially highlighted during comparison . For example , adults asked to match elements between two pictures are more likely to choose correspondences based on common relational role ( rather than matching similar objects ) if they have previously compared the two pictures ( Markman & Gentner , 1993a ) . A particu - larly convincing line of support for the claim that comparison preferentially highlights com - mon relational structure comes from studies by Gentner and Namy ( 1999 ; Namy & Gentner , 2002 ) . In these studies , 4 - year - old children were given a novel label ( e . g . , dax ) for a pictured object ( e . g . , a bicycle ) and asked to choose another dax from two alternatives : a perceptually similar ( same shape ) object from a different category ( e . g . , eyeglasses ) or a perceptually dis - similar match from the same high - level category ( e . g . , a skateboard—another vehicle ) . When children saw either standard ( bicycle or tricycle ) singly , they tended to choose the per - ceptual match , consistent with prior studies showing a shape bias in children’s word learning ( Baldwin , 1989 ; Imai , Gentner , & Uchida , 1994 ; Landau , Smith , & Jones , 1988 ) . However , children who compared the two standards ( e . g . , bicycle and tricycle ) were signiﬁcantly more likely to choose the relational match . This result cannot be predicted by a traditional account of similarity , in which comparison is viewed simply as an intersection of the properties of the two items . Because the two standards always shared the same salient perceptual proper - ties with each other as they did with the perceptual alternative , such an intersection process would have heightened the salience of the common perceptual properties and led to more perceptual responding rather than less . Instead , it appears that comparison selectively D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 757 favored relational commonalities such as ‘‘both can be ridden’’ and ‘‘both are used outside’’—consistent with the idea that comparison induces a focus on common relational structure . Further evidence that comparison highlights relational commonalties comes from res - earch in transfer of learning . Comparing two scenarios dramatically increases the likelihood that a principle common to two exemplars will be transferred to a future item ( relative to seeing just one exemplar , or even the same two items without encouragement to compare ) ( Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Gentner , Anggoro , & Klibanoff , in press ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . For example , Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner ( 1999 ) found that business school students who compared two negotiation scenarios were over twice as likely to trans - fer the negotiation strategy to an analogous test negotiation as were those who studied the same two scenarios separately . 3 . 1 . Structural alignment supports learning new relational patterns Taking advantage of this highlighting effect , Stella Christie and I have used comparison to teach children novel spatial conﬁgurations ( Christie & Gentner , in press ) . Christie and Gentner used the Comparison - versus - Solo word - extension task developed by Gentner and Namy ( 1999 ) to test whether structural alignment would help young children learn novel spatial conﬁgurations , such as ‘‘small thing above big thing , otherwise identical’’ ( Fig . 3 ) . Fig . 3 . Sample set from Christie and Gentner ( in press ) . In the Solo condition , children saw one of the standards and were given a novel label ( e . g . , blicket ) for it . In the Comparison condition , children saw both standards together , were told they were both blickets , and were encouraged to compare them . Both groups were then asked which alternative was also a blicket . 758 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) Children ( 3 - and 4 - year - olds ) were told the name ( say , blicket ) of either one standard ( Solo condition ) or two ( Comparison condition ) . In the Comparison condition , children were asked , ‘‘Do you see why these are both blickets ? ’’ in order to encourage comparison of the standards . Then children were asked which of two alternatives was a blicket . One alternative ( the Relational choice ) depicted two new objects in the same conﬁguration ; the other shared an exact object match with the standard ( or two object matches , in the Comparison condition ) . We expected this to be a challenging task , because the conﬁgurations were unfamiliar and because we know from prior research that object matches are extremely appealing to young children ( Chen , 1996 ; Gentner , 1988 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ) . Indeed , in the Solo condition , 3 - year - olds chose the relational match only 2 % of the time ( i . e . , they chose 98 % object matches ) . In sharp contrast , 3 - year - olds who compared two standards chose the relational alternative 57 % of the time . Importantly , a further study showed that this increase in relational responding did not occur when children saw the same two standards sequentially . Even when the standards were presented and named in imme - diate sequence , children’s word - extension performance did not differ signiﬁcantly from that in the Solo condition . Simply hearing that both standards were blickets was not enough ; children had to compare them to experience the relational insight . This leads to the sugges - tion that cross - situational learning may succeed in just those cases when alignment naturally occurs – such as when the items are highly similar or are ordered in a progressive alignment sequence , as described next . 3 . 2 . Progressive alignment and experiential learning Highlighting of common structure occurs to some degree for close matches as well as for ‘‘far’’ analogical matches . This means that even close matches can bootstrap learning in young children ( Claim 3 of the initial claims ) . Carrying out a concrete literal similarity match involves an alignment of relational structure , just as does analogy—the difference is that literal similarity also involves object matches . Such literal matches are a major learning route for young children , for two reasons : ( a ) their high overall similarity makes it likely that children will spontaneously compare them ; and ( b ) because the object matches support the relational matches , even young children are likely to arrive at the correct alignment . Close matches thus serve as ‘‘training wheels’’ for more challenging , purely relational matches ( Gentner et al . , in press ) . The following three studies illustrate this phenomenon of progressive alignment , whereby carrying out an easy literal match confers the beginnings of relational insight ( Gentner & Medina , 1998 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) : • Loewenstein and Gentner ( 2001 ) gave children ( aged 3½ ) a challenging search task modeled after DeLoache’s ( 1987 ) classic studies . Children watched the experimenter hide a toy in a small model room ( the Hiding room ) , and then tried to ﬁnd the toy hid - den ‘‘in the same place’’ in a second model room ( the Finding room ) . The Finding room contained the same type of furniture ( bed , table , etc . ) as the Hiding room , in the same conﬁguration , but was dissimilar in the speciﬁc shapes of its furniture , making D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 759 the mapping task difﬁcult for young children ( Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; DeLoache , 1987 ) . Before engaging in the task , all the children were shown the Hiding room along with another highly similar room ( identical except for color ) . Half the children saw the two rooms together and were encouraged to compare them ; the other half discussed each room separately . Children who had compared the rooms were signiﬁcantly more likely to correctly locate the toy in the Finding room than those who had experienced the rooms separately . Thus , comparing two nearly identical rooms facilitated children’s ability to map their common spatial relational structure to a relationally similar but surface - dissimilar target . • Haryu , Imai , and Okada ( in press ) taught 4 - year - old children a verb for a novel event and asked whether the children could extend the verb to other events . They found that children were initially limited to close overall matches ( i . e . , literally similar events ) : That is , they extended the verb only when the new event shared objects as well as action with the initial event , and failed when the new event shared only its action with the initial event . In a second study , Haryu et al . found that progressive alignment from close to far matches enabled a new group of 4 - year - olds to extend the verb based on sameness of action , without support from object similarity . As in the Loewenstein and Gentner study just described , high object similarity led children to make the correct correspondences , which supported the correct structural alignment . Achieving this alignment resulted in heightening the salience of the relational structure , which the children could then extend to an event that shared only that structure . These ﬁndings are consistent with the position that verb meanings are bootstrapped by comparing utterances in which verbs appear in very similar frames ( Childers , 2005 ; Childers & Paik , 2009 ; Childers & Tomasello , 2001 ; Pruden , Hirsh - Pasek , Shallcross , & Golinkoff , 2008 ; Piccin & Waxman , 2007 ; see Gentner & Namy , 2006 for longer discussion ) . • Thompson and Opfer ( in press ) used progressive alignment to help second - grade children overcome the logarithmic spacing tendency ( whereby children represent number lines with wider spacing between smaller numbers than between larger numbers ) . These children had correct linear representations for small numbers ( 0 – 10 and 0 – 100 ) but made logarithmic scales for 0 – 1 , 000 and above ( Siegler & Opfer , 2003 ) . In the progressive alignment condition , children ﬁrst compared differ - ent manifestations of the 0 – 100 scale , so they could see that a given number—say , 15—appears in the same place . Then they gave the child a series of pairwise com - parisons with larger scales : For example , placing the number 15 on the 0 – 100 line and placing the number 1 , 500 on the 1 – 10 , 000 line . In the posttest , children who had received this progressive alignment training showed linear representations on all three scales , outperforming children who had received all the same exemplars separately . In sum , progressive alignment can foster rapid learning . Early in learning , children are unlikely to spontaneously discover far analogies , but they naturally compare closely similar pairs that occur in close proximity ( Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . These close , highly 760 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) alignable matches can bootstrap young children to a more distant relational mapping . Pro - gressive alignment offers a route by which children’s ordinary experiential learning can gradually lead them to the discovery of analogical matches ( Gentner & Medina , 1998 ) . Indeed , I suspect that for young children seemingly mundane repetition offers moments of invisible learning that seed further abstractions . 3 . 3 . Structural alignment promotes abstraction in infants A particularly dramatic example of early learning was found by Marcus , Vijayan , Rao , and Vishton ( 1999 ) , using simple language - like stimuli . They found that 7 - month - old infants , after repeated exposure to like patterns of syllables , could learn to recognize that same pattern even with new syllables . For example , if the infants had heard several instances of an ABA pattern , and then were presented with new syllables in either the same ABA pattern or a new pattern ( say , ABB ) , they showed a novelty response to the new pat - tern . Kuehne , Gentner , and Forbus ( 2000 ) simulated this ‘‘infant rule - learning’’ using a model of learning by progressive alignment . This model , called SEQL ( Kuehne , Forbus , Gentner , & Quinn , 2000 ) , forms abstractions across a set of exemplars by making successive structural comparisons among exemplars ( using SME ) . 5 When a new exemplar is intro - duced , it is compared to the existing abstractions and ( if sufﬁciently similar ) assimilated into that abstraction , typically resulting in a slightly more abstract generalization . Exemplars that cannot be assimilated into any existing category ( because they are too dissimilar from the existing generalizations ) are maintained as separate exemplars . New exemplars are com - pared ﬁrst to existing abstractions , then to stored exemplars . If none of these exceeds the similarity threshold for combining representations , then the new item is stored as a separate exemplar . The SEQL simulation was able to learn the Marcus et al . language - like patterns within the same number of trials as the infants , without feedback , and without pretraining , in con - trast to connectionist simulations of the same phenomenon , which typically require exten - sive pretraining and ⁄ or many thousands of learning trials . Two aspects of SEQL’s performance seem apt in capturing the infants’ novelty response . First , when presented with new strings , it found those with different structure far less similar ( more novel ) than those with the same structure . Second , when confronted with a new structure , it made incorrect candidate inferences : For example , if it had received ABA study items and was given an ABB test exemplar , it used its ABA schema to infer that the third syllable in the test item should be an A—a prediction that was immediately contradicted . This contradicted infer - ence , we suggest , corresponds to a violation of expectations . Interestingly , although the simulation matched the infant response pattern quite closely , it did not do so on the basis of a fully abstract rule . On every run , the generalization retained some surface features . Yet because of the structural character of the matching process , SEQL still found new instances with matching structure to be much more similar than those with different structure . These ﬁndings raise the possibility that some of the seemingly abstract rules of grammar may in fact be simply near - abstractions resulting from progressive alignment . D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 761 4 . Structural alignment supports learning by contrast Another way that structural alignment promotes learning is that it highlights alignable differences ( Markman & Gentner , 1993b ) . When two things are compared , differences connected to their common structure stand forth to the learner , making these differences available for learning by contrast ( Gentner , Loewenstein , & Hung , 2007 ; Ming , 2009 ) . For example , Gelman et al . ( 2009 ) asked 4 - year - olds and adults to generate commonalities or differences for pairs of pictured objects . Both age groups generated both more commonali - ties and more alignable differences for high - similarity pairs ( e . g . , cat ⁄ dog ) than for low - sim - ilarity pairs ( e . g . , cat ⁄ fork ) . This is consistent with the claim that structural alignment potentiates noticing commonalities and alignable differences ; since high - similarity pairs yield larger aligned structures ( as well as being easier to align ) ( Lovett et al . , 2009 ) , they should generate more commonalities and more differences than low - similarity pairs . Interestingly , children who heard generic wording ( Gelman , 2003 ) generated deeper commonalities and differences than did those who heard speciﬁc language . Evidence that structural alignment can reveal alignable differences , and that this process can aid children’s learning , comes from a study conducted at the Chicago Children’s Museum ( Gentner et al . , 2009 ) . The main goal of the exhibit was for children and their fam - ilies to engage in a free - form construction of a model skyscraper together . Our instructional opportunity was extremely brief session prior to this activity . Yet by using the principles of alignment and contrast , we were able to achieve a fair degree of learning in roughly 2 min per child . Our goal was to convey a key principle of stable construction—namely , the idea of using a diagonal brace to stabilize a structure . 6 This insight is typically not obvious to children , as Haden and colleagues have shown ( Wilkerson , Benjamin , & Haden , 2007 ; see also Olson , 1970 ) . Our method utilized three principles from structure - mapping theory , already reviewed : ( a ) abstraction : analogical comparison reveals common structure ; ( b ) contrast : analogical comparison highlights alignable differences—differences along a common dimension or predicate that plays the same role in the common structure ; and ( c ) progressive alignment : alignment is easier and less error - prone when the items being compared are highly similar in their objects and parts as well as in their relational structure ; and such alignments potentiate further , more challenging alignments . Children aged 6 – 8 years were randomly assigned to either a High Alignability , a Low Alignability , or a No Training condition . In the ﬁrst two conditions , children were taken aside from their families just prior to the construction session and shown a pair of buildings . One building included a diagonal brace ( which gave the structure stability ) and the other had a horizontal crosspiece ( which provided no structural support ) . Children were asked ‘‘Which one is stronger , ’’ and then ( brieﬂy ) allowed to wiggle them ; this revealed that the diagonally braced building was hard to distort , whereas the other could be greatly distorted . When asked again after the demonstration , all but a few children chose the braced building as strongest . In the High Alignability condition , the two buildings differed only in this key feature of brace placement and were readily alignable otherwise . In the Low Alignability condition , 762 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) the buildings were perceptually different—one was wider than the other—and were there - fore harder to align . Although the Low Alignability pair had the same key difference as the High Alignability pair ( a diagonal brace vs . a horizontal crosspiece ) , we predicted that this difference was more likely to be noticed in the High Alignability condition . The third group ( the No training group ) simply proceeded directly to the construction session . After the roughly 13 - min unsupervised construction activity , children were taken aside for a brief transfer test . They were shown a partly constructed , unstable building . The exper - imenter wiggled the building to show that it was not stable and then asked the child to place a beam so as to improve it ‘‘so that it doesn’t wobble . ’’ The dependent measure was whether the child indicated a diagonal placement ( correct ) or a horizontal ⁄ vertical place - ment . The results showed a large effect of training : There were more diagonal placements among children who had received comparison training than among those who had not . More interestingly , children in the High Alignability condition ( M = 0 . 65 ) were more likely to make a diagonal placement than those in the Low Alignability condition ( M = 0 . 48 ) — evidence that structural alignment is crucial to identifying differences as well as commonalities . These ﬁndings show that even a single brief comparison experience can confer insight . They also add to evidence that the key to this insight is structural alignment . Children who received highly alignable models were more likely to derive the insight than those who did not . Thus , alignment is important not only for abstracting commonalities but also for detecting structurally relevant differences . 5 . Language ampliﬁes analogical processing to facilitate cognitive development So far the discussion has centered on how structural alignment fosters learning . We now turn to how language interacts with comparison processes in learning and development . In this account , I adopt the language as toolkit view ( Gentner , 2003 ; Gentner & Goldin - Meadow , 2003 ; see also Frank , Everett , Fedorenko , & Gibson , 2008 ) , rather than a strong linguistic determinism view . The toolkit view holds that acquiring a language provides new resources that augment human cognitive capacities , but it does not replace prelinguistic abilities . This view is consistent with Carey’s ( 1985a ) proposal that language provides ‘‘tools of wide application’’ that facilitate forming particular representations and carrying out particular processes . My colleagues and I have proposed four ways in which language interacts with analogical processes to foster learning and development ( Gentner , 2003 ; Gentner & Christie , in press ; Gentner & Namy , 2006 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . 1 . Common labels invite comparison and abstraction : By giving two things the same name , we invite children to compare them ; Gentner and Medina ( 1998 ) termed this symbolic juxtaposition . 2 . Naming promotes reiﬁcation : A linguistic label helps to preserve the abstraction derived from a comparison and to render it more accessible for future use D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 763 ( Gentner , 2003 ; Gentner et al . , in press ; Lupyan , Rakison , & McClelland , 2007 ; Son & Goldstone , 2005 ) . 3 . Naming promotes uniform relational encoding : An important consequence of reiﬁca - tion is the possibility of uniform relational encoding . Habitual use of a given rela - tional term makes it more likely that the relational constellation will be encoded in the same manner at different times and in different contexts . This is important , if we assume ( a ) that memory retrieval is based on matching the current contents of working memory with a stored representation and ( b ) that one reason relational trans - fer is generally quite poor ( compared to retrieval based on surface matches ) is that relations are encoded more variably than objects ( Forbus et al . , 1995 ; Gentner et al . , 2009 ) . Uniform relational encoding is a major route to reliable relational retrieval . 4 . Linguistic structure invites conceptual structure : Systematic structure in the language can invite correspondingly systematic conceptual structure ( Gentner , 2003 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . To see how these principles operate in concert with analogical processes , we turn to a speciﬁc example—the development of number . 7 To set the stage , I ﬁrst brieﬂy review the acquisition of the natural numbers and the evidence for language effects in number development . 5 . 1 . Language and the natural numbers Intuitively , it seems that mathematical structure is so compelling that all humans must inevitably recognize at least the natural numbers . As the English mathematician G . H . Hardy stated , ‘‘I believe that mathematical reality lies outside us , that our function is to discover or observe it , and that the theorems which we prove , and which we describe grandiloquently as our ‘creations , ’ are simply our notes of our observations’’ ( quoted in Dehaene , 1997 , p . 242 ) . Yet there is evidence that even simple numerical insight is not inevitable , and that human language is instrumental in developing the very notion of number . For example , Spelke and Tsivkin ( 2001 ) trained Russian - English bilinguals to solve either exact calcula - tion problems or approximation problems ( which do not depend on exact number ) . When trained in one language , they readily transferred the approximation techniques to the other language ; but when trained on exact calculation , their performance deteriorated sharply when asked to do similar problems in their other language . This pattern led Spelke and Tsivkin to suggest that language is implicated in the representation of exact large number . How does this unfold developmentally ? Two preverbal capacities enter into theories of numerical cognition : an analog magnitude system and a system for keeping track of small numbers of items . The analog magnitude system , shared broadly with other species , allows approximate judgments of quantity and is often modeled with an accumulator model ( Gallistel & Gelman , 1992 ; Meck & Church , 1983 ) . It is generally agreed to be language independent . The analog magnitude system operates over even very large quantities , but its accuracy is limited by Weber’s law : The discriminability between two amounts is a function of their ratio . Thus , inaccuracies occur for large magnitudes that are very close . The other 764 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) system is a capacity for keeping track of small numbers of items—part of our general capac - ity for representing mental models of the world ( e . g . , Carey , 2004 ; Spelke , 2003 ) . In contrast to the analog magnitude system , the object tracking system operates over discrete represen - tations and is capacity limited , to roughly three or four objects . Dramatic evidence that number language augments these preverbal capacities comes from studies of two Amazonian peoples whose languages—Piraha˜ and Munduruku´—lack a full counting system ( Everett , 2005 ; Frank et al . , 2008 ; Gordon , 2004 ; Pica , Lemer , Izard , & Dehaene , 2004 ) . In a ground - breaking study , Gordon ( 2004 ) investigated the Piraha˜ , whose language for numerical quantities appears to be ‘‘few , some , many . 8 ‘‘When Gordon gave a variety of numerical tasks to Piraha˜ participants , he found striking failures even on what seem to be very simple tasks . For example , he showed participants a number of small objects in a line and asked them to make a line of batteries ( a familiar object ) that was sim - ilar but orthogonal to the experimenter’s line . They were fairly accurate for amounts of three or fewer , but their performance became progressively more inaccurate as the number of objects increased . Similar results were obtained for the ‘‘nuts in a can’’ task , in which Gordon showed the participant an array of nuts , then put the nuts in a can and took them out one by one , each time asking participants whether there were still more nuts in the can . Again performance became more inaccurate the larger the number—the signature of the analog magnitude system . Frank et al . ( 2008 ) replicated Gordon’s results with the Piraha˜ and conﬁrmed that for many of Gordon’s tasks 9 the size of the error ﬁt Weber’s law . This basic pattern was replicated by Pica et al . ( 2004 ) , working with the Munduruku´ . All three of these studies found greater inaccuracies for larger numbers , suggesting reliance on a signature of the analog magnitude system . Pica et al . further found that Munduruku´ speakers were fairly comparable to French speakers on quantity estimation tasks , but greatly deﬁcient on tasks that require exact computation beyond two or three . It appears that language profoundly inﬂuences numerical cognition , consistent with the cognitive toolkit account . However , again consistent with the toolkit account , language does not replace the preverbal capacity for magnitude estimation . 5 . 2 . Acquiring the natural numbers Bertrand Russell ( 1920 ) memorably stated : ‘‘It must have required many ages to discover that a brace of pheasants and a couple of days were both instances of the number 2 : the degree of abstraction involved is far from easy . ’’ The aptness of this intuition can be seen in the difﬁculty children have in coming to understand the natural numbers . Children ﬁrst learn the count routine as a kind of language game , with only a vague connection to numbers ( Fuson , 1988 ) . At this stage , a child may be fairly proﬁcient at counting from 1 to 10 , while at the same time showing little or no insight into cardinality . If a typical young 2 year old is asked , ‘‘How many marbles are there ? ’’ she will count the marbles ; but having counted cor - rectly to four , she is unable to report that there are four marbles . If pressed to say how many , she may simply execute the count routine again . Likewise , if asked to ‘‘show me three marbles’’ a young 2 year old will produce three , ﬁve , or eight marbles ( Fuson , 1988 ; Wynn , 1992 ) . D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 765 Gradually children learn to bind the numerals in the count routine to actual numerical quantities , beginning with very small setsizes . Children’s ﬁrst forays into the mapping between number and set - size are highly context speciﬁc ( Mix , 2002 ; Mix , Sandhofer , & Baroody , 2005 ) , as is often the case in early learning ( Gentner & Medina , 1998 ) . For exam - ple , Mix ( 2002 ) noted that at 20 months her son Spencer could reliably bring from another room exactly two treats for the family’s two dogs ; but when asked to go get ‘‘train treats’’ for his two toy trains , he failed . His understanding of ‘‘twoness’’ was highly context - bound , just as Russell might have predicted . However , children whose language contains a count list do not have to discover this abstraction by themselves ; they are given a royal road to abstrac - tion when they learn the count terms . As Mix et al . ( 2005 ) suggest , hearing different sets labeled with the same count word—say , ‘‘two’’—prompts the child to compare the sets and to notice their common setsize . This is consistent with our proposal that common labels invite comparison and abstraction ( Gentner & Medina , 1998 ) . 5 . 3 . Ordinal language invites ordinal numerical structure So far we have considered how language interacts with relational processes to foster com - parison and abstraction . We now turn to the fourth kind of interaction : that linguistic struc - ture invites conceptual structure . We take up Susan Carey’s proposal that an analogical mapping of ordinal structure from number language to quantity is instrumental in bootstrap - ping the cardinality principle—perhaps the clearest example of the power of systematic lan - guage to confer systematic conceptual structure . 10 Carey’s ( 2004 , 2009 ) account agrees with those discussed above in assuming that number language is initially learned as a routine , well before the young children understand the exact mapping to particular quantities . Gradually , the child learns to attach number words to very small set sizes , which can be held by the object - tracking system . The learning is at ﬁrst slow and piecemeal—even after binding two to sets of cardinality two , weeks or months may ensue before the child realizes that three refers to a set with three items ( Carey , 2004 ; Mix , 2002 ; Mix et al . , 2005 ) . But once a child reaches an understanding of roughly three or four , the pattern changes ; the child rapidly binds the succeeding numbers to their cardinali - ties . At this point , Carey suggests , the child has begun to see the analogy between the increase in the count sequence and the increase in set size . The binding of three to the quantity three is a momentous connection for the parallel - increase analogy . At that point , as shown in Fig . 4 , the child has two examples of coordina - tion between further - by - one in count and greater - by - one in set size . Having noticed that this pattern of parallel increase holds for 1 ﬁ 2 and 2 ﬁ 3 . the child wonders whether it will continue to hold . Lo and behold , it does : Counting on one more from ‘‘3’’ gives ‘‘4 , ’’ which indeed corresponds to the set size one greater than { 3 } , and so on for larger and larger num - bers . Eventually , I suggest , the two parallel relations are rerepresented as SUCCESSOR relations applying to different aspects of number : that is , SUCCESSOR [ ( count ( n ) , count ( n + 1 ) ] and SUCCESSOR [ ( setsize ( n ) , setsize ( n + 1 ) ] . At this point the analogy has yielded an extended relational abstraction . 766 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 6 . Structure - mapping in language acquisition I have focused here on ways in which language acquisition contributes to analogical abil - ity . However , the reverse interaction is equally important . Structure - mapping is a central mechanism by which humans acquire language ( Gentner & Namy , 2006 ) . There is evidence that comparison contributes to learning word meanings for nouns ( Gentner & Namy , 1999 , 2004 ; Liu et al . , 2001 ) , adjectives ( Sandhofer & Smith , 2001 ; Waxman & Klibanoff , 2000 ) , prepositions ( Casasola , 2005 ) , verbs ( Childers , 2005 ; Childers & Paik , in press ; Haryu et al . , in press ; Piccin & Waxman , 2007 ; Pruden et al . , 2008 ) , and even mental concepts ( Baldwin & Saylor , 2005 ) . There is also evidence that structure - mapping contributes to the acquisition of grammar ( Casenhiser & Goldberg , 2005 ; Fischer , 1996 ; Kuehne , Gentner et al . , 2000 ; Marcus et al . , 1999 Tomasello , 2000 ) . All this suggests a highly productive mutual causa - tion between analogy and language . 7 . General discussion The twin mysteries of ‘‘Why we’re so smart’’ and ‘‘How do children progress so fast ? ’’ are inextricably connected . My answer to both is the mutual facilitation between relational A B Fig . 4 . The analogy linking count sequence and numerical order [ based on Carey’s ( 2001 , 2004 , 2009 ) pro - posal ] . ( A ) When the child has ‘‘2’’ connected to set size 2 , and ‘‘3’’ to set size 3 , this makes two instances of the same relational pattern—permitting an analogy . This analogy invites the inference ( not shown here ) that the same relational pattern will hold for ‘‘4’’ : that is , that its set size will be one greater than the set size of ‘‘3 . ’’ ( B ) The analogy also invites the abstraction IMPLIES { FURTHER - BY - ONE ( count list ) ﬁ GREATER - BY - ONE ( setsize ) } , suggesting that the sequence continues indeﬁnitely . D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 767 ability and language . I began this paper by reviewing evidence that analogical processes are fundamental to human cognition and learning . I argued that comparison engages a process of structure - mapping that begins with structural alignment , and that achieving a structural alignment potentiates learning in at least four interrelated ways : ( a ) abstraction : the common system resulting from the alignment becomes more salient and more available for future use ; ( b ) rerepresentation can occur , generally to a more abstract relation that captures both analogs ; ( c ) inference - projection : spontaneous candidate inferences are made from a well - structured representation to one that is less complete ; and ( d ) difference - detection : alignable differences—differences that occupy the same role in the two systems—are highlighted , fostering learning by contrast . I reviewed evidence for these kinds of compari - son - driven learning in children’s development . I also reviewed a process model , SME , which shows how new learning can be bootstrapped from initially partial understandings . The second great force in our intellectual development is language . Although humans are born with high relational ability , interaction with language is necessary to realize the full potential of our analogical capacity ( Gentner , 2003 ; Gentner & Christie , 2008 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . Language—especially relational language—forms a positive feedback system with relational cognition that bootstraps human learning . This position is broadly consistent with Susan Carey’s ( 2009 ) account of how Quinean bootstrapping supports con - ceptual change in children . I discussed four ways in which language can interact with ana - logical processing : ( a ) common labels invite comparison and abstraction between the things named ; ( b ) labeling a concept ( including one derived via comparison ) reiﬁes it , giving it more stability ; ( c ) naming a concept also promotes uniform relational encoding , which increases the probability of relational retrieval ; and ( d ) linguistic structure can invite corre - sponding conceptual structure . I reviewed several kinds of evidence for this claim that lan - guage bootstraps analogical processing and thereby promotes children’s learning . 7 . 1 . Some challenges Before concluding this paper , I want to deal with some potential challenges . First , is structure - mapping claimed to be the only important human learning process ? The answer is no ; for example , associative learning and reinforcement learning are extremely important for humans , though widely shared with other species . Analogy also cannot take the place of higher level processes like causal reasoning , means - ends analysis , or logical deduction . However , I suggest that analogical processes are important in acquiring the relational knowledge that supports such reasoning . People often derive a causal model by analogy with another example , even though the actual process of causal reasoning is separate from the process of analogical mapping ( Colhoun & Gentner , 2009 ) . The second challenge is whether it is relational ability in particular that distinguishes humans from other species . Studies of our closest relatives , chimpanzees , have shown that they possess some degree of relational ability ( Haun & Call , 2009 ) . However , a recent wide - ranging review concluded that the common denominator in tasks in which chimpan - zees fall severely behind humans is the need for relational representation and matching ( Penn et al . , 2008 ) . A telling point is that although chimpanzees can learn and use numbers 768 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) up to eight or nine ( Boysen & Berntson , 1989 ) , there is no evidence that they ever experience the analogical insight that comes to preschool children—that is , that the parallel - increase pattern occurs over and over . 11 Studies of chimpanzees are also relevant to the other half of the present thesis—the claim that relational language contributes to analogical ability . There is evidence that language - trained chimpanzees show considerably greater relational insight than those without language training ( Oden , Thompson & Premack , 2001 ; Premack , 1983 ; see Gentner & Christie , 2008 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . The third challenge is to explain why , given this powerful mechanism , children do not learn even faster . One major reason is that children fail to notice many potential comparisons . Children are likely to miss potential analogies if they lack sufﬁcient relational knowledge to align the analogs , or if the potential analogs are not highly surface - similar or do not occur in close juxtaposition . Even adults often fail to retrieve potential analogs , and adults have the beneﬁt of a large relational vocabulary ( with the attendant beneﬁt of uniform relational encoding ) to aid in their relational retrieval . Thus , if two highly alignable events happen to be juxtaposed , the child can compare and abstract ; but if they are not sufﬁciently similar , or not sufﬁciently close in time , then nothing will be gained . Interestingly , from this account it follows that sequences of close , highly alignable exemplars should be the ideal learning situation . Such a situation exists in many infant habituation studies—suggesting that these studies are about what babies can learn as well as about what they know . 8 . Conclusion The ability to represent and reason about relational structure lies at the core of human cognitive powers . Aligning and mapping on the basis of shared relational structure is a general learning process that allows young humans to form abstract ideas from ordinary experience , and this ability is massively ampliﬁed by language and culture . Notes 1 . A simpler form of comparison may occur for very simple stimuli such as color swatches . 2 . The theory assumes structured representations in which the elements are connected by labeled relations , and higher order relations ( such as causal relations ) connect ﬁrst - order statements ( see Falkenhainer , Forbus , & Gentner , 1989 ; Markman , 1999 ) . 3 . Analogy is also a major contributor to another form of knowledge change , namely , restructuring —altering the domain structure of one domain in terms of the other . This is a true case of conceptual change in Carey’s ( 1985b ) sense . However , true restructuring almost certainly requires more other processes in addition to analogy ( Dunbar , 1995 ) . D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 769 4 . The claim that comparison processing—whether of similarity , analogy or meta - phor—is symmetric at the outset may seem far - fetched , given the strong directionality of analogy and metaphor ( Ortony , 1979 ) . However , there is evidence that comparison processes are symmetric in the initial stages of processing , even for highly directional comparisons ( Gentner & Wolff , 1997 ; Wolff & Gentner , 2000 , unpublished data ) . 5 . The current version of this system is called SAGE . 6 . The underlying principle here is that the triangle is the only stable polygon : That is , in a triangle , one cannot change the shape without changing the length of at least one of the sides . 7 . There is also considerable evidence that acquiring language augments children’s ability to represent and reason about space ( Bowerman & Choi , 2003 ; Dessalegn & Landau , 2008 ; Hermer - Vasquez , Spelke , & Katsnelson , 1999 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) and other domains ( see Bowerman & Levinson , 2001 ; Gentner & Goldin - Meadow , 2003 ) . For discussions of how spatial language and spatial analogizing interact in the spatial domain , see S . Christie , D . Gentner , & S . Goldin - Meadow ( unpublished data ) . 8 . Although this system was originally thought to be a ‘‘one , two , many’’ system , Frank et al . ( 2008 ) found that when given the naming task in reverse ( 10 – 1 ) order , the Piraha˜ assigned these terms differently : For example , the putative ‘‘one’’ term ( ho´i ) was used for one , two , or three items , and the putative ‘‘two’’ term ( hoi ) was used frequently for six , seven , or eight items . 9 . Interestingly , both Gordon ( 2004 ) and Frank et al . ( 2008 ) found high accuracy even for larger numbers ( 8 or 9 ) when the task was to make a line parallel to the original line—possibly because this task can be accomplished by one - to - one correspondence and does not require a sense of exact number . 10 . See Spelke ( 2003 ) for a related but distinct view of how language supports numerical cognition . For opposing views , see Rips , Bloomﬁeld , and Asmuth ( 2008 ) and Galli - stel and Gelman ( 2000 ) . 11 . It must be noted that this difference could stem from speciﬁc aspects of the way chimpanzees are taught language . Chimpanzees do not receive the extensive evi - dence ( from counting routines , etc . ) that inculcates the count sequence ; and , whereas children typically hear numbers like ‘‘50 , ’’ ‘‘100 , ’’ and above , chimpanzees may not receive evidence that the count string goes on indeﬁnitely . Acknowledgments This research was supported by NSF SLC grant SBE - 0541957 , the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center ( SILC ) . Development of the structure - mapping theory and simulation was supported by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research , award number N00014 - 02 - 10078 . I thank Stella Christie , Nina Simms , and others in the Cognition and Language Lab at Northwestern University for discussions of the ideas , and Benjamin Dionysus and Katherine James for technical assistance . 770 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) References Baldwin , D . A . ( 1989 ) . Priorities in children’s expectations about object label reference : Form over color . Child Development , 60 , 1289 – 1306 . Baldwin , D . A . , & Saylor , M . M . ( 2005 ) . Language promotes structural alignment in the acquisition of mentalis - tic concepts . In J . A . Astington & J . A . Baird ( Eds . ) , Why language matters for theory of mind ( pp . 123 – 143 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Blades , M . , & Cooke , Z . ( 1994 ) . Young children’s ability to understand a model as a spatial representation . Journal of Genetic Psychology , 155 , 201 – 218 . Boroditsky , L . ( 2007 ) . Comparison and the development of knowledge . Cognition , 102 ( 1 ) , 118 – 128 . Bowdle , B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1997 ) . Informativity and asymmetry in comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 34 ( 3 ) , 244 – 286 . Bowerman , M . , & Choi , S . ( 2003 ) . Space under construction : Language - speciﬁc spatial categorization in ﬁrst language acquisition . In D . Gentner & S . Goldin - Meadow ( Eds . ) , Language in mind : Advances in the study of language and cognition ( pp . 387 – 428 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Bowerman , M . , & Levinson , S . ( Eds . ) ( 2001 ) . Language acquisition and conceptual development [ preface , intro - duction ] . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Boysen , S . T . , & Berntson , G . G . ( 1989 ) . Numerical competence in a chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes ) . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 103 ( 1 ) , 23 – 31 . Carey , S . ( 1985a ) . Are children fundamentally different kinds of thinkers and learners than adults ? In S . F . Chipman , J . W . Segal & R . Glaser ( Eds . ) , Thinking and learning skills : Current research and open questions , Vol . 2 ( pp . 485 – 517 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Carey , S . ( 1985b ) . Conceptual change in childhood . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Carey , S . ( 2001 ) . Whorf versus continuity theorists : bringing data to bear on the debate . In M . Bowerman & S . C . Levinson ( Eds . ) , Language acquisition and conceptual development ( pp . 185 – 214 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Carey , S . ( 2004 ) . Bootstrapping and the origin of concepts . Daedalus . Winter , 133 ( 1 ) , 59 – 68 . Carey , S . ( 2009 ) . The origin of concepts . New York : Oxford University Press . Casasola , M . ( 2005 ) . Can language do the driving ? The effect of linguistic input on infants’ categorization of support spatial relations . Developmental Psychology , 41 , 183 – 192 . Casenhiser , D . , & Goldberg , A . E . ( 2005 ) . Fast mapping of a phrasal form and meaning . Developmental Science , 8 , 500 – 508 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limitations on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 15 ( 6 ) , 1147 – 1156 . Chen , Z . ( 1996 ) . Children’s analogical problem solving : The effects of superﬁcial , structural , and procedural similarity . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 62 , 410 – 431 . Chen , Z . , & Klahr , D . ( 1999 ) . All other things being equal : Acquisition and transfer of the Control of Variables Strategy . Child Development , 70 ( 5 ) , 1098 – 1120 . Childers , J . B . ( 2005 ) . Is comparison useful for verb learning ? Paper presented at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development , Atlanta , GA . Childers , J . B . , & Paik , J . H . ( 2009 ) . Korean - and English - speaking children use cross - situational information to learn novel predicate terms . Journal of Child Language . Childers , J . B . , & Tomasello , M . ( 2001 ) . The role of pronouns in young children’s acquisition of the English transitive construction . Developmental Psychology , 37 , 739 – 748 . Christie , S . , & Gentner , D . ( in press ) . Where hypotheses come from : Learning new relations by structural alignment . Journal of Cognition and Development . Clement , C . , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . Systematicity as a selection constraint in analogical mapping . Cognitive Science , 15 , 89 – 132 . Colhoun , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2009 ) . Inference processes in causal analogies . In B . Kokinov , K . Holyoak , & D . Gentner ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the second international conference on analogy ( pp . 82 – 96 ) . Soﬁa , Bulgaria : NBU Press . D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 771 Dehaene , S . ( 1997 ) . The number sense : How the mind creates mathematics . New York : Oxford University Press . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1987 ) . Rapid change in the symbolic functioning of very young children . Science , 238 , 1556 – 1557 . Dessalegn , B . , & Landau , B . ( 2008 ) . More than meets the eye : The role of language in binding and maintaining feature conjunctions . Psychological Science , 19 , 189 – 195 . Doumas , L . A . A . , Hummel , J . E . , & Sandhofer , C . M . ( 2008 ) . A theory of the discovery and predication of rela - tional concepts . Psychological Review , 115 , 1 – 43 . Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason : Scientiﬁc reasoning in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365 – 395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Everett , D . ( 2005 ) . Cultural constraints on grammar and cognition in Piraha ˜ : Another look at the design features of human language . Current Anthropology , 76 , 621 – 646 . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The structure - mapping engine : Algorithm and examples . Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 41 , 1 – 63 . Fisher , C . ( 1996 ) . Structural limits on verb mapping : The role of analogy in children’s interpretations of sentences . Cognitive Psychology , 31 , 41 – 81 . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1995 ) . MAC ⁄ FAC : A model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science , 19 , 141 – 205 . Frank , M . C . , Everett , D . L . , Fedorenko , E . , & Gibson , E . ( 2008 ) . Number as a cognitive technology : Evidence from Piraha ˜ language and cognition . Cognition , 108 , 819 – 824 . French , R . M . ( 2002 ) . The computational modeling of analogy - making . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 6 ( 5 ) , 200 – 205 . Fuson , K . C . ( 1988 ) . Children’s counting and concepts of number . New York : Springer Verlag . Gallistel , C . R . , & Gelman , R . ( 1992 ) . Preverbal and verbal counting and computation . Cognition , 44 , 43 – 74 . Gallistel , C . R . , & Gelman , R . ( 2000 ) . Non - verbal numerical cognition : From reals to integers . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 4 , 59 – 65 . Gelman , S . A . ( 2003 ) . The essential child : Origins of essentialism in everyday thought . New York : Oxford University Press . Gelman , S . , Raman , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2009 ) . Effects of language and similarity on comparison processing . Language Learning and Development , 5 , 147 – 171 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1988 ) . Metaphor as structure mapping : The relational shift . Child Development , 59 , 47 – 59 . Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Why we’re so smart . In D . Gentner & S . Goldin - Meadow ( Eds . ) , Language in mind : Advances in the study of language and thought ( pp . 195 – 235 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . , Anggoro , F . , & Klibanoff , R . ( in press ) . Children’s learning of relational categories . Child Development . Gentner , D . , & Christie , S . ( 2008 ) . Relational language supports relational cognition in humans and apes . Behaviorial and Brain Sciences , 31 , 137 – 183 . Gentner , D . , & Christie , S . ( in press ) . Why we’re so smart : Mutual bootstrapping between language and rela - tional cognition . Language and Cognition . Gentner , D . , & Forbus , K . ( in press ) . Computational models of analogy . WIREs Cognitive Science . Gentner , D . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2003 ) . Whither Whorf . In D . Gentner & S . Goldin - Meadow ( Eds . ) , Language in mind : Advances in the study of language and thought ( pp . 3 – 14 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Kokinov , B . ( Eds . ) ( 2001 ) . The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . , Levine , S . , Dhillon , S . , & Poltermann , A . ( 2009 ) . Using structural alignment to facilitate learning of spatial concepts in an informal setting . In B . Kokinor , K . Holyoak , & D . Gentner ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the second analogy conference ( pp . 175 – 182 ) . Soﬁa , Bulgaria : NBU Press . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Hung , B . ( 2007 ) . Comparison facilitates children’s learning of names for parts . Journal of Cognition and Development , 8 , 285 – 307 . 772 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1994 ) . Structural alignment in comparison : No difference without similarity . Psychological Science , 5 ( 3 ) , 152 – 158 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 – 56 . Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1998 ) . Similarity and the development of rules . Cognition , 65 , 263 – 297 . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . ( 1999 ) . Comparison in the development of categories . Cognitive Development , 14 , 487 – 513 . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . L . ( 2004 ) . The role of comparison in children’s early word learning . In D . G . Hall & S . R . Waxman ( Eds . ) , Weaving a lexicon ( pp . 533 – 568 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of similarity . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Brynes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on thought and language : Interrelations in development ( pp . 225 – 277 ) . London : Cam - bridge University Press . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . L . ( 2006 ) . Analogical processes in language learning . Current Directions in Psycholo - gical Science , 15 ( 6 ) , 297 – 301 . Gentner , D . , & Sagi , E . ( 2006 ) . Does ‘‘different’’ imply a difference ? A comparison of two tasks . In R . Sun & N . Miyake ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the twenty - eighth annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 261 – 266 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 – 300 . Gentner , D . , & Wolff , P . ( 1997 ) . Alignment in the processing of metaphor . Journal of Memory and Language , 37 , 331 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Gordon , P . ( 2004 ) . Numerical cognition without words : Evidence from Amazonia . Science , 306 , 406 – 499 . Hammer , R . , Diesendruck , G . , Weinshall , D . , & Hochstein , S . ( 2009 ) . The development of category learning strategies : What makes the difference ? Cognition , 112 ( 2009 ) , 105 – 119 . Haryu , E . , Imai , M . , & Okada , H . ( in press ) . Object similarity bootstraps young children to action - based verb extensions . Child Development . Haun , D . B . M . , & Call , J . ( 2009 ) . Great apes’ capacities to recognize relational similarity . Cognition , 110 ( 2009 ) , 147 – 159 . Hermer - Vasquez , L . , Spelke , E . S . , & Katsnelson , A . S . ( 1999 ) . Sources of ﬂexibility in human cognition : Dual - task studies of space and language . Cognitive Psychology , 39 , 3 – 36 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributed representations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 104 , 427 – 466 . Imai , M . , Gentner , D . , & Uchida , N . ( 1994 ) . Children’s theories of word meaning : The role of shape similarity in early acquisition . Cognitive Development , 9 , 45 – 75 . Kokinov , B . , & French , R . M . ( 2002 ) . Computational models of analogy - making . In L . Nadel ( Ed . ) , Encyclope - dia of cognitive science ( pp . 113 – 118 ) . London : Macmillan . Kokinov , B . N . , & Petrov , A . A . ( 2001 ) . Integrating memory and reasoning in analogy - making : The AMBR model . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cogni - tive science ( pp . 161 – 196 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 – 2822 . Kuehne , S . E . , Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Quinn , B . ( 2000 ) . SEQL : Category learning as progressive abstraction using structure mapping . In L . R . Gleitman & A . K . Joshi ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the twenty - second annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 770 – 775 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Kuehne , S . E . , Gentner , D . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 2000 ) . Modeling infant learning via symbolic structural alignment . In L . R . Gleitman & A . K . Joshi ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the twenty - second annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society , ( pp . 286 – 291 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 773 Landau , B . , Smith , L . B . , & Jones , S . S . ( 1988 ) . The importance of shape in early lexical learning . Cognitive Development , 3 , 299 – 321 . Larkey , L . B . , & Love , B . C . ( 2003 ) . CAB : Connectionist Analogy Builder . Cognitive Science , 27 , 781 – 794 . Liu , J . , Golinkoff , R . M . , & Sak , K . ( 2001 ) . One cow does not an animal make ! Children can extend novel words at the superordinate level . Child Development , 72 , 1674 – 1694 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Spatial mapping in preschoolers : Close comparisons facilitate far mappings . Journal of Cognition and Development , 2 ( 2 ) , 189 – 219 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . Relational language and the development of relational mapping . Cognitive Psychology , 50 , 315 – 353 . Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1999 ) . Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in negotiation . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 6 ( 4 ) , 586 – 597 . Lovett , A . , Gentner , D . , Forbus , K . , & Sagi , E . ( 2009 ) . Using analogical mapping to simulate time - course phenomena in perceptual similarity . Cognitive Systems Research , 10 , 216 – 228 . Lupyan , G . , Rakison , D . H . , & McClelland , J . L . ( 2007 ) . Language is not just for talking : Redundant labels facilitate learning of novel categories . Psychological Science , 18 , 1077 – 1083 . Marcus , G . , Vijayan , S . , Rao , S . , & Vishton , P . M . ( 1999 ) . Rule learning by seven - month - old infants . Science , 283 , 77 – 80 . Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Constraints on analogical inference . Cognitive Science , 21 ( 4 ) , 373 – 418 . Markman , A . B . ( 1999 ) . Knowledge representation . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993a ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 – 467 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993b ) . Splitting the differences : A structural alignment view of similarity . Journal of Memory and Language , 32 , 517 – 535 . Meck , W . H . , & Church , R . M . ( 1983 ) . A mode control model of counting and timing processes . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavioral Processes , 9 , 320 – 334 . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 ( 2 ) , 254 – 278 . Ming , N . ( 2009 ) . Analogies vs . contrasts : A comparison of their learning beneﬁts . In B . Kokinov , K . Holyoak , & D . Gentner ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the second international conference on analogy . ( pp . 338 – 347 ) . Soﬁa , Bulgaria : NBU Press . Mix , K . S . ( 2002 ) . The construction of number concepts . Cognitive Development , 17 , 1345 – 1363 . Mix , K . S . , Sandhofer , C . M . , & Baroody , A . J . ( 2005 ) Number words and number concepts : The interplay of verbal and nonverbal quantiﬁcation in early childhood . In R . V . Kail ( Ed . ) , Advances in child development and behavior , Vol . 33 ( pp . 305 – 346 ) . New York : Academic Press . Namy , L . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Making a silk purse out of two sow’s ears : Young children’s use of comparison in category learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 131 , 5 – 15 . Oakes , L . M . , & Ribar , R . J . ( 2005 ) . A comparison of infants’ categorization in paired and successive presentation familiarization tasks . Infancy , 7 , 85 – 98 . Oden , D . L . , Thompson , R . K . R . , & Premack , D . ( 2001 ) . Can an ape reason analogically ? Comprehension and production of analogical problems by Sarah , a chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes ) . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from Cognitive Science ( pp . 471 – 498 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Olson , D . R . ( 1970 ) . Language and thought : Aspects of a cognitive theory of semantics . Psychological Review , 77 , 257 – 273 . Opfer , J . E . , & Siegler , R . S . ( 2007 ) . Representational change and children’s numerical estimation . Cognitive Psychology , 55 , 169 – 195 . Ortony , A . ( 1979 ) . Beyond literal similarity . Psychological Review , 86 , 161 – 180 . Penn , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Povinelli , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Darwin’s mistake : Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds . Brain and Behavioral Sciences , 31 , 109 – 178 . 774 D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) Pica , P . , Lemer , C . , Izard , V . , & Dehaene , S . ( 2004 ) . Exact and approximate arithmetic in an Amazonian indigene group . Science , 306 , 499 – 503 . Piccin , T . B . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 2007 ) . Why nouns trump verbs in word learning : New evidence from children and adults in the Human Simulation Paradigm . Language Learning and Development , 3 , 295 – 323 . Premack , D . ( 1983 ) . The codes of man and beasts . Behavioral & Brain Sciences , 6 , 125 – 167 . Pruden , S . , Hirsh - Pasek , K . , Shallcross , W . L . , & Golinkoff , R . M . ( 2008 ) . Foundations of verb learning : Comparison helps infants abstract event components . In H . Chan , H . Jacob & E . Kapia ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 32nd annual Boston University conference on language development , 2 , 402 – 414 . Somerville , MA : Cascadilla Press . Ramscar , M . , & Yarlett , D . ( 2003 ) . Semantic grounding in models of analogy : an environmental approach . Cognitive Science , 27 , 41 – 71 . Richland , L . E . , Morrison , R . G . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Children’s development of analogical reasoning : Insights from scene analogy problems . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 94 , 249 – 271 . Rips , L . J . , Bloomﬁeld , A . , & Asmuth , J . ( 2008 ) . From numerical concepts to concepts of number . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 31 , 623 – 642 . Russell , B . ( 1920 ) . Introduction to mathematical philosophy . New York : The Macmillan Co . Sandhofer , C . M . , & Smith , L . B . ( 2001 ) . Why children learn color and size words so differently : Evidence from adults’ learning of artiﬁcial terms . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 130 , 600 – 620 . Siegler , R . S . , & Opfer , J . E . ( 2003 ) . The development of numerical estimation : Evidence for multiple represen - tations of numerical quantity . Psychological Science , 14 , 237 – 243 . Son , J . Y . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2005 ) . Relational words as handles : They bring along baggage . Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , ( pp . 2050 – 2055 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Son , J . Y . , Smith , L . B . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2007 ) . Re - representation using labels : Comparison or replacement ? Proceedings of the 29th annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Nashville , TN : Cognitive Science Society . Spelke , E . S . ( 2003 ) . What makes us smart ? Core knowledge and natural language . In D . Gentner & S . Goldin - Meadow ( Eds . ) , Language in mind : Advances in the study of language and cognition ( pp . 277 – 312 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Spelke , E . S . , & Tsivkin , S . ( 2001 ) . Initial knowledge and conceptual change : space and number . In M . Bowerman & S . C . Levinson ( Eds . ) , Language acquisition and conceptual development ( pp . 70 – 100 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Thompson , R . K . R . , & Oden , D . L . ( 1996 ) . A profound disparity revisited : Perception and judgment of abstract identity relations by chimpanzees , human infants , and monkeys . Behavioural Processes , 35 , 149 – 161 . Thompson , C . A . , & Opfer , J . E . ( in press ) . How 15 hundred is like 15 cherries : Effect of progressive alignment on representational changes in numerical cognition . Child Development . Tversky , A . ( 1977 ) . Features of similarity . Psychological Review , 84 ( 4 ) , 327 – 352 . Wang , S . , & Baillargeon , R . ( 2008 ) . Can infants be ‘‘taught’’ to attend to a new physical variable in an event category ? The case of height in covering events . Cognitive Psychology , 56 ( 2008 ) , 284 – 326 . Waxman , S . R . , & Klibanoff , R . S . ( 2000 ) . The role of comparison in the extension of novel adjectives . Developmental Psychology , 36 , 571 – 581 . Wilkerson , E . , Benjamin , N . J . , & Haden , C . A . ( 2007 ) . Building understanding in under construction : Can preparatory activities support collaborative learning ? Paper presented at the Meeting of the Cognitive Development Society . Wolff , P . , & Gentner , D . ( 2000 ) . Evidence for role - neutral initial processing of metaphors . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 , 529 – 541 . Wynn , K . ( 1992 ) . Children’s acquisition of the number words and the counting system . Cognitive Psychology , 24 , 220 – 251 . Yan , J . , Forbus , K . , & Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . A theory of rerepresentation in analogical matching . In R . Alterman & D . Kirsh ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the twenty - ﬁfth annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 1265 – 1270 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . D . Gentner ⁄ Cognitive Science 34 ( 2010 ) 775