Butler University Digital Commons @ Butler University LAS Faculty Book Reviews College of Liberal Arts & Sciences 11 - 1 - 2008 Flat Earth : The History of an Infamous Idea by Christine Garwood , Thomas Dunne Books 2008 Michael Zimmerman Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . butler . edu / las _ bookreviews This Book Review is brought to you for free and open access by the College of Liberal Arts & Sciences at Digital Commons @ Butler University . It has been accepted for inclusion in LAS Faculty Book Reviews by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Butler University . For more information , please contact omacisaa @ butler . edu . Recommended Citation Zimmerman , Michael , " Flat Earth : The History of an Infamous Idea by Christine Garwood , Thomas Dunne Books 2008 " ( 2008 ) . LAS Faculty Book Reviews . 11 . http : / / digitalcommons . butler . edu / las _ bookreviews / 11 Because Ideas Matter . . . The faculty and staff of Butler University ' s College of Liberal Arts and Sciences presents Recommended Readings Flat Earth : The History of an Infamous Idea by Christine Garwood , Thomas Dunne Books 2008 Reviewed by Michael Zimmerman Garwood , historian of science at the Open University in England , has produced a thoroughly enjoyable and engaging first book . She examines the belief that the world is flat from a wide array of perspectives and makes a number of important points . She demonstrates quite convincingly , for example , that , contrary to what most people believe , the ancients knew the world was not flat : " the earth has been widely believed to be a globe since the fifth century BC . " Indeed , growing acceptance of a flat earth occurred in the 19th century and was largely promoted by Biblical literalists . Garwood does an impressive job of comparing those professing this belief with modern day creationists . She also makes the case that it is all but impossible to argue effectively with true believers - Alfred Russel Wallace , co - founder of the theory of natural selection with Charles Darwin , ended up in years of litigation after he accepted a challenge to demonstrate that there is curvature to the surface of the earth . Modern believers assert that the space program is a " big , giant hoax . " When , on the 25th anniversary of the first manned landing on the moon , a 1994 Washington Post poll estimated that approximately 20 million Americans thought the landing was staged on earth , it is obvious that some outrageous beliefs still hold sway . Garwood is respectful throughout , analyzing the philosophical underpinnings of those who have doubted the earth ' s rotundity . - Michael Zimmerman is Dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences and professor of biology at Butler University .