RESEARCH ARTICLE A free - boundary model of a motile cell explains turning behavior Masoud Nickaeen 1 , Igor L . Novak 1 , Stephanie Pulford 2 , Aaron Rumack 3 , Jamie Brandon 4 , Boris M . Slepchenko 1 , Alex Mogilner 5 * 1 RichardD . Berlin Center for Cell Analysis and Modeling , Departmentof Cell Biology , University of Connecticut Health Center , Farmington , CT , United States of America , 2 Center for Engineering Learning & Teaching , Universityof Washington , Seattle , WA , United States of America , 3 Departmentof Computer Science , CornellUniversity , Ithaca , NY , United States of America , 4 Departmentof Mathematics , Adrian College , Adrian , MI , United States of America , 5 CourantInstitute and Departmentof Biology , New York University , New York , NY , United States of America * mogilner @ cims . nyu . edu Abstract To understand shapes and movements of cells undergoing lamellipodial motility , we sys - tematically explore minimal free - boundary models of actin - myosin contractility consisting of the force - balance and myosin transport equations . The models account for isotropic con - traction proportional to myosin density , viscous stresses in the actin network , and constant - strength viscous - like adhesion . The contraction generates a spatially graded centripetal actin flow , which in turn reinforces the contraction via myosin redistribution and causes retraction of the lamellipodial boundary . Actin protrusion at the boundary counters the retraction , and the balance of the protrusion and retraction shapes the lamellipodium . The model analysis shows that initiation of motility critically depends on three dimensionless parameter combinations , which represent myosin - dependent contractility , a characteristic viscosity - adhesion length , and a rate of actin protrusion . When the contractility is sufficiently strong , cells break symmetry and move steadily along either straight or circular trajectories , and the motile behavior is sensitive to conditions at the cell boundary . Scanning of a model parameter space shows that the contractile mechanism of motility supports robust cell turn - ing in conditions where short viscosity - adhesion lengths and fast protrusion cause an accu - mulation of myosin in a small region at the cell rear , destabilizing the axial symmetry of a moving cell . Author summary To understand shapes and movements of simple motile cells , we systematically explore minimal models describing a cell as a two - dimensional actin - myosin gel with a free boundary . The models account for actin - myosin contraction balanced by viscous stresses in the actin gel and uniform adhesion . The myosin contraction causes the lamellipodial boundary to retract . Actin protrusion at the boundary counters the retraction , and the bal - ance of protrusion and retraction shapes the cell . The models reproduce a variety of motile PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 1 / 22 a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111 OPEN ACCESS Citation : NickaeenM , Novak IL , PulfordS , Rumack A , BrandonJ , Slepchenko BM , et al . ( 2017 ) A free - boundarymodel of a motile cell explains turning behavior . PLoS ComputBiol 13 ( 11 ) : e1005862 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 Editor : MartinMeier - Schellersheim , National Institutesof Health , UNITEDSTATES Received : April 7 , 2017 Accepted : October 31 , 2017 Published : November14 , 2017 Copyright : © 2017 Nickaeenet al . This is an open access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproductionin any medium , provided the original authorand source are credited . Data Availability Statement : Numerical codes used tosolve the model equationsare in the file RotatingCell . zip at http : / / cims . nyu . edu / ~ mogilner / codes . html . Funding : This work was supported by the National Institutesof Health grants : 2 P41 RR013186 - 15 from the National Centerfor Research Resources and 9 P41 GM103313 - 15 and U54 GM64346 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences . AR and JB weresupported by the National Science Foundationgrant DMS1460967 . AM was supportedby the National Institutes ofHealth grant shapes observed experimentally . The analysis shows that the mechanical state of a cell depends on a small number of parameters . We find that when the contractility is suffi - ciently strong , cells break symmetry and move steadily along either straight or circular tra - jectory . Scanning model parameters shows that the contractile mechanism of motility supports robust cell turning behavior in conditions where deformable actin gel and fast protrusion destabilize the axial symmetry of a moving cell . Introduction Cell motility is a fundamental biological phenomenon that underlies many physiological pro - cesses in health and disease , including wound healing , embryogenesis , immune response , and metastatic spread of cancer cells [ 1 ] , to name a few . Understanding the full complexity of cell motility , exacerbated by complex biochemical regulation , poses enormous challenges . One of them is multiple , sometimes redundant , sometimes complementary or even competing , mech - anisms of motility [ 2 ] . Many researchers hold the view , which we share , that the way to face this challenge is to study all these mechanisms thoroughly , and then proceed with a more holistic approach . One of the best studied types of motility is the lamellipodial motility on flat , hard and adhe - sive surfaces [ 3 ] , in which broad and flat motile appendages – lamellipodia – spread around the cell body . Biochemical regulation plays an important role in the lamellipodial dynamics , but minimal mechanisms of the lamellipodial motility , such as growth and spreading of a flat actin network wrapped in plasma membrane and myosin - powered contraction of this network , are mechanical in nature [ 3 ] . While many cell types exhibit the lamellipodial motility , one model system , the fish epithelial keratocyte cell , contributed very prominently to the understanding of lamellipodial mechanics , due to its large lamellipodium , streamlined for rapid and steady locomotion [ 4 , 5 ] . There are at least three distinct mechanical states of this system . The cells can be in a stationary symmetric state , with a ring - like lamellipodium around the cell body [ 6 ] . Spontane - ously , even if slowly , the cells self - polarize , so that the lamellipodium retracts at the prospective rear and takes on a fan - like shape , upon which the cell starts crawling with a constant speed and steady shape [ 6 , 7 ] . Often , cell’s trajectory changes from straight to circular – the cells start turning [ 8 ] . Mechanics of keratocyte movements has been studied extensively [ 4 , 5 , 7 , 9 ] . Two principal mechanisms enable the keratocyte motility . First , polymerization of the polarized actin net - work at the front pushes forward the membrane at the leading edge , stretching the membrane and creating membrane tension at the sides ; the membrane then snaps at the rear and pulls forward the depolymerizing actin network [ 10 ] . Second , contractile forces generated by myo - sin , lagging behind in a moving cell , hold the cell sides and retract the rear , allowing the front to protrude [ 5 ] . This and stick - slip dynamics of adhesions were recently shown to generate the cell self - polarization [ 7 ] . One of the fundamental questions of cell motility concerns dynamics of the cell shape : how do the actin - myosin mechanics in the cell bulk interact with actin growth and membrane mechanics at the boundary to shape , stabilize and propel the cell ? This question requires math - ematical insight , and in the last two decades , keratocyte mechanics were extensively modeled mathematically . The mathematical problem arising in these models is generally challenging , given that the motile cell is a free - boundary object , in which deformations of the cell shape A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 2 / 22 GM068952 and by US ArmyResearch Office grant W911NF - 17 - 1 - 0417 . The funders had no role in study design , data collectionand analysis , decision to publish , or preparationofthe manuscript . Competinginterests : The authorshave declared that no competinginterestsexist . depend on , and in turn affect , the actin - myosin movements and forces inside the cell . The his - tory of the free - boundary cell modeling was recently reviewed in [ 11 ] . To reduce the mathematical complexity of the problem , one can ignore the mechanics in the lateral cross section and consider a simplified one - dimensional ( 1D ) model , essentially rep - resenting the cell as a 1D strip of an actin - myosin gel . Mathematical models of this kind [ 12 – 15 ] provided valuable insight into conditions for symmetry breaking , motility initiation , and stabilization of the anterior - posterior length of the moving cell . Modeling the front - to - rear cell mechanics is not the only 1D approach : one can also disregard the bulk of the actin - myosin network and hypothesize that the essential dynamics is concentrated at the very edge of the cell ; this allows one to approximate the cell shape by a 1D dynamic contour , which protrudes or retracts locally according to some set of rules . A number of such models [ 16 – 19 ] revealed that a small set of the boundary deformation rules can generate an unexpected variety of dynamic cell shapes mimicking a number of observed motile cell types . The first such model was a Graded Radial Extension mathematical model [ 20 ] , which integrated experimental data and posited that actin polymerization at the lamellipodial boundary results in protrusion of the cell front and sides in the direction locally normal to the boundary , with spatially graded rate maximal at the center of the leading edge and decreasing towards the sides . A more accurate mathematical rendering of the lamellipodia is achieved via a full 2D free - boundary model . Its general concept , first introduced in [ 21 ] , is as follows . Actin - myosin con - traction in the bulk of the 2D lamellipodium generates a centripetal actin flow that redistrib - utes myosin powering the contraction ; this feedback results in a spatially graded flow that tends to retract the lamellipodial boundary . Actin growth at the boundary results in protrusion countering the retraction , and the balance of protrusion and retraction shapes the lamellipo - dium , feeding back to the actin - myosin contraction in the bulk of the lamellipodium . The question is : what kind of cell shapes and movements does this model predict ? To address this question , 2D models of actin - myosin mechanics were employed to repro - duce steady - state shapes and speed , as well as self - polarization , of a motile cell [ 5 , 7 , 22 ] , but a number of important issues have not been adequately explored , including turning behavior and dependence of the motile behavior on the model parameters and boundary conditions . In this paper , we resolve these issues by simulating numerically a minimal free - boundary model described in the next section . We find that 1 ) cells are stationary when contractility is weak , 2 ) when contractility is strong , cells break symmetry and move steadily along either straight or circular trajectory , 3 ) cells exhibit turning behavior when fast protrusion destabilizes the axial symmetry of a planar myosin distribution or cell shape , and 4 ) motile behavior of a cell is sen - sitive to conditions of force balance at the cell boundary . Models and methods Mechanics plays a dominant role in keratocyte motility , while the role of biochemical regula - tion is less clear , and is probably of less importance [ 3 ] ; thus we focus on mechanical formula - tion . Moreover , at least for the self - polarization phenomenon , the contractile mechanism of motility is dominant compared to the graded actin polymerization [ 7 ] , and so we concentrate on the myosin generated forces and movements , and for simplicity assume that the actin growth is uniform around the cell boundary . The model consists of force - balance and myosin transport equations , Z D X U þ s r X M (cid:0) x U ¼ 0 @ T M ¼ r X (cid:1) ð D eff r X M (cid:0) U eff M Þ ð 1 Þ for the velocity of actin flow U ( X , t ) and myosin concentration M ( X , t ) defined locally for X 2 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 3 / 22 O ( t ) , where O ( t ) is a moving 2D domain representing cell geometry . Note , that all model equa - tions are formulated in the lab frame of references . We discuss the validity of approximating the flat lamellipodium as a 2D domain in the thin - cell limit in the Supplemental Material . The model is similar to an actomyosin dynamic model suggested in [ 5 , 23 ] , and to active gel models of the soft matter physics [ 24 ] . In the force balance equation , the first term describes the force due to passive viscous stresses in the deforming actin network , where η is the effective actin viscosity . The form of this term corresponds to the viscous shear stress in the Stokes equation of hydrodynamics ; we emphasize that the actin polymer mesh is compressible ( fluid cytoplasm can be squeezed easily into the dorsal direction in the cell [ 23 ] ) , and so there is no incompressi - bility condition . In the Supplemental Material , we discuss the conditions under which the effects of hydrostatic pressure and Darcy flow are negligible in the lamellipodium . Because the movement of the cell takes place on the slow time scales , we do not consider viscoelastic effects [ 23 ] . Also , as was done in many modeling studies [ 25 ] , we ignore for simplicity subtle and complex interplay between bulk and shear viscous stresses . The second term in the force - balance equation describes the divergence of the myosin con - tractile stress . As in [ 5 , 23 , 24 ] , we assume the stress to be isotropic and proportional to the myosin density , with σ denoting the force per unit of myosin density . The third term describes the effective viscous drag arising from creeping movement of F - actin relative to a substrate , mediated by dynamic adhesions and characterized by the viscous drag coefficient ξ . The linear dependence of this drag on actin velocity is a standard assumption made in cell mechanics models ; for some cases , this assumption was verified experimentally . The second of Eq ( 1 ) describes myosin transport . Kinetics of myosin can be interpreted in terms of transitions between two states , a state of free myosin diffusing in the cytoplasm and a state in which myosin is bound to the actin network [ 23 ] ; clusters of the bound myosin both contract the actin network and move with it . For the transitions occurring on a fast time scale , the overall transport is well approximated by a diffusion - advection equation , and we assume this limit in our model here . Additional discussion of the myosin transport is in the Supple - mental Material . For low viscosity and slow diffusion , however , using U as an advection veloc - ity and constant diffusion coefficients D results in singular solutions , in which M and U develop Dirac - delta singularities . The effect is reminiscent of the collapsing phenomenon in a 2D version of the Keller - Segel chemotaxis model [ 26 ] , which is mathematically similar to our mechanical model . The singular solutions are obviously unrealistic , given that myosin mole - cules have a finite size . The excluded volume effect can be taken into account by introducing effective velocities [ 27 ] , U eff = U ( 1− M / M max , u ) , which approach zero when M ! M max , u But in a free - boundary problem , the actual maximum of myosin concentrations may significantly exceed M max , u . This is because in motile solutions , myosin accumulates at the rear of the cell , where it is also swept forward by a moving boundary ; mathematically , this effect originates from the Rankine - Hugoniot boundary condition described in the next paragraph . Thus , the effect of molecular crowding on myosin velocity should generally be written as : U eff = U ( 1− M / M max , u ) , if M < M max , u , and zero otherwise . Because diffusion is also affected by the crowding , the effective diffusivity in Eq ( 1 ) is D eff = D ( 1− M / M max , d ) , with a value of the cut - off M max , d that exceeds the actual maximal densities of myosin [ 28 ] . Overall , using a tighter myosin cut - off for advection , M max , u < M max , d , helps avoiding the singularities and numerical instabilities associated with them in a wide range of model parameters . We also explored the possibility that the anti - crowding effects come from an attenuation of the myosin stress when the myosin density is too high , described in detail in the Supplemental Material . One of our goals is to investigate how boundary conditions , specified in a free boundary problem at a moving cell boundary @ O ( t ) , affect the model behavior . We explore two types of conditions for the force - balance equation . One of them is the zero actin velocity at the A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 4 / 22 boundary , U | @ O ( t ) = 0 , which assumes a very narrow band of very strong adhesions near the cell edge that rapidly adjust their positions to the instantaneous location of the boundary . Many experimental observations indicate the presence of such a band . We will term this version of the model a zero - velocity ( ZV ) model . Alternatively , in the absence of the sticky band , the force balance is reflected by a zero stress condition , introduced earlier in [ 5 , 23 ] : n (cid:1) ð Z r X U þ M ^ I Þj @ O ð t Þ ¼ 0 , where ^ I is the unit tensor and n is the outward normal . This assumes that the membrane tension is small relative to the contractile and viscous stresses . We will call this variant of the model a zero - stress ( ZS ) model . Both versions of the model share a no - flux Rankine - Hugoniot boundary condition for myosin , n (cid:1) ( − D eff r X M + ( U eff – V f ) M ) | @ O ( t ) = 0 , where V f is the local boundary velocity . Kinematics of the boundary is modeled by a superposition of locally normal protrusion powered by actin growth and retraction stemming from the centripetal actin flow : V f = V p n + U | @ O ( t ) . The approximation of the speed of normal protrusion V p is somewhat different in the two versions of the model , as described below . In the ZS model , V p is defined uniformly along the boundary but depends on the cell size : V p = V 0 ( A 0 / A ) − K ( A − A 0 ( A 0 / A ) n ) , where A = | O ( t ) | , A 0 = | O ( 0 ) | , and n = 2 . The first term repre - sents the rate of membrane displacement due to actin growth with a rate constant V 0 . The cell - size dependence of this term reflects an effective drop in actin concentration in an expanding cell , but this term alone would still produce an infinite cell expansion for large V 0 . Realistically , cell stretching is limited by membrane tension , which is represented in V p by − KA term ; this is consistent with previous experiments and modeling [ 4 , 5 , 29 ] . The term / ( A 0 / A ) n reflects cytoplasmic resistance to contractile forces and thus excludes collapsing of the cell in the model with small V 0 . Mathematically , the quadratic nonlinearity in the area dependence appears to be the lowest nonlinearity preventing the cell collapse in the ZS model . Overall , the second term in V p , combining the effects of membrane tension and cytoplasm resistance to contraction , plays an area - preserving role ( with the parameter K describing sensitivity of V p to changes in A ) . Indeed , if A < A 0 , the membrane tension decreases , whereas actin polymeriza - tion accelerates and the resistance to further contraction rapidly grows . On the other hand , if A > A 0 , the membrane tension increases rapidly stopping the actin growth . For the ZV model , where U | @ O ( t ) = 0 and V f = V p n , there must be a nontrivial variation of V p along the boundary , since for a uniform V p , the cell centroid is always stationary . Based on experimental observations and models showing that myosin can impede protrusion by bun - dling actin filaments at the boundary [ 18 ] , we hypothesized that the actin growth rate is a decreasing function of local myosin density . Correspondingly , we use the following expression for V p in the ZV model , V p = V 0 ( A 0 / A ) ( 1 + M ) | @ O ( t ) / M 0 ) −1 − K ( A − A 0 ) , where M 0 is a threshold beyond which myosin inhibits actin growth almost entirely . The expression has essentially the same dependence on cell area as in the ZS model , except that for the ZV model , n = 0 proved to be sufficient for preserving the target area . We discuss derivation of the mathematical expression for V p from the force balance at the lamellipodial boundary and provide additional explanations in the Supplemental Material . Nondimensionalization To nondimensionalize the model , we use the following set of units . The length unit L is defined as a characteristic linear size of the cell with a target area , L ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ A 0 = p p ( e . g . , if this cell is a cir - cle , L is its radius ) . We further choose L 2 D −1 and M 0 as the units of time and myosin concen - tration , respectively . Then the dimensionless variables , differential operator , and current and target cell areas are , respectively , t = TDL −2 , x = X L −1 , u = U LD −1 , m = M / M 0 , r (cid:17) r x = L r X , | A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 5 / 22 ω | = | O | L − 2 and a 0 = A 0 L − 2 . Correspondingly , Eqs ( 1 ) takes the form , @ t m ¼ r (cid:1) ð d eff r m (cid:0) u eff m Þ a D u þ b r m (cid:0) u ¼ 0 ; ð 2 Þ where u eff = u ( 1− m / m max , u ) , if m < m max , u , and zero otherwise , and d eff = 1− m / m max , d . Eqs ( 2 ) include two dimensionless parameters : the dimensionless viscosity - adhesion length parameter α = η L − 2 ξ − 1 and the myosin contractility constant β = σM 0 ( Dξ ) − 1 . Note that the mechanical effect of localized myosin contraction spreads on the length scale ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ Z = x p , so the viscosity - adhe - sion length parameter α is the ratio of the length scale of the mechanical action to the cell size . The first of Eqs ( 2 ) , a diffusion - advection equation for myosin , is subject to the mass - conserv - ing zero - flux boundary condition , n (cid:1) ( − d eff r m + ( u eff − v f ) m ) | @ ω ( t ) = 0 , yielding an additional dimensionless parameter m tot ¼ ∬ o ð t Þ m (cid:1) d j o j . The dimensionless boundary conditions for the force - balance equation ( the second of Eqs ( 2 ) ) in the ZV and ZS models are u | @ ω ( t ) = 0 and n (cid:1) ð a r u þ b m ^ I Þj @ o ð t Þ ¼ 0 , respectively . The dimensionless boundary velocity equation is v f = v p n + u | @ ω ( t ) . In this equation , the dimensionless rate of membrane displacement caused by the actin polymerization and area preserving factors is v p = v 0 a 0 / a − k ( a − a 0 ( a 0 / a ) n ) , where v 0 = V 0 L / D and a = | ω ( t ) | . For the ZS model , n = 2 , whereas for the ZV model , n = 0 and there is the additional dependence on m in the first term : v p = v 0 a 0 / ( a ( 1 + m | @ ω ( t ) ) ) − k ( a − a 0 ) . Note that varying parameter k = KL 3 D −1 is equivalent to rescaling the actin polymerization constant v 0 . Also , because the myosin contractility constant β enters Eq ( 2 ) in combination with m , varying β is similar to rescaling μ tot ; in fact , β could be formally excluded from the ZS model by employing a different concentration unit , and the same is true for the ZV model defined in a fixed geometry , see section Cell becomes motile when myosin contractility is higher than critical . We therefore focus in our study on the role played by three essentially indepen - dent model parameters : α , μ tot and v 0 . Initial conditions Steady dynamics of a motile cell were explored by solving Eqs ( 2 ) in domains with free bound - aries . Note that even though the force - balance equation does not involve time derivatives in and of itself , the coupled system ( 2 ) constitutes an initial - value problem and one must specify initial conditions for both variables and the domain , m ( x , 0 ) , u ( x , 0 ) , and ω ( 0 ) . To elucidate processes leading to instability of an initially symmetric stationary state of a motile cell and its transitioning to motility , we used initial conditions based on a stationary steady state of the ZV model in a circular geometry ω ( 0 ) = { ( x , y ) : x 2 + y 2 (cid:20) 1 } ( such that a 0 = | ω ( 0 ) | = π ) : u ( x , 0 ) = 0 , m ( x , 0 ) = ( μ tot / | ω | ) ( 1− gx ) . Note the linear horizontal gradient , added to a steady - state uniform myosin distribution to probe stability of a stationary state ; the gradient steepness g was assigned values from ( 0 , 1 ] . Note also that given the symmetry of ω ( 0 ) , the defi - nition of m ( x , 0 ) ensures that the solution has a prescribed μ tot . The initial conditions specified above were used in solving both ZV and ZS models throughout this study . Numerical methods Numerical solutions of the ZV and ZS models were obtained using a generalized version of a mass - conservative algorithm originally developed for solving parabolic equations in moving domains with known kinematics [ 30 ] . The method has been shown to converge in space with an order close to 2 in L 2 - norm and ensures exact local mass conservation . The latter is achieved by employing finite - volume spatial discretization [ 31 ] and natural neighbor interpolation [ 32 ] . A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 6 / 22 The algorithm was developed for modeling cell motility in Virtual Cell ( VCell ) , a general - pur - pose computational framework for modeling cellular phenomena in realistic geometries [ 33 ] . To be applicable to a free - boundary problem with the models described above , the original method had to be augmented in several aspects . First , the boundary kinematics is generally not known a priori but rather needs to be computed on the basis of the rates that are functions of state variables—the actin velocities , in the ZS model , and the myosin concentrations , in the ZV model . To approximate values of the variables at the points of the boundary where the bound - ary velocities need to be evaluated , we used the second - order bilinear extrapolation . Once the boundary velocities are obtained , the cell boundary is advanced using a robust front - tracking technique implemented in FronTier , a freely available C + + library for tracking interfaces in two and three dimensions [ 34 ] . Accuracy of the algorithm coupled to FronTier was evaluated using several benchmark examples , one of which was based on the models of this study . The tests have shown that the accuracy of the original algorithm is preserved , if in addition to the second - order extrapolation , the front - tracking routine is also at least second - order accurate . Second , the system ( 2 ) , consisting of the coupled parabolic and elliptic equations , is nonlin - ear . Indeed , the equations are coupled via the advection term of the parabolic equation and myosin - dependent stress term in the elliptic equation , as well as through the boundary condi - tions at the moving boundary ; also , the effective transport parameters are functions of the myosin concentration . To solve the system , we implemented a segregated solution strategy [ 31 ] , in which equations are solved one at a time and nonlinear terms are treated by fixed - point iterations . One advantage of the segregated solver is that it prevents the matrix of a line - arized system from becoming very large even with very fine computational grids . The system was advanced in time using an implicit backward Euler time discretization . For each time step , the segregated method performs fixed - point iterations in two steps . First , we solve for actin velocities using fixed myosin concentrations from the previous itera - tion . The obtained velocities are then used as a fixed advection field at the next step , where we solve the linearized transport equation for myosin concentrations . Note that at this step , the values of the myosin concentrations in the discretized time derivative correspond to the previ - ous time step , not to the previous fixed - point iteration . At the end of the iteration , maximum absolute differences of two consecutive iterates are checked for convergence . If they are within prescribed tolerances , the iterations stop and the solver reports the velocities and myosin con - centrations as the current time step values , otherwise it proceeds to the next iteration and con - tinues until the iterations converge or an imposed maximum for the number of iterations is exceeded . The algorithm is illustrated below for one time step by the mathematical pseudo - code , where m k and u k are the variable values at the k th time step , m k þ 1 n and u k þ 1 n are the n th iterates for the ( k + 1 ) th time step , MaxNumIters is the maximum allowed number of iterations , and k(cid:1)k 1 denotes the L 1 - norm . set m k þ 1 1 ¼ m k and u k þ 1 1 ¼ u k for n = 1 : MaxNumIters - solve a D u k þ 1 n þ 1 þ b r m k þ 1 n (cid:0) u k þ 1 n þ 1 ¼ 0 to get u k þ 1 n þ 1 - evaluate u eff and d eff using u k þ 1 n þ 1 and m k þ 1 n - solve ð m k þ 1 n þ 1 (cid:0) m k Þ = D t ¼ r (cid:1) ð d eff r m k þ 1 n þ 1 (cid:0) u eff m k þ 1 n þ 1 Þ to get m k þ 1 n þ 1 - calculate absolute errors k u k þ 1 n þ 1 (cid:0) u k þ 1 n k 1 and k m k þ 1 n þ 1 (cid:0) m k þ 1 n k 1 - if solution converged , break the loop , else m k þ 1 n ¼ m k þ 1 n þ 1 , u k þ 1 n ¼ u k þ 1 n þ 1 end of segregated loop if n < MaxNumIters m k þ 1 ¼ m k þ 1 n þ 1 , u k þ 1 ¼ u k þ 1 n þ 1 , else iterations are stagnant . A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 7 / 22 The segregated solver was validated against a coupled nonlinear solver implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics [ 35 ] . Good agreement was observed , with relative differences below 0 . 3 % . The computations were performed with the following solution parameters : the mesh sizes h varied between 0 . 05 and 0 . 16 , whereas the time step was Δ t = ch with c varying from 0 . 0002 to 0 . 025 ( fast - moving cells required smaller mesh sizes and time steps ) , the tolerance for the dif - ferences of consecutive iterates was 1E - 10 , and the maximum allowed number of iterations , set at 35 , was never reached . Results The ZV and ZS models were used to simulate transitions of a motile cell from stationary to motile state . For this , as described in section Initial conditions , an initially radially symmetric cell was perturbed by superimposing a linear gradient over a uniform distribution of myosin . The emerged steady states fall into three asymptotically stable mechanical modes . For some parameter values , the cell , after a finite displacement , comes to a stop , with a final radially sym - metric shape and myosin distribution , indicating the stability of the stationary state ( Fig 1 A ) . For other parameters , the cell irreversibly breaks symmetry , both in terms of its shape , distri - bution of myosin , and actin velocity field , and either acquires unidirectional motility ( Fig 1 B ) or locks in a rotational mode ( Fig 1 C ) . To analyze conditions for transitioning to different types of motility , we scanned the actin growth constant ( v 0 ) and the contractility parameter ( μ tot ) for two values of viscosity - adhesion length parameter , α = 0 . 5 and α = 1 . The values of other model parameters , β = 5 , a 0 = π , k = 1 . 5 , m max , u = 15 and m max , d = 125 , were fixed in all simulations ; the choice of these values ensures that the corresponding section of parameter space is representative of various states . The results of parameter scanning are presented in Fig 2 showing cell mechanical states as functions of the model parameters . It should be noted that distinguishing between translational and rotational modes is some - times ambiguous , particularly for the states near the borders between the corresponding regions in the parameters space . For example , some states of the ZS model shown in the dia - grams of Fig 2 as translating were in fact only ‘piecewise unidirectional’ , as the cell in those states would on occasion change its direction . Moreover , in some states in the ZS model , iden - tified as translations , also neighboring the rotations in the diagrams of Fig 2 , the cell actually changes its direction but very gradually , so the state could be a rotation with a very long radius . As a practical rule , we labeled states as rotations only if the radius of rotation of the cell cen - troid was comparable to , or less than , the linear size of the cell . Below we discuss in detail the conditions required for the straight and rotational motility in our models and the underlying mechanisms . Cell becomes motile when myosin contractility is higher than critical The results in Fig 2 show that cells break symmetry and transition to motility when parameter μ tot exceeds a threshold . The threshold behavior originates from a positive feedback between the actin flow and myosin gradients : the contractile forces , generating the centripetal flow of myosin , are proportional to the myosin gradients , which , in turn , are reinforced by the advec - tion of myosin . This positive feedback results in steep myosin gradients and , potentially , sym - metry breaking , but below a critical value of μ tot , these gradients are prevented by dissipative viscous forces and myosin diffusion , and the cell remains stationary and radially symmetric . Above the critical value of μ tot , steep gradients of myosin are developed and the radially sym - metric stationary state becomes unstable . While kinematics of a free boundary plays a key role A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 8 / 22 in the symmetry breaking and transitioning to motility in both models , the loss of symmetry in the ZV model also occurs in fixed domains . In the next section , we discuss effects of the boundary conditions for actin flow on solutions in domains with fixed and free boundaries . Linear stability analysis can be used to estimate critical values of μ tot in a simplified ZV model in a fixed domain . Consider a 1D ZV model on the fixed - length segment @ ω = { x 2 ( 0 , 1 ) } in the limit m max , 1 , m max , 2 ! 1 , so that d eff = 1 and u eff = u ( x , t ) . Then , Eqs ( 2 ) become α u xx + β m x − u = 0 , m t = m xx − ( um ) x . In this model , varying the contractility constant β is equivalent to rescaling μ tot . Indeed , β could be excluded altogether by renormalizing m : ~ m ¼ b m , but in what follows parameter β is kept for generality . The symmetric steady state is characterized by uni - form myosin distribution and absence of actin flow , u = 0 , m = μ tot . Its stability is probed by imposing small perturbations , δ u ( x , t ) = δ u 0 exp ( λ t + iqx ) , δ m ( x , t ) = δ m 0 exp ( λ t + iqx ) with 0 < δ u 0 < < 1 , 0 < δ m 0 < < 1 and q = π , 2 π , . . . , so that u = δ u and m = μ tot + δ m . The perturbations sat - isfy the linearized system of differential equations , αδ u xx + βδ m x − δ u = 0 , δ m t = δ m xx − μ tot ( δ u ) x , and the corresponding system of linear algebraic equations , − ( 1 + α q 2 ) δ u 0 + iq βδ m 0 = 0 , iqμ tot δ u 0 + ( λ + q 2 ) δ m 0 = 0 , yields nontrivial solutions for δ u 0 and δ m 0 , if λ ( q ) = q 2 ( β μ tot ( 1 + α q 2 ) −1 −1 ) . The Fig 1 . Asymptotically stable mechanicalstates ( in all cases , α = 0 . 5 ) : ( a ) a stationary state of ZS model , ( v 0 , μ tot ) = ( 2 . 5 , 0 . 125 π ) ; ( b ) unidirectional translation in ZV model , ( v 0 , μ tot ) = ( 2 . 5 , 2 π ) ; ( c ) rotations in ZS model , ( v 0 , μ tot ) = ( 2 . 5 , 0 . 75 π ) . Pseudo - colors depict distributions of myosin ; arrows are actin velocities ; a red dashed line / curve shows the trajectory of a centroid . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 . g001 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 9 / 22 perturbations grow if λ ( q ) > 0 , with the fastest growing mode having the minimal wave number , q min = π , and thus involving a large - scale redistribution of myosin . Thus , the symmetric state becomes unstable if β μ tot > 1 + π 2 α or , in the dimensional form , σM 0 πL 2 > D ( ξL 2 + π 2 η ) . The instability criterion predicts that the critical value of β μ tot is an increasing function of α . The results of Fig 2 indicate that this prediction , while obtained by analyzing a ZV model in a fixed domain , holds for the free - boundary models as well . Indeed , the com - petition between the myosin contractile stress and dissipative processes , mathematically expressed in the instability condition , drives the initiation of motility in the free - boundary models . As described at the beginning of this section , the transition to motility occurs when the contractility , reinforced by the model positive feedback , prevails over the dissipation . For α (cid:21) 1 , the dimensional form of the instability criterion reduces to σM 0 L 2 > πD η : the total myo - sin stress needs to overcome the smoothing effects of actin viscosity and myosin diffusion , while the adhesion strength does not matter . In the limit of large values of α , the actin net - work is effectively stiff and thus does not allow for significant actin flows , which makes the cell more symmetric and as a consequence less motile and slower . Our simulations confirm this prediction ( Fig 3A and 3B ) . In the opposite limit of highly deformable actin network , α < < 1 , the instability criterion reduces to σM 0 > ξD , so the cell becomes motile if the charac - teristic myosin stress is able to generate actin flow that overcomes myosin diffusion , which requires the weakening of adhesions and strengthening of myosin , in agreement with the experiment [ 7 ] . Finally , it is worth noting that whereas the motility threshold in the ZS model is indepen - dent of v 0 , the critical values of μ tot in the ZV model , where the actin growth is affected by myo - sin , vary with v 0 ( Fig 2 ) . Indeed , the cell described by the ZV model with v 0 = 0 would not transition to motility for any μ tot , because in this case , the myosin influence on the boundary is lost . Therefore , in this version of the model motility initiates only for finite values of v 0 , which drop with the increase of μ tot . In the ZS model , the cell with a sufficiently high μ tot initiates Fig 2 . Mechanical states of ZV and ZS models for varying sets ( v 0 , μ tot ) and α = 0 . 5 and 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 . g002 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 10 / 22 Fig 3 . Aspect ratios and translational or linear rotational speeds of steadily moving cells . ( a ) Aspect ratio as a function of viscosity - adhesion length α ; the results were obtained with ( v 0 , μ tot ) = ( 2 . 5 , 1 . 5 π ) for ZS model , and with ( v 0 , μ tot ) = ( 5 , 1 . 5 π ) for ZV model ; aspect ratios were computedas ratios of the longest to shortest distances betweencell boundaryand cell centroid . ( b ) Dimensionlesstranslationalor linear rotational A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 11 / 22 motility even as v 0 ! 0 , because the asymmetric myosin pulls the boundary inward asymmetri - cally , and the area - preserving term causes the effective protrusion . Shape and speed of the motile cell Similar to the 1D ZV model analyzed in the previous section , the symmetric state of the 2D ver - sion of the ZV model becomes unstable for sufficiently high μ tot even in a fixed geometry , with myosin relocating to the cell boundary . Fig 4A illustrates the instability of the radially symmetric steady state , in which the maximum of myosin was slightly shifted to the left of the cell center . Qualitatively , because of the zero actin velocities at the boundary , a second , initially small , local maximum of myosin appears at the boundary point closest the main maximum due to slightly faster diffusion . The competition between the two maxima lowers the myosin gradients on the left side of the main one , resulting in a net force acting on it in the left direction . Hence , the relocation of myosin to the left segment of the boundary . In the cell with a free boundary , the redistribution of myosin is conferred to boundary velocity , resulting in slower outward and eventually inward movements of the part of the boundary that becomes the cell rear . The cell movement further skews the myosin towards the rear . For the small to moderate rate of actin growth and cell speeds , the cell maintains a convex shape and a steady unidirectional motion , with myosin forming a wide band at the rear edge ( Fig 1 B and S1 Movie ) . In the ZS model of a fixed symmetric cell , an inward actin flow at the membrane prevents myosin from accumulating there . As a result , the symmetric solution with a myosin maximum at the center remains stable even for μ tot above the threshold . Indeed , shifting the maximum speedof a cell centroidas a function of viscosity - adhesionlength α ; model parameters are as in panel ( a ) . ( c ) Aspect ratio as a function of v 0 and μ tot ; the results were obtainedwith α = 1 for ZV model and with α = 0 . 5 for ZS model . ( d ) Radiusof rotation of a cell centroidas a function of v 0 and μ tot , with values of α as in ( c ) . ( e ) Dimensionless angular velocity of a cell centroid as a function of v 0 and μ tot , with values of α as in ( c ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 . g003 Fig 4 . Symmetry breaking in a fixed circle and in a free - boundary problem . ( a ) Instability of a symmetric steady state of ZV model in a fixed circle : snapshots of dimensionless myosin density ( pseudo - color ) and actin velocities ( arrows ) at specifiedtimes t after myosin was slightly shifted left of center ; computations were done for μ tot = 1 . 5 π and α = 0 . 5 . ( b ) Transition to unidirectional motility in ZS model ; dimensionless myosin concentration ( pseudo - colors ) and boundaryvelocities ( arrows ) are shown for the solution obtained with α = 1 , v 0 = 5 , and μ tot = 1 . 5 π ; the cell assumes steady unidirectional motility after t = 14 ( S2 Movie ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 . g004 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 12 / 22 from the center in this case increases the myosin gradients and centripetal forces on the ‘shorter’ side and decreases them on the ‘longer’ side , netting a stabilizing force . In the free - boundary problem , however , the symmetric solution , stable at low μ tot ( Fig 1 A ) , becomes unstable above the motility threshold . Fig 4B and S2 Movie illustrate a transition to unidirec - tional motility that occurs in the ZS model with sufficiently large μ tot and small to moderate v 0 . As the myosin cluster shifts slightly from the cell center , the closer side is pulled inward faster and becomes the prospective cell rear , while the opposite side , where the protrusions are faster than retractions , becomes the cell front . In the ensued motility , myosin is pressed against the rear and in turn exerts a stronger inward force on the proximal portion of the boundary , devel - oping a local concavity . If the movement is sufficiently fast , the myosin spreads along the por - tion of the boundary with negative curvature . This positive feedback between the myosin asymmetry , actin flow , and cell movement is the key to the stable motility . Our simulations show that the aspect ratio of a steadily moving cell varies between 1 and 3 ( Fig 3C ) , in agreement with experimental observations [ 5 ] . Note that in contrast to the ZV model , where the cell aspect ratio grows moderately with v 0 , it becomes essentially indepen - dent of model parameters in the ZS model with μ tot / π > 1 . This can be qualitatively understood by noting that myosin , which in a moving cell accumulates in the middle of the rear , exerts comparable forces on the front and side portions of the boundary . Then , because the myosin - generated flow decreases with distance at similar rates in all directions , the distances from the rear to the front and the sides should be on the same order , yielding the average aspect ratio ~ 2 . The ZS model generally predicts significantly higher cell speeds compared to those in the ZV model ( Fig 5A ) . This is because in the ZS model , the fast centripetal flows generated by myosin at the rear boundary tend to decrease the cell area , leading to fast effective protrusion at the front , as actin can grow rapidly against the lowered membrane tension . As a result , the cell speed increases but the cell area decreases with total myosin ( Fig 5B ) . Interestingly , the cell speed in the ZS model decreases slightly with the actin growth rate v 0 , which can be under - stood by noting that the cell area in this model increases with v 0 , thus mitigating the effect of myosin . In the ZV model , the cell speed is virtually insensitive to μ tot , for μ tot > π , because the term with v 0 in the expression for v p becomes inessential for m * μ tot / π > 1 . For the same rea - son , the cell area is also insensitive to μ tot . Importantly , our model predicts that there are no short - wavelength instabilities in the cell shape ( like fingering instabilities characteristic for some physical free - boundary models ) , which is supported by the experiment : there are small fluctuations on the experimentally observed cell boundaries , but they mostly do not grow . Mechanics of the straight and turning motility The most nontrivial and important property of our models is that they predict rotational states with a radius of rotation comparable to the cell size in large regions of their parameter space ( Fig 2 ) . Note that both the radius of rotation and the angular velocity are not particularly sensi - tive to parameter values ( Fig 3D and 3E ) . Emergence of cell turning in the models can be qualitatively understood by analyzing the loss of stability of a planar axial symmetry characteristic of the straight moving cell . In the ZV model , the steady rotations are observed for v 0 exceeding a threshold that is largely insensitive to either α or μ tot . Fig 6 and S3 Movie illustrate , for a particular parameter set , how rotations come about in the ZV model during a transient movement following a ‘nudge’ applied to a sta - tionary cell in the form of an initial horizontal gradient of myosin . The initial convex cell shape is favorable for maintaining a unipolar axially symmetric myosin distribution , and the A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 13 / 22 resulting motility is unidirectional . But due to sufficiently large v 0 , fast boundary velocities at cell’s sides tend to elongate the cell in y - direction , making it prone to developing a concavity at the cell rear . In such a shape , the myosin spreads along the rear part of the boundary more uni - formly ( Fig 6 B , t = 5 ) , a distribution that is no longer stable . Indeed , even a slight asymmetry in the distribution of myosin , reinforced by the positive feedback from actin velocities and myosin accumulation due to faster movement of the corresponding portion of the rear bound - ary , breaks the axial symmetry ( Fig 6 B , t = 15 ) . As a result , a stable asymmetric cell shape emerges as the cell locks in rotations ( Fig 6 A ) , with myosin aggregated at a high - curvature por - tion of the boundary . While the same mechanisms underlie the turning behavior in the ZS model , the two models yield significantly different results for the parameter regions of rotations . This is due to the dif - ferences in boundary conditions that reflect the opposing assumptions about the strength of adhesions at the cell periphery , and in ways of conferring the myosin dynamics onto kinemat - ics of the boundary . Unlike the ZV model , the v 0 threshold for rotations in the ZS model strongly depends on μ tot and α ( Fig 2 ) . In particular , the rotational states may exist for any v 0 , if α is sufficiently small . Note also , that the concavity of the cell shape does not always destabi - lize unidirectional motility in the ZS model ( Fig 4B ) . Fig 7 and S4 Movie illustrate the onset of turning in ZS model . If the contractility due to myosin is strong , myosin forms a radially symmetric aggregate , which in a translating cell is skewed to the cell rear , pulling the rear boundary inward and maintaining the cell propulsion . Fig 5 . Cell speeds and areasas functions of v 0 and μ tot . ( a ) Dimensionless translationalor linear rotational speedof a cell centroidwere obtainedwith α = 1 for ZV model and α = 0 . 5 for ZS model . ( b ) Dimensionless steady - state areas for values of α as in panel ( a ) . Insets in both panels : corresponding level sets . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 . g005 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 14 / 22 When the myosin aggregate is sufficiently close to the rear boundary , it pulls the center of the cell rear inward stronger than the sides of the rear edge , creating a ‘dip’ at the center of the rear edge and giving the cell a characteristic keratocyte fan - like shape , in which the sides of the cell lag behind the center . For the parameters in the upper left corner of the parameter space ( Fig 2 ) , the cell motion is fast , and in the frame of the cell , myosin is effectively swept towards the rear and ‘pressed’ against the rear boundary ; in these conditions , the translational motility remains stable ( Fig 4B ) . For intermediate values of μ tot , the cell moves slower and the myosin aggregate maintains its radial symmetry and remains close to the cell centroid ( Fig 7 A , t = 7 ) . In this position , myosin is able to pull inward not only the rear but also the front of the cell , making the axial symmetry of the system unstable . Indeed , even a slight random asymmetry in either the myosin distribution or the cell shape induces and reinforces the asymmetry of the other . If , for example , the myosin aggregate becomes slightly closer to one side , this side is pulled inward faster than the other , which brings even more myosin to the side that is pulled inward , because the shift of that side effectively sweeps myosin towards it ( Fig 7 A , t = 9 ) . Once the axial symmetry of cell shape and the position of the myosin aggregate is broken ( Fig 7 A , t = 23 . 5 ) , the boundary velocity field becomes asymmetric as well ( Fig 7 B ) . It is then clear that a steady movement of a cell with an asymmetric shape and asymmetric boundary velocities ( where faster displacements occur at the location of higher myosin gradients ) must involve rotations . Indeed , by connecting consecutively the ends of the arrows representing normal displacements of points of the boundary in Fig 7 B , one recovers the same contour in a Fig 6 . Onset of steady rotations in ZV model , ( v 0 , μ tot , α ) = ( 12 . 5 , 2 π , 1 ) . ( a ) Entire cell trajectory and cell centroidtrack ( red dashedcurve ) . ( b ) Snapshotsof transient myosin distributionswith individual color scales duringa transient , and with white arrows representingactin velocities ( S3 Movie ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 . g006 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 15 / 22 rotated position , as the centroids of the cell in different positions belong to the same circle ( Fig 7 B ) . We also note that the shape of the expanding portion of the cell boundary is reminiscent of spirals described by more abstract models of rotating free boundaries [ 36 ] . Discussion In this paper we systematically explored the ability of a minimal actin - myosin contractility model [ 7 , 14 ] to reproduce observed mechanical states of the simplest motile cell . The model analysis has shown that the mechanical state of the cell critically depends on just three dimen - sionless parameters representing the myosin contractility , characteristic viscosity - adhesion length , and actin growth . For the large viscosity - adhesion length , the actin network becomes effectively stiff and does not allow for significant actin flows , which makes the cell more sym - metric and as a consequence less motile and slower , and in the limit of very large values of vis - cosity - adhesion lengths , the cell is stationary . In the opposite limit of short viscosity - adhesion Fig 7 . Steady rotations in ZS model , ( v 0 , μ tot , α ) = ( 2 . 5 , 0 . 75 π , 0 . 5 ) ( see also S4 Movie ) . ( a ) Transient distributions of myosin ( pseudo - colors ) and actin velocities ( arrows ) : t = 2 , an initiallysymmetric cell with centroidat ( x , y ) = ( 0 , 0 ) self - polarizesand assumes fast unidirectional motility , myosin accumulatesin a semi - circularband , pullingthe rear inwards to form a ‘dip’ ; t = 7 , the cell slows down and becomesunstable , as myosin is now close enoughto cell front to be able to pull it in as well ; t = 9 , loss of axial symmetry , as the lower part of the cell with steeper myosin gradientsis pulledinwardsfaster than the upper one ; t = 23 . 5 : emergence of stable asymmetric myosin distribution and cell shape , as the cell locks in rotations ( see Fig 1 C ) . ( b ) Cell shapeand boundaryvelocitiesin steady rotations . Positions of the cell boundary and centroid at t = 23 . 5 , 23 . 6 , and 24 ( solid , dashed , and dotted - dashed contours , respectively , and filled circles with larger size corresponding to later time ) . Faster boundaryvelocities ( arrows ) in the high curvature region , consistent with the locationof steep myosin gradients ( panel ( a ) ) , ensure rotationalmotility with a circular trajectory of the centroid ( dotted arc ) , see also Fig 1 C . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 . g007 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 16 / 22 lengths , myosin forms a very small high - density aggregate , which affects the actin network only locally . In this regime , the steady motility is impossible , and the cell starts to pivot . Thus , an important conclusion is that to move straight and steadily , the cell has to keep the viscosity - adhesion length on the order of unity ( to adjust the ratio of actin viscosity to adhesion strength so that it is on the order of the cell area ) . Interestingly , this conclusion is consistent with esti - mates based on the experimental data for keratocytes [ 5 ] . Intuitively , if myosin contractility is weak , the myosin spreads uniformly and the cell remains stationary and symmetric . Above a contractility threshold , the cells become motile . The mode of motility depends on the boundary conditions . For the zero actin velocity at the boundary and the sufficiently small actin growth constant and cell speed , the convex - shaped cell maintains unidirectional motility , with myosin concentrated in a band at the rear edge . With the rate of actin growth above a certain threshold , the increase of the cell speed is suffi - cient for the cell to lose its planar axial symmetry and start rotating . With the zero - stress boundary conditions , rotations occur for intermediate contractility strengths , whereas in the high contractility range , the fast cells stabilize their unidirectional movement , as myosin being effectively compressed into a long band at the rear edge . We found that both explored bound - ary conditions explain general features of the keratocyte motility , but there are interesting dif - ferences in the predicted behaviors , as discussed above . The main finding of our study is that the contractile mechanism of motility results in a very robust turning behavior of the cell : in the models with both explored boundary conditions , the cell moving along a circular trajectory is not an anomaly but rather a solution that exists in a large region of the model parameter space . Broadly speaking , the cell starts turning in condi - tions of breaking the planar axial symmetry of its myosin distribution ; in the ZV model the transition to rotation is controlled by the rate of actin growth , whereas in the ZS model – by all three independent model parameters . Turning motile behavior is an important part of the cell mechanical response in chemotaxis [ 37 ] and galvanotaxis [ 38 ] , and our model generates intui - tion about the turning mechanism . One important test of our model is that the solutions exhibit a characteristic fan - like kerato - cyte shape , with the side - to - side distance greater than the front - to - rear distance and aspect ratio between 1 and 3 , in excellent agreement with the observations [ 5 ] . Moreover , the pre - dicted aspect ratio in the ZS version is nontrivial and biphasic , reaching a maximum at inter - mediate myosin contractility and decreasing at very weak or strong contractility , indeed observed in [ 5 ] . Similarly , the model predicts that the lamellipodial area increases at higher adhesion and lower myosin contractility , and that the cell speed increases with myosin con - tractility , as observed [ 5 ] . Lastly , in agreement with the experiment [ 7 ] , higher myosin con - tractility and / or lower adhesion strength are predicted to promote the cell polarization and motility initiation . One significant prediction of our model is that both self - polarization of the cell and its turning behavior can , in principle , occur , without complex adhesion dynamics . While it was observed that a nonlinear stick - slip adhesion behavior accompanied cell polariza - tion [ 7 ] , it remains an open question whether this nonlinear behavior is essential . The model predicts that the stable motile behavior of the cell requires tight regulation of the total lamellipodial area . We hypothesized that this regulation is mechanical , through the mem - brane tension . Indeed , perturbations of the total membrane area and membrane tension were found to change the lamellipodial area in a predictable way , and drastic perturbations destabi - lized the cell [ 29 ] . We find that cell polarization may not depend on the cell ability to move : in the ZV model , myosin distribution and actin flow become asymmetric even in the stationary symmetric domain . However , for the motility initiation , protrusion of the boundary is obvi - ously essential ( note that while motility in the ZS free - boundary model with sufficiently high μ tot can be initiated even with v 0 ! 0 , the area - preserving term of V p in this limit effectively A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 17 / 22 induces protrusion of the front , which is less affected by myosin , see sections Model and Cell becomes motile when myosin contractility is higher than critical ) . Keratocyte motility and especially the peculiar and steady shape of the moving cell inspired a great deal of free - boundary modeling in the past decade . Our model is based on the well - jus - tified assumption that the mechanical force balance determines cell shape and movements . Conceptually , our model is similar to the active gel models [ 24 , 39 ] , originating in the soft - matter physics . Some models were based on the viable idea that certain self - organized chemical patterns are upstream from the actin - myosin machinery [ 22 , 40 , 41 ] , but majority of studies explored mechanical models [ 42 – 44 ] . A variety of numerical techniques – Potts models [ 40 , 45 ] , phase - field method [ 42 , 44 ] , immersed boundary method [ 43 ] – were used in respective simulations . Keratocyte polarization was modeled in [ 7 , 46 ] . Alternative turning mechanisms , very different from the one predicted by our model , were computationally explored in [ 47 , 48 ] . The fact that the majority of the models reproduce the keratocyte shapes and motile behavior corroborates the existing biological intuition about the keratocyte lamellipodium as the most basic , streamlined and robust actin - myosin motile structure [ 49 ] . Each of the cited studies Fig 8 . Steady - state cell shapes , myosin distributions ( pseudo - colors ) , actin velocities ( arrows ) , and motility types from solutionsof the ZS ( a ) and ZV ( b ) models obtainedfor specifiedparameter values ( v 0 , μ tot ) . Gridlinesare spaced uniformly with h = 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 . g008 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 18 / 22 added invaluable insights to understanding multifaceted aspects of cell motility ; a relative advantage of our model is in that it is most easily connected to the experimentally observed biophysics of force balance and myosin transport in keratocytes [ 5 , 7 ] . The minimal model we explored already predicts a wealth of motile behaviors ( Fig 8 ) . It is known , however , that even the cell as streamlined for locomotion as keratocyte has complexi - ties that far exceed our minimal model . The two main aspects that need to be added to the model to make it more realistic are : spatially graded actin polymerization independent of myo - sin [ 10 ] and dynamic nonlinear adhesions . Complex effects of dynamic and non - homoge - neous adhesions already attracted special attention and were simulated in [ 7 , 46 , 50 ] . It will also be interesting to explore how the predicted cell dynamics depend on actin density [ 51 ] , more complex constitutive relations for the actin - myosin stress [ 52 ] , membrane curvature [ 53 , 54 ] , elastic [ 55 ] and anisotropic [ 49 ] effects in the actin network . Our minimal free - boundary model might be useful for future modeling of other modes of cell motility [ 56 ] and collective cell movements [ 57 , 58 ] . Lastly , for decades , research focused on understanding cell move - ments on flat 2D surfaces , and only recently exploration of cell crawling through three - dimen - sional ( 3D ) matrices , more physiologically relevant , has begun experimentally [ 59 ] and theoretically [ 60 – 62 ] . Extension of our model to 3D will be a challenging , yet necessary , effort . Supporting information S1 Appendix . Variations of the model . Supplemental text explaining effects of various model assumptions , equations and boundary conditions , including explicit consideration of actin dynamics and more detailed model of myosin transport . ( DOCX ) S1 Movie . Example of steadily moving cell predicted by simulations of the zero velocity model . ( AVI ) S2 Movie . Example of steadily moving cell predicted by simulations of the zero stress model . ( AVI ) S3 Movie . Example of rotating cell predicted by simulations of the zero velocity model . ( AVI ) S4 Movie . Example of rotating cell predicted by simulations of the zero stress model . ( AVI ) Acknowledgments M . N . , I . L . N . and B . M . S . thank Leslie Loew for his continuing support and helpful discussions . Author Contributions Conceptualization : Boris M . Slepchenko , Alex Mogilner . Formal analysis : Masoud Nickaeen , Igor L . Novak , Boris M . Slepchenko , Alex Mogilner . Investigation : Stephanie Pulford , Aaron Rumack , Jamie Brandon , Boris M . Slepchenko , Alex Mogilner . Methodology : Alex Mogilner . Software : Masoud Nickaeen , Igor L . Novak , Boris M . Slepchenko . A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 19 / 22 Supervision : Boris M . Slepchenko , Alex Mogilner . Validation : Masoud Nickaeen , Igor L . Novak . Writing – original draft : Masoud Nickaeen , Boris M . Slepchenko , Alex Mogilner . Writing – review & editing : Masoud Nickaeen , Boris M . Slepchenko , Alex Mogilner . References 1 . Ridley AJ , Schwartz MA , BurridgeK , Firtel RA , Ginsberg MH , Borisy G , et al . Cell migration : integrating signalsfrom front to back . Science2003 Dec 5 ; 302 ( 5651 ) : 1704 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1092053PMID : 14657486 2 . La¨mmermann T , Sixt M . Mechanicalmodes of ’amoeboid’ cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2009 Oct ; 21 ( 5 ) : 636 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2009 . 05 . 003PMID : 19523798 3 . VerkhovskyAB . The mechanisms of spatialand temporal patterning of cell - edgedynamics . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2015Oct ; 36 : 113 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2015 . 09 . 001 PMID : 26432504 4 . Keren K , Pincus Z , Allen GM , Barnhart EL , Marriott G , Mogilner A , et al . Mechanismof shape determi - nation in motile cells . Nature 2008 May 22 ; 453 ( 7194 ) : 475 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature06952 PMID : 18497816 5 . Barnhart EL , Lee KC , Keren K , MogilnerA , Theriot JA . An adhesion - dependent switch betweenmecha - nisms that determine motile cell shape . PLoS Biol . 2011May ; 9 ( 5 ) : e1001059 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001059PMID : 21559321 6 . Yam PT , Wilson CA , Ji L , Hebert B , Barnhart EL , Dye NA , et al . Actin - myosinnetwork reorganization breaks symmetry at the cell rear to spontaneously initiate polarizedcell motility . J Cell Biol . 2007 Sep 24 ; 178 ( 7 ) : 1207 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200706012PMID : 17893245 7 . Barnhart EL , Lee KC , Allen GM , Theriot JA , MogilnerA . Balancebetweencell - substrate adhesion and myosin contractiondetermines the frequency of motility initiationin fish keratocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015Apr 21 ; 112 ( 16 ) : 5045 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1417257112PMID : 25848042 8 . Ream RA , Theriot JA , Somero GN . Influencesof thermal acclimationand acute temperature change on the motility of epithelialwound - healingcells ( keratocytes ) of tropical , temperate and Antarctic fish . J Exp Biol . 2003 Dec ; 206 ( 24 ) : 4539 – 51 . 9 . VerkhovskyAB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG . Network contractionmodel for cell translocation and retro - grade flow . BiochemSoc Symp . 1999 ; 65 : 207 – 22 . PMID : 10320940 10 . Ofer N , Mogilner A , Keren K . Actin disassembly clock determines shapeand speedof lamellipodialfrag - ments . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 Dec 20 ; 108 ( 51 ) : 20394 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105333108PMID : 22159033 11 . Holmes WR , Edelstein - Keshet L . A comparison of computational models for eukaryoticcell shapeand motility . PLoS Comput Biol . 2012 ; 8 ( 12 ) : e1002793 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1002793 PMID : 23300403 12 . Gracheva M , Othmer H . A continuummodel of motility in amoeboidcells . Bull Math Biol 2004 ; 66 : 167 – 193 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bulm . 2003 . 08 . 007PMID : 14670535 13 . CarlssonAE . Mechanisms of Cell Propulsionby Active Stresses . New J Phys . 2011 ; 13 – 073009 . 14 . Recho P , Putelat T , Truskinovsky L . Contraction - driven cell motility . Phys Rev Lett . 2013 Sep 6 ; 111 ( 10 ) : 108102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 111 . 108102 PMID : 25166712 15 . Kimpton LS , Whiteley JP , Waters SL , King JR , Oliver JM . Multiple travelling - wave solutionsin a minimal model for cell motility . Math Med Biol . 2013 ; 30 ( 3 ) : 241 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / imammb / dqs023 PMID : 22789545 16 . SatulovskyJ , Lui R , Wang YL . Exploringthe control circuit of cell migrationby mathematical modeling . BiophysJ . 2008 May 1 ; 94 ( 9 ) : 3671 – 83 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 117002PMID : 18199677 17 . Hecht I , Skoge M , Charest P , Ben - Jacob E , Firtel R , Loomis WF , et al . Activated membranepatches guide chemotactic cell motility . PLoS Comput Biol 2011 ; 7 : e1002044 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1002044 PMID : 21738453 18 . LomakinAJ , Lee KC , Han SJ , Bui DA , DavidsonM , MogilnerA , et al . Competition for actin betweentwo distinct F - actin networks defines a bistableswitch for cell polarization . Nat Cell Biol . 2015 Nov ; 17 ( 11 ) : 1435 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3246 PMID : 26414403 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 20 / 22 19 . RaynaudF , Ambu¨hl ME , GabellaC , Bornert A , SbalzariniIF , Meister JJ , et al . Minimalmodelfor sponta - neous cell polarizationand edge activity in oscillating , rotating and migratingcells . Nature Physics 2016 January ; 12 : 367 – 373 . 20 . Lee J , Ishihara A , Theriot JA , JacobsonK . Principlesof locomotionfor simple - shaped cells . Nature . 1993 Mar 11 ; 362 ( 6416 ) : 167 – 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 362167a0PMID : 8450887 21 . RubinsteinB , JacobsonK , MogilnerA . Multiscaletwo - dimensional modelingof a motile simple - shaped cell . Multiscale Model Sim 2005 ; 3 : 413 – 439 . 22 . WolgemuthCW , Stajic J , Mogilner A . Redundant mechanisms for stable cell locomotionrevealed by minimalmodels . BiophysJ 2011 ; 101 : 545 – 553 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 06 . 032 PMID : 21806922 23 . RubinsteinB , Fournier MF , JacobsonK , Verkhovsky AB , Mogilner A . Actin - Myosin ViscoelasticFlow in the Keratocyte Lamellipod , Biophys J . 2009 Oct 7 ; 97 ( 7 ) : 1853 – 1863 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2009 . 07 . 020 PMID : 19804715 24 . Bois JS , Ju¨licher F , Grill SW . Pattern formation in active fluids . Phys Rev Lett . 2011 Jan 14 ; 106 ( 2 ) : 028103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 106 . 028103 PMID : 21405254 25 . Foster PJ , Fu¨rthauer S , ShelleyMJ , NeedlemanDJ . Active contractionof microtubule networks . eLife . 2015 Dec 23 ; 4 : e10837 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 10837PMID : 26701905 26 . Keller EF , Segel LA . Model for chemotaxis . J . Theor . Biol . 1971 ; 30 : 225 – 234 . PMID : 4926701 27 . Leduc C , Padberg - Gehle K , Varga V , HelbingD , Diez S , HowardJ . Molecularcrowdingcreates traffic jams of kinesinmotors on microtubules . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012 109 ( 16 ) : 6100 – 6105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1107281109 PMID : 22431622 28 . BruggemanDAG . Calculationof variousphysicalconstants in heterogeneous substances . I . Dielectric constants and conductivity of composites from isotropic substances . Annalender Physik 1935 24 : 636 – 664 . 29 . LieberAD , Yehudai - Resheff S , Barnhart EL , Theriot JA , Keren K . Membranetensionin rapidly moving cells is determinedby cytoskeletal forces . Curr Biol . 2013 Aug 5 ; 23 ( 15 ) : 1409 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 05 . 063 PMID : 23831292 30 . Novak IL , Slepchenko BM . Conservative algorithmfor parabolicproblems in domainswith moving boundaries . J Comput Phys . 2014 Mar 20 ; 270 : 203 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jcp . 2014 . 03 . 014 PMID : 25067852 31 . Ferziger JH , Peric M . Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics , 3 rd ed . Springer ; 2002 . 32 . Sibson R . , A brief description of natural neighborinterpolation . In : Barnett V , editor . InterpretingMulti - variate Data . Chichester : John Wiley & Sons ; 1981 . pp . 21 – 36 . 33 . Slepchenko BM , and LM Loew . Use of Virtual Cell in studies of cellulardynamics . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 2010 ; 283 : 1 – 56 . 34 . Du J , Fix B , Glimm J , Jia X , Li X , Li Y , et al . A simple packagefor front tracking . J . Comput . Phys . 2006 ; 213 : 613 – 628 . 35 . COMSOL Multiphysics . Version 5 . 2 [ software ] . Stockholm , Sweden : COMSOL AB ; 2015 . Available from : www . comsol . com . 36 . AltschulerDJ , Altschuler SJ , AngenentSB , Wu LF . The zoo of solitons for curve shortening . Nonlinear - ity 2013 ; 26 : 1189 – 1226 . 37 . Yang HW , CollinsSR , Meyer T . Locally excitableCdc42 signalssteer cells duringchemotaxis . Nat Cell Biol . 2016 Feb ; 18 ( 2 ) : 191 – 201 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3292PMID : 26689677 38 . Allen GM , Mogilner A , Theriot JA . Electrophoresis of cellularmembranecomponents creates the direc - tional cue guidingkeratocyte galvanotaxis . Curr Biol . 2013 Apr 8 ; 23 ( 7 ) : 560 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 02 . 047 PMID : 23541731 39 . Tjhung E , Marenduzzo D , Cates ME . Spontaneoussymmetry breakingin active droplets provides a generic route to motility . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012 Jul 31 ; 109 ( 31 ) : 12381 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1200843109PMID : 22797894 40 . Maree´ AF , Jilkine A , Dawes A , GrieneisenVA , Edelstein - Keshet L . Polarizationand movement of kera - tocytes : a multiscalemodellingapproach . Bull Math Biol 2006 ; 68 ( 5 ) : 1169 – 1211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11538 - 006 - 9131 - 7 PMID : 16794915 41 . MacDonald G , Mackenzie JA , Nolan M , Insall RH . A computational method for the coupledsolutionof reaction - diffusion equationson evolvingdomainsand manifolds : Applicationto a model of cell migration and chemotaxis . J Comput Phys . 2016 Mar 15 ; 309 : 207 – 226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jcp . 2015 . 12 . 038 PMID : 27330221 42 . Shao D , Rappel WJ , LevineH . Computationalmodel for cell morphodynamics . Phys Rev Lett 2010 ; 105 : 108104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 105 . 108104PMID : 20867552 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 21 / 22 43 . VanderleiB , Feng J , Edelstein - Keshet L . A computational model of cell polarizationand motility cou - pling mechanicsand biochemistry . Multiscale Model Simul 2011 ; 9 : 1420 – 1443 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1137 / 100815335 PMID : 22904684 44 . Ziebert F , Swaminathan S , Aranson IS . Model for self - polarization and motility of keratocyte fragments . J R Soc Interface 2012 May 7 ; 9 ( 70 ) : 1084 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsif . 2011 . 0433PMID : 22012972 45 . NishimuraSI , Sasai M . Modulation of the reactionrate of regulatingprotein induceslarge morphological and motionalchange of amoebiccell . J Theor Biol . 2007 Mar 21 ; 245 ( 2 ) : 230 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2006 . 09 . 027 PMID : 17113108 46 . Ziebert F , Aranson IS . Effects of adhesion dynamics and substrate complianceon the shapeand motil - ity of crawling cells . PLoS One 2013 May 31 ; 8 ( 5 ) : e64511 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0064511PMID : 23741334 47 . Mogilner A , Rubinstein B . Actin disassembly ’clock’ and membranetension determine cell shapeand turning : a mathematical model . J Phys CondensMatter . 2010May 19 ; 22 ( 19 ) : 194118 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 0953 - 8984 / 22 / 19 / 194118 PMID : 20559462 48 . Camley BA , Zhao Y , Li B , Levine H , RappelWJ . Crawlingand turning in a minimalreaction - diffusion cell motility model : couplingcell shapeand Biochemistry . Phys . Rev . E 2017 ; 95 : 012401 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 95 . 012401PMID : 28208438 49 . RafelskiSM , Theriot JA . Crawlingtoward a unifiedmodel of cell mobility : spatialand temporalregulation of actin dynamics . Annu Rev Biochem . 2004 ; 73 : 209 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 73 . 011303 . 073844 PMID : 15189141 50 . Shao D , Levine H , RappelW . Couplingactin flow , adhesion , and morphologyin a computational cell motility model . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012 ; 109 : 6851 – 6856 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1203252109PMID : 22493219 51 . KuuselaE , Alt W . Continuummodel of cell adhesion and migration . J Math Biol . 2009 Jan ; 58 ( 1 – 2 ) : 135 – 61 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00285 - 008 - 0179 - x PMID : 18488227 52 . LinsmeierI , BanerjeeS , Oakes PW , Jung W , Kim T , Murrell MP . Disordered actomyosin networks are sufficient to producecooperative and telescopiccontractility . Nat Commun . 2016 Aug 25 ; 7 : 12615 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms12615 PMID : 27558758 53 . Kabaso D , Shlomovitz R , SchloenK , Stradal T , Gov N . Theoreticalmodel for cellularshapes driven by protrusive and adhesiveforces . PLoS Comput Biol 2011 ; 7 : e1001127 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1001127 PMID : 21573201 54 . Du X , Doubrovinski K , Osterfield M . Self - organized cell motility from motor - filament interactions . Bio - phys J . 2012 Apr 18 ; 102 ( 8 ) : 1738 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 03 . 052 PMID : 22768929 55 . Zemel A , Safran SA . Active self - polarizationof contractilecells in asymmetrically shapeddomains . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys . 2007 Aug ; 76 ( 2 Pt 1 ) : 021905 . 56 . Strychalski W , Guy RD . Intracellular Pressure Dynamics in BlebbingCells . BiophysJ . 2016 Mar 8 ; 110 ( 5 ) : 1168 – 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2016 . 01 . 012PMID : 26958893 57 . Camley BA , Zhang Y , Zhao Y , Li B , Ben - Jacob E , Levine H , et al . Polarity mechanisms such as contact inhibitionof locomotionregulatepersistent rotational motion of mammalian cells on micropatterns . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014 Oct 14 ; 111 ( 41 ) : 14770 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1414498111 PMID : 25258412 58 . Lo¨ber J , Ziebert F , Aranson IS . Collisionsof deformablecells lead to collectivemigration . Sci Rep . 2015 Mar 17 ; 5 : 9172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep09172PMID : 25779619 59 . Petrie RJ , Yamada KM . Multiplemechanismsof 3D migration : the origins of plasticity . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2016 Oct ; 42 : 7 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2016 . 03 . 025 PMID : 27082869 60 . Herant M , Dembo M . Form and function in cell motility : from fibroblasts to keratocytes . BiophysJ 2010 ; 98 : 1408 – 1417 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2009 . 12 . 4303 PMID : 20409459 61 . Tjhung E , TiribocchiA , Marenduzzo D , Cates ME . A minimal physical model captures the shapes of crawlingcells . Nat Commun . 2015 Jan 21 ; 6 : 5420 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms6420 PMID : 25607536 62 . Zhu J , MogilnerA . Comparisonof cell migrationmechanical strategies in three - dimensionalmatrices : a computational study . Interface Focus . 2016 Oct 6 ; 6 ( 5 ) : 20160040 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsfs . 2016 . 0040 PMID : 27708764 A free - boundary model of a motile cell explainsturning behavior PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005862 November 14 , 2017 22 / 22