Soccer Science and the Bayes Community : Exploring the Cognitive Implications of Modern Scientiﬁc Communication Jeff Shrager , a Dorrit Billman , b Gregorio Convertino , b J . P . Massar , c Peter Pirolli b a Stanford University Symbolic Systems Program ( consulting ) and CollabRx , Inc . b PARC ( the Palo Alto Research Center ) , Inc . c Berkeley , CA Received 10 July 2008 ; received in revised form 6 June 2009 ; accepted 15 June 2009 Abstract Science is a form of distributed analysis involving both individual work that produces new knowl - edge and collaborative work to exchange information with the larger community . There are many particular ways in which individual and community can interact in science , and it is difﬁcult to assess how efﬁcient these are , and what the best way might be to support them . This paper reports on a ser - ies of experiments in this area and a prototype implementation using a research platform called CACHE . CACHE both supports experimentation with different structures of interaction between individual and community cognition and serves as a prototype for computational support for those structures . We particularly focus on CACHE - BC , the Bayes community version of CACHE , within which the community can break up analytical tasks into ‘‘mind - sized’’ units and use provenance tracking to keep track of the relationship between these units . Keywords : Scientiﬁc reasoning ; Distributed cognition ; Provenance tracking ; Decision analysis ; Bayes community ; Collaboration ; Bayesian reasoning The process of scientiﬁc discovery—how we do science—will change more over the next 20 years than in the past 300 years . —Michael Nielsen ( http : / / michaelnielsen . org / blog / ? p = 448 ) Correspondence should be sent to Jeff Shrager , Stanford University Symbolic Systems Program ( consulting ) , 169 University Ave . and CollabRx , Inc . , Palo Alto , CA 94301 . E - mail : jshrager @ stanford . edu Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 1 – 20 Copyright (cid:2) 2009 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights reserved . ISSN : 1756 - 8757 print / 1756 - 8765 online DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1756 - 8765 . 2009 . 01049 . x 1 . Introduction As a form of distributed analysis , science involves both individual work that produces new knowledge and collaborative work to exchange information with the larger community . There are many particular ways in which individual and community can interact in science , and it is difﬁcult to assess how efﬁcient these are and what the best way might be to support interaction . Toward ﬁlling these gaps in our knowledge of how science works , we have developed a research platform , called CACHE , that serves two functions . First , it supports experimentation with different structures of interaction between individual and community cognition in science . Second , it enables us to proto - type computational support for those structures . This paper reports on a series of such investigations . Our work is guided by characteristics of cognition that have substantial impact on the conduct of science . Being a distributed process that takes place at many levels , there are cognitive principles that apply at the level of working group and of community , as well as the level of the individual . Our approach in this paper is to identify those principles that operate strongly at the level of the individual , yet propagate through and affect distributed cognition . We have identiﬁed ﬁve such principles . Our goal is not to provide a complete characterization of the factors affecting scientiﬁc cognition , but to motivate and position our contribution . 1 . 1 . ‘‘Mind - sized’’ analytical sets Effective attentive reasoning or problem solving requires operating on small , ‘‘mind - sized’’ collections of information , or chunks . When very large information collections are potentially relevant , as is the case for science , the ability to effectively bound and select small relevant sets is very important ( e . g . , relevant studies from long lists of related papers from a search engine ) . The idea of a limited focal set of information has pervaded the con - temporary understanding of cognition , going back at least as far as Miller’s classic paper ( Miller , 1956 ) . 1 . 2 . Apt representation An apt external problem representation both distinguishes among importantly different types of information and organizes the information in a way that both matches the structure of information and supports the operations to be conducted on it . As shown by researchers and designers in information visualization , effective representations can enable tasks that are not otherwise feasible ( Card , Mackinlay , & Shneiderman , 1999 ) . They can improve per - formance whether successfully carrying out calculations , or debiasing reasoning ( Gigerenzer & Hoffrage , 1995 ; Kotovsky , Hayes , & Simon , 1985 ; Zhang , 1997 ) . The importance of external representation for science , at the individual and cultural level , is widely noted ( Bridewell , Sanchez , Langley , & Billman , 2006 ; Nersessian , 1999 ; Novick & Hurley , 2001 ; Stigler , 1984 ) . 2 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 1 . 3 . Efﬁcient and controlled sharing An individual working within a community is vulnerable to conﬂicting pressures between what facilitates working alone versus what facilitates interacting with the community . Analo - gous tensions at the individual versus group level , and attendant process costs of group work , are widely noted ( Nunamaker , Dennis , Valacich , Vogel , & George , 1991 ) . The impact of changing distribution methods is addressed in studies of the history of science and in recent work on distributed groups of scientists and engineers ( Olson , Finholt , & Teasley , 2000 ) . 1 . 4 . Task orientation An individual scientist not only needs to interact with a large and heterogeneous collec - tion of information available in the community , but she or he does so for a variety of tasks , projects , and purposes . Preserving context so that information needed for the same task is organized together reduces costs of switching among activities . The value of organizing information and documents by task has been recognized for individual work ( Henderson & Card , 1986 ) . Further , the need for per - task organization is likely to increase as a person’s work becomes more linked to varied sources in a community , and as individuals are driven to impose task structure on communication tools ( Bellotti , Ducheneaut , Howard , Smith , & Grinter , 2005 ) . 1 . 5 . Multistage inference Complex reasoning often entails a cascade of sequential reasoning steps . Such sequences risk compounding error , either by amplifying biases in a single step or by introducing new biases across the steps . In multistage probabilistic inference , people are inaccurate primarily because they fail to aggregate the information across steps in accord with normative models ( Gettys , Kelly , & Peterson , 1973 ; Johnson & Halpin , 1974 ) . Johnson and Halpin ( 1974 ) call for systems that address this problem and support analysts’ multistage reasoning by decom - posing complex problems into manageable chunks . An individual scientist , endowed with these and other cognitive characteristics , carries out her ( or his ) work within the social structure organizing the science of her time . This social structure changes . In the next section we describe Open Science , a recent sea change in how scientiﬁc information is exchanged ( e . g . , Bradley , Owens , & Williams , 2008 ) . Open Science poses both opportunities and demands . After discussing this change , we describe the CACHE series of test - beds for exploring how cognitively based technology can support a cluster of scientiﬁc activities within the emerging social form of Open Science . CACHE is a Web - based platform that supports distributed , collaborative analysis . We have used CACHE both as a platform for experimentation in Open Science and as prototype of tools that could help communities of scientists cope with the ﬂood of information posed by the Open Science movement . Our focus in this paper is not on the CACHE tool per se , but on how social organization and computational tools can help in reducing the cognitive load imposed upon analysts by Open Science . J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 3 2 . Open Science A pervasive historical ﬁction uniquely honors individual intellectual contributions to science ; witness prizes such as the Nobel , almost always awarded to individuals . But mod - ern science is much too complex for any individual to make signiﬁcant progress without participating in numerous , often large , collaborations . Indeed , modern science is a massive , evidence - based , nonmonotonic , multistage reasoning system , distributed across millions of scientists , thousands of institutions , and hundreds of years . What all of these individuals and groups have in common is that their progress depends upon being able to efﬁciently draw upon one another’s results and methods , and then to efﬁciently feed back high - quality knowledge into their community . Two key classes of factors control scientiﬁc productivity : the cost of doing high - quality research by an individual or laboratory ( e . g . , time , instruments ) , and the cost of scientiﬁc communication and integration of new knowledge . The second class of factors include ( a ) the time and tools required to share or distribute contributions , ( b ) the quality of the new sci - entiﬁc contributions , and ( c ) the difﬁculty of ﬁnding and integrating one’s own contributions with related contributions made by others . Communication and integration of knowledge are critical because if low - quality research , regardless of its cost , ﬂoods the scientiﬁc knowl - edge base , time and money will be wasted in either following up false leads or in trying to sift the wheat from the chaff . Historically , the functions of communicating and archiving knowledge among scientists have been addressed through increasingly improved tools and practices : from technical cor - respondence before the 1700s , to archival journals introduced in 1700s , to archival journals with assessment of originality and soundness of the contributions in the 1800s , to regular conferences in the 1900s ( and preprinted conference proceedings in the late 1900s ) . Finally , in the 2000s , the rapid diffusion of Web technology has permitted much more efﬁcient archiving and communication in digital libraries and databases . While the functions of com - munication and archiving have progressively improved , the amount of information that sci - entists can access has also increased . More importantly , submitting contributions has become easier and faster , leading to a larger volume of contributions and greater variability in the quality of the contributions . This places greater responsibility for assessing the quality of the contributions and checking the sources on the reader . Also more workload and tensions are placed on the review and publications process ( Grudin , 2004 ) . Since at least the 18th century , a robust quality control system based upon peer review has protected the scientiﬁc knowledge - production system from signiﬁcant waste . However , in the past decade , Web - based publications such as blogs , forums , wikis , unreviewed online databases , prepublication manuscript repositories , formal online prepublication , and unreviewed ( or reader - reviewed ) publications , have created a so - called Open Science . Open Science is characterized by always - on , uncensored , instantaneous , free , and ubiquitous com - munication . This trend appears to be an inevitable adaptation of science to the rapid spread of new technologies and emerging practices . For example , Grudin ( 2004 ) reconstructs such adaptation for Computer Science and Human - Computer Interaction , a community that was exposed to the Web technology before others . 4 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) Open Science introduces both opportunities and risks . It clearly allows for increased efﬁ - ciency , because contributions can be shared and accessed faster , and at lower cost . On the other hand , if rapidly reported but low - quality publications ﬂood the ( Web - based ) literature , it might lead science into a crisis of wasted effort . If such a crisis is to be avoided , social and technical quality - control structures analogous to peer review must arise . What sorts of technologies might help maintain robust scientiﬁc progress in light of changing communication ? 3 . Soccer Science : The cognitive implications of Open Science As science often progresses by appeal to metaphor , we would like to contribute one of our own : Contrast American football with soccer . Although both football and soccer involve moving a ball down the ﬁeld toward a goal , the manner of play is completely different . Football has a clear plan - execute cycle whose tempo enables each play in the game to be tightly controlled by the coach . The coach has a view of the whole state of play , and when a play ends , he or she interacts with the quarterback to plan the next play . The team then tries to execute the plan , engaging as needed in localized opportunistic execution . In rather short course , everything stops , the coach takes stock , plans the next play , and so on . Soccer is , by comparison , a more ﬂuid and continuous process , which , like Open Science , can be said to be ‘‘always - on’’ : Planning and execution are not sequential but parallel and interleaved with players setting up for the next play even while the current one is underway . Even though the high - level strategy and roles are set by the coach in soccer , the planning and execution of the action is in done dynamically by players on the ﬁeld during the running play , and partic - ularly by whoever has the ball . Soccer does not , indeed it cannot , have a centrally controlled , plan - execute cycle like football because there are no breaks in play when an external coach could intervene to revise the plan . These games’ very different tempos lead to very different cognitive requirements for the players : Because any member of a soccer team might become master of the play , and must take at that moment both the strategy and tactics into his or her own hands ( or , rather , his or her feet ) , every player must be aware of the entire state of play and tactics of the moment and must compute updated tactics at a moment’s notice . Thus , every player must understand the strategy and tactics of the game in great depth . Moreover , the lack of planning breaks in soccer deprives the players both of the leisure of having a plan before each execution , and of an overview of the state of play . In football , on the other hand , the ﬁelded players ( aside from the quarterback ) operate almost entirely tactically , with strategy being mainly in the hands of the omniscient coach ( and to a much lesser degree , the quarterback ) . A football player ( aside from the quarterback ) will sometimes take it upon himself to change the plan in the middle of a play , but when this happens it is considered a special case . In sum , the per - player temporal constraints , informational limitations , and knowledge requirements in soccer are enormously larger than in football . All players presumably must ‘‘satisﬁce’’—that is , make decisions under constraints of imperfect information and limited time ( Simon , 1956 ) , meaning that all players must understand the strategy and tactics of J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 5 soccer to great depth . As these constraints are much more severe for soccer players , we would expect that the planning and execution strategies they employ to be quite different than those of football players . Metaphorically speaking , the always - on , uncensored , instantaneous , free , and ubiquitous nature of Open Science is changing science from a football to a soccer model . In ‘‘Football Science , ’’ small teams plan and experiment more or less independently of what the rest of the ﬁeld is doing , publishing results through the long , narrow , quality - controlled publication cycle , and only having to reconsider their work , generally , ‘‘at the breaks in play’’—that is , when the journals come out . The publication cycle dominates football science and enables the independent labs to engage in a somewhat leisurely read - plan - experiment - publish cycle . In the new world of Open ( ‘‘Soccer’’ ) Science , communication is continuous and inter - leaved with scientiﬁc work ; instead of running many experiments , and then pushing some results through a structured , peer - reviewed publishing cycle , soccer scientists could poten - tially publish their uncensored lab notebooks , or even raw data , directly on the Web , making every datum and interpretive thought available to every other team , sans review . From the standpoint of the receiver of the information everything must be processed as soon as possi - ble , and on an unpredictable cycle . In the limit , the ball is being passed continuously , requir - ing every lab in the world to reevaluate its work on a nearly daily basis . Just as soccer places a much greater cognitive load on each individual player than does football , and presumably leads to different strategies that involve greater satisﬁcing , one would expect Soccer Scientists to experience a much greater planning load , and that they would employ strategies that satiﬁce much more extensively . While high pressure , fast action is fun in sports , it could be deleterious to science . The burden imposed by the ﬂood of scientiﬁc information of uncertain quality , while having no more hours in a day to assess it , would tend to increase satisﬁcing and decrease the quality of individual decisions . On the other hand , because decisions are being made much more rapidly , perhaps this decrease in the quality of individual decisions will be more than bal - anced by increase in the rate at which the space of solutions is searched , dropping out bad solutions rapidly , and moving rapidly to new parts of the search space . This could increase the overall quality of decisions when the community of science is taken as a whole . Our purpose here is not to take a stand on the pros or cons of Soccer Science ; we take it as a matter of fact that modern science is changing in this way . We are interested speciﬁ - cally in how new forms of distributed cognition evolving under these conditions may best be supported . We see several distinct but interlocked implications of this shift , from the point of view of individual or small lab - group . First , as Soccer Science will make available a much larger ﬂow of potentially relevant information , scientists will need to maintain awareness of a larger body of information . Second , the characteristics of the information stream will change in quality and stability . Speciﬁcally , we could expect that the average quality will drop and high - quality information will be less clearly marked , as the peer - review process ( or whatever form assessment of contributions takes ) becomes less struc - tured and more separated from the production of results . In addition , the information will be less stable , as quickly posted , preliminary information is more likely to be revised . These changes mean that identifying the high - quality information relevant to a particular 6 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) researcher will be more difﬁcult and so , other things being equal , will take more effort to ﬁnd . In turn , scientists will either need to spend more time ﬁnding and ﬁltering information and less time acting on it , or act based on less complete or reliable information . As the pace of information distribution in the community speeds up , this will push an individual researcher to act faster , for example , to avoid being scooped , which may in turn reduce an individual scientist’s ability or willingness to review , reﬂect , or check , at the same time that external vetting is reduced . The following vignette illustrates some of the shifting in demands imposed by Open Science : A molecular biologist , let’s call her Anne , is trying to determine the function of a protein whose gene , Ga , has just been sequenced . ( This is called ‘‘gene annotation , ’’ and genes are said to ‘‘code for’’ proteins . ) Genes of similar sequence are often found to have similar function , so Anne enters the sequence into a search engine . Suppose that Ga has a sequence that is similar to another gene , Gb , that was previously annotated as ‘‘glucokinase’’ by another biologist , Barry , and posted on his public blog - like lab notebook . Anne proceeds to post on her public blog ⁄ notebook that Ga codes for glucokinase based on the results of its match with Barry’s Gb . Other scientists read Anne’s blog and draw further conclusions based upon her assertion that Ga codes for glucokinase . Suppose that some time later a third scientist , Chris , reanalyzes Barry’s data and determines that Gb does not , in fact , code for glucokinase but rather for glyceraldehyde dehydrogenase . Chris posts this to his blog , and maybe even drops Barry a courtesy email ( or , more likely , posts a comment on Barry’s blog ) . Now , note that Anne , and others relying on her work , cannot detect this change in reliability of Barry’s evidence . She has , at least in the current world , no way of knowing of Chris’s update to Barry’s results . Further , even if Barry changes the information he posted , there may be no reason for Anne to search again and detect the change . Although this vignette is ﬁctional , it is not far from reality . Although most biologists today rely upon government - maintained databases for such information , not one another’s blogs , many biologists , including one of the present authors ( JS ) has been tripped up by just such an updating problem in these very government - maintained databases ! In the Open Science world , when the interaction is through blogs and search engines , this would be a far more pervasive problem . In short , the shift to Open ( Soccer ) Science can increase the cognitive demands of doing good science by accentuating the difﬁculties of ﬁnding relevant knowledge in the sea of available information , assessing the quality of contributions , connecting pieces of knowl - edge across contributions , and tracking the changing status of claims . What cognitive strate - gies will scientists develop to operate effectively in an Open Science world ? What strategies will the scientiﬁc community , as a whole , develop ? How will Soccer Science be played ? 4 . A platform in support of Open Science exploration Many sorts of work practices and tools might moderate the problems introduced by the conﬂicting cognitive demands of efﬁcient sharing and reliable analysis . Efﬁcient sharing J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 7 can be supported if , when distributing the information to the community , scientists use the same external representations that they developed in the course of their own private reason - ing . A common , sharable representation can reduce communication overhead in moving ideas from the private to public domain by reducing the need for translation . In addition , the cost of information uptake can be reduced if the provenance , 1 reliability , and context of found information is easily accessible . Also , the burden of distribution is reduced if the scientist can easily and directly control when and with whom the local information is distributed or updated . To explore the practice and tools that might be useful in an Open Science world , we have developed a research platform , called CACHE , that allows us to investigate different modes of community practice and types of interaction that would enable scientists to play Soccer Science productively . In this section we outline three developmental stages of the CACHE platform : ACH0 , which supports individual analysts , CACHE - A , which supports small groups collaborating in real time , and CACHE - BC , which supports diverse structures of interaction across a community that may be widely dispersed in time and space , and which may not even be part of an explicit collaboration . In addition to serving as an experimental platform , CACHE models possible computational support for Open Science on multiple lev - els : the individual scientist , the interacting group , and the broader community . At the indi - vidual level , CACHE incorporates methods to debias individuals in analysis tasks . At a group level , it includes tools for sharing representations of a focal problem and supporting awareness within a working group . At a community level , it allows easy distribution of , and relevance - based access to , new ﬁndings . The cognition of decision makers , including scientists , is affected by biases in making judgments ( i . e . , systematic errors and limitations ) . The biases are generally ampliﬁed by complex decision tasks that , as for scientiﬁc tasks , require chained inferences ( Gettys et al . , 1973 ) . Corrective interventions or aids such as the introduction of apt representations can reduce some of these biases ( e . g . , Lim & Benbasat , 1997 ) . Groups of decision makers are also biased to some degree . The quality of group decisions can be improved by properly engineering the properties of the groups ( Schultz - Hart , Frey , Lu¨thgens , & Moscovici , 2000 ) or the tools that support the decision groups ( see Convertino , Billman , Pirolli , Massar , & Shrager , 2008 ) . CACHE incorporates methods for reducing biases and improving decision quality of scientists . CACHE capitalizes on an analytical method , called ACH—the Analysis of Competing Hypotheses—developed by Richards Heuer ( 1999 ) to improve reasoning by intelligence analysts . Heuer noted a series of cognitive biases and shortcuts that can impair intelligence analysis , including biases in the perception of cause and effect , biases in estimating proba - bility , hindsight biases , and others . Our research has focused on ‘‘conﬁrmation bias , ’’ or the tendency to be overly committed to an initial hypothesis or belief , despite evidence that should prompt revision : ‘‘people do not naturally seek disconﬁrming evidence , and when such evidence is received it tends to be discounted’’ ( Heuer , 1999 , p . 46 ) . The relations between conﬁrmation bias , science , and tool development merit unpacking . First , adherence to prior belief given conﬂicting evidence is not always biased : The body of established support may outweigh the new , conﬂicting information . Indeed , observation of 8 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) practicing scientists’ ﬁrst reaction to a surprising result showed that they ﬁrst checked whether something was wrong with the method rather than immediately accepting the result at face value ( Fugelsang , Stein , Green , & Dunbar , 2004 ) . Bias arises when decision makers tend to err systematically in one direction , not because decision makers are sensitive to prior beliefs . Second , while it is difﬁcult to identify what the ‘‘correct’’ degree of adherence to prior belief may be in the course of doing science , in situations where this can be assessed people systematically tend toward over - , not under commitment to initial beliefs . Third , the tools and methods we advocate should reduce bias of either sort ; should there be situations in which scientists are too rash , not just too conservative , our methods should help here as well . Improved reasoning should result from a systematic and extensive consideration of rel - evant evidence and hypotheses , and this is what our tools are designed to support . Finally , we note that CACHE can also aid in integrating information from multiple attempted repli - cations of a new ﬁnding . Conﬁrming ﬁndings through replication and tracking the evolving methods around new phenomena are important functions of science ( Gorman , 1992 ) , and CACHE can support organized accumulation of evidence of this sort . Heuer not only notes the occurrence of bias , but prescribes a method for improvement , the Analysis of Competing Hypotheses ( ACH ) . ACH provides a systematic process for eval - uating hypotheses in light of evidence . The ACH method requires that the analyst ﬁll out a decision matrix , where the rows represent evidence and the columns represent mutually exclusive and covering hypotheses ( Fig . 1 , and Heuer , 1999 , p . 97 ) . The analyst is encour - aged to ﬁll in each cell of the matrix to indicate how each piece of evidence ( row ) bears on each hypothesis ( column ) , indicating , for example , that the evidence is ‘‘consistent , ’’ ‘‘inconsistent , ’’ or ‘‘neutral’’ with respect to the hypothesis . The evidence can be integrated to decide among alternatives . The ACH method is based on classical decision matrices , with evidence playing the role of the choice attributes . Pirolli , Good , Heiser , Shrager , and Hutch - ins ( 2005 ) developed a digital implementation of ACH , here called ACH0 , and empirically demonstrated that it supports the ACH method at least as efﬁciently as the ‘‘pen and paper’’ practice of ACH analysis prescribed by Heuer . Pirolli et al . ’s electronic ACH0 is beginning to gain adoption in the U . S . intelligence community . Several characteristics of the basic ACH method deserve note with respect to the cogni - tive considerations of distributed science discussed above . First , all analysts using the ACH method utilize the same decision - matrix representation , leading to simplicity in sharing . Second , decision matrices are simple to use and understand—they are ‘‘mind sized’’—and can be used to organize analyses in self - contained , piecemeal , understandable subsets . Third , encouraging analysts to ﬁll out the entire matrix focuses them on disconﬁrming as well as conﬁrming evidence , and it helps to compensate for systematic biases such as conﬁrmation bias . The ACH method was originally conceived for individual decision makers . However , in CACHE it is also aimed at improving the reasoning of groups and communities . Indeed , the tendency of scientiﬁc communities to conﬁrm , rather than falsify theories , or to support the dominant paradigm has been pointed out by many philosophers and historians of science , most famously Kuhn ( 1962 ) and Lakatos ( 1978 ) . Neither ACH nor its electronic instantiation , ACH0 , support collaboration , and useful as the ACH method may be , decision matrices are not an adequate representation for complex J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 9 multistage inferences , where the problem is being analyzed in small components distributed across the community . Toward studying these aspects of distributed analysis , Convertino et al . ( 2008 ) developed and studied a suite of collaborative ACH tools , collectively called CACHE ( Collaborative ACH Environment ) . CACHE improves upon Pirolli et al . ’s ACH0 in a number of ways . First , CACHE is Web - based ; multiple analysts can work on different parts of the same problem simultaneously , each incorporating different evidence into their analyses and sharing their analytical matrices with one another . Convertino et al . used an early version of CACHE ( CACHE - A ) to study how this form of collaboration might inﬂu - ence analytical biases in groups , like those identiﬁed by Heuer for individuals . This is of sig - niﬁcant concern because , as previously described , collaboration could accentuate or minimize bias ; for example , collaborating analysts might inappropriately entrain one another’s analyses , rather than harvesting the beneﬁts of bringing different points of view to a problem . CACHE - A extends ACH , permitting multiple analysts to collaborate while retaining the ‘‘mind - sized - ness’’ of the ACH matrix , and Heuer’s other insights . CACHE - A also inherits ACH’s clear distinction between evidence and hypotheses . The CACHE platform includes a suite of tools that support real - time collaborative work in teams : A ‘‘ticker’’ notiﬁes when a the analysis of a collaborator has changed , analysts in the same team can then view one another’s matrices , and they can use a chat tool to com - municate about the analysis . Fig . 1 . Two decision matrices are depicted ‘‘owned’’ by different users ( Heuer and Shrager ) , engaged in differ - ent aspects of the analysis of a crime . The matrices are linked by a hypothesis ﬁ evidence provenance edge . Presumably Heuer created his matrix and then promoted the linked hypothesis to the assertion pool . Shrager discovered this promoted assertion and used it as evidence in his analysis . The resulting provenance connection is explicit from the point of view of the community , and yet implicit to the individual users . 10 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 5 . From real - time group collaboration to the Bayes community : CACHE - A to CACHE - BC CACHE - A extended ACH0 to enable real - time collaboration in teams , but , as we have noted , science is a collaboration that extends not just across individuals and teams but also across loosely coupled communities distributed in space and time . In ‘‘Football Science’’ time is less of the essence as there is time to consider one’s options , but Open ( ‘‘Soccer’’ ) Science will require effective support for collaborations taking place much more rapidly—at what we shall call ‘‘Web Speed . ’’ Web Speed collaboration may well be worse than either real - time ( e . g . , face - to - face , or ‘‘on the phone’’ ) or long - term ( e . g . , via email ) collabora - tions . In real - time collaborations , the participants are working as a unit—able to immedi - ately work out problems such as misunderstandings . Similarly , in the long , slow collaborations that characterize Football Science , there is sufﬁcient time to reﬂect and try out a number of combinations if problems arise . At Web Speed one neither has the advanta - ges of being able to interact with the immediacy of real time , nor of having the time to reﬂect . The CACHE Bayes community ( CACHE - BC ) model was designed with this prob - lematic balance in mind . 2 CACHE - BC handles real - time revision updating through explicit representation of evidential provenance . The conclusions in a given study , here , as before , represented by ACH matrices , are generally built on preexisting conclusions from other studies ( matri - ces ) . If the latter are revised , the former should be updated . Recall in our vignette about Anne , Barry , and Chris that when Chris’s new analysis led to a revision in Barry’s analysis of the function of Gb , Anne was unable to rapidly ( if at all ) ﬁnd out about this change . In these situations , a computational infrastructure for real - time revision updating would enable the automatic propagation of information up the evidential chain . CACHE - BC enables the community to work on many separate , but interrelated problems and to have real - time revision updating so that everyone who utilizes a piece of information can ﬁnd out when any factors relating to that information , such as its content , quality , or basis , change . The way that this works in CACHE - BC is through the explicit representa - tion of evidential provenance : When Anne bases an analysis on Barry’s analysis , the link - age between these is explicitly maintained , so that when Chris leads Barry to update his result , Anne is automatically notiﬁed . Further , everyone who had depended upon Anne’s result would be recursively notiﬁed of this change , so that they could reconsider their analyses . This simple mechanism leads to a very powerful new way of playing Soccer Science . CACHE - BC represents a signiﬁcant conceptual advance on both Heuer’s ACH method ( and its implementation : ACH0 ) and on CACHE - A . In both of those cases , the ACH matrix representation both affords and enforces a clear distinction between evidence and the hypotheses : evidence in rows , hypotheses in columns . In constructing an ACH matrix the analyst selects evidence from a central pool ( here called the ‘‘assertion pool’’ ) and assigns these to rows in the ACH matrix . Analysts cannot add to or delete assertions from the pool itself nor modify individual assertions in the pool . Put in another way , the public state of belief in evidence in the ACH world ( i . e . , the community’s information space ) is not itself J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 11 subject to analysis ; speciﬁc analysts can include or exclude evidence from their own analyses and differentially weight these in a given analysis , but analysts cannot change the evidence ; the assertion pool is static ; with respect to the community of reference , evidence exists , so to speak , ‘‘in the wild . ’’ This is a critical assumption of both ACH and CACHE - A : The value of evidence differs only in the context of particular analyses , and a particular analysis is precisely what is represented by a particular ACH matrix . Real - time revision updating through explicit representation of evidential provenance is supported by a key property of CACHE - BC , which we call ‘‘promotion . ’’ Whereas ACH0 did not permit any form of collaboration , and CACHE - A permitted analysts to examine one another’s analyses within a group , CACHE - BC supports the broader function for which one analyst’s hypothesis can be used by another analyst , who came afterwards , as part of his evidence . This is accomplished simply by allowing analysts to ‘‘promote’’ their hypotheses to the public assertion pool . Promoted hypotheses , from that point onward , appear to all analysts just like evidence : They can be selected as evidence by any other analyst in the community and added as evidence to any analytic matrix ( Fig . 2 ) . 3 , 4 Promotion is , in CACHE - BC , the analog of publishing a new result in Football Science , or , for example , blogging a result in Soccer Science ; once promoted , hypotheses are available for use as evidence in other analyses conducted by any other analyst . Allowing hypotheses to be promoted to the assertion pool and then used as evidence in other analyses qualitatively changes the collaboration process . To see this , let us Fig . 2 . A portion of the community - wide network projected by promotion and sharing of hypotheses . Only a few of the sharing relationships are shown . Each such relationship is formed by a process similar to that depicted in Fig . 1 . 12 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) return to Anne , Barry , and Chris : Suppose that Anne , Barry , and Chris were all using CACHE - BC instead of merely publishing in standard blogs . Publication ( promotion ) is still immediate , just as in the typical blog world : When Barry promotes his hypothesis that Gb functions as glucokinase , it is placed into the assertion pool . Anne accesses Barry’s promoted hypothesis by importing it as evidence into the matrix she is using to analyze Ga . She concludes ( hopefully through other evidence as well ) that Ga functions as a glucokinase as well . She likewise promotes her hypothesis , which others import as evidence into their analytical matrices , and so on . When , later , Chris draws Barry’s conclusion into question , Chris will ( one hopes ) promote this result , inform Barry , who will presumably import Chris’s new conclusion into his ( Barry’s ) Gb analytical matrix . Normally , that is without CACHE - BC , Barry’s change at this point would not affect Anne’s conclusions , which , after all , were made in the past . Furthermore , again without CACHE - BC , anyone who relied upon Anne’s conclusions would also not be able to ﬁnd out about the change in Barry’s analysis of Gb ( unless they , and Anne , were highly attentive to the literature ) . But because CACHE - BC exhaustively retains the explicit linkages between Barry’s hypothesis about Gb and Anne’s use of it , and between Anne’s hypothesis about Ga and others’ uses of this , Anne , and others who use her results can be informed of potentially important changes in results that they have relied upon . Once linked up in this way , CACHE - BC can track changes and pos - sibly update conﬁdences through to all of the conclusions that may be affected by those changes . 5 , 6 As a result of this facility , complex problems can , in CACHE - BC , be broken down into overlapping subproblems , and these can be distributed throughout the community of deci - sion makers . Different matrices may overlap in terms of the evidence they rely upon , or in terms of the hypothesis under consideration , and may represent subgoal ⁄ supergoal or prior ⁄ posterior relationships with respect to one another , or , as in Convertino et al . , different ways of relating the same evidence to the same or similar hypotheses . Indeed , one would expect the community to almost always divide up the problem space into subcomponents through their own self - selection of problems to work on and evidence to use in analysis ; CACHE - BC is merely a device for provenance tracking : recording the subjective relation - ships between evidence and hypotheses , and the logical dependencies among contributions across a community of analysts distributed in space and time . Once one has such a record , it can be utilized to increase the efﬁciency of analysis by the community in the ways described and probably in other ways as well . It is widely understood that tracking provenance is important , but CACHE - BC goes beyond a simple scientiﬁc citation tree—the directed acyclic graph of papers citing other papers—by stating how particular hypotheses rely upon particular evidence . In addition to permitting the sort of updating described above , the CACHE - BC model of provenance tracking helps to increase the signal - to - noise ratio in the face of very large and noisy knowl - edge bases , partially ameliorating the problems in our conﬂicting gene function example , as well as in cases of noisy data . This sort of technology simpliﬁes revision updating , marking results as questionable , informing scientists when results that they have depended upon come into question , and ‘‘chasing’’ such revisions through the provenance tree . J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 13 6 . Discussion The line of work reviewed in this paper has led us from a pen - and - paper technique for overcoming cognitive bias in analysis ( ACH : Heuer , 1999 ) and a direct digital implementa - tion of that technique ( ACH0 : Pirolli et al . , 2005 ) , to an extension of that technique support - ing simultaneously collaborating teams of analysts ( CACHE - A : Convertino et al . , 2008 ) , and ﬁnally to a way of enabling the management of evidence and hypotheses across multiple stages of inference that cross both communities and time ( CACHE - BC ) . Our goal in this research program has been twofold : ﬁrst , to articulate a design rationale and the development of systems that can support multistage reasoning at the individual , group , and community levels , and second to provide a means of empirically investigating new forms of societal organization in analytical ( esp . scientiﬁc ) collaboration . The process of developing and testing the various instantiations of CACHE drew on , and in turn increased our understanding of collaborative analysis tasks , which have not yet been investigated extensively by the distributed cognition community . We believe , following Kraemer and King ( 1988 ) , that for decision support designs to succeed , the development of technology and the evaluation of its impact on decision processes need to be combined . CACHE - A and - BC both allow individual analysts to maintain their private , local , per - spectives on relatively simple subproblems while , at the same time , allowing them to collab - orate on complex problems . CACHE - BC goes beyond CACHE - A by enabling analysts to depend upon one another’s results and to depend upon the efﬁcient updating of belief as new evidence is collected . This model may free analysts from worrying about the risk that the knowledge used now could become outdated or inaccurate in the future , because they know that its quality will be updated dynamically as provenance is automatically maintained by the system ; one is not required to think at all about the structure of the provenance net - work , thus reducing cognitive load and freeing resources . CACHE thereby enables the com - munity to integrate large amounts of heterogeneous information , share hypotheses and interpretations , discover relevant evidence , and maintain provenance linkages between stages in the multistage process . We developed the CACHE series of experimental platforms in order to explore more efﬁ - cient forms of knowledge sharing and multistage reasoning in scientiﬁc communities . The platforms , and especially CACHE - BC , honor to various degrees the cognitive principles described at the beginning of this paper . Although initially motivated by considering the work of individual scientists , these principles are also ( if not more ) applicable to work of interacting groups , or indeed to the whole community of scientists where the individual’s ability to be successful is dependent on coordinated cognitive interactions with collaborators and the cognitive products that these interactions generate . Thus , CACHE - BC should simultaneously provide support at the levels of the individual scientist , the group , and the community . At the individual level , it offers tools to support foraging for new information and debiasing individuals in analysis tasks . At a group level , it includes tools for sharing representations of a focal problem and for improving awareness of judgments about the shared evidence pool . At a community level , it supports the functions of provenance track - ing and automatic updating , as various ﬁndings relevant to individuals or groups are revised 14 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) across the community . Finally , CACHE - BC’s support for problem decomposition into sub - problems ( i . e . , as interconnected decision matrices ) and for collaborative multistage reason - ing across these subproblems reduces cognitive costs at each of the levels of analysis . To summarize , let us return to the ﬁve principles described in the introduction and brieﬂy recount how CACHE addresses them . 6 . 1 . ‘‘Mind - sized’’ analytical sets All of the ACH - line of methods hark to mind - sizedness , but CACHE - BC especially addresses this principle because complex problems can be broken down into mind - sized matrices , constructed by one or a small number of collaborators , that refer to one another . In this way a complex problem is divided ( and hopefully conquered ) through many inter - referred mind - sized chunks . 6 . 2 . Apt representation The ACH - line of methods provides a common meta - representation in the matrices for the relation between evidence and hypotheses . This is not , of course , a complete resolution to the problem of apt representation among hypotheses , but it is a start . The latter is a much more difﬁcult problem , pervading all technologies of this sort , and is not directly addressed by any of the ACH methods . 7 6 . 3 . Efﬁcient and controlled sharing Both CACHE - A and CACHE - BC carefully manage the sharing of information , albeit in very different ways . In a sense , this is the central point of the whole line of CACHE meth - ods , and it is where most of the important future work will take place . ( See the section on future work , below . ) 6 . 4 . Task orientation The ACH - line of methods organizes information for any of several tasks into its own interrelated set of matrices . This organization facilitates working on and switching among multiple tasks , as typically needed by scientists . Switching to a new task by switching to a new matrix set provides the scientist with an integrated representation of the task , preserved its context , and thus allows a scientist easily to return to an ongoing task . 6 . 5 . Multistage inference This is , of course , CACHE - BC’s raison d’etre . Not only do these methods support indi - viduals reasoning over complex evidence chains , they also support reasoning distributed across people and time . Public and up - to - date records for each inference allow the members to revise and build upon prior inferences . J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 15 7 . Relation to prior work Our interest in supporting the dynamics of Open Science is shared by other researchers . In particular , prior work has emphasized the importance of efﬁcient sharing . An early example is ArXiv . org , a dramatically successful project for sharing well - developed results ( physics preprints ) in an electronic archive . Developed in 1991 , physicists are now expected to upload their papers simultaneous with sending them to journals for ofﬁcial publication , and thousands of e - prints are added every month . Thus , the worldwide community has immediate free access to novel results . More recent Web - based capabilities such as social networking , social annotations , wiki applications , and semantic Web techniques portent major transformations in how scientist share and collaborate ( e . g . , Bradley et al . , 2008 ) . Citeseer was the ﬁrst Web - based system to introduce automated citation indexing and citation linking and includes automatic notiﬁcations of new citations and recommendations of new papers based on a user proﬁle . Bollacker , Lawrence , and Giles ( 1998 ) initially developed the system as a research prototype , but it has become a highly successful public search engine . Recently , Farooq , et al . ( 2008 ) explored novel collaborative features that could support a collaborative laboratory around Citeseer : social networking tools , activity awareness tools , and notiﬁcations . This work was inspired by prior research on scientiﬁc collaboratories ( Finholt & Olson , 1997 ) . Citeseer focuses on provenance maintenance , but not reasoning over the information accessed . Indeed , we do not know of other tools that support the inference integration aspect of distributed multistep inference , though the need was originally noted by Johnson and Halpin ( 1974 ) . Looking farther aﬁeld from Open Science , collaborative systems developed for the workplace have suggested the cost - saving beneﬁts of a shared workspace that organizes the sharing and the collaboration around the task ( or shared activity ) . Examples include the IBM Activity Explorer prototype and the activity - centric design ( Moran , Cozzi , & Farrell , 2005 ) and the task management augmenting e - mail clients ( Bellotti , Thornton , Chin , Schiano , & Good , 2007 ) . Unlike CACHE - BC , these tools do not pertain to collaborative sense making and are not directed at communities . In short , a variety of successful projects suggest the importance and tractability of supporting Open Science . However , tools that support the multiple factors affecting cognition in Open Science are rare . Our work gives an initial characterization of ﬁve important factors , and it provides a tool designed to give multifaceted support . 8 . Future directions Our long - term vision for the CACHE series of platforms is to create a living laboratory enabling us to simultaneously support and study Open Science . We describe some examples of projects toward this end that use the CACHE research platform to explore alternative col - laborative practices and policies for scientiﬁc communications . The CACHE matrix provides a cognitively motivated , mind - sized format , one that may contribute to balanced integration of evidence and hence bias reduction . As part of further 16 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) empirical explorations of debiasing , it will be important to investigate different evidence inte - gration methods . For example : Under what conditions are assessments improved by weighing evidence by importance or credibility ? Is it useful to include irrelevant but discounted evi - dence , as a means of tracking its status ? How does sensitivity to reputation or judged reliability inﬂuence assessment , and how good must those assessments be to improve the result ? A second set of questions concern collaboration policies , such as the role of reputation or the speed of notiﬁcation . Without some careful consideration of such policies , one could be overwhelmed by the number of minor updates that were propagated through the network ( as will be very familiar to anyone who uses Twitter , http : / / www . twitter . com ) . In our experi - ments so far we have emphasized the value of notiﬁcation of changed evidential status , but additional information such as reputation can also be propagated . This might play the role of peer review , potentially acting at the level of both the individual ( e . g . , ‘‘people say this person does good work’’ ) and the evidence ( e . g . , ‘‘people say this study is well done’’ ) . More broadly , the effects of equal versus differentiated impact from different sources can be investigated , either in experimentally established or naturally occurring communities . Importantly , the effects of different policies with different assumptions about information quality can be explored through simulation . Similar issues arise about policies regarding the speed of propagation of updates . To date we have emphasized the potential value of very rapid transmission of information to a wide audience . However , there can also be advantages to slower or more ﬁltered distribution . This might be accomplished by any number of methods , for example , initial propagation to a smaller group , whose response inﬂuences the later rate and scope of further distribution . Alternatively , this might be done by system - wide ‘‘lag’’ in distribution , for example , requir - ing some delay between an author’s initial posting ( into a locally viewable workspace ) and distribution to wider audiences . Again , different policies of screening could be added to the delay . Finally , to reduce distraction and information load , the notiﬁcations could be pro - vided via peripheral displays and digest deliveries that are controlled by the end - user selec - tion rules . Research will be needed on sound policy and practice for using the tools as well as for tool development . Both empirical studies and simulation in all these areas will be informative , and they could lead to improved support for Open Science based upon the CACHE model . Notes 1 . Provenance refers to the chain of information relating to the origins of something . The term is commonly used in the world of art and artifacts , referring to the documen - tation that , for example , validates a piece as an original da Vinci ( see : http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Provenance , accessed : 24 May 2009 ) . In science , provenance could include information about the lab and researchers advancing a claim , the date of discovery , the instruments , methods , models , or analyses used , and so on . 2 . We use the term ‘‘Bayes’’ here by reference to the well - known Bayesian method of updating probabilities wherein a posterior probability is calculated via a simple J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 17 equation , from prior probabilities and evidence . This method affords iteration over time , as is commonly observed in science , and has been applied in many useful ways , including to networks of hypotheses , which are similar to the model discussed here . Indeed , one way to think of a Bayes community , is as a Bayesian network dispersed across a community of analysts . 3 . They can also be selected as hypotheses , enabling multiple matrices to contribute to the support or refutation of given hypotheses . 4 . In interface terms , promotion is an almost trivial change in functionality to the tool : A ‘‘promote’’ button appears with each hypothesis . 5 . Although the story so far has been linear for simplicity’s sake—one hypothesis arising from , and one piece of evidence entering into each matrix—ACH matrixes will gener - ally import multiple pieces of evidence , and will generally export multiple hypotheses ( as Figs . 1 and 2 ) ; the appropriate graphical model , therefore , is a directed ( acyclic ) graph , not the simpler linear graph . This , however , presents no theoretical problems for the proposed upward propagation of the updates . 6 . In practice , CACHE can integrate uncertainty in a number of ways , including Bayesian , Dempster - Schafer , continuous or discrete averaging , winner - take - all ( actually logit ) , or spreading activation . The default propagation algorithm is just to notify everyone up the tree that something in the incoming provenance root system has changed . The spreading activation model is like the default propaga - tion algorithm except that it reduces the strength of the notiﬁcation according to the distance from the change . This has both a discrete and a continuous mode . 7 . The CACHE - BC implementation actually addresses this more directly in ways that are too complex to go into here , and which we intend to address in detail elsewhere . Brieﬂy , all assertions in the pool are connected to a semantic network so that one can conduct semantic search for related hypotheses , regardless of the particular vocabular - ies used by the authors . Acknowledgments This work was funded , in part , by Ofﬁce of Naval research Contract N00014 - 02 - C - 0203 to P . Pirolli and S . K . Card , and by Advanced Research and Development Activity Novel Intelligence from Massive Data contract MDA904 - 03 - C - 0404 to P . Pirolli and S . K . Card . Stu Card , Ed Chi , Richards Heuer , and Mark Steﬁk were instrumental in helping us think through some of the subtle issues underlying this work . Mike Gorman and Caroline Verdier shepherded the paper through many reviews . Most importantly , three anonymous reviewers gave generously their time in reviewing the paper several times in great detail and provided many insightful comments . Even in the face of the unstoppable tidal wave of Open Science , we authors are unanimous in our appreciation for reviewers who put so much work into a paper that is not even theirs . They , and many other reviews over the years , have saved us from what would have been countless cases of public humiliation . Additionally , we would like to thank Rebecca Agin for ﬁgure art . 18 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) References Bellotti , V . , Ducheneaut , N . , Howard , M . , Smith , I . , & Grinter , R . E . ( 2005 ) . Quality versus quantity : E - mail - centric task management and its relation with overload . Human - Computer Interaction , Special Issue on Revisiting and Reinventing E - Mail , 20 , 89 – 138 . Bellotti , V . , Thornton , J . D . , Chin , A . , Schiano , D . J . , & Good , N . ( 2007 ) . TV - ACTA : Embedding an activity - centered interface for task management in email . Fourth Conference on Email and Anti - Spam ( CEAS 2007 ) , Mountain View , CA . Bollacker , K . D . , Lawrence , S . , & Giles , C . L . ( 1998 ) . CiteSeer : An autonomous web agent for automatic retrie - val and identiﬁcation of interesting publications . In I . Witten , R . Akscyn , & F . Shipman III ( Eds . ) , Digital libraries 98 , Third ACM Conference on digital libraries ( pp . 89 – 98 ) . Newyork : ACM Press . Bradley , J . C . , Owens , K . , & Williams , A . ( 2008 ) . Chemistry crowdsourcing and open notebook science . Nature Precedings , doi : 10 . 1038 / npre . 2008 . 1505 . 1 . Bridewell , W . , Sanchez , J . , Langley , P . , & Billman , D . ( 2006 ) . An interactive environment for the modeling and discovery of scientiﬁc knowledge . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies , 64 , 1099 – 1114 . Card , S . K . , Mackinlay , J . D . , & Shneiderman , B . ( 1999 ) . Information visualization : Using vision to think . San Francisco , CA : Morgan - Kaufmann . Convertino , G . , Billman , D . , Pirolli , P . , Massar , J . P . , & Shrager , J . ( 2008 ) . The CACHE Study : Group effects in computer - supported collaborative analysis . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 17 , 353 – 393 . Farooq , U . , Ganoe , C . H . , Carroll , J . M . , Councill , I . G . , & Giles , C . L . ( 2008 ) . Design and evaluation of aware - ness mechanisms in CiteSeer . Information Processing & Management , 44 , 596 – 612 . Finholt , T . A . , & Olson , G . M . ( 1997 ) . From laboratories to collaboratories : A new organizational form for scientiﬁc collaboration . Psychological Science , 8 , 28 – 35 . Fugelsang , J . A . , Stein , C . B . , Green , A . E . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2004 ) . Theory and data interactions of the scien - tiﬁc mind : Evidence from the molecular and the cognitive laboratory . Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology , 58 ( 2 ) , 86 – 95 . Gettys , C . F . , Kelly , C . W . , & Peterson , C . R . ( 1973 ) . The best guess hypothesis in multistage inference . Organi - zational Behavior and Human Performance , 10 , 364 – 373 . Gigerenzer , G . , & Hoffrage , U . ( 1995 ) . How to improve Bayesian reasoning without instruction : Frequency formats . Psychological Review , 102 , 684 – 704 . Gorman , M . ( 1992 ) . Simulating science : Heuristics , mental models , and technoscientiﬁc thinking . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . Grudin , J . ( 2004 ) . Crossing the divide . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , 11 ( 1 ) , 1 – 25 . Henderson Jr , D . A . , & Card , S . K . ( 1986 ) . Rooms : The use of multiple virtual workspaces to reduce space contention in a window - based graphical user interface . ACM Transaction on Graphics , 5 , 211 – 241 . Heuer , R . ( 1999 ) . The psychology of intelligence analysis . Washington , DC : Center for the Study of Intelligence , Central Intelligence Agency . Johnson , E . M . , & Halpin , S . M . ( 1974 ) . Multistage inference models for intelligence analysis . Alexandria , VA : Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences . Kotovsky , K . , Hayes , J . R . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1985 ) . Why are some problems hard ? Evidence from Tower of Hanoi . Cognitive Psychology , 17 , 248 – 294 . Kraemer , K . L . , & King , J . L . ( 1988 ) . Computer - based systems for cooperative work and group decision making . ACM Computing Surveys , 20 , 115 – 146 . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1962 ) . The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lakatos , I . ( 1978 ) . The methodology of scientiﬁc research programmes . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Lim , L . H . , & Benbasat , I . ( 1997 ) . The debiasing role of group support systems : An experimental investigation of the representativeness bias . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies , 47 , 453 – 471 . Miller , G . ( 1956 ) . The magic number seven plus or minus two . Psychological Review , 63 , 81 – 97 . J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 ) 19 Moran , T . P . , Cozzi , A . , & Farrell , S . P . ( 2005 ) . Uniﬁed activity management : Supporting people in eBusiness . Communications of the ACM , 48 ( 12 ) , 67 – 70 . Special section on Semantic eBusiness Vision . Nersessian , N . J . ( 1999 ) . Model - based reasoning in conceptual change . In L . Magnani , N . J . Nersessian , & P . Thagard ( Eds . ) , Model - based reasoning in scientiﬁc discovery ( pp . 5 – 22 ) . New York : Kluwer Academic ⁄ Plenum Publishers . Novick , L . R . , & Hurley , S . M . ( 2001 ) . To matrix , network , or hierarchy : That is the question . Cognitive Psychology , 42 , 158 – 216 . Nunamaker Jr , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . , & George , J . F . ( 1991 ) . Electronic meeting systems to support group work . Communications of the ACM , 34 , 40 – 61 . Olson , G . , Finholt , T . , & Teasley , S . ( 2000 ) . Behavioral aspects of collaboratories . In S . Koslow & M . Huerta ( Eds . ) , Electronic collaboration in science ( pp . 1 – 14 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Pirolli , P . , Good , L . , Heiser , J . , Shrager , J . , & Hutchins , S . ( 2005 ) . UIR technical report . Palo Alto , CA : Palo Alto Research Center Incorporated . Schultz - Hart , S . , Frey , D . , Lu ¨ thgens , C . , & Moscovici , S . ( 2000 ) . Biased information search in group decision making . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 78 ( 4 ) , 655 – 669 . Simon , H . A . ( 1956 ) . Rational choice and the structure of the environment . Psychological Review , 63 , 129 – 138 . Stigler , J . W . ( 1984 ) . ‘‘Mental abacus’’ : The effect of abacus training on Chinese children’s mental calculation . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 145 – 176 . Zhang , J . ( 1997 ) . The nature of external representations in problem solving . Cognitive Science , 21 ( 2 ) , 179 – 217 . 20 J . Shrager et al . ⁄ Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2009 )